[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dio05)  [Next](dio07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486434591/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Works of Dionysius the Areopagite, tr. by John Parker, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iii"></span>

### <span id="ii.ii.ii.iii-p0.1"></span>CAPUT III.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iii-p1"></span>What is the power of prayer, and
concerning the blessed Hierotheus, and concerning reverence and covenant
in the Word of God.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iii-p2"></span>SECTION I.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iii-p3"></span>FIRST, with your permission, let us
examine the all-perfect Name of Goodness, which is indicative of the
whole progressions of Almighty God, having invoked the supremely good,
and super-good Triad--the Name which indicates Its whole best
Providences. For, we must first be raised up to It, as Source of good,
by our prayers; and by a nearer approach to It, be initiated as to the
all good gifts which are established around It. For It is indeed present
to all, but all are not present to It. But then, when we have invoked
It, by all pure prayers and unpolluted mind, and by our aptitude towards
Divine Union, we also are present to It. For, It is not in a place, so
that It should be absent from a particular place, or should pass from
one to another. But even the statement that It is in all existing
beings, falls short of Its infinitude (which is) above all, and
embracing all. Let us then elevate our very selves by our prayers to the
higher ascent of the Divine and good rays,--as if a luminous chain being
suspended from the celestial heights, <span id="page_28">p. 28</span>
<span id="ii.ii.ii.iii-Page_28"></span> and reaching down hither, we, by
ever clutching this upwards, first with one hand, and then with the
other, seem indeed to draw it down, but in reality we do not draw it
down, it being both above and below, but ourselves are carried upwards
to the higher splendours of the luminous rays. Or, as if, after we have
embarked on a ship, and are holding on to the cables reaching from some
rock, such as are given out, as it were, for us to seize, we do not draw
the rock to us, but ourselves, in fact, and the ship, to the rock. Or to
take another example, if any one standing on the ship pushes away the
rock by the sea shore, he will do nothing to the stationary and unmoved
rock, but he separates himself from it, and in proportion as he pushes
that away, he is so far hurled from it. Wherefore, before everything,
and especially theology, we must begin with prayer, not as though we
ourselves were drawing the power, which is everywhere and nowhere
present, but as, by our godly reminiscences and invocations, conducting
ourselves to, and making ourselves one with, it.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iii-p4"></span>SECTION II.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iii-p5"></span>Perhaps also, this is worthy of
apology, that whilst our illustrious leader, Hierotheus, is compiling
his *Theological Elements,* in a manner above natural capacity, we, as
if those were not sufficient, have composed others, and this present
theological treatise. And yet, if that man had deigned to treat
systematically all the theological treatises, and had gone <span
id="page_29">p. 29</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.iii-Page_29"></span>
through the sum of all theology, by detailed expositions, we should not
have gone to such a height of folly, or stupidity, as to have attempted
alone theological questions, either more lucidly or divinely than he, or
to indulge in vain talk by saying superfluously the same things twice
over, and in addition to do injustice to one, both teacher and friend,
and that we, who have been instructed from his discourses, after Paul
the Divine, should filch for our own glorification his most illustrious
contemplation and elucidation. But, since in fact, he, whilst teaching
things divine, in a manner suitable to presbyters, set forth
comprehensive definitions, and such as embraced many things in one, as
were suitable to us, and to as many as with us were teachers of the
newly-initiated souls, commanding us to unfold and disentangle, by
language commensurate with our ability, the comprehensive and uniform
compositions of the most intellectual capacity of that illustrious man;
and you, yourself, have oftentimes urged us to this, and sent back the
very book, as being of transcendent value; for this reason, then, we too
distinguish him as a teacher of perfect and presbyterial conceptions for
those who are above the common people, even as certain second Oracles,
and next to the Anointed of God. But for people, such as we are, we will
transmit things Divine, according to our capacity. For, if strong meat
belongs to the perfect, how great perfection is required that the same
should feed others. Correctly, then, we have affirmed this, that <span
id="page_30">p. 30</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.iii-Page_30"></span> the
self-perceptive vision of the intelligible Oracles, and their
comprehensive teaching, needs presbyterial power; but the science and
the thorough teaching of the reasons which lead to this, fittingly
belong to those purified and hallowed persons placed in a subordinate
position. And yet, we have insisted upon this with the utmost care,
that, as regards the things that have been thoroughly investigated by
him, our divine leader, with an accurate elucidation, we should not, in
any way, handle the same tautologically, for the same elucidation of the
Divine text expounded by him. For, amongst our inspired hierarchs (when
both we, as you know, and yourself, and many of our holy brethren, were
gathered together to the depositing of the Life-springing and
God-receptive body, and when there were present also James, the brother
of God, and Peter, the foremost and most honoured pinnacle of the
Theologians, when it was determined after the depositing, that every one
of the hierarchs should celebrate, as each was capable, the Omnipotent
Goodness of the supremely Divine Weakness), he, after the Theologians,
surpassed, as you know, all the other divine instructors, being wholly
entranced, wholly raised from himself, and experiencing the pain of his
fellowship with the things celebrated, and was regarded as an inspired
and divine Psalmist by all, by whom he was heard and seen and known, and
not known. And why should I say anything to thee concerning the things
there divinely spoken? For, <span id="page_31">p. 31</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iii-Page_31"></span> if I do not forget myself, many a time
do I remember to have heard from thee certain portions of those inspired
songs of praise; such was thy zeal, not cursorily, to pursue things
Divine.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iii-p6"></span>SECTION III.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iii-p7"></span>But to pass over the mystical things
there, both as forbidden to the multitude and as known to thee, when it
was necessary to communicate to the multitude, and to bring as many as
possible to the sacred knowledge amongst ourselves, he so excelled the
majority of sacred teachers, both by use of time and purity of mind, and
accuracy of demonstrations, and by his other sacred discourses, that we
should scarcely have dared to look so great a sun straight in the face.
For we are thus far conscious in ourselves, and know, that we may
neither advance to understand sufficiently the intelligible of Divine
things, nor to express and declare the things spoken of the divine
knowledge. For, being far removed from the skill of those divine men, as
regards theological truth, we are so inferior that we should have,
through excessive reverence, entirely come to this--neither to hear nor
to speak anything respecting divine philosophy, unless we had grasped in
our mind, that we must not neglect the knowledge of things divine
received by us. And to this we were persuaded, not only by the innate
aspirations of the minds which always lovingly cling to the permitted
contemplation of the supernatural, but also by the most excellent order
itself of the Divine institutions, <span id="page_32">p. 32</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iii-Page_32"></span> which prohibits us, on the one hand,
from much inquisition into things above us, as above our degree, and as
unattainable; yet, on the other hand, persistently urges us to
graciously impart to others also whatever is permitted and given to us
to learn. Yielding then to these considerations, and neither shirking
nor flinching from the attainable discovery of things Divine, but also
not bearing to leave unassisted those who are unable to contemplate
things too high for us, we have brought ourselves to composition, not
daring indeed to introduce anything new, but by more easy and more
detailed expositions to disentangle and elucidate the things spoken by
the Hierotheus indeed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Caput IV.](dio07)
