[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dio06)  [Next](dio08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486434591/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Works of Dionysius the Areopagite, tr. by John Parker, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv"></span>

### <span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p0.1"></span>CAPUT IV.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p1"></span>Concerning Good, Light, Beauty, Love,
Ecstasy, Jealousy, and that the Evil is neither existent, nor from
existent, nor in things being.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p2"></span>SECTION I.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p3"></span>BE it so then. Let us come to the
appellation "Good," already mentioned in our discourse, which the
Theologians ascribe pre-eminently and exclusively to the super-Divine
Deity, as I conjecture, by calling the supremely Divine Subsistence,
Goodness; and because the Good, as essential Good, by Its being, extends
Its Goodness to all things that be.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p4"></span>For, even as our sun--not as
calculating or choosing, but by its very being, enlightens all things
able <span id="page_33">p. 33</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_33"></span> to partake of its light in their own
degree--so too the Good--as superior to a sun, as the archetype *par
excellence,* is above an obscure image--by Its very existence sends to
all things that be, the rays of Its whole goodness, according to their
capacity. By reason of these (rays) subsisted all the intelligible and
intelligent essences and powers and energies. By reason of these they
are, and have their life, continuous and undiminished, purified from all
corruption and death and matter, and generation; and separated from the
unstable and fluctuating and vacillating mutability, and are conceived
of as incorporeal and immaterial, and as minds they think in a manner
supermundane, and are illuminated as to the reasons of things, in a
manner peculiar to themselves; and they again convey to their kindred
spirits things appropriate to them; and they have their abiding from
Goodness; and thence comes to them stability and consistence and
protection, and sanctuary of good things; and whilst aspiring to It,
they have both being and good being; and being conformed to It, as is
attainable, they are both patterns of good, and impart to those after
them, as the Divine Law directs, the gifts which have passed through to
themselves from the Good.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p5"></span>SECTION II.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p6"></span>Thence come to them the supermundane  
orders, the unions amongst themselves, the mutual penetrations, the
unconfused distinctions, the powers elevating the inferior to the
superior, the providences <span id="page_34">p. 34</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_34"></span> of the more exalted for those below
them; the guardings of things pertaining to each power; and unbroken
convolutions around themselves; the identities and sublimities around
the aspiration after the Good; and whatever is said in our Treatise
concerning the angelic properties and orders. Further also, whatever
things belong to the heavenly Hierarchy, the purifications befitting
angels, the supermundane illuminations, and the things perfecting the
whole angelic perfection, are from the all-creative and fontal Goodness;
from which was given to them the form of Goodness, and the revealing in
themselves the hidden Goodness, and that angels are, as it were, heralds
of the Divine silence, and project, as it were, luminous lights
revealing Him Who is in secret. Further, after these--the sacred and
holy minds--the souls, and whatever is good in souls is by reason of the
super-good Goodness--the fact that they are intellectual--that they have
essential life--indestructible--the very being itself--and that they are
able, whilst elevated themselves to the angelic lives, to be conducted
by them as good guides to the good Origin of all good things, and to
become partakers of the illuminations, thence bubbling forth, according
to the capacity of each, and to participate in the goodlike gift, as
they are able, and whatever else we have enumerated in our Treatise
concerning the soul. But also, if one may be permitted to speak of the
irrational souls, or living creatures, such as cleave the air, and such
as walk on earth, and such as creep along earth, and those whose life is
in waters, <span id="page_35">p. 35</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_35"></span> or amphibious, and such as live
concealed under earth, and burrow within it, and in one word, such as
have the sensible soul or life, even all these have their soul and life,
by reason of the Good. Moreover, all plants have their growing and
moving life from the Good; and even soulless and lifeless substance is
by reason of the Good, and by reason of It, has inherited its
substantial condition.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p7"></span>SECTION III.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p8"></span>But, if the Good is above all things
being, as indeed it is, and formulates the formless, even in Itself
alone, both the non-essential is a pre-eminence of essence, and the
non-living is a superior life, and the mindless a superior wisdom, and
whatever is in the Good is of a superlative formation of the formless,
and if one may venture to say so, even the nonexistent itself aspires to
the Good above all things existing, and struggles somehow to be even
itself in the Good,--the really Superessential--to the exclusion of all
things.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p9"></span>SECTION IV.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p10"></span>But what slipped from our view in the
midst of our discourse, the Good is Cause of the celestial movements in
their commencements and terminations, of their not increasing, not
diminishing, and completely changeless, course <span
id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30) , and of the noiseless movements, if one
may so speak, of the vast celestial transit, and of the astral orders,
and the beauties and <span id="page_36">p. 36</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_36"></span> lights, and stabilities, and the
progressive swift motion of certain stars, and of the periodical return
of the two luminaries, which the Oracles call "great," from the same to
the same quarter, after which our days and nights being marked, and
months and years being measured, mark and number and arrange and
comprehend the circular movements of time and things temporal. But, what
would any one say of the very ray of the sun? For the light is from the
Good, and an image of the Goodness, wherefore also the Good is
celebrated under the name of Light; as in a portrait the original is
manifested. For, as the goodness of the Deity, beyond all, permeates
from the highest and most honoured substances even to the lowest, and
yet is above all, neither the foremost outstripping its superiority, nor
the things below eluding its grasp, but it both enlightens all that are
capable, and forms and enlivens, and grasps, and perfects, and is
measure of things existing, and age, and number, and order, and grasp,
and cause, and end; so, too, the brilliant likeness of the Divine
Goodness, this our great sun, wholly bright and ever luminous, as a most
distant echo of the Good, both enlightens whatever is capable of
participating in it, and possesses the light in the highest degree of
purity, unfolding to the visible universe, above and beneath, the
splendours of its own rays, and if anything does not participate in
them, this is not owing to the inertness or deficiency of its
distribution of light, but is owing to the inaptitude for
light-reception of the things which do not unfold <span id="page_37">p.
37</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_37"></span> themselves for the
participation of light. No doubt the ray passing over many things in
such condition, enlightens the things after them, and there is no
visible thing which it does not reach, with the surpassing greatness of
its own splendour. Further also, it contributes to the generation of
sensible bodies, and moves them to life, and nourishes, and increases,
and perfects, and purifies and renews; and the light is both measure and
number of hours, days, and all our time. For it is the light itself,
even though it was then without form, which the divine Moses declared to
have fixed that first Triad <span id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31) of our
days. And, just as Goodness turns all things to Itself, and is chief
collector of things scattered, as One-springing and One-making Deity,
and all things aspire to It, as Source and Bond and End, and it is the
Good, as the Oracles say, from Which all things subsisted, and are being
brought into being by an all-perfect Cause; and in Which all things
consisted, as guarded and governed in an all-controlling route; and to
Which all things are turned, as to their own proper end; and to Which
all aspire --the intellectual and rational indeed, through knowledge,
and the sensible through the senses, and those bereft of sensible
perception by the innate movement of the aspiration after life, and
those without life, and merely being, by their aptitude for mere
substantial participation; after the same method of its illustrious
original, the light also collects and turns to itself all things
existing--things with sight <span id="page_38">p. 38</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_38"></span> *--*things with motion--things
enlightened--things heated--things wholly held together by its brilliant
splendours--whence also, Helios, because it makes all things altogether
(<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p10.4"></span>ἀολλῆ), and collects things
scattered. And all creatures, endowed with sensible perceptions, aspire
to it, as aspiring either to see, or to be moved and enlightened, and
heated, and to be wholly held together by the light. By no means do I
affirm, after the statement of antiquity, that as being God and Creator
of the universe, the sun, by itself, governs the luminous world, but
that the invisible things of God are clearly seen from the foundation of
the world, being understood by the things that are made, even His
eternal power and Deity.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p11"></span>SECTION V.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p12"></span>But we have spoken of these things in
our *Symbolical Theology.* Let us now then celebrate the spiritual Name
of Light, under Which we contemplate the Good, and declare that He, the
Good, is called spiritual <span id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32) Light, on
the ground that He fills every supercelestial mind with spiritual light,
and expels all ignorance and error from all souls in which they may be,
and imparts to them all sacred light, and cleanses their mental vision
from the mist which envelops them, from ignorance, and stirs up and
unfolds those enclosed by the great weight of darkness, and imparts, at
first, a measured radiance; then, whilst they taste, as it were, the
light, and <span id="page_39">p. 39</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_39"></span> desire it more, more fully gives
Itself, and more abundantly enlightens them, because "they have loved
much," and ever elevates them to things in advance, as befits the
analogy of each for aspiration.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p13"></span>SECTION VI.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p14"></span>The Good then above every light is
called spiritual Light, as fontal ray, and stream of light welling over,
shining upon every mind, above, around <span
id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33) , and in the world, from its fulness, and
renewing their whole mental powers, and embracing them all by its
over-shadowing; and being above all by its exaltation; and in one word,
by embracing and having previously and pre-eminently the whole
sovereignty of the light-dispensing faculty, as being source of light
and above all light, and by comprehending in itself all things
intellectual, and all things rational, and making them one altogether.
For as ignorance puts asunder those who have gone astray, so the
presence of the spiritual light is collective and unifying of those
being enlightened, both perfecting and further turning them towards the
true Being, by turning them from the many notions and collecting the
various views, or, to speak more correctly, fancies, into one true, pure
and uniform knowledge, and by filling them with light, one and unifying.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p15"></span>SECTION VII.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p16"></span>This Good is celebrated by the sacred
theologians, both as beautiful and as Beauty, and as Love, and as <span
id="page_40">p. 40</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_40"></span>
Beloved; and all the other Divine Names which beseem the beautifying and
highly-favoured comeliness. But the beautiful and Beauty are not to be
divided, as regards the Cause which has embraced the whole in one. For,
with regard to all created things, by dividing them into participations
and participants, we call beautiful that which participates in Beauty;
but beauty, the participation of the beautifying Cause of all the
beautiful things. But, the superessential Beautiful is called Beauty, on
account of the beauty communicated from Itself to all beautiful things,
in a manner appropriate to each, and as Cause of the good harmony and
brightness of all things which flashes like light to all the beautifying
distributions of its fontal ray, and as calling (<span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p16.1"></span>καλοῦν) all things to Itself (whence also
it is called Beauty) (<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p16.2"></span>κάλλος), and
as collecting all in all to Itself. (And it is called) Beautiful, as
(being) at once beautiful and super-beautiful, and always being under
the same conditions and in the same manner beautiful, and neither coming
into being nor perishing, neither waxing nor waning; neither in this
beautiful, nor in that ugly, nor at one time beautiful, and at another
not; nor in relation to one thing beautiful, and in relation to another
ugly, nor here, and not there, as being beautiful to some, and not
beautiful to others; but as Itself, in Itself, with Itself, uniform,
always being beautiful, and as having beforehand in Itself pre-eminently
the fontal beauty of everything beautiful. For, by the simplex and
supernatural nature of all beautiful things, all beauty, and everything
<span id="page_41">p. 41</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_41"></span>
beautiful, pre-existed uniquely as to Cause. From this Beautiful (comes)
being to all existing things,--that each is beautiful in its own proper
order; and by reason of the Beautiful are the adaptations of all things,
and friendships, and inter-communions, and by the Beautiful all things
are made one, and the Beautiful is origin of all things, as a creating
Cause, both by moving the whole and holding it together by the love of
its own peculiar Beauty; and end of all things, and beloved, as final
Cause (for all things exist for the sake of the Beautiful) and exemplary
(Cause), because all things are determined according to It. Wherefore,
also, the Beautiful is identical with the Good, because all things
aspire to the Beautiful and Good, on every account, and there is no
existing thing which does not participate in the Beautiful and the Good.
Yea, reason will dare to say even this, that even the non-existing
participates in the Beautiful and Good. For then even it is beautiful
and good, when in God it is celebrated superessentially to the exclusion
of all. This, the one Good and Beautiful, is uniquely Cause of all the
many things beautiful and good. From this are all the substantial
beginnings of things existing, the unions, the distinctions, the
identities, the diversities, the similarities, the dissimilarities, the
communions of the contraries, the commingling of things unified, the
providences of the superior, the mutual cohesions of those of the same
rank; the attentions of the more needy, the protecting and immoveable
abidings and stabilities of their whole selves and, on the other hand,
the <span id="page_42">p. 42</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_42"></span> communions of all things among all, in
a manner peculiar to each, and adaptations and unmingled friendships and
harmonies of the whole, the blendings in the whole, and the undissolved
connections of existing things, the never-failing successions of the
generations, all rests and movements, of the minds, of the souls, of the
bodies. For, that which is established above every rest, and every
movement, and moves each thing in the law of its own being to its proper
movement, is a rest and movement to all.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p17"></span>SECTION VIII.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p18"></span>Now, the divine minds <span
id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34) are said to be moved circularly indeed,
by being united to the illuminations of the Beautiful and Good, without
beginning and without end; but in a direct line, whenever they advance
to the succour of a subordinate, by accomplishing all things directly;
but spirally, because even in providing for the more indigent, they
remain fixedly, in identity, around the good and beautiful Cause of
their identity, ceaselessly dancing around.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p19"></span>SECTION IX.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p20"></span>Further, there is a movement of soul,
circular indeed,--the entrance into itself from things without, and the
unified convolution of its intellectual powers, bequeathing to it
inerrancy, as it were, in a sort of circle, and turning and collecting
itself, from the many things without, first to itself, then, as having
become single, uniting with the uniquely unified powers, and thus
conducting to the Beautiful and <span id="page_43">p. 43</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_43"></span> Good, which is above all things being,
and One and the Same, and without beginning and without end. But a soul
is moved spirally, in so far as it is illuminated, as to the divine
kinds of knowledge, in a manner proper to itself, not intuitively and at
once, but logically and discursively; and, as it were, by mingled and
relative operations; but in a straight line, when, not entering into
itself, and being moved by unique intuition (for this, as I said, is the
circular), but advancing to things around itself, and from things
without, it is, as it were, conducted from certain symbols, varied and
multiplied, to the simple and unified contemplations.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p21"></span>SECTION X.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p22"></span>Of these three motions then in
everything perceptible here below, and much more of the abidings and
repose and fixity of each, the Beautiful and Good, which is above all
repose and movement, is Cause and Bond and End; by reason of which, and
from which, and in which, and towards which, and for sake of which, is
every repose and movement. For, both from It and through It is both
Essence and every life, and both of mind and soul and every nature, the
minutiae, the equalities, the magnitudes, all the standards and the
analogies of beings, and harmonies and compositions; the entireties, the
parts, every one thing, and multitude, the connections of parts, the
unions of every multitude, the perfections of the entireties, the
quality, the weight, the size, the infinitude, the compounds, <span
id="page_44">p. 44</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_44"></span> the
distinctions, every infinitude, every term, all the bounds, the orders,
the pre-eminences, the elements, the forms, every essence, every power,
every energy, every condition, every sensible perception, every reason,
every conception, every contact, every science, every union, and in one
word, all things existing are from the Beautiful and Good, and in the
Beautiful and Good, and turn themselves to the Beautiful and Good.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p23"></span>Moreover, all things whatever, which
are and come to being, are and come to being by reason of the Beautiful
and Good; and to It all things look, and by It are moved and held
together, and for the sake of It, and by reason of It, and in It, is
every source exemplary, final, creative, formative, elemental, and in
one word, every beginning, every bond, every term, or to speak
summarily, all things existing are from the Beautiful and Good; and all
things non-existing are superessentially in the Beautiful and Good; and
it is of all, beginning and term, above beginning and above term,
because from It, and through It, and in It, and to It, are all things,
as says the Sacred Word.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p24"></span>By all things, then, the Beautiful and
Good is desired and beloved and cherished; and, by reason of It, and for
the sake of It, the less love the greater suppliantly; and those of the
same rank, their fellows brotherly; and the greater, the less
considerately; and these severally love the things of themselves
continuously; and all things by aspiring to the Beautiful and Good, do
and wish all things whatever <span id="page_45">p. 45</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_45"></span> they do and wish. Further, it may be
boldly said with truth, that even the very Author of all things, by
reason of overflowing Goodness, loves all, makes all, perfects all,
sustains all, attracts all; and even the Divine Love is Good of Good, by
reason of the Good. For Love itself, the benefactor of things that be,
pre-existing overflowingly in the Good, did not permit itself to remain
unproductive in itself, but moved itself to creation <span
id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35) , as befits the overflow which is
generative of all.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p25"></span>SECTION XI.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p26"></span>And let no one fancy that we honour
the Name of Love beyond the Oracles, for it is, in my opinion,
irrational and stupid not to cling to the force of the meaning, but to
the mere words; and this is not the characteristic of those who have
wished to comprehend things Divine, but of those who receive empty
sounds and keep the same just at the ears from passing through from
outside, and are not willing to know what such a word signifies, and in
what way one ought to distinctly represent it, through other words of
the same force and more explanatory, but who specially affect sounds and
signs without meaning, and syllables, and words unknown, which do not
pass through to the mental part of their soul, but buzz without, around
their lips and ears, as though it were not permitted to signify the
number four, by twice two, or straight lines by direct lines, or
motherland by fatherland, or any other, which signify the self-same
thing, by many parts of speech. <span id="page_46">p. 46</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_46"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p27"></span>We ought to know, according to the
correct account, that we use sounds, and syllables, and phrases, and
descriptions, and words, on account of the sensible perceptions; since
when our soul is moved by the intellectual energies to the things
contemplated, the sensible perceptions by aid of sensible objects are
superfluous; just as also the intellectual powers, when the soul, having
become godlike, throws itself, through a union beyond knowledge, against
the rays of the unapproachable light, by sightless efforts. But, when
the mind strives to be moved upwards, through objects of sense, to
contemplative conceptions, the clearer interpretations are altogether
preferable to the sensible perceptions, and the more definite
descriptions are things more distinct than things seen; since when
objects near are not made clear to the sensible perceptions, neither
will these perceptions be well able to present the things perceived to
the mind. But that we may not seem, in speaking thus, to be pushing
aside the Divine Oracles, let those who libel the Name of Love (<span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p27.1"></span>Ἔρωτος) hear them. "Be in love with It,"
they say, "and It will keep thee--Rejoice over It, and It will exalt
thee--Honour It, in order that It may encompass thee,"--and whatever
else is sung respecting Love, in the Word of God.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p28"></span>SECTION XII.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p29"></span>And yet it seemed to some of our
sacred expounders that the Name of Love is more Divine than that of
loving-kindness (<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p29.1"></span>ἀγάπης). But even
the <span id="page_47">p. 47</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_47"></span> Divine Ignatius <span
id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36) writes, "my own Love (<span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p29.3"></span>ἔρως) is crucified;" and in the
introductions to the Oracles you will find a certain One saying of the
Divine Wisdom, "1 became enamoured of her Beauty." So that we,
certainly, need not be afraid of this Name of Love, nor let any alarming
statement about it terrify us. For the theologians seem to me to treat
as equivalent the name of Loving-kindness, and that of Love; and on this
ground, to attribute, by preference, the veritable Love, to things
Divine, because of the misplaced prejudice of such men as these. For,
since the veritable Love is sung of in a sense befitting God, not by us
only, but also by the Oracles themselves, the multitude, not having
comprehended the Oneness of the Divine Name of Love, fell away, as might
be expected of them, to the divided and corporeal and sundered, seeing
it is not a real love, but a shadow, or rather a falling from the
veritable Love. For the Oneness of the Divine and one Love is
incomprehensible to the multitude, wherefore also, as seeming a very
hard name to the multitude, it is assigned to the Divine Wisdom, for the
purpose of leading back and restoring them to the knowledge of the
veritable Love; and for their liberation from the difficulty respecting
it. And again, as regards ourselves, where it happened often that men of
an earthly character imagined something out of place, (there is used)
what appears more euphonius. A certain one says, "Thy <span
id="page_48">p. 48</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_48"></span>
affection fell upon me, as the affection of the women." For those who
have rightly listened to things Divine, the name of Loving-kindness and
of Love is placed by the holy theologians in the same category
throughout the Divine revelations, and this is of a power unifying, and
binding together, and mingling pre-eminently in the Beautiful and Good;
pre-existing by reason of the beautiful and good, and imparted from the
beautiful and good, by reason of the Beautiful and Good; and sustaining
things of the same rank, within their mutual coherence, but moving the
first to forethought for the inferior, and attaching the inferior to the
superior by respect.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p30"></span>SECTION XIII.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p31"></span>But Divine Love is extatic, not
permitting (any) to be lovers of themselves, but of those beloved. They
shew this too, the superior by becoming mindful of the inferior; and the
equals by their mutual coherence; and the inferior, by a more divine
respect towards things superior. Wherefore also, Paul the Great, when
possessed by the Divine Love, and participating in its extatic power,
says with inspired lips, "I live no longer, but Christ lives in me." As
a true lover, and beside himself, as he says, to Almighty God, and not
living the life of himself, but the life of the Beloved, as a life
excessively esteemed. One might make bold to say even this, on behalf of
truth, that the very Author of all things, by the beautiful and good
love of everything, through an overflow of His loving goodness, becomes
out of Himself, by His providences for all existing things, <span
id="page_49">p. 49</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_49"></span> and is,
as it were, cozened by goodness and affection and love, and is led down
from the Eminence above all, and surpassing all, to being in all, as
befits an extatic superessential power centred in Himself. Wherefore,
those skilled in Divine things call Him even Jealous, as (being) that
vast good Love towards all beings, and as rousing His loving inclination
to jealousy,--and as proclaiming Himself Jealous--to Whom the things
desired are objects of jealousy, and as though the objects of His
providential care were objects of jealousy for Him. And, in short, the
lovable is of the Beautiful and Good, and Love preexisted both in the
Beautiful and Good, and on account of the Beautiful and Good, is and
takes Being.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p32"></span>SECTION XIV.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p33"></span>But what do the theologians mean when
at one time they call Him Love, and Loving-kindness, and at another,
Loved and Esteemed? For, of the one, He is Author and, as it were,
Producer and Father; but the other, He Himself is; and by one He is
moved, but by the other He moves; or (when they say), that He Himself is
Procurer and Mover of Himself and by Himself. In this sense, they call
Him esteemed and loved, as Beautiful and Good: but again Love and
Loving-kindness, as being at once moving and conducting Power to
Himself;--the alone--self Beautiful and Good, by reason of Itself, and,
being, as it were, a manifestation of Itself through Itself, and a good
Progression of the <span id="page_50">p. 50</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_50"></span> surpassing union, and a loving
Movement, simplex, self-moved, self-operating, pre-existing in the Good,
and from the Good bubbling forth to things existing, and again returning
to the Good, in which also the Divine Love indicates distinctly Its own
unending and unbeginning, as it were a sort of everlasting circle
whirling round in unerring combination, by reason of the Good, from the
Good, and in the Good, and to the Good, and ever advancing and remaining
and returning in the same and throughout the same. And these things our
illustrious initiator divinely set forth throughout His Hymns of Love,
of which we may appropriately make mention, and, as it were, place as a
certain sacred chapter to our treatise concerning Love.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p34"></span>SECTION XV.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p35"></span>Extract from the "Hymns of Love" by
the most holy Hierotheus:--

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p36"></span>Love, whether we speak of Divine, or
Angelic, or intelligent, or psychical, or physical, let us regard as a
certain unifying and combining power, moving the superior to forethought
for the inferior, and the equals to a mutual fellowship, and lastly, the
inferior to respect towards the higher and superior.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p37"></span>SECTION XVI.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p38"></span>Of the same, from the same Erotic
Hymns.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p39"></span>Since we have arranged the many loves
from the one, by telling, in due order, what are the<span
id="page_51">p. 51</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_51"></span> kinds
of knowledge and powers of the mundane and supermundane loves; over
which, according to the defined purpose of the discourse, the orders and
ranks of the mental and intelligible loves preside; next after <span
id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) which are placed the self-existent
intelligible and divine, over the really beautiful loves there which
have been appropriately celebrated by us; now, on the other hand, by
restoring all back to the One and enfolded Love, and Father of them all,
let us collect and gather them together from the many, by contracting It
into two Powers entirely lovable, over which rules and precedes
altogether the Cause, resistless from Its universal Love beyond all, and
to which is elevated, according to the nature of each severally, the
whole love from all existing things.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p40"></span>SECTION XVII.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p41"></span>Of the same, from the same Hymns of
Love.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p42"></span>Come then, whilst collecting these
again into one, let us say, that it is a certain simplex power, which of
itself moves to a sort of unifying combination from the Good, to the
lowest of things existing, and from that again in due order, circling
round again, through all to the Good from Itself, and through Itself and
by Itself, and rolling back to Itself always in the same way.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p43"></span>SECTION XVIII.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p44"></span>And yet, any one might say, "if the
Beautiful and Good is beloved and desired, and esteemed <span
id="page_52">p. 52</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_52"></span> by all
(for even that which is non-existing desires It, as we have said, and
struggles how to be in It; and Itself is the form-giving, even of things
without form, and by It alone, even the non-existing is said to be, and
is superessentially)--"How is it that the host of demons do not desire
the Beautiful and Good, but, through their earthly proclivities, having
fallen away from the angelic identity, as regards the desire of the
Good, have become cause of all evils both to themselves and to all the
others who are said to be corrupted? and why, in short, when the tribes
of demons have been brought into being from the Good, are they not like
the Good? or how, after being a good production from the Good, were they
changed? and what is that which depraved them, and in short, what is
evil? and from what source did it spring? and in which of things
existing is it? and how did He, Who is Good, will to bring it into
being? and how, when He willed it, was He able? And if evil is from
another cause, what other cause is there for things existing, beside the
Good? Further, how, when there is a Providence, is there evil, either
coming into existence at all, or not destroyed? And how does any
existing thing desire it, in comparison with the Good?

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p45"></span>SECTION XIX. <span
id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38)

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p46"></span>Such a statement as this might be
alleged by way of objection. We, however, on our part, will <span
id="page_53">p. 53</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_53"></span> pray
the objector to look to the truth of the facts, and will make bold to
say this first. The Evil is not from the Good, and if it is from the
Good, it is not the Evil. For, it is not the nature of fire to make
cold, nor of good to bring into being things not good; and if all things
that be are from the Good (for to produce and to preserve is natural to
the Good, but to destroy and to dissolve, to the Evil), there is no
existing thing from the Evil, nor will the Evil itself be, if it should
be evil even to itself. And, if it be not so, the Evil is not altogether
evil, but has some portion of the Good, in consequence of which it
wholly is. Now, if the things existing desire the Beautiful and Good,
and whatever they do, they do for the sake of that which seems good, and
every purpose of things existing has the Good for its beginning and end
(for nothing looking to the Evil *qua* evil, does what it does), how
shall the Evil be in things existing; or, wholly being, how has it been
seduced from such a good yearning? Also if all the things existing are
from the Good, and the Good is above all things existing, then there is
existing in the Good even the non-existing; but the Evil is not
existing; and, if this be not the case, it is not altogether evil, nor
non-existing, for the absolutely non-existing will be nothing, unless it
should be spoken of as in the Good superessentially. The Good, then,
will be fixed far above both the absolutely existing and the
non-existing; but the Evil is neither in things existing, nor in things
non-existing, but, being further distant from the Good than <span
id="page_54">p. 54</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_54"></span> the
non-existing itself, it is alien and more unsubstantial. Where then is
the Evil? some one may perchance say. For if the Evil is not,--virtue
and vice are the same, both universally and particularly. Or, not even
that which opposes itself to virtue will be evil, and yet sobriety and
license, and righteousness and unrighteousness, are contraries. And I,
by no means, speak in reference to the just and unjust man, and the
temperate and intemperate man; but also, long before the difference
between the just man and his opposite is made manifest externally, in
the very soul itself the vices stand altogether apart from the virtues,
and the passions rebel against the reason; and from this we must grant
some evil contrary to the Good. For the Good is not contrary to Itself,
but as the product from one Source and one Cause, It rejoices in
fellowship and unity and friendship. Nor yet is the lesser good opposed
to the greater, for neither is the less heat or cold opposed to the
greater. The Evil <span id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39) then is in things
existing, and is existing, and is opposed, and is in opposition to, the
Good; and if it is the destruction of things existing, this does not
expel the Evil from existence; but it will be, both itself existing, and
generator of things existing. Does not frequently the destruction of one
become birth of another? and the Evil will be contributing to the
completion of the whole, and supplying through itself non-imperfection
to the whole. <span id="page_55">p. 55</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_55"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p47"></span>SECTION XX.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p48"></span>Now to all this true reason will
answer, that the Evil *qua* evil makes no single essence or birth, but
only, as far as it can, pollutes and destroys the subsistence of things
existing. But, if any one says, that it is productive of being, and that
by destruction of one it gives birth to another, we must truly answer,
that not *qua* destruction it gives birth, but *qua* destruction and
evil, it destroys and pollutes only, but it becomes birth and essence,
by reason of the Good; and the Evil will be destruction indeed, by
reason of itself; but producer of birth by reason of the Good; and *qua*
evil, it is neither existing, nor productive of things existing; but, by
reason of the Good, it is both existing and good-existing, and
productive of things good. Yea, rather (for neither will the same by
itself be both good and evil, nor the self-same power be of itself
destruction and birth--neither as self-acting power, nor as self-acting
destruction), the absolutely Evil is neither existing nor good, nor
generative, nor productive of things being and good; but the Good in
whatever things it may be perfectly engendered, makes them perfect and
pure, and thoroughly good,--but the things which partake of it in a less
degree are both imperfectly good, and impure, by reason of the lack of
the Good. And (thus) the Evil altogether, is not, nor is good, nor good
producing; but that which approaches more or less near the Good will be
proportionately good; since the All-perfect Goodness, in passing through
all, not only passes to the <span id="page_56">p. 56</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_56"></span> All-good beings around Itself, but
extends Itself to the most remote, by being present to some thoroughly,
to others subordinately, but to the rest, in the most remote degree, as
each existing thing is able to participate in It. And some things,
indeed, participate in the Good entirely, whilst others are deprived of
It, in a more or less degree, but others possess a more obscure
participation in the Good; and to the rest, the Good is present as a
most distant echo. For if the Good were not present according to the
capacity of each, the most Divine and honoured would occupy the rank of
the lowest. And how were it possible that all should participate in the
Good uniformly, when not all are in the same way adapted to its whole
participation?

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p49"></span>Now, this is the exceeding greatness
of the power of the Good, that It empowers, both things deprived, and
the deprivation of Itself, with a view to the entire participation of
itself. And, if one must make bold to speak the truth, even the things
fighting against It, both are, and are able to fight, by Its power. Yea
rather, in order that I may speak summarily, all things which are, in so
far as they are, both are good, and from the Good; but, in so far as
they are deprived of the Good, are neither good, nor do they exist. For,
even with regard to the other conditions, such as heat or cold, there
are things which have been heated, and when the heat has departed from
them, many of them are deprived both of life and intelligence (now
Almighty God is outside essence, and is, superessentially), and, in
<span id="page_57">p. 57</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_57"></span>
one word, with regard to the rest, even when the condition has departed,
or has not become completely developed, things exist, and are able to
subsist; but that which is every way deprived of the Good, in no way or
manner ever was, or is, or will be, nor is able to be. For example, the
licentious man, even if he have been deprived of the Good, as regards
his irrational lust, in this respect he neither is, nor desires
realities, but nevertheless he participates in the Good, in his very
obscure echo of union and friendship. And, even Anger participates in
the Good, by the very movement and desire to direct and turn the seeming
evils to the seeming good. And the very man, who desires the very worst
life, as wholly desirous of life and that which seems best to him, by
the very fact of desiring, and desiring life, and looking to a best
life, participates in the Good. And, if you should entirely take away
the Good, there will be neither essence, nor life, nor yearning, nor
movement, nor anything else. So that the fact, that birth is born from
destruction, is not a power of evil, but a presence of a lesser good,
even as disease is a defect of order, not total--for, if this should be,
not even the disease itself will continue to exist, but the disease
remains and is, by having the lowest possible order of essence, and in
this continues to exist as a parasite. For that which is altogether
deprived of the Good, is neither existing, nor in things existing; but
the compound, by reason of the Good in things existing, and in
consequence of this in things <span id="page_58">p. 58</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_58"></span> existing, is also existing in so far as
it participates in the Good. Yea rather, all things existing will so far
be, more or less, as they participate in the Good; for, even as respects
the self-existing Being, that which in no ways is at all, will not be at
all; but that which partially is, but partially is not, in so far as it
has fallen from the ever Being, is not; but so far as it has
participated in the Being, so far it is, and its whole being, and its
non-being, is sustained and preserved. And the Evil,--that which has
altogether fallen from the Good--will be good, neither in the more nor
in the less; but the partially good, and partially not good, fight no
doubt against a certain good, but not against the whole Good, and, even
it is sustained by the participation of the Good, and the Good gives
essence even to the privation of Itself, wholly by the participation of
Itself; for, when the Good has entirely departed, there will be neither
anything altogether good, nor compound, nor absolute evil. For, if the
Evil is an imperfect good, (then) by the entire absence of the Good,
both the imperfect and the perfect Good will be absent; and then only
will be, and be seen, the Evil, when on the one hand, it is an evil to
those things to which it was opposed, and, on the other, is expelled
from other things on account of their goodness. For, it is impossible
that the same things, under the same conditions in every respect, should
fight against each other. The Evil then is not an actual thing. <span
id="page_59">p. 59</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_59"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p50"></span>SECTION XXI.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p51"></span>But neither is the Evil in things
existing. For, if all things existing are from the Good, and the Good is
in all things existing, and embraces all, either the Evil will not be in
things existing, or it will be in the Good; and certainly it will not be
in the Good, for neither is cold in fire, nor to do evil in Him, Who
turns even the evil to good. But, if it shall be, how will the Evil be
in the Good? If forsooth, from Itself, it is absurd and impossible. For
it is not possible, as the infallibility of the Oracles affirms, that a
"good tree should bring forth evil fruits," nor certainly, *vice versa.*
But, if not from Itself, it is evident that it will be from another
source and cause. For, either the Evil will be from the Good, or the
Good from the Evil; or, if this be not possible, both the Good and the
Evil will be from another source and cause, for no dual is source, but a
Unit will be source of every dual. Further, it is absurd that two
entirely contraries should proceed and be from one and the same, and
that the self-same source should be, not simplex and unique, but divided
and double, and contrary to itself, and be changed; and certainly it is
not possible that there should be two contrary sources of things
existing, and that these should be contending in each other, and in the
whole. For, if this were granted, even Almighty God will not be in
repose, nor free from disquietude, if there were indeed something
bringing disturbance even to Him. Then, <span id="page_60">p. 60</span>
<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_60"></span> everything will be in disorder,
and always fighting; and yet the Good distributes friendship to all
existing things, and is celebrated by the holy theologians, both as very
Peace, and Giver of Peace. Wherefore, things good are both friendly and
harmonious, every one, and products of one life, and marshalled to one
good; and kind, and similar, and affable to each other. So that the Evil
is not in God, and the Evil is not inspired by God. But neither is the
Evil from God, for, either He is not good, or He does good, and produces
good things; and, not once in a way, and some; and at another time not,
and not all; for this would argue transition and change, even as regards
the very Divinest thing of all, the Cause. But, if in God, the Good is
sustaining essence, God, when changing from the Good, will be sometimes
Being, and sometimes not Being. But, if He has the Good by
participation, He will then have it from another; and sometimes He will
have it, and sometimes not. The Evil, then, is not from God, nor in God,
neither absolutely nor occasionally.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p52"></span>SECTION XXII.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p53"></span>But neither is the Evil in Angels; for
if the good-like angel proclaims the goodness of God, being by
participation in a secondary degree that which the Announced is in the
first degree as Cause, the Angel is a likeness of Almighty God--a
manifestation of the unmanifested light--a mirror untarnished--most
transparent--without flaw--pure--without spot-- <span id="page_61">p.
61</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_61"></span> receiving, if I may so
speak, the full beauty of the Good-stamped likeness of God--and without
stain, shedding forth undefiledly in itself, so far as is possible, the
goodness of the Silence, which dwells in innermost shrines. The Evil,
then, is not even in Angels. But by punishing sinners are they evil? By
this rule, then, the punishers of transgressors are evil, and those of
the priests who shut out the profane from the Divine Mysteries. And yet,
the being punished is not an evil, but the becoming worthy of
punishment; nor the being deservedly expelled from Holy things, but the
becoming accursed of God, and unholy and unfit for things un-defiled.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p54"></span>SECTION XXIII.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p55"></span>But, neither are the demons evil by
nature; for, if they are evil by nature, neither are they from the Good,
nor amongst things existing; nor, in fact, did they change from good,
being by nature, and always, evil. Then, are they evil to themselves or
to others? If to themselves, they also destroy themselves; but if to
others, how destroying, or what destroying?--Essence, or power, or
energy? If indeed Essence, in the first place, it is not contrary to
nature; for they do not destroy things indestructible by nature, but
things receptive of destruction. Then, neither is this an evil for every
one, and in every case; but, not even any existing thing is destroyed,
in so far as it is essence and nature, but by the defect of nature’s
order, the <span id="page_62">p. 62</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_62"></span> principle of harmony and proportion
lacks the power to remain as it was. But the lack of strength is not
complete, for the complete lack of power takes away even the disease and
the subject; and such a disease will be even a destruction of itself; so
that, such a thing is not an evil, but a defective good, for that which
has no part of the Good will not be amongst things which exist. And with
regard to the destruction of power and energy the principle is the same.
Then, how are the demons, seeing they come into being from God, evil?
For the Good brings forth and sustains good things. Yet they are called
evil, some one may say. But not as they are (for they are from the Good,
and obtained a good being), but, as they are not, by not having had
strength, as the Oracles affirm, "to keep their first estate." For in
what, tell me, do we affirm that the demons become evil, except in the
ceasing in the habit and energy for good things Divine? Otherwise, if
the demons are evil by nature, they are always evil; yet evil is
unstable. Therefore, if they are always in the same condition, they are
not evil; for to be ever the same is a characteristic of the Good. But,
if they are not always evil, they are not evil by nature, but by
wavering from the angelic good qualities. And they are not altogether
without part in the good, in so far as they both are, and live and
think, and in one word--as there is a sort of movement of aspiration in
them. But they are said to be evil, by reason of their weakness as
regards their action according to nature. The evil then, in them, is
<span id="page_63">p. 63</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_63"></span> a
turning aside and a stepping out of things befitting themselves, and a
missing of aim, and imperfection and impotence, and a weakness and
departure, and falling away from the power which preserves their
integrity in them. Otherwise, what is evil in demons? An irrational
anger--a senseless desire--a headlong fancy.--But these, even if they
are in demons, are not altogether, nor in every respect, nor in
themselves alone, evils. For even with regard to other living creatures,
not the possession of these, but the loss, is both destruction to the
creature, and an evil. But the possession saves, and makes to be, the
nature of the living creature which possesses them. The tribe of demons
then is not evil, so far as it is according to nature, but so far as it
is not; and the whole good which was given to them was not changed, but
themselves fell from the whole good given. And the angelic gifts which
were given to them, we by no means affirm that they were changed, but
they exist, and are complete, and all luminous, although the demons
themselves do not see, through having blunted their powers of seeing
good. So far as they are, they are both from the Good, and are good, and
aspire to the Beautiful and the Good, by aspiring to the realities,
Being, and Life, and Thought; and by the privation and departure and
declension from the good things befitting them, they are called evil,
and are evil as regards what they are not: and by aspiring to the
non-existent, they aspire to the Evil. <span id="page_64">p. 64</span>
<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_64"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p56"></span>SECTION XXIV.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p57"></span>But does some one say that souls are
evil? If it be that they meet with evil things providentially, and with
a view to their preservation, this is not an evil, but a good, and from
the Good, Who makes even the evil good. But, if we say that souls become
evil, in what respect do they become evil, except in the failure of
their good habits and energies; and, by reason of their own lack of
strength, missing their aim and tripping? For we also say, that the air
around us becomes dark by failure and absence of light, and yet the
light itself is always light, that which enlightens even the darkness.
The Evil, then, is neither in demons nor in us, as an *existent* evil,
but as a failure and dearth of the perfection of our own proper goods.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p58"></span>SECTION XXV.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p59"></span>But neither is the Evil in irrational
creatures, for if you should take away anger and lust, and the other
things which we speak of, and which are not absolutely evil in their own
nature, the lion having lost his boldness and fierceness will not be a
lion; and the dog, when he has become gentle to every body, will not be
a dog, since to keep guard is a dog’s duty, and to admit those of the
household, but to drive away the stranger. So the fact that nature is
not destroyed is not an evil, but a destruction of nature, weakness, and
failure of the natural habitudes and energies and powers. And, if all
<span id="page_65">p. 65</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_65"></span>
things through generation in time have their perfection, the imperfect
is not altogether contrary to universal nature.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p60"></span>SECTION XXVI.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p61"></span>But neither is the Evil in nature
throughout, for if all the methods of nature are from universal nature,
there is nothing contrary to it. But in each individual (nature) one
thing will be according to nature, and another not according to nature.
For one thing is contrary to nature in one, and another in another, and
that which is according to nature to one, is to the other, contrary to
nature. But malady of nature, that which is the contrary to nature, is
the deprivation of things of nature. So that there is not an evil
nature; but this is evil to nature, the inability to accomplish the
things of one’s proper nature.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p62"></span>SECTION XXVII.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p63"></span>But, neither is the Evil in bodies.
For deformity and disease are a defect of form, and a deprivation of
order. And this is not altogether an evil, but a less good; for if a
dissolution of beauty and form and order become complete, the body
itself will be gone. But that the body is not cause of baseness to the
soul is evident, from the fact that baseness continues to coexist even
without a body, as in demons. For this is evil to minds and souls and
bodies, (viz.) the weakness and declension from the habitude of their
own proper goods. <span id="page_66">p. 66</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_66"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p64"></span>SECTION XXVIII.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p65"></span>But neither (a thing which they say
over and over again) is the evil in matter, so far as it is matter. For
even it participates in ornament and beauty and form. But if matter,
being without these, by itself is without quality and without form, how
does matter produce anything--matter, which, by itself, is impassive?
Besides how is matter an evil? for, if it does not exist in any way
whatever, it is neither good nor evil but if it is any how existing, and
all things existing are from the Good, even it would be from the Good;
and either the Good is productive of the Evil, or the Evil, as being
from the Good, is good; or the Evil is capable of producing the Good; or
even the Good, as from the Evil, is evil; or further, there are two
first principles, and these suspended from another one head. And, if
they say that matter is necessary, for a completion of the whole Cosmos,
how is matter an evil? For the Evil is one thing, and the
necessary <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) is another. But, how does
He, Who is Good, bring anything to birth from the Evil? or, how is that,
which needs the Good, evil? For the Evil shuns the nature of the Good.
And how does matter, being evil, generate and nourish nature? For the
Evil, *quâ* evil, neither generates, nor nourishes, nor solely produces,
nor preserves anything.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p66"></span>But, if they should say, that it does
not make baseness in souls, but that they are dragged to it, how will
this be true? for many of them look towards the <span id="page_67">p.
67</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_67"></span> good; and yet how did
this take place, when matter was dragging them entirely to the Evil? So
that the Evil in souls is not from matter, but from a disordered and
discordant movement. But, if they say this further, that they invariably
follow matter, and unstable matter is necessary for those who are unable
to stand firmly by themselves, how is the Evil necessary, or the
necessary an evil?

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p67"></span>SECTION XXIX.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p68"></span>But neither is it this which we
affirm--the "privation fights against the Good by its own power <span
id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41) "; for the complete privation is
altogether powerless, and the partial has the power, not in respect of
privation, but in so far as it is not a complete privation. For, whilst
privation of good is partial, it is not, as yet, an evil, and when, it
has become an accomplished fact, the nature of the evil has departed
also.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p69"></span>SECTION XXX.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p70"></span>But, to speak briefly, the Good is
from the one and the whole Cause, but the Evil is from many and partial
defects. Almighty God knows the Evil *qua* good; and, with Him, the
causes of the evils are powers producing good <span
id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42) . But, if the Evil is eternal, and
creates, and has power, and is, and does, whence do these come to it? Is
it either from the Good, or by the Good from the Evil, or by both from
another cause? Everything that is according to nature comes into being
from a <span id="page_68">p. 68</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_68"></span> defined cause. And if the Evil is
without cause, and undefined, it is not according to nature. For there
is not in nature what is contrary to nature; nor is there any *raison d’
etre* for want of art in art. Is then the soul cause of things evil, as
fire of burning, and does it fill everything that it happens to touch
with baseness? Or, is the nature of the soul then good, but, by its
energies, exists sometimes in one condition, and sometimes in another?
If indeed by nature, even its existence is an evil, and whence then does
it derive its existence? Or, is it from the good Cause creative of the
whole universe? But, if from this, how is it essentially evil? For good
are all things born of this. But if by energies, neither is this
invariable, and if not, whence are the virtues? Since it (the soul)
comes into being without even seeming good. It remains then that the
Evil is a weakness and a falling short of the Good.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p71"></span>SECTION XXXI.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p72"></span>The Cause of things good is One. If
the Evil is contrary to the Good, the many causes of the Evil, certainly
those productive of things evil, are not principles and powers, but want
of power, and want of strength, and a mixing of things dissimilar
without proportion. Neither are things evil unmoved, and always in the
same condition, but endless and undefined, and borne along in different
things, and those endless. The Good will be beginning and end of all,
even things evil, for, for the sake of the Good, are all things, both
those that are good, and <span id="page_69">p. 69</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_69"></span> those that are contrary. For we do even
these as desiring the Good (for no one does what he does with a view to
the Evil), wherefore the Evil has not a subsistence, but a parasitical
subsistence, coming into being for the sake of the Good, and not of
itself.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p73"></span>SECTION XXXII.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p74"></span>It is to be laid down that being
belongs to the Evil as an accident and by reason of something else, and
not from its own origin, and thus that that which comes into being
appears to be right, because it comes into being for the sake of the
Good, but that in reality it is not right for the reason that we think
that which is not good to be good. The desired is shewn to be one thing,
and that which comes to pass is another. The Evil, then, is beside the
path, and beside the mark, and beside nature, and beside cause, and
beside beginning, and beside end, and beside limit, and beside
intention, and beside purpose. The Evil then is privation and failure,
and want of strength, and want of proportion, and want of attainment,
and want of purpose; and without beauty, and without life, and without
mind, and without reason, and without completeness, and without
stability, and without cause, and without limit, and without production;
and inactive, and without result, and disordered, and dissimilar, and
limitless, and dark, and unessential, and being itself nothing in any
manner of way whatever. How, in short, can evil do anything by its
mixture with the Good? For that which is altogether without
participation <span id="page_70">p. 70</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_70"></span> in the Good, neither is anything, nor
is capable of anything. For, if the Good is both an actual thing and an
object of desire, and powerful and effective, how will the contrary to
the Good,--that which has been deprived of essence, and intention, and
power, and energy,--be capable of anything? Not all things are evil to
all, nor the same things evil in every respect. To a demon, evil is to
be contrary to the good-like mind--to a soul, to be contrary to
reason--to a body, to be contrary to nature.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p75"></span>SECTION XXXIII.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p76"></span>How, in short, are there evils when
there is a Providence? The Evil, *qua* evil, is not, neither as an
actual thing nor as in things existing. And no single thing is without a
Providence. For neither is the Evil an actual thing existing unmixed
with the Good. And, if no single thing is without participation in the
Good, but the lack of the Good is an evil, and no existing thing is
deprived absolutely of the Good, the Divine Providence is in all
existing things, and no single thing is without Providence. But
Providence, as befits Its goodness, uses even evils which happen for the
benefit, either individual or general, of themselves or others, and
suitably provides for each being. Wherefore we will not admit the vain
statement of the multitude, who say that Providence ought to lead us to
virtue, even against our will. For to destroy nature is not a function
of Providence. Hence, as Providence is conservative of the nature of
each, it provides for <span id="page_71">p. 71</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_71"></span> the free, as free; and for the whole,
and individuals, according to the wants of all and each, as far as the
nature of those provided for admits the providential benefits of its
universal and manifold Providence, distributed proportionably to each.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p77"></span>SECTION XXXIV.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p78"></span>The Evil, then, is not an actual
thing, nor is the Evil in things existing. For the Evil, *qua* evil, is
nowhere, and the fact that evil comes into being is not in consequence
of power, but by reason of weakness. And, as for the demons, what they
are is both from the Good, and good. But their evil is from the
declension from their own proper goods, and a change--the weakness, as
regards their identity and condition, of the angelic perfection
befitting them. And they aspire to the Good, in so far as they aspire to
be and to live and to think. And in so far as they do not aspire to the
Good, they aspire to the non-existent; and this is not aspiration, but a
missing of the true aspiration.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p79"></span>SECTION XXXV.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p80"></span>Now the Oracles call conscious
transgressors those who are thoroughly weak as regards the ever
memorable knowledge or the practise of the Good, and who, knowing the
will, do not perform it,--those who are hearers indeed, but are weak
concerning the faith, or the energy of the Good. And for some, it is
against their will to understand to do good, by reason of the deviation
or weakness of the will. <span id="page_72">p. 72</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_72"></span> And in short, the Evil (as we have
often said) is want of strength and want of power, and defect, either of
the knowledge, or the never to be forgotten knowledge, or of the faith,
or of the aspiration, or of the energy of the Good. Yet, some one may
say, the weakness is not punishable, but on the contrary is pardonable.
Now, if the power were not granted, the statement might hold good; but,
if power comes from the Good, Who giveth, according to the Oracles, the
things suitable to all absolutely, the failure and deviation, and
departure and declension of the possession from the Good of our own
proper goods is not praiseworthy. But let these things suffice to have
been sufficiently said according to our ability in our writings
"*Concerning just and Divine chastisement"* throughout which sacred
treatise the infallibility of the Oracles has cast aside those
sophistical statements as senseless words, speaking injustice and
falsehood against Almighty God. But now, according to our ability, the
Good has been sufficiently praised, as really lovable,--as beginning and
end of all--as embracing things existing--as giving form to things not
existing--as Cause of all good things--as guiltless of things evil--as
Providence and Goodness complete--and soaring above things that are and
things that are not--and turning to good things evil, and the privation
of Itself--as by all desired, and loved, and esteemed, and whatever
else, the true statement, as I deem, has demonstrated in the preceding.
<span id="page_73">p. 73</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.iv-Page_73"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_30"></span>[35:31](dio07.htm#fr_30) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p10.1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p10.2"></span>ευροίας.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[37:32](dio07.htm#fr_31) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p10.3"></span>See Dulac, Theology anticipates Science.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[38:33](dio07.htm#fr_32) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p12.1"></span>The Greek word is <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p12.2"></span>νοητὸν, which in connection with <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p12.3"></span>φῶς is rendered here "spiritual light."

<span id="fn_33"></span>[39:34](dio07.htm#fr_33) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p14.1"></span>See Book of Hierotheus, c. 2.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[42:35](dio07.htm#fr_34) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p18.1"></span>Angels.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[45:36](dio07.htm#fr_35) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p24.1"></span>Creation through Goodness not necessity.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[47:37](dio07.htm#fr_36) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p29.2"></span>See note, p. 128.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[51:38](dio07.htm#fr_37) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p39.1"></span>i.e. in ascending order.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[52:39](dio07.htm#fr_38) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p45.1"></span>Plato, Theaet.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[54:40](dio07.htm#fr_39) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p46.1"></span>Theaet., 1763.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[66:41](dio07.htm#fr_40) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p65.1"></span>Jahn, p. 66.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[67:42](dio07.htm#fr_41) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p68.1"></span>Jahn, p, 67.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[67:43](dio07.htm#fr_42) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.iv-p70.1"></span>Out of evil forth producing good.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Caput V.](dio08)
