[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dio12)  [Next](dio14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486434591/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Works of Dionysius the Areopagite, tr. by John Parker, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii.ii.x"></span>

### <span id="ii.ii.ii.x-p0.1"></span>CAPUT X.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.x-p1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ii.x-p2"></span>Concerning Sovereign Lord, "Ancient of
days" in which also, concerning Age and Time <span
id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) .

<span id="ii.ii.ii.x-p3"></span>SECTION I.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.x-p4"></span>THE time, then, is come for our
discourse, to sing the God of many Names, as "Sovereign Lord," and as
"Ancient of days." For He is called *the former,* by reason that He is
an all-controlling basis, binding and embracing the whole, and
establishing and supporting, and tightening, and completing the whole.
Continuous in itself, and from itself, producing the whole, as it were
from a Sovereign root, and turning to itself the whole, as to a
sovereign parent stock, and holding them together as an all-embracing
basis of all, securing all the things embraced, within one grasp
superior to all, and not permitting them, when <span id="page_110">p.
110</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.x-Page_110"></span> fallen from itself to
be destroyed, as moved from an all-perfect sanctuary. But the Godhead is
called Sovereign, both as controlling and governing the members of His
household, purely, and as being desired and beloved by all, and as
placing upon all the voluntary yokes, and the sweet pangs of the Divine
and Sovereign, and in dissolvable love of the Goodness itself,

<span id="ii.ii.ii.x-p5"></span>SECTION II.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.x-p6"></span>But Almighty God is celebrated as
"*Ancient of days"* because He is of all things both Age and Time,--and
before Days, and before Age and Time. And yet we must affirm that He is
Time and Day, and appointed Time, and Age, in a sense befitting God, as
being throughout every movement unchangeable and unmoved, and in His
ever moving remaining in Himself, and as being Author of Age and Time
and Days. Wherefore, in the sacred Divine manifestations of the mystic
visions, He is represented as both old and young; the former indeed
signifying the "Ancient" and being from the beginning, and the latter
His never growing old; or both teaching that He advances through all
things from beginning to end,--or as our Divine initiator says, "since
each manifests the priority of God, the Elder having the first place in
Time, but the Younger the priority in number; because the unit, and
things near the unit, are nearer the beginning than numbers further
advanced. <span id="page_111">p. 111</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.x-Page_111"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ii.x-p7"></span>SECTION III.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.x-p8"></span>But we must, as I think, see from the
Oracles the nature of Time and Eternity, for they do not always (merely)
call all the things absolutely unoriginated and really everlasting,
eternal, but also things imperishable and immortal and unchangeable, and
things which are in like fashion, as when they say, "be ye opened,
eternal doors," and the like. And often they characterize the things the
most ancient by the name of Eternity; and again they call the whole
duration of our time Eternity, in so far as the ancient and
unchangeable, and the measurement of existence throughout, is a
characteristic of Eternity. But they call time that concerned in
generation and decay and change, and sometimes the one, and sometimes
the other. Wherefore also, the Word of God says that even we, who are
bounded here by time, shall partake of Eternity, when we have reached
the Eternity which is imperishable and ever the same. But sometimes
eternity is celebrated in the Oracles, even as temporal, and time as
eternal. But if we know them better and more accurately, things
spiritual <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) are spoken of and denoted
by Eternity, and things subject to generation by time. It is necessary
then to suppose that things called eternal are not absolutely co-eternal
with God, Who is before Eternity, but that following unswervingly the
most august Oracles, we should understand things eternal and temporal
according to the hopes recognized by <span id="page_112">p. 112</span>
<span id="ii.ii.ii.x-Page_112"></span> them, hut whatever participates
partly in eternity and partly in time, as things midway between things
spiritual and things being born. But Almighty God we ought to celebrate,
both as eternity and time, as Author of every time and eternity, and
"Ancient of days," as before time, and above time; and as changing
appointed seasons and times; and again as being before ages, in so far
as He is both before eternity and above eternity and His kingdom, a
kingdom of all the Ages. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_53"></span>[109:54](dio13.htm#fr_53) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.x-p2.1"></span>Dulac, p. 226.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[111:55](dio13.htm#fr_54) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.x-p8.1"></span><span id="ii.ii.ii.x-p8.2"></span>τὰ
ὄντα--actual.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Caput XI.](dio14)
