[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dio18)  [Next](dio20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486434591/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Works of Dionysius the Areopagite, tr. by John Parker, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iii.ii"></span>

## <span id="ii.iii.ii-p0.1"></span>MYSTIC THEOLOGY.

<span id="ii.iii.ii.i"></span>

### <span id="ii.iii.ii.i-p0.1"></span>CAPUT I.

<span id="ii.iii.ii.i-p1"></span>What is the Divine Gloom?

<span id="ii.iii.ii.i-p2"></span>SECTION I.

<span id="ii.iii.ii.i-p3"></span>TRIAD supernal, both super-God and
super-good, Guardian of the Theosophy of Christian men, direct us aright
to the super-unknown and super-brilliant and highest summit of the
mystic Oracles, where the simple and absolute and changeless mysteries
of theology lie hidden within the super-luminous gloom of the silence,
revealing hidden things, which in its deepest darkness shines above the
most super-brilliant, and in the altogether impalpable and invisible,
fills to overflowing the eyeless minds with glories of surpassing
beauty. This then be my prayer; but thou, O dear Timothy, by thy
persistent commerce with the mystic visions, leave behind both sensible
perceptions and intellectual efforts, and all objects of sense and
intelligence, and all things not being and being, and be raised aloft
unknowingly to the union, as far as attainable, with Him Who is above
every essence and knowledge. For by the resistless and absolute ecstasy
in all purity, from thyself and all, thou wilt be carried on high, to
the superessential ray of the Divine darkness, when thou hast cast away
all, and become free from all. <span id="page_131">p. 131</span> <span
id="ii.iii.ii.i-Page_131"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.ii.i-p4"></span>SECTION II.

<span id="ii.iii.ii.i-p5"></span>But see that none of the uninitiated
listen to these things--those I mean who are entangled in things being,
and fancy there is nothing superessentially above things being, but
imagine that they know, by their own knowledge, Him, Who has placed
darkness as His hiding-place. But, if the Divine initiations are above
such, what would any one say respecting those still more uninitiated,
such as both portray the Cause exalted above all, from the lowest of
things created, and say that It in no wise excels the no-gods fashioned
by themselves and of manifold shapes, it being our duty both to
attribute and affirm all the attributes of things existing to It, as
Cause of all, and more properly to deny them all to It, as being above
all, and not to consider the negations to be in opposition to the
affirmations, but far rather that It, which is above every abstraction
and definition, is above the privations.

<span id="ii.iii.ii.i-p6"></span>SECTION III.

<span id="ii.iii.ii.i-p7"></span>Thus, then, the divine Bartholomew says
that Theology is much and least, and the Gospel broad and great, and on
the other hand concise. He seems to me to have comprehended this
supernaturally, that the good Cause of all is both of much utterance,
and at the same time of briefest utterance and without utterance; as
having neither utterance nor conception, because It is superessentially
exalted above all, and manifested without veil and in truth, to those
alone who pass through both all things consecrated<span id="page_132">p.
132</span> <span id="ii.iii.ii.i-Page_132"></span> and pure, and ascend
above every ascent of all holy summits, and leave behind all divine
lights and sounds, and heavenly words, and enter into the gloom, where
really is, as the Oracles say, He Who is beyond all. For even the divine
Moses is himself strictly bidden to be first purified, and then to be
separated from those who are not so, and after entire cleansing hears
the many-voiced trumpets, and sees many lights, shedding pure and
streaming rays; then he is separated from the multitude, and with the
chosen priests goes first to the summit of the divine ascents, although
even then he does not meet with Almighty God Himself, but views not Him
(for He is viewless) but the place where He is. Now this I think
signifies that the most Divine and Highest of the things seen and
contemplated are a sort of suggestive expression, of the things subject
to Him Who is above all, through which His wholly inconceivable Presence
is shown, reaching to the highest spiritual summits of His most holy
places; and then he (Moses) is freed from them who are both seen and
seeing, and enters into the gloom of the *Agnosia;* a gloom veritably
mystic, within which he closes all perceptions of knowledge and enters
into the altogether impalpable and unseen, being wholly of Him Who is
beyond all, and of none, neither himself nor other; and by inactivity of
all knowledge, united in his better part to. the altogether Unknown, and
by knowing nothing, knowing above mind.

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span> <span
id="ii.iii.ii.i-Page_133"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Caput II.](dio20)
