[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dio15)  [Next](dio17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486434591/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Works of Dionysius the Areopagite, tr. by John Parker, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii.ii.xiii"></span>

### <span id="ii.ii.ii.xiii-p0.1"></span>CAPUT XIII.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.xiii-p1"></span>Concerning "Perfect" and "One".

<span id="ii.ii.ii.xiii-p2"></span>SECTION I.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.xiii-p3"></span>So much then on these matters; but
let us now at last, with your good pleasure, approach the most difficult
subject in the whole discourse. For the Word of God predicates
everything, singly and collectively, respecting the Cause of all, and
extols Him both as *Perfect* and as *One* <span
id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57) . He is then perfect not only as
self-perfect, and solitarily separated within Himself, by Himself, and
throughout most perfect, but also as super-perfect, as beseems His
pre-eminence over all, and limiting every infinitude, and surpassing
every term, and by none contained or comprehended; but even extending at
once to all, and above all, by His unfailing gratuities and endless
energies. But, on the other hand, He is called perfect, both as without
increase, and always perfect, and as undiminished, as pre-holding all
things in Himself, and overflowing as beseems one, inexhaustible, and
same, and super-full, and undiminished, abundance, in accordance with
which He perfects all perfect things, and fills them with His own
perfection. <span id="page_123">p. 123</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.xiii-Page_123"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ii.xiii-p4"></span>SECTION II.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.xiii-p5"></span>But *One,* because He is uniquely
all, as beseems an excess of unique Oneness, and is Cause of all without
departing from the One. For there is no single existing being, which
does not participate in the one, but as every number participates in an
unit, and one dual and one decade is spoken of, and one half, and one
third and tenth, so everything, and part of everything participates in
the one, and by the fact that the One is, all existing things are. And
the Cause of all is not One, as one of many, but before every one and
multitude, and determinative of every one and multitude. For there is no
multitude which does not partake in some way or other of the one. Yea,
that which is many by parts, is one in the whole; and the many by the
accidents, is one by the subject; and the many by the number or the
powers, is one by the species, and the many by the species, is one by
the genus; and the many by the progressions, is one by the source. And
there is no single thing which does not participate in some way in the
one, which uniformly pre-held in the uniqueness throughout all, all and
whole, all, even the things opposed. And indeed, without the one there
will not be a multitude, but without the multitude there will be the
one, even as the unit previous to every multiplied number; and, if any
one should suppose, that all things are united to all, the All will be
one in the whole. <span id="page_124">p. 124</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.xiii-Page_124"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ii.xiii-p6"></span>SECTION III.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.xiii-p7"></span>Especially must this be known, that
according to the pre-conceived species of each one, things united are
said to be made one, and the one is elemental of all; and if you should
take away the one, there will be neither totality nor part, nor any
other single existing thing. For the one, uniformly, pre-held and
comprehended all things in itself. For this reason, then, the Word of
God celebrates the whole Godhead, as Cause of all, by the epithet of the
One, both one God the Father, and one Lord Jesus Christ, and one and the
same Spirit, by reason of the surpassing indivisibility of the whole
Divine Oneness, in which all things are uniquely collected, and are
super-unified, and are with It Superessentially. Wherefore also, all
things are justly referred and attributed to It, by Which and from
Which, and through Which, and in Which, and to Which, all things are,
and are co-ordinated, and abide, and are held together, and are filled,
and are turned towards It. And you would not find any existing thing,
which is not what it is, and perfected and preserved, by the One, after
which the whole Deity is superessentially named. And it is necessary
also, that we being turned from the many to the One, by the power of the
Divine Oneness, should celebrate as One the whole and one Deity--the one
Cause of all--which is before every one and multitude, and part and
whole, and limit and illimitability, and term and infinity, which bounds
all things that be, even the Being Itself, and is <span id="page_125">p.
125</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.xiii-Page_125"></span> uniquely Cause of
all, individually and collectively, and at the same time before all, and
above all, and above the One existing Itself, and bounding the One
existing Itself; since the One existing--that in things being--is
numbered, and number participates in essence; but the superessential One
bounds both the One existing, and every number, and Itself is, of both
one and number, and every being, Source and Cause, and Number and.
Order. Wherefore also, whilst celebrated as Unit and Triad, the Deity
above all is neither Unit nor Triad, as understood by us or by any other
sort of being, but, in order that we may celebrate truly. Its
super-oneness, and Divine generation, by the threefold and single name
of God, we name the Deity, Which is inexpressible to things that be, the
Superessential. But no Unit nor Triad, nor number nor unity, nor
productiveness, nor any other existing thing, or thing known to any
existing thing, brings forth the hiddenness, above every expression and
every mind, of the Super-Deity Which is above all superessentially. Nor
has It a Name, or expression, but is elevated above in the inaccessible.
And neither do we apply the very Name of Goodness, as making it adequate
to It, but through a desire of understanding and saying something
concerning that inexpressible nature, we consecrate the most august of
Names to It, in the first degree, and although we should be in accord in
this matter with the theologians, yet we shall fall short of the truth
of the facts. Wherefore, even they have given the preference to the
ascent through <span id="page_126">p. 126</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.xiii-Page_126"></span> negations, as lifting the soul out
of things kindred to itself, and conducting it through all the Divine
conceptions, above which towers that which is above every name, and
every expression and knowledge, and at the furthest extremity attaching
it to Him, as far indeed as is possible for us to be attached to that
Being.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.xiii-p8"></span>SECTION IV.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.xiii-p9"></span>We then, having collected these
intelligible Divine Names, have unfolded them to the best of our
ability, falling short not only of the precision which belongs to them,
(for this truly, even Angels might say) nor only of their praises as
sung by Angels (and the chief of our Theologians come behind the lowest
of them), nor indeed of the Theologians themselves, nor of their
followers or companions, but even of those who are of the same rank as
ourselves, last and subordinate to them; so that, if the things spoken
should be correct, and, if we, as far as in us lies, have really reached
the perception of the unfolding of the Divine Names, let the fact be
ascribed to the Author of all good things, Who, Himself, bestows first
the power to speak, then to speak well. And if any one of the Names of
the same force has been passed over, that also you must understand
according to the same methods. But, if these things are either incorrect
or imperfect, and we have wandered from the truth, either wholly or
partially, may it be of thy brotherly kindness to correct him, who
unwillingly is ignorant, and to impart a word to him, who wishes to
learn, <span id="page_127">p. 127</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.xiii-Page_127"></span> and to vouchsafe assistance to him,
who has not power in himself; and to heal him, who, not willingly, is
sick; and having found out some things from thyself, and others from
others, and receiving all from the good to transfer them also to us. By
no means grow weary in doing good to a man thy friend, for thou
perceivest, that we also have kept to ourselves none of the hierarchical
communications transmitted to us, but have transmitted them without
flaw, both to you and to other holy men, yea, and will continue to
transmit them, as we may be sufficient to speak, and those to whom we
speak, to hear, doing injury in no respect to the tradition, if at least
we do not fail in the conception and expression thereof. But, let these
things be held and spoken in such way, as is well pleasing to Almighty
God; and let this indeed be our conclusion to the intelligible Divine
Names. But I will now pass to the *Symbolic Theology* <span
id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58) , with God for my Guide.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.xiii-p10"></span>27 *October,* 1896.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_57"></span>[122:58](dio16.htm#fr_57) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.xiii-p3.1"></span>\[Greek\]. It should be noted that where
He, Him and His are used in this Section, the Neuter is used in the
Greek.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[127:59](dio16.htm#fr_58) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.xiii-p9.1"></span>See letter to Titus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Note](dio17)
