[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dio11)  [Next](dio13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486434591/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Works of Dionysius the Areopagite, tr. by John Parker, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii.ii.ix"></span>

### <span id="ii.ii.ii.ix-p0.1"></span>CAPUT IX.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.ix-p1"></span>Concerning great, small, same,
different, similar, dissimilar, standing, movement, equality.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.ix-p2"></span>SECTION I.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.ix-p3"></span>BUT since even the great and the small
are attributed to the Cause of all, arid the same, and the different,
and the similar, and the dissimilar, and the standing, and the movement.
Come! and let us gaze upon these images of the Divine Names, such as
have been manifested to us. Almighty God, then, is celebrated in the
Oracles as great, both in greatness and in a gentle breeze, which
manifests the Divine littleness; and as the same, when the Oracles
declare "thou art the same"; and as different, when He is depicted, by
the same Oracles, as of many shapes and many forms; and as similar, as
mainstay of things similar and similitude; and as dissimilar to all, as
the like of whom there is not; and as standing, and unmoved, and seated
for ever; and as moving, as going forth to all; and whatever other
Divine Names, of the same force with these, are celebrated by the
Oracles.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.ix-p4"></span>SECTION II.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.ix-p5"></span>Almighty God, then, is named *great* in
reference to His own peculiar greatness, which imparts itself to all
things great; and overflows, and extends itself outside of all
greatness; embracing every place, surpassing every number, going through
every infinitude, both in reference to its super-fulness, and <span
id="page_103">p. 103</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.ix-Page_103"></span>
mighty operation, and its fontal gifts, in so far as these, being
participated by all in a stream of boundless gifts, are altogether
undiminished, and have the same super-fulness, and are not lessened by
the impartations, but are even still more bubbling over. This Greatness
then is infinite, and without measure and without number. And this is
the preeminence as regards the absolute and surpassing flood of the
incomprehensible greatness.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.ix-p6"></span>SECTION III.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.ix-p7"></span>But *little,* i.e. fine, is affirmed
respecting Him,--that which leaves behind every mass and distance, and
penetrates through all, without hindrance. Yet the little is
Elemental <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51) Cause of all, for nowhere
will you find the idea of the little unparticipated. Thus then the
little must be received as regards God as penetrating to all, and
through all, without impediment; and operating, and piercing through, to
"a dividing of soul and spirit, and joints and marrow"; and "discerning
thoughts and intents of heart," yea rather--all things that be. For
there is not a creature unmanifest in His sight. This littleness is
without quality and without quantity, without restraint, without limit,
without bound, comprehending all things, but itself incomprehensible.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.ix-p8"></span>SECTION IV.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.ix-p9"></span>But the *same* is superessentially
everlasting, inconvertible, abiding in itself, always being in the same
<span id="page_104">p. 104</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.ix-Page_104"></span> condition and manner; present to all
in the same manner, and itself by itself, upon itself, firmly and purely
fixed in the most beautiful limits of the superessential sameness,
without changing, without falling, without swerving, unalterable,
unmingled, immaterial, most simplex, self-sufficient, without increase,
without diminution, unoriginated, not as not yet come into being, or
unperfected, or not having become from this, or that, nor as being in no
manner of way whatever, but as all unoriginated, and absolutely
unoriginated, and ever being; and being self-complete, and being the
same by itself, and differentiated by itself in one sole and same form;
and shedding sameness from itself to all things adapted to participate
in It; and assigning things different to those different; abundance and
cause of identity, preholding identically in itself even things
contrary, as beseems the One and unique Cause, surpassing the whole
identity.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.ix-p10"></span>SECTION V.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.ix-p11"></span>But the *different,* since Almighty
God is present to all providentially, and becomes all in all, for the
sake of the preservation of all, resting upon Himself, and His own
identity within Himself, standing, as beseems an energy, one and
ceaseless, and imparting Himself with an unbending power, for
deification of those turned to Him. And we must suppose that the
difference of the manifold shapes of Almighty God, during the multiform
visions, signifies that certain things are different from the phenomena
<span id="page_105">p. 105</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.ix-Page_105"></span> under which they appear. For, as when
language depicts the soul itself, under a bodily form, and fashions
bodily members around the memberless, we think differently of the
members attributed to it, as befits the soul’s memberless condition; and
we call the mind head, and opinion neck,--as intermediate between
rational and irrational--and anger, breast; and lust, belly; and the
constitution, legs and feet; using the names of the members as symbols
of the powers. Much more then, as respects Him, Who is beyond all, is it
necessary to make clear the difference of forms and shapes by reverent
and God-becoming, and mystic explanations. And if you wish to apply the
threefold shapes of bodies to the impalpable and shapeless God, you must
say, that the Progression of Almighty God, which spreads out to all
things, is a Divine extension; and length, the power extending itself
over the whole; and depth, the hiddenness and imperception
incomprehensible to all creatures. But, that we may not forget
ourselves, in our explanation, of the different shapes and forms, by
confounding the incorporeal Divine Names with those given through
symbols of objects of sense, we have for this reason spoken concerning
these things in the *Symbolic Theology.* But now, let us suppose the
Divine difference, as really not a sort of change from the
super-immovable identity, but as the single multiplication of itself,
and the uniform progressions of its fecundity to all. <span
id="page_106">p. 106</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.ix-Page_106"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ii.ix-p12"></span>SECTION VI.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.ix-p13"></span>But *similar*, if any one might speak
of Almighty God as the same, as being wholly throughout, similar to
Himself--abidingly and indivisibly; we must not despise the Divine Name
of the Similar; but the Theologians affirm that the God above all, in
His essential nature, is similar to none; but that He bequeaths a Divine
similarity to those who turn to Him, Who is above every limit and
expression, by imitation according to their capacity. And there is the
power of the Divine similitude, which turns all created things to the
Cause. These things, then, must be said to be similar to Almighty God,
both after a Divine likeness and similitude. For, neither must we say
that Almighty God is similar to them, because neither is a man like his
own image. For, with regard to those of the same rank, it is possible
that these should be similar to each other, and that the similarity
corresponds to each, and that both are similar to each other, after a
preceding appearance of like. But, with respect to the Cause and the
things caused, we do not accept the correspondence. For, the being
similar is bequeathed, not to these, or those, alone, but to all those
who participate in similarity. Almighty God becomes Cause of their being
similar, and is mainstay of the self-existing Similarity itself; and the
similar in all is similar to a soft of footprint of the Divine
Similarity and completes their Oneness. <span id="page_107">p.
107</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.ix-Page_107"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ii.ix-p14"></span>SECTION VII.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.ix-p15"></span>And what must we say concerning this?
For the Word of God Itself extols the fact that He is dissimilar, and of
the same rank with none; as "different" even from everything, and, what
is more paradoxical, says there is nothing that is similar to Him. Yet
the expression is not contrary to the similarity towards Him, for the
same things are both similar to God, and dissimilar--the former as
regards the received imitation <span id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52) of
the inimitable, the latter as regards the dependence of the things
caused upon the cause, and their being inferior in degrees, endless and
incalculable.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.ix-p16"></span>SECTION VIII.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.ix-p17"></span>But what also do we say concerning the
Divine standing, i.e. seat? What other than that Almighty God remains
Himself, in Himself, and is abidingly fixed in unmoved identity, and is
firmly established on high; and that He acts according to the same
conditions, and in reference to the same object, and in the same way;
and that He exists altogether, as beseems the immutability from Himself;
and as beseems the immovability Itself, entirely immovable, and that
superessentially. For He is Cause of the standing and sitting of all,
Who is above all sitting and standing, and in Him all things consist,
being kept from falling out of the state of their own proper goods.
<span id="page_108">p. 108</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.ix-Page_108"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ii.ix-p18"></span>SECTION IX.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.ix-p19"></span>But what again, when the Theologians
say, that the unmoved goes forth to all, and is *moved*? Must we not
understand this in a sense befitting God? For we must reverently suppose
that He is moved, not as beseems carriage, or change, or alteration, or
turning, or local movement, or the straight, or the circular, or that
from both (curvative), or the intellectual, or the spiritual, or the
physical, but that Almighty God brings into being and sustains
everything, and provides in every way for everything; and is present, to
all, by the irresistible embrace of all, and by His providential
progressions and operations to all existing things. But we must concede
to our discourse, to celebrate in a sense becoming God, even movements
of God, the immovable. And the straight must be considered (to be) the
unswerving and the undeviating progression of the operation, and the
production from Himself of the whole; and the curvative--the steady
progression and the productive condition; and the circular the same, and
the holding together the middle and extremities, which encompass and are
encompassed,--and the turning to Him of the things which proceeded from
Him.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.ix-p20"></span>SECTION X.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.ix-p21"></span>But, if any one should take the Divine
Name in the Oracles, of "the same," or that of "justice," in the sense
of "the *equal,"* we must say, that Almighty God is *equal,* not only as
indivisible and unswerving, but also as going forth to all, and through
all, <span id="page_109">p. 109</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.ix-Page_109"></span> equally; and as foundation of the
self-existent Equality, in conformity with which, He equally effects the
same passage, through all things mutually, and the participation of
those who receive equally, according to the aptitude of each; and the
equal gift distributed to all, according to due; and according as He has
anticipated pre-eminently and uniquely in Himself, every equality,
intelligible, intelligent, rational, sensible, essential, physical,
voluntary, as beseems the Power over all, which is productive of every
equality.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_51"></span>[103:52](dio12.htm#fr_51) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.ix-p7.1"></span>Atomic theory.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[107:53](dio12.htm#fr_52) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.ix-p15.1"></span>Letter 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Caput X.](dio13)
