[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dio31)  [Next](dio33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486434591/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Works of Dionysius the Areopagite, tr. by John Parker, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p1"></span>**LETTER VIII.** *To Demophilus,
Therapeutes. About minding ones own business, and kindness.*

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p2"></span>SECTION I.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3"></span>The histories of the Hebrews say, O
noble Demophilus, that, even that holy, distinguished Moses was deemed
worthy of the Divine manifestation on account of his great
meekness <span id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) . And, if at any time they
describe him as being excluded from the vision <span
id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85) of God, they do not cast him out from God
for his meekness. But they say that when speaking very rashly, and
opposing the Divine Counsels, Jehovah was angry with him with wrath. But
when they make him proclaimed by his God-discerned deserts, he is
proclaimed, from his pre-eminent imitation of the Good. For he was very
meek, and on this account is called "Servant of God," and deemed more
fit for vision of God than all Prophets. Now, when certain envious <span
id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86) people were contending with him and
Aaron, about the High Priesthood and government of the tribes, he was
superior to all love of honour, and love of rule, and referred the
presidency over the people to the Divine judgment. And, when they even
rose up against him, and reproaching him concerning the precedency, were
threatening him, and were already almost upon him, the meek man invoked
the Good for preservation, but very suitably asserted that <span
id="page_151">p. 151</span> <span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-Page_151"></span> he
would be guiltless of all evils to the governed. For he knew that it is
necessary, that the familiar with God the Good should be moulded, as far
as is attainable, to that which is specially most like the Good, and
should be conscious within himself of the performance of deeds of good
friendship. And what made David <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87) ,
the father of God, a friend of God? Even for being good and generous
towards enemies <span id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) . The Super-Good,
and the Friend of Good says--"I have found a man after mine own heart."
Further also, a generous injunction was given, to care for even one’s
enemy’s beasts of burden <span id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89) . And
Job <span id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) was pronounced just, as being
free from injury. And Joseph <span id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91) did
not take revenge upon the brethren who had plotted against him; and
Abel, at once, and without suspicion, accompanied the fratricide. And
the Word of God proclaims all the good as not devising evil things <span
id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) , not doing them <span
id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) , but neither being changed from the
good, by the baseness of others <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) ,
but, on the contrary, after the example of God <span
id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) , as doing good to, and throwing their
shield over the evil; and generously calling them to their own abundant
goodness, and to their own similitude. But let us ascend higher, not
proclaiming the gentleness of holy men, nor kindness of philanthropic
angels, who take compassion upon nations, and invoke good <span
id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96) on their behalf, and punish the <span
id="page_152">p. 152</span> <span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-Page_152"></span>
destructive and devastating mobs, and, whilst being grieved over
calamities, yet rejoice over the safety of those who are being called
back to things good <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) ; nor whatever
else the Word of God teaches concerning the beneficent angels <span
id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98) ; but, whilst in silence welcoming the
beneficent rays of the really good and super-good Christ, by them let us
be lighted on our path, to His Divine works of Goodness. For assuredly
is it not of a Goodness inexpressible and beyond conception, that He
makes all things existing to be, and brought all things themselves to
being, and wishes all things ever to become near to Himself, and
participants of Himself, according to the aptitude of each? And why?
Because He clings lovingly to those who even depart from Him, and
strives <span id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99) and beseeches not to be
disowned by those beloved who are themselves coy; and He bears with
those who heedlessly reproach Him <span
id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100) , and Himself makes excuse for them,
and further promises to serve them, and runs towards and meets <span
id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101) even those who hold themselves aloof,
immediately that they approach; and when His entire self has embraced
their entire selves, He kisses them, and does not reproach them for
former things, but rejoices over the present, and holds a feast, and
calls together the friends, that is to say, the good, in order that the
household may be altogether rejoicing. (But, Demophilus, of all persons
in the world, is at enmity <span id="page_153">p. 153</span> <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-Page_153"></span> with, and very justly rebukes, and
teaches beautiful things to, good men, and rejoices.) "For how," He
says, "ought not the good to rejoice over safety of the lost, and over
life of those who are dead." And, as a matter of course, He raises upon
His shoulders that which with difficulty has been turned from error, and
summons the good angels to rejoicing, and is generous to the unthankful,
and makes His sun to rise upon evil and good, and presents His very
soul <span id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102) as an offering on behalf of
those who are fleeing from Him.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p4"></span>But thou, as thy letters testify, I
do not know how, being in thy senses, hast spurned one fallen down
before the priest, who, as thou sayest, was unholy and a sinner. Then
this one entreated and confessed that he has come for healing of evil
deeds, but thou didst not shiver, but even insolently didst cover with
abuse the good priest, for shewing compassion to a penitent, and
justifying the unholy. And at last, thou saidst to the priest, "Go out
with thy like"; and didst burst, contrary to permission, into the
sanctuary, and defiledst the Holy of holies, and writest to us, that "I
have providentially preserved the things sacred, which were about to be
profaned, and am still keeping them undefiled."

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p5"></span>Now, then, hear our view. It is not
lawful that a priest should be corrected by the Leitourgoi, who are
above thee, or by the Therapeutae, who are of the same rank with thee;
even though he should seem to <span id="page_154">p. 154</span> <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-Page_154"></span> act irreverently towards things
Divine, and though he should be convicted of having done some other
thing forbidden. For, if want of order, and want of regulation, is a
departure from the most Divine institutions and decrees, it is not
reasonable that the divinely transmitted order should be changed on
God’s behalf. For Almighty God is not divided against Himself, for, "how
then shall His kingdom stand <span id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103) ?"
And if the judgment is of God, as the Oracles affirm <span
id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104) , and the priests are angels and
interpreters, after the hierarchs, of the Divine judgments, learn from
them through whom thou wast deemed worthy to be a Therapeutes, through
the intermediate Leitourgoi, when opportunity serves, the things Divine
suitable for thyself <span id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105) . And do
not the Divine Symbols proclaim this, for is not the Holy of holies
altogether simply separated from all, and the order of the consecrators
is in closer proximity to it than the rank of the priests, and following
these, that of the Leitourgoi. But the gates of the sanctuary are
bounded by the appointed Therapeutae, within which they are both
ordained, and around which they stand, not to guard them, but for order,
and teaching of themselves that they are nearer the people than the
priesthood. Whence the holy regulation of the priests orders them to
participate in things Divine, enjoining the impartation of these to
others, that is to say, the more inward. For even those who always stand
<span id="page_155">p. 155</span> <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-Page_155"></span> around the Divine Altar, for a
symbolical purpose, see and hear things Divine revealed to themselves in
all clearness; and advancing generously to things outside the Divine
Veils, they shew, to the subject Therapeutae, and to the holy people,
and to the orders under purification, according to their meetness,
things holy which had been beautifully guarded without pollution, until
thou didst tyrannically burst into them, and compelledst the Holy of
holies, against its will, to be strutted over by thee, and thou sayest,
that thou holdest and guardest the sacred things, although thou neither
hast known, nor heard, nor possessest any of the things belonging to the
priests; as neither hast thou known the truth of the Oracles, whilst
cavilling about them each day to subversion of the hearers. And even if
same civil Governor undertook what was not commanded him by a King,
justly would any one of the subordinates standing by be punished who
dared to criticise the Governor, when justifying, or condemning any one;
(for I do not go so far as to say to vituperate), and at the same time
thought to cast him from his government; but thou, man, art thus rash in
what concerns the affairs of the meek and good, and his hierarchical
jurisdiction. We are bound to say these things, when any one undertakes
what is above his rank, and at the same time thinks that he acts
properly. For this is not within the powers of any one. For what was
Ozias <span id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106) doing out of place, when
offering incense to Almighty God? and what Saul <span
id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107) in sacrificing? <span id="page_156">p.
156</span> <span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-Page_156"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6"></span>Yea, further, what were those
domineering demons <span id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108) , who were
truly proclaiming the Lord Jesus God? But every one who meddles with
other people’s business, is outlawed by the Word of God; and each one
shall be in the rank of his own service, and alone the High Priest <span
id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109) shall enter into the Holy of holies,
and once only throughout the year <span
id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110) , and this in the full legal
hierarchical purification <span id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111) . And
the priests <span id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112) encompass the holy
things, and the Levites must not touch the holy things, lest they die.
And Jehovah was angry with wrath at the rashness of Ozias, and
Mariam <span id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113) becomes leprous, because
she had presumed to lay down laws for the lawgiver. And the demons
fastened on the sons of Sceva, and He says, "I did not send them, yet
they ran, and I spake not to them yet they prophesied <span
id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114) ." "And the profane <span
id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115) who sacrifices to me a calf, (is) as
he who slays a dog," and to speak briefly, the all-perfect justice of
Almighty God does not tolerate the disregarders of law, but whilst they
are saying "in Thy <span id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116) Name, we
ourselves did many wonderful works," He retorts, "And I know you not; go
from Me all ye workers of lawlessness." So that it is not permissible,
as the holy Oracles say, even to pursue things that are just, when not
according to order <span id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117) , but each
must keep to himself <span id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118) , and not
meditate things too high and too deep for him <span
id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119) , but <span id="page_157">p.
157</span> <span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-Page_157"></span> contemplate alone
things prescribed for him according to order.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p7"></span>SECTION II.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p8"></span>" What then," thou sayest, "is it not
necessary to correct the priests who are acting irreverently, or
convicted of something else out of place, but to those only, who glory
in law, shall it be permitted to dishonour Almighty God <span
id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120) , through the transgression of the
Law? "And how are the priests interpreters <span
id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121) of Almighty God? For, how do they
announce to the people the Divine virtues, who do not know the power of
them? or how do they, who are in darkness <span
id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122) , communicate light? Further, how do
they impart the Divine Spirit, who, by habit and truth do not believe
whether there is a Holy Spirit <span id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123) ?
Now I will give thee an answer to these things. For truly my Demophilus
is not an enemy, nor will I tolerate that thou shouldst be overreached
by Satan.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p9"></span>For each rank of those about God, is
more godlike than that which stands further away. And those which are
somewhat nearer to the true light, are at once more luminous, and more
illuminating; and do not understand the nearness topically, but
according to God-receptive aptitude. If, then, the order of the priests
is the illuminating, entirely has he fallen from the priestly rank and
power, who does not illuminate, or perhaps rather (he becomes) the
unilluminated. <span id="page_158">p. 158</span> <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-Page_158"></span> And he seems, to me at least, rash
who, being such, undertakes the priestly functions, and has no fear, and
does not blush, when performing things Divine, contrary to propriety,
and fancying that God does not know the very things of which he is
conscious in himself, and thinks to mislead Him Who is falsely called by
him Father, and presumes to repeat his cursed blasphemies (for I would
not say prayers) over the Divine symbols, after the example of Christ.
This one is not a priest,--No!--but devilish--crafty --a deceiver of
himself--and a wolf to the people of God, clothed in sheep’s clothing.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p10"></span>SECTION III.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p11"></span>But, it is not to Demophilus that it
is permitted to put these things straight. For, if the Word of God
commands to pursue just things justly <span
id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124) (but to pursue just things is, when
any one wishes to distribute to each one things that are meet), this
must be pursued by all justly, not beyond their own meetness or
rank <span id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125) ; since even to angels it
is just that things meet be assigned and apportioned, but not from us, O
Demophilus, but through them to us, of God, and to them through the
angels who are still more pre-eminent. And to speak shortly, amongst all
existing things their due is assigned through the first to the second,
by the well-ordered and most just forethought of all. Let those, then,
who have been ordered by God to superintend others, <span
id="page_159">p. 159</span> <span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-Page_159"></span>
distribute after themselves their due to their inferiors. But, let
Demophilus apportion their due to reason and anger and passion; and let
him not maltreat the regulation of himself, but let the superior reason
bear rule over things inferior. For, if one were to see, in the
market-place, a servant abusing a master, and a younger man, an elder;
or also a son, a father; and in addition attacking and inflicting
wounds, we should seem even to fail in reverence if we did not run and
succour the superior, even though perhaps they were first guilty of
injustice; how then shall we not blush, when we see reason maltreated by
anger and passion, and cast out of the sovereignty given by God; and
when we raise in our own selves an irreverent and unjust disorder, and
insurrection and confusion? Naturally, our blessed Law-giver from God
does not deem right that one should preside over the Church of God, who
has not already well presided over his own house <span
id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126) . For, he who has governed himself
will also govern another; and who, another, will also govern a house;
and who, a house, also a city; and who, a city, also a nation. And to
speak briefly as the Oracles affirm, "he who is faithful in little, is
faithful also in much," and "he who is unfaithful in little, is
unfaithful also in much."

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p12"></span>SECTION IV.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p13"></span>Thyself, then, assign their due
limit to passion and anger and reason. And to thyself, let the divine
<span id="page_160">p. 160</span> <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-Page_160"></span> Leitourgoi assign the due limit, and
to these, the priests, and to the priests, hierarchs, and to the
hierarchs, the Apostles and the successors of the Apostles. And if,
perchance, any, even among these, should have failed in what is
becoming, he shall be put right by the holy men of the same rank; and
rank shall not be turned against rank, but each shall be in his own
rank, and in his own service. So much for thee, from us, on behalf of
knowing and doing one’s own business. But, concerning the inhuman
treatment towards that man, whom thou callest "irreverent and sinner," I
know not how I shall bewail the scandal of my beloved. For, of whom dost
thou suppose thou wast ordained Therapeutes by us? For if it were not of
the Good, it is necessary that thou shouldst be altogether alien from
Him and from us, and from our whole religion, and it is time for thee
both to seek a God, and other priests, and amongst them to become brutal
rather than perfected, and to be a cruel minister of thine own
fierceness. For, have we ourselves, forsooth, been perfected to the
altogether Good, and have no need of the divine compassion for
ourselves <span id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127) , or do we commit the
double sin <span id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128) , as the Oracles say,
after the example of the unholy, not knowing in what we offend, but even
justifying ourselves and supposing we see, whilst really not
seeing <span id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129) ? Heaven was startled at
this, and I shivered, and I distrust myself. And <span id="page_161">p.
161</span> <span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-Page_161"></span> unless I had met
with thy letters (as know well I would I had not), they would not have
persuaded me if indeed any other had thought good to persuade me
concerning thee, that Demophilus supposes, that Almighty God, Who is
good to all, is not also compassionate towards men, and that he himself
has no need of the Merciful or the Saviour; yea further, he deposes
those priests who are deemed worthy, through clemency, to bear the
ignorances of the people, and who well know, that they also are
compassed with infirmity. But, the supremely Divine Priest pursued a
different (course), and that as the Oracles say, from being separate of
sinners, and makes the most gentle tending of the sheep a proof of the
love towards Himself; and He stigmatizes as wicked, him who did not
forgive his fellow-servant the debt, nor impart a portion of that
manifold goodness, graciously given to himself; and He condemns him to
enjoy his own deserts, which both myself and Demophilus must take care
to avoid. For, even for those who were treating Him impiously, at the
very time of His suffering, He invokes remission from the Father; and He
rebukes even the disciples, because without mercy they thought it right
to convict of impiety the Samaritans who drove Him away. This, indeed,
is the thousand times repeated theme of thy impudent letter (for thou
repeatest the same from beginning to end), that thou hast avenged, <span
id="page_162">p. 162</span> <span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-Page_162"></span>
not thyself, but Almighty God. Tell me (dost thou avenge) the Good by
means of evil?

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p14"></span>SECTION V.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p15"></span>Avaunt! We have not a High Priest,
"Who cannot be touched with our infirmities, but is both without sin and
merciful." "He shall not strive nor cry, and is Himself meek, and
Himself propitiatory for our sins; so that we will not approve your
unenviable attacks, not if you should allege a thousand times your
Phineas and your Elias. For, when the Lord Jesus heard these things, He
was displeased with the disciples, who at that time lacked the meek and
good spirit. For, even our most divine preceptor teaches in meekness
those who opposed themselves to the teaching of Almighty God. For, we
must teach, not avenge ourselves upon, the ignorant, as we do not punish
the blind, but rather lead them by the hand. But thou, after striking
him on the cheek, rustiest upon that man, who is beginning to rise to
the truth, and when he is approaching with much modesty, thou insolently
kickest him away (certainly, this is enough to make one shudder), whom
the Lord Christ, as being good, seeks, when wandering upon the
mountains, and calls to Him, when fleeing from Him, and when, with
difficulty, found, places upon His shoulders. Do not, I pray, do not let
us thus injuriously counsel for ourselves, nor drive the sword against
ourselves. For they, who undertake to injure any one, or on <span
id="page_163">p. 163</span> <span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-Page_163"></span>
the contrary to do them good, do not always effect what they wish, but
for themselves, when they have brought into their house vice or virtue,
will be filled either with Divine virtues, or ungovernable passions. And
these indeed, as followers and companions of good angels, both here and
there, with all peace and freedom from all evil, will inherit the most
blessed inheritances for the ever-continuing age, and will be ever with
God, the greatest of all blessings; but, the other will fall both from
the divine and their own peace, and here, and after death, will be
companions with cruel demons. For which reason, we have an earnest
desire to become companions of God, the Good, and to be ever with the
Lord, and not to be separated, along with the evil, from the most Just
One, whilst undergoing that which is due from ourselves, which I fear
most of all, and pray to have no share in anything evil. And, with your
permission, I will mention a divine vision of a certain holy man, and do
not laugh, for I am speaking true.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p16"></span>SECTION VI.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p17"></span>When I was once in Crete, the holy
Carpus <span id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130) entertained me,--a man,
of all others, most fitted, on account of great purity of mind, for
Divine Vision. Now, he never undertook the holy celebrations of the
Mysteries, unless a propitious vision were first manifested to him
during his preparatory devout <span id="page_164">p. 164</span> <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-Page_164"></span> prayers. He said then, when some one
of the unbelievers had at one time grieved him (and his grief was, that
he had led astray to ungodliness a certain member of the Church, whilst
the days of rejoicing were still being celebrated for him); that he
ought compassionately to have prayed on behalf of both, and taking God,
the Saviour, as his fellow-helper, to convert the one, and to overcome
the other by goodness <span id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131) , and not
to have ceased warning them so long as he lived until this day; and thus
to lead them to the knowledge of God, so that the things disputed by
them might be clearly determined, and those, who were irrationally bold,
might be compelled to be wiser by a judgment according to law. Now, as
he had never before experienced this, I do not know how he then went to
bed with such a surfeit of ill-will and bitterness. In this evil
condition he went to sleep, for it was evening, and at midnight (for he
was accustomed at that appointed hour to rise, of his own accord, for
the Divine melodies) he arose, not having enjoyed, undisturbed, his
slumbers, which were many and continually broken; and, when he stood
collected for the, Divine Converse, he was guiltily vexed and
displeased, saying, that it was not just that godless men, who pervert
the straight ways of the Lord, should live. And, whilst saying this, he
besought Almighty God, by some stroke of lightning, suddenly, without
mercy, to cut short the lives of them both. But, whilst saying this, he
declared, <span id="page_165">p. 165</span> <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-Page_165"></span> that he seemed to see suddenly the
house in which he stood, first torn asunder, and from the roof divided
into two in the midst, and a sort of gleaming fire before his eyes (for
the place seemed now under the open sky) borne down from the heavenly
region close to him; and, the heaven itself giving way, and upon the
back of the heaven, Jesus, with innumerable angels, in the form of men,
standing around Him. This indeed, he saw, above, and himself marvelled;
but below, when Carpus had bent down, he affirmed that he saw the very
foundation ripped in two, to a sort of yawning and dark chasm, and those
very men, upon whom he had invoked a curse, standing before his eyes,
within the mouth of the chasm, trembling, pitiful, only just not yet
carried down by the mere slipping of their feet; and from below the
chasm, serpents, creeping up and gliding from underneath, around their
feet, now contriving to drag them away, and weighing them down, and
lifting them up, and again inflaming or irritating with their teeth or
their tails, and all the time endeavouring to pull them down into the
yawning gulf; and that certain men also were in the midst, co-operating
with the serpents against these men, at once tearing and pushing and
beating them down. And they seemed to be on the point of falling, partly
against their will, partly by their will; almost overcome by the
calamity, and at the same time resigned. And Carpus said, that he
himself was glad, whilst looking below, and that he was forgetful of the
things <span id="page_166">p. 166</span> <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-Page_166"></span> above; further, that he was vexed
and made light of it, because they had not already fallen, and that he
often attempted to accomplish the fact, and that, when he did not
succeed, he was both irritated and cursed. And, when with difficulty he
raised himself, he saw the heaven again, as he saw it before, and Jesus,
moved with pity at what was taking place, standing up from His
supercelestial throne, and descending to them, and stretching a helping
hand, and the angels, co-operating with Him, taking hold of the two men,
one from one place and another from, another, and the Lord Jesus said to
Carpus, whilst His hand was yet extended, "Strike against Me in future,
for I am ready, even again, to suffer for the salvation of men; and this
is pleasing to Me, provided that other men do not commit sin. But see,
whether it is well for thee to exchange the dwelling in the chasm, and
with serpents, for that with God, and the good and philanthropic
angels." These are the things which I heard myself, and believe to be
true.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p18"></span>TITUS.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p19"></span>ZENAS, one of the seventy-two
disciples, who was versed in the science of law, wrote a life of Titus,
and says that he was descended from the family of Minos, King of Crete.
Titus gave himself to the study of Homer and Philosophy till his
twentieth year, when he heard a voice from heaven, which told him to
quit this place and save his soul. He <span id="page_167">p. 167</span>
<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-Page_167"></span> waited one year, to test the
truth of the voice, and then had a revelation which bade him read the
Hebrew Scriptures. Opening Isaiah, his eye fell on chapter xli. vv 1-5.
He was then sent to Jerusalem by the pro-consul of Crete to report upon
the reality of the miracles said to be performed by Jesus Christ. He saw
our Saviour, and His miracles, and believed; and became one of the
seventy-two. He witnessed the Passion and Ascension; the Apostles
consecrated him, and sent him with Paul, whom he attended to Antioch, to
Seleucia and to Crete, where Rutilus, pro-consul, was baptized, and
Titus appointed Bishop. In A.D. 64, St. Paul addressed his Epistle to
Titus, and about the same time Dionysius also, this letter. Dexter
records that Titus visited Spain, and that Pliny, the younger, was
converted to the Faith by Titus. He consecrated the second Bishop of
Alexandria, and died at the age of 94.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_84"></span>[150:85](dio32.htm#fr_84) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.2"></span>[Num. xii.
3-8](../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#003)<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[150:86](dio32.htm#fr_85) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.3"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.4"></span>[Ex.
iv. 14](../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#014)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[150:87](dio32.htm#fr_86) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.5"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.6"></span>[Num. xvi.
1-11](../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#001)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.6"></span>.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[151:88](dio32.htm#fr_87) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.7"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.8"></span>[Matt. i.
1-16](../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.8"></span>.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[151:89](dio32.htm#fr_88) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.9"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.10"></span>[1Samuel
24:7](../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#007)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.10"></span>, <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.11"></span>[1Samuel
13:14](../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#014)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.11"></span>.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[151:90](dio32.htm#fr_89) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.12"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.13"></span>[Ex. xxiii.
4](../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#004)<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.13"></span>.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[151:91](dio32.htm#fr_90) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.14"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.15"></span>[Job i.
8](../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#008)<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.15"></span>.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[151:92](dio32.htm#fr_91) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.16"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.17"></span>[Gen. l.
21](../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#021)<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.17"></span>.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[151:93](dio32.htm#fr_92) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.18"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.19"></span>[1Corinthians
13:5](../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#005)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.19"></span>.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[151:94](dio32.htm#fr_93) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.20"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.21"></span>[Ps. xv.
3](../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#003)<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.21"></span>.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[151:95](dio32.htm#fr_94) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.22"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.23"></span>[Rom. xii.
21](../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#021)<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.23"></span>.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[151:96](dio32.htm#fr_95) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.24"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.25"></span>[Matt. v.
45](../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.25"></span>.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[151:97](dio32.htm#fr_96) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.26"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.27"></span>[Zech. i.
12](../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#012)<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.27"></span>.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[152:98](dio32.htm#fr_97) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.28"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.29"></span>[Luke xv.
7](../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#007)<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.29"></span>.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[152:99](dio32.htm#fr_98) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.30"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.31"></span>[Ps. xci.
11](../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#011)<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.31"></span>.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[152:100](dio32.htm#fr_99) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.32"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.33"></span>[Matt. vi.
19](../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#019)<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.33"></span>.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[152:101](dio32.htm#fr_100) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.34"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.35"></span>[Luke xxiii.
34](../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034)<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.35"></span>.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[152:102](dio32.htm#fr_101) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.36"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.37"></span>[Luke
15:20](../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#020)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.37"></span>.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[153:103](dio32.htm#fr_102) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.38"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.39"></span>[1John
2:10](../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#010)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3.39"></span>.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[154:104](dio32.htm#fr_103) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p5.1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p5.2"></span>[Matt. xii.
26](../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#026)<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p5.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[154:105](dio32.htm#fr_104) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p5.3"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p5.4"></span>[Is.
xxx. 18](../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#018)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p5.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[154:106](dio32.htm#fr_105) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p5.5"></span>Ec. Hier. c. 6. part 2.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[155:107](dio32.htm#fr_106) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p5.6"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p5.7"></span>[2Chronicles
26:16-19](../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#016)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p5.7"></span>.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[155:108](dio32.htm#fr_107) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p5.8"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p5.9"></span>[1Samuel
13:19](../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#019)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p5.9"></span>.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[156:109](dio32.htm#fr_108) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.2"></span>[Mark iii.
11](../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#011)<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[156:110](dio32.htm#fr_109) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.3"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.4"></span>[Lev. xvi.
2](../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#002)<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[156:111](dio32.htm#fr_110) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.5"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.6"></span>[Ex.
xxx. 10](../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#010)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.6"></span>.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[156:112](dio32.htm#fr_111) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.7"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.8"></span>[Exodus
19:21](../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#021)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.8"></span>.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[156:113](dio32.htm#fr_112) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.9"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.10"></span>[Num. iv.
15](../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#015)<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.10"></span>.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[156:114](dio32.htm#fr_113) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.11"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.12"></span>[Numbers
12:10](../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#010)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.12"></span>.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[156:115](dio32.htm#fr_114) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.13"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.14"></span>[Jer. xxiii.
21](../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#021)<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.14"></span>.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[156:116](dio32.htm#fr_115) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.15"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.16"></span>[Is. xlvi.
3](../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#003)<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.16"></span>.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[156:117](dio32.htm#fr_116) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.17"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.18"></span>[Matt. vii.
23](../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#023)<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.18"></span>.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[156:118](dio32.htm#fr_117) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.19"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.20"></span>[Deut. xvi.
20](../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#020)<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.20"></span>.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[156:119](dio32.htm#fr_118) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.21"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.22"></span>[1Timothy
4:16](../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#016)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.22"></span>.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[156:120](dio32.htm#fr_119) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.23"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.24"></span>[Rom. xii.
3-6](../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#003)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6.24"></span>.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[157:121](dio32.htm#fr_120) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p8.1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p8.2"></span>[Rom. ii.
23](../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#023)<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p8.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[157:122](dio32.htm#fr_121) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p8.3"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p8.4"></span>[Mal. ii.
7](../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007)<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p8.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[157:123](dio32.htm#fr_122) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p8.5"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p8.6"></span>[Eph. iv.
18](../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#018)<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p8.6"></span>.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[157:124](dio32.htm#fr_123) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p8.7"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p8.8"></span>[Acts xix.
2](../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#002)<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p8.8"></span>.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[158:125](dio32.htm#fr_124) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p11.1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p11.2"></span>[Deut. xvi.
20](../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#020)<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p11.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[158:126](dio32.htm#fr_125) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p11.3"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p11.4"></span>[2Corinthians
13:10](../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#010)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p11.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[159:127](dio32.htm#fr_126) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p11.5"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p11.6"></span>[1Timothy
3:5](../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#005)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p11.6"></span>.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[160:128](dio32.htm#fr_127) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p13.1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p13.2"></span>[Luke xvi.
10](../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#010)<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p13.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[160:129](dio32.htm#fr_128) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p13.3"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p13.4"></span>[Jer. ii.
13-35](../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#013)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p13.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[160:130](dio32.htm#fr_129) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p13.5"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p13.6"></span>[Rom. i.
27](../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#027)<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p13.6"></span>.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[163:131](dio32.htm#fr_130) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p17.1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p17.2"></span>[2Timothy
4:13](../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#013)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p17.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[164:132](dio32.htm#fr_131) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p17.3"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p17.4"></span>[Rom. xi.
21](../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#021)<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p17.4"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter IX. To Titus, Hierarch, asking by letter what is the house
of wisdom, what the bowl, and what are its meats and drinks?](dio33)
