[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dio37)  [Next](dio39) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486434591/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Works of Dionysius the Areopagite, tr. by John Parker, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi"></span> <span id="page_202">p. 202</span> <span
id="ii.vi-Page_202"></span>

## <span id="ii.vi-p0.1"></span>OBJECTIONS TO GENUINENESS.

<span id="ii.vi-p1"></span>THE most plausible objection to the
genuineness of these writings is thus expressed by Dupin: "Eusebius and
Jerome wrote an accurate catalogue of each author known to them--with a
few obscure exceptions,--and yet never mention the writings of the
Areopagite." Great is the rejoicing in the House of the Anti-Areopagites
over this PROOF;--but what are the facts? Eusebius acknowledges that
innumerable works have not come to him--Jerome disclaims either to know
or to give an accurate catalogue either of authors or works. The Library
of Caesarea contained three hundred thousand volumes, according to the
modest computation of Doublet, according to Schneider, many more--Jerome
says there are some writings, so illustrious in themselves, that they
will not suffer from not being mentioned by him; Jerome fallows
Dionysius on the Heavenly Hierarchy; Jerome’s Catalogue of Illustrious
Men contains one hundred and thirty-five names.

<span id="ii.vi-p2"></span>Josephus is mentioned for his testimony to
Christ --Seneca, for his correspondence with St, Paul--Philo, for his
description of the Therapeutse of Alexandria. Yet Dupin would have the
unwary infer that Jerome gives a full catalogue of each Author known to
him, with a few obscure exceptions.

<span id="ii.vi-p3"></span>The "Ecclesiastical History" of Eusebius
treats of <span id="page_203">p. 203</span> <span
id="ii.vi-Page_203"></span>the nature of Christ, the companions of the
Apostles, the Martyrdoms--the succession of Bishops--the
persecutions--the folk-lore of the Church to the fourth Century. The
Book would fill about 125 pages, yet Dupin would have us believe that he
gives a complete catalogue; He does not give the writings of Hymenseus
and Narcissus, of Athenagoras, and Pantaenus, nor a complete list of
Clement, Origen, and Dionysius of Alexandria. His silence, in my
opinion, is owing to "odium theologicum." According to Eusebius, Jesus
is <span id="ii.vi-p3.1"></span>διττός; according to Dionysius, Jesus is
<span id="ii.vi-p3.2"></span>ἁπλοῦς; both true when properly understood,
but when misunderstood--"<span id="ii.vi-p3.3"></span>Hinc lachrymae
illae"--Dupin formed his premise for his conclusion, not from
facts <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139) .

<span id="ii.vi-p4"></span>FALLACY OF NAMES.

<span id="ii.vi-p5"></span>Pearson, Daillé, Blundellum, Erasmus, Valla,
Westcott, Lupton, pronounce against the genuineness. Who are you? But
Pearson demolishes Daillé; Vossius pulverises Blundellum; Erasmus
repudiates Valla. Dr. Westcott, following Dupin, assumes the
non-genuineness, but his literary instinct places his Article on
Dionysius before that on Origen. Dean Colet bumps the scale against Mr.
Lupton.

<span id="ii.vi-p6"></span>Pearson, in the xth Chapter of Ignatii
Vindiciae, gives the shortest and best summary in favour of the
genuineness. Speaking of the scholars of his own day, he says, "No one
is so ignorant as not to know that these writings were recognised as
genuine by the <span id="page_204">p. 204</span> <span
id="ii.vi-Page_204"></span> best judges in the sixth, fifth, fourth, and
third centuries." Unhappily, he also said, Every "erudite" person
regarded them in his day as written in the fourth century, and he
assumed the date of Eusebius’ death, as the date of the works, to
account for his silence. Hence every inerudite person, who wished to
pass for erudite, maintained that opinion for his own reputation. But
when Pearson had re-surveyed the evidence, he confessed, with shame,
that though he had given, what seemed to him a true opinion, he left the
decision of the whole matter to the judgment of a more learned person.

<span id="ii.vi-p7"></span>Erasmus, in his "Institutio" of a Christian
Prince, writes thus:--"<span id="ii.vi-p7.1"></span>Divus ille Dionysius
qui fecit tres Hierarchias." In his prime work, "<span
id="ii.vi-p7.2"></span>ratio verae religionis," Erasmus not only
enumerates the "Divine Names," the "Mystic and Symbolic Theology," but
calls them, not Stoic, not Platonic, not Aristotelian, but "celestial"
philosophy. He so moulds Dionysius into his book, that it becomes
Dionysius writing elegant Latin. The only reason which outweighed with
him all external testimony, was, that Erasmus could not imagine that any
man, living in apostolic times, and so far removed from the age of
Erasmus, could possibly have penned such a mirror of apostolic doctrine.
How could the Areopagite, though disciple of Paul, and familiar friend
of John Theologus, possibly be so learned as the author of these
writings? Such is the testimony of the two Theologians who have been
permitted to be doubtful of the genuineness. <span id="page_205">p.
205</span> <span id="ii.vi-Page_205"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p8"></span>GREGORY OF TOURS <span
id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140) .

<span id="ii.vi-p9"></span>Gregory is the great authority of those who
think that the St. Denis of France is not identical with Dionysius the
Areopagite. The authority is worthy of their critical acumen. Gregory
collects the more obscure martyrdoms, in Gaul, under Nero, and
subsequent Emperors. He gives several martyrdoms under Nero, and thus
proves the Apostolic Evangelisation of Gaul. Gregory quotes, and
misquotes, and misunderstands the ancient document <span
id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141) , "Concerning <span
id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142) seven men sent by St. Peter into
Gaul,--in Gallias--to preach." "Under Claudius --sub CLDIO--Peter the
Apostle sent certain disciples into Gaul to preach,--they were,
Trophimus, Paulus, Martial, Austremonius, Gatianus, Saturninus,
Valerius, and many companions."--These men were sent A.D. 42–43. Gregory
omits Valerius, and inserts Dionysius --who was not converted to the
Christian Faith till A.D. 44 or 49. Then Gregory misreads "Claudio "for
"consulibus Decio," and adds, "Grato" as the fellow-consul. Thus a
disciple of the Apostles, sent by Clement, successor of Peter, arrives
in Gaul A.D. 250, and the identical names of his companions recur
miraculously in the third century. At the very time that Trophimus <span
id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143) is thus supposed to have arrived at
Aries, we have a letter from Cyprian, A.D. 254, urging Pope Stephen to
depose Marcion, 15th or<span id="page_206">p. 206</span> <span
id="ii.vi-Page_206"></span> 18th Bishop of Aries from Trophimus. Such is
the basis upon which our critical friends build their house upon the
sand.

<span id="ii.vi-p10"></span>THE PÈRES BOLANDISTES.

<span id="ii.vi-p11"></span>The Pères Bolandistes are a wonder in
Christendom. They are critical, and yet follow the gross blunder of
Gregory of Tours. They belong to the papal obedience, and yet prefer
Gregory of Tours when wrong, to Gregory XIII., when right. They
pronounce the solemn declaration of Pope John XIXth, "that Martial of
Limoges was an apostolic man <span id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144) ,"
as of no historic value. They think that St. John Damascene did not
possess the same critical apparatus for proving the authenticity of the
writings of Dionysius, that we possess in the xixth Century. Their
"<span id="ii.vi-p11.2"></span>actes authentiques <span
id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145) " of Dionysius acknowledge that he was
sent to Gaul by Clement, successor of Peter; and yet they affirm that he
arrived in Gaul, A.D, 250. After Clement I., who succeeded Peter and
Paul, there was not another Clement, Bishop of Rome, for a thousand
years <span id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146) . Happily, Les petits
Bolandistes are more rational and critical than their Pères.

<span id="ii.vi-p12"></span>GENERAL OBJECTION.

<span id="ii.vi-p13"></span>"The style, the theological learning, the
language and allusions, prove the writings written after the apostolic
age." <span id="page_207">p. 207</span> <span
id="ii.vi-Page_207"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p14"></span>Is the Epistolary style the proof? St. Paul,
St. John, St. Peter, St. Luke, and nearly the whole of the New Testament
is written under the form of Epistles. The Epistle of St. James,--the
first written in the Canon of the New Testament,--will bear comparison
with the book of Job for ornate diction. Consult the marginal references
to the Epistle of St. Peter, to see the scriptural knowledge of the
Apostles. Men use the testimony of the High Priests, that the Apostles
were unlearned and ignorant men, but omit their testimony that they took
knowledge of them, that they had been with Jesus; and the further
testimony, that Jesus opened their understanding, that they should
understand the testimony of the Scriptures, respecting Himself; and
further, that the Holy Spirit should recall to them whatever He had said
to them. Those who would rather assume twenty miracles, than acknowledge
one natural fact, surmise, that a Syrian, in the ivth century, may have
written Greek permeated with technical expressions of Plato and
Aristotle. *There is not a single allusion to persons or events after
the first century,* unless it be supposed that the Epistle of Ignatius,
A.D. 108, is quoted. The works abound in names recorded in the New
Testament. The Apostolic Epistles allude to the leaven of heresy already
working. The Antwerp edition gives about five hundred references to Holy
Scripture in the Writings of Dionysius. He quotes every book in the
Bible, except the two last particular Epistles of St. John, or John
Presbyter. Dionysius writes <span id="page_208">p. 208</span> <span
id="ii.vi-Page_208"></span> four letters to Gaius, to whom St. John
wrote his third Epistle. We have, therefore, in the writings of this
Apostolic man, a proof that the Canonical Scriptures were quoted as the
Oracles of God, in the first century, and a triumphant testimony that

<span id="ii.vi-p15"></span>Faith is more trustworthy than criticism.

<span id="ii.vi-p16"></span>Thanks be to God!

<span id="ii.vi-p17"></span>Other Works by same Author.

<span id="ii.vi-p18"></span>HOLY SCRIPTURES IN CHURCH OF ROME.

<span id="ii.vi-p19"></span>APOSTOLIC TRADITIONS ACCORDING TO THE
COUNCIL OF TRENT.

<span id="ii.vi-p20"></span>THE CELESTIAL AND ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY.

<span id="ii.vi-p21"></span>**Printed by James Parker and Co., Crown
Yard, Oxford.**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_139"></span>[203:140](dio38.htm#fr_139) <span
id="ii.vi-p3.4"></span>Vidieu, page 107.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[205:141](dio38.htm#fr_140) <span
id="ii.vi-p8.1"></span>L’Abbé Darras. St. Denys l’Areopagite, p. 34.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[205:142](dio38.htm#fr_141) <span
id="ii.vi-p9.1"></span>Ibid., p. 51.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[205:143](dio38.htm#fr_142) <span
id="ii.vi-p9.2"></span>See Monuments inédits de M. Faillon, t. ii. p.
375.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[205:144](dio38.htm#fr_143) <span
id="ii.vi-p9.3"></span>Darras, p. 14.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[206:145](dio38.htm#fr_144) <span
id="ii.vi-p11.1"></span>See Surius.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[206:146](dio38.htm#fr_145) <span
id="ii.vi-p11.3"></span>Darras, 293-300.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[206:147](dio38.htm#fr_146) <span
id="ii.vi-p11.4"></span>Clement I., A.D. 67, Cl. II. 1046.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Title Page - Volume 2.](dio39)
