[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dio42)  [Next](dio44) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486434591/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Works of Dionysius the Areopagite, tr. by John Parker, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.iv"></span>

### <span id="iv.i.iv-p0.1"></span>DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE AND THE ALEXANDRINE SCHOOL.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p1"></span>ALEXANDRIA became the home of Christian
Philosophy, but Athens was its birthplace. Pantaenus and Ammonius-Saccus
were chief founders of the Alexandrine School. They were both Christian.
They both drew their teaching from the Word of God, " the Fountain of
Wisdom," and from the writings of Hierotheus, and Dionysius the
Areopagite--Bishops of Athens. For several centuries there had been a
Greek preparation for the Alexandrine School. As the Old Testament was a
Schoolmaster, leading to Christ, so the Septuagint, Pythagoras, Plato,
Aristobulus, Philo, and Apollos were heralds who prepared the minds of
men for that fulness of light and truth in Jesus Christ, which, in
Alexandria, clothed itself in the bright robes of Divine Philosophy.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p2"></span>Pantaenus was born in Athens, a.d. 120, and
died in Alexandria, a.d. 213. He was Greek by nationality, and Presbyter
of the Church in, Alexandria by vocation. First, Stoic, then
Pythagorean, he became Christian some time before a.d. 186, at which
date he was appointed chief instructor in the Didaskeleion, <span
id="page_vi">p. vi</span> <span id="iv.i.iv-Page_vi"></span>by
Demetrius, Bishop of Alexandria. Pantaenus recognised the preparation
for the Christian Faith in the Greek Philosophy. Anastasius-Sinaita
describes him as "one of the early expositors who agreed with each other
in treating the first six days of Creation as prophetic of Christ and
the whole Church."

<span id="iv.i.iv-p3"></span>Eusebius says, that "Pantaenus expounded
the treasures of the Divine dogmas preserved direct, as from father to
son, from St. Paul and other Apostles. Phptius records that Pantaenus
was pupil of those who had seen the Apostles, but that he certainly had
not listened to any of them themselves. Now, if Pantaenus was pupil of
those who had seen the Apostles, and yet had, not listened to their oral
teaching, it is natural to infer that he was pupil through their
writings. I am a pupil of Dr. Pusey, but I never listened to his oral
teaching; I am pupil through his writings. Now, there exist, to this
day, the writings of two Presbyters who had seen the Apostles--both,
converts to the faith through St. Paul,---whose writings contain the
treasures of the Divine dogmas, received from St. Paul and the other
Apostles. Those two Presbyters are Hierotheus and Dionysius the
Areopagite, both ordained Bishop of Athens by St. Paul. Dionysius the
Areopagite expressly calls, St. Paul his "chief initiator," and as such,
gives his teaching on the holy Angels, in the sixth chapter of the
Heavenly Hierarchy; and frequently describes St. Paul as his "chief
instructor."

<span id="iv.i.iv-p4"></span>If, then, we can prove that the writings of
<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span> <span
id="iv.i.iv-Page_vii"></span>Dionysius existed before and were known in
Alexandria, when Pantaenus delivered his lectures in that city, we may
fairly infer that Pantaenus would know, and knowing, would use, the
writings penned by the Chief of his own Areopagus, and Bishop of his own
Athens.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p5"></span>Historical criticism does not permit us to
reject probabilities, merely because they confirm the Christian Faith.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p6"></span>Dexter, in his Chronicle, collected from
the Archives of Toledo and other churches in Spain, gives this
testimony:--

<span id="iv.i.iv-p7"></span>"U.C. 851 (a.d. 98). <span
id="iv.i.iv-p7.1"></span>Dionysius Areopagita dicat Eugenio Marcello,
dicto, propter ingenii excellentiam, Timotheo, *libros* *de Divinis
Nominibus*."

<span id="iv.i.iv-p8"></span>Dionysius of Alexandria, writing to Tope
Sixtus II., c. 250, respecting the writings of Dionysius the Areopagite,
affirms "that no one can intelligently dispute their paternity--that no
one penetrated more profoundly than Dionysius into the mysterious depths
of Holy Scripture--that Dionysius was disciple of St. Paul, and piously
governed the Church of Athens." If, then, the Bishops of Alexandria and
Rome exchanged letters only a few years after the death of Pantaenus,
and only seven years after the death of Ammonius, and in those letters
affirmed the writings to be undoubtedly written by Dionysius the
Areopagite, it would be the height of absurdity to affirm that such
writings were unknown to Pantaenus and Ammonius.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p9"></span>But we do not need to base our proof on
mere <span id="page_viii">p. viii</span> <span
id="iv.i.iv-Page_viii"></span>supposition. Routh gives two fragments of
Pantaenus. The second is a distinct echo of Dionysius. In Divine Names
(c. 7), Dionysius discusses how Almighty God knows existing things, and
explains the text; "*He, knowing all things before their birth*" as
proving that "not as learning existing things from existing things, but
from Himself, and in Himself, as Cause, the Divine Being pre-holds and
pre-comprehends the notions and essence of all things, not approaching
each several thing according to its kind, but knowing and containing all
things within one grasp of the cause. Thus Almighty God knows existing
things, not by a knowledge of existing things, but by that of Himself."
Dionysius, c. V. s. 8, speaking of creation, declares that the Divine
and good *volitions* of Almighty God define and produce existing things.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p10"></span>Pantaenus teaches the same: "Neither does
He know things sensible sensibly (<span
id="iv.i.iv-p10.1"></span>αἰσθητῶς), nor things intelligible
intellectually. For it is not possible that He, Who is above all things,
should comprehend things being, after things being (<span
id="iv.i.iv-p10.2"></span>κατὰ τα ὄντα), but we affirm that He knows
things being" as *His own volitions* . . . yea, as His own volitions,
Almighty God knows things being, since by willing (<span
id="iv.i.iv-p10.3"></span>θέλων), He made all things being."

<span id="iv.i.iv-p11"></span>In Mystic Theology, c. V., Dionysius says,
"Almighty God does not know existing things, *qua* existing." The
teaching of Ammonius-Saccus is the same; Ammonius uses the word <span
id="iv.i.iv-p11.1"></span>βούλημα, Dionysius and Pantaenus, <span
id="iv.i.iv-p11.2"></span>θελήματα, of God, as Source of Creation. <span
id="page_ix">p. ix</span> <span id="iv.i.iv-Page_ix"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv-p12"></span>But, though the known fragments of
Pantaenus are few, we possess abundant writings of two pupils, Clement
of Alexandria and Origen, from which we may gather the teaching of their
master. Clement speaks of Pantaenus as his "great instructor and
collaborator." Such is the similarity between the writings of Clement
and Dionysius, that some have hazarded the conjecture that Clement the
Philosopher, mentioned by Dionysius, was Clement of Alexandria! I give
only one familiar illustration. Clement writes: "As then, those riding
at anchor at sea, drag the anchor, but do not drag it to themselves, but
themselves to the anchor, thus those who are drawn to God in the gnostic
life, find themselves unconsciously led to God." Dionysius, D. N., c.
III. s. 1, says, "or, as if after we have embarked on ship, and are
holding on to the cable, attached to some rock, we do not draw the rock
to us, but ourselves, and the ship, to the rock. Wherefore, before
everything, and especially theology, we must begin with prayer; not as
though we ourselves were drawing the power, which is everywhere, and
nowhere present, but as, by our godly reminiscences and invocations,
conducting ourselves to, and making ourselves one with It."

<span id="iv.i.iv-p13"></span>Origen confessed that Pantaenus was his
superior in the philosophy of the schools, and that he moulded his
teaching upon the model of Pantaenus. Do the writings of Origen bear the
stamp of Dionysius and Hierotheus? Origen, on the resurrection of the
body, says, "For how does it not seem absurd <span id="page_x">p.
x</span> <span id="iv.i.iv-Page_x"></span>that this body which has
endured scars for Christ, and, equally with the soul, has borne the
savage torments of persecutions, and has also endured the suffering of
chains, and rods, and has been tortured with fire, beaten with the
sword, and has further suffered the cruel teeth of wild beasts, the
gallows of the cross, and divers kinds of punishments,--that this should
be deprived of the prizes of such contests. If forsooth, the soul alone,
which not alone contended, should receive the crown, and its companion
the body, which served it with much labour, should attain no recompense,
for its agony and victory,--how does it not seem contrary to all reason,
that the flesh, resisting for Christ its natural vices, and its innate
lust, and guarding its virginity with immense labour,--that one, when
the time for rewards has come, should be rejected as unworthy and the
other should receive its crown? Such a fact would undoubtedly argue on
the part of God, either a lack of justice or a lack of power." Dionysius
(E. H., c. VII.) says, "Now the pure bodies of the holy souls, enrolled
together as yoke-fellows, and fellow travellers, which together strove
during the divine contests, throughout the Divine Life, in the unmoved
steadfastness of the souls, will together receive their own
resurrection. For, having been made one with the holy souls, to which
they were united during this present life, by having become members of
Christ, they will receive in return the godlike and incorruptible
immortality and blessed inheritance." Dionysius (D. N., c. VI. s. 2)
says, "what is still more <span id="page_xi">p. xi</span> <span
id="iv.i.iv-Page_xi"></span>divine, It promises to "transfer our whole
selves (I mean souls and bodies, their yoke-fellows), to a perfect life
and immortality. Others again do this injustice to bodies, that, after
having toiled with the holy souls, they unjustly deprive them of the
holy retributions, when they have come to the goal of their most divine
course." "For if the man have passed a life dear to God in soul and
body, the body which has contended throughout the Divine struggles will
be honoured together with the devout soul."

<span id="iv.i.iv-p14"></span>To shew that Origen knew the works of
Hierotheus, we give an extract from his letter to Gregory: "Would that
you might both participate in and continually augment this part, so that
you may not only say, ‘we are partakers of Christ,’ but also partakers
of God." Papias <span id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147) , Bishop of
Hierapolis (fragment V.) says, "the Presbyters, the disciples of the
Apostles, say that this is the gradation and method of those who are
saved, and that they advance through steps of this nature, and that,
moreover, they ascend through the Spirit to the Son, and through the Son
to the Father; and that, in due time, the Son will yield up His work to
the Father." Who the *Presbyters, the disciples of* the Apostles were,
we may gather from the three last chapters of the "Book of
Hierotheus <span id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148) ," in which the very
same doctrine is taught. Is it not, then, a legitimate inference, that
when Photius says " that <span id="page_xii">p. xii</span> <span
id="iv.i.iv-Page_xii"></span>Pantaenus was a pupil of *the Presbyters
who had seen the Apostles*," he designated Hierotheus and Dionysius the
Areopagite, generally known under that title?

<span id="iv.i.iv-p15"></span>Ammonius Saccus was born of Christian
parents in Alexandria, and died in that city, a.d. 242.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p16"></span>Anastasius Sinaita calls him "the Wise,"
and Hierocles, "the taught of God." Besides being famous for his
expositions of Holy Scripture, he wrote the "Diatesseron," or "Harmony
of the Gospels," contained in the Bib. Patrum. In a.d. 236, he wrote the
agreement between Moses and Jesus. He was the great conciliator, who
sought the good in every system, and to make all one in Christ.
Pressensé beautifully describes him as a man who wished to believe and
to know--to adore and to comprehend--to conciliate the Greek Philosophy
with the Mysteries of the East. He wrote a commentary on the golden
verses of Pythagoras, which Hierocles published, as well as reproduced
his other works. The titles of his books, mentioned by Photius, such as
"Providence" and "Free Will," recall those of the lost books of
Dionysius, of which we have only a summary in his known works. (Cod.
251-214.)

<span id="iv.i.iv-p17"></span>Ammonius was surnamed Saccus from having
been a corn carrier. Virgil, Shakespere, Milton, were great geniuses in
themselves, but when we know the sources from which they drew, we can
better understand their achievements.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p18"></span>Dionysius was indebted to
Hierotheus--Ammonius <span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span> <span
id="iv.i.iv-Page_xiii"></span>drew from Dionysius. This we shall shew,
not as we might, by his works as described by Photius, but from
Plotinus, his disciple, in order that we may have the prevailing proof,
to some minds, of testimony not necessarily Christian.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p19"></span>Plotinus was born in Lycopolis, a.d. 205,
and died in Campagna, a.d. 270. At the age of 29, he began to search for
truth, in the schools of Alexandria. He wandered from teacher to
teacher, but could find no rest until he was persuaded to go and hear
Ammonius-Saccus. After listening to him, he exclaimed, "This is what I
sought."

<span id="iv.i.iv-p20"></span>Plotinus remained under him eleven years,
until the death of Ammonius, a.d. 242. In a.d. 244, Plotinus began to
teach in Rome. Plotinus was not a refined scholar. Porphyry, therefore,
committed his teaching to writing. Porphyry was regarded as the greatest
enemy to the Christian Faith in the early centuries. Persecutors burned
the bodies of Christians, but Porphyry sought to undermine their faith
in the Holy Scriptures, by quibbles of unbelief, which have been revived
to-day as "New Criticism." Porphyry wrote against the Holy Scriptures
with a bitterness engendered by a conviction of their truth. Now, it is
a startling fact, that though the teaching of Plotinus comes to us
through Porphyry, there is not a word in the Enneades, in which the
teaching of Plotinus is given, against the Christian Faith. It is true
that Eutochius published another version of the teaching of Plotinus, on
the ground that his teaching was coloured by Porphyry, but we <span
id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span> <span id="iv.i.iv-Page_xiv"></span>prefer to
rest our proof on Porphyry, as not being prejudiced in favour of the
truth.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p21"></span>Let us then first see what Plotinus
teaches respecting the Holy Trinity. He says, "We need not go beyond the
three *Hypostaseis*" (Persons). It is true that Plotinus presents that
Trinity as "One," "Mind," and "Soul," whereas Dionysius gives the
formula "Father, Son, and Spirit." Occasionally Plotinus uses "Logos"
instead of "Mind." But even this substitution of "One" for "Father" may
be traced to Dionysius, who speaks of the Triad, <span
id="iv.i.iv-p21.1"></span>ἐναρχικὴ and even <span
id="iv.i.iv-p21.2"></span>ἐναρχικῶν ὑποστὰσεων, "*One* springing." The
"One" represents the Father. Plotinus says, "We may represent the first
principle, ‘One,’ as source, which has no other origin than Itself, and
which pours Itself in a multitude of streams without being diminished by
what it gives." Dionysius speaks of the "Father" as sole source of
Godhead, and says that "the Godhead is undiminished by the gifts
imparted." In Chap. XII. of Divine Names, Dionysius treats of "One" and
"Perfect" as applied to Almighty God.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p22"></span>Let Us now hear Plotinus on the
"Beautiful" Enneades (I. 6-7). Plotinus says, "The soul advances in its
ascent towards God, until being raised above everything alien, it sees
face to face, in His simplicity, and in all His purity, Him upon Whom
all hangs, to Whom all aspire; from Whom all hold existence, life and
thought. What transport of love must not he feel who sees Him! with what
ardour ought he not to desire to be united to Him! He, <span
id="page_xv">p. xv</span> <span id="iv.i.iv-Page_xv"></span>who has not
seen Him, desires Him as the Good; he who has seen Him, admires Him as
the sovereign Beauty; and struck at once with astonishment and pleasure,
disdains the things which heretofore he called by the name of Beauty.
This is what happens to those to whom have appeared the forms of gods
and demons;--they no longer care For the beauty of other bodies. What
think you, then, should he experience who has seen the Beautiful
Himself,--the Beautiful surpassing earth and heaven! The miserable is
not he, Who has neither fresh colour nor comely form, nor power, nor
royalty; it is alone he, Who sees himself excluded from the possession
of Beauty--a possession in comparison with which he ought to disdain
royalty, rule of the whole earth, of the sea, and heaven itself, if he
should be able, by abandoning, by despising all these, to rise to the
contemplation of the Beautiful, face to face." Plotinus also recognised,
"that the eye soiled with impurity could never bear the sight, or attain
to the vision of that Beauty. We must render the organs of vision
analogous and like to the object that they would contemplate. Every man
ought to begin by rendering himself beautiful and divine to obtain a
Vision of the Beautiful and the Deity." Well might St. Augustine say,
that "with the change of a few words, Plotinus became concordant with
Christ’s religion." No wonder that Gregory and Basil quoted so largely
from Plotinus. Let us now hear what Dionysius says of the "Good and
Beautiful":-- <span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span> <span
id="iv.i.iv-Page_xvi"></span>"Goodness turns all things to Itself; all
things aspire to It, as source and bond and end. From this Beautiful
comes being to all existing things. All things aspire to the Beautiful
and Good,--and there is no existing thing which does not participate in
the Beautiful and Good." Read the Fourth Chapter of the Divine Names.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p23"></span>Porphyry records that Plotinus attained to
that vision of the Beautiful three times during his life. How that
vision of the Beautiful is to be attained, Dionysius describes in the
"Mystic Theology:"--"But thou, O dear Timothy, by thy persistent
commerce with the mystic visions, leave behind both sensible perceptions
and intellectual efforts, and all objects of sense and intelligence, and
all things not being and being, and be raised aloft agnostically to the
union, as attainable, with Him Who is above every essence and knowledge.
For by unchecked and absolute extasy, in all purity, from thyself, and
all, thou wilt be carried on high to the superessential Ray of the
Divine Darkness, when thou hast cast away all and become free from all."
Ammonius had such extasy during his lectures, in which he seemed to have
Divine visions.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p24"></span>Plotinus differs from Dionysius in
regarding creation as an act of necessity, whereas Dionysius regards it
as an act of love. Plotinus treats evil as "an elongation from God."
Dionysius speaks of Almighty God as immanent in matter the most
elongated from spirit. Plotinus traces evil to matter; Dionysius to the
fallacious choice of a free agent. <span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>
<span id="iv.i.iv-Page_xvii"></span>May it not be that the pagan
colouring of Porphyry in these respects led Eutochius to give a more
faithful and consistent account of the teaching of Plotinus.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p25"></span>But the crowning proof that Dionysius was
the source from which the Alexandrine School drew much of its wisdom, is
Proclus (450-485). Suidas affirmed long ago that Proclus cribbed whole
passages from Dionysius. Professor Stiglmayr fills seven pages with
parallel passages.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p26"></span>Vachérot describes certain chapters of the
"Divine Names" as extracts from Proclus, word for word, and says the
whole doctrine of Dionysius seems to be a commentary upon the Theology
of Alexandria. Barthélémy St. Hilaire says that Dionysius and Scotus
Erigena, almost entirely implanted, in the middle age, the doctrine of
Neo-Platonism. Matter is more profound; Professor Langen finds in
Dionysius the "characteristics of Neo-Platonic speculation." The
similarity of doctrine is denied by none. Which writings appeared first?
*that* is the question.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p27"></span>Dexter commemorates the "Divine Names"
a.d. 98 <span id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149) .

<span id="iv.i.iv-p28"></span>Polycarp quotes Dionysius verbatim as "a
certain one." Jerome quotes him as "<span
id="iv.i.iv-p28.1"></span>quidam Graecorum." Dionysius of Alexandria
(a.d. 250), writing to Sixtus II., declares that no one can
intelligently doubt that the writings are those of Dionysius, the
convert of St. Paul, Bishop of Athens. <span id="page_xviii">p.
xviii</span> <span id="iv.i.iv-Page_xviii"></span>Tertullian, expresses
the Agnosia "<span id="iv.i.iv-p28.2"></span>nihil scire omnia scire,"
Origen quotes him by name. Theodore (a.d. 420) answers objections,--whom
Photius approved. Gregory calls Dionysius "an ancient and venerable
Father." The Second Council of Nicea quotes the very words, contained in
the "Ecclesiastical Hierarchy," c. I. s. 4, as those of the great
Dionysius. Bishop Pearson proves that the best judges in the sixth,
fifth, fourth and third centuries regarded the writings as written: by
Dionysius the Areopagite. German scholars to-day admit that the external
testimony is in favour of their genuineness.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p29"></span>Yet eccentric critics, on account of the
precise theology, cannot believe that the works were written; by a
learned Greek,--Chief of the Areopagus--who forsook all to follow
Christ,--the convert and disciple of St.. Paul,--the familiar friend of
St. John and other Apostles, to whom our Saviour revealed the mysteries
of the Father; but those critics can believe that an unknown man, whose
century no one can fix, and possibly a Syrian, may have gleaned from
writers of the first four centuries these theological pearls expressed
in Greek in a style unique and always like itself. They can, believe
that the Author of these Divine writings, would incorporate, fictitious
allusions to persons and events of the apostolic, age, to add lustre to
incomparable works, and to impute them to another. They can believe that
writings, so composed, were foisted upon a credulous Christendom, so
that Dionysius of Alexandria, Maximus, St. John Damascene, and the <span
id="page_xix">p. xix</span> <span id="iv.i.iv-Page_xix"></span>Council
of Nicea, accepted them as the genuine works of Dipnysius. I do not
belong to that school. Only unbelief could believe anything so
incredible. Rational men will not hazard the surmise that works known in
the first century were gleaned from writings composed four hundred years
afterwards.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p30"></span>The tone of the Alexandrine School may be
further illustrated from Amelius and Dionysius the Sublime. Amelius
attended Plotinus twenty-four years as companion and pupil. Eusebius
gives an extract from his writings, in which Amelius says, "This plainly
was the Word, by Whom, being Eternal, things becoming became, as
Heraclitus would say." It was probably he who said, "the Prologue of St.
John’s Gospel ought to be written in gold, and placed in the most
conspicuous place in every church." De Civ. Dei, LX. c. 29. Dionysius,
the famous secretary of Zenobia, attended the lectures of
Ammonius-Saccus. He was the "arbiter" of all literary questions. He
expresses his admiration, De sub. L. 9, of the diction of Moses in the
description of the six days’ creation, and numbers St. Paul amongst the
most brilliant Greek orators, as a man who propounded a "dogma beyond
demonstration."

<span id="iv.i.iv-p31"></span>We claim that the testimony of these
illustrious men, and the extracts from Pantaenus, Ammonius, and their
disciples, justify the conclusion that the Alexandrine School was
Biblical, Christian, and Philosophical, that its Philosophy was a Divine
<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span> <span
id="iv.i.iv-Page_xx"></span>Philosophy *of the Faith,* not a pagan
philosophy *against the Faith,* and that the main sources of its Divine
Philosophy were the writings of Hierotheus and Dionysius, Bishops of
Athens.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p32"></span>JOHN PARKER.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p33"></span>Cannes,  
*Epiphany,* 1899.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p34"></span>For sketch of Life, Internal Evidence of
date, and External Testimony to genuineness during first nine centuries,
see "Celestial and Ecclesiastical Hierarchy." (Skeffington, 2*s*. 6*d.*)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_147"></span>[xi:148](dio43.htm#fr_147) <span
id="iv.i.iv-p14.1"></span>c. 140.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[xi:149](dio43.htm#fr_148) <span
id="iv.i.iv-p14.2"></span>Br. Mus. (Ad. Rich. 7189)

<span id="fn_149"></span>[xvii:150](dio43.htm#fr_149) <span
id="iv.i.iv-p27.1"></span>From Tabularia of Toledo, a.d. 98.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Caput I.](dio44)
