[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dio54)  [Next](dio56) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486434591/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Works of Dionysius the Areopagite, tr. by John Parker, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xii"></span>

### <span id="iv.ii.xii-p0.1"></span>CAPUT XII.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p1"></span>Why the Hierarchs amongst men are called
Angels.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p2"></span>Section I.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p3"></span>But this is sometimes also asked by
diligent contemplators of the intelligible Oracles; Inasmuch as the
lowest Orders do not possess the completeness of the superior, for what
reason is our Hierarch named by the Oracles, "Angel of the Sovereign
Lord?"

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p4"></span>Section II.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p5"></span>Now the statement, as I think, is not
contrary to what has been before defined; for we say that the last lack
the complete and pre-eminent Power of the more reverend Divisions; for
they participate in the partial and analogous, according to the one
harmonious and binding fellowship of all things. For example, the rank
of the holy Cherubim participates in higher wisdom and knowledge, but
the Divisions of the Beings beneath them, participate, they also, in
wisdom and knowledge, but nevertheless partially, as compared with them,
and <span id="page_45">p. 45</span> <span id="iv.ii.xii-Page_45"></span>
in a lower degree. For the participation of wisdom and knowledge
throughout is common to all the minds which bear the image of God; but
the being near and first, or second and inferior, is not common, but, as
has been determined for each in its own degree. This also one might
safely define respecting all the Divine Minds; for, as the first possess
abundantly the saintly characteristics of the inferior, so the last
possess those of the superior, not indeed in the same degree, but
subordinately. There is, then, as I think, nothing absurd, if the Word
of God calls our Hierarch, Angel, since he participates, according to
his own capacity, in the messenger characteristic of the Angels, and
elevates himself, as far as attainable to men, to the likeness of their
revealing office.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p6"></span>Section III.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p7"></span>But you will find that the Word of God
calls gods, both the Heavenly Beings above us, and the most beloved of
God, and holy men amongst us, although the Divine Hiddenness is
transcendently elevated and established above all, and no created Being
can. properly and wholly be said to be like unto It, except those
intellectual and rational Beings who are entirely and wholly turned to
Its Oneness as far as possible, and who elevate themselves incessantly
to Its Divine illuminations, as far as attainable, by their imitation of
God, if I may so speak, according to their power, and are deemed worthy
of the same divine name. <span id="page_46">p. 46</span> <span
id="iv.ii.xii-Page_46"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Caput XIII.](dio56)
