[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dio60)  [Next](dio62) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486434591/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Works of Dionysius the Areopagite, tr. by John Parker, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.iii"></span>

### <span id="iv.iii.iii-p0.1"></span>CAPUT III.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>I.
Concerning things accomplished in the Synaxis.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p2"></span>Courage, then, since we have made
mention of this (Eucharist) which we may not pass over to celebrate any
other Hierarchical function in preference to it. For according to our
illustrious <span id="page_88">p. 88</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_88"></span> Leader, it is "initiation of
initiations," and one must first lay down the Divine description of it,
before the rest, from the inspired and hierarchical science of the
Oracles, and then be borne by the supremely Divine Spirit to its sacred
contemplation. First, let us reverently consider this; for what reason
that, which is common also to the other Hierarchical initiations, is
pre-eminently attributed to it, beyond the rest; and it is uniquely
called, "Communion and Synaxis," when each consecrating function both
collects our divided lives into uniform deification, and gives communion
and union with the One, by the Godlike folding together of our
diversities. Now we affirm that the Perfecting by the communications of
the other Hierarchical symbols springs from the supremely Divine and
perfecting gifts of it. For it scarcely ever happens, that any
Hierarchical initiation is completed without the most Divine Eucharist,
as head of the things done in each, ministering the collecting of the
person initiated to the One, and completing his communion with God, by
the Divinely transmitted gift of the perfecting mysteries. If, then,
each of the Hierarchical initiations, being indeed incomplete, will not
make perfect our communion and our gathering to the One, even its being
initiation is precluded on account of the lack of completeness. Now
since the imparting of the supremely Divine mysteries to the man
initiated is the head and tail of every initiation, naturally then the
<span id="page_89">p. 89</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_89"></span>Hierarchical judgment hit upon an
appellation propel to it, from the truth of the facts. Thus, for
instance, with regard to the holy initiation of the Divine birth; since
it imparts first-Light, and is head of all the Divine illuminations, we
celebrate the true appellation from the enlightening effected. For,
though it be common to all Hierarchical functions to impart the gift of
sacred light to those initiated, yet it <span
id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238) gave to me the power to see first, and
through its first light I am enlightened to gaze upon the other
religious rites. Having said this, let us minutely investigate and
examine hierarchically the accurate administration and contemplation of
the most pure initiation, in every particular.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p3"></span><span id="iv.iii.iii-p3.1"></span>II.
Mysterion <span id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239) of Synaxis, that is,
Communion.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p4"></span>The Hierarch, having completed a
reverent prayer, near the Divine Altar, starts with the incensing, and
proceeds to every part of the enclosure of the sacred place; he then
returns to the Divine Altar, and begins the sacred chanting of the
Psalms, the whole ecclesiastical assembly chanting, with him, the sacred
language of the Psalter. Next follows the reading of the Holy Scriptures
by the Leitourgoi. After these readings the catechumens quit the sacred
enclosure, as well as the "possessed," and the <span id="page_90">p.
90</span> <span id="iv.iii.iii-Page_90"></span>penitents. But those who
are deemed worthy of the sight and participation of the Divine Mysteries
remain. Of the Leitourgoi, some stand near the closed gates of the
sanctuary, whilst others perform some other duty of their own rank. But
chosen members of the ministering Order with the Priests lay the holy
Bread and the Cup of Blessing upon the Divine Altar, whilst the
universal Song <span id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240) of Praise is
being professed beforehand by the whole body of the Church. Added to
these, the Divine Hierarch makes a sacred prayer, and proclaims the holy
Peace to all. When all have kissed each other, the mystical proclamation
of the holy tablets is performed. When the Hierarch and the Priests have
washed their hands in water, the Hierarch stands in the midst of the
Divine Altar, and the chosen Deacons alone, with the Priests, stand
around. The Hierarch, when he has sung the sacred works of God,
ministers things most divine, and brings to view the things sung,
through the symbols reverently exposed <span
id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241) , and when he has shewn the gifts of
the works of God <span id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242) , he first
proceeds to the sacred participation of the same, and turns and exhorts
the others. When he has received and distributed the supremely Divine
Communion, he terminates with a holy thanksgiving; whilst the multitude
have merely glanced at the Divine symbols alone, he is ever conducted by
the Divine Spirit, as becomes <span id="page_91">p. 91</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_91"></span>a Hierarch, in the purity of a Godlike
condition, to the holy sources of the things performed, in blessed and
intelligible visions.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p5"></span><span id="iv.iii.iii-p5.1"></span>III.
Contemplation.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p6"></span>Section I.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p7"></span>Here then, too, O excellent son, after
the images, I come in due order and reverence to the Godlike reality of
the archetypes, saying here to those yet being initiated, for the
harmonious guidance of their souls, that the varied and sacred
composition of the symbols is not without spiritual contemplation for
them, as merely presented superficially. For the most sacred chants and
readings of the Oracles teach them a discipline of a virtuous life, and
previous to this, the, complete purification from destructive evil; and
the most Divine, and common, and peaceful distribution of one and the
same, both Bread and Cup, enjoins upon them a godly fellowship in
character, as having a fellowship in food, and recalls to their memory
the most Divine Supper, and arch-symbol of the rites performed,
agreeably with which the Founder of the symbols Himself excludes, most
justly, him who had supped with Him on the holy things, not
piously <span id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243) and in a manner suitable
to his character; teaching at once, clearly <span id="page_92">p.
92</span> <span id="iv.iii.iii-Page_92"></span>and Divinely, that the
approach to Divine mysteries with a sincere mind confers, on those who
draw nigh, the participation in a gift according to their own character.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p8"></span>Section II.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p9"></span>Let us, then, as I said, leave behind
these things, beautifully depicted upon the entrance of the. innermost
shrine, as being sufficient for those, who are yet incomplete for
contemplation, and let us proceed from the effects to the causes; and
then, Jesus lighting the way, we shall view our holy Synaxis, and the
comely contemplation of things intelligible, which makes radiantly
manifest the blessed beauty of the archetypes. But, oh, most Divine and
holy initiation, uncovering the folds of the dark mysteries enveloping
thee in symbols, be manifest to us in thy bright glory, and fill our
intellectual visions with single and unconcealed light.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p10"></span>Section III.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p11"></span>We must, then, in my opinion, pass
within the All Holy Mysteries, after we have laid bare the intelligible
of the first of the votive gifts, to gaze upon its Godlike beauty, and
view the Hierarch, divinely going with sweet fragrance from the Divine
Altar to the furthermost bounds of the holy place, and again returning
to it to complete the function. For the Blessedness, supremely Divine
above all, even if, through Divine goodness, It goes forth to the
communion of the holy who participate in It, yet <span id="page_93">p.
93</span> <span id="iv.iii.iii-Page_93"></span>It never goes outside its
essential unmoved position and steadfastness; and illuminates all the
Godlike in due degree, being always self-centred, and in nowise moved
from its own proper identity; so, too, the Divine initiation (sacrament)
of the Synaxis, although it has a unique, and simple, and enfolded
Source, is multiplied, out of love towards man, into the holy variety of
the symbols, and travels through the whole range of the supremely Divine
description; yet uniformly it is again collected from these, into its
own proper Monady, and unifies those who are being reverently conducted
towards it. In the same Godlike manner, the Divine Hierarch, if he
benignly lowers to his subordinates his own unique Hierarchical science,
by using the multiplicities of the holy enigmas, yet again, as absolute,
and not to be held in check by smaller things, he is restored to his
proper headship without diminution, and, when he has made the
intellectual entry of himself to the One, he sees clearly the uniform
*raisons d’être* of the things done, as he makes the goal of his
philanthropic progress to things secondary the more Divine <span
id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244) return to things primary.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p12"></span>Section IV.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p13"></span>The chanting of the Psalms, being
co-essential with almost all the Hierarchical mysteries, was not likely
to be separated from the most Hierarchical of all. For every holy and
inspired Scripture sets forth <span id="page_94">p. 94</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_94"></span>for those meet for deification, either
the originated beginning and ordering of things from God; or the
Hierarchy and polity of the Law; or the distributions and possessions of
the inheritances of the people of God; or the understanding of sacred
judges, or of wise kings, or of inspired Priests: or philosophy of men
of old time, unshaken in endurances of the things let loose in variety
and multitude; or the treasures of wisdom for the conduct of life; or
songs and inspired pictures of Divine Loves; or the declaratory
predictions of things to come; or the Theandric works of Jesus; or the
God-transmitted and God-imitating polities and holy teachings of His
Disciples, or the hidden and mystic gaze of the beloved and divinely
sweet of the disciples, or the supermundane theology of Jesus; and
implanted them in the holy and Godlike instructions of the mystic rites.
Now the sacred description of the Divine Odes, whose purpose is to sing
the words and works of God throughout, and to praise the holy words and
works of godly men, forms an universal Ode and narrative of things
Divine, and makes, in those who inspiredly recite it, a habit suitable
for the reception and distribution of every Hierarchical mystery. <span
id="page_95">p. 95</span> <span id="iv.iii.iii-Page_95"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p14"></span>Section V.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p15"></span>When, then, the comprehensive melody of
the holy Hymns has harmonized the habits of our souls to the things
which are presently to be ministered, and, by the unison of the Divine
Odes, as one and concordant chorus of holy men, has established an
accord with things Divine, and themselves <span
id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245) , and one another, the things, more
strained and obscure in the intellectual language of the mystic Psalms,
are expanded by the most holy lections of the inspired writings, through
more full and distinct images and narratives. He, who devoutly
contemplates these, will perceive the uniform and one conspiration, as
being moved by One, the supremely Divine Spirit. Hence, naturally, in
the history of the world, after the more ancient <span
id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246) tradition, the new Covenant is
proclaimed; the inspired and Hierarchical order teaching this, as I
think, that the one affirmed the Divine works of Jesus, as to come; but
the other accomplished; and as that described the truth in figures, this
shewed it present. For the accomplishment, within this, of the
predictions of that, established the truth, and the work of God is a
consummation of the Word of God.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p16"></span>Section VI.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p17"></span>Those who absolutely have no ear for
these sacred initiations do not even recognize the images,-- <span
id="page_96">p. 96</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_96"></span>unblushingly rejecting the saving
revelation of the Divine Birth, and in opposition to the Oracles reply
to their destruction, "Thy ways I do not wish to know."

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p18"></span>Now the regulation of the holy
Hierarchy permits the catechumens, and the possessed, and the penitents,
to hear the sacred chanting of the Psalms, and the inspired reading of
the all-Holy Scriptures; but it does not invite them to the next
religious services and contemplations, but only the eyes of the
initiated. For the Godlike Hierarchy is full of reverent justice, and
distributes savingly to each, according to their due, bequeathing
savingly the harmonious communication of each of the things Divine, in
measure, and proportion, and due time. The lowest rank, then, is
assigned to the catechumens, for they are without participation and
instruction in every Hierarchical initiation, not even having the being
in God by Divine Birth, but are yet being brought to <span
id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247) Birth by the Paternal Oracles, and
moulded, by life-giving formations, towards the blessed introduction to
their first life and first light from Birth in God. As, then, children
after the flesh, if, whilst immature and unformed, they should
anticipate their proper delivery, as untimely born and abortions, will
fall to earth without life and without light; and no one, in his senses,
would say from what he saw, that they, released from the darkness of the
womb, were brought to the light (for the <span id="page_97">p. 97</span>
<span id="iv.iii.iii-Page_97"></span>medical authority, which is learned
in the functions of the body, would say that light operates on things
receptive of light); so also the all-wise science of religious rites
brings these first to delivery, by the preparatory nourishment of the
formative and life-giving Oracles; and when it has made their person
ripe for Divine Birth, gives to them savingly, in due order, the
participation in things luminous and perfecting; but, at present, it
separates things perfect from them as imperfect, consulting the good
order of sacred things, and the delivery and life of the catechumens, in
a Godlike order of the Hierarchical rites.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p19"></span>Section VII.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p20"></span>Now the multitude of the possessed
indeed is unholy, but it is next above the catechumens, which is lowest.
Nor is that which has received a certain participation in the most holy
offices, but is yet entangled by contrary qualities, whether
enchantments or terrors, on a par, as I think, with the altogether
uninitiated and entirely uncommunicated in the Divine initiations; but,
even for them, the view and participation in the holy mysteries is
contracted, and very properly. For, if it be true that the altogether
godly man, the worthy partaker of the Divine mysteries, the one carried
to the very summit of the Divine likeness, to the best of his powers, in
complete and most perfect deifications, does not even perform the things
of the flesh, beyond the most necessary requirements of nature, and then
as <span id="page_98">p. 98</span> <span id="iv.iii.iii-Page_98"></span>
a parergon, but will be, at the same time, a temple, and a follower,
according to his ability, of the supremely Divine Spirit, in the highest
deification, implanting like in like;--such an one as this would never
be possessed by opposing phantoms or fears, but will laugh them to
scorn, and when they approach, will cast them down and put them to
flight, and will act rather than comply, and in addition to the
passionless and indomitableness of his own character, will be seen also
a physician to others, for such "possessions" as these; (and *I* think
further, yea, rather, I know certainly that the most impartial
discrimination of Hierarchical persons knows more than they <span
id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248) , that such as are possessed with a
most detestable possession, by departing from the Godlike life, become
of one mind and one condition with destructive demons, by turning
themselves from things that really are, and undying possessions, and
everlasting pleasures, for the sake of the most base and impassioned
folly destructive to themselves; and by desiring and pursuing the
earthly variableness, and the perishable and corrupting pleasures, and
the unstable comfort in things foreign to their nature, not real but
seeming;) these then, first, and more properly than those, were shut out
by the discriminating authority of the Deacon; for it is not permitted
to them to have part in any other holy function than the teaching of the
Oracles, which is likely to turn them to better things. For, if the
<span id="page_99">p. 99</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_99"></span>supermundane Service of the Divine
Mysteries excludes those under penitence, and those who have already
attained it, not permitting anything to come near which is not
completely perfect, and proclaims, and this in all sincerity, that "I am
unseen and uncommunicated by those who are in any respect imperfectly
weak as regards the summit of the Divine Likeness" (for that altogether
most pure voice scares away even those who cannot be associated with the
worthy partakers of the most Divine mysteries).; how much more, then,
will the multitude of those who are under the sway of their passions be
unhallowed and alien from every sight and participation in the holy
mysteries. When, then, the uninitiated in the mysteries, and the
imperfect, and with them the apostates from the religious life, and
after them, those who through unmanliness are prone to the fears and
fancies of contrary influences, as not reaching through the persistent
and indomitable inclination towards godliness, the stability and
activity of a Godlike condition; then, in addition to these, those who
have separated indeed from the contrary life, but have not yet been
cleansed from its imaginations by a godly and pure habit and love, and
next, those who are not altogether uniform, and to use an expression of
the Law, "entirely without spot and blemish," when these have been
excluded from the divine temple and the service which is too high for
them, the all-holy ministers and loving contemplators of things
all-holy, gazing reverently upon the most pure rite, <span
id="page_100">p. 100</span> <span id="iv.iii.iii-Page_100"></span>sing
in an universal Hymn of Praise <span id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249)
the Author and Giver of all good, from Whom the saving mystic Rites were
exhibited to us, which divinely work the sacred deification of those
being initiated. Now this Hymn some indeed call a Hymn of Praise,
others, the symbol of worship, but others, as I think, more divinely, a
Hierarchical thanksgiving, as giving a summary of the holy gifts which
come to us from God. For, it seems to me the record <span
id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250) of all the works of God related to
have been done for us in song, which, after it had benevolently fixed
our being and life, and moulded the Divine likeness in ourselves to
beautiful archetypes, and placed us in participation of a more Divine
condition and elevation; but when it beheld the dearth of Divine gifts,
which came upon us by our heedlessness, is declared to have called us
back to our first condition, by goods restored, and by the complete
assumption <span id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251) of what was ours, to
have made good the most perfect impartation of His own, and thus tp have
given to us a participation in God and Divine things.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p21"></span>Section VIII.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p22"></span>When the supremely Divine love towards
Man has thus been religiously celebrated, the Divine Bread is presented,
veiled, and likewise the Cup of Blessing, and the most Divine greeting
is <span id="page_101">p. 101</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_101"></span>devoutly performed, and the mystic and
supermundane recital of the holy-written tablets. For it is not possible
to be collected to the One, and to partake of the peaceful union with
the One, when people are divided amongst themselves. For if, being
illuminated by the contemplation and knowledge of the One, we would be
united to an uniform and Divine agreement, we must not permit ourselves
to descend to divided lusts, from which are formed earthly enmities,
envious and passionate, against that which is according to nature. This
unified and undivided life is, in my opinion, established by the holy
service of the "peace," which establishes like in like, and separates
the Divine and unified visions from things divided. The recital of the
holy tablets after the "peace" proclaims those who have passed through
life holily, and have reached the term of a virtuous life without
faltering, urging and conducting us to their blessed condition and
Divine repose, through similarity to them, and, announcing them as
living, and, as the Word of God says, "not dead, but as having passed
from death to a most divine life <span id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252)
."

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p23"></span>Section IX.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p24"></span>But observe that they are enrolled in
the holy memorials, not as though the Divine memory were represented
under the figure of a memorial, after the manner of men; but as one
might say, with <span id="page_102">p. 102</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_102"></span>reverence towards God, as beseems the
august and unfailing knowledge in God of those who have been perfected
in the likeness of God. For "He knoweth," say the Oracles, "them that
are His," and "precious, in the sight of the Lord, is the death of His
saints, "death of saints," being said, instead of the perfection in
holiness. And bear this religiously in mind, that when the worshipful
symbols have been placed on the Divine Altar, through which (symbols)
the Christ is signified and partaken, there is inseparably present the
reading of the register of the holy persons, signifying the indivisible
conjunction of their supermundane and sacred union with Him. When these
things have been ministered, according to the regulations described, the
Hierarch, standing before the most holy symbols, washes his hands with
water, together with the reverend order of the Priests. Because, as the
Oracles testify, when a man has been washed, he needs no other washing,
except that of his extremities, i.e his lowest; through which extreme
cleansing he will be resistless and free, as altogether uniform, in a
sanctified habit of the Divine Likeness, and advancing in a goodly
manner to things secondary, and being turned again uniquely to the One,
he will make his return, without spot and blemish, as preserving the
fulness and completeness of the Divine Likeness. <span id="page_103">p.
103</span> <span id="iv.iii.iii-Page_103"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p25"></span>Section X.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p26"></span>There was indeed the sacred laver, as
we have said, in the Hierarchy of the Law <span
id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253) ; and the present cleansing of the
hands of the Hierarch and the Priests suggests it. For it behoves those
who approach the most hallowed service to be purified even to the
remotest imaginations of the soul, through likeness to it, and, as far
as possible, to draw nigh; for thus they will shed around more visibly
the Divine manifestations, since the supermundane flashes permit their
own splendour to pass more thoroughly and brilliantly into the
brightness of mirrors like themselves. Further, the cleansing of the
Hierarch and the Priests to their extremities, i.e. lowest, takes place
before the most holy symbols, as in the presence of Christ, Who surveys
all our most secret thoughts, and since the utmost purification is
established under His all-surveying scrutiny, and most just and
unflinching judgment, the Hierarch thus becomes one with the things
Divine, and, when he has extolled the holy works of God, he ministers
things most Divine, and brings to view the things being sung <span
id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254) .

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p27"></span>Section XI.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p28"></span>We will now explain, in detail, to the
best of our ability, certain works of God, of which we spoke. For *I* am
not competent to sing *all,* much less to know accurately, and to reveal
their mysteries to <span id="page_104">p. 104</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_104"></span>others. Now whatever things have been
sung and ministered by the inspired Hierarchs, agreeably to the Oracles,
these we will declare, as far as attainable to us, invoking the
Hierarchical inspiration to our aid. When, in the beginning, our human
nature had thoughtlessly fallen from the good things of God, it
received, by inheritance, the life subject to many passions, and the
goal of the destructive death <span id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255) .
For, as a natural consequence, the pernicious falling away from genuine
goodness and the transgression of the sacred Law in Paradise delivered
the man fretted with the life-giving yoke, to his own downward
inclinations and the enticing and hostile wiles of the adversary--the
contraries of the divine goods; thence it pitiably exchanged for the
eternal, the mortal, and, having had its own origin in deadly
generations, the goal naturally corresponded with the beginning; but
having willingly fallen from the Divine and elevating life, it was
carried to the contrary extremity,--the variableness of many passions,
and lead astray, and turned aside from the strait way leading to the
true God,--and subjected to destructive and evil-working
multitudes--naturally forgot that it was worshipping, not gods, or
friends, but enemies. Now when these had treated it harshly, according
to their own cruelty, it fell pitiably into danger of annihilation and
destruction; but the boundless Loving-kindness of the supremely Divine
goodness towards man did not, in Its benevolence, withdraw from us Its
spontaneous forethought, but <span id="page_105">p. 105</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_105"></span>having truly participated sinlessly in
all things belonging to us, and having been made one with our lowliness
in connection with the unconfused and flawless possession of Its own
properties in full perfection, It bequeathed to us, as henceforth
members of the same family, the communion with Itself, and proclaimed us
partakers of Its own beautiful things; having, as the secret teaching
holds, loosed the power of the rebellious multiplicity, which was
against us; not by force, as having the upper hand, but, according to
the Logion, mystically transmitted to us, "in judgment and
righteousness."

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p29"></span>The things within us, then, It
benevolently changed to the entire contrary. For the lightless within
Our mind It filled with blessed and most Divine Light, and adorned the
formless with Godlike beauties; the tabernacle <span
id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256) of our soul It liberated from most
damnable passions and destructive stains by a perfected deliverance of
our being which was all but prostrate, by shewing to us a supermundane
elevation, and an inspired polity in our religious assimilation to
Itself, as far as is possible.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p30"></span>Section XII.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p31"></span>But how could the Divine imitation
otherwise become ours, unless the remembrance of the most holy works of
God were perpetually being renewed by the mystical teachings and
ministrations of the Hierarchy? This, then, we do, as the Oracles say,
<span id="page_106">p. 106</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_106"></span>"for Its remembrance." Wherefore the
Divine Hierarch, standing before the Divine Altar, extols the aforesaid
holy works of God, which proceed from the most divine forethought of
Jesus on our behalf, which He accomplished for preservation of our race,
by the good pleasure of the most Holy Father in the Holy Spirit,
according to the Logion. When he has extolled their majesty, and gazed,
with intellectual eyes, upon their intelligible contemplation, he
proceeds to their symbolical ministration,--and this,--as transmitted
from God. Whence after the holy hymns of the works of God, he piously
and, as becomes a hierarch, deprecates his own unworthiness for a
service above his merits, first, reverently crying aloud to Him, "Thou
hast said, This do for My remembrance." Then, <span
id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257) having asked to become meet for this
the God-imitating of service, and to consecrate things Divine by the
assimilation to Christ Himself, and to distribute them altogether
purely, and that those who shall partake of things holy may receive them
holily, he consecrates things most Divine, and brings to view through
the symbols reverently exposed the things whose praises are being sung.
For when he has unveiled the veiled and undivided Bread, and divided it
into many, and has divided the Oneness of the Cup to all, he
symbolically multiplies and distributes the unity, completing in these
an altogether most holy ministration. For the "one," and "simple," and
<span id="page_107">p. 107</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_107"></span>"hidden," of Jesus, the most supremely
Divine Word, by His incarnation amongst us, came forth, out of goodness
and love towards man, to the compound and visible, and benevolently
devised the unifying, communion, having united, to the utmost, our
lowliness to the most Divine of Himself; if indeed we have been fitted
to Him, as members to a body, after the identity of a blameless and
Divine life, and have not, by being killed through destructive passions,
become inharmonious, and unfastened, and unyoked, to the godly and most
healthy members. For, if we aspire to communion with Him, we must keep
our eye fixed upon His most godly Life in the flesh, and we must retrace
our path to the Godlike and blameless habit of Its holy sinlessness by
assimilation to It; for thus He will communicate harmoniously to us the
communion with the similar.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p32"></span>Section XIII.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p33"></span>The Hierarch makes known these things
to those who are living religiously, by bringing the veiled gifts to
view, by dividing their oneness into many, and by making the recipients
partakers of them, by the utmost union of the things distributed with
those who receive them. For he delineates in these things under sensible
forms our intelligible life in figures, by bringing to view the Christ
Jesus from the Hidden within the Divine Being, out of love to man, made
like unto us by the all-perfect and unconfused <span id="page_108">p.
108</span> <span id="iv.iii.iii-Page_108"></span>incarnation in our
race, from us, and advancing to the divided condition of ourselves,
without change from the essential One, and calling the human race,
through this beneficent love of man, into participation with Himself and
His own good things, provided we are united to His most Divine Life by
our assimilation to it, as far as possible; and by this, in very truth,
we shall have been perfected, as partakers of God and of Divine things.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p34"></span>Section XIV.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p35"></span>Having received and distributed the
supremely Divine Communion, he terminates with a holy thanksgiving, in
which the whole body of the Church take part. For the Communion precedes
the imparting, and the reception of the mysteries, the mystic
distribution. For this is the universal regulation and order of the
Divine Mysteries, that the reverend Leader should first partake, and be
filled with the gifts, to be imparted, through him, from God to others,
and so impart to others also. Wherefore, those who rashly content
themselves with the inspired instructions, in preference to a life and
condition agreeable to the same, are profane, and entirely alien from
the sacred regulation established. For, as in the case of the bright
shining of the sun, the more delicate and luminous substances, being
first filled with the brilliancy flowing into them, brightly impart
their overflowing light to things after them; so it is not tolerable
that one, who has not <span id="page_109">p. 109</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_109"></span>become altogether Godlike in his whole
character, and proved to be in harmony with the Divine influence and
judgment, should become Leader to others, in the altogether divine.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p36"></span>Section XV.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p37"></span>Meanwhile, the whole order of the
Priests having been collected together in hierarchical order, and
communicated in the most Divine mysteries, finishes with a holy
thanksgiving, after having recognized and sung the favours of the works
of God, according to their degree. So that those, who have not partaken
and are ignorant of things Divine, would not attain to thanksgiving,
although the most Divine gifts are, in their essential nature, worthy of
thanksgiving. But, as I said, not having wished even to look at the
Divine gifts, from their inclination to things inferior, they have
remained throughout ungracious towards the boundless graces of the works
of God. "Taste and see," say the Oracles, for, by the sacred initiation
of things Divine, the initiated recognize their munificent graces, and,
by gazing with utmost reverence upon their most Divine height and
breadth in the participation, they will sing the supercelestial
beneficent works of the Godhead with gracious thanksgiving. <span
id="page_110">p. 110</span> <span id="iv.iii.iii-Page_110"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_238"></span>[89:239](dio61.htm#fr_238) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p2.1"></span>Baptism, Ap. C. lib. 3, c. 16.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[89:240](dio61.htm#fr_239) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p3.2"></span>See Traicté de la Liturgie ou S. Messe selon
l’usage et la forme des apostres, et de leur disciple Sainct Denys,
Apostre des François, par. Gilb. Genebrard, archevesque d’Aix.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[90:241](dio61.htm#fr_240) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p4.1"></span>Ap. C. lib. 8, s. 12, Lit. of Dionysius, p.
189.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[90:242](dio61.htm#fr_241) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p4.2"></span>As in Denmark.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[90:243](dio61.htm#fr_242) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p4.3"></span><span
id="iv.iii.iii-p4.4"></span>θεουργίων--Divine Mysteries?

<span id="fn_243"></span>[91:244](dio61.htm#fr_243) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p7.1"></span><span id="iv.iii.iii-p7.2"></span>[John
xiii. 11](../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p7.2"></span>. St. Cyprian thought Judas was excluded;
St. Augustine not. See Cornelius a Lapide on <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p7.3"></span>[John xiii.
11](../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#011)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p7.3"></span> Ap.
C. S, s. 14.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[93:245](dio61.htm#fr_244) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p11.1"></span>Hieracles, p. 41.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[95:246](dio61.htm#fr_245) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p15.1"></span>Republic, lib. iv. ad finem. Dulac, p.
426-7.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[95:247](dio61.htm#fr_246) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p15.2"></span>The Law and the Prophets.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[96:248](dio61.htm#fr_247) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p18.1"></span>See Plato, Thet. i. 114, 115. Dulac, 429.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[98:249](dio61.htm#fr_248) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p20.1"></span>The energoumenoi.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[100:250](dio61.htm#fr_249) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p20.2"></span>The whole Psalter is said in Liturgy of St.
James before celebration.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[100:251](dio61.htm#fr_250) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p20.3"></span>Liturgy of Dionysius, p. 191.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[100:252](dio61.htm#fr_251) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p20.4"></span>Incarnation.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[101:253](dio61.htm#fr_252) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p22.1"></span><span id="iv.iii.iii-p22.2"></span>[1John
3:14](../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#014)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p22.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[103:254](dio61.htm#fr_253) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p26.1"></span><span id="iv.iii.iii-p26.2"></span>[Deut.
xxi. 6](../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p26.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[103:255](dio61.htm#fr_254) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p26.3"></span>As is the use in Denmark.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[104:256](dio61.htm#fr_255) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p28.1"></span>The Fall.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[105:257](dio61.htm#fr_256) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p29.1"></span>Plato, Crat. i. 295.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[106:258](dio61.htm#fr_257) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p31.1"></span>Prayer of humble access.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Caput IV.](dio62)
