[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dio59)  [Next](dio61) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486434591/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Works of Dionysius the Areopagite, tr. by John Parker, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.ii"></span>

### <span id="iv.iii.ii-p0.1"></span>CAPUT II.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>I.
Concerning things done in Illumination.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p2"></span>We have, then, reverently affirmed that
this is the purpose of our Hierarchy, viz., our assimilation and union
with God, as far as attainable. And, as the Divine Oracles teach, we
shall attain this only by the love and the religious performance of the
most worshipful Commandments. For He says: "He <span
id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228) that loveth Me will keep My Word, and
My Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and will make Our
abode with him." What, then, is source of the religious performance of
the most august commandments? Our preparation for the restitution of the
supercelestial rest, which forms the habits of our souls into an
aptitude for the reception of the other sacred sayings and doings <span
id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229) , the transmission of our holy and
most divine regeneration <span id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230) . For,
as our illustrious Leader used <span id="page_75">p. 75</span> <span
id="iv.iii.ii-Page_75"></span>to say, the very first movement of the
mind towards Divine things is the willing reception of Almighty God, but
the very earliest step of the religious reception towards the religious
performance of the Divine commandments is the unutterable operation of
our being from God. For if our <span id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231)
being from God is the Divine engendering, never would he know, and
certainly never perform, any of the Divine instructions, who had not had
his beginning to be in God. To speak after the manner of men, must we
not first begin to be, and then to do, our affairs? Since he, who does
not exist at all, has neither movement nor even beginning; since he, who
in some way exists, alone does, or suffers, those things suitable to his
own nature. This, then, as I think, is clear. Let us next contemplate
the Divine symbols of the birth in God. And I pray, let no uninitiated
person approach the sight <span id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232) ; for
neither is it without danger to gaze upon the glorious rays of the sun
with weak eyes, nor is it without peril to put our hand to things above
us. For right was the priesthood of the Law, when rejecting Osias,
because he put his hand to sacred things; and Korah, because to things
sacred above his capacity; and Nadab and Abihu, because they treated
things, within their own province, unholily. <span id="page_76">p.
76</span> <span id="iv.iii.ii-Page_76"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p3"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p3.1"></span>II.
Mysterion of Illumination.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p4"></span>Section I.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p5"></span>The Hierarch, then, wishing that all men
whatsoever should be saved by their assimilation towards God, and come
to recognition of truth, proclaims to all the veritable Good News, that
God being compassionate towards those upon earth, out of His own proper
and innate goodness, deigned Himself to come to us with outstretched
arms, by reason of loving-kindness towards men; and, by the union with
Him, to assimilate, like as by fire, things that have been made one, in
proportion to their aptitude for deification. "For as many as received
Him, to them gave He power to become children of God--to those who
believe on His Name, who were begotten, not of bloods, nor of will of
flesh, but of God <span id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233) ."

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p6"></span>Section II.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p7"></span>He, who has felt a religious longing to
participate in these truly supermundane gifts, comes to some one of the
initiated, and persuades him to act as his conductor to the Hierarch. He
then professes wholly to follow the teaching that shall be given to him,
and prays him to undertake the superintendence of his introduction, and
of all his after life. Now he, though religiously longing for his
salvation, when he measures human infirmity against the loftiness of the
undertaking, is suddenly seized <span id="page_77">p. 77</span> <span
id="iv.iii.ii-Page_77"></span>with a shivering and sense of incapacity,
nevertheless, at last, he agrees, with a good grace, to do what is
requested, and takes and leads him to the chief Hierarch.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p8"></span>Section III.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p9"></span>He, then, when with joy he has received,
as the sheep upon his shoulders, the two men, and has first worshipped,
glorifies with a mental thanksgiving and bodily prostration the One
beneficent Source, from Which, those who are being called, are called,
and those who are being saved, are saved.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p10"></span>Section IV.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p11"></span>Then collecting a full religious
assembly into the sacred place, for co-operation, and common rejoicing
over the man’s salvation, and for thanksgiving for the Divine Goodness,
he first chants a certain hymn, found in the Oracles, accompanied by the
whole body of the Church; and after this, when he has kissed the holy
table, he advances to the man before him, and demands of him, what has
brought him here?

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p12"></span>Section V.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p13"></span>When the man, out of love to God, has
confessed, according to the instruction of his sponsor, his ungodliness,
his ignorance of the really beautiful, his insufficiency for the life in
God, and prays, through his holy mediation, to attain to God and Divine
things, he (the Hierarch) testifies to him, that his approach ought to
be entire, as to God Who is All Perfect, and without <span
id="page_78">p. 78</span> <span id="iv.iii.ii-Page_78"></span> blemish;
and when he has expounded to him fully the godly course of life, and has
demanded of him, if he would thus live,--after his promise he places his
right hand upon his head, and when he has sealed him, commands the
priests to register the man and his sponsor.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p14"></span>Section VI.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p15"></span>When these have enrolled the names, he
makes a holy prayer, and when the whole Church have completed this with
him, he looses his sandals, and removes his clothing, through the
Leitourgoi. Then, when he has placed him facing the west and beating his
hands, averted towards the same quarter, he commands him thrice to
breathe scorn upon Satan, and further, to profess the words of the
renunciation. When he has witnessed his threefold renunciation, he turns
him back to the east, after he has professed this thrice; and when he
has looked up to heaven, and extended his hands thitherward, he commands
him to be enrolled under Christ, and all the Divinely transmitted
Oracles of God. When the man has done this, he attests again for him his
threefold profession, and again, when he has thrice professed, after
prayer, he gives thanks, and lays his hand upon him.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p16"></span>Section VII.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p17"></span>When the Deacons have entirely unclothed
him, the Priests bring the holy oil of the anointing. Then he begins the
anointing, through the threefold sealing, and for the rest assigns the
man to the Priests, for the anointing of his whole body, while himself
<span id="page_79">p. 79</span> <span
id="iv.iii.ii-Page_79"></span>advances to the mother of filial adoption,
and when he has purified the water within it by the holy invocations,
and perfected it by three cruciform effusions of the altogether most
pure Muron <span id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234) , and by the same
number of injections of the all holy Muron, and has invoked the sacred
melody of the inspiration of the God-rapt Prophets, he orders the man to
be brought forward; and when one of the Priests, from the register, has
announced him <span id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235) and his surety, he
is conducted by the Priests near the water to the hand of the Hierarch,
being led by the hand to him. Then the Hierarch, standing above, when
the Priests have again called aloud near the Hierarch within the water
the name of the initiated, the Hierarch dips him three times, invoking
the threefold Subsistence of the Divine Blessedness, at the three
immersions and emersions of the initiated. The Priests then take him,
and entrust him to the Sponsor and guide of his introduction; and when
they, in conjunction with him, have cast over the initiated appropriate
clothing, they lead him again to the Hierarch, who, when he has sealed
the man with the most Divinely operating Muron, pronounces him to be
henceforward partaker of the most Divinely initiating Eucharist. <span
id="page_80">p. 80</span> <span id="iv.iii.ii-Page_80"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p18"></span>Section VIII.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p19"></span>When he has finished these things, he
elevates himself from his progression to things secondary, to the
contemplation of things <span id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236) first,
as one, who, at no time or manner, turns himself to any other thing
whatever than those which are peculiarly his own, but from things Divine
to Divine,--is persistently and always ranging himself under the banner
of the supremely Divine Spirit.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p20"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p20.1"></span>III.
Contemplation.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p21"></span>Section I.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p22"></span>This initiation, then, of the holy birth
in God, as in symbols, has nothing unbecoming or irreverent, nor
anything of the sensible images, but (contains) enigmas of a
contemplation worthy of God, likened to physical and human images. For
how should it appear misleading? Even when the very divine meaning of
the things done is passed over in silence, <span
id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237) the divine Instruction might convince,
religiously pursuing as it does the good life of the candidate,
enjoining upon him the purification from every kind of evil, through a
virtuous and Divine life, by the physical cleansing through the agency
of water in a bodily form. This symbolic teaching then of the things
done, even if it had nothing more divine, would not be without religious
value, as I think, introducing a discipline of a well-regulated life,
and. suggesting mysteriously, through the total bodily <span
id="page_81">p. 81</span> <span
id="iv.iii.ii-Page_81"></span>purification by water, the complete
purification from the evil life.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p23"></span>Section II.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p24"></span>Let this, then, be, for the uninitiated,
a conducting guidance of the soul, which separates, as is meet things
sacred and uniform from multiplicity, and apportions the harmonious
elevation to the Orders severally in turn. But we, who have ascended by
sacred gradations to the sources of the things performed, and have been
religiously taught these (sources), shall recognize of what moulds they
are the reliefs, and of what invisible things they are the likenesses.
For, as is distinctly shewn in the Treatise concerning "Intelligible and
Sensible," sacred things in sensible forms are copies of things
intelligible, to which they lead and shew the way; and things
intelligible are source and science of things hierarchical cognizable by
the senses.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p25"></span>Section III.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p26"></span>Let us affirm, then, that the goodness
of the Divine Blessedness is always in the same condition and manner,
unfolding the beneficent rays of its own light upon all the intellectual
visions without grudging. Should, then, the self-choosing
self-sufficiency of the contemplators either turn away from the light
contemplated, by closing, through love of evil, the faculties for
enlightenment naturally implanted within it, it would be separated from
the light present to <span id="page_82">p. 82</span> <span
id="iv.iii.ii-Page_82"></span> it, not turned away, but shining upon it
when shortsighted and turning its face from light generously running to
it; or should it overstep the bounds of the visible given to it in due
proportion, and rashly undertake to gaze upon the rays superior to its
vision, the light indeed will do nothing beyond its proper functions,
but it, by imperfectly approaching thing’s perfect, would not attain to
things unsuitable, and, by stupidly disregarding the due proportion,
would fail through its own fault.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p27"></span>But, as I said, the Divine Light is
always unfolded beneficently to the intellectual visions, and it is
possible for them to seize it when present, and always being most ready
for the distribution of things appropriate, in a manner becoming God. To
this imitation the divine Hierarch is fashioned, unfolding to all,
without grudging, the luminous rays of his inspired teaching, and, after
the Divine example, being most ready to enlighten the proselyte, neither
using a grudging nor an unholy wrath for former back-slidings or excess,
but, after the example of God, always enlightening by his conducting
light those who approach him, as becomes a Hierarch, in fitness, and
order, and in proportion to the aptitude of each for holy things.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p28"></span>Section IV.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p29"></span>But, inasmuch as the Divine Being is
source of sacred order, within which the holy Minds regulate themselves,
he, who recurs to the proper view of <span id="page_83">p. 83</span>
<span id="iv.iii.ii-Page_83"></span> Nature, will see his proper self in
what he was originally, and will acquire this, as the first holy gift,
from his recovery to the light. Now he, who has well looked upon his own
proper condition with unbiassed eyes, will depart from the gloomy
recesses of ignorance, but being imperfect he will not, of his own
accord, at once desire the most perfect union and participation of God,
but little by little will be carried orderly and reverently through
things present to things more forward, and through these to things
foremost, and when perfected, to the supremely Divine summit. An
illustration of this decorous and sacred order is the modesty of the
proselyte, and his prudence in his own affairs in having the sponsor as
leader of the way to the Hierarch. The Divine Blessedness receives the
man, thus conducted, into communion with Itself, and imparts to him the
proper light as a kind of sign, making him godly and sharer of the
inheritance of the godly, and sacred ordering; of which things the
Hierarch’s seal, given to the proselyte, and the saving enrolment of the
priests are a sacred symbol, registering him amongst those who are being
saved, and placing in the sacred memorials, beside himself also his
sponsor,--the one indeed, as a true lover of the life-giving way to
truth and a companion of a godly guide, and the other, as an unerring
conductor of his follower by the Divinely-taught directions. <span
id="page_84">p. 84</span> <span id="iv.iii.ii-Page_84"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p30"></span>Section V.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p31"></span>Yet it is not possible to hold,
conjointly, qualities thoroughly opposed, nor that a man who has had a
certain fellowship with the One should have divided lives, if he clings
to the firm participation in the One; but he must be resistless and
resolute, as regards all separations from the uniform. This it is which
the teaching of the symbols reverently and enigmatically intimates, by
stripping the proselyte, as it were, of his former life, and discarding
to the very utmost the habits within that life, makes him stand naked
and barefoot, looking away towards the west, whilst he spurns, by the
aversion of his hands, the participations in the gloomy baseness, and
breathes out, as it were, the habit of dissimilarity which he had
acquired, and professes the entire renunciation of everything contrary
to the Divine likeness. When the man has thus become invincible and
separate from evil, it turns him towards the east, declaring clearly
that his position and recovery will be purely in the Divine Light, in
the complete separation from baseness; and receiving his sacred promises
of entire consort with the One, since he has become uniform through love
of the truth. Yet it is pretty evident, as I think, to those versed in
Hierarchical matters, that things intellectual acquire the
unchangeableness of the Godlike habit, by continuous and persistent
struggles towards one, and by the entire destruction and annihilation of
<span id="page_85">p. 85</span> <span id="iv.iii.ii-Page_85"></span>
things contrary. For it is necessary that a man should not only depart
from every kind of baseness, but he must be also bravely obdurate and
ever fearless against the baneful submission to it. Nor must he, at any
time, become remiss in his sacred love of the truth, but with all his
power persistently and perpetually be elevated towards it, always
religiously pursuing his upward course, to the more perfect mysteries of
the Godhead.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p32"></span>Section VI.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p33"></span>Now you may see the distinct
illustrations of these things in the religious rites performed by the
Hierarch. For the Godlike Hierarch starts with the holy anointing, and
the Priests under him complete the Divine service of the Chrism,
summoning in type the man initiated to the holy contests, within which
he is placed under Christ as Umpire: since, as God, He is Institutor of
the awards of contest, and as wise, He placed its laws, and as generous,
the prizes suitable to the victors. And this is yet more Divine, since
as good, He devotedly entered the lists with them, contending, on behalf
of their freedom and victory, for their power over death and
destruction, he who is being initiated will enter the contests, as those
of God, rejoicing, and abides by the regulations of the Wise, and
contends according to them, without transgression holding <span
id="page_86">p. 86</span> <span id="iv.iii.ii-Page_86"></span> fast the
hope of the beautiful rewards, as being enrolled under a good Lord and
Leader of the awards: and when after following in the Divine footsteps
of the first of athletes, through goodness, he has overthrown, in his
struggles after the Divine example, the energies and impulses opposed to
his deification, he dies with Christ--to speak mystically --to sin, in
Baptism.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p34"></span>Section VII.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p35"></span>And consider attentively, I pray, with
what appropriateness the holy symbols are presented. For since death is
with us not an annihilation of being, as others surmise, but the
separating of things united, leading to that which is invisible to us,
the soul indeed becoming invisible through deprivation of the body, and
the body, through being buried in earth in consequence of one of its
bodily changes, becoming invisible to human ken, appropriately, the
whole covering by water would be taken as an image of death, and the
invisible tomb. The symbolical teaching, then, reveals in mystery that
the man baptized according to religious rites, imitates, so far as
Divine imitation is attainable to men, by the three immersions in the
water, the supremely Divine death of the Life-giving Jesus, Who spent
three days and three nights in the tomb, in Whom, according to the
mystical and secret teaching of the sacred text, the Prince of the world
found nothing. <span id="page_87">p. 87</span> <span
id="iv.iii.ii-Page_87"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p36"></span>Section VIII.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p37"></span>Next, they throw garments, white as
light, over the man initiated. For by his manly and Godlike
insensibility to contrary passions, and by his persistent inclination
towards the One, the unadorned is adorned, and the shapeless takes
shape, being made brilliant by his luminous life.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p38"></span>But the perfecting unction of the Muron
makes the man initiated of good odour, for the holy perfecting of the
Divine birth unites those who have been perfected to the supremely
Divine Spirit. Now the overshadowing which makes intelligibly of a good
savour, and perfect, as being most unutterable, I leave to the mental
consciousness of those who are deemed worthy of the sacred and deifying
participation of the Holy Spirit within their mind.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p39"></span>At the conclusion of all, the Hierarch
calls the man initiated to the most Holy Eucharist, and imparts to him
the communion of the perfecting mysteries.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_228"></span>[74:229](dio60.htm#fr_228) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p2.1"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p2.2"></span>[John xiv.
23](../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#023)<span id="iv.iii.ii-p2.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[74:230](dio60.htm#fr_229) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p2.3"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p2.4"></span>[John
1:13](../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#013)<span id="iv.iii.ii-p2.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[74:231](dio60.htm#fr_230) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p2.5"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p2.6"></span>[John
3:5](../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#005)<span id="iv.iii.ii-p2.6"></span>.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[75:232](dio60.htm#fr_231) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p2.7"></span>See Baptismal Offices.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[75:233](dio60.htm#fr_232) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p2.8"></span>C. 2. s. 62.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[76:234](dio60.htm#fr_233) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p5.1"></span>Coptic Con. II. 40; Ap. C. lib. viii. c. 38.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[79:235](dio60.htm#fr_234) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p17.1"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p17.2"></span>μύπος is
the *unguent* prepared from myrrh, <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p17.3"></span>μυποθεγγὴς is shining with such *unguent,*
and <span id="iv.iii.ii-p17.4"></span>μυροσταγὴς (<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p17.5"></span>μυπος and <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p17.6"></span>σταζω) dripping with ditto. Ap. Con. lib.
ii. c. 14.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[79:236](dio60.htm#fr_235) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p17.7"></span>Syr. Doc. p. 60. Clark.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[80:237](dio60.htm#fr_236) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p19.1"></span>From outward signs to inward grace.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[80:238](dio60.htm#fr_237) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p22.1"></span>Catechism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Caput III.](dio61)
