[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptpl08)  [Next](ptpl10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029U2W0U/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Principal Teachings of The True Sect of Pure Land*, by Yejitsu Okusa,
\[1915\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### IV. SALVATION.

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> the True Sect of Pure Land, we have
the true, all-embracing love of Amida to save all beings from ignorance
and pain. It is the net of boundless compassion thrown by the Buddha's
own hand into the sea of misery, in which the ignorant rather than the
wise, the sinful rather than the good, are meant to be gathered up. This
love and compassion is eternally abiding with the Buddha, whose will to
save all

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

beings knows no temporal limitations; and on this account the Buddha is
called *Amitāyus* (Eternal Life). His power to save is manifest in his
light. Though invisible to our defiled eyes, this light is constantly
shedding its rays upon all sentient beings ever leading us onward to the
awakening of faith. Those who have awakened this faith in the love of
Amida which saves, are at once embraced in his light and destined to be
born in Pure Land after death. This light is the will of Amida under
whose merciful care all beings are made to grow; it reaches every part
of the universe, knowing no spatial limitations. Therefore, the Buddha
is also called *Amitābha* (Infinite Light). His will to save is, thus,
infinite not only in time but in space, hence his two attributes,
Amitāyus and Amitābha. In China and Japan, he is briefly known as Amida,
meaning the Infinite.

Amida is the Father of all beings;

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

he is the Only One; he has, from the very beginning of all things, been
contriving to save the world, and once incarnated himself in the person
of Dharmākara Bhikshu to deliver the message of happiness among us.
Amida made the Bhikshu invoke forty-eight vows as recorded in the
Amitāyus-sūtra, the main idea of which is that "I will make every one
enjoy a rebirth in Pure Land if he listen to my name and believe in my
will to save and rejoice in it." It is said that, before making this
wish, the Bhikshu cogitated for a period of five kalpas; that, in order
to fulfil the wish, he accumulated innumerable merits by practising the
six virtues for innumerable kalpas with a heart full of love and
compassion and free from all defilement; and, finally, that the
fulfilment of this vow took place ten kalpas ago. Amida is now
[summoning](errata.htm#13) us to his Land of Purity by showing us his
name that saves.

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

This world of ours is a defiled world filled with sin and suffering;
neither the wise nor the ignorant are free from sin, the noble as well
as the poor are suffering from pain. He that declares himself to be
sinless must be either an insane man or an idiot. Even when, judging
from our own ignorant conditions, we imagine ourselves happy, we may be
deceiving ourselves; for in the Buddha's eye our apparent happiness may
be a real pain. In such a world of impurity as this, it is impossible to
find a true state of peace and happiness. Fame, wealth, love,
learning,—so many evils are ever leading us downward into the abyss of
utter darkness. Where can we then find a region which harbors no pain?
There stands Amida pointing to his Land of Purity and Happiness
(*Sukhāvatī*), where our worldly sufferings and tribulations are no
more. In this land there always smiles the spring of peace. No pain, no
sin,

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

but all beauty, goodness, and joy. Those born there enjoy a happiness
that knows no ending; they are endowed not only with infinite wisdom and
liberty, but with pure love and compassion which has the power to save
all beings from the world of pain. All this happiness enjoyed by those
who are in Pure Land is the outcome of Amida's love and will to save.

Amida thus grudges nothing for our deliverance from sin; with various
contrivances, good and excellent, he ever leads us to the way of
salvation, and it is through his grace that we have in ourselves the
reason of salvation and are allowed to enjoy its fulfilment. Now, Amida
has two ways of showing his grace towards us: the one is called the
"wōsō yekō," which means that the Buddha supplies us not only with the
cause of our rebirth in Pure Land, but with its result; and the other is
called the "gensō yekō," meaning that

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

he confers upon us the power to come back to this world of pain even
after our rebirth in Pure Land, in order to deliver our fellow-beings
from sufferings. In the "wōsō yekō" there are four things to be
distinguished, which are teaching, practice, faith, and attainment. The
following scheme will make us understand this better:

<div align="center">

|                |                                                                    |                                                                 |
|----------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| The Wōsō yekō  | 1\. Teaching, as set forth in the Amitāyus-sūtra (in two volumes). | Cause.                                                          |
|                | 2\. Practice, or reciting the name of Amida.                       |                                                                 |
|                | 3\. Faith, or believing in his will to save…                       |                                                                 |
|                | 4\. Attainment, or being born in Pure Land and becoming a Buddha…  | Effect.                                                         |
| The Gensō yekō |                                                                    | Coming back to the world of suffering to save the fellow-beings |

</div>

This will be explained more in detail:

*The Teaching*. Amida once assumed a human form and appeared on earth

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

in order to save us from sin and ignorance; and Shākyamuni was he. The
most important of all his teachings is the Amitāyus-sūtra translated
into Chinese in two volumes, 252 A.D., in which is brought forth the
true signification of salvation by Amida. In fact, the very object of
his appearance on earth was to teach this sūtra and to establish the
foundation of the True Sect of Pure Land. In other words, therefore, we
can say that the True Sect is the direct revelation of Amida Buddha.

The Practice. We are now acquainted with the name of Amida according to
the discourse by Shākyamuni, and we know that in this name is embodied
the significance of Amida's will to save; for to hear the name is to
hear the voice of salvation, saying, "Trust in me, for I will surely
save you,"—a word coming directly from Amida. Such, indeed, being the
sense embodied in

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

the name of Amida, we must express deep feeling of gratitude by reciting
his name as he wills when we have been able to hear the call of our
Father so full of love and compassion. In Sanskrit, the recitation runs:
"Namo ’mitāyushe Buddhāya" or "Namo ’mitabhāya Buddhāya," but in
Japanese briefly "Namu Amida Bu."

While all other deeds of ours are more or less defiled, the reciting of
"Namu Amida Bu" is an act free from impurities; for it is not we that
recite it, but Amida himself, who, giving us his own name, makes us
recite it.

*The Faith*. When we hear the name of Amida, we cannot help but believe
in the certainty of our salvation, and this belief, too, comes from the
grace of Amida. For (1) when we come to think of his will to save, we
are unable to deceive ourselves as to our inner life full of falsehoods,
and to behave as if we were thoroughly wise. This must

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

be, because the will of Amida, pure and free from falsehood, descends
upon us.

\(2\) The moment we hear the name of the Buddha and surrender ourselves
to his will, we grow convinced of our own salvation through his grace
and gain peace of mind; this will, however, be impossible, if not for
the fact that Amida's will to save everyone who enters into his love
affirms itself in us.

\(3\) The moment we believe in our salvation through his grace, we awake
within ourselves a desire to be born in his Pure Land, and are happy in
the conviction that it will be done as we desire. This must be due to
the influence upon us of Amida's overflowing love which invites us to
join him in Pure Land. Therefore, we conclude that, that we come to rely
upon Amida for our salvation is entirely due to his grace and not to
personal efforts. Indeed, this feeling of dependence, or this faith in
Amida, is no more nor

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

less than his own will.

*The Attainment*. The instant the belief is confirmed in our salvation
through Amida, our destiny is settled that we are to be reborn in Pure
Land and become a Buddha. Then it is said that we are all embraced in
the light of Amitābha, and, living under his loving guidance, our life
after the confirmation of faith is but filled with joy unspeakable,
which is a gift of the Buddha. Then we have no need to pray the gods or
Buddhas for more happiness in this life; for are we not already enjoying
all the happiness that could be obtained here? If we still have to
suffer misfortune, it is the outcome of evil deeds committed by
ourselves in the past; and this no amount of praying will remove. It is
only after our rebirth in the Land of Happiness that we are allowed to
lead a life absolutely free from pain.

At the end of our earthly life, we

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

cast aside every trace of this defiled existence; and upon being born in
the Land of Purity and Happiness, we attain to the enlightenment of the
Buddha. And it is not necessary at this moment of rebirth to keep our
last thoughts on earth in tranquillity, and wait for the coming of the
Buddha to take us into his country. As we have already been living
encircled by the rays of Amitābha Buddha, however disturbed our last
moments, we are sure to be led into Pure Land through the mysterious
operation of the Buddha's light.

The Land of Happiness is the garden of Nirvana. Those who are born
there, gain the great enlightenment of Nirvana, enjoy a life
everlasting, and are forever free from the bondage of birth and death.
Not only this, they are then able to manifest themselves over and over
again in the world of suffering in order to deliver their fellow-beings
from sin and ignorance. All these innumerable

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

happinesses we can enjoy come from no other source than the grace of
Amida Butsu.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. Faith](ptpl10)
