[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Sources](sources) [Previous](bits014) [Next](bits016)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

|                                   |                             |
|:----------------------------------|----------------------------:|
| <span id="page_129">p. 129</span> | <span class="small"></span> |

#### 

§ 15. THERE IS NO EGO.

<span class="small"><span id="15a">§ 15 *a*.--Translated from the
Milindapañha (25<sup>1</sup>).</span></span>

   Then drew near Milinda the king to where the venerable Nâgasena; and
having passed the compliments of friendship and civility, he sat down
respectfully at one side. And the venerable Nâgasena returned the
greeting; by which, verily, he won the heart of king Milinda.

   And Milinda the king spoke to the venerable Nâgasena as follows:--

   "How is your reverence called? Bhante, what is your name?"

   "Your majesty, I am called Nâgasena; my fellow-priests, your majesty,
address me as Nâgasena: but whether parents give one the name Nâgasena,
or Sûrasena, or Vîrasena, or Sîhasena, it is, nevertheless, your
majesty, but a way of counting, a term, an appellation, a convenient
designation, a mere name, this Nâgasena; for there is no Ego here to be
found."

   Then said Milinda the king,--

   "Listen to me, my lords, ye five hundred Yonakas, and ye eighty
thousand priests! Nâgasena here says thus: 'There is no Ego here to be
found.' Is it possible, pray, for me to assent to what he says?"

   And Milinda the king spoke to the venerable Nâgasena as follows:--

|                                   |                                                  |
|:----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_130">p. 130</span> | <span class="small">\[Mil.25<sup>18</sup></span> |

   "Bhante Nâgasena, if there is no Ego to be found, who is it then
furnishes you priests with the priestly requisites, --robes, food,
bedding, and medicine, the reliance of the sick? who is it makes use of
the same? who is it keeps the precepts? who is it applies himself to
meditation? who is it realizes the Paths, the Fruits, and Nirvana? who
is it destroys life? who is it takes what is not given him? who is it
commits immorality? who is it tells lies? who is it drinks intoxicating
liquor? who is it commits the five crimes that constitute 'proximate
karma'?<span id="page_130_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_130_note_1) In that case, there is
no merit; there is no demerit; there is no one who does or causes to be
done meritorious or demeritorious deeds; neither good nor evil deeds can
have any fruit or result. Bhante Nâgasena, neither is he a murderer who
kills a priest, nor can you priests, bhante Nâgasena, have any teacher,
preceptor, or ordination. When you say, 'My fellow-priests, your
majesty, address me as Nâgasena,' what then is this Nâgasena? Pray,
bhante, is the hair of the head Nâgasena?"

   "Nay, verily, your majesty."

   "Is the hair of the body Nâgasena?"

   "Nay, verily, your majesty."

   "Are nails . . . teeth . . . skin . . . flesh . . . sinews . . .
bones . . . marrow of the bones . . . kidneys . . . heart . . . liver .
. . pleura . . . spleen . . . lungs . . . intestines . . . mesentery . .
. stomach . . . faeces . . . bile . . . phlegm . . . pus . . . blood . .
. sweat . . . fat . . . tears lymph . . . saliva . . . snot . . .
synovial fluid . . . urine . . . brain of the head Nâgasena?"

   "Nay, verily, your majesty."

|                                   |                                                  |
|:----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_131">p. 131</span> | <span class="small">\[Mil.26<sup>12</sup></span> |

   "Is now, bhante, form, Nâgasena?"

   "Nay, verily, your majesty."

   "Is sensation Nâgasena?"

   "Nay, verily, your majesty."

   "Is perception Nâgasena?"

   "Nay, verily, your majesty."

   "Are the predispositions Nâgasena?"

   "Nay, verily, your majesty."

   "Is consciousness Nâgasena?"

   "Nay, verily, your majesty."

   "Are, then, bhante, form, sensation, perception, the predispositions,
and consciousness unitedly Nâgasena?"

   "Nay, verily, your majesty."

   "Is it, then, bhante, something besides form, sensation, perception,
the predispositions, and consciousness, which is Nâgasena?"

   "Nay, verily, your majesty."

   "Bhante, although I question you very closely, I fail to discover any
Nâgasena. Verily, now, bhante, Nâgasena is a mere empty sound. What
Nâgasena is there here? Bhante, you speak a falsehood, a lie: there is
no Nâgasena."

   Then the venerable Nâgasena spoke to Milinda the king as follows:--

   "Your majesty, you are a delicate prince, an exceedingly delicate
prince; and if, your majesty, you walk in the middle of the day on hot
sandy ground, and you tread on rough grit, gravel, and sand, your feet
become sore, your body tired, the mind is oppressed, and the
body-consciousness suffers. Pray, did you come afoot, or riding?"

   "Bhante, I do not go afoot: I came in a chariot."

   "Your majesty, if you came in a chariot, declare to me the chariot.
Pray, your majesty, is the pole the chariot?"

   "Nay, verily, bhante."

   "Is the axle the chariot?"

   "Nay, verily, bhante."

   "Are the wheels the chariot?"

   "Nay, verily, bhante."

   "Is the chariot-body the chariot?"

|                                   |                                                 |
|:----------------------------------|------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_132">p. 132</span> | <span class="small">\[Mil.27<sup>5</sup></span> |

   "Nay, verily, bhante."

   "Is the banner-staff the chariot?"

   "Nay, verily, bhante."

   "Is the yoke the chariot?"

   "Nay, verily, bhante."

   "Are the reins the chariot?"

   "Nay, verily, bhante."

   "Is the goading-stick the chariot?"

   "Nay, verily, bhante."

   "Pray, your majesty, are pole, axle, wheels, chariot-body,
banner-staff, yoke, reins, and goad unitedly the chariot?"

   "Nay, verily, bhante."

   "Is it, then, your majesty, something else besides pole, axle,
wheels, chariot-body, banner-staff, yoke, reins, and goad which is the
chariot?"

   "Nay, verily, bhante."

   "Your majesty, although I question you very closely, I fail to
discover any chariot. Verily now, your majesty, the word chariot is a
mere empty sound. What chariot is there here? Your majesty, you speak a
falsehood, a lie: there is no chariot. Your majesty, you are the chief
king in all the continent of India; of whom are you afraid that you
speak a lie? Listen to me, my lords, ye five hundred Yonakas, and ye
eighty thousand priests! Milinda the king here says thus: 'I came in a
chariot;' and being requested, 'Your majesty, if you came in a chariot,
declare to me the chariot,' he fails to produce any chariot. Is it
possible, pray, for me to assent to what he says?"

   When he had thus spoken, the five hundred Yonakas applauded the
venerable Nâgasena and spoke to Milinda the king as follows:--

   "Now, your majesty, answer, if you can."

   Then Milinda the king spoke to the venerable Nâgasena as follows:--

   "Bhante Nâgasena, I speak no lie: the word 'chariot' is but a way of
counting, term, appellation, convenient designation, and name for pole,
axle, wheels, chariot-body, and banner-staff."

|                                   |                                                  |
|:----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_133">p. 133</span> | <span class="small">\[Mil.27<sup>30</sup></span> |

   "Thoroughly well, your majesty, do you understand a chariot. In
exactly the same way, your majesty, in respect of me, Nâgasena is but a
way of counting, term, appellation, convenient designation, mere name
for the hair of my head, hair of my body . . . brain of the head, form,
sensation, perception, the predispositions, and consciousness. But in
the absolute sense there is no Ego here to be found. And the priestess
Vajirâ, your majesty, said as follows in the presence of The Blessed
One:--

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="5">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd" data-valign="top">
<td>"'Even as the word of "chariot" means<br />
That members join to frame a whole;<br />
So when the Groups appear to view,<br />
We use the phrase, "A living being.<span id="page_133_fr_1"></span><a href="#page_133_note_1"><sup><span class="small">1</span></sup></a>"'"<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   "It is wonderful, bhante Nâgasena! It is marvellous, bhante Nâgasena!
Brilliant and prompt is the wit of your replies. If The Buddha were
alive, he would applaud. Well done, well done, Nâgasena! Brilliant and
prompt is the wit of your replies."

 

<span class="small"><span id="15b">§ 15 *b*.--Translated from the
Visuddhi-Magga (chap. xviii.).</span></span>

   Just as the word "chariot" is but a mode of expression for axle,
wheels, chariot body, pole, and other constituent members, placed in a
certain relation to each other, but when we come to examine the members
one by one, we discover that in the absolute sense there is no chariot;
and just as the word "house" is but a mode of expression for wood and
other constituents of a house, surrounding space in a certain relation,
but in the absolute sense there is no house; and just as the word "fist"
is but a mode of expression for the fingers, the thumb, etc., in a
certain relation; and the word "lute" for the body of the lute, strings,
etc.; "army" for elephants, horses, etc.; "city" for fortifications,
houses, gates, etc.; "tree" for trunk, branches, foliage, etc., in a
certain relation, but when we come to examine the parts one by one, we
discover that in the absolute sense there is no tree; in exactly the
same way the words "living entity" and "Ego" are but

|                                   |                                        |
|:----------------------------------|---------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_134">p. 134</span> | <span class="small">\[Vis.xviii</span> |

a mode of expression for the presence of the five attachment groups, but
when we come to examine the elements of being one by one, we discover
that in the absolute sense there is no living entity there to form a
basis for such figments as "I am," or "I"; in other words, that in the
absolute sense there is only name and form. The insight of him who
perceives this is called knowledge of the truth.

   He, however, who abandons this knowledge of the truth and believes in
a living entity must assume either that this living entity will perish
or that it will not perish. If he assume that it will not perish, he
falls into the heresy of the persistence of existences; or if he assume
that it will perish, he falls into that of the annihilation of
existences. And why do I say so? Because, just as sour cream has milk as
its antecedent, so nothing here exists but what has its own
antecedents.<span id="page_134_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_134_note_1) To say, "The living
entity persists," is to fall short of the truth; to say, "It is
annihilated," is to outrun the truth. Therefore has The Blessed One
said:--

   "There are two heresies, O priests, which possess both gods and men,
by which some fall short of the truth, and some outrun the truth; but
the intelligent know the truth.

   "And how, O priests, do some fall short of the truth?

   "O priests, gods and men delight in existence, take pleasure in
existence, rejoice in existence, so that when the Doctrine for the
cessation of existence is preached to them, their minds do not leap
toward it, are not favorably disposed toward it, do not rest in it, do
not adopt it.

   "Thus, O priests, do some fall short of the truth.

   "And how, O priests, do some outrun the truth?

   "Some are distressed at, ashamed of, and loathe existence, and
welcome the thought of non-existence, saying, 'See here! When they say
that on the dissolution of the body this Ego is annihilated, perishes,
and does not exist after death, that is good, that is excellent, that is
as it should be.'

   "Thus, O priests, do some outrun the truth.

   "And how, O priests, do the intelligent know the truth?

|                                   |                                        |
|:----------------------------------|---------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_135">p. 135</span> | <span class="small">\[Vis.xviii</span> |

   "We may have, O priests, a priest who knows things as they really
are, and knowing things as they really are, he is on the road to
aversion for things, to absence of passion for them, and to cessation
from them.

   "Thus, O priests, do the intelligent know the truth."

 

<span class="small"><span id="15c">§ 15 *c*.--Translated from the
Mahâ-Nidâna-Sutta (256<sup>21</sup>) of the Dîgha-Nikâya.</span></span>

   "In regard to the Ego, Ânanda, what are the views held concerning it?

   "In regard to the Ego, Ânanda, either one holds the view that
sensation is the Ego, saying, 'Sensation is my Ego;'

   "Or, in regard to the Ego, Ânanda, one holds the view, 'Verily,
sensation is not my Ego; my Ego has no sensation;'

   "Or, in regard to the Ego, Ânanda, one holds the view, 'Verily,
neither is sensation my Ego, nor does my Ego have no sensation. My Ego
has sensation; my Ego possesses the faculty of sensation.'<span
id="page_135_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_135_note_1)

   "In the above case, Ânanda, where it is said, 'Sensation is my Ego,'
reply should be made as follows: 'Brother, there are three sensations:
the pleasant sensation, the unpleasant sensation, and the indifferent
sensation. Which of these three sensations do you hold to be the Ego?'

   "Whenever, Ânanda, a person experiences a pleasant sensation, he does
not at the same time experience an unpleasant sensation, nor does he
experience an indifferent sensation; only the pleasant sensation does he
then feel. Whenever, Ânanda, a person experiences an unpleasant
sensation, he does not at the same time experience a pleasant sensation,
nor does he experience an indifferent sensation; only the unpleasant

|                                   |                                                        |
|:----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_136">p. 136</span> | <span class="small">\[Grimblot 257<sup>14</sup></span> |

sensation does he then feel. Whenever, Ânanda, a person experiences an
indifferent sensation, he does not at the same time experience a
pleasant sensation, nor does he experience an unpleasant sensation; only
the indifferent sensation does he then feel.

   "Now pleasant sensations, Ânanda, are transitory, are due to causes,
originate by dependence, and are subject to decay, disappearance,
effacement, and cessation; and unpleasant sensations, Ânanda, are
transitory, are due to causes, originate by dependence, and are subject
to decay, disappearance, effacement, and cessation; and indifferent
sensations, Ânanda, are transitory, are due to causes, originate by
dependence, and are subject to decay, disappearance, effacement, and
cessation. While this person is experiencing a pleasant sensation, he
thinks, 'This is my Ego.' And after the cessation of this same pleasant
sensation, he thinks, 'My Ego has passed away.' While he is experiencing
an unpleasant sensation, he thinks, 'This is my Ego.' And after the
cessation of this same unpleasant sensation, he thinks, 'My Ego has
passed away.' And while he is experiencing an indifferent sensation, he
thinks, 'This is my Ego.' And after the cessation of this same
indifferent sensation, he thinks, 'My Ego has passed away.' So that he
who says, 'Sensation is my Ego,' holds the view that even during his
lifetime his Ego is transitory, that it is pleasant, unpleasant, or
mixed, and that it is subject to rise and disappearance.

   "Accordingly, Ânanda, it is not possible to hold the view, 'Sensation
is my Ego.'

 

   "In the above case, Ânanda, where it is said, 'Verily sensation is
not my Ego; my Ego has no sensation,' reply should be made as follows:
'But, brother, where there is no sensation, is there any "I am"?'"

   "Nay, verily, Reverend Sir."

   "Accordingly, Ânanda, it is not possible to hold the view, 'Verily,
sensation is not my Ego; my Ego has no sensation.'

 

   "In the above case, Ânanda, where it is said, 'Verily, neither is
sensation my Ego, nor does my Ego have no sensation.

|                                   |                                                        |
|:----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_137">p. 137</span> | <span class="small">\[Grimblot 258<sup>20</sup></span> |

My Ego has sensation; my Ego possesses the faculty of sensation,' reply
should be made as follows: 'Suppose, brother, that utterly and
completely, and without remainder, all sensation were to cease--if there
were nowhere any sensation, pray, would there be anything, after the
cessation of sensation, of which it could be said, "This am I"?'"

   "Nay, verily, Reverend Sir."

   "Accordingly, Ânanda, it is not possible to hold the view, 'Verily,
neither is sensation my Ego, nor does my Ego have no sensation. My Ego
has sensation; my Ego possesses the faculty of sensation.'

 

   "From the time, Ânanda, a priest no longer holds the view that
sensation is the Ego, no longer holds the view that the Ego has no
sensation, no longer holds the view that the Ego has sensation,
possesses the faculty of sensation, he ceases to attach himself to
anything in the world, and being free from attachment, he is never
agitated, and being never agitated, he attains to Nirvana in his own
person; and he knows that rebirth is exhausted, that he has lived the
holy life, that he has done what it behooved him to do, and that he is
no more for this world.

   "Now it is impossible, Ânanda, that to a mind so freed a priest
should attribute the heresy that the saint exists after death, or that
the saint does not exist after death, or that the saint both exists and
does not exist after death, or that the saint neither exists nor does
not exist after death.

   "And why do I say so?

   "Because, Ânanda, after a priest has been freed by a thorough
comprehension of affirmation and affirmation's range, of predication and
predication's range, of declaration and declaration's range, of
knowledge and knowledge's field of action, of rebirth and what rebirth
affects, it is impossible for him to attribute such a heretical lack of
knowledge and perception to a priest similarly freed."

 

|                                   |                                                    |
|:----------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_138">p. 138</span> | <span class="small">\[S.xxii.85<sup>1</sup></span> |

<span class="small"><span id="15d">§ 15 *d*.--Translated from the
Samyutta-Nikâya (xxii.85<sup>1</sup>).</span></span>

   Thus have I heard.

   On a certain occasion the venerable Sâriputta was dwelling at
Sâvatthi in Jetavana monastery in Anâthapindika's Park.

   Now at that time the following wicked heresy had sprung up in the
mind of a priest named Yamaka: "Thus do I understand the doctrine taught
by The Blessed One, that on the dissolution of the body the priest who
has lost all depravity is annihilated, perishes, and does not exist
after death."

   And a number of priests heard the report: "The following wicked
heresy has sprung up in the mind of a priest named Yamaka: 'Thus do I
understand the doctrine taught by The Blessed One, that on the
dissolution of the body the priest who has lost all depravity is
annihilated, perishes, and does not exist after death.'"

   Then drew near these priests to where the venerable Yamaka was; and
having drawn near, they greeted the venerable Yamaka; and having passed
the compliments of friendship and civility, they sat down respectfully
at one side. And seated respectfully at one side, these priests spoke to
the venerable Yamaka as follows: "Is the report true, brother Yamaka,
that the following wicked heresy has sprung up in your mind: 'Thus do I
understand the doctrine taught by The Blessed One, that on the
dissolution of the body the priest who has lost all depravity is
annihilated, perishes, and does not exist after death'?"

   "Even so, brethren, do I understand the doctrine taught by The
Blessed One, that on the dissolution of the body the saint who has lost
all depravity is annihilated, perishes, and does not exist after death."

   "Say not so, brother Yamaka. Do not traduce The Blessed One; for it
is not well to traduce The Blessed One. The Blessed One would never say
that on the dissolution of the body the saint who has lost all depravity
is annihilated, perishes, and does not exist after death."

|                                   |                                                    |
|:----------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_139">p. 139</span> | <span class="small">\[S.xxii.85<sup>8</sup></span> |

   Nevertheless, in spite of all these priests could say, the venerable
Yamaka persisted obstinately to adhere to his pestiferous delusion:
"Thus do I understand the doctrine taught by The Blessed One, that on
the dissolution of the body the priest who has lost all depravity is
annihilated, perishes, and does not exist after death."

   And when these priests found themselves unable to detach the
venerable Yamaka from this wicked heresy, then these priests arose from
their seats and drew near to where the venerable Sâriputta was. And
having drawn near they spoke to the venerable Sâriputta as follows:--

   "Brother Sâriputta, the following wicked heresy has sprung up in the
mind of a priest named Yamaka: 'Thus do I understand the doctrine taught
by The Blessed One, that on the dissolution of the body the priest who
has lost all depravity is annihilated, perishes, and does not exist
after death.' Pray, let the venerable Sâriputta be so kind as to draw
near to where the priest Yamaka is."

   And the venerable Sâriputta consented by his silence.

   Then the venerable Sâriputta in the evening of the day arose from
meditation, and drew near to where the venerable Yamaka was; and having
drawn near, he greeted the venerable Yamaka; and having passed the
compliments of friendship and civility, he sat down respectfully at one
side. And seated respectfully at one side, the venerable Sâriputta spoke
to the venerable Yamaka as follows: "Is the report true, brother Yamaka,
that the following wicked heresy has sprung up in your mind: 'Thus do I
understand the doctrine taught by The Blessed One, that on the
dissolution of the body the priest who has lost all depravity is
annihilated, perishes, and does not exist after death'?"

   "Even so, brother, do I understand the doctrine taught by The Blessed
One, that on the dissolution of the body the priest who has lost all
depravity is annihilated, perishes, and does not exist after death."

   "What think you, brother Yamaka? Is form permanent, or transitory?"

   "It is transitory, brother."

|                                   |                                                     |
|:----------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_140">p. 140</span> | <span class="small">\[S.xxii.85<sup>14</sup></span> |

   "And that which is transitory--is it evil, or is it good?"

   "It is evil, brother."

   "And that which is transitory, evil, and liable to change--is it
possible to say of it: 'This is mine; this am I; this is my Ego'?"

   "Nay, verily, brother."

   "Is sensation . . . perception . . . the predispositions . . .
consciousness permanent, or transitory?"

   "It is transitory, brother."

   "And that which is transitory--is it evil, or is it good?"

   "It is evil, brother."

   "And that which is transitory, evil, and liable to change--is it
possible to say of it: 'This is mine; this am I; this is my Ego'?"

   "Nay, verily, brother."

   "Accordingly, brother Yamaka, as respects all form whatsoever, past,
future, or present, be it subjective or existing outside, gross or
subtile, mean or exalted, far or near, the correct view in the light of
the highest knowledge is as follows: 'This is not mine; this am I not;
this is not my Ego.'

   "As respects all sensation whatsoever, . . . as respects all
perception whatsoever, . . . as respects all predispositions whatsoever,
. . . as respects all consciousness whatsoever, past, future, or
present, be it subjective or existing outside, gross or subtile, mean or
exalted, far or near, the correct view in the light of the highest
knowledge is as follows: 'This is not mine; this am I not; this is not
my Ego.'

   "Perceiving this, brother Yamaka, the learned and noble disciple
conceives an aversion for form, conceives an aversion for sensation,
conceives an aversion for perception, conceives an aversion for the
predispositions, conceives an aversion for consciousness. And in
conceiving this aversion he becomes divested of passion, and by the
absence of passion he becomes free, and when he is free he becomes aware
that he is free; and he knows that rebirth is exhausted, that he has
lived the holy life, that he has done what it behooved him to do, and
that he is no more for this world.

|                                   |                                                     |
|:----------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_141">p. 141</span> | <span class="small">\[S.xxii.85<sup>21</sup></span> |

   "What think you, brother Yamaka? Do you consider form as the saint?"

   "Nay, verily, brother."

   "Do you consider sensation . . . perception . . . the predispositions
. . . consciousness as the saint?"

   "Nay, verily, brother."

   "What think you, brother Yamaka? Do you consider the saint as
comprised in form?"

   "Nay, verily, brother."

   "Do you consider the saint as distinct from form?"

   "Nay, verily, brother."

   "Do you consider the saint as comprised in sensation? . . . as
distinct from sensation? . . . as comprised in perception? . . . as
distinct from perception? . . . as comprised in the predispositions? . .
. as distinct from the predispositions? . . . as comprised in
consciousness?"

   "Nay, verily, brother."

   "Do you consider the saint as distinct from consciousness?"

   "Nay, verily, brother."

   "What think you, brother Yamaka? Are form, sensation, perception, the
predispositions, and consciousness unitedly the saint?"

   "Nay, verily, brother."

   "What think you, brother Yamaka? Do you consider the saint as a
something having no form, sensation, perception, predispositions, or
consciousness?"

   "Nay, verily, brother."

   "Considering now, brother Yamaka, that you fail to make out and
establish the existence of the saint in the present life, is it
reasonable for you to say: 'Thus do I understand the doctrine taught by
The Blessed One, that on the dissolution of the body the priest who has
lost all depravity is annihilated, perishes, and does not exist after
death'?"

   "Brother Sâriputta, it was because of my ignorance that I held this
wicked heresy; but now that I have listened to the doctrinal instruction
of the venerable Sâriputta, I have abandoned that wicked heresy and
acquired the true doctrine."

|                                   |                                                     |
|:----------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_142">p. 142</span> | <span class="small">\[S.xxii.85<sup>36</sup></span> |

   "But if others were to ask you, brother Yamaka, as follows: 'Brother
Yamaka, the priest who is a saint and has lost all depravity, what
becomes of him on the dissolution of the body, after death?' what would
you reply, brother Yamaka, if you were asked that question?"

   "Brother, if others were to ask me as follows: 'Brother Yamaka, the
priest who is a saint and has lost all depravity, what becomes of him on
the dissolution of the body, after death?' I would reply, brother, as
follows, if I were asked that question: 'Brethren, the form was
transitory, and that which was transitory was evil, and that which was
evil has ceased and disappeared. The sensation . . . perception . . .
predispositions . . . consciousness was transitory, and that which was
transitory was evil, and that which was evil has ceased and
disappeared.' Thus would I reply, brother, if I were asked that
question."

   "Well said! well said! brother Yamaka. Come now, brother Yamaka, I
will give you an illustration that you may still better comprehend this
matter.

   "Suppose, brother Yamaka, there were a householder, or a son of a
householder, rich, wealthy, and affluent, and thoroughly well guarded,
and some man were to become unfriendly, inimical, and hostile to him,
and were to wish to kill him. And suppose it were to occur to this man
as follows: 'This householder, or son of a householder, is rich,
wealthy, and affluent, and thoroughly well-guarded. It would not be easy
to kill him by violence. What if now I were to ingratiate myself with
him and then kill him.' And suppose he were to draw near to that
householder, or son of a householder, and say as follows: 'Lord, I would
fain enter your service.' And suppose the householder, or son of a
householder, were to admit him into his service; and the man were to be
his servant, rising before him and retiring after him, willing and
obliging and pleasant-spoken. And suppose the householder, or son of a
householder, were to treat him as a friend, were to treat him as a
comrade, and repose confidence in him. And suppose then, brother, that
when that man judged that the householder, or son of a householder, had

|                                   |                                                     |
|:----------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_143">p. 143</span> | <span class="small">\[S.xxii.85<sup>39</sup></span> |

acquired thorough confidence in him, he were to get him into some
secluded spot and kill him with a sharp weapon.

   "What think you, brother Yamaka? When that man drew near to that
householder, or son of a householder, and said as follows: 'Lord, I
would fain enter your service,' was he not a murderer, though not
recognized as such?

   "And also when he was his servant, rising before him and retiring
after him, willing and obliging and pleasant-spoken, was he not a
murderer, though not recognized as such?

   "And also when he got him into a secluded spot and killed him with a
sharp weapon, was he not a murderer, though not recognized as such?"

   "Even so, brother."

   "In exactly the same way, brother, the ignorant, unconverted man, who
is not a follower of noble disciples, not conversant with the Noble
Doctrine, not disciplined in the Noble Doctrine, not a follower of good
people, not conversant with the Doctrine held by good people, not
trained in the Doctrine held by good people, not disciplined in the
Doctrine held by good people, considers form in the light of an
Ego--either the Ego as possessing form, or form as comprised in the Ego,
or the Ego as comprised in form. Considers sensation . . . perception .
. . the predispositions . . . consciousness in the light of an
Ego--either the Ego as possessing consciousness, or consciousness as
comprised in the Ego, or the Ego as comprised in consciousness.

   "He does not recognize the fact that form is transitory. He does not
recognize the fact that sensation . . . perception . . . the
predispositions . . . consciousness is transitory.

   "He does not recognize the fact that form . . . sensation . . .
perception . . . the predispositions . . . consciousness is evil.

   "He does not recognize the fact that form . . . sensation . . .
perception . . . the predispositions . . . consciousness is not an Ego.

   "He does not recognize the fact that form . . . sensation . . .
perception . . . the predispositions . . . consciousness is due to
causes.

|                                   |                                                     |
|:----------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_144">p. 144</span> | <span class="small">\[S.xxii.85<sup>48</sup></span> |

   "He does not recognize the fact that form . . . sensation . . .
perception . . . the predispositions . . . consciousness is a murderer.

   "And he seeks after form, attaches himself to it, and makes the
affirmation that it is his Ego. And he seeks after sensation, . . .
perception, . . . the predispositions, . . . consciousness, attaches
himself to it, and makes the affirmation that it is his Ego. And these
five attachment-groups, sought after and become attached, long inure to
his detriment and misery.

   "But the learned and noble disciple, brother, who is a follower of
noble disciples, conversant with the Noble Doctrine, disciplined in the
Noble Doctrine, a follower of good people, conversant with the Doctrine
held by good people, disciplined in the Doctrine held by good people,
does not consider form in the light of an Ego--neither the Ego as
possessing form, nor form as comprised in the Ego, nor the Ego as
comprised in form. Does not consider sensation . . . perception . . .
the predispositions . . . consciousness in the light of an ego--neither
the Ego as possessing consciousness, nor consciousness as comprised in
the Ego, nor the Ego as comprised in consciousness.

   "He recognizes the fact that form . . . sensation . . . perception .
. . the predispositions . . . consciousness is transitory .

   "He recognizes the fact that form . . . sensation . . . perception .
. . the predispositions . . . consciousness is evil.

   "He recognizes the fact that form . . . sensation . . . perception .
. . the predispositions . . . consciousness is not an Ego.

   "He recognizes the fact that form . . . sensation . . . perception .
. . the predispositions . . . consciousness is due to causes.

   "He recognizes the fact that form . . . sensation . . . perception .
. . the predispositions . . . consciousness is a murderer.

   "And he does not seek after form, . . . sensation, . . .

|                                   |                                                     |
|:----------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_145">p. 145</span> | <span class="small">\[S.xxii.85<sup>56</sup></span> |

perception, . . . the predispositions, . . . consciousness, nor attach
himself to it, nor make the affirmation that it is his Ego. And these
five attachment-groups, not sought after and not become attached, long
inure to his welfare and happiness."

   "Even so, brother Sâriputta, is it with those venerable persons who
have for co-religionists such compassionate and benevolent exhorters and
instructors as you. And now that I have listened to the doctrinal
instruction of the venerable Sâriputta my mind has lost all attachment
and become released from the depravities."

   Thus spake the venerable Sâriputta, and, delighted, the venerable
Yamaka applauded the speech of the venerable Sâriputta.

 

<span class="small"><span id="15e">§ 15 *e*.--Translated from the
Visuddhi-Magga (chap. xxi.).</span></span>

   He grasps the fourfold emptiness disclosed in the words: "I am
nowhere a somewhatness for any one, and nowhere for me is there a
somewhatness of any one." And how?

   *I am nowhere*:--He sees that he has no Ego anywhere.

   *A somewhatness<span id="page_145_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_145_note_1) for any one*:--He sees
that he has no Ego to bring forward to be a somewhatness for any one
else. The sense is, he sees that he has none to bring forward to play
the role of a brother, or of a friend, or of a follower.

   *And nowhere for me*:--Here we must disregard for the present the
words "for me," and the sense then is, he sees that nowhere has any one
an Ego.

   *Is there a somewhatness of any one*:--We must now bring in the words
"for me" and understand a somewhatness in any role assumed towards
himself. He sees that no one has any Ego to be a somewhatness to him.
The sense is, he sees that no one else has an Ego to bring forward to be
a somewhatness in any rôle, either of a brother, or of a friend, or of a
follower.

   Thus, inasmuch as he sees that there is no Ego anywhere,

|                                   |                                      |
|:----------------------------------|-------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_146">p. 146</span> | <span class="small">\[Vis.xxi</span> |

and that he has none to bring forward to be a somewhatness to any one
else, and that no one else has an Ego to bring forward to be a
somewhatness to himself, he has grasped the fourfold emptiness.

 

<span class="small"><span id="15f">§ 15 *f*.--Translated from the
Visuddhi-Magga (chap. xvi.).</span></span>

   Therefore has it been said as follows:--

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="5">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd" data-valign="top">
<td>"Misery only doth exist, none miserable.<br />
No doer is there; naught save the deed is found.<br />
Nirvana is, but not the man who seeks it.<br />
The Path exists, but not the traveler on it."<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 16. All Signs of an Ego are Absent](bits016)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_130">p. 130</span>

<span id="page_130_note_1"></span>[1](#page_130_fr_1) Translated from
the Sârasangaha, as quoted in Trenckner's note to this passage:

"By *proximate karma* is meant karma that ripens in the next existence.
To show what this is, I \[the author of the Sârasangaha\] give the
following passage from the Atthânasutta of the first book of the
Anguttara-Nikâya:--'It is an impossibility, O priests, the case can
never occur, that an individual imbued with the correct doctrine should
deprive his mother of life, should deprive his father of life, should
deprive a saint of life, should in a revengeful spirit cause a bloody
wound to a Tathâgata, should cause a schism in the church. This is an
impossibility.'"

<span id="footnotes_page_133">p. 133</span>

<span id="page_133_note_1"></span>[1](#page_133_fr_1) That is, "a living
entity."

<span id="footnotes_page_134">p. 134</span>

<span id="page_134_note_1"></span>[1](#page_134_fr_1) See [pages
239-40](bits047.htm#page_239).

<span id="footnotes_page_135">p. 135</span>

<span id="page_135_note_1"></span>[1](#page_135_fr_1) From the
commentary on the Mahâ-Nidâna-Sutta, Providence Manuscript, folio
*ghâu*, b, lines 4 and 5:--*Sensation is my Ego* gives the heresy of
individuality as based on the sensation-group; *My Ego has no
sensation*, as based on the form-group; and *My Ego has sensation; my
Ego possesses a faculty of sensation*, as based on the perception-group,
the predisposition-group, and the consciousness-group. For these three
groups have sensation through union with sensation, and possess a
faculty of sensation on account of the inseparability of this union.

<span id="footnotes_page_145">p. 145</span>

<span id="page_145_note_1"></span>[1](#page_145_fr_1) That is,
somethingness, the opposite of nothingness.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
