[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Sources](sources) [Previous](bits033) [Next](bits035)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

|                                   |                             |
|:----------------------------------|----------------------------:|
| <span id="page_189">p. 189</span> | <span class="small"></span> |

#### 

§ 34. ATTACHMENT.

<span class="small"><span id="34a">§ 34 *a*.--Translated from the
Visuddhi-Magga (chap. xiv.).</span></span>

   In looking upon Form and the other Groups as having a nature
resembling bubbles of foam and the like, the meditative priest ceases to
look upon the unsubstantial as substantiality. To particularize:--

   In looking upon subjective Form as impure, he comes thoroughly to
understand material food, abandons the perverse mistaking of the impure
for the pure, crosses the torrent of sensual pleasure, breaks loose from
the yoke of sensual pleasure, is freed from the depravity of sensual
pleasure,

|                                   |                                      |
|:----------------------------------|-------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_190">p. 190</span> | <span class="small">\[Vis.xiv</span> |

severs the myriad bonds of covetousness, and does not attach himself by
the Attachment of Sensual Pleasure;

   In looking upon Sensation as misery, he comes thoroughly to
understand the nutriment called contact, abandons the perverse mistaking
of misery for happiness, crosses the torrent of existence, breaks loose
from the yoke of existence, is freed from the depravity of passion for
existence, severs the myriad bonds of malevolence, and does not attach
himself by the Attachment of Fanatical Conduct;

   In looking upon Perception and the Predispositions as not an Ego, he
comes thoroughly to understand the nutriment called karma, abandons the
perverse mistaking of what is no Ego for an Ego, crosses the torrent of
heresy, breaks loose from the yoke of heresy, is freed from the
depravity of heresy, severs the myriad bonds of dogmatism, and does not
attach himself by the Attachment of the Assertion of an Ego;

   In looking upon Consciousness as transitory, he comes thoroughly to
understand the nutriment called consciousness, abandons the perverse
mistaking of the transitory for the permanent, crosses the torrent of
ignorance, breaks loose from the yoke of ignorance, is freed from the
depravity of ignorance, severs the myriad bonds of an affectation of
fanatical conduct, and does not attach himself by the Attachment of
Heresy.

 

<span class="small"><span id="34b">§ 34 *b*.--Translated from the
Visuddhi-Magga (chap. xvii.).</span></span>

   In the proposition, *On desire depends attachment*,

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="5">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd" data-valign="top">
<td>Attachments are in number four:<br />
Whose definition various,<br />
Their short description, and their long,<br />
And sequence must one seek to show.<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   The following is the showing:--

   The following are the *four attachments*; the attachment of sensual
pleasure, the attachment of heresy, the attachment of fanatical conduct,
the attachment of the assertion of an Ego.

|                                   |                                       |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_191">p. 191</span> | <span class="small">\[Vis.xvii</span> |

   The following is the *definition various*.

   The attachment of sensual pleasure is attachment with some form of
sensual pleasure as its object. Or, again, it is the attachment of
sensual pleasure because it is at the same time attachment and sensual
pleasure. The word attachment<span id="page_191_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_191_note_1) means a tenacious grasp.
The syllables *u-pa* strengthen the word, just as in *upâyâsa*,
*upakkuttha*, etc.

   In like manner the attachment of heresy is heresy and attachment; or
it is attachment to some form of heresy, whether concerning the past or
the future, as when one says, "The Ego and the world are persistent,"
etc.

   In like manner the attachment of fanatical conduct is attachment to
some mode of fanatical conduct; or it is attachment and fanatical
conduct. Cattle-conduct, cattle-behavior, and the like are attachments
because they involve the belief that thus purity can be obtained.

   In like manner assertion is what people assert; attachment is that by
which they attach themselves. What do they assert? and to what do they
attach themselves? The Ego. The attachment of the assertion of an Ego is
the attachment to the assertion of an Ego, or it is the simple assertion
of an Ego. The attachment of the assertion of an Ego is when people
attach themselves by the assertion of an Ego.

   The above, then, is the *definition various*.

   *Their short description, and their long*.

   First in regard to the attachment of sensual pleasure.

   "What is the attachment of sensual pleasure? Sensual craving, sensual
passion, sensual delight, sensual desire, sensual affection, sensual
torment, sensual infatuation, sensual cleaving, this is called the
attachment of sensual pleasure." In short, in this quotation, attachment
is described as tenacity of desire. Tenacious desire is when an earlier
desire has become tenacious by the proximate dependence. Some, however,
say, "Desire is the quest of an object before it is obtained, as when a
robber gropes about in the dark; attachment is the seizing hold of an
object within reach, as when the robber gets

|                                   |                                       |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_192">p. 192</span> | <span class="small">\[Vis.xvii</span> |

hold of his booty. And both are inimical to moderation and contentment
and are the roots out of which grow seeking and guarding.

   The short description of the other three attachments is that they are
heresy.

   In their long description, however, the attachment of sensual
pleasure is tenacity of the aforesaid one-hundred-and-eight-fold desire
for forms and other objects of sense.

   The attachment of heresy consists of heretical views regarding ten
different subjects.

   "What is the attachment of heresy? 'There is no such thing as a gift,
a sacrifice, an offering, a fruition or result of good or evil deeds, a
present life, a future life, a mother, a father, apparitional existence,
or any monk or Brahman having found the right road and correct line of
conduct who can proclaim of his own knowledge and perception either this
world or the next!' any such heresy, heretical belief, heretical jungle,
heretical wilderness, heretical puppet-show, heretical writhing,
heretical fetter, figment, notion, persuasion, affectation, byway, false
way, falsity, schismatic doctrine, or error is called the attachment of
heresy."

   The heresy of fanatical conduct is the affectation of the belief that
purity is by fanatical conduct. As it is said:

   "What is the attachment of fanatical conduct? Purity is by conduct;
purity is by fanaticism; purity is by fanatical conduct,--any such
heresy, heretical belief, heretical jungle, heretical wilderness,
heretical puppet-show, heretical writhing, heretical fetter, figment,
notion, persuasion, affectation, byway, false way, falsity, schismatic
doctrine, or error is called the attachment of fanatical conduct."

   The attachment of the assertion of an Ego is the twenty-fold heresy
of individuality. As it is said:

   "What is the heresy of the assertion of an Ego? Here an ignorant,
unconverted man, who is not a follower of noble disciples, not
conversant with the Noble Doctrine, not disciplined in the Noble
Doctrine, not a follower of good people, not conversant with the
doctrine held by good people, not disciplined in the doctrine of good
people, considers form in

|                                   |                                       |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_193">p. 193</span> | <span class="small">\[Vis.xvii</span> |

the light of an Ego--either the Ego as possessing form, or form as
comprised in the Ego, or the Ego as comprised in form; considers
sensation . . . perception . . . the predispositions . . . consciousness
as the Ego, or the Ego as possessing consciousness, or consciousness as
comprised in the Ego, or the Ego as comprised in consciousness,--any
such heresy, heretical belief, heretical jungle, heretical wilderness,
heretical puppet-show, heretical writhing, heretical fetter, figment,
notion, persuasion, affectation, byway, false way, falsity, schismatic
doctrine, or error is called the attachment of the assertion of the
Ego."<span id="page_193_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_193_note_1)

   The above is *their short description, and their long*.

   *And sequence*:--That sequence is threefold; sequence in originating,
sequence in abandoning, sequence in teaching.

   Now, as the round of rebirth is without known beginning and it is
impossible to say which corruption first arises, no absolute order of
sequence can be laid down; but in any particular existence the order
most commonly followed is for the heresy of the assertion of an Ego to
come first and be followed by a heretical belief either in the
persistence of existences or in their annihilation. Then he who believes
that the Ego is persistent adopts the attachment of the heresy of
fanatical conduct to purify his Ego, and he who believes that the Ego is
annihilated, being reckless of a future life, adopts the attachment of
sensual pleasure. Thus the sequence of originating in any particular
existence is for the attachment of the heresy of the assertion of an Ego
to come first, and after it the attachments of heresy, fanatical
conduct, and sensual pleasure.

   The attachment of heresy, the attachment of fanatical conduct, and
the attachment of the assertion of an Ego are first abandoned, as they
are destroyed by the Path of Conversion; the attachment of sensual
pleasure afterwards by the Path of Arhatship. This is the sequence in
abandonment.

   The attachment of sensual pleasure is first taught both on account of
its extent and of its conspicuousness. For as it

|                                   |                                       |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_194">p. 194</span> | <span class="small">\[Vis.xvii</span> |

occurs in conjunction with eight of the consciousnesses it has a large
extent; the others have but little, being conjoined with only four. And
as mankind is for the most part given over to its lusts, the attachment
of sensual pleasure is conspicuous; not so the others. Or, the
attachment of sensual pleasure is for the purpose of obtaining objects
of lust, and the attachment of heresy in the form of belief in the
persistence of the Ego comes next as being more a question of
speculative curiosity and the like. This has two divisions, the
attachment of fanatical conduct, and the attachment of the assertion of
an Ego. Of these two, the attachment of fanatical conduct is first
taught from its grossness as one can see cattle-practices and
dog-practices with one's own eyes; the attachment of the assertion of an
Ego comes last on account of its subtileness. This is the sequence in
teaching.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 35. Existence](bits035)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_191">p. 191</span>

<span id="page_191_note_1"></span>[1](#page_191_fr_1) In Pâli upâdâna,
i.e. upa + âdâna.

<span id="footnotes_page_193">p. 193</span>

<span id="page_193_note_1"></span>[1](#page_193_fr_1) See Dhammasangani,
§§ 1214 to 1217.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
