[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Sources](sources) [Previous](bit-int2) [Next](bits014)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

|                                   |                                                  |
|:----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_117">p. 117</span> | <span class="small">\[M.i.426<sup>6</sup></span> |

#### 

§ 13. QUESTIONS WHICH TEND NOT TO EDIFICATION.

SERMON NUMBER 1.

<span id="13a">{The Lesser Mâlunkyâputta Sutta}</span>

<span class="small">§ 13*a*.--Translated from the Majjhima-Nikâya, and
constituting Sutta 63.</span>

   Thus have I heard.

   On a certain occasion The Blessed One was dwelling at Sâvatthi in
Jetavana monastery in Anâthapindika's Park. Now it happened to the
venerable Mâlunkyâputta, being in seclusion and plunged in meditation,
that a consideration presented itself to his mind, as follows:--

   "These theories which The Blessed One has left unelucidated, has set
aside and rejected,--that the world is eternal, that the world is not
eternal, that the world is finite, that the world is infinite, that the
soul and the body are identical, that the soul is one thing and the body
another, that the saint exists after death, that the saint does not
exist after death, that the saint both exists and does not exist after
death, that the saint neither exists nor does not exist after
death,--these The Blessed One does not elucidate to me. And the fact
that The Blessed One does not elucidate them to me does not please me
nor suit me. Therefore I will draw near to The Blessed One and inquire
of him concerning this matter. If The Blessed One will elucidate to me,
either that the world is eternal, or that the world is not eternal, or
that the world is finite, or that the world is infinite, or that the
soul and the body are identical, or that the soul is one thing and the
body another, or that the saint exists after death, or that the saint
does not exist after death, or that the saint both exists and does not
exist after death, or that the saint neither exists nor does not exist
after death, in that case will I lead the religious life under The
Blessed One. If The Blessed One will not elucidate to me, either that
the world is eternal, or that the world is not eternal, . . . or that
the saint neither exists

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_118">p. 118</span> | <span class="small">\[M.i.426<sup>27</sup></span> |

nor does not exist after death, in that case will I abandon religious
training and return to the lower life of a layman."

   Then the venerable Mâlunkyâputta arose at eventide from his
seclusion, and drew near to where The Blessed One was; and having drawn
near and greeted The Blessed One, he sat down respectfully at one side.
And seated respectfully at one side, the venerable Mâlunkyâputta spoke
to The Blessed One as follows:--

   "Reverend Sir, it happened to me, as I was just now in seclusion and
plunged in meditation, that a consideration presented itself to my mind,
as follows: 'These theories which The Blessed One has left unelucidated,
has set aside and rejected,--that the world is eternal, that the world
is not eternal, . . . that the saint neither exists nor does not exist
after death,--these The Blessed One does not elucidate to me. And the
fact that The Blessed One does not elucidate them to me does not please
me nor suit me. I will draw near to The Blessed One and inquire of him
concerning this matter. If The Blessed One will elucidate to me, either
that the world is eternal, or that the world is not eternal, . . . or
that the saint neither exists nor does not exist after death, in that
case will I lead the religious life under The Blessed One. If The
Blessed One will not elucidate to me, either that the world is eternal,
or that the world is not eternal, . . . or that the saint neither exists
nor does not exist after death, in that case will I abandon religious
training and return to the lower life of a layman.'

   "If The Blessed One knows that the world is eternal, let The Blessed
One elucidate to me that the world is eternal; if The Blessed One knows
that the world is not eternal, let The Blessed One elucidate to me that
the world is not eternal. If The Blessed One does not know either that
the world is eternal or that the world is not eternal, the only upright
thing for one who does not know, or who has not that insight, is to say,
'I do not know; I have not that insight.'

   "If The Blessed One knows that the world is finite, . . .'

   "If The Blessed One knows that the soul and the body are identical, .
. .'

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_119">p. 119</span> | <span class="small">\[M.i.427<sup>35</sup></span> |

   "If The Blessed One knows that the saint exists after death, . . .'

   "If The Blessed One knows that the saint both exists and does not
exist after death, let The Blessed One elucidate to me that the saint
both exists and does not exist after death; if The Blessed One knows
that the saint neither exists nor does not exist after death, let The
Blessed One elucidate to me that the saint neither exists nor does not
exist after death. If The Blessed One does not know either that the
saint both exists and does not exist after death, or that the saint
neither exists nor does not exist after death, the only upright thing
for one who does not know, or who has not that insight, is to say, 'I do
not know; I have not that insight.'"

   "Pray, Mâlunkyâputta, did I ever say to you, 'Come, Mâlunkyâputta,
lead the religious life under me, and I will elucidate to you either
that the world is eternal, or that the world is not eternal, . . . or
that the saint neither exists nor does not exist after death'?"

   "Nay, verily, Reverend Sir."

   "Or did you ever say to me, 'Reverend Sir, I will lead the religious
life under The Blessed One, on condition that The Blessed One elucidate
to me either that the world is eternal, or that the world is not
eternal, . . . or that the saint neither exists nor does not exist after
death'?"

   "Nay, verily, Reverend Sir."

   "So you acknowledge, Mâlunkyâputta, that I have not said to you,
'Come, Mâlunkyâputta, lead the religious life under me and I will
elucidate to you either that the world is eternal, or that the world is
not eternal, . . . or that the saint neither exists nor does not exist
after death;' and again that you have not said to me, 'Reverend Sir, I
will lead the religious life under The Blessed One, on condition that
The Blessed One elucidate to me either that the world is eternal, or
that the world is not eternal, . . . or that the saint neither exists
nor does not exist after death.' That being the case, vain man, whom are
you so angrily denouncing?

   "Mâlunkyâputta, any one who should say, 'I will not lead the
religious life under The Blessed One until The

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_120">p. 120</span> | <span class="small">\[M.i.428<sup>34</sup></span> |

Blessed One shall elucidate to me either that the world is eternal, or
that the world is not eternal, . . . or that the saint neither exists
nor does not exist after death;'--that person would die, Mâlunkyâputta,
before The Tathâgata had ever elucidated this to him.

   "It is as if, Mâlunkyâputta, a man had been wounded by an arrow
thickly smeared with poison, and his friends and companions, his
relatives and kinsfolk, were to procure for him a physician or surgeon;
and the sick man were to say, 'I will not have this arrow taken out
until I have learnt whether the man who wounded me belonged to the
warrior caste, or to the Brahman caste, or to the agricultural caste, or
to the menial caste.'

   "Or again he were to say, 'I will not have this arrow taken out until
I have learnt the name of the man who wounded me, and to what clan he
belongs.'

   "Or again he were to say, 'I will not have this arrow taken out until
I have learnt whether the man who wounded me was tall, or short, or of
the middle height.'

   "Or again he were to say, 'I will not have this arrow taken out until
I have learnt whether the man who wounded me was black, or dusky, or of
a yellow skin.'

   "Or again he were to say, 'I will not have this arrow taken out until
I have learnt whether the man who wounded me was from this or that
village, or town, or city.'

   "Or again he were to say, 'I will not have this arrow taken out until
I have learnt whether the bow which wounded me was a câpa, or a
kodannda.'

   "Or again he were to say, 'I will not have this arrow taken out until
I have learnt whether the bow-string which wounded me was made from
swallow-wort, or bamboo, or sinew, or maruva, or from milk-weed.'

   "Or again he were to say, 'I will not have this arrow taken out until
I have learnt whether the shaft which wounded me was a kaccha or a
ropima.'

   "Or again he were to say, 'I will not have this arrow taken out until
I have learnt whether the shaft which wounded me was feathered from the
wings of a vulture,

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_121">p. 121</span> | <span class="small">\[M.i.429<sup>28</sup></span> |

or of a heron, or of a falcon, or of a peacock, or of a sithilahanu.'

   "Or again he were to say, 'I will not have this arrow taken out until
I have learnt whether the shaft which wounded me was wound round with
the sinews of an ox, or of a buffalo, or of a ruru deer, or of a
monkey.'

   "Or again he were to say, '1 will not have this arrow taken out until
I have learnt whether the arrow which wounded me was an ordinary arrow,
or a claw-headed arrow, or a vekanda, or an iron arrow, or a calf-tooth
arrow, or a karavîrapatta.' That Mâlunkyâputta, without ever having
learnt this.

   "In exactly the same way, Mâlunkyâputta, any one who should say, 'I
will not lead the religious life under The Blessed One until The Blessed
One shall elucidate to me either that the world is eternal, or that the
world is not eternal, . . . or that the saint neither exists nor does
not exist after death;'--that person would die, Mâlunkyâputta, before
The Tathâgata had ever elucidated this to him.

   "The religious life, Mâlunkyâputta, does not depend on the dogma that
the world is eternal; nor does the religious life, Mâlunkyâputta, depend
on the dogma that the world is not eternal. Whether the dogma obtain,
Mâlunkyâputta, that the world is eternal, or that the world is not
eternal, there still remain birth, old age, death, sorrow, lamentation,
misery, grief, and despair, for the extinction of which in the present
life I am prescribing.

   "The religious life, Mâlunkyâputta, does not depend on the dogma that
the world is finite; . . .

   "The religious life, Mâlunkyâputta, does not depend on the dogma that
the soul and the body are identical; . . .

   "The religious life, Mâlunkyâputta, does not depend on the dogma that
the saint exists after death; . . .

   "The religious life, Mâlunkyâputta, does not depend on the dogma that
the saint both exists and does not exist after death; nor does the
religious life, Mâlunkyâputta, depend on the dogma that the saint
neither exists nor does not exist after death. Whether the dogma obtain,
Mâlunkyâputta, that the

|                                   |                                                  |
|:----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_122">p. 122</span> | <span class="small">\[M.i.431<sup>6</sup></span> |

saint both exists and does not exist after death, or that the saint
neither exists nor does not exist after death, there still remain birth,
old age, death, sorrow, lamentation, misery, grief, and despair, for the
extinction of which in the present life I am prescribing.

   "Accordingly, Mâlunkyâputta, bear always in mind what it is that I
have not elucidated, and what it is that I have elucidated. And what,
Mâlunkyâputta, have I not elucidated? I have not elucidated,
Mâlunkyâputta, that the world is eternal; I have not elucidated that the
world is not eternal; I have not elucidated that the world is finite; I
have not elucidated that the world is infinite; I have not elucidated
that the soul and the body are identical; I have not elucidated that the
soul is one thing and the body another; I have not elucidated that the
saint exists after death; I have not elucidated that the saint does not
exist after death; I have not elucidated that the saint both exists and
does not exist after death; I have not elucidated that the saint neither
exists nor does not exist after death. And why, Mâlunkyâputta, have I
not elucidated this? Because, Mâlunkyâputta, this profits not, nor has
to do with the fundamentals of religion, nor tends to aversion, absence
of passion, cessation, quiescence, the supernatural faculties, supreme
wisdom, and Nirvana; therefore have I not elucidated it.

   "And what, Mâlunkyâputta, have I elucidated? Misery, Mâlunkyâputta,
have I elucidated; the origin of misery have I elucidated; the cessation
of misery have I elucidated; and the path leading to the cessation of
misery have I elucidated. And why, Mâlunkyâputta, have I elucidated
this? Because, Mâlunkyâputta, this does profit, has to do with the
fundamentals of religion, and tends to aversion, absence of passion,
cessation, quiescence, knowledge, supreme wisdom, and Nirvana; therefore
have I elucidated it. Accordingly, Mâlunkyâputta, bear always in mind
what it is that I have not elucidated, and what it is that I have
elucidated."

   Thus spake The Blessed One; and, delighted, the venerable
Mâlunkyâputta applauded the speech of The Blessed One.

<span class="small">The Lesser Mâlunkyâputta Sermon.</span>

 

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_123">p. 123</span> | <span class="small">\[M.i.483<sup>27</sup></span> |

SERMON NUMBER 2.

<span id="13b">{The Aggi-Vacchagotta Sutta}</span>

<span class="small">§ 13*b*.--Translated from the Majjhima-Nikâya, and
constituting Sutta 72.</span>

   Thus have I heard.

   On a certain occasion The Blessed One was dwelling at Sâvatthi in
Jetavana monastery in Anâthapindika's Park. Then drew near Vaccha, the
wandering ascetic, to where The Blessed One was; and having drawn near,
he greeted The Blessed One; and having passed the compliments of
friendship and civility, he sat down respectfully at one side. And
seated respectfully at one side, Vaccha, the wandering ascetic, spoke to
The Blessed One as follows:--

   "How is it, Gotama? Does Gotama hold that the world is eternal, and
that this view alone is true, and every other false?"

   "Nay, Vaccha. I do not hold that the world is eternal, and that this
view alone is true, and every other false."

   "But how is it, Gotama? Does Gotama hold that the world is not
eternal, and that this view alone is true, and every other false?"

   "Nay, Vaccha. I do not hold that the world is not eternal, and that
this view alone is true, and every other false."

   "How is it, Gotama? Does Gotama hold that the world is finite, . . ."

   "How is it, Gotama? Does Gotama hold that the soul and the body are
identical, . . ."

   "How is it, Gotama? Does Gotama hold that the saint exists after
death, . . ."

   "How is it, Gotama? Does Gotama hold that the saint both exists and
does not exist after death, and that this view alone is true, and every
other false?"

   "Nay, Vaccha. I do not hold that the saint both exists and does not
exist after death, and that this view alone is true, and every other
false."

   "But how is it, Gotama? Does Gotama hold that the saint neither
exists nor does not exist after death, and that this view alone is true,
and every other false?"

|                                   |                                                  |
|:----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_124">p. 124</span> | <span class="small">\[M.i.485<sup>5</sup></span> |

   "Nay, Vaccha. I do not hold that the saint neither exists nor does
not exist after death, and that this view alone is true, and every other
false."

   "How is it, Gotama, that when you are asked, 'Does the monk Gotama
hold that the world is eternal, and that this view alone is true, and
every other false?' you reply, 'Nay, Vaccha. I do not hold that the
world is eternal, and that this view alone is true, and every other
false'?

   "But how is it, Gotama, that when you are asked, 'Does the monk
Gotama hold that the world is not eternal, and that this view alone is
true, and every other false?' you reply, 'Nay, Vaccha. I do not hold
that the world is not eternal, and that this view alone is true, and
every other false'?

   "How is it, Gotama, that when you are asked, 'Does Gotama hold that
the world is finite, . . . '?

   "How is it, Gotama, that when you are asked, 'Does Gotama hold that
the soul and the body are identical, . . . '?

   "How is it, Gotama, that when you are asked, 'Does Gotama hold that
the saint exists after death, . . . '?

   "How is it, Gotama, that when you are asked, 'Does the monk Gotama
hold that the saint both exists and does not exist after death, and that
this view alone is true, and every other false?' you reply, 'Nay,
Vaccha. I do not hold that the saint both exists and does not exist
after death, and that this view alone is true, and every other false'?

   "But how is it, Gotama, that when you are asked, 'Does the monk
Gotama hold that the saint neither exists nor does not exist after
death, and that this view alone is true, and every other false?' you
reply, 'Nay, Vaccha. I do not hold that the saint neither exists nor
does not exist after death, and that this view alone is true, and every
other false'? What objection does Gotama perceive to these theories that
he has not adopted any one of them?"

   "Vaccha, the theory that the world is eternal, is a jungle, a
wilderness, a puppet-show, a writhing, and a fetter, and is coupled with
misery, ruin, despair, and agony, and does not tend to aversion, absence
of passion, cessation, quiescence, knowledge, supreme wisdom, and
Nirvana.

.       .       .       .       .       .       .       .       .       .

 

|                                   |                                                  |
|:----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_125">p. 125</span> | <span class="small">\[M.i.486<sup>3</sup></span> |

   "Vaccha, the theory that the saint neither exists nor does not exist
after death, is a jungle, a wilderness, a puppet-show, a writhing, and a
fetter, and is coupled with misery, ruin, despair, and agony, and does
not tend to aversion, absence of passion, cessation, quiescence,
knowledge, supreme wisdom, and Nirvana.

   "This is the objection I perceive to these theories, so that I have
not adopted any one of them."

   "But has Gotama any theory of his own?"

   "The Tathâgata, O Vaccha, is free from all theories; but this,
Vaccha, does The Tathâgata know,--the nature of form, and how form
arises, and how form perishes; the nature of sensation, and how
sensation arises, and how sensation perishes; the nature of perception,
and how perception arises, and how perception perishes; the nature of
the predispositions, and how the predispositions arise, and how the
predispositions perish; the nature of consciousness, and how
consciousness arises, and how consciousness perishes. Therefore say I
that The Tathâgata has attained deliverance and is free from attachment,
inasmuch as all imaginings, or agitations, or proud thoughts concerning
an Ego or anything pertaining to an Ego, have perished, have faded away,
have ceased, have been given up and relinquished."

   "But, Gotama, where is the priest reborn who has attained to this
deliverance for his mind?"

   "Vaccha, to say that he is reborn would not fit the case."

   "Then, Gotama, he is not reborn."

   "Vaccha, to say that he is not reborn would not fit the case."

   "Then, Gotama, he is both reborn and is not reborn."

   "Vaccha, to say that he is both reborn and not reborn would not fit
the case."

   "Then, Gotama, he is neither reborn nor not reborn."

   "Vaccha, to say that he is neither reborn nor not reborn would not
fit the case."

   "When I say to you, 'But, Gotama, where is the priest reborn who has
attained to this deliverance for his mind?' you reply, 'Vaccha, to say
that he is reborn would not fit

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_126">p. 126</span> | <span class="small">\[M.i.486<sup>30</sup></span> |

the case.' And when I say to you, 'Then, Gotama, he is not reborn,' you
reply, 'Vaccha, to say that he is not reborn would not fit the case.'
And when I say to you, 'Then, Gotama, he is both reborn and not reborn,'
you reply, 'Vaccha, to say that he is both reborn and not reborn would
not fit the case.' And when I say to you, 'Then, Gotama, he is neither
reborn nor not reborn,' you reply, 'Vaccha, to say that he is neither
reborn nor not reborn would not fit the case.' Gotama, I am at a loss
what to think in this matter, and I have become greatly confused, and
the faith in Gotama inspired by a former conversation has now
disappeared."

   "Enough, O Vaccha! Be not at a loss what to think in this matter, and
be not greatly confused. Profound, O Vaccha, is this doctrine,
recondite, and difficult of comprehension, good, excellent, and not to
be reached by mere reasoning, subtile, and intelligible only to the
wise; and it is a hard doctrine for you to learn, who belong to another
sect, to another faith, to another persuasion, to another discipline,
and sit at the feet of another teacher. Therefore, Vaccha, I will now
question you, and do you make answer as may seem to you good. What think
you, Vaccha? Suppose a fire were to burn in front of you, would you be
aware that the fire was burning in front of you?"

   "Gotama, if a fire were to burn in front of me, I should be aware
that a fire was burning in front of me."

   "But suppose, Vaccha, some one were to ask you, 'On what does this
fire that is burning in front of you depend?' what would you answer,
Vaccha?"

   "Gotama, if some one were to ask me, 'On what does this fire that is
burning in front of you depend?' I would answer, Gotama, 'It is on fuel
of grass and wood that this fire that is burning in front of me
depends.'"

   "But, Vaccha, if the fire in front of you were to become extinct,
would you be aware that the fire in front of you had become extinct?"

   "Gotama, if the fire in front of me were to become extinct, I should
be aware that the fire in front of me had become extinct."

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_127">p. 127</span> | <span class="small">\[M.i.487<sup>24</sup></span> |

   "But, Vaccha, if some one were to ask you, 'In which direction has
that fire gone,--east, or west, or north, or south?' what would you say,
O Vaccha?"

   "The question would not fit the case, Gotama. For the fire which
depended on fuel of grass and wood, when that fuel has all gone, and it
can get no other, being thus without nutriment, is said to be extinct."

   "In exactly the same way, Vaccha, all form by which one could
predicate the existence of the saint, all that form has been abandoned,
uprooted, pulled out of the ground like a palmyra-tree, and become
non-existent and not liable to spring up again in the future. The saint,
O Vaccha, who has been released from what is styled form, is deep,
immeasurable, unfathomable, like the mighty ocean. To say that he is
reborn would not fit the case. To say that he is not reborn would not
fit the case. To say that he is both reborn and not reborn would not fit
the case. To say that he is neither reborn nor not reborn would not fit
the case.

   "All sensation . . .

   "All perception . . .

   "All the predispositions . . .

   "All consciousness by which one could predicate the existence of the
saint, all that consciousness has been abandoned, uprooted, pulled out
of the ground like a palmyra-tree, and become non-existent and not
liable to spring up again in the future. The saint, O Vaccha, who has
been released from what is styled consciousness, is deep, immeasurable,
unfathomable, like the mighty ocean. To say that he is reborn would not
fit the case. To say that he is not reborn would not fit the case. To
say that he is both reborn and not reborn would not fit the case. To say
that he is neither reborn nor not reborn would not fit the case."

   When The Blessed One had thus spoken, Vaccha, the wandering ascetic,
spoke to him as follows:

   "It is as if, O Gotama, there were a mighty sal-tree near to some
village or town, and it were to lose its dead branches and twigs, and
its loose shreds of bark, and its unsound wood, so that afterwards, free
from those branches and twigs, and

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_128">p. 128</span> | <span class="small">\[M.i.488<sup>30</sup></span> |

the loose shreds of bark, and the unsound wood, it were to stand neat
and clean in its strength. In exactly the same way doth the word of
Gotama, free from branches and twigs, and from loose shreds of bark, and
from unsound wood, stand neat and clean in its strength. O wonderful is
it, Gotama! O wonderful is it, Gotama! It is as if, O Gotama, one were
to set up that which was overturned; or were to disclose that which was
hidden; or were to point out the way to a lost traveller; or were to
carry a lamp into a dark place, that they who had eyes might see forms.
Even so has Gotama expounded the Doctrine in many different ways. I
betake myself to Gotama for refuge, to the Doctrine, and to the
Congregation of the priests. Let Gotama receive me who have betaken
myself to him for refuge, and accept me as a disciple from this day
forth as long as life shall last."

<span class="small">The Aggi-Vacchagotta Sermon.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 14. King Milinda and Nâgasena Come to an
Understanding](bits014)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
