[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Sources](sources) [Previous](bits057) [Next](bits059)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

|                                   |                                      |
|:----------------------------------|-------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_288">p. 288</span> | <span class="small">\[Vis.iii</span> |

#### 

§ 58. CONCENTRATION.

<span class="small"><span id="58a">§ 58 *a*.--Translated from the
Visuddhi-Magga (chap. iii.).</span></span>

   What is concentration? Concentration is manifold and various, and an
answer which attempted to be exhaustive would both fail of its purpose
and tend to still greater confusion. Therefore we will confine ourselves
to the meaning here intended, and say--Concentration is an intentness of
meritorious thoughts.

 

<span class="small"><span id="58b">§ 58 *b*.--Translated from the
Anguttara-Nikâya (iii.88).</span></span>

   And what, O priests, is the discipline in elevated concentration?

   Whenever, O priests, a priest, having isolated himself from sensual
pleasures, having isolated himself from demeritorious traits, and still
exercising reasoning, still exercising reflection, enters upon the first
trance, which is produced by isolation and characterized by joy and
happiness; when, through the subsidence of reasoning and reflection, and
still retaining joy and happiness, he enters upon the second trance,
which is an interior tranquilization and intentness of thoughts, and is
produced by concentration; when, through the paling of joy, indifferent,
contemplative, conscious, and in the experience of bodily
happiness--that state which eminent men describe when they say,
"Indifferent, contemplative, and living happily"--he enters upon the
third trance; when, through the abandonment of happiness, through the
abandonment of misery, through the disappearance of all antecedent
gladness and grief, he enters upon the fourth trance, which has neither
misery nor happiness, but is contemplation as refined by indifference,
this, O priest 9, is called the discipline in elevated concentration.

 

<span class="small"><span id="58c">§ 58 *c*.--Translated from the
Anguttara-Nikâya (ii.3<sup>10</sup>).</span></span>

   What advantage, O priests, is gained by training in quiescence? The
thoughts are trained. And what advantage is gained by the training of
the thoughts? Passion is abandoned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 59. The Thirty-one Grades of Being](bits059)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
