[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Sources](sources) [Previous](bits026) [Next](bits028)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

|                                   |                             |
|:----------------------------------|----------------------------:|
| <span id="page_179">p. 179</span> | <span class="small"></span> |

#### 

§ 27. KARMA.

<span class="small">Translated from the Visuddhi-Magga (chap.
xvii.).</span>

   The kinds of karma are those already briefly mentioned, as consisting
of the triplet beginning with meritorious karma and the triplet
beginning with bodily karma, making six in all.

   To give them here in full, however, meritorious karma consists of the
eight meritorious thoughts which belong to

|                                   |                                       |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_180">p. 180</span> | <span class="small">\[Vis.xvii</span> |

the realm of sensual pleasure and show themselves in alms-giving,
keeping the precepts, etc., and of the five meritorious thoughts which
belong to the realm of form and show themselves in ecstatic
meditation,--making thirteen thoughts; demeritorious karma consists of
the twelve demeritorious thoughts which show themselves in the taking of
life etc.; and karma leading to immovability consists of the four
meritorious thoughts which belong to the realm of formlessness and show
themselves in ecstatic meditation. Accordingly these three karmas
consist of twenty-nine thoughts.

   As regards the other three, bodily karma consists of the thoughts of
the body, vocal karma of the thoughts of the voice, mental karma of the
thoughts of the mind. The object of this triplet is to show the avenues
by which meritorious karma etc. show themselves at the moment of the
initiation of karma.

   For bodily karma consists of an even score of thoughts, namely, of
the eight meritorious thoughts which belong to the realm of sensual
pleasure and of the twelve demeritorious ones. These by exciting
gestures show themselves through the avenue of the body.

   Vocal karma is when these same thoughts by exciting speech show
themselves through the avenue of the voice. The thoughts, however, which
belong to the realm of form, are not included, as they do not form a
dependence for subsequent consciousness. And the case is the same with
the thoughts which belong to the realm of formlessness. Therefore they
also are to be excluded from the dependence of consciousness. However,
all depend on ignorance.

   Mental karma, however, consists of all the twenty-nine thoughts, when
they spring up in the mind without exciting either gesture or speech.

   Thus, when it is said that ignorance is the dependence of the
karma-triplet consisting of meritorious karma etc., it is to be
understood that the other triplet is also included.

   But it may be asked, "How can we tell that these karmas are dependent
on ignorance?" Because they exist when ignorance exists.

|                                   |                                       |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_181">p. 181</span> | <span class="small">\[Vis.xvii</span> |

   For, when a person has not abandoned the want of knowledge concerning
misery etc., which is called ignorance, then by that want of knowledge
concerning misery and concerning anteriority etc. he seizes on the
misery of the round of rebirth with the idea that it is happiness and
hence begins to perform the threefold karma which is its cause; by that
want of knowledge concerning the origin of misery and by being under the
impression that thus happiness is secured, he begins to perform karma
that ministers to desire, though such karma is really the cause of
misery; and by that want of knowledge concerning cessation and the path
and under the impression that some particular form of existence will
prove to be the cessation of misery, although it really is not so, or
that sacrifices, alarming the gods by the greatness of his austerities,
and other like procedures are the way to cessation, although they are
not such a way, he begins to perform the threefold karma.

   Moreover, through this non-abandonment of ignorance in respect of the
Four Truths, he does not know the fruition of meritorious karma to be
the misery it really is, seeing that it is completely overwhelmed with
the calamities, birth, old age, disease, death, etc.; and so to obtain
it he begins to perform meritorious karma in its three divisions of
bodily, vocal, and mental karma, just as a man in love with a heavenly
nymph will throw himself down a precipice. When he does not perceive
that at the end of that meritorious fruition considered to be such
happiness comes the agonizing misery of change and disappointment, he
begins to perform the meritorious karma above described, just as a
locust will fly into the flame of a lamp, or a man that is greedy after
honey will lick the honey-smeared edge of a knife. When he fails to
perceive the calamities due to sensual gratification and its fruition,
and, being under the impression that sensuality is happiness, lives
enthralled by his passions, he then begins to perform demeritorious
karma through the three avenues, just as a child will play with filth,
or one who wishes to die will eat poison. When he does not perceive the
misery of the change that takes place in the constituents of being, even
in the

|                                   |                                       |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_182">p. 182</span> | <span class="small">\[Vis.xvii</span> |

realm of formlessness, but has a perverse belief in persistence etc., he
begins to perform mental karma that leads to immovability, just as a man
who has lost his way will go after a mirage.

   As, therefore, karma exists when ignorance exists but not when it
does not exist, it is to be understood that this karma depends on
ignorance. And it has been said as follows:

   "O priests, the ignorant, uninstructed man performs meritorious
karma, demeritorious karma, and karma leading to immovability. But
whenever, O priests, he abandons his ignorance and acquires wisdom, he
through the fading out of ignorance and the coming into being of wisdom
does not even perform meritorious karma."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 28. Consciousness](bits028)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
