[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Sources](sources) [Previous](bits036) [Next](bit-int3)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

|                                   |                             |
|:----------------------------------|----------------------------:|
| <span id="page_202">p. 202</span> | <span class="small"></span> |

#### 

§ 37. DISCUSSION OF DEPENDENT ORIGINATION.

<span class="small">Translated from the Mahâ-Nidâna-Sutta of the
Dighâ-Nikâya (Grimblot's edition, p. 245<sup>1</sup>).</span>

   Thus have I heard.

   On a certain occasion The Blessed One was dwelling among the Kurus
where was the Kuru-town named Kammâsadhamma.

|                                   |                                                       |
|:----------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_203">p. 203</span> | <span class="small">\[Grimblot 245<sup>3</sup></span> |

   Then drew near the venerable Ânanda to where The Blessed One was; and
having drawn near and greeted The Blessed One, he sat down respectfully
at one side. And seated respectfully at one side, the venerable Ânanda
spoke to The Blessed One as follows:

   "O wonderful is it, Reverend Sir! O marvellous is it, Reverend Sir!
How profound, Reverend Sir, is Dependent Origination, and of how
profound an appearance! To me, nevertheless, it is as clear as clear can
be."

   "O Ânanda, say not so! O Ânanda, say not so! Profound, Ânanda, is
Dependent Origination, and profound of appearance. It is through not
understanding this doctrine, Ânanda, through not penetrating it, that
thus mankind is like to an entangled warp, or to an ensnarled web, or to
muñja-grass and pabbaja-grass, and fails to extricate itself from
punishment, suffering, perdition, rebirth.

   "Ânanda, if it be asked, 'Do old age and death depend on anything?'
the reply should be, 'They do.' And if it be asked, 'On what do old age
and death depend?' the reply should be, 'Old age and death depend on
birth.'

   "Ânanda, if it be asked, 'Does birth depend on anything?' the reply
should be, 'It does.' And if it be asked, 'On what does birth depend?'
the reply should be, 'Birth depends on existence.'

   "Ânanda, if it be asked, 'Does existence depend on anything?' the
reply should be, 'It does.' And if it be asked, 'On what does existence
depend?' the reply should be, 'Existence depends on attachment.'

   "Ânanda, if it be asked, 'Does attachment depend on anything?' the
reply should be, 'It does.' And if it be asked, 'On what does attachment
depend?' the reply should be, 'Attachment depends on desire.'

   "Ânanda, if it be asked, 'Does desire depend on anything?' the reply
should be, 'It does.' And if it be asked, 'On what does desire depend?'
the reply should be, 'Desire depends on sensation.'

   "Ânanda, if it be asked, 'Does sensation depend on anything?' the
reply should be, 'It does.' And if it be asked,

|                                   |                                                        |
|:----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_204">p. 204</span> | <span class="small">\[Grimblot 246<sup>15</sup></span> |

'On what does sensation depend?' the reply should be, 'Sensation depends
on contact.'

   "Ânanda, if it be asked, 'Does contact depend on anything?' the reply
should be, 'It does.' And if it be asked, 'On what does contact depend?'
the reply should be, 'Contact depends on name and form.'

   "Ânanda, if it be asked, 'Do name and form depend on anything?' the
reply should be, 'They do.' And if it be asked, 'On what do name and
form depend?' the reply should be, 'Name and form depend on
consciousness.'

   "Ânanda, if it be asked, 'Does consciousness depend on anything?' the
reply should be, 'It does.' And if it be asked, 'On what does
consciousness depend?' the reply should be, 'Consciousness depends on
name and form.'

   "Thus, Ânanda, on name and form depends consciousness;

   "On consciousness depend name and form;

   "On name and form depends contact;

   "On contact depends sensation;

   "On sensation depends desire;

   "On desire depends attachment;

   "On attachment depends existence;

   "On existence depends birth;

   "On birth depend old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, misery,
grief, and despair. Thus does this entire aggregation of misery arise.

   "I have said that on birth depend old age and death. This truth,
Ânanda, that on birth depend old age and death, is to be understood in
this way. Suppose, Ânanda, there were utterly and completely no birth at
all for any one into any world, as, namely, for gods into the world of
gods; for genii into the world of genii; for ogres into the world of
ogres; for demons into the world of demons; for men into the world of
men; for quadrupeds into the world of quadrupeds; for winged creatures
into the world of winged creatures; for creeping things into the world
of creeping things;--suppose, Ânanda, there were no birth for any of
these beings into their several worlds: if there were nowhere any

|                                   |                                                        |
|:----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_205">p. 205</span> | <span class="small">\[Grimblot 247<sup>14</sup></span> |

birth, pray, on the cessation of birth would there be any old age and
death?"

   "Nay, verily, Reverend Sir."

   "Accordingly, Ânanda, here we have in birth the cause, the occasion,
the origin, and the dependence of old age and death.

   "I have said that on existence depends birth. This truth, Ânanda,
that on existence depends birth, is to be understood in this way.
Suppose, Ânanda, there were utterly and completely no existence at all
for any one in any mode, as, namely, existence in the realm of sensual
pleasure, existence in the realm of form, existence in the realm of
formlessness;--if there were nowhere any existence, pray, on the
cessation of existence would there be any birth?"

   "Nay, verily, Reverend Sir."

   "Accordingly, Ânanda, here we have in existence the cause, the
occasion, the origin, and the dependence of birth.

   "I have said that on attachment depends existence. This truth Ânanda,
that on attachment depends existence, is to be understood in this way.
Suppose, Ânanda, there were utterly and completely no attachment at all
of any one to anything, as, namely, the attachment of sensual pleasure,
the attachment of heresy, the attachment of fanatical conduct, the
attachment of the assertion of an Ego;--if there were nowhere any
attachment, pray, on the cessation of attachment would there be any
existence?"

   "Nay, verily, Reverend Sir."

   "Accordingly, Ânanda, here we have in attachment the cause, the
occasion, the origin, and the dependence of existence.

   "I have said that on desire depends attachment. This truth, Ânanda,
that on desire depends attachment, is to be understood in this way.
Suppose, Ânanda, there were utterly and completely no desire at all on
the part of any one for anything, as, namely, desire for forms, desire
for sounds, desire for odors, desire for tastes, desire for things
tangible, desire for ideas;--if there were nowhere any desire, pray, on
the cessation of desire would there be any attachment?"

|                                   |                                                        |
|:----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_206">p. 206</span> | <span class="small">\[Grimblot 248<sup>20</sup></span> |

   "Nay, verily, Reverend Sir."

   "Accordingly, Ânanda, here we have in desire the cause, the occasion,
the origin, and the dependence of attachment.

   "I have said that on sensation depends desire. This truth, Ânanda,
that on sensation depends desire, is to be understood in this way.
Suppose, Ânanda, there were utterly and completely no sensation at all
on the part of any one for anything, as, namely, sensation sprung from
contact of the eye, sensation sprung from contact of the ear, sensation
sprung from contact of the nose, sensation sprung from contact of the
tongue, sensation sprung from contact of the body, sensation sprung from
contact of the mind;--if there were nowhere any sensation, pray, on the
cessation of sensation would there be any desire?"

   "Nay, verily, Reverend Sir."

   "Accordingly, Ânanda, here we have in sensation the cause, the
occasion, the origin, and the dependence of desire."

     .     .     .     .     .     <span class="small">\[Grimblot
253<sup>4</sup>.\]</span>     .     .     .     .     .     

   "I have said that on contact depends sensation. This truth, Ânanda,
that on contact depends sensation, is to be understood in this way.
Suppose, Ânanda, there were utterly and completely no contact at all of
any organ with any object, as, namely, contact of the eye, contact of
the ear, contact of the nose, contact of the tongue, contact of the
body, contact of the mind;--if there were nowhere any contact, pray, on
the cessation of contact would there be any sensation?"

   "Nay, verily, Reverend Sir."

   "Accordingly, Ânanda, here we have in contact the cause, the
occasion, the origin, and the dependence of sensation.

   "I have said that on name and form depends contact. This truth,
Ânanda, that on name and form depends contact, is to be understood in
this way. Suppose, Ânanda, there were not these different traits,
peculiarities, signs, and indications by which are made manifest the
multitude of elements of being constituting name;--if there were not
these different

|                                   |                                                        |
|:----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_207">p. 207</span> | <span class="small">\[Grimblot 253<sup>19</sup></span> |

traits, peculiarities, signs, and indications, pray, would there be any
designative contact appearing in form?"

   "Nay, verily, Reverend Sir."

   "Suppose, Ânanda, there were not these different traits,
peculiarities, signs, and indications by which are made manifest the
multitude of elements of being constituting form;-- if there were not
these different traits, peculiarities, signs, and indications, pray,
would there be any inertia-contact appearing in name?"

   "Nay, verily, Reverend Sir."

   "Suppose, Ânanda, there were not these different traits,
peculiarities, signs, and indications by which are made manifest the
multitude of elements of being constituting name and the multitude of
elements of being constituting form;--if there were not these different
traits, peculiarities, signs, and indications, pray, would there be any
contact?"

   "Nay, verily, Reverend Sir."

   "Accordingly, Ânanda, here we have in name and form the cause, the
occasion, the origin, and the dependence of contact.

   "I have said that on consciousness depend name and form. This truth,
Ânanda, that on consciousness depend name and form, is to be understood
in this way. Suppose, Ânanda, consciousness were not to descend into the
maternal womb, pray, would name and form consolidate in the maternal
womb?"

   "Nay, verily, Reverend Sir."

   "Suppose, Ânanda, consciousness, after descending into the maternal
womb, were then to go away again, pray, would name and form be born to
life in the world?"

   "Nay, verily, Reverend Sir."

   "Suppose, Ânanda, consciousness were to be severed from a child,
either boy or girl, pray, would name and form attain to growth,
increase, and development?"

   "Nay, verily, Reverend Sir."

   "Accordingly Ânanda, here we have in consciousness the cause, the
occasion, the origin, and the dependence of name and form.

|                                   |                                                        |
|:----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_208">p. 208</span> | <span class="small">\[Grimblot 254<sup>26</sup></span> |

   "I have said that on name and form depends consciousness. This truth,
Ânanda, that on name and form depends consciousness, is to be understood
in this way. Suppose, Ânanda, that name and form were not to become
established, pray, would there, in the future, be birth, old age and
death, and the coming into existence of misery's host?"

   "Nay, verily, Reverend Sir."

   "Accordingly, Ânanda, here we have in name and form the cause, the
occasion, the origin, and the dependence of consciousness.

   "Verily, Ânanda, this name and form coupled with consciousness is all
there is to be born, or to grow old, or to die, or to leave one
existence, or to spring up in another. It is all that is meant by any
affirmation, predication, or declaration we may make concerning anybody.
It constitutes knowledge's field of action. And it is all that is reborn
to appear in its present shape."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction to Chapter III: Karma and Rebirth](bit-int3)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
