[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Sources](sources) [Previous](bits072) [Next](bits074)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

|                                   |                             |
|:----------------------------------|----------------------------:|
| <span id="page_351">p. 351</span> | <span class="small"></span> |

#### 

§ 73. THE FIRE-SERMON.

<span class="small">Translated from the Mahâ-Vagga
(i.21<sup>1</sup>).</span>

   Then The Blessed One, having dwelt in Uruvelâ as long as he wished,
proceeded on his wanderings in the direction of Gayâ Head, accompanied
by a great congregation of priests, a thousand in number, who had all of
them aforetime been monks with matted hair. And there in Gayâ, on Gayâ
Head, The Blessed One dwelt, together with the thousand priests.

   And there The Blessed One addressed the priests:--

|                                   |                                                  |
|:----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_352">p. 352</span> | <span class="small">\[MV.i.21<sup>2</sup></span> |

   "All things, O priests, are on fire. And what, O priests, are all
these things which are on fire?

   "The eye, O priests, is on fire; forms are on fire; eye-consciousness
is on fire; impressions received by the eye are on fire; and whatever
sensation, pleasant, unpleasant, or indifferent, originates in
dependence on impressions received by the eye, that also is on fire.

   "And with what are these on fire?

   "With the fire of passion, say I, with the fire of hatred, with the
fire of infatuation; with birth, old age, death, sorrow, lamentation,
misery, grief, and despair are they on fire.

   "The ear is on fire; sounds are on fire; . . . the nose is on fire;
odors are on fire; . . . the tongue is on fire; tastes are on fire; . .
. the body is on fire; things tangible are on fire; . . . the mind is on
fire; ideas are on fire; . . . mind-consciousness is on fire;
impressions received by the mind are on fire; and whatever sensation,
pleasant, unpleasant, or indifferent, originates in dependence on
impressions received by the mind, that also is on fire.

   "And with what are these on fire?

   "With the fire of passion, say I, with the fire of hatred, with the
fire of infatuation; with birth, old age, death, sorrow, lamentation,
misery, grief, and despair are they on fire.

   "Perceiving this, O priests, the learned and noble disciple conceives
an aversion for the eye, conceives an aversion for forms, conceives an
aversion for eye-consciousness, conceives an aversion for the
impressions received by the eye; and whatever sensation, pleasant,
unpleasant, or indifferent, originates in dependence on impressions
received by the eye, for that also he conceives an aversion. Conceives
an aversion for the ear, conceives an aversion for sounds, . . .
conceives an aversion for the nose, conceives an aversion for odors, . .
. conceives an aversion for the tongue, conceives an aversion for
tastes, . . . conceives an aversion for the body, conceives an aversion
for things tangible, . . . conceives an aversion for the mind, conceives
an aversion for ideas, conceives an aversion for mind-consciousness,
conceives an aversion for the impressions received

|                                   |                                                  |
|:----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_353">p. 353</span> | <span class="small">\[MV.i.21<sup>4</sup></span> |

by the mind; and whatever sensation, pleasant, unpleasant, or
indifferent, originates in dependence on impressions received by the
mind, for this also he conceives an aversion. And in conceiving this
aversion, he becomes divested of passion, and by the absence of passion
he becomes free, and when he is free he becomes aware that he is free;
and he knows that rebirth is exhausted, that he, has lived the holy
life, that he has done what it behooved him to do, and that he is no
more for this world."

   Now while this exposition was being delivered, the minds of the
thousand priests became free from attachment and delivered from the
depravities.

<span class="small">Here Endeth the Fire-Sermon.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 74. The Four Intent Contemplations](bits074)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
