[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Sources](sources) [Previous](bits100) [Next](bits102)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

|                                   |                             |
|:----------------------------------|----------------------------:|
| <span id="page_451">p. 451</span> | <span class="small"></span> |

#### 

§ 101. THE STORY OF VISÂKHÂ.

<span class="small">Translated from the Dhammapada, and from
Buddhaghosa's comment.</span>

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="5">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd" data-valign="top">
<td>53.</td>
<td>"As flowers in rich profusion piled<br />
Will many a garland furnish forth;<br />
So all the years of mortal man<br />
Should fruitful be in all good works."<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   "*As flowers in rich profusion piled*." This doctrinal instruction
was given by The Teacher while dwelling near Sâvatthi in Eastern
Monastery; and it was concerning Visâkhâ, a female lay disciple. She was
born, we are told, in the city of Bhaddiya, in the kingdom of Bengal.
Her father Dhanañjaya, Bon of Mendaka<span
id="page_451_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_451_note_1) the treasurer, ranked

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_452">p. 452</span> | <span class="small">\[Dhp.230<sup>25</sup></span> |

also as treasurer, and her mother was the lady Sumanâ his principal
wife.

   When Visâkhâ was seven years old, The Teacher, perceiving that the
Brahman Sela, and others of her city, were competent to attain to
salvation, went thither on his wanderings, accompanied by a great
congregation of priests.

   Now at that time Mendaka, who was filling the office of treasurer in
that city, was head of a household of five persons of great merit. The
five persons of great merit were: Mendaka the treasurer; Padumâ, his
principal wife; Dhanañjaya, his eldest son; the latter's wife, Sumanâ
and Mendaka's slave, Punna. Now Mendaka the treasurer was not the only
person of illimitable wealth in Bimbisâra's territory. There were five
of them: Jotiya, Jatila, Mendaka, Punnaka, Kâkavaliya.

   When Mendaka the treasurer heard of the arrival of The One Possessing
the Ten Forces, he sent for the little maid Visâkhâ, the daughter of his
son Dhanañjaya the treasurer, and said to her,

   "Dear girl, this is an auspicious day for you and for me! With your
five hundred girl-attendants mount five hundred chariots, and with these
five hundred female slaves as your retinue go to welcome The One
Possessing the Ten Forces."

   "Very well," said she, and did so. But as she well knew what
etiquette required, when she had gone as far in her carriage as was
proper for carriages to go, she alighted, and on foot drew near to The
Teacher. Then she did him obeisance, and stood respectfully at one side.
Pleased with her behavior, The Teacher taught her the Doctrine, and at
the end of the discourse, she attained to the fruit of conversion,
together with her five hundred maidens.

   Also Mendaka the treasurer drew near to The Teacher, and listening to
a sermon, attained to the fruit of conversion, and invited him for the
morrow to breakfast. On the next day at his own house he served The
Buddha and the congregation of the priests with excellent food, both
hard and soft; and thus for half a month he gave liberally. And when The
Teacher had stopped in the city of Bhaddiya as long as he wished, he
departed.

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_453">p. 453</span> | <span class="small">\[Dhp.231<sup>23</sup></span> |

   Now at that time Bimbisâra and Pasenadi the Kosalan were connected by
marriage, being each of them the husband of the other's sister. And one
day it occurred to the Kosalan king: "In Bimbisâra's territory dwell
five men of illimitable wealth, while there is not one in mine. Suppose,
now, I go to Bimbisâra, and ask him for one of these persons of great
merit."

   And going to king Bimbisâra, he was received cordially by the latter,
who then asked,

   "What was your purpose in coming?"

   "In your territory dwell five men of illimitable wealth, persons of
great merit. I have come with the intention of taking one of them back
with me. Let me have one."

   "It would be impossible for me to move one of those great families."

   "I will not go without," was the reply.

   The king took counsel with his ministers, and then said to him:

   "To move such powerful personages as Joti and the others, would be
like moving the world. But Mendaka the great treasurer has a son called
Dhanañjaya the treasurer: I will consult with him, and then give you my
reply."

   Then Bimbisâra sent for Dhanañjaya the treasurer, and said to him,

   "Dear friend, the king of the Kosalans says he will not return home
unless you go with him. Therefore, go with him, pray."

   "Sire, I will go, if you send me."

   "Then make your preparations, dear friend, and go."

   So he got himself ready, and the king was full of kind attentions to
him, and at parting formally intrusted him to Pasenadi the king. And
Pasenadi the king set out for Sâvatthi, intending to spend one night on
the way. And coming to a pleasant spot, they bivouacked there.

   Then said Dhanañjaya the treasurer,

   "Whose territory are we on now?"

   "Mine, O treasurer."

   "How far is it from here to Sâvatthi?"

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_454">p. 454</span> | <span class="small">\[Dhp.232<sup>12</sup></span> |

   "Seven leagues."

   "It is very crowded in a city, and my suite is a large one. Sire, if
it so please you, I will dwell here."

   "Very good," said the king in assent; and mapping out for him a city,
he gave it to him, and went away. And from the circumstance that the
settlement in that place was made in the evening \[sâ-yam\], the city
received the name of Sâketa.

   Now there was dwelling at Sâvatthi a young man named Punnavaddhana,
who was the son of a treasurer named Migâra, and had just come of age.
And his mother and father said to him,

   "Son, choose yourself a wife from what family you please."

   "Oh! I have no use for anything of that sort."

   "Son, act not so! No family can last without children."

   "Well, then," said he, when they continually insisted, "if I can have
a girl endowed with the five beauties, I will do as you say."

   "But, son, what are these five beauties?"

   "Beauty of hair; beauty of flesh; beauty of bone; beauty of skin; and
beauty of youth."

   (The hair of a woman who is experiencing the reward of great merit is
like a peacock's tail, and, when it is loosened and allowed to fall,
reaches to the bottom of the tunic, where the ends turn and point
upwards. This is "Beauty of hair." The lips are of a fine color,
resembling a bright red gourd, and are smooth and pleasant to the touch.
This is "Beauty of flesh." The teeth are white, with even interstices,
resembling a row of diamonds set upright, or evenly cut mother-of-pearl.
This is "Beauty of bone." The skin, even without the application of
sandal-wood perfume, or any rouge, or other cosmetic, is glossy like a
blue-lotus wreath, and white like a wreath of kanikâra flowers. This is
"Beauty of skin." She possesses a youthfulness as fresh when she has
brought forth ten times, as if she had brought forth but once. This is
"Beauty of youth.")

   Then his mother and father invited and entertained one hundred and
eight Brahmans, and inquired of them,

|                                   |                                                  |
|:----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_455">p. 455</span> | <span class="small">\[Dhp.233<sup>6</sup></span> |

   "Are there any women endowed with the five beauties?"

   "Assuredly there are."

   "Then let eight of you go in search of a girl of this description."

   And giving them a liberal present, they continued: "When you return,
we will remember you again. Go, search for a girl of this description,
and as soon as you find her, put on her this decoration." And with that
they placed in their hands a gold wreath worth a hundred thousand pieces
of money, and dismissed them.

   So the eight Brahmans went searching through all the large cities,
but discovered no girl endowed with the five beauties. Then they turned
back, and as they were returning, they chanced to arrive at Sâketa on
Public Day. "Now," thought they, "our mission will be effected."

   It seems that every year in that city there was held a festival
called "Public Day." Then all those ladies who are not in the habit of
going out of doors issue forth from their homes with their attendants,
and show themselves in public, going on foot to the banks of the river.
And on the same day they do this, all the rich men's sons of the warrior
and other castes station themselves alongside the paths in order to put
garlands on the heads of any pretty girl they may see of equal rank with
themselves.

   And these Brahmans came also, and stationed themselves in a hall on
the banks of the river. At that moment Visâkhâ, then some fifteen or
sixteen years of age, came to that place on her way to bathe in the
river, being decked in all her ornaments, and attended by five hundred
maidens. And suddenly a cloud arose, and it began to rain. The five
hundred maidens took to running, and sought refuge in the hall. The
Brahmans scanned them carefully, but saw not one among them endowed with
the five beauties. Then Visâkhâ came up at her natural gait, and entered
the hall, and her garments and ornaments were wet.

   The Brahmans perceived that she had four of the beauties, and being
desirous of seeing her teeth, they began conversing among themselves,
saying,

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_456">p. 456</span> | <span class="small">\[Dhp.233<sup>30</sup></span> |

   "Our daughter is of a lazy disposition; her husband, we must needs
suppose, will have to content himself with sour gruel."

   Then said Visâkhâ, "What is that you are saying?"

   "Dear girl, we say thus and so."

   (They say the sound of her voice was sweet, sounding forth like the
tones of a gong of bell-metal.)

   Then with a sweet voice, she asked them again,

   "Why do you say that?"

   "Your attendant women came running to this hall, and did not get
their garments or their ornaments wet. But though it is but a little
way, you did not run at all, and got your garments and ornaments wet.
This is why we speak as we do."

   "Good sirs, say not so. I am better able to run than they; but I had
my reasons for not running."

   "What were they, dear girl?"

   "Good sirs, there are four things which do not appear to advantage
when running. And there is another reason."

   "Dear girl, what are the four things?"

   "Good sirs, an anointed and richly dressed king does not appear to
advantage when he binds up his loin-cloth, and runs in the royal court.
Every one finds fault, saying, 'How is it this great king rushes around
like any householder?' He appears to advantage when walking at a slow
gait. The king's caparisoned state elephant does not appear to advantage
when running. He appears to advantage when marching at an elephant's
natural dignified pace. A man who has retired from the world does not
appear to advantage when running. Every one finds fault, saying, 'How is
it this monk rushes about like any layman?' He appears to advantage when
adopting a tranquil gait. No woman appears to advantage when running.
People justly find fault with her, saying, 'How is it this woman rushes
about like a man?' These four do not appear to advantage when running."

   "But what, dear girl, was your other reason?"

   "Good sirs, a daughter is brought up by her mother and father, who
put a value on every limb in her body. For we

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_457">p. 457</span> | <span class="small">\[Dhp.234<sup>22</sup></span> |

are goods for sale. They bring us up in order to marry us into another
family. If we should run and stumble, either over our skirts or over
some obstacle on the ground, and in falling should break either a hand
or a foot, we should remain as burdens on our families. But articles of
ornament, if they get wet, can dry. This, good sirs, was my reason for
not running."

   All the while she was talking, the Brahmans were beholding the
splendor of her teeth, such splendor as they felt they had never seen
before. And having applauded her speech, they took the gold wreath, and
placed it on her head, and said:

   "You, dear girl, are the one whom this befits."

   Then she asked them: "Good sirs, from what city are you come?"

   "From Sâvatthi, dear girl."

   "The treasurer, the head of the family, what is his name?"

   "His name, dear girl, is Migâra the treasurer."

   "And my young master, what is his name?"

   "He is the young Punnavaddhana, dear girl."

   Having thus ascertained that the family was of equal caste to her
own, she sent a message to her father to send the chariot. For although
she had come on foot, it is not allowed to maidens to return in that
manner when once they have been decorated with the wreath. The daughters
of influential families return in chariots and the like; others, either
mount ordinary carriages, or walk under a palm-leaf parasol, or, if that
is lacking, they raise the skirts of their cloaks and throw them over
their shoulders. In the present instance, her father sent her five
hundred chariots, and she and her attendants mounted and returned home,
while the Brahmans accompanied them.

   Then said the treasurer to the Brahmans,

   "Whence are ye come?"

   "From Sâvatthi, great treasurer."

   "The treasurer, what is his name?"

   "Migâra the treasurer."

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_458">p. 458</span> | <span class="small">\[Dhp.235<sup>12</sup></span> |

   "What is the son's name?"

   "Young Punnavaddhana."

   "The riches, how great are the riches?"

   "Four hundred millions, great treasurer."

   "His riches, by the side of ours, are but as a farthing. However,
from the time one obtains a protector for a maiden, why look for
anything else?" Thus he gave his consent.

   After a day or two of hospitable entertainment, he dismissed them.
And they returned to Sâvatthi, and announced to Migâra the treasurer:

   "We have found the girl."

   "Whose daughter is she?"

   "Dhanañjaya the treasurer's."

   "That is a powerful personage whose daughter you have secured for us.
We must go quickly to fetch her." Then he went and announced to the king
the circumstances of the case, and that he must needs absent himself for
a while.

   And the king thought to himself: "This is the great personage whom I
removed from before Bimbisâra and settled in Sâketa. I ought to pay him
some attention." And he said to Migâra the treasurer,

   "I, too, will go."

   "Very good, sire," replied the other, and sent the following message
to Dhanañjaya the treasurer: "When I come, the king will come also, and
the king's army is large. Shall you be able to take care of so many
people, or not?"

   The return message came: "Let ten kings come, if they wish."

   Then Migâra the treasurer took all the inhabitants of that large
city, leaving barely enough to guard the houses, and when he had come
within half a league of Sâketa, he halted, and sent a message announcing
his arrival.

   Then Dhanañjaya the treasurer, after sending out to them a large
present, consulted with his daughter:

   "My dear," said he, "I hear that your father-in-law has come with the
king of the Kosalans. Which house shall we get ready for him, which for
the king, and which ones for the deputy kings?"

|                                   |                                                  |
|:----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_459">p. 459</span> | <span class="small">\[Dhp.236<sup>2</sup></span> |

   Now clever was the treasurer's daughter, with a fully matured and
keen intellect, the result of longing expressed and aspiration cherished
through a hundred thousand world-cycles. And she gave orders: "Let such
and such a house be got ready for my father-in-law, such another for the
king, and such others for the deputy kings." After making these
arrangements, she next summoned the slaves and servants, and said to
them: "Let so many of you wait on the king, and so many on the deputy
kings; and do you who are hostlers and the like take care of the
elephants, horses, and other beasts; for our guests must have a merry
time while they are here." Such were her orders. And why? So that none
might say: "We came to Visâkhâ's merrymaking and got nothing for our
pains, but spent our time looking after our beasts."

   That same day, Visâkhâ's father sent for five hundred goldsmiths, and
giving them a thousand nikkhas of red gold, besides silver, gems,
pearls, coral, diamonds, etc., enough to go with it, he said: "Make for
my daughter what is called the great creeper parure."

   After remaining a few days, the king sent a message to Dhanañjaya the
treasurer, saying,

   "It is too great a load for a simple treasurer to feed and take care
of us. Be pleased to appoint a time for the maiden's departure."

   But Dhanañjaya the treasurer returned word to the king:

   "The rainy season is now come, and you can well afford to remain four
months. Let everything pertaining to your army be my care. It will be
time enough for your majesty to go when I dismiss you."

   From that time on it was like a continual festival for the city of
Sâketa. From the king down, every one was provided with garlands,
perfumes, garments, and other gifts, so that each one felt himself the
especial object of the treasurer's hospitality.

   Thus three months went by, but the parure was not yet finished.

   Then came the masters of ceremonies, and announced to the treasurer:

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_460">p. 460</span> | <span class="small">\[Dhp.236<sup>26</sup></span> |

   "There is no lack of anything else, but the army has not sufficient
wood to cook its meals."

   "Go, my dear sirs, take all the tumble-down elephant stables, and
other buildings of the kind in the city, and all the dilapidated houses,
and use them for cooking-fuel."

   This wood did the cooking for half a month, and thereupon they again
announced to the treasurer:

   "There is no wood."

   "At this time in the year one cannot go for wood. But open the
store-houses where stuffs are kept, and make wicks of the coarse cloths,
dip them in vessels of oil, and so cook your meals."

   They did so for half a month, and thus four months had gone by, and
the parure was finished. There was no thread in this parure; silver was
used instead. When this parure was on, it extended from head to foot. At
the latter place were bunches of gold medals, and silver dies. On the
crown of the head was a medal, at the top of the ears two, at the throat
one, at the knees two, at the elbows two, and at the sides of the waist
two.

   Now a part of this parure consisted of a peacock, and there were five
hundred feathers of red gold in the wing on the right side, and five
hundred in the one on the left side. The beak was of coral, the eyes
were of jewels, and likewise the neck and the tail-feathers. The midribs
of the feathers were of silver, and likewise the shanks of the legs.
When placed in position on Visâkhâ head, it appeared like a peacock
dancing on the summit of a mountain, and the sound which came from the
thousand midribs rolled forth like the tones of celestial choruses and
orchestras. And it was only when people had come quite close that they
knew it was not a real peacock.

   This parure was worth ninety millions, and a hundred thousand was
spent on the workmanship. But what was the deed in a previous existence
which caused her to obtain this parure? They say that in the time of
Kassapa Buddha she gave cloth for robes to twenty thousand priests, also
thread and needles and dyeing material, all her own property; and

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_461">p. 461</span> | <span class="small">\[Dhp.237<sup>22</sup></span> |

the parure was the result of this liberality. For the giving of robes by
a woman attains its fruition in the great creeper parure; by a man, in
the supernatural bowl and robes.

   When the great treasurer had thus spent four months in getting ready
his daughter's trousseau, he began giving her the dowry. He gave five
hundred carts full of money, five hundred carts full of gold dishes,
five hundred full of silver dishes, five hundred full of copper dishes,
five hundred full of silk garments, five hundred full of clarified
butter, five hundred full of husked rice, and five hundred full of
plowshares and other implements. They say the reason why he thus gave
her all manner of implements was for fear that his daughter in her new
home might need something, and be obliged to send to a neighbor's for
it. And he gave fifteen hundred waiting-maids whose duties were to
bathe, feed, and dress her,--all of them handsome slaves, and richly
dressed, and riding in five hundred chariots, three to each several
chariot.

   Then he determined to give his daughter some cattle, and gave orders
to his men:

   "Look you now! Go and open the door of my lesser cattle-fold, and
post yourselves for a distance of three quarters of a league, and at
every quarter-league have a drum. And let the space across from side to
side be a hundred and forty cubits, and let not the cows transgress
those limits. And as soon as you get them in position, sound your
drums."

   They did so. When the cows passed out of the fold, and had gone a
quarter-league, the men gave a signal with the drum, and again at the
end of the second quarter-league, and again at the third quarter-league.
And they hemmed them in at the sides. Thus, for a space of
three-quarters of a league in length, and a hundred and forty cubits
across, the cows stood so close that they chafed one another.

   Then said the great treasurer, "That is enough cows for my daughter.
Shut the door." So they shut the door of the fold: but, notwithstanding
the door was shut, such was the effect of Visâkhâ's merit that the
vigorous bulls and the milch

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_462">p. 462</span> | <span class="small">\[Dhp.238<sup>16</sup></span> |

cows leaped up and got out. And. in spite of all the men could do to
prevent them, sixty thousand vigorous bulls and sixty thousand milch
cows got out, and behind the milch cows followed vigorous bull calves.

   What was the deed in a previous existence by reason of which the
cattle thus got out? Because once she kept on giving, in spite of the
efforts people made to stop her. As tradition has it, in the time of The
Supreme Buddha Kassapa, she was the youngest of the seven daughters of
king Kiki, and her name was Servant-of-the-Congregation. And as she was
once giving the five products of the cow in alms to twenty thousand
priests, the young priests and the novices cried, "Enough, enough!" and
closed their hands up tight. But, notwithstanding their efforts to
prevent her, she kept on giving, saying, "Here is a sweet bit; here is a
dainty morsel." This was the reason the cattle kept on coming out,
notwithstanding the efforts made to prevent them.

   When the treasurer had got thus far in his giving, his wife said to
him,

   "You have assigned goods to my daughter, but no male and female
vassals to do her bidding. Why is this?"

   "Because I want to find out who are fond of her, and who are not. Of
course, I shall send vassals with her to do her bidding. When she comes
to mount her chariot to depart, I shall make proclamation: 'Let all who
wish to go with my daughter, do so; and let all others stay at home.'"

   Now the day before she was to depart, the treasurer sat in his room
and had his daughter sit by him, and he admonished her, telling her what
rules of conduct she should adopt when she came to dwell in her
husband's family. And it happened that Migâra the treasurer was seated
in the next room, and overheard the admonition of Dhanañjaya the
treasurer, which was as follows:

   "My child, as long as you dwell in your father-in-law's family, the
in-door fire is not to be taken out of doors; outdoor fire is not to be
brought within doors; give only to him who gives; give not to him who
does not give; give both to him who givest and to him who does not give;
sit happily;

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_463">p. 463</span> | <span class="small">\[Dhp.239<sup>10</sup></span> |

eat happily; sleep happily; wait upon the fire; and reverence the
household divinities." This was the tenfold admonition.

   On the next day he assembled the different guilds of artisans, and in
the presence of the royal army he appointed eight householders to be
sponsors for his daughter, saying,

   "You are to try any charge of sin that may be brought against my
daughter in her new home." Next he had his daughter put on her great
creeper parure that was worth ninety millions, and gave her besides five
hundred and forty millions with which to buy aromatic powders for her
bath. And causing her to mount a chariot, he took her about in the
neighborhood of Sâketa as far as to Anurâdhapura, through fourteen
villages that were subject to him; and as he went through one after
another, he caused proclamation to be made: "Let all who wish to go with
my daughter, go." On hearing the proclamation, all the inhabitants of
the fourteen villages, without exception, issued forth, saying, "When
our mistress is on the point of leaving, why stay we here?" Then
Dhanañjaya the treasurer, full of polite attentions to the king and
Migâra the treasurer, accompanied them a short distance on their way;
and having intrusted his daughter into their hands, he there took leave
of them.

   And Migâra the treasurer rode in a conveyance behind the others, and
beholding a great crowd of people following, he asked,

   "Pray, who are these?"

   "They are male and female vassals to do the bidding of your
daughter-in-law."

   "Who could ever feed so many? Beat and drive them away, and keep only
those who do not run."

   "Hold!" cried Visâkhâ "do not drive them away! The one army can feed
the other."

   But the treasurer persisted, saying, "My dear girl, we have no use
for them. Who is there to feed them?" And he caused his men to fling
clods of earth at them, and to beat them with sticks, and all those who
did not run he took with him, saying, "These are a plenty."

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_464">p. 464</span> | <span class="small">\[Dhp.239<sup>32</sup></span> |

   When Visâkhâ approached the gate of the city of Sâvatthi, she began
to reflect, "Shall I enter seated in a covered conveyance, or standing
erect in a chariot?" Then she thought, "If I am in a covered conveyance
when I enter, no one will see the elegance of my great creeper parure."
So she entered the city standing in her chariot, and showing herself to
the whole town. And when the inhabitants of Sâvatthi beheld the
magnificence of Visâkhâ they said, "This, then, is Visâkhâ Truly, her
magnificence becomes her well!" And thus it was in great pomp she
entered the treasurer's house.

   Then all the inhabitants of the city sent gifts to her, according to
their power, and according to their ability; for they thought,
"Dhanañjaya the treasurer was exceedingly hospitable to us when we went
to his city." But Visâkhâ took all the gifts that were sent her, and
distributed them to the different families everywhere throughout the
city. And in sending, she accompanied each gift with an affectionate
message: "This is for my mother, this for my father, this for my
brother, and this for my sister;" thus treating each one according to
age, and making, as it were, all the inhabitants of the city her
relatives.

   Now towards the end of the night, her thoroughbred mare gave birth to
a foal. And Visâkhâ, accompanied by her female slaves bearing torches,
went to the stable, and superintended while they washed the mare with
warm water, and anointed her with oil. Then she returned to her own
quarters.

   Now Migâra the treasurer had for a long time been favorably disposed
to the sect of naked ascetics. And urged by this feeling, though The
Buddha was dwelling in a neighboring monastery, he neglected him in the
festivities of his son's wedding, but determined to do the naked
ascetics an honor. So, on a certain day, he had some rice porridge
cooked in several hundred new dishes, and extended an invitation to five
hundred of the unclothed. And when he had got them all into his house,
he sent a message to Visâkhâ, saying, "Let my daughter-in-law come and
do reverence to the saints."

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_465">p. 465</span> | <span class="small">\[Dhp.240<sup>27</sup></span> |

   When Visâkhâ heard the word "saints" she was greatly delighted, for
she had been converted, and was a noble disciple. But when she came to
the place where they were eating, and beheld them, she was angry with
the treasurer, and returned to her own quarters, saying reproachfully,
"These persons so devoid of shame and fear of sinning cannot be saints.
Why did my father-in-law have me summoned?"

   When the unclothed caught sight of her, they all with one mouth
reproached the treasurer:

   "Why, O householder, did you not find some one else for a
daughter-in-law? You have introduced into your house an arrant
misfortune-breeder, a disciple of the monk Gotama. Make haste and have
her expelled from the house."

   "It is out of the question," thought the treasurer, "for me to expel
her just because these men tell me to do so. She is from too powerful a
family." And he dismissed them, saying,

   "Your reverences, young people sometimes act without knowing what
they are about. Hold your peace!"

   Then he sat down on a costly seat, and began to eat the sweet rice
porridge from a golden bowl. At that moment a \[Buddhist\] elder on his
begging rounds entered the house. Visâkhâ was standing fanning her
father-in-law, and saw him. And thinking, "It would not be fitting for
me to announce him to my father-in-law," she moved off in such away as
to call his attention to the elder. But the foolish, unconverted man,
although he saw the elder, made as if he did not see him, and with head
bent down, he kept on eating.

   "Pass on, reverend sir," said Visâkhâ, when she perceived that her
father-in-law made no sign, notwithstanding he had seen the elder; "my
father-in-law is eating stale fare."

   The treasurer, although he had borne with the talk of the naked
ascetics, the moment she said, "He is eating stale fare," removed his
hand from his bowl, and exclaimed,

   "Take away this rice porridge, and turn the girl out of the house! To
think that she should accuse me, and in a time of festivity, too, of
eating anything unclean!"

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_466">p. 466</span> | <span class="small">\[Dhp.241<sup>18</sup></span> |

   But all the slaves and servants in the house belonged to Visâkhâ. Who
was there to seize her by hand or foot? There was not one who dared so
much as open his mouth.

   "Father," said Visâkhâ, after listening to him; "I'll not leave so
easily as you seem to think. I am not a common prostitute, picked up at
some river bathing-place; and daughters whose parents are still living
are not turned off so easily. Now my father has provided for this very
case. When I was starting to come hither, he summoned eight
householders, and put me in their charge, saying, 'If any charge of sin
be made against my daughter, investigate it.' Have these men summoned,
and establish my guilt or innocence."

   "She speaks well," said the treasurer, and had the eight householders
summoned.

   Said he: "This young girl, when I was seated, in a time of festivity,
eating rice porridge from a golden bowl, said I was eating what was
unclean. Find her guilty and turn her out."

   "Dear girl, is it so, as he says?"

   "That is not as *I* say:--but when a certain elder on his
begging-rounds came and stood in the door-way, my father-in-law, who was
eating sweet rice porridge, paid no attention to him. Then I thought:
'My father-in-law is not acquiring any merit in this existence, but is
consuming old, stale merit.' So I said: 'Pass on, reverend sir; my
father-in-law is eating stale fare.' Now, what fault is there here of
mine?"

   "There is none. Our daughter speaks justly. Why are you angry with
her?"

   "Sirs, granted that this is no fault: but one night in the middle
watch, she went out behind the house, accompanied by her male and female
slaves."

   "Dear girl, is it so, as he says?"

   "Good sirs, I went for no other reason but that I thought when a
thoroughbred mare was bringing forth in this very house, it would not do
to sit still and make no sign. So I had my slave-girls take torches, and
went and caused the mare to receive the attentions suitable for a time
of foaling."

   "Sir, our daughter does in your house work that is unfit even for
slave-girls. What fault can you discover here?"

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_467">p. 467</span> | <span class="small">\[Dhp.242<sup>14</sup></span> |

   "Sirs, granted that here also there is no fault. Her father, however,
was admonishing her at the time she was starting to come hither, and
gave her ten admonitions of a deeply hidden meaning; and I do not
understand them. Let her tell me their meaning. For instance, her father
said, 'The in-door fire is not to be taken out of doors.' Is it
possible, pray, for us to get on with our neighbors, without ever
sending fire to their households?"

   "Is it so, as he says, dear girl?"

   "Good sirs, my father did not mean that by what he said; but this is
what he meant: 'Dear girl, if you notice any fault in your
mother-in-law, or your father-in-law, or your husband, do not tell of it
outside in some one else's house. There is no worse fire than this.'"

   "Sirs, so be it: but her father said: 'Out-door fire is not to be
brought within doors.' Would it be possible, if our in-door fire were to
go out, for us not to fetch fire from outside?"

   "Is it so, as he says, dear girl?"

   "Good sirs, my father did not mean that by what he said; but this is
what he meant: 'If any of your neighbors, whether male or female, speak
ill of your father-in-law, or of your husband, do not bring their talk
home, and repeat it saying, "So and so has this or that to say of you."
For there is no fire comparable to this fire.'"

   Thus, in this point also she was guiltless. And as in this case, so
also in the others; and the following is their purport:--

   When her father said to her: "Give only to him who gives," he meant,
"Give only to those who give borrowed articles back again."

   And "Give not to him who does not give," meant, "Give not to those
who do not give back again what they borrow."

   "Give both to him who gives, and to him who does not give," meant,
"When your needy relatives and friends come to you, you should give to
them, whether they are able to repay you or not."

   "Sit happily," meant, "When you see your mother-in-law,

|                                   |                                                  |
|:----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_468">p. 468</span> | <span class="small">\[Dhp.243<sup>9</sup></span> |

or your father-in-law, or your husband, you should rise, and not keep
your seat."

   "Eat happily," meant, "You should not eat before your mother-in-law,
or your father-in-law, or your husband. You must eat after you have
waited on them, and they have been helped to everything they wish."

   "Sleep happily," meant, "Do not ascend your couch to lie down to
sleep before your mother-in-law, or your father-in-law, or your husband;
but when you have done for them all the different services which should
be done, you can afterwards yourself lie down to sleep."

   "Wait upon the fire," meant, "You should look upon your
mother-in-law, your father-in-law, and your husband, as if they were a
flame of fire, or a royal serpent."

   "Reverence the household divinities," meant, "You should look upon
your mother-in-law, your father-in-law, and your husband, as your
divinities."

   When thus the treasurer had heard the meaning of the ten admonitions,
he was unable to find any reply, and sat with downcast eyes. The
householders then said to him,

   "Treasurer, is there any other sin in our daughter?"

   "Sirs, there is none."

   "Then, if she is guiltless, why did you attempt without cause to turn
her out of doors?"

   "Good sirs," said Visâkhâ, at this point in the discussion, "although
at first it was not fitting that I should leave at the command of my
father-in-law, yet now that you whom my father appointed to try charges
which might be brought against me, have found me guiltless, it is a good
time to go."

   So saying, she gave orders to her male and female slaves to get ready
the carriages and make the other necessary preparations.

   "Dear girl, I spoke in ignorance; pardon me," said then the
treasurer, speaking half to the householders.

   "Good sir, I do pardon you all there is to pardon. I am, however,
daughter in a family that has studied and has faith in the religion of
The Buddha, and to see something of the congregation of the priests is
necessary to us. If I can be

|                                   |                                                  |
|:----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_469">p. 469</span> | <span class="small">\[Dhp.244<sup>5</sup></span> |

allowed to wait on the congregation of the priests at my pleasure, I
will stay."

   "Dear girl, wait on your monks as much as you please," was the reply.

   Visâkhâ, accordingly, sent an invitation to The One Possessing the
Ten Forces, and on the next day received him at her house. And the naked
monks, when they heard that The Teacher had gone to the house of Migâra
the treasurer, went also, and sat down outside the house encompassing
it. Visâkhâ, having given the water of donation, sent a message to her
father-in-law:

   "All the arrangements for the entertainment are ready. Let my
father-in-law come and wait on The One Possessing the Ten Forces."

   But as he was about to go, the naked ascetics restrained him, saying,

   "O householder, go not near the monk Gotama."

   So he sent back word: "Let my daughter-in-law wait on him herself."

   When she had waited on The Buddha and on the congregation of the
priests that followed him, and the meal was now at an end, she again
sent a message:

   "Let my father-in-law come and hear the sermon."

   "If I were not to go now, it would not do at all," said then the
treasurer; for he was very desirous of hearing the Doctrine-

   "Well, then," said the naked monks, when they saw he was bent on
going, "you may listen to the Doctrine of the monk Gotama, if you will
sit outside of a curtain." Then they went ahead of him, and drew a
curtain around, and he went and sat down outside of the curtain.

   But The Teacher thought, "Sit outside of a curtain, if you will, or
beyond a wall, or beyond a mountain, or at the end of the world. I am
The Buddha, and can make you hear my voice." And marching as it were
with a mighty Jambu trunk held aloft, and showering down as it were
showers of ambrosia, he began to teach the Doctrine in consecutive
discourse.

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_470">p. 470</span> | <span class="small">\[Dhp.244<sup>25</sup></span> |

   Now when a Supreme Buddha teaches the Doctrine, those in front, and
those behind, and those beyond a hundred or a thousand worlds, and
those, even, who inhabit the abode of the Sublime Gods, exclaim: "The
Teacher is looking at me; The Teacher is teaching the Doctrine to me."
To each one it seems as if The Teacher were beholding and addressing him
alone. The Buddhas, they say, resemble the moon: as the moon in the
midst of the heavens appears to every living being as if over his head,
so The Buddhas appear to every one as if standing in front of him. This
gift is said to be their reward for liberality in previous existences,
when, for the benefit of others, they cut off their own garlanded heads,
gouged out their own eyes, tore out their own hearts, and gave away to
be slaves sons such as Jâli, daughters such as Kanhâjinâ, and wives such
as Maddî.

   And Migâra the treasurer, as he sat outside the curtain, and turned
over and over in his mind the teaching of The Tathâgata, became
established in the thousandfold ornamented fruit of conversion, and
acquired an immovable and unquestioning faith in the three refuges.
Then, raising the curtain, he approached his daughter-in-law, and taking
her breast in his hand, he said: "From this day forth you are my
mother," thus giving her the position of mother. And henceforth she was
known as "Migâra's mother;" and when, later on, she had a son, she named
him Migâra.

   The great treasurer then let go his daughter-in-law's breast, and
went and fell at the feet of The Blessed One, and stroking them with his
hands, and kissing them with his lips, he three times proclaimed his own
name, "Reverend Sir, I am Migâra."

   "Reverend Sir," continued he, "all this time have I been without
knowing that on you should one bestow alms to obtain great reward. But
now I have learnt it, thanks to my daughter-in-law, and am released from
all danger of being reborn in a lower state of existence. Truly, it was
for my advantage and for my welfare that my daughter-in-law came to my
house." So saying, he pronounced the following stanza:

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_471">p. 471</span> | <span class="small">\[Dhp.245<sup>20</sup></span> |

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="5">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd" data-valign="top">
<td>"Now have I learnt where rich reward<br />
Will surely follow every gift!<br />
Truly a happy day for me,<br />
When first my daughter sought my home!"<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   Visâkhâ invited The Teacher again for the next day on her own
account, and on the day after her mother-in-law also attained to the
fruit of conversion. And henceforth that house kept open doors for the
religion of The Buddha.

   Then thought the treasurer, "My daughter-in-law is a great
benefactress to me; I must make her a present. And, truly, her present
parure is too heavy for every-day wear. I will have a very light one
made, which she can wear both by day and by night in all the four
postures."

   And he had made what is called a highly polished parure, worth a
thousand pieces of money: and when it was finished, he invited The
Buddha and the congregation of the priests, and assiduously waited on
them at breakfast. And causing Visâkhâ to bathe herself with sixteen
pitcherfuls of perfumed water, he placed her in front of The Teacher,
and putting her parure upon her, he had her do obeisance. Then The
Teacher, after giving thanks for the repast, returned to the monastery.

   And Visâkhâ continued to give alms, and do other deeds of merit, and
she received the eight boons from The Teacher. And as the crescent of
the moon waxes great in the sky, so did she increase in sons and
daughters. They say she had ten sons and ten daughters, and of these
each had ten sons and ten daughters, and of these also each had ten sons
and ten daughters. Thus the children and children's children which had
sprung from her numbered eight thousand and four hundred and twenty
persons.

   She lived to be a hundred and twenty years old, but there was not a
single gray hair on her head,--always she appeared as if about sixteen.
When people saw her on her way to the monastery, surrounded by her
children and children's children, there were always those who inquired:
"Which of these is Visâkhâ?" Those who saw her as she walked would
think: "I hope she will walk a little further;

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_472">p. 472</span> | <span class="small">\[Dhp.246<sup>14</sup></span> |

our lady looks well when she walks." And those who saw her stand, or
sit, or lie, would think: "I hope she will lie a little longer now; our
lady looks well when she is lying down." Thus in respect of the four
postures, it could not be charged against her that there was any one
posture in which she did not look well.

   Moreover, she was as strong as five elephants. And the king, hearing
that Visâkhâ was currently reported to be as strong as five elephants,
was desirous of testing her strength; and one day, as she was on her way
back from the monastery where she had been to hear a sermon, he let
loose an elephant against her. The elephant, lifting his trunk, came on
to meet Visâkhâ. Of her five hundred attendant women, some fled away,
while others threw their arms about her. And when she asked what the
matter was, they replied: "They say the king is desirous of testing your
iron strength, and has let loose an elephant against you." When Visâkhâ
saw the elephant, she thought, "What is the need of my running away? It
is only a question how I shall take hold of him." And, being afraid that
if she seized him roughly it might kill him, she took hold of his trunk
with two fingers, and pressed him back. The elephant was unable either
to resist or to keep his feet, and fell back on his haunches in the
royal court. Thereupon the crowd shouted "Bravo!" and she and her
attendants reached home in safety.

   Now at that time Visâkhâ, Migâra's mother, lived at Sâvatthi, and had
many children and many children's children, and the children were free
from disease, and the children's children were free from disease, and
she was considered to bring good luck. Among her thousands of children
and children's children not one had died. And when the inhabitants of
Sâvatthi had their festivals and holidays, Visâkhâ was always the first
to be invited, and the first to be feasted.

   Now on a certain day of merry-making, the populace were going in
their fine clothes and ornaments to the monastery to listen to the
Doctrine. And Visâkhâ having come from a place of entertainment, and
wearing the great creeper parure,

|                                   |                                                  |
|:----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_473">p. 473</span> | <span class="small">\[Dhp.247<sup>6</sup></span> |

was likewise proceeding with the populace to the monastery. There she
took off her ornaments, and gave them to her slave-girl. Concerning
which it is said,

   "Now at that time there was a merry-making at Sâvatthi; and the
people in gorgeous array went to the park. Visâkhâ, also, Migâra's
mother, in gorgeous array went to the monastery. Then Visâkhâ, Migâra's
mother, took off her ornaments, and tying them up in a bundle in her
cloak, gave them to her slave-girl, saying, 'Here, take this bundle.'"

   It would appear that she thought it not seemly to enter the monastery
wearing such an extremely costly and showy parure,--a decoration which,
when put on, adorned her from head to foot. Thus it was that, as she was
proceeding to the monastery, she took it off, and made of it a bundle,
and gave it to a slave-girl, who had been born with the strength of five
elephants as the result of former good deeds, and hence was able to
carry it. Thus her mistress could say to her, "Dear girl, take this
parure. I will put it on when I return from The Teacher."

   Having put on her highly polished parure, she drew near The Teacher,
and listened to the Doctrine. And at the close of the sermon she rose,
did obeisance to The Blessed One, and went forth from his presence. The
slave-girl, however, forgot the parure. Now it was the custom of Ânanda
the elder, when the assembly had listened to the Doctrine, and had
departed, to put away anything that had been forgotten. And so this day
he noticed the great creeper parure, and announced to The Teacher,

   "Reverend Sir, Visâkhâ has gone forgetting her parure."

   "Lay it aside, Ânanda."

   The elder lifted it up, and hung it on the side of the staircase.

   And Visâkhâ, in company with her friend Suppiyâ, wandered about the
monastery to see what could be done for the in-coming, for the
out-going, for the sick, and others. Now it was the custom of the young
priests and novices, when they saw the devout ladies bringing clarified
butter, honey, oil, and other medicaments, to draw near with basins of
various kinds. And on that day also they did so.

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_474">p. 474</span> | <span class="small">\[Dhp.247<sup>32</sup></span> |

   Thereupon Suppiyâ saw a certain sick priest, and asked him,

   "Sir, of what do you stand in need?"

   "Meat broth," was the reply.

   "Very well, sir; I will send you some."

   But as she failed on the next day to obtain any suitable meat, she
made the preparation with flesh from her own thigh; and afterwards by
the favor of The Teacher her body was made whole.

   When Visâkhâ had attended to the sick and to the young priests, she
issued forth from the monastery. But before she had gone far, she
stopped and said,

   "Dear girl, bring me the parure; I will put it on."

   Instantly the slave-girl remembered that she had forgotten it, and
had left it behind. And she said,

   "Mistress, I forgot it."

   "Go, then, and get it, and bring it hither. But if my master, Ânanda
the elder, has taken it up and laid it away anywhere, then do not fetch
it. It is a present to my master." It appears she knew that the elder
was in the habit of putting away valuables which highborn personages had
forgotten; and this was why she spoke as she did.

   When the elder saw the slave-girl, he said to her,

   "Why have you returned?"

   "I went away forgetting my mistress's parure," said she.

   "I have put it by the staircase," said the elder; "go and get it."

   "My lord," said the slave-girl, "an article which has been touched by
your hand is not to be reclaimed by my mistress." And so she returned
empty-handed.

   "How was it, dear girl?" said Visâkhâ. And she told her.

   "Dear girl, never will I wear an article which my master has touched.
I make him a present of it. Nevertheless, it would be troublesome for my
masters to take care of it. I will sell it, and give them things which
are more suitable. Go fetch it."

   And the slave-girl went and fetched it.

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_475">p. 475</span> | <span class="small">\[Dhp.248<sup>21</sup></span> |

   Visâkhâ did not put it on, but sent for some goldsmiths and had it
appraised.

   "It is worth ninety millions," said they; "and the workmanship is
worth a hundred thousand."

   "Then put the parure in a wagon," said Visâkhâ "and sell it."

   "There is no one who is able to take it at such a price, and a woman
worthy to wear such a parure is difficult to find. For in all the
circuit of the earth only three women have the great creeper parure:
Visâkhâ, the great female lay disciple; the wife of Bandhula, the
general of the Mallas; and Mallikâ, daughter of a treasurer of Benares."

   So Visâkhâ paid the price herself; and, putting ninety millions and a
hundred thousand into a cart, she took the amount to the monastery.

   "Reverend Sir," said she, when she had made her obeisance to The
Teacher, "my master, Ânanda the elder, has touched with his hand my
parure, and from the time he has touched it, it is impossible for me to
wear it again. I have endeavored to sell it, thinking that with the
amount I should get for it, I would give things suitable for priests.
But when I saw there was no one else able to buy it, I made up the price
myself, and have now brought the money with me. Reverend Sir, which one
of the four reliances shall I give?"

   "Visâkhâ, a dwelling-place at the east gate for the congregation of
the priests would be fitting."

   "The very thing, Reverend Sir!"

   And Visâkhâ, with a joyous mind, bought a site for ninety millions,
and with another ninety millions she began constructing a monastery.

   Now one day, as The Teacher at dawn was gazing over the world, he
perceived that a son, Bhaddiya, had been born from heaven into the
family of a treasurer of the city of Bhaddiya, and was competent to
attain to salvation. And after taking breakfast at the house of
Anâthapindika, he directed his steps towards the north gate of the city.
Now it was the custom of The Teacher, if he took alms at the house of
Visâkhâ, to issue forth from the city by the south gate and

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_476">p. 476</span> | <span class="small">\[Dhp.249<sup>13</sup></span> |

lodge at Jetavana monastery. If he took alms at the house of
Anâthapindika, he would issue forth by the east gate, and lodge in
Eastern Park; but if The Blessed One was perceived at sunrise making his
way to the north gate, then people knew that he was setting out on his
travels.

   So when Visâkhâ heard on that day that he had gone in the direction
of the north gate, she hastened to him, and making an obeisance, said,

   "Reverend Sir, are you desirous of going traveling?"

   "Yes, Visâkhâ."

   "Reverend Sir, at this vast expense am I having a monastery built for
you. Reverend Sir, turn back."

   "Visâkhâ, this journey admits not of my turning back."

   "Assuredly," thought Visâkhâ, "The Blessed One has some special
reason in all this." Then she said, "Reverend Sir, in that case, before
you go, command some priest to stay behind who will know how the work
should be done."

   "Visâkhâ take the bowl of anyone you wish." Then Visâkhâ, though fond
of Ânanda, thought of the magical power of the elder, Moggallâna the
Great, and how swiftly the work would progress with him to assist, and
took his bowl.

   The elder then looked at The Teacher.

   "Moggallâna," said The Teacher, "take five hundred priests in your
train and turn back."

   And he did so: and by his supernatural power they would go a distance
of fifty or sixty leagues for logs and stones; and having secured logs
and stones of tremendous size, they would bring them home on the same
day. And they who placed the logs and stones on the carts were not
exhausted, nor did the axles break. And in no long time they had erected
a two-story building on high foundations and approached by steps. The
building contained a thousand apartments,--five hundred apartments being
in the lower story, and the same number in the upper.

   After traveling about for nine months, The Teacher came again to
Sâvatthi; and in these nine months Visâkhâ had put up her building, and
was now at work on the peak, which was

|                                   |                                                  |
|:----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_477">p. 477</span> | <span class="small">\[Dhp.250<sup>6</sup></span> |

intended to hold the water-pots, and was finished in solid, beaten, red
gold.

   And Visâkhâ hearing that The Teacher was proceeding towards Jetavana
monastery, went to meet him; and, conducting him to her monastery, she
exacted of him a promise:

   "Reverend Sir, dwell here for four months with the congregation of
the priests, and I will have the building completed."

   The Teacher consented; and thenceforth she gave alms to The Buddha,
and to the congregation of the priests in the monastery.

   And it came to pass that a certain female friend of Visâkhâ came to
her with a piece of stuff that was worth a thousand pieces of money.

   "Dear friend," said she, "I want to replace some of the
floor-covering in your pavilion, and spread this instead. Tell me a
place in which to spread it."

   "Dear friend, if I were to tell you there was no place left, you
would think, 'She does not want to let me have a place.' But look
through the two floors of the pavilion and the thousand apartments
yourself, and find a place in which to spread it."

   Then the other took the piece of stuff worth a thousand pieces of
money, and went through the building; but finding no stuff there of less
value than hers, she was overcome with grief; for she thought: "I shall
have no share in the merit of this building." And stopping still, she
wept. And Ânanda the elder happened to see her, and said,

   "Why do you weep? And she told him the matter.

   "Let not that trouble you," said the elder; "I will tell you a place
in which to spread it. Make a door-mat of it, and spread it between the
place for washing the feet and the staircase. The priests, after washing
their feet, will wipe them upon the mat before they enter the building:
thus will your reward be great." This spot, it appears, had been
overlooked by Visâkhâ.

   For four months did Visâkhâ give alms in her monastery to The Buddha
and to the congregation which followed him; and at the end of that time
she presented the congregation of

|                                   |                                                                       |
|:----------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_478">p. 478</span> | <span class="small">\[Dhp.250<sup>28</sup>Dhp.230<sup>25</sup></span> |

the priests with stuff for robes, and even that received by the novices
was worth a thousand pieces of money. And of medicines, she gave the
fill of every man's bowl. Ninety millions were spent in this donation.
Thus ninety millions went for the site of the monastery, ninety for the
construction of the monastery, and ninety for the festival at the
opening of the monastery, making two hundred and seventy millions in all
that were expended by her on the religion of The Buddha. No other woman
in the world was as liberal as this one who lived in the house of a
heretic.

   On the day the monastery was completed, when the shadows of eventide
were lengthening, she walked with her children and her children's
children round and round the building, delighted with the thought that
her prayer of a former existence had now attained its complete fruition.
And with a sweet voice, in five stanzas, she breathed forth this solemn
utterance:--

"'O when shall I a mansion give,  
Plastered with mud and stuccoed o'er,  
A pleasing monastery-gift?'--  
O this my prayer is now fulfilled!  

"'O when shall I give household goods,  
Benches and stools to sit upon,  
And bolsters, pillows for the couch?'--  
O this my prayer is now fulfilled!  

"'O when shall I provisions give,  
The ticket-food so pure and good,  
Smothered in broths of various meats?'--  
O this my prayer is now fulfilled!  

"'O when shall I give priestly robes,  
Garments of fine Benares cloth,  
And linen, cotton goods as well?'--  
O this my prayer is now fulfilled!  

"'O when shall I give medicines,  
Fresh butter, butter clarified,  
And honey, treacle, purest oil?'--  
O this my prayer in now fulfilled!"  

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_479">p. 479</span> | <span class="small">\[Dhp.251<sup>18</sup></span> |

   When the priests heard her, they brought word to The Teacher:

   "Reverend Sir, in all this time we have never known Visâkhâ to sing;
but now, surrounded by her children and her children's children, she
walks singing round and round the building. Pray, is her bile out of
order? or has she become mad?"

   "Priests," said The Teacher, "my daughter is not singing; but the
desire of her heart having come to pass, in her delight she breathes
forth a solemn utterance."

   "But when was it, Reverend Sir, she made the prayer?"

   "Priests, will you listen?"

   "Reverend Sir, we will."

   Whereupon he related a tale of ancient times:--

   "Priests, a hundred thousand cycles ago, a Buddha was born into the
world by the name of Padumuttara. His term of life was a hundred
thousand years; his retinue of those in whom depravity had become
extinct was a hundred thousand; his city was Hamsavatî; his father, king
Sunanda; and his mother, queen Sujâtâ. The chief benefactress of this
Teacher, a lay devotee, had obtained the eight boons and held the
position of mother, and used to provide him with the four reliances.
Every evening and morning she used to wait on him at the monastery, and
a certain female friend constantly accompanied her.

   "When this friend saw on what intimate terms she conversed with The
Teacher, and how much she was beloved, she began to consider: 'What do
people do to be beloved by The Buddhas?' And she said to The Teacher:

   "'Reverend Sir, what is this woman to you?'

   "'She is the chief of my benefactresses.'

   "'Reverend Sir, by what means does one thus become chief
benefactress?'

   "'By praying for a hundred thousand world-cycles to become one.'

   "'Reverend Sir, could I become one, if I now made my prayer?'

   "'Assuredly, you could.'

|                                   |                                                   |
|:----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_480">p. 480</span> | <span class="small">\[Dhp.252<sup>11</sup></span> |

   "'In that case, Reverend Sir, come with your hundred thousand priests
and take alms of me for seven days.'

   "The Teacher consented; and for seven days she gave alms of food, and
on the last day stuff for robes. Then she did obeisance to The Teacher,
and, falling at his feet, made her prayer:

   "'Reverend Sir, I do not pray for rule among the gods, or any other
such reward as the fruit of this alms-giving; but that from some Buddha
like yourself I may obtain the eight boons, and have the position of
mother, and be chief of those able to provide the four reliances.'

   "The Teacher looked into the future for a hundred thousand cycles to
see if her prayer would be fulfilled, and said:

   "'At the end of a hundred thousand cycles a Buddha named Gotama shall
arise, and you shall be a female lay disciple of his, and have the name
Visâkhâ. From him you shall obtain the eight boons, and obtain the
position of mother, and become chief of the benefactresses who shall
provide the four reliances.'

   ". . . and after a life of meritorious deeds, she was reborn in the
world of the gods. And continuing to be reborn in the world of the gods
and the world of men, she was born in the time of The Supreme Buddha
Kassapa as the youngest of the seven daughters of Kiki, king of Benares.
In this existence she was called Servant-of-the-Congregation; and having
married, and with her sisters for a long time given alms and done other
meritorious deeds, she fell at the feet of The Supreme Buddha Kassapa,
and prayed: 'At a future time may I hold the position of mother to a
Buddha such as you, and become chief of the female givers of the four
reliances.' Now, after further rebirths in the world of the gods and the
world of men, she has been born in this existence as the daughter of
Dhanañjaya the treasurer, the son of Mendaka the treasurer, and has done
many meritorious deeds for my religion. Thus it is, O priests, that I
say my daughter is not singing, but that, at the realization of her
prayer, she breathes forth a solemn utterance."

   And The Teacher continued his instruction, and said,

|                                   |                                                  |
|:----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------:|
| <span id="page_481">p. 481</span> | <span class="small">\[Dhp.253<sup>6</sup></span> |

   "Priests, just as a skilful garland-maker, if he obtain a large heap
of various kinds of flowers, will go on and on making all manner of
garlands, even so does the mind of Visâkhâ incline to do all manner of
noble deeds." So saying, he pronounced this stanza:

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="5">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd" data-valign="top">
<td>53.</td>
<td>"As flowers in rich profusion piled<br />
Will many a garland furnish forth;<br />
So all the years of mortal man<br />
Should fruitful be in all good works."<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 102. The Buddhist Apocalypse](bits102)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_451">p. 451</span>

<span id="page_451_note_1"></span>[1](#page_451_fr_1) Identical with the
Mendaka of the last selection.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
