[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index)  [Shiite
Texts](../shi)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sal011)  [Next](sal013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

"(11)

Dua-e-Mazkoor

*In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful*

There is no lord but Allah. Again there is no lord but Allah and again

there is no lord but Allah and that there is no lord except Allah. As He

Himself says that there is no lord except Allah as His creatures
testify.

And Allah is great as His creatures have testified it. And Allah is Pure
as

His creatures have glorified Him. And the Praise is for Allah as His

Throne has Praised Him and there is no lord but Allah in the way His

Throne and the things below the throne have testified it. Allah is the

greatest as is testified by His throne and the things below it. And
praise

be to Allah in the manner as He is praised in the heavens and the earth.

I mention the purity of Allah as His angels have glorified Him and there
is

no lord but Allah as His angels have testified it. Allah is great, in
the way

as the angels narrate it. In this manner the Praise is for Allah as His

heavens testify it. Allah is the Greatest as His Throne glorifies and
this

knowledge circles everyone. Praise is for Allah in the way the ocean

prays and all the things in it. And there is no lord but Allah as is
testified

by the ocean and things in it. Praise is for Allah in the manner the

Hereafter and this world and its inhabitants praise Him. And Allah is

greatest as is testified by the Hereafter, this world and its
inhabitants.

Praise is for Allah to such an extent by which He is pleased and is an

adornment for His throne to the extent of eternal happiness and in an

unparallel manner. Praise is for Allah before everything, with
everything

and equal to all the number. Praise if for Allah equal to His verses and
to

His Names, to the number of inhabitants of Heaven and Hell. And there

is no lord but Allah to the extent of the verses and His Names and the

inhabitants of Heaven and Hell. Praise be to Allah, to the extent it

becomes uncountable by imagination or by numbers. Glory be to Allah!

Purified be He to the extent which cannot be measured by strength or by

numbers. And Allah is the greatest to such an extent, which cannot be

imagined by numbers, strength or imagination. Praise is for Allah to the

extent of stars, water in the sea, leaves on the trees and hair on the

head. There is no lord but Allah to the extent of stars, water in the
sea,

leaves on the tree and hair on the head. Praise be to Allah to the

numbers of pebbles, seeds, earth, and jinns and men. Allah is the

greatest to the extent of pebbles, seeds, earth, jinns and men. Glory be

to Allah to the numbers of pebbles, seeds, earth, jinns and men. I wish
to

praise Allah to such an extent, after which there is no praise left in
the

knowledge of the Lord. I say there is no lord but Allah in such a way
that

there is no way left for expressing the oneness of Allah. I say Allah is

greatest in such a way that in the knowledge of Lord there is no other

way of expressing it. I glorify Allah to such an extent and mention His

purity in such a way that there is no glorification left in the
knowledge of

the Lord. Praise is for Allah till the end of the worship, before the

worship and after the worship and there is no lord but He, till the end
of

worship, before the worship and after the worship and Allah is the

greatest which is the extent of worship will remain before and after the

worship and Praise is for Allah equal to the number of all the praises
and

as compared to such examples is manifold times, still this Praise and

Glorification is little for Allah. He is far more great as compared to
the

number of all these glorification and all these are nothing as compared

to Him. And I say, "There is no Power or majesty save Allah" so many

times that to the extent of above mentioned things nay, more than that
in

reality, still it is less for Him. And Allah bless Muhammad (s.a.w.a.)
and

his Progeny to the extent of above-mentioned things. And a request of

repentance and forgiveness from Allah other than Whom there is no

god. He is living and Self-subsisting, this is also equal to the number
of

things mentioned earlier, and I request in His Presence for every sin

which is present in my deeds every disobedience which I have

committed, this repentance is also equal to the number of things

mentioned earlier. O Allah! O the Protector! O the One to give life! O

Great! O the Possessor of Power! O the Possessor of Glory! You are

Pure and High from the associates of the polytheists. O Allah! O the

possessor of Majesty! O the possessor of Grace! O Allah! O Lord of

generosity! O Allah! O the giver of life and the Resurrector on the Day
of

Judgment! O Allah! O Self sufficient! O the highly praised one. O Allah!

O the bestower of bounties! O the responder to prayers! O Allah! O the

most knowledgeable and the present. O Allah! The Forbearer the

Generous! O Allah! The clement the compassionate! O Allah! O the

Concealer of faults! O the rewarder of thankfulness! O the one to be

pleased by the smallest of deeds! O the Concealer of evil deeds! O the

bestower of bounties in abundance! O the forgiver of great sins! O the

one to do what He pleases! O the possessor of victory, power and

majesty! O Allah! O the possessor of greatness! O Allah! O the

possessor of Holiness and exalted! O Allah! O the High and Pure! O the

Great Allah! O the ever-living Allah! O the possessor of Power. O Allah!

O the one to overpower all! O the possessor of pardon! O Allah! O the

One and Unique having no parallel or similarity! O Allah! O the one to

increase and decrease the sustenance! O Allah! The Creator, the

Sustainer! O Allah the One Who gives life! And the guardian of the

Universe! O Allah the Possessor of Grace! O Allah the bestower of

favours and goodness! O Allah the One to accept to good deeds! The

One to have power over all things! O Allah! Lord of the desires! O the

refuge for the one who seeks refuge! O the One nearer to the doers of

good! O the most merciful of all the mercifuls! O the one Who hears the

grievances of the grief stricken! O the bestower of bounties! O the

remover of worries from the grieved! O the averter of the greatest

calamities! O the light is only Your light! In it is the truth of Allah!
O the

Beneficent! By these names I ask of You which are perfect! O Allah! O

Beneficent! I ask in these names which are mighty and wise! O Allah! O

Beneficent! I take the help of these names, which are great and liked
(by

You). O Allah! O Beneficent! I call You by those names in which Your

pleasure is included! O Allah! O Beneficent! Before everything, after

everything and in the measure of everything. Bless Muhammad

(s.a.w.a.) and his Progeny to the extent that no one can understand the

measure except You. Bestow blessings to the extent of number of things

present and to the extent of things mentioned in Your book, which Your

knowledge encompasses, and deal with me by your standards and not

by any standards. I seek from You the necessities of this world and the

Hereafter if Allah wishes and Mercy and blessing of Allah on His

appointed and chosen Muhammad who is the chief of the Prophets and

on his progeny and peace be on them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: His Dua mentioning the Holy Prophet](sal013)
