[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wos07)  [Next](wos09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

### CHAPTER V.

### HEATHEN FABLES ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE FALL OF MAN.

HAVING shown that THE SERPENT, as *an emblem of divinity*, as *a charm*,
as *an oracle*, or as A GOD, entered into the worship of almost every
considerable nation of the ancient world, I proceed to consider what
traditionary evidence to the seduction of our first parents, by the
serpent, is afforded in the remains of their respective mythologies.

In the progress of corrupt religion, whatever was originally a pure
patriarchal tradition became gradually less pure, not only by the
addition of circumstances entirely fabulous, but also by the admixture
of *other patriarchal traditions*, so blended together, that every fable
into which they entered became still more obscure and marvellous. The
inquirer into truth is, therefore, frequently encumbered with the
antecedent

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

necessity of separating fact from fact, before he can hope to extricate
truth from error. The shades are so indistinctly thrown together, that
he must first seek to separate one patriarchal tradition from another,
before he can pronounce, with any degree of precision, where the light
of revelation ends, and the darkness of mythology begins.

But, at the same time, the candid and patient inquirer has the
satisfaction to feel assured that scarcely any leading fable of heathen
mythology is altogether the offspring of a poetical imagination. "Non
*res ipsas* gestas finxerunt poetæ, sed *rebus gestis* addiderunt
quendam colorem," is the shrewd observation of Lactantius <span
id="fr_444"></span>[1](#fn_443); and the more we read, the more
convinced are we of its correctness.

One of the most remarkable of these compound heathen fables is that of
TYPHON. And this has been made subservient to several explanations, more
or less satisfactory as the writer has approached, or receded from, the
only test of truth--the Scriptures.

Bryant and Faber have determined that the

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

fable of Typhon has reference to the deluge: there are, however, other
characteristics which ought not to be overlooked. Of their valuable
information I avail myself cheerfully, in separating one truth from the
fable; but another remains, of far more importance to the individual
interests of mankind, and this also I will endeavour to elucidate.

#### I. TYPHON.

*An Egyptian fable; chiefly preserved by Plutarch, in his dissertation
on Isis and Osiris; noticed also by Hyginus, fab.* 152, *and by
Apollodorus, lib.* i. c. 6.

The fable of Typhon may have been embellished by the traditions of the
deluge; but for its origin we must look higher. All tradition cannot be
supposed to have centered in the deluge; for it is not probable that the
sons and daughters of Noah, who survived the flood, would have been
silent about the stupendous events which preceded it.

The creation of the world and of man; his happiness in paradise, and his
expulsion from

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

it through sin; the cause of this sin, and its consequences; THE SERPENT
TEMPTER and THE "REDEEMING ANGEL <span
id="fr_445"></span>[1](#fn_444),"--would form natural and interesting
subjects for the paternal instruction of these elders to their children.
Is it surprising, then, that their children should preserve as sacred
those oral traditions, from the recital of which they had received both
instruction and amusement; and the remembrance of which, probably,
formed part of their religious service of praise and thanksgiving? Is it
not rather probable that they would themselves transmit them to their
children's children? And if, in the lapse of ages, a poetic imagination,
or a desire to excite astonishment, should envelope these truths in the
robe of fiction, can we wonder at the circumstance? We have much more
reason for wonder that so little fiction, rather than so much, has
obscured the truth.

There are some circumstances interwoven with the attributes of Typhon,
which would lead us to conjecture, that the first interference of this
monster, in mundane affairs, was his

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

seduction of our first parents UNDER THE FORM OF A SERPENT.

Typhon was the EVIL SPIRIT of the Egyptians. Jablonski derives his name
from the two Coptic words, *Theu-ph-ou*, "spiritus-malus:" a derivation
which corresponds with the remark of Plutarch: "The Egyptians commonly
called Typhon Κακὸυ Δαίμονα <span id="fr_446"></span>[1](#fn_445)." The
history of this dæmon will be found to be parallel with that of Satan in
Scripture.

Hyginus informs us, that Typhon was the son of Tartarus (*Hell*) and the
Earth: that *he made war against Jupiter for dominion*, and, being
struck by lightning, was *thrown flaming to the earth*, where Mount Ætna
was placed upon him. Tartarus ex Terrâ procreavit Typhonem, immani
inagnitudine, specieque portentosa, *cui centum capita draconum* ex
humeris errata erant. *Hic Jovem provocavit, si vellet secum de regno
certare*. Jovis fulmine ardenti pectus ejus percussit. Cui cum
flagraret, montem Ætnam, qui est in Siciliâ, super eum imposuit: qui ex
eo adhuc ardere dicitur.--*Hyginus*, fab. 152.

Pindar tells us, that "Typhon, the hundred-headed

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

*enemy of the gods*, lies in Tartarus <span
id="fr_447"></span>[1](#fn_446)."

The war in heaven, *for dominion*, is evidently a version of the
patriarchal tradition recorded by St. Jude, of which a vision was
subsequently revealed to St. John. "There was war in heaven; Michael and
his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought, and his
angels, and prevailed not, neither was their place found any more in
heaven. And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the
Devil and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: *he was cast into the
earth*, and his angels were cast out with him <span
id="fr_448"></span>[2](#fn_447)."

Under the same character, of *a rebel against the gods*, Typhon is
celebrated in Grecian mythology by the name of Typhoeus <span
id="fr_449"></span>[3](#fn_448) and in the Syrian by the name of
Ophioneus. The latter is the same as the serpent-god Ophion or Obion,
whose worship we have traced in the preceding pages.

This remarkable tradition, of "a war in heaven," is preserved also in
the mythologies of the Persians, Hindûs, and Celts.

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

The terrestrial history of Typhon, which Plutarch records, is briefly
this. Being envious of his brother, Osiris, he put him to death, placed
the dismembered body in a chest, and set him adrift on the Nile. But
after some time Osiris was either restored to life, or recovered by his
wife, Isis, in a mutilated state; for the fable admits of either
conclusion.

The principal features in this fable are,

1st, The envy of Typhon.

2dly, The murder of his brother in consequence.

3dly, His brother's restoration to life by means of his wife.

It is extremely probable that, in this short fable, *three* independent
patriarchal truths, at least, have been mixed together: the murder of
Abel through the jealousy of Cain; the preservation of Noah in the ark;
and the fall and redemption of man. The first is sufficiently obvious;
the second has been adopted by those writers who look upon Typhon as a
personification of the deluge; and the third I will endeavour to
establish by such proofs as have occurred to me in the ordinary course
of reading.

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

We are assured by the author of the Book of Wisdom, that "through envy
of the devil came death into the world <span
id="fr_450"></span>[1](#fn_449):" and our Lord informs us, that the
devil "was a murderer from the beginning <span
id="fr_451"></span>[2](#fn_450)." This, of course, alludes more
particularly to the *spiritual* murder of Adam; but his loss of
immortality, in consequence of following the suggestions of the devil,
might very naturally form the foundation of a fable, in which things
spiritual would be accommodated to things temporal, in accordance with
the genius and practice of mythology. All that we can therefore
reasonably expect, in tracing an agreement between history and fable, is
a common cause assigned by each to a fact which each professes to
record; and a few leading characteristics, relative to the *transaction*
and *the agents*, common to both the historical and mythological
tradition.

In the history, and in the fable, "*Envy*" was the cause of the
spiritual or the carnal murder. *The same being*, who made "a war in
heaven," and was cast down "from thence upon the earth," was the agent
in each: and in either case he is represented in a *dracontic form*. The

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

devil deceived Eve under the figure of a serpent: such a figure was also
attributed to Typhon, at least in part; and a *partial* resemblance,
such as this, is more satisfactory than a complete similitude. Typhon is
a monster with a human head, and dracontic arms and legs. According to
Apollodorus <span id="fr_452"></span>[1](#fn_451), "*an hundred
serpents' heads issued from his hands, and his legs 'terminated in two
enormous snakes*." Hyginus tells us, that "*an hundred serpents' heads
issued from his shoulders*." The figure, therefore, was partly *human*,
and partly *dracontic*; and in such we should have expected that the
genius of mythology would clothe the serpent-tempter. For the tradition
of the serpent, *speaking with a human voice*, would very naturally
adorn the serpent of the fable with *a human body* <span
id="fr_453"></span>[2](#fn_452).

The being, therefore, who deprived Adam and Osiris of life, was THE EVIL
SPIRIT, and he was corporeally united with the serpent.

It should not be concealed, however, that Jablonski does not think that
the Egyptian

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Typhon was the same as the Greek Typhoeus, to
whom the above description rather belongs. He says that Typhon was not a
monster, human and dracontic. There can be little doubt however, but
that the Grecian fable, and even name of Typhoeus, is borrowed from the
Egyptian fable and name of Typhon. For if *Typhon* be derived, as
Jablonski contends, from *Theu-ph-ou*, *Typhoeus* comes as near, or
nearer, to the root. I conceive the fact to be simply *this*: that the
Egyptian fable has been divided into *two* by the Greeks, and that
whatever attribute of *Typhon* is wanting in *Typhoeus*, is to be found
in PYTHON.

The fall of Adam is again graphically described in the sculptured images
of his counterpart Osiris, who is sometimes represented *in the midst of
the volumes of a serpent*, as we learn from Montfaucon.

So far, then, the history and the fable coincide. We can, however,
pursue the parallel a little farther. The fall of Adam being produced by
the agency of the serpent, his recovery was to be effected by "the
woman's seed." This part of the truth is expressed in the fable by the
restoration of Osiris to life through the instrumentality of his wife
Isis,

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

and the vanquishing of Typhon by *their son* ORUS <span
id="fr_454"></span>[1](#fn_453). It is a singular part of the fable,
that Osiris, when restored to life, was restored in a *mutilated
condition*; which may be an allusion, not obscure, to the *imperfection*
of the redeemed man, compared with his perfection before the fall. The
nature of the imperfection mentioned in the fable, may have been
suggested by a corrupt tradition of the first consequences of the fall,
as stated in Genesis iii. 7. Plutarch informs us, that when Orus was
contending with Typhon, Thueris, the concubine of the latter, went over
to the former, but *was pursued by a serpent*, which was, however,
destroyed by the attendants of Orus. So that throughout the whole of
this confused, but remarkable legend, THE SERPENT seems to be most
singularly involved, as allied to TYPHON.

Putting all these facts together, I cannot but be persuaded that the
original characters of the fable were historical persons, and that these
were no other than ADAM and EVE, represented by OSIRIS and ISIS; the
SERPENT-TEMPTER, by TYPHON; and the victorious ''WOMAN'S SEED," by ORUS.
A conclusion

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

which is corroborated by the remarkable fact, that ORUS is considered by
the Greek writers to have been the same as APOLLO <span
id="fr_455"></span>[1](#fn_454); and Apollo, it is well known, was the
destroyer of the serpent Python, *which had persecuted his mother
Latona*. Whether with Gale, therefore, we derive ORUS from אור, (LIGHT);
or with Jablonski, from the Coptic *U-er*, (THE CAUSE), the result will
be the same; a correspondence with a *title* or an *attribute* of the
"woman's seed," as "*a Light which lighteth every man that cometh into
the world* <span id="fr_456"></span>[2](#fn_455);" or as "*the Word by
whom all things were made, and without whom was not any thing made that
was made* <span id="fr_457"></span>[3](#fn_456)."

Orus, after his victory over Typhon, is said to have reigned "happily,"
and was *the last of* the Egyptian dæmon kings <span
id="fr_458"></span>[4](#fn_457); thus in every respect fulfilling the
attributes of THE MESSIAH, who, having bruised the serpent's head, shall
reign for ever and ever, when "all enemies are put under his feet."

Further, it is to be observed, that Plutarch calls Typhon "*an enemy* to
Isis;" affirming that

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

he derived his name from the word τετυφωμένος, for, being *puffed up*
through ignorance and error, he *destroys and annuls* τὸν ἱερὸν
λόγον--THE HOLY WORD--which she collects, and arranges, and teaches to
those who are initiated into her worship," &c. <span
id="fr_459"></span>[1](#fn_458) What is this but a Pagan version of the
Scripture truth, that "*the serpent beguiled Eve through his
subtilty* <span id="fr_460"></span>[2](#fn_459);" and that "*he who
taketh the word* out of the hearts of men, lest they should believe and
be saved <span id="fr_461"></span>[3](#fn_460)," is THE DEVIL?

Plutarch, with the vanity so conspicuous in Grecian writers of referring
the origin of every thing to their native country, says, that *Isis*, as
well as Typhon, is a word of Greek derivation, from ἴσημι--scio. The
error is too preposterous to require a serious refutation--suffice it to
say, that the Greek *language*, *people*, *theology*, and *manners*,
were, for the most part, derived from Egyptian colonies. The derivation
of *Isis*, approved by Jablonski, is I-SI, *abundantia permanans*; from
a notion that Isis was the personification of nature. This idea is
suggested by the following inscription, copied by Plutarch

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

from a temple of Isis at Sais: "*I am all that hath been, and is, and
shall be; and my veil no mortal hath ever removed*."

But we may observe, that the Isis of Egypt is to be recognised in the
ISI of Hindûstan <span id="fr_462"></span>[1](#fn_461): the name of her
consort is ISA. May not these two names have been originally derived
from איש and; אשה, *the names of Adam and Eve* in the second chapter of
Genesis? The transposition of the words does not militate against the
hypothesis--such permutations being allowed to mythology. These words
are derived from the root ישה, signifying *abstract existence* <span
id="fr_463"></span>[2](#fn_462)--an idea which is not repugnant to that
of I-si, *abundantia permanans*. The transition of ideas from "the
mother of the human race," to the mother of the terrestrial globe--from
the "abundantia permanans" of the habitable world, to the "abundantia
permanans" of the universe, is in accordance with the genius of
mythology.

When we are informed, therefore, by Faber <span
id="fr_464"></span>[3](#fn_463), and other learned men, that Osiris and
Isis are the CREATOR OF THE UNIVERSE, under the mystical character of
husband and wife--"The

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Great Creator being sometimes esteemed in
mythology, the animating soul, and sometimes the husband of the
universe; while the universe, on the other hand, is sometimes reckoned
the *body* and sometimes the *wife* of the Intelligent Being,"--(one
theory representing the union of spirit and matter, under the idea of
soul and body; and the other under the notion of conjugal unity)--we are
not deprived of the hypothesis that *Osiris and Isis were originally
Adam and Eve*. On the contrary, we may conjecture that the *intimate
union* of Adam and Eve, and *the mysterious creation of the latter from
the former*, might have suggested the notion of the father and mother of
the universe in mystical union and separation. It is but the
substitution of the father and mother of *all things* for the father and
mother of *all men*.

One of the epithets by which Isis was known in Egypt was *Muth*, which
Plutarch (*rightly*, according to Jablonski,) interprets "*Mother*." The
word *Muth*, מות, in Hebrew, signifies *death*; and the coincidence is
not a little remarkable, when we remember that it was EVE who introduced
"death" into the world.

The Phœnicians taught that MUTH was a

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

man; the son of Saturn and Rhea (or OPS, *the serpent*.) The words of
Eusebius are these:--"He consecrates his son Muth, whom he had by Rhea;
whom the Phœnicians called DEATH, or PLUTO <span
id="fr_465"></span>[1](#fn_464)." DEATH, the offspring of THE SERPENT,
is thus an epithet to designate the woman "by whom came death!" Can
there be a closer affinity between truth and fable, or a more
illustrative commentary of mythology upon Scripture? It is true, that
for this illustration we have had recourse to Phœnician and Egyptian
fable; but it should be remembered that Thoth, the author of Egyptian
learning, was likewise the founder of Phœnician theology.

"*Muth*," signifying in the Egyptian language "Mother," is probably the
parent of our English word expressing the same idea: and if ever there
was a period in the primitive language <span
id="fr_466"></span>[2](#fn_465), in which the word *Muth* signified both
*mother* and *death*, how elegant is the combination, and how expressive
its simplicity! "Mother" is a sound which brings with it the remembrance
of affectionate solicitude from the

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

cradle to the grave; but accustomed as we are to its connexion with the
former, how little are we sensible of its relation to the latter! how
little do we imagine that from her who gave us *life* we inherit
*death*.

Having made the above observations, I do not pretend to be ignorant that
Osiris and Isis were the names under which the personified deities of
the sun and moon were worshipped in Egypt; for I do not consider that
this admitted fact militates in any degree against my hypothesis. The
sun was the great god of the heathen world, and the moon was considered
as his *wife*. So that the sun and moon of Egyptian worship, were THE
CREATOR *in the mystical character of husband and wife*, under which he
was expressed by many symbols and names. The sun and the moon; the male
and female serpent; Osiris and Isis;--are in turn employed to denote the
Intelligent Being, the Maker of all things, in conjugal unity; and it
does not follow, that because *two* of these terms happen sometimes to
be united to express *two others*, which are expressive of a common
object, that therefore they *lose* their original character,

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

which is thus momentarily merged. *Osiris* and *Isis*, then, do not
forfeit their original representation of *Adam* and *Eve*, when combined
to express the *sun* and *moon*, which, independently convey the same
idea of the mystical Creator; any more than the male and female serpent,
though typical of Osiris and Isis, and of the sun and moon, lose their
original typification of *the serpent in paradise*, by being employed to
represent the abstract Deity.

OSIRIS and ISIS, then, are ADAM and EVE; and, though in the fable which
records their history, other patriarchal truths may be confounded, yet I
think there can be no doubt of its involving likewise the events in
paradise. I have brought forward a few points of singular coincidence,
and learning and ingenuity may find more. For such is the nature of
heathen mythology, that if, under the heap of fabulous rubbish, we can
perceive the least sparkling of a gem of truth, we may confidently
affirm that the gem is not accidental, but that the rubbish has been
heaped upon it.

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

#### II. PYTHON.

*A Grecian fable--noticed by Hyginus, Fab*. 140, *Ovid, Strabo,
Pausanias, and Lucan*.

"Python, Terræ filius, Draco ingens. Hic ante Apollinem, ex oraculo in
monte Parnasso responsa dare solitus erat. *Huic ex Latonæ partu
interitus erat fato futurus*. . . . . . . Python ubi sensit Latonam ex
Jove gravidam esse, *persequi cœpit ut eam interficeret*. . . . . .
Latona *oleam tenens* parit Apollinem et Dianam. . . . . . Apollo
Pythonem sagittis interfecit." *Hyginus, Fab*. 140.

In this fable we recognise some remarkable features corresponding with
the Fall and Redemption of mankind: *the persecution of the woman by the
serpent*; his *predicted* destruction by "the woman's seed;" *the olive
branch of peace* held in the hand of the mother who gave birth to "the
Prince of Peace;" and, what is not the least significant portion of the
legend, *the heavenly extraction* of the promised Avenger, uniting the
*divine* nature of the Father with the *human* nature of the mother.

In the history of Python, his *antiquity* is to

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

be observed. He was produced by the slime which was left upon the earth
at the subsiding of the deluge <span id="fr_467"></span>[1](#fn_466).
This was an origin naturally enough attributed to him by the poets; for
in heathen mythology the deluge was supposed to have been caused by the
evil spirit, of whose dracontic form the legend of Python preserved the
memorial. "Plutarch supposed that the serpent Python typified
*destruction*; Adamantius conceived that he represented *a race of
demons to whom dragons and serpents perform the part of ministering
attendants*. Pierius teaches us, that by the serpent the ancients
symbolized *destruction*, *misfortune*, and *terror*; and Diodorus
Siculus asserts, that *a serpent twisted in spiral volumes was the
hieroglyphic of evil* <span id="fr_468"></span>[2](#fn_467). All these
symbolizations of Python intimate his connexion with the evil spirit.

The whole story of Python and Apollo is surprisingly parallel with that
of the serpent-tempter and his conqueror, CHRIST. "It was ordained,"
says Cleombrotus, (Plutarch *de defectu* Orac. cited by Gesner, p. 92,)
"that he

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

who would slay Python, must be, not merely banished from the temple ten
years, but even *depart from the world; whence he should return* after
nine revolutions of the great year, *expiated* and *purified*: wherefore
he should obtain the name of Phœbus--i.e. *pure*; and obtain possession
of the oracle at Delphi."

Here is intimated, in terms not very obscure, the *death* of "the
woman's seed," who should "bruise the serpent's head;" his *perfect
righteousness*; and his *second advent*, as the Lord of the universal
temple.

2\. THE DRAGON OF THE HESPERIDES.--*Hyginus, Fab.*
30*.--Apollodorus--Ovid Met. Hesiod, &c*.

That the events in paradise must have left a deep and indelible
impression of their reality upon the minds of mankind, is apparent from
the *number* and *mutual independence* of the fables into which they
enter. The dragon which kept the garden of the Hesperides forms another
legend allusive to the paradisiacal serpent; but it relates more
particularly to the victory of the Redeemer. The garden of the
Hesperides, and its forbidden fruit, have long been considered as the
mythological memorials of the

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

garden and the fruit of Eden: the dragon, as the representative of the
serpent-tempter; and Hercules, as the triumphant woman's seed." But the
perverseness of paganism, having, in this instance, converted the woman
into a goddess, converted likewise the seducing serpent into a guardian
minister. Still, however, there are traces sufficiently strong, of the
affinity which the fable bears to the truth. The dragon, *the offspring
of Typhon* <span id="fr_469"></span>[1](#fn_468), was slain by Hercules,
the son of Jupiter and Alcmena; that is, by a hero *uniting in his
person the divine and human natures*. Being a servant of Juno, the slain
dragon was translated into a constellation of the northern hemisphere,
where he appears, in astronomical mythology, between the greater and
lesser bear. Hercules is depicted upon the sphere as *pressing the
dragon's head with his left foot*--"Sinistro autem toto caput draconis
opprimere conatur <span id="fr_470"></span>[2](#fn_469)"--while the
mouth of the dragon is represented in the act of "*bruising his heel*."

Another version of the fable is, that this dragon, in the war of the
giants against the

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

gods was opposed to Minerva, who "hurled him, contorted as he was, to
the skies, and fixed him to the axis of the heavens <span
id="fr_471"></span>[1](#fn_470)'."

It is obvious, that in these two versions of the legend, the two great
events in the history of Satan--his destruction by the woman's seed, and
his overthrow by the archangel--are described. A proof that this
celestial dragon was a representation of the serpent Satan, may be seen
in Job xxvi. 13, as illustrated by the Septuagint. Speaking of the
omnipotence of God, the prophet says, "By his spirit he hath garnished
the heavens: his hand hath formed THE CROOKED SERPENT:" which expression
is thus most remarkably paraphrased by the Septuagint. "By his hand he
has slain THE APOSTATE SERPENT <span id="fr_472"></span>[2](#fn_471)."

There can be no doubt, therefore, but that the seventy-two translators
of the Hebrew Scriptures identified the dragon of the fable with the
evil spirit who "kept not his first estate."

That Hercules was a personification of the Messiah, has been shown by
several writers: but I do not recollect to have seen it observed, that
his history is most surprisingly interwoven

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

with stories of *serpents vanquished by his arm*, at different periods
of his life. His first act in childhood was to strangle *two serpents*
in the cradle. His second labour was the destruction of the Lernæan
*Hydra*, and the clearing of the neighbourhood of Argos from *serpents*.
And his consummating glory, the conquest of the *dragon* which guarded
the golden fruit in the garden of the Hesperides. In his combat with
Geryon, he slew a *dragon*; and in the wars of the giants against
Jupiter, a monster, whose human body terminated in *serpent-legs* <span
id="fr_473"></span>[1](#fn_472): while, to denote his connexion with the
mystic serpent, he bore upon his shield the Ophite hierogram of THE
SERPENT AND CIRCLE <span id="fr_474"></span>[2](#fn_473).

All these coincidences can hardly have arisen from the unmeaning
imagination of mythologists. The appearance of Satan in a dracontic form
is clearly recognised in the fable of the dragon of the Hesperides; and
his dialogue with the woman seems to be remembered in the traditionary
property attributed to this dragon--ἐχρῆτο δὲ φωναῖς παντοίαις--so says
Apollodorus <span id="fr_475"></span>[3](#fn_474):--"*He used all hinds
of voices*;"--of which, in

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

accordance with the genius of mythology, we may suppose that the human
voice was one.

To the same events there is an allusion in Plato <span
id="fr_476"></span>[1](#fn_475), who, discoursing of the primitive
condition of mankind, informs us, that at that time "*they lived naked,
in a state of happiness*, and had *an abundance of fruits*, which were
produced *without the labour of agriculture*; and that *men and beasts
could then converse together*. But these things," he says, we must pass
over *until there appear* SOME ONE *meet to interpret them to us*." Here
is evidently a fragment of an original tradition of Adam in Paradise, in
a state of happy innocence; and not an obscure recollection of the
conversation of Eve with the serpent. For the philosopher confesses that
the tradition *involves a mystery*; and intimates that there must come
*some highly-gifted person into the world to elucidate it*.

It is not then too much to assume, that in this relic of tradition are
involved and confused--*the state of man in paradise*; *his fall through
the serpent*; and *his future and final redemption*.

3\. The conversation of Eve with the serpent,

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

and the opening of her eyes in consequence, may be detected under the
fables of "Melampus," and "Helenus and Cassandra;" who were all supposed
to have had *an insight into futurity*, by means of *serpents*. Melampus
having preserved two snakes from destruction, was one day asleep beneath
an oak, when the reptiles crept up and licked his ears. When he awoke
from sleep, he found himself able to understand the chirping of birds;
and discovered, moreover, that he was *gifted with prophecy*.

Helenus and Cassandra were asleep in the temple of Apollo <span
id="fr_477"></span>[1](#fn_476), when they acquired the power of
prophecy--"the passages of their senses being cleansed by the tongues of
serpents." The same, says the scholiast on Euripid, *Hecuba*, that
"serpents approaching and licking their ears, made them so sharp of
hearing, that they alone, of all men, could understand the counsels of
the gods, and became very excellent prophets <span
id="fr_478"></span>[2](#fn_477)." To these we may add the case of
Plutus, mentioned by Aristophanes, p. 76. *Two serpents* licking the
eyelids

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

of this personage, who was *blind*, restored him to eyesight, and made
his eyes "more than humanly acute <span
id="fr_479"></span>[1](#fn_478)."

Those who *ate serpents' flesh* were also supposed to acquire the gift
of understanding the languages of the brute creation--consult
Philostratus de vitâ Apollonii, lib. iii. c. 3,--wherein he says, that
the Paracæ, a people of India, are said to have "understood the thoughts
and languages of animals, by eating the heart and liver of serpents."
The same author (lib. i. c. 14) says the same thing of the Arabians.

4\. The story of Ceres and Proserpine is evidently a corruption of the
events in paradise. Proserpine is deceived by Jupiter in the form of *a
dragon*, or *great serpent*; but the prurient imagination of the Greek
mythologists gave a colour to the tale suited to their licentious
superstition. Subsequently, Pluto, *the god of hell*, becomes enamoured
of Proserpine, and *carries her off with him to Tartarus*. Her mother
Ceres obtains permission to see her, and is carried thither in a car
drawn by *serpents*. For "*Jupiter*," in the first instance, substitute
"*Pluto*," and the story will be scarcely fabulous.

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The ruler of hell will then appear as first
seducing the woman under the form of a serpent; and then carrying her
away to hell. The fall of Eve, and the consequence of that fall--eternal
death--might very easily be converted into such a fable. The connexion
of the *serpent* with all that goes to Tartarus, is not a little
remarkable. *Serpents* drew Ceres, and the bite of a *serpent* sent
Eurydice to hell; while Mercury escorts every soul to the realms of
Pluto, with the *serpentine* caduceus in his hand <span
id="fr_480"></span>[1](#fn_479). The transformation of heathen deities
into *serpents*, for the purpose of deceiving women, is of constant
occurrence in mythology, and alludes to the deception of Eve by A
SPIRITUAL BEING, who assumed for that purpose the dracontic form.

5\. Though mythology has preserved more memorials of the seduction of
Eve than that of Adam; yet the fall of Adam is not without its witness
in heathen fable. Such a witness is the story of the deception of SATURN
by his wife OPS. Saturn was deceived by OPS, who gave

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

him a stone to eat instead of his children, as Adam was deceived by his
wife, who induced him to eat the forbidden fruit. The character of
Saturn involves many particulars, both of Adam and of Noah; so that in
"the father of the golden age" we recognize at once the first and second
father of mankind. This confusion of times and characters is frequent in
mythology, for want of an authentic history of the period which
intervened between the Fall and the Deluge. It is the natural result of
tradition supplying the place of written documents, when the
discriminating power of the true religion is withdrawn or rejected. In
the fable before us, there is a singular confusion between *the woman*
and *the serpent*, such as could not have occurred but by corrupting the
truth: and on that account we may consider it as one of the most
valuable records of heathen mythology. The name of the wife and deceiver
of Saturn is Rhea, or *Ops*--that is, OPH, the SERPENT-GOD of antiquity.
The *deception* is therefore remembered, and the *agents* in the
transaction; but true religion having withdrawn her discriminating
light, the truth is discerned only "as through a glass, darkly:" and in
the dimness, the serpent being

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

confounded with the woman, invests her at once with his name and his
power. Saturn is deceived by a *serpent-wife*. In the *name of the
stone*, also, which was devoured by the deceived husband, is preserved a
memorial of the real author of the Fall. This stone is called ABADIR,
the signification of which may be "SERPENS-DOMINUS-SOL."

The ABADIR-stone was regarded as the symbol of the solar deity, whose
most favourite emblem was THE SERPENT; and *as such* assumed a conical
figure to represent a sun's ray. The historical facts are sufficiently
confused to create an agree-able fable; and the fable retains sufficient
marks of its origin to show that it is a corruption of historical facts.

#### III. AHRIMAN.

*A Persian tradition, preserved in the Zendavesta, from which Faber
derives the following account*.

1\. "After the world had been created in the course of *five* successive
periods, man himself is said to have been formed during a *sixth*. The
first of the human species was compounded of a man and a hull; and this
mixed being was

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

the commencement of all generations. *For some time after his production
was a season of great innocence and happiness*; and the man-bull himself
resided in an elevated region which the deity had assigned to him. At
last an EVIL ONE, denominated AHRIMAN, *corrupted the world*. After
having dared *to visit heaven*, he descended to the earth, and *assumed
the form of a serpent*. The man-bull was poisoned by his venom, and died
in consequence of it. Meanwhile AHRIMAN threw the whole universe into
confusion; for that enemy of good mingled himself with every thing,
appeared everywhere, and sought to do mischief both above and below. His
machinations produced a general corruption; and so deeply was the earth
and every element tainted by his malignity, that the purifying ablution
of a GENERAL DELUGE became necessary to wash out the inveterate stain of
evil <span id="fr_482"></span>[1](#fn_481)."

In this legend we have, in fact, *but one fabulous circumstance*--the
compound character of the first man: all the rest is a correct picture
of the Fall, and of its consequence--*corruption through Satanic
agency*; until the waters of the

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

deluge checked the progress, but left untouched the seat, of evil, which
could only be "washed white" in the blood of "the Lamb slain from the
foundation of the world."

2\. The "war in heaven" is also remembered in Persian mythology, and
appears, as in the fables of all other Gentiles, in the celestial signs.
"The Polar Dragon" they denominated, (according to Dr. Hyde,)
AZACHA.--"The serpent who devours men and beasts <span
id="fr_483"></span>[1](#fn_482)" The contention of the Archangel with
Satan is probably shadowed out in the hierogram of the two serpents,
representing the good and evil genius contending for the mundane egg,
the symbol of the universe. The constellation *serpentarius*, to which
Ahriman was exalted under the name of Azacha, is described in the hand
of a human figure called Ophiuchus, which is the same as the Ophioneus
of Syrian mythology, the rebel against the gods.

#### IV. THE ARABIAN TRADITION.

Respecting the seduction of our first parents, by the serpent, the
Arabians have a tradition to

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

the following effect:--"That the devil, offering to get into Paradise to
tempt Adam, was not admitted by the guard; whereupon he begged of all
the animals, one after another, to carry him, that he might speak to
Adam and his wife; but they all refused, except the serpent, who took
him between two of his teeth, and so introduced him <span
id="fr_484"></span>[1](#fn_483)."

Hence probably was borrowed the rabbinical conceit, that "when Sammael
(*i.e.* the devil) wished to deceive Eve, he entered Paradise riding
upon a serpent, who was at that time shaped something like a camel <span
id="fr_485"></span>[2](#fn_484)."

#### V. CRISHNA.

*A tradition of the Brahmins of Hindûstan*.

The two sculptures of CRISHNA *suffering*, and CRISHNA *triumphant*, of
which beautiful engravings are given by Maurice <span
id="fr_486"></span>[3](#fn_485), are evident records of the fall and
redemption of man. In the former, the god (a beautiful youthful figure,)
is represented enfolded by an

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

enormous SERPENT, *who bites his heel*; in the latter, the god is
represented as *trampling upon the serpent's head*.

The story of Crishna is very similar to that of Hercules in Grecian
mythology, the serpent forming a prominent feature in both. He conquers
a *dragon*, into which the Assoor Aghe had transformed himself to
swallow him up <span id="fr_487"></span>[1](#fn_486). He defeats also
Kalli Naga, (*the black or evil spirit with a thousand heads*,) who,
placing himself in the bed of the river Jumna, poisoned the stream, so
that *all the companions* of Crishna, and his *cattle*, who tasted of
it, *perished*. He overcame Kalli Naga *without arms*, and *in the form
of a child*. The serpent twisted himself about the body of Crishna, but
the god tore off his heads, one after the other, and trampled them under
his feet. Before he had completely destroyed Kalli Naga, the wife and
children of the monster (serpents also,) came and besought him to
release their relative. Crishna took pity on them, and, releasing. Kalli
Naga, said to him, Begone quickly *into the abyss*; this place is not
proper for thee.

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Since I have engaged with thee*, thy name shall
remain through all the period of time: and devatars and men shall
henceforth *remember thee without dismay*." So the serpent, with his
wife and children, went into the abyss, and *the water which had been
infected by his poison became pure and wholesome* <span
id="fr_488"></span>[1](#fn_487).

At another period of his history we discover Crishna destroying the
dæmon Sanchanaga, *the serpent-king of Egypt*, and his army of
*snakes* <span id="fr_489"></span>[2](#fn_488). Crishna was *vulnerable
only in the sole of his foot* <span id="fr_490"></span>[3](#fn_489).
Similarly the hero Achilles was vulnerable only in the *heel*. The idea
was probably borrowed from the tradition of "the woman's seed," whose
"heel should be bruised" by the serpent Satan.

In corroboration of this inference we may adduce No. CLIV. of the
Etruscan Vases, described in the Canino catalogue, in the Archæologia,
vol. xxiii. p. 140. Here is represented the abduction of Thetis by
Peleus. The goddess is defended by *a serpent*. The connection, to say
the least, is curious, and may have arisen from some garbled tradition
of the *woman*, the *serpent*,

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

and her human-divine son, who was only vulnerable in the *heel*.

The singular agreement of the history of CRISHNA with that of CHRIST,
has driven sceptics to the conclusion, that the whole fable of the
former was grafted upon Hindû mythology by the votaries of the latter,
who first embraced Christianity in India. The only plausible ground for
such a conclusion is the similarity of sound between "Crishna" and
"Christ." But they, who argue upon this accidental resemblance, forget
that the word "CHRIST" is purely *Greek*, and that the Apostles, being
*Jews*, were not likely to talk of the Messiah by his Grecian
appellation, in a country of Hindûs. It was much more likely that they
would have preached JESUS, that word being one in their native language:
and yet the word JESUS is not interwoven with Hindû mythology.

In the traditions of the wars of Crishna and Budh, the *eagle* of the
former is represented as pursuing the *serpent* of the latter, to
recover the *books of science and religion* with which he had fled <span
id="fr_491"></span>[1](#fn_490). The same serpent is also said to have

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

carried off Ella the daughter of Ichswaca the son of Manu, and so
provoked the hostility of Crishna.

The mythological connection of the Serpent with *knowledge* is
remarkable. Col. Tod observes that "it is a singular fact that in every
country THE SERPENT is the medium of communicating knowledge. The
*Takshacs*, *Nagas*, or *Serpents*, introduced letters into India <span
id="fr_492"></span>[1](#fn_491)."

#### VI. THE TEUTONIC FABLES.

In the Teutonic mythology the assumption of the serpentine form by the
devil is poetically described by representing THE GREAT SERPENT as an
emanation from the evil spirit LOKE.

In the rebellion of Loke against the universal father, the serpent being
overcome was thrown down into the ocean, where he encompasses the whole
earth with his folds.

The evil principle of the Scandinavians is called in the Edda--"THE
CALUMNIATOR OF THE GODS; THE GRAND CONTRIVER OF DECEITS AND FRAUDS; THE
REPROACH OF GODS AND MEN." "He is beautiful in figure, but his mind is
evil,

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

and his inclinations inconstant. Three monsters emanate from this evil
being: the wolf Fenris, THE SERPENT Midgard, and HELA, or DEATH. All
three are enemies to the gods, who, after various struggles, have
chained the wolf till the last day, when he shall break loose and devour
the sun. The serpent has been cast into the sea, where he shall remain
*until he is conquered by the god* THOR: and *Hela shall be banished
into the lower regions* <span id="fr_493"></span>[1](#fn_492)."

This intimate connexion, between the EVIL SPIRIT, THE SERPENT, and
DEATH, immediately suggests the conclusion, that the whole legend is but
the original patriarchal tradition fabulized.

"Thor was esteemed A MIDDLE DIVINITY--A MEDIATOR BETWEEN GOD AND MAN. He
is said to have *bruised the head of the great serpent* with his mace.
It was further believed of him, that in his final engagement with the
same serpent he would beat him to the earth and slay him; but that the
victory would be obtained *at the expense of his own life*, for that he
himself would be suffocated by the floods of poison

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

vomited out of the mouth of the noxious reptile <span
id="fr_494"></span>[1](#fn_493)."

The superstition of "the serpent in the sea" was known to the Chinese,
as we observed in the chapter on the Serpent-worship of China. But it
was, doubtless, at one time, a very general superstition among the
heathen, for we find it mentioned by Isaiah, chap. xxvii. 1--"In that
day the Lord, with his sore and great and strong sword shall punish
Leviathan, the piercing serpent, even Leviathan that CROOKED SERPENT:
and he shall slay THE DRAGON THAT IS IN THE SEA <span
id="fr_495"></span>[2](#fn_494)."

The prophet here represents, as I conceive, the triumph of the Messiah
over Satan, who is pre-eminently THE SERPENT; and who, through

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

the blindness of idolatry, had been elevated into a constellation; or,
through the influence of tradition corruptly remembered, had been
clothed with the attributes of the author of the deluge. The Eastern
nations, more particularly, adored him under the former; the Northern
under the latter character. The prophecy of Isaiah may denote the
triumph of the Messiah over *both*, in the conversion of these people to
the knowledge of his gospel.

It is worthy of observation, that in Scandinavia the serpent rarely (I
believe *never*) arrives at such a size as to become a formidable enemy
to an unarmed man. Why then, should he be represented as symbolical of
the great enemy of God and man? In the absence of every other reasonable
hypothesis to account for this phenomenon, we must attribute the
connexion of the Teutonic serpent with the evil spirit, and the notion
of his natural hostility to the human race to the original tradition,
preserved and handed down by the patriarchs after the flood, and
conveyed by their descendants to the remotest corner of the globe.

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

#### VII.

Hence the superstition in MEXICO and PERU, where the serpent was adored
with the most revolting worship, and where even the memory of the fall
of man by the instrumentality of the serpent was preserved.

Baron Humboldt, in his "*Researches concerning the Antiquities of
America*," gives an engraving of a very interesting hieroglyphic
painting of the Aztecks (the original possessors of Mexico) which is
preserved in the Vatican; and which, if genuine, is decisive of the long
disputed question, "whether or not the Mexicans retained any tradition
of the fall of man."

In this painting is described a female in conversation with a serpent
who is erect. This female, we are assured, is called, by the Mexicans,
"*woman of our flesh*," and is considered as "THE MOTHER OF THE HUMAN
RACE." She is always represented with a great serpent <span
id="fr_496"></span>[1](#fn_495). The serpent represented in the company
of 'the mother of men' is the GENIUS OF EVIL; and is also described as
'crushed,' and sometimes

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

cut to pieces, by the great spirit Teotl <span
id="fr_497"></span>[1](#fn_496)."

In two of the paintings, preserved by M. Aglio <span
id="fr_498"></span>[2](#fn_497), is seen a figure *destroying a great
serpent* by smiting him *on the head* with a sword. In one of these
pictures the figure is *human*, in the other a GOD.

A similar, but still more expressive, painting occurs in plate 74 of the
Borgian Collection <span id="fr_499"></span>[3](#fn_498) in which we
distinguish a deity in human form contending with a dragon. The god is
victorious, and in the act of thrusting a sword into *the dragon's
head*, while, singular to relate, the dragon has *bitten off his foot at
the heel!* 

The serpent, or dragon, are also, frequently seen, either as symbolical
of the months, or of the signs of the zodiac. In one corner of two of
these paintings, in vol. ii. is a dragon *swallowing a man*. There are
also representations of *gods encircled in the folds of a serpent*; and,
indeed, so many, and so various are these dracontic emblems, that the
most casual observer would discover, at a glance, that *serpents* and
*dragons* were grand symbols of the Mexican gods, and

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

in some mysterious manner connected with the history of man.

Respecting the origin of these hieroglyphic pictures there has been some
discussion in the literary world, and many men of eminence have
expressed their conviction that they were mostly painted *after* the
arrival of the Spaniards in the country, and were intended to be
descriptive of the religion which the Christians taught rather than of
that which the Mexicans already held. Regarding the question
*theoretically*, there seems to be some ground for the conclusion: but
the recent exhibition of Mr. Bullock's collection of Mexican antiquities
has *practically* settled the dispute. The stupendous idol of THE
SERPENT DEVOURING A FEMALE, could not have been sculptured after the
overthrow of the empire by Cortez; but is probably one of the idols
which Bernal Dias del Castillo observed in the great temple. This
agreement of sculpture and painting, among an unlettered people, may be
deemed a testimony equivalent to written history.

There is, however, written history to show that the Peruvians worshipped
snakes, and kept them PICTURED in their houses and

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

temples <span id="fr_500"></span>[1](#fn_499)." It is probable,
therefore, that the Mexicans did the same. Besides, we are informed by
Robertson <span id="fr_501"></span>[2](#fn_500), that Zummaragua, the
*first* bishop of Mexico, destroyed every Mexican painting he could
discover, because he regarded them as fuel to keep alive the
superstitions of the people. It is not very probable, therefore, that
any future Spanish priests would be permitted to deck out Christian
doctrines in the garb of the ancient idolatry. Until proof can be
adduced that such a practice prevailed, we are authorized to believe
that the traditions of the old world were not forgotten in the new.

The spiritual destruction of the woman by the serpent in Paradise is the
great truth preserved in the memorial of the *sculpture*; while her
previous conversation with him is depicted in the *painting*. The
"*crushing*" of the serpent by Teotl is the victory of "the woman's
seed;" and the blood of HUMAN VICTIMS, shed before the dracontic and
serpentine idols in the great temple, is commemorative of "THE BLOOD"

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

which "overcame <span id="fr_502"></span>[1](#fn_501) the serpent," and
redeemed mankind.

*The conversation of Eve with the serpent* seems to have made more
impression upon the memory of man than almost any other event in
primeval history: as from the singularity of the circumstance we might
expect. It is remembered in the mythologies of Egypt, Greece, Syria,
Hindûstan, Northern Europe, and North and South America. And it is one
of the very few rays of truth discoverable in the darkness of the NEW
ZEALANDER'S mind; for "these people have a tradition, that THE SERPENT
ONCE SPOKE WITH A HUMAN VOICE <span id="fr_503"></span>[2](#fn_502)!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_443"></span>[312:1](wos08.htm#fr_444) De falsâ relig. lib.
i. c. 2.

<span id="fn_444"></span>[314:1](wos08.htm#fr_445) Gen. xlviii. 16.

<span id="fn_445"></span>[315:1](wos08.htm#fr_446) De Iside et Osiride,
p. 380.

<span id="fn_446"></span>[316:1](wos08.htm#fr_447) Pythia, 1.

<span id="fn_447"></span>[316:2](wos08.htm#fr_448) Rev. xii. 7, &c.

<span id="fn_448"></span>[316:3](wos08.htm#fr_449) Hesiod. Theogon.

<span id="fn_449"></span>[318:1](wos08.htm#fr_450) Wisd. ii. 24.

<span id="fn_450"></span>[318:2](wos08.htm#fr_451) 2 John viii. 44.

<span id="fn_451"></span>[319:1](wos08.htm#fr_452) Lib. i. c. 6. s. 3.

<span id="fn_452"></span>[319:2](wos08.htm#fr_453) Thus in a Mexican
painting, in the Borgian Collection, there is a god with *two* heads:
one *human*, and the other a *serpent's*.--*Aglio. Mex. Ant*. vol. iii.

<span id="fn_453"></span>[321:1](wos08.htm#fr_454) Herodot. ii. 156.

<span id="fn_454"></span>[322:1](wos08.htm#fr_455) Herodot. ii. 144.
Plutarch, Diodorus, &c.

<span id="fn_455"></span>[322:2](wos08.htm#fr_456) John i. 9.

<span id="fn_456"></span>[322:3](wos08.htm#fr_457) John i.

<span id="fn_457"></span>[322:4](wos08.htm#fr_458) Jablonski, Panth. Æg.
l. ii. p. 204.

<span id="fn_458"></span>[323:1](wos08.htm#fr_459) De Isid. et Osirid.
*in principio*.

<span id="fn_459"></span>[323:2](wos08.htm#fr_460) 2 Cor. xi. 3.

<span id="fn_460"></span>[323:3](wos08.htm#fr_461) Luke viii. 12.

<span id="fn_461"></span>[324:1](wos08.htm#fr_462) Faber's Pagan Idol.
i. 167.

<span id="fn_462"></span>[324:2](wos08.htm#fr_463) Parkhurst.

<span id="fn_463"></span>[324:3](wos08.htm#fr_464) Pag. Idol. i. 165.

<span id="fn_464"></span>[326:1](wos08.htm#fr_465) Euseb. Præp. Evang.
i. 38.

<span id="fn_465"></span>[326:2](wos08.htm#fr_466) In the Coptic
language, the words which express "mother," and "to die," approach very
near each other.

<span id="fn_466"></span>[330:1](wos08.htm#fr_467) Ovid, Met. i. 438.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[330:2](wos08.htm#fr_468) Faber, Pag. Idol. i.
441, who cites Olaus Wormius *de aureo cornu*.

<span id="fn_468"></span>[332:1](wos08.htm#fr_469) Hygin. Fab. 30.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[332:2](wos08.htm#fr_470) Hygin. Poet. Astron.
122.

<span id="fn_470"></span>[333:1](wos08.htm#fr_471) Hygin. Poet. Astron.
362.

<span id="fn_471"></span>[333:2](wos08.htm#fr_472) "Δράκοντα ἀποστάτην."

<span id="fn_472"></span>[334:1](wos08.htm#fr_473) Montfaucon, i. plate
64.

<span id="fn_473"></span>[334:2](wos08.htm#fr_474) Stukeley, Abury, 69.

<span id="fn_474"></span>[334:3](wos08.htm#fr_475) Lib. ii. s. 2.

<span id="fn_475"></span>[335:1](wos08.htm#fr_476) Polit. fol. 272.
*Edit. Steph*.

<span id="fn_476"></span>[336:1](wos08.htm#fr_477) Homer, Iliad, H.
Scholiast.

<span id="fn_477"></span>[336:2](wos08.htm#fr_478) Bochart. Hieroz. lib.
i. fol. 21.

<span id="fn_478"></span>[337:1](wos08.htm#fr_479) Spanheim, 212.

<span id="fn_479"></span>[338:1](wos08.htm#fr_480) Cerberus himself, the
watch-dog of Tartarus, had a *dragon's* tail, and his skin was studded
with *serpents' heads* <span id="fr_481"></span>[\*](#fn_480).

<span id="fn_480"></span>[338:\*](wos08.htm#fr_481) Apollod.

<span id="fn_481"></span>[341:1](wos08.htm#fr_482) Faber, Hor. Mos. i.
72.

<span id="fn_482"></span>[342:1](wos08.htm#fr_483) Maurice, Hist. of
Hind. i. 315,

<span id="fn_483"></span>[343:1](wos08.htm#fr_484) Sale's Koran, ch. ii.
*note*.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[343:2](wos08.htm#fr_485) Maimonides, More
Nevoch. 281.

<span id="fn_485"></span>[343:3](wos08.htm#fr_486) Hist. Hind. vol. ii.

<span id="fn_486"></span>[344:1](wos08.htm#fr_487) Maurice, Hist. Hind.
ii. 272.

<span id="fn_487"></span>[345:1](wos08.htm#fr_488) Maurice, Hist. Hind.
ii. 276.

<span id="fn_488"></span>[345:2](wos08.htm#fr_489) Ibid. ii. 89. 140.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[345:3](wos08.htm#fr_490) Ibid. iii. 88.

<span id="fn_490"></span>[346:1](wos08.htm#fr_491) Tod, Rajasthan i.
537.

<span id="fn_491"></span>[347:1](wos08.htm#fr_492) Asiatic Transactions,
vol. ii. p. 563.

<span id="fn_492"></span>[348:1](wos08.htm#fr_493) Mallet, Northern
Antiq. i. 100. *Bishop Percy's translation*.

<span id="fn_493"></span>[349:1](wos08.htm#fr_494) Faber Pag. Idol. i.
442, citing the Edda; and Hor. Mos. i. 77.

<span id="fn_494"></span>[349:2](wos08.htm#fr_495) The translation of
Bishop Lowth is somewhat different; but the variation is immaterial.

"In that day shall Jehovah punish with his sword,  
His well-tempered, and great, and strong sword,  
Leviathan the rigid serpent,  
And Leviathan the winding serpent:  
And shall slay the *monster* that is in the sea."

The word here rendered "*monster*" is תנין, which may mean a whale, or
*a sea serpent*. I follow the Septuagint.

<span id="fn_495"></span>[351:1](wos08.htm#fr_496) Humboldt, Res. vol.
i. p. 195.

<span id="fn_496"></span>[352:1](wos08.htm#fr_497) Humboldt, Res. vol.
i. p. 228.

<span id="fn_497"></span>[352:2](wos08.htm#fr_498) Mex. Ant. vol. iii.

<span id="fn_498"></span>[352:3](wos08.htm#fr_499) Mex. Ant. vol. iii.

<span id="fn_499"></span>[354:1](wos08.htm#fr_500) Purchas, Pilgrims,
pt. iv. p. 1478.

<span id="fn_500"></span>[354:2](wos08.htm#fr_501) America, vol. iii. p.
5.

<span id="fn_501"></span>[355:1](wos08.htm#fr_502) "*They overcame him
by the blood of the Lamb*."--Rev. xii. 11.

<span id="fn_502"></span>[355:2](wos08.htm#fr_503) Faber, Pag. Idol. i.
274, citing Marsden in the Chr. Obs. Nov. 1810, p. 724.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Serpent Temples](wos09)
