[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wos00)  [Next](wos02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

# PREFACE.

THE deception of Eve by Satan, through the instrumentality of a
*serpent*, has ever been an object of ridicule with the profane, who,
reading without reflection, or reflecting without reading, deem that "a
foolishness" which they cannot understand, or that "a stumbling-block"
which they cannot explain away. Thus faith, which had defied the
sophistry of the acutest sceptic, has been sometimes shaken by an
incredulous sneer: and Christians, who would have scorned to be argued
out of their religion, have not been ashamed to be laughed out of it.

To establish by the testimony of heathen authorities the credibility of
the Temptation and Fall of Man in Paradise, *through the agency of Satan
in a serpent's form*, is my endeavour in the following Treatise: nor is
it with a vain confidence that every argument adduced is either *new* or
*conclusive*. Many have gone before me

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

in the same path of inquiry, though not to the same extent; and whatever
I have found either useful in their arguments, or apt in their
illustrations, I have unhesitatingly adopted and as readily acknowledge.
But where no reference records the author of any opinion, I am content
to take the responsibility upon myself; desiring only that the whole
theory may not be pronounced untenable on account of the deficiency of
any inconsiderable portion of it. For the force of the argument consists
not in the independent importance of every individual inference, but in
the *aggregate effect* of all. Facts in themselves apparently
insignificant, and coincidences which *singly* might be deemed
fortuitous, often assume *in connexion* a character and a consistency
which amount to the weight of irresistible evidence. If, therefore, by
the aggregate testimony of facts inconsiderable in themselves, and only
considerable through the consistency with which they mutually support
each other, the main object of this treatise--*the universality of
Ophiolatreia*--can be proved, the point is gained; the proposition is
demonstrated.

Many writers have remarked that the worship of the serpent by the
ancient heathen is a conclusive

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

proof of the Fall of Man by the seduction of a serpent-tempter: but
failing to show its *universal* prevalence, have reaped but half the
advantages of their argument. They have left the multitude either
doubtful of its force, or relying for the truth of it upon their
authority only; while habitual unbelievers, who never search for
themselves, deeming all such authorities suspicious, because interested,
and interested because, for the most part, *ecclesiastical*, reject the
reasoning and renounce the conclusion.

I have therefore endeavoured to establish the *fact*, while I appeal to
the *argument*: to *prove* the universality of Serpent-worship, while I
adduce the universal worship of the Serpent as a testimony to the
Temptation and Fall of Man.

Of all the writers who have treated of this subject, Bryant and Faber
may be regarded as the chief. But even these learned men have only
considered it in the course of a System of Analysis of Pagan Idolatry.
With either of these authors the worship of the serpent forms but a part
of a more comprehensive work; and their observations, of necessity, have
been circumscribed. To them, however, I am indebted for a great part of
my information,

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

and only do not praise them so highly as I honour them, because one is
beyond, and *both* above all praise.

To the kindness of the latter 1 have been still more indebted since the
publication of the first edition of this treatise. Many valuable
corrections, noticed as they occur, have been voluntarily communicated
by Mr. Faber; and it is to me a source of no little gratification, that
in my first effort to be useful, I have obtained the encouragement of
the first of Christian scholars.

The Worship of the Serpent had already attracted the notice of the
learned, when Bryant and Faber, each improving upon the discoveries of
his predecessors, fixed its data upon a lasting basis. It was deemed a
fit field for the recreation of the unwearied genius of Dr. Stukeley,
whose work upon Abury is a masterpiece of ingenuity, and a key to the
most obscure part of Ophiolatreia--*the figure of the serpent temples*.
On this interesting subject nothing was even guessed at, until his
master-hand evoked, as by the wave of a magician's wand, the Python of
Delphi in the wilds of Wiltshire.

Other eminent writers, among whom Bishop

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Stillingfleet should have honourable mention,
have cursorily noticed the serpent-worship of the ancients. In the works
of Mr. Maurice, also, much may be found interesting and useful, as
connecting Ophiolatreia with the superstitions of the Brahmins of
Hindûstan. Captain Franklin has likewise entered upon the subject in a
chapter of his History of the Jains and Budhists, in which he gives a
short, but excellent, analysis of the prevalence of Ophiolatreia in the
ancient world. The plan of this analysis is so nearly the same as the
one adopted in the following treatise, that I shall probably find some
difficulty in persuading the reader that it was not the prototype of the
present volume. But I can assure him that I never even *heard* of the
existence of Captain Franklin's book, until twelve months after the
publication of my own. It is only, however, in the general outline that
they are similar. This treatise enters more minutely into the subject,
and follows the serpent-god into more regions of the world. The
application of the subject is also more extensively theological, and the
scope of the inquiry considerably greater. I shall therefore be secure
from the charge of

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

plagiarism with every one who compares the two volumes together.

Among foreigners, Bochart, Vossius, Kircher, and Heinsius may be
profitably consulted. There is also a tract "*De Cultu Serpentum*,"
written by M. Koch, but valuable chiefly, as proving the idolatry in
Scandinavia. Bryant mentions a treatise by *Philip* Olearius, entitled
"Ophiolatreia:" but I cannot find it in any of the public libraries
which I have searched.

I am not aware of any other important work upon the subject. I have made
full use of all the foregoing authors; avoiding only, as much as
possible, the etymological conjectures of Bryant, which are considered
by some critics as open to objection. In this I have followed rather the
taste of the age than my own conviction; for these conjectures are at
all times ingenious, frequently plausible, and sometimes
incontrovertible. Whenever they have appeared to be as coming under the
last class, I have not hesitated to use them.

The plan of this work is simple. It professes to prove the existence of
Ophiolatreia in almost every considerable country of the ancient world;
and to discover, in the mythology of every

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

civilized nation, evidences of a recollection of the events in Paradise.
If these facts can be established, the conclusion is obvious--that all
such traditions must have had a common origin; and that the most ancient
record, which contains their basis, must be the authentic history. The
most ancient record containing this basis, is the Book of Genesis,
composed by Moses. The Book of Genesis, therefore, contains the history
upon which the fables, rites, and superstitions of the mythological
serpent are founded.

I cannot close these remarks without recording my obligation to a
gentleman whose sound and varied learning is equalled by the kindness
with which he imparts it; and from whom no writer departs without
encouragement, whose object is to promote or to protect the truth. The
Rev. Lancelot Sharpe will, I trust, pardon this allusion, as due to one
who kindly looked over the MSS. of the first edition of this treatise;
and as one to whom I am indebted for many valuable suggestions.

Neither can I, in justice to my own sense of obligations, omit the
mention of my esteemed friend, P. C. Delagarde, Esq. of Exeter, to

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

whose ingenuity I owe much that is novel and interesting in the present
volume; especially the discovery of the origin of columnar architecture
in the avenues of the Dracontium.

In conclusion, I must remark, that the present edition of this treatise,
although very superior to the last, both as to correctness of
information, and quantity of new matter, is still only an *introduction*
to what *may* be written on "the Worship of the Serpent," as connected
with the Fall and Redemption of Man. And I shall hail the day with
pleasure, when "some person of *true learning* and *a deep insight* into
antiquity shall go through (*with this view*) with the history of the
serpent <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)." It would be, indeed, as
Bryant most justly observes, "a noble undertaking, and very edifying in
its consequences;" and if this short syllabus shall be in any degree
instrumental to a work so desired, it will not have been written in
vain.

JOHN BATHURST DEANE.

LAURENCE POUNTNEY-HILL, LONDON,  
 *July* 12, 1833.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[xii:1](wos01.htm#fr_0) Bryant, Anal. 2. 219.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Table of Contents](wos02)
