[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wos02)  [Next](wos04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

###### THE

# WORSHIP OF THE SERPENT.

### PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS ON THE FALL OF MAN.

I. THAT man, in his present state of ignorance, infirmity and
wickedness, is not the Adam of God's hand--the similitude of his
Creator--the being which he was when God "breathed into his nostrils the
breath of life," placed him in Paradise, and pronounced him "good,"--is
an observation not resulting from metaphysical research, but obvious to
the most simple, unlettered mind. To the truth of it responds every
feeling of our nature, and every voice from the Scriptures; and whether
we look into *ourselves* or into *them*, we read the same writing,

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

indited by the same Spirit: "*There is not a just man upon earth, that
doeth good and sinneth not* <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md)."

Whence then this corruption, so great, so universal? Whence this
unsparing and appalling ruin? "*By* ONE MAN *sin entered into the world,
and death by sin* <span id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2.md)." "*By the offence
of* ONE, *judgment came upon* ALL MEN *to condemnation* <span
id="fr_3"></span>[3](#fn_3.md)." "*By* ONE MAN'S *disobedience*, MANKIND
(οἱ πολλοι) *were made sinners* <span id="fr_4"></span>[4](#fn_4.md)."

But consequences so ruinous as the corruption of the body and soul of
all his posterity,--the dissolution of the one, and the eternal
banishment of the other from the presence of GOD,--could not have
resulted from the disobedience of ONE MAN, had the sin which he
committed fallen short of the most aggravated which he could commit.
Scripture and reason declare GOD to be "just:" he would not therefore
have "visited the sin of the father upon the children," had not THAT SIN
been of a nature THE MOST ODIOUS in his sight. This necessary conclusion
from established premises, has induced many a well-meaning but
ill-reflecting

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Christian to represent the history of the fall
of man as AN ALLEGORY. But allegorizing Scripture is at all times a
hazardous, and sometimes a dangerous, practice. It is so in the case
before us: for if the narrative of the Fall be allegorical, the promise
of the Redemption must be allegorical likewise, since the serpent enters
personally into the one, as well as the other. But the promise of
Redemption, though figuratively expressed, assumes *the real agency* of
the Serpent in the Fall: we conclude, therefore, that not only did the
serpent bring about this calamity upon man, but that he brought it about
in the very manner in which it is described by the woman: "THE SERPENT
*beguiled me, and I did eat*."

Having stated this, the sacred historian says no more; leaving it to the
understanding and common sense of the children of Israel to conclude
that the serpent's form must have been assumed by a spirit of
extraordinary power and malignity, the better to accomplish his object
of seduction. That this powerful and malignant spirit was the Devil, we
are expressly informed by St. John, who calls the dragon of the
Apocalypse "*that old serpent called the Devil and*

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Satan, that deceiveth the whole world* <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5.md)." The author of the Book of Wisdom
attributes the fall of man to the agency of the Devil: "God created man
to be immortal, and made him to be an image of his own eternity; but
*through envy of the Devil came death into the world* <span
id="fr_6"></span>[2](#fn_6.md)." St. Paul, alluding to the same event,
ascribes it to the serpent:--"But I fear lest by any means, as *the
serpent* beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should be
corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ <span
id="fr_7"></span>[3](#fn_7.md)."

These incidental allusions to the agency of the Devil under the form of
a serpent, are perhaps more valuable in corroborating the account of
Moses, than if the whole narrative of the Fall were in so many words
recapitulated by the other sacred writers: for these writers, being
Jews, had no reason for enforcing the assent of their contemporaries to
facts which were universally admitted. Hence incidental allusions as to
a fact well known, are all that we can expect to find in the sacred
writings respecting the agency of Satan and the Serpent, in the ruin of
mankind. These are abundant; and from the event which they assume, arose
the metaphor

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

under which the enemies of God and the wicked are described. These are
represented under the image of "*a serpent* <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8.md)," "*a dragon* <span
id="fr_9"></span>[2](#fn_9.md)," "*a leviathan, a crooked serpent* <span
id="fr_10"></span>[3](#fn_10.md)," &c.; expressions which are strong
presumptive evidences of the intimate connexion between the SERPENT and
the EVIL SPIRIT.

Though the circumstances of the seduction and fall of man are objects of
no difficulty to the faith of a Christian, yet it must be confessed that
an obscurity surrounds them, which is not easily penetrable to the rash
or unreflecting. Hence some have argued that the whole is allegorical,
and others have pronounced the whole to be an invention: for a sceptical
mind solves every difficulty by disbelief. Against either of these
opinions I will endeavour to show, that the seduction of man by the
agency of the serpent is *no allegory*; that the fall of man by eating
of the forbidden tree is *no allegory*: that nothing could be more
natural than that Adam and Eve should fall by such a simple act: and
that no method of seduction could be so effective as the one employed by
Satan.

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

First then, let us consider THE SIN; and secondly, THE TEMPTER.

"*The Lord God said unto the woman, what is this that thou hast
done* <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11.md)?"--The offence of which she
had been guilty was the eating of a tree, of which GOD had said, "*Thou
shalt not eat of it; for in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt
surely die* <span id="fr_12"></span>[2](#fn_12.md)."

Here we perceive, amidst a general indulgence, *one particular
restriction*, and a penalty attached to the violation of it. It is
argued against the probability of such a condition,

First, *That the restriction is unworthy of God*.

Secondly, *That the punishment is more than adequate to the offence*.

Both of which objections I will endeavour to answer.

 

1\. From the narrative of Moses we learn, that at the time of this sin,
Adam and his wife Eve were the only human creatures in existence--that
"they twain were one flesh "--and that they were without those natural
propensities to wickedness, which now, unhappily, characterize their
descendants. A positive command

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

was given to them, under. a very severe penalty in case of disobedience;
and this command was, that they should not eat the fruit of a particular
tree.

If, instead of so simple a command as this, they had been enjoined, like
the Jews and Christians after them, to observe inviolate the
Commandments of the two tables, *would that have been a more reasonable
injunction--more worthy of God--more suitable to the condition of Adam
and Eve?* We apprehend *not*. The injunction would have been so far
unreasonable and unworthy of God, as the violation of it was
*impossible* on the part of Adam and Eve. For being themselves the
*immediate* work of the Creator, and maintaining with him a continual
and direct communion <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13.md), is it possible
that they could have worshipped any strange gods or idols--taken the
name of GOD in vain--or by any act of irreverence profaned the Sabbath?
Commandments which would restrict them from such sins as these, would
have been unreasonable, and unworthy of God; *for they could not be
broken*. The first table of the decalogue would therefore have been
unnecessary;

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

and if unnecessary, "unworthy of GOD" to ordain.

In like manner, Adam and Eve could not have violated any commandment of
the second. The second table of the decalogue is for a state of
*society*: Adam and his wife were *alone*. How could they, therefore,
honour their father and mother, who had none? How could they commit
adultery or theft *against each other?* How could they have borne false
witness against their *neighbour*, or coveted his goods? And can we
suppose that they would so far forget the sense of their common interest
as to *kill* either the other, since the commission of such a crime
would have left the survivor the only creature in the universe without
its kind? They would not, therefore, have committed *murder*, even had
they known (which is doubtful) the *nature* and the *means* of death.
Commandments, therefore, which would restrict them from such sins as
these, would have been unreasonable, and unworthy of GOD; for they could
not, by any probability, be broken. *Besides*, the violation of them
presupposes that *tendency to sin*--that *corruption of their nature*,
which did not exist in them until after the Fall.

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

The offence by which Adam fell must, therefore, have been *a simple
one*: so simple, that it might be committed without inherent depravity;
and yet so obnoxious to GOD, as to demand his *instant* and *severest
visitation*. Now what offence can we imagine more simple, more free from
innate depravity, than that of eating the fruit of a forbidden tree? The
inducements to eat of it were powerful; and such as, in the absence of a
prohibitory command, would have been not only natural, but laudable. It
was a desire to become as intelligent as the angels: a desire which, in
Adam and Eve, was natural; for by the gratification of it, they would
know more of GOD and of themselves: and as "the knowledge of GOD" is
perfect happiness, it was natural that they should wish to perfect their
enjoyments. Springing from such an origin, the desire was sinless; and
only sinful when indulged in opposition to a prohibitory command.

But this command was written by the finger of GOD upon their hearts:
"*Thou shalt not eat of it*." And this command they violated!

*Simple*, of necessity. was the *outward act* by which they incurred the
displeasure of their Maker: but the *moral offence* involved all the

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

guilt which attaches to unnecessary disobedience, incredulity of GOD'S
word, and defiance of his power; and under this view we may regard the
sin of Adam to have been as great as if we were to violate *the whole of
the decalogue*: for the *whole commandment* which was given to them,
they *broke*.

 

2\. But, if the prohibition was not unworthy of the dignity of GOD, was
not the punishment which followed disobedience more than adequate to the
offence? Certainly not. Entire disobedience, being entire
unrighteousness, is manifestly obnoxious to the severest penalty. The
greatness of the punishment can prove nothing but the greatness of the
sin which preceded it, when the parties concerned are man and GOD. But
even had the punishment been "more than adequate to the offence," it
would not have been an act of injustice to inflict it. For Adam and Eve,
as they knew the means of *obedience*, knew the penalty which would
follow *disobedience*; they sinned, therefore, with all the consequences
of sin before them. Their eyes were sufficiently "open" to know the
truth which was afterwards revealed to the children

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

of disobedience, that "GOD is not a man, that he should lie; neither the
son of man, that he should repent: hath he said, and shall he not do it?
or hath he spoken, and shall he not make it good <span
id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14.md)?"

We see, then, that neither was the prohibition of the tree of knowledge
of good and evil an unworthy condition on the part of Gm) to make with
Adam, nor the punishment which overtook the disobedient man too great
for the offence.

But here it may be objected, upon the very principle of our
argument,--if Adam committed sin in consequence of a natural instinct--a
desire of enlarging his understanding--with this desire about him,
*prompting him to sin*,--can he be said to have been created *pure?* And
if he had not been created *pure*, there is no necessity for believing
that he ever fell, in the peculiar manner related by Moses; for the
sinfulness of man would be sufficiently accounted for by the
imperfection of his origin. To this we may reply, that the desire of
enlarging his understanding did not *necessarily* induce Adam to sin:
sin was, indeed, the consequence of his indulging

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

this desire, but not the *necessary* consequence. He might have indulged
it by communion with GOD, instead of finding its gratification by
communion with Satan. That Adam, by too great a thirst after knowledge,
*fell*, does not prove that he was *prone* to sin; but it certainly does
prove that he was *liable to it*: and while we deny the proneness, we
not only admit, but maintain his *liability to fall*. Being created,
expressly, for the greatest glory of Gov, it follows that Adam was
created with that nature which was best adapted to this purpose. He was,
therefore, created *pure*, *perfect*, and *free*. For Omnipotence itself
cannot produce a nobler being than one in Gods own spiritual likeness;
perfectly sinless, and perfectly a free agent. But, however free and
pure, such a person cannot be without a *liability* to sin: for if he be
without a liability, he is without *responsibility*, which is an
attribute suited to the Creator alone, and incommunicable to a creature.
It could not, therefore, be otherwise, than that Adam should have *been
liable*, though not *prone*, to sin: for that would have made his nature
imperfect, and anticipated the corruption which did not exist in him
until after his fall. What, before the fall,

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

was only a *liability*, became afterwards a *proneness to sin*. Had Adam
been placed in Paradise in any other state, he would either not have
been a free agent, or too free to be responsible. If not a free agent,
the gift of reason was superfluous, and every superfluity detracts from
*perfection*. If too free to be responsible, he would not have been a
creature; for to be a creature implies subordination, and subordination
implies responsibility. The only condition, therefore, in which Adam
could have been placed, was that of a free agent, responsible for his
actions; with obedience or disobedience, and their respective
consequences, before his eyes, and with the power to choose either.
Being a free agent, it was necessary that he should be placed in *a
state of trial*. For his free agency consisting in a capability of
choice between obedience and disobedience, his happiness would consist
in a wise employment of this power <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15.md).
And since real happiness is inseparable from holiness, Adam, to be
happy, must have been holy. But holy or obedient (for it is the same
thing,) he could not be, unless something were enjoined to which he
might be disobedient. Adam, therefore,

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

being a free agent, was necessarily placed in a state of trial.

It appears, then, that the fall of man may be rationally explained,
without having recourse to any allegorical interpretation; indeed, *what
allegory* can render the circumstances more intelligible? or *of what*
can the eating of a forbidden tree be allegorical? The only mysterious
part of the transaction, after the assumption of the serpent's form by
Satan, was the communication of intellectual knowledge by the taste of a
tree. That the fruit of the forbidden tree did not affect the *body*,
seems evident from the circumstance of God's dooming the body to
corruption, *after* the fruit had been tasted, and "the eyes were
opened." "The return to dust" was an effect of *the curse of* God, and
not of any poisonous quality in the tree. The poison of the tree
infected the mind alone: but the manner is a mystery.

There is, however, a method of explaining away the difficulty of the
*communication of knowledge by means of a tree*, of which the advocate
of literal interpretation may avail himself. With the learned and acute
KENNICOT, he may consider that the tree in question was not to make

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

any change in the intellectual faculties of the recipient. By
substituting the word "*test*" for "*knowledge*"--a substitution which,
he contends, the original will allow--the text will become, "and the
tree *which is the test* of good and evil:" that is, "the tree by which
God would *try* them, and by which it should appear whether or no they
would own the sovereignty of their Maker, and obey or disobey his
commands <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16.md)." Notwithstanding this
ingenious, and not unsatisfactory, explanation, I prefer the received
version, because it is more in accordance with the context. The effect
produced upon the guilty pair is described under the metaphor, "their
eyes were opened." This certainly implies that their *minds* had
undergone a change; for their corporeal eyes could have seen "their
nakedness" as easily before the Fall, as after; but the mind conceived
no shame from the circumstance. This effect was produced by the fruit of
the tree; for "when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and
that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree *to be desired to make one
wise*, she took of the fruit thereof, and *did eat*, and gave also to
her husband with her, and *he did*

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

*eat: And their eyes were opened* <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17.md)."
Between the action, "*they did eat*," and the effect, "*their eyes were
opened*," there is no room for interpolating any other cause for the
illumination, than the eating the fruit of the tree of knowledge. The
copulative conjunction *and* points out the cause--namely, *the fruit of
the tree*.

The seduction of Eve by the SERPENT is as far from being allegorical as
the other circumstances of the Fall. Satan had determined to bring about
the destruction of man, and, therefore, would approach to the
accomplishment of it in the most subtil manner. For this purpose, we are
taught to believe that he assumed the form of the serpent, probably
because the nature of that animal most nearly resembled his own: for
"the serpent was more subtil than all the beasts of the field." His own
form was *spiritual*; he could not, therefore, have shown himself to Eve
as he really was. He appeared, consequently, under a disguise to which
she had been accustomed, and at which she would not be startled.

A beautiful but *mute* animal crossed her path, ascended the tree of
knowledge, and plucked

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

its fruit; and in an instant appeared gifted with the powers of reason
and of speech <span id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18.md). He spoke to her;
desired her to taste the same fruit which had opened *his mind*; and
when, at length, having overcome her first astonishment, she refused, on
the plea that God had forbidden her to touch it, he said unto her,
"*Yea! hath God said*, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden?"

If such should appear to have been the nature of the temptation which
assailed Eve, who shall deny, that it was the most powerful which could
be presented to the human mind? A mute and irrational creature, having
tasted the fruit of this forbidden tree, became gifted with speech and
reason; and how surpassing must be the knowledge which *they* would
acquire by following the same course! Well, then, might she believe
"that they would be as gods, knowing good and evil."

Such an interpretation of the temptation of Eve appears not only the
most reasonable which can be offered to our belief, but it is, probably,
the most correct, from the very language of the Scripture which
describes the Fall. The third

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

chapter of Genesis opens in an abrupt manner; and the first words of the
serpent induce the inference, that something had previously passed
between him and Eve, which is not mentioned in the narrative. The words,
"*Yea! hath God said?*" appear to be the continuation of a conversation
already begun. This will explain the reason why the woman expresses no
surprise in hearing, for the first time, a brute animal speak with the
voice of a man--an explanation more natural than that adopted by Bishop
Patrick. He was of opinion that the tempter assumed the form of a
beautiful winged serpent, whose bright golden colour made him, when
flying, to be resplendent like fire. Of this kind, he informs us, were
the serpents in the wilderness which destroyed the rebellious
Israelites <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19.md). They are called
*seraphim*, from a root which signifies "*to burn*." "The angels of the
presence" were also called *seraphim*, from a similar glorious
appearance <span id="fr_20"></span>[2](#fn_20.md). The advocates of this
opinion suppose that Eve took the serpent-tempter for one of these
heavenly messengers, come down to enlighten her; "for she was not so
simple as to think that beasts could speak <span
id="fr_21"></span>[3](#fn_21.md)." This opinion is

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

defended by the expression of St. Paul (2 Cor. xi. 14),--"*Satan is
transformed into an angel of light*." In the same chapter, he previously
expresses his fears lest, "as *the serpent* beguiled Eve through his
subtilty," so the Corinthians "should be corrupted from the simplicity
which is in Christ." It is contended that St. Paul, in noticing the
transformation of Satan into an "angel of light," alludes to the
deception of Eve by the serpent. But this does not necessarily appear
from the argument of the apostle: it is quite as likely that he refers
to the temptation of our Lord, when Satan did probably appear "as an
angel of light."

But if Eve took the serpent for a *seraph*--a divine messenger sent to
remove the prohibition from the tree of knowledge--how happened it that,
when questioned by her Creator, "What is this that thou hast done?" she
answered, unhesitatingly, "*the serpent* beguiled me, and I did eat." A
reply which amounts to conclusive evidence that she believed the tempter
to be a *real serpent*. As a *terrestrial* animal, the deceiver is
cursed--"Upon thy belly thou shalt go, and dust shalt thou eat all the
days of thy life." This curse applies not to a spiritual being.

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Moreover the word, which we translate "serpent,"
is, in the original, not "*seraph*," but "*nachash*" throughout.
Conformably to which, the Septuagint employ the word ὄφις.

There is every ground, therefore, for accepting the temptation and fall
of man in the *literal* sense of the Scripture, which reveals them to
our faith.

That the devil, on this occasion, assumed the form of one of tile
angelic seraphim, was a tradition of the East, adopted or invented by
the Doctors of the Jewish Church. Rabbi Bechai, on Gen. iii. 14,
observes: "This is the secret (or mystery) of the holy language, that a
*serpent* is called *saraph*, as an *angel* is called *saraph*;" and
"hence the Scriptures called serpents seraphim (Numb. xxi. 6-8), because
they were the offspring of this old *saraph* <span
id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22.md)." The *seraphim* of the wilderness are
proved by Bochart to have been the same as those called in Isaiah (xix.
29. and xxx. 6), "fiery *flying* serpents." Whether the epithet
"*flying*" was a metaphor for *velocity*, or whether it meant that these
creatures had actually *wings*, is uncertain; it is certain, however,
that tradition had invested both the *celestial*

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

and *terrestrial* seraphim with wings: and hence the notion that the
Paradisiacal serpent was a "winged" creature. Hence, also, the poetical
fiction of *winged dragons*, as guardians of treasure and protectors of
female innocence. For, singularly enough, the malevolent actions of the
Paradisiacal serpent had a colouring given by heathen mythologists
diametrically opposite to the reality. The *seducer* of Eve is thus
perversely termed the *protector* of maiden virtue; and the tempter, who
induced her to *pluck* the forbidden fruit, is the *guardian* of the
*golden apples* in the Garden of the Hesperides. So powerful is "the
Prince of this World" to delude his victims!

Adam, then, was *free*, as created for God's glory; *pure*, as the
similitude of his spotless nature; *perfect*, as the temple of his Holy
Spirit. Of created things, the last and best on earth, he came into
existence on the eve of God's holy rest; and the first duty to which he
was called, was the celebration of the Sabbath. Constituted, as he was,
with the capacity to comprehend, and the inclination to adore his Maker,
he was created to be happy. The most perfect soul in the most perfect
body, and each endued

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

with ability to enjoy the most perfect happiness of its nature,
characterized the noblest of terrestrial beings. Had he continued in
obedience, he would have continued in happiness; but, alas! the union of
excellence, which conciliated the goodwill of the good angels, excited
and exasperated the envy of the bad. In an hour of weakness, the tempter
came: with the voice of kindness, he insinuated distrust in God; the
insidious appeal was heard; the forbidden tree was tasted:--"the eyes"
of man "were opened"--but his soul was lost! And in this state it
continued, until, by the sacrifice of THE REDEEMER--by the bruising of
HIS heel, who should bruise the serpent's head--that which had been
"dead" was alive again;" that which had been "lost" was "found."

### II. Allusions to the original Innocence, and subsequent Fall of Man, by Heathen Authors.

We have regarded the Fall of Man as an historical fact, dæmonstrable by
reason. We may, therefore, very properly require *traces* of this

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

event in the opinions and traditions of people upon whom the light of
revelation never shone. All are descended from the same family in the
ark, and it is more than probable that some vestiges of the original
history of man were preserved in the traditions of the more enlightened
Gentiles. Such is the conclusion of unprejudiced reason; and, in full
accordance, it has been ascertained, that the philosopher, the
mythologist, and the uneducated idolater of every nation, bears witness
in his writings, in his fables, or in his religion, to the truth of the
Mosaic history.

It is unnecessary to remind the classical reader, that the degeneracy of
mankind is a common topic of complaint with the philosophers of Greece
and Rome. But a few brief references to establish this position may not
be deemed superfluous, as they will greatly illustrate the arguments of
the subsequent pages.

1\. The writings of Plato abound with allusions to the degeneracy of
mankind. So closely do his ideas on this subject approach the truth,
that Bishop Stillingfleet has not scrupled to affirm, "he must have
known more of the lapse of mankind than he would openly discover <span
id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23.md):" and

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Gale was so persuaded of the same thing, that he
made it the chief object of his elaborate work to show that the Gentile
philosopher had drank deeply of the fountain of sacred truth. He cites
with approbation a saying of Numenius, the Pythagorean, Τί γάρ ἐστι
Πλάτων ἢ Μωυσῆς ἀττικίζων; "*What is Plato, but Moses speaking the
language of Athens?*" Led away by the glare of this strong resemblance,
the learned Gale ascribed the agreement to plagiarism: but it is more
than probable that the fountain at which Plato drank the truth, was the
broad but troubled stream of patriarchal tradition, which irrigated
alike the fertile and the barren mind, in every region of the globe.

Among other striking passages in the writings of that philosopher, is
the following:--"*These causes of our wickedness are derived from our
parents, and from our constitutions, rather than from ourselves; for
while we recoil from the works of our ancestors they are not idle* <span
id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24.md):" as much as to say, that there is within
us, by inheritance, a principle of sin, continually at war with the
principle of righteousness; "a law in our members warring against the
law of our minds, and bringing us into captivity to the law of sin,

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

which is in our members <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25.md)." This
notion is very nearly allied to the dogma of the Persians concerning the
two innate principles, the good and the evil, of which we read in the
very interesting story of Araspes and Panthea, related by Xenophon <span
id="fr_26"></span>[2](#fn_26.md).

This state of the soul the philosopher terms "*a moral or spiritual
death*;" and upon the authority of "*wise men*," by whom Gale
conjectures that he must have meant "Jewish priests:" more probably,
perhaps, Egyptian, with whom he is known to have conversed
familiarly.--"*I have heard from wise men, that we are now dead, and
that the body is our sepulchre* <span id="fr_27"></span>[3](#fn_27.md)."

The change of nature which ensued immediately after the fall of man, may
be alluded to by the same philosopher in his discourse of the imaginary
island of Atlantis, which, upon the division of the earth between the
gods, fell to the lot of Vulcan and Minerva <span
id="fr_28"></span>[4](#fn_28.md). There they created mortals of a superior
mould, who lived in the unbounded enjoyment of happiness and
peace.--"For many ages, as long as they were *under the influence of
this divine nature*, they were

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

obedient to the laws, and well-affected to the gods, *to whom they were
kindred* . . . . . . . . . . but when *the divine nature, which was in
them*, became frequently mingled *with the mortal*, and *the human.
inclination prevailed*, being unable to bear present calamities, they
disgraced themselves: and, to those who could see them, appeared base,
having lost the most beautiful of their precious possessions . . . . . .
. . . . The Jupiter, the god of gods, . . . . . . . . . . perceiving
this honourable race lying in a state of depravity, and being desirous
of punishing them . . . . . . . . . . called together all the gods," &c.

In the *Atlantis* of Plato, we may, I think, discover the EDEN of
Scripture; and in the lapse of the Atlantians from virtue and THE DIVINE
NATURE, the fall of Adam from purity and THE IMAGE OF GOD. The state of
mankind, at the time of the deluge, is, doubtless, blended with the
tradition; for we find that the island Atlantis was submerged in the
ocean. But the want of authentic records of the period intermediate
between the fall and the deluge, left the heathen, in a great measure,
ignorant of antediluvian history. Hence their frequent confusion of the
characters of Adam and Noah, and

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

the identification of their histories in mythology. Of these we have
constant proofs in the fables which have been transmitted to us, as we
shall observe in the progress of this volume. In the council of Jupiter,
to consider the depravity of the Atlantians, we may recognize a
similarity to the council of the Holy Trinity: "*Behold the man is
become as* ONE OF US, *to know good and evil*."

The corruption thus acknowledged by Plato to exist in mankind, is
elsewhere represented by him as "*a general depravation of the
understanding, the will, and the affections*." The corruption of the
understanding he describes under the allegory of a person who, from his
infancy, lay, neck and heels together, in a dark dungeon, where he could
only see some imperfect shadows, by means of a fire kindled at the top."
Whence he concludes that "*the eye of the soul is immersed in the
barbaric gulf of ignorance* <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29.md)."

2\. To the testimony of Plato may be added that of Hierocles, a disciple
of the Platonic school, whose Commentary on the Golden Verses of
Pythagoras very closely approaches Scripture truth.--"Most men are bad,
and under

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

the influence of their passions; and, from their propensity to earth,
are grown impotent of mind. But this evil they have brought upon
themselves by their *wilful apostasy from God*, and *by withdrawing
themselves from that communion with him, which they once enjoyed in pure
light* <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30.md)."

3\. If we ascend to authority of more remote date, we shall find in "the
Golden Verses" themselves this remarkable sentiment: "*Men are grown
miserable through their own fault*." An expression which argues in
Pythagoras, as well as Plato, "more acquaintance with the truth than he
is inclined to discover."

4\. If, from the meditations of philosophers, we pass to the
imaginations of poets, we shall find that neither Homer nor Hesiod were
ignorant of the degeneracy of mankind. In the poetic fiction of "the
Golden Age" we shall recognize a clear trace of the original purity of
man, whose fall and corruption may be as clearly traced in the
subsequent ages of deterioration. The opinion of Homer, that "*few
children are like their fathers, the majority worse* <span
id="fr_31"></span>[2](#fn_31.md)," illustrates the poetical conceit so
beautifully imagined by

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Hesiod:--"Dreadfully did the second race
degenerate from the virtues of the first. They were men of violence;
they had no pleasure in worshipping the immortal gods; they experienced
no delight in offering up to them those sacrifices which duty
required <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32.md)."

So clearly did the mind of Hesiod apprehend the real state of mankind,
that, in his fable of Pandora, he seems but to paraphrase the story of
Adam and Eve. Pandora was a female to whom every god and goddess
imparted a virtue or an accomplishment: *she was made from clay, to be
the wife of the man Prometheus*, whose nature and origin were of a more
elevated caste. He was the son of Japetus, a demigod, who was the son of
Cœlus--*i.e.* *heaven defied*. Prometheus is represented as *irreverent
towards the gods*. Among other things, Pandora was presented with a
beautiful casket by Jupiter, which she was to offer as a nuptial dowry
to her husband; but ordered, at the same time, on no account to open it.
Prometheus did not marry her, being suspicious of the design of Jupiter;
but sent her to his brother, whose wife she became. *Through inordinate
curiosity*, he opened the casket, and

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

*from it issued all the evils which have ever since afflicted mankind*.
HOPE alone remained at the bottom, to assuage the sorrows which EVIL had
introduced.

In this fable we perceive, with a little variation, a beautifully
wrought description of the fall of Adam, with a delicately poetical
allusion to the REDEMPTION.

5\. The Latin writers are as explicit in their opinion of the corruption
of man as the Greek. Among the philosophers, Cicero and Seneca; among
the poets, Virgil, Ovid, Horace, Juvenal, Lucretius, Catullus,--agree in
representing the present state of man as degenerate. It would be tedious
to transcribe, or even enumerate, their testimonies, since many of the
passages are familiar to the classical reader. We may, however, remark,
that no *Christian* scholar should fail to impress upon his memory the
splendid description of "The Four Ages," which is presented in the first
book of "THE METAMORPHOSES," by OVID. If anything can add to its beauty
and elegance, it is the close relation which it bears to Scriptural
truth.

That man had fallen from a condition of greater purity, was, therefore,
the belief of the mythologist,

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

poet, and philosopher, of Greece and Rome. It was, moreover, the belief
of every nation whose religion was moulded into system, or the system of
whose religion is not altogether unintelligible. It was the belief of
the Celts and Druids; and "the Brahmins of Hindostan have an entire
Purana on the subject: the story is there told as related by Moses; the
facts uniformly correspond, and the consequences are equally
tremendous <span id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33.md)." It was the belief of
all the nations surrounding Syria; it penetrated into the remote regions
of the Persian monarchy; and it may be recognized in the mythology of
Egypt. Of these I shall adduce proofs in the sequel. But if there were
no other indication of this Scriptural doctrine, the universal
prevalence of EXPIATORY SACRIFICES would declare it. "For unless an idea
of lost integrity had pervaded the whole world, and unless the doctrine
of such an aberration had been handed down from the most remote
antiquity, it is impossible to account for the universal establishment
of so very peculiar an ordinance <span id="fr_34"></span>[2](#fn_34.md)."

It is not only to the existence of a natural

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

corruption in man, that the philosophy of heathenism so strongly
alludes; but minuter traces of THE FALL are to be recognized in the
traditionary legends of heathen mythology. The most remarkable
corroboration, however, of the Mosaic history, is to be found in those
fables which involve THE MYTHOLOGICAL SERPENT, and in THE WORSHIP which
was so generally offered to him throughout the world.

THE WORSHIP OF THE SERPENT may be traced in almost every religion
through ancient Asia, Europe, Africa, and America. The progress of the
sacred serpent from Paradise to Peru is one of the most remarkable
phenomena in mythological history; and to be accounted for only upon the
supposition that a corrupted tradition of the serpent in Paradise had
been handed down from generation to generation. But how an object of
abhorrence could have been exalted into an object of veneration, must be
referred to the subtilty of the arch enemy himself, whose constant
endeavour has been rather to corrupt than obliterate the true faith,
that, in the perpetual conflict between truth and error, the mind of man
might be more surely confounded and debased. Among other

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

devices, that of elevating himself into an object of adoration, has ever
been the most cherished. It was this which he proposed to OUR LORD: "All
these things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down and *worship
me* <span id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35.md)." We cannot therefore wonder
that the same being who had the presumption to make such a proposal to
the Son of Gov, should have had the address to insinuate himself into
the worship of the children of men. In this he was, unhappily, but too
well seconded by the natural tendency of human corruption. The
unenlightened heathen, in obedience to the voice of nature, acknowledged
his dependence upon a superior being. His reason assured him that there
must be a God; his conscience assured him that God was good; but he felt
and acknowledged the prevalence of evil, and attributed it, naturally,
to. an evil agent. But as the evil agent to his unillumined mind seemed
as omnipotent as the good agent, he worshipped *both*; *the one*, that
he might propitiate his kindness; *the other*, that he might avert his
displeasure. The great point of devil-worship being gained--naively, the
acknowledgment of the evil spirit as GOD--the transition to

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

idolatry became easy. The mind once darkened by the admission of an
allegiance divided between GOD and Satan, became gradually more feeble
and superstitious, until at length sensible objects were called in to
aid the weakness of degraded intellect; and from their first form as
*symbols*, passed rapidly through the successive stages of apotheosis,
until they were elevated into GODS. Of these the most remarkable was THE
SERPENT; upon the basis of tradition, regarded, first, as the *symbol*
of the malignant being; subsequently, considered *talismanic* and
*oracular*; and, lastly, venerated and worshipped as DIVINE,

As a symbol, the serpent was by some nations attributed to the GOOD, and
by others to the EVIL DEITY. Among the Egyptians it was an emblem of the
good dæmon; while the mythology of Hindûstan, Scandinavia, and Mexico,
considered it as characteristic of the evil spirit.

That in the warmer regions of the globe, where this creature is the most
formidable enemy which man can encounter, the serpent should be
considered the mythological attendant of the evil being, is not
surprising: but that in the frozen or temperate regions of the earth,

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

where he dwindles into the insignificance of a reptile without power to
create alarm, he should be regarded in the same appalling character, is
a fact which cannot be accounted for by natural causes. Uniformity of
tradition can alone satisfactorily explain uniformity of superstition,
where local circumstances are so discordant.

The serpent is the symbol which *most* generally enters into the
mythology of the world. It may in different countries admit among its
fellow-satellites of Satan, the most venomous or the most terrible of
the animals in each country; but it preserves its own constancy, as *the
only invariable* object of superstitious terror throughout the habitable
world. "Wherever the Devil reigned," remarks Stillingfleet, "the serpent
was held in some peculiar veneration." THE UNIVERSALITY of this worship,
I propose to show in the subsequent pages: and having shown it, shall
feel justified in drawing the conclusion, that the narrative of Moses is
most powerfully corroborated by the prevalence of this singular and
irrational, yet natural superstition. *Irrational*--for there is nothing
in common between deity and a reptile, to suggest the notion of
SERPENT-WORSHIP; and *natural*, because allowing the

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

truth of the events in Paradise, every probability is in favour of such
a superstition springing up. For it is more than probable that Satan
should erect as the standard of idolatry the stumbling-block ascertained
to be fatal to man. By so doing, he would not only receive the homage
which he so ardently desired from the beginning, but also be perpetually
reminded of his victory over Adam, than which no gratification can be
imagined more fascinating to his malignant mind. It was his device,
therefore, that since by the temptation of the serpent man fell, by the
adoration of the serpent he should continue to fall.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2:1](wos03.htm#fr_1.md) Eccl. vii. 20.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[2:2](wos03.htm#fr_2.md) Rom. v. 12.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[2:3](wos03.htm#fr_3.md) Rom. v. 18.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[2:4](wos03.htm#fr_4.md) Rom. v. 19.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[4:1](wos03.htm#fr_5.md) Rev. xii. 9.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[4:2](wos03.htm#fr_6.md) Wisd. ii. 23-24.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[4:3](wos03.htm#fr_7.md) 2 Cor. xi. 3.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[5:1](wos03.htm#fr_8.md) Isaiah xiv. 29.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[5:2](wos03.htm#fr_9.md) Isaiah xxvii. 1.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[5:3](wos03.htm#fr_10.md) Isaiah xxvii. 1.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[6:1](wos03.htm#fr_11.md) Gen. 13.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[6:2](wos03.htm#fr_12.md) Gen. ii. 17.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[7:1](wos03.htm#fr_13.md) Gen. iii. 8.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[11:1](wos03.htm#fr_14.md) Num. xxiii. 19.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[13:1](wos03.htm#fr_15.md) Kennicot., *Dissert. on
the Tree of Life*, 33.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[15:1](wos03.htm#fr_16.md) Dissert. on the Tree of
Life, p. 36.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[16:1](wos03.htm#fr_17.md) Gen. iii. 6, 7.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[17:1](wos03.htm#fr_18.md) Delany, "*Revel.
Examined*."

<span id="fn_19"></span>[18:1](wos03.htm#fr_19.md) Numb. xxi. 6-8.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[18:2](wos03.htm#fr_20.md) Isaiah vi. 2-6.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[18:3](wos03.htm#fr_21.md) Bishop Patrick.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[20:1](wos03.htm#fr_22.md) Bishop Patrick *in loc*.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[23:1](wos03.htm#fr_23.md) Orig. Sacr. l. 3. c. 3.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[24:1](wos03.htm#fr_24.md) Timæus, 103.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[25:1](wos03.htm#fr_25.md) Rom. vii. 23.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[25:2](wos03.htm#fr_26.md) Cyrop. lib. 8.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[25:3](wos03.htm#fr_27.md) Georgias, 493.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[25:4](wos03.htm#fr_28.md) Critias.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[27:1](wos03.htm#fr_29.md) Gale. *Court of the
Gentiles*, l. 3. 63.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[28:1](wos03.htm#fr_30.md) Cited by Stillingfleet.
Orig. Sac. book iii. c. 3. s. 15.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[28:2](wos03.htm#fr_31.md) Odyss. ii. 276.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[29:1](wos03.htm#fr_32.md) Oper. et Dier. i. 126.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[31:1](wos03.htm#fr_33.md) Faber. Hor. Mos. i. 66,
citing Maurice Ind. Antiq.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[31:2](wos03.htm#fr_34.md) Faber. Hor. Mos. i. 59.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[33:1](wos03.htm#fr_35.md) Matt. iv. 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. Serpent-Worship in Asia](wos04.md)
