[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wos11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_461">p. 461</span>

### CHAPTER IX.

### CONCLUDING REMARKS ON THE REDEMPTION OF MAN.

FROM the moment in which Adam, by transgression, fell, it became
apparent that, *of himself*, he could never rise again. The cause of his
fall being *entire disobedience*, the *effects* of that cause could only
be alleviated by *entire obedience*,--and *this* he was not in a
condition to pay. His nature had become corrupt; his mind, his will, and
his affections, were depraved; and "the imaginations of the thoughts of
his heart were only evil continually." In his inability, therefore, to
pay perfect obedience in his own person, he was compelled to rely, for
the redemption of his soul, on *the perfect obedience of another being*.
For the law of God was to be kept; and some one must keep it, to
*justify man*, and *glorify God*.

<span id="page_462">p. 462</span>

But even this would not have been sufficient for the redemption of the
soul of man; since *no obedience*, however perfect, can cancel the
previous act of *disobedience*; and therefore can never, of itself,
remove the guilt. It may indeed recommend the guilty to mercy, but can
never make *satisfaction* for the sin.

It was utterly impossible, therefore, for Adam, by any repentance or
amendment, to recover his lost communion with God. Something more than
entire obedience was necessary to satisfy the JUSTICE of God, before his
MERCY could be shown; and nothing less than the *sacrifice* of the
Redeemer, AS WELL AS *his entire obedience* to the law, could fulfil the
conditions of human redemption. Thus, and thus alone, Mercy and Truth
would meet together; Righteousness and Peace would kiss each other <span
id="fr_573"></span>[1](#fn_572.md)."

But these conditions could not be fulfilled by a mere child of Adam,
though "the seed of the woman" was ordained "to bruise the serpent's
head." For the subject of atonement being the sins of the whole world,
and the Being to be appeased GOD ALMIGHTY, the Mediator

<span id="page_463">p. 463</span>

must be such as could "speak face to face" with both. This could not be
a man, born in the course of natural generation, for such an one could
not approach God to satisfy the preliminaries of his JUSTICE. The
insurmountable barrier of human imperfection would interpose between the
sin and the atonement.

But as, by the sinful disobedience of MAN was forfeited the earthly
Paradise, by the sinless obedience of MAN must the heavenly Paradise be
entered.

What the natural man could not, by reason of his corruption, accomplish,
an incarnate angel, though born of "the seed of the woman," could not
effect. For however superior the ministers of God, in heaven, may be to
his fallen creatures on earth, their purity is not sufficiently proof
against temptation to make the offering of a *sinless* body. For God
"chargeth even his angels with folly;" and these in their *spiritual*
forms may err, as the angels erred who "kept not their first estate:"
*how much more*, then, would they be liable to *sin*, if clothed with
the infirmities of human nature!

Since, then, neither man, nor an incarnate

<span id="page_464">p. 464</span>

angel, could offer a suitable and sufficient sacrifice for the sin of
Adam, there remained but one atonement, *suitable* and
*sufficient*,--INCARNATE DIVINITY.

To this, and to no other, could Adam have looked with any reasonable
ground for "the hope that was in him." *That he did look for this
spiritual redemption* is evident, from the universal expectation of the
Gentile world, that an INCARNATE GOD would destroy the SPIRITUAL
SERPENT.

To HIM, as the true sacrifice for "*the propitiation of sins*," was the
eye of every Pagan, though dimly, directed, when, in accordance with the
belief and practice of Abel, the blood of the atoning victim was poured
out upon the altar. On HIM, as "*the woman's seed, who would bruise the
serpent's head*," was the faith of every Pagan, though ignorantly,
reposed, when the fabled heroes of heathen mythology were exalted into
the heavens for their services to man on earth. To HIM, as "*the ransom
of our souls*" from death, was the hope of every Pagan, though blindly,
turned, when oppressed under a sense of the terrors of divine vengeance,
he imagined no atonement so available,

<span id="page_465">p. 465</span>

to avert the wrath of God, as THE BLOOD OF A HUMAN VICTIM. THIS was "THE
UNKNOWN GOD" of all the world, whom every nation, actually, though
"*ignorantly worshipped*," in their fables, and in their sacrifices, and
in their deified heroes.

The tradition of "the woman's seed" was handed down by the three
patriarchs who peopled the earth, after the deluge, to their children's
children: and however corrupted by the lapse of time, or the blindness
of idolatry, the same tradition may be recognized in the mythology of
every nation which has arrived at the comprehension of a religious
system. Else, WHY that universal prevalence of *animal sacrifice in
propitiation of sins*, which has obtained among the most enlightened,
and the most barbarous of mankind? WHY that more extraordinary opinion
reduced to practice, that no blood is so available to avert the wrath of
God as that of a HUMAN VICTIM? WHY are these opinions found in ALL THE
WORLD, if man never fell; if the Redeemer was never promised; if God
never said, "I HAVE GIVEN THE BLOOD UPON THE ALTAR TO MAKE AN ATONEMENT
FOR YOUR SOULS--FOR IT IS

<span id="page_466">p. 466</span>

THE BLOOD WHICH MAKETH AN ATONEMENT FOR THE SOUL <span
id="fr_574"></span>[1](#fn_573.md)?" WHY, moreover, was that wonderful
superstition of SERPENT-WORSHIP so generally resorted to by all the
world, if the evil spirit never triumphed in the serpent's form? And WHY
were those fables so current in mythology, which represent THE SERPENT,
*the emblem of the evil spirit*, as finally to be overcome by a hero,
born of a CELESTIAL FATHER *and* A TERRESTRIAL MOTHER, who, after his
victory, shall be enrolled *among the gods*, if revelation never
promised that "THE SEED OF THE WOMAN *should bruise* THE SERPENT'S
HEAD?" And, finally, WHY should it have entered into the imagination of
mythologists to represent this victorious hero as SLAIN by his dragon
enemy, if redemption were not promised *at the price of the Redeemer's
life*; if JEHOVAH never said to the apostate serpent, "*Thou shalt
bruise* HIS HEEL?"

These are phænomena, to be reconciled by no rule but that of faith in
the word of God, which present to the contemplation of the untrembling
sceptic a path of the most rugged and unbounded difficulty, through the
mazes of which the Christian, with the Bible in

<span id="page_467">p. 467</span>

his hand, can alone securely travel. But, interpreted by the Scriptures,
they are FACTS of the most solemn and engrossing interest, to which
history and fable, religion and superstition, bear equal testimony;
which instruct while they admonish, and satisfy while they amaze the
mind of the inquirer: and he that would be wise, "wise unto salvation,"
will "ponder them in his heart."

The humble-minded Christian will consider them with the seriousness
which they solemnly demand. He will consider, that the agreement of THE
WHOLE WORLD upon a subject, which could not have suggested itself
spontaneously to the mind, especially of people most remote and most
dissimilar, and placed under circumstances in every other respect
discordant, cannot be the result of *conspiracy* or *chance*; but that
what has been the belief of ALL MANKIND, however ignorantly expressed,
must have had for its origin ONE FAITH, which was founded upon ONE
PROMISE, which was accepted upon ONE ASSURANCE--namely, that it was THE
TRUTH, and THE REVELATION OF GOD.

Thus if the Redeemer of mankind was "THE SHILOH" of the Jews, "THE
DESIRE OF ALL

<span id="page_468">p. 468</span>

\[paragraph continues\] NATIONS <span id="fr_575"></span>[1](#fn_574.md),"
"THE UNKNOWN GOD" of every worship, and THE TYPIFIED VICTIM of every
altar,--we are not only justified in referring this coincidence of
belief and practice, but *peremptorily called upon to refer it* to the
original revelation made by God to Adam, and through him to all mankind.

2\. It is unnecessary to prove what "holy men of God," by "the word of
prophecy;" evangelists, by the pen, under the guidance of the Holy
Spirit; and martyrs, by their blood--have testified in characters,
"which he may read who runs," that the "Shiloh" of the Jews, "the desire
of all nations," "the unknown God" of every worship, whom all mankind
*really*, though "ignorantly," adored, is JESUS CHRIST. IT COULD HAVE
BEEN NO OTHER. For HE ALONE of all men lived without sin, and died
without requiring the mercy of God. He "went

<span id="page_469">p. 469</span>

about doing good;" and he only "had the words" and the power "of eternal
life." By his patience, by his innocence, by his labours, and by his
resignation, he showed himself to be more than an ordinary man; and by
his wisdom, by his preaching, by his prophecies, and by his miracles, he
evinced himself a prophet, *yea more than a prophet*:" while the
consummating miracles of his resurrection from the grave, and ascension
into glory, declared him to be "GOD BLESSED FOR EVER <span
id="fr_576"></span>[1](#fn_575.md)."

This was the true victim, THE SINLESS, THE SUFFICIENT SACRIFICE; by the
shedding of whose blood the sin of Adam was atoned for, and Adam
restored to the communion which he had lost. That the atonement might be
complete, it was indispensably necessary that the victim should be
divine; in JESUS we behold the DIVINE VICTIM, and in HIS BLOOD the
COMPLETE ATONEMENT. For not only the miracles which, *in fulfilment of
prophecy*, he wrought; not only the authority, *equivalent to that of
God*, which he assumed, and successfully exercised; but even the
confession of the

<span id="page_470">p. 470</span>

evil spirits themselves, declared Jesus to be "the Christ, the Son of
the living God."

To be, however, a SUITABLE, as well as a SUFFICIENT, SACRIFICE for the
sins of men, it was necessary that he should be HUMAN. In JESUS we
recognize this HUMAN VICTIM, and point him out like Pilate, though with
far different feelings, "BEHOLD THE MAN!"

But while sufficiency for the end required the victim to be *divine*,
and suitableness to the object demanded a *human sacrifice*, the eternal
necessity that "all righteousness should be fulfilled," as peremptorily
required *the two natures to be united*. Without THE MAN *to suffer* God
would not be satisfied: without THE GOD to *qualify*, THE MAN could not
be perfect. In JESUS, therefore, we behold the MYSTERIOUS UNION of GOD
and MAN. "*In him it pleased the Father that all fulness should
dwell* <span id="fr_577"></span>[1](#fn_576.md);" and "IN HIM DWELT ALL THE
FULNESS OF THE GODHEAD BODILY <span id="fr_578"></span>[2](#fn_577.md)."

3\. This was the Redeemer, and this the redemption, in anticipation of
which, Adam repined not at the sentence which consigned him to toil and
sorrow; which had driven him

<span id="page_471">p. 471</span>

from a life of ease to labour--from "a garden of pleasure" to a field of
thorns. Though every morsel of bread, and every drop of pure water,
brought with it the recollection of his sin and fall: though, "for his
sake," the very ground which he tilled was "cursed," and "in sorrow," he
was doomed to "eat of it all the days of his life;" though the partner
of his affliction was still more afflicted, and, through "sorrow," was
condemned to pass to the blessedness of a mother--yet did the faith of
Adam sustain his sinking spirit--yet did he "eat the bread of labour
with thanksgiving;" and *yet* did his loved partner "forget the sorrow
for joy that a man was born into the world." FOR in that bread of labour
he recognized the gift of an indulgent Father; and *in that man-child
she expected the redemption and consolation of their souls*. Thus,
though that consolation and redemption were remote; though ages must
roll on ages, and *individuals* become *nations*, before that desired
HOLY ONE could enter into his kingdom--*so firm, so constant*, and *so
confident* was the hope of Adam, that, in the glance of his prospective
faith, he gathered ages into a moment, and nations into an individual,
when the voice of his

<span id="page_472">p. 472</span>

loved partner exclaimed with holy transport--"*I have gotten* THE MAN
*from the Lord* <span id="fr_579"></span>[1](#fn_578.md)!" And though fond
expectation might have given place to despair, when the "child of their
many prayers" left them childless in the world, by the murder of his
brother, and the banishment of himself--yet still did Adam hope against
hope, that "the seed of the woman WOULD bruise the serpent's head." And
hence, when instead of him who had been branded with the curse of God,
another child was given, on him they bestowed the name of SETH--that is
"SUBSTITUTED:" for in their hearts they believed that *he was*
"*substituted*" for their first-born; in his place to console them
through their pilgrimage upon earth, and in his place to redeem them
from the last penalty of sin. Thus ADAM "*died in faith, not having
received the promises*." He "died in the faith" of a SPIRITUAL
REDEMPTION.

In the same faith had died ABEL; and he evinced it in that sacrifice
unto which "God had had respect," as offered in assurance of the blood
which should be shed, "once for all," at Calvary.

<span id="page_473">p. 473</span>

In the same faith died NOAH, the second father of mankind, and
bequeathed it as the best blessing of a departing parent to a surviving
child. "*God shall enlarge Japheth*," was his inspired promise to the
son whom temporal prosperity would magnify: but HE SHALL DWELL IN THE
TENTS OF SHEM," was the spiritual and eternal blessing. *In the family
of Shem* was the Messiah born, and lived, and died. He "*dwelt*" *as in
a tent* "*among them* <span id="fr_580"></span>[1](#fn_579.md)."

For ages after the deluge the tradition was handed down by each dying
patriarch to that son who was destined to be the progenitor of "the hope
of Israel;" but the time in which this Holy One would enter into his
kingdom being still uncertain, it was not *until upon his death-bed*
that the pious patriarch perceived that salvation was still distant.
*Then* did the prophetic spirit which was imparted to the dying saint,
open the dim eye to pierce into futurity. As the body decayed, the soul
gathered strength: as earth receded, heaven approached: as all around
him grew dark, all above him was bright. And, "THE SUN OF RIGHTEOUSNESS,

<span id="page_474">p. 474</span>

arising with healing on his wings," disclosed, through the dark clouds
of advancing ages, LIFE, and IMMORTALITY, and JESUS CHRIST.

Thus "ABRAHAM *rejoiced to see the day of Christ: he saw it, and was
glad* <span id="fr_581"></span>[1](#fn_580.md)." Thus "ISAAC *blessed Jacob
concerning things to come* <span id="fr_582"></span>[2](#fn_581.md)." Thus
JACOB declared his hope and expectation--"*I have waited for thy
salvation, O Lord* <span id="fr_583"></span>[3](#fn_582.md)!" Each in his
own life-time looked anxiously for the redemption, which each on his
death-bed "*saw, but not nigh*." In the prophetic spirit which
afterwards inspired the unworthy Balaam, they perceived that "*a star
would come out of Jacob, and a sceptre would arise out of Judah*;" but,
like him, they were assured--"*I shall see Him; but not now; I shall
behold Him, but not nigh* <span id="fr_584"></span>[4](#fn_583.md)."
"*These all died in faith, not having received the promises; but having
seen them afar off, and being persuaded of them, and embracing them, and
confessing that they were strangers, and pilgrims on the earth* <span
id="fr_585"></span>[5](#fn_584.md)." "*They did all eat the same spiritual
meat; they did all drink the same spiritual drink; for they drank of the
spiritual rock that followed them, and* THAT ROCK WAS CHRIST <span
id="fr_586"></span>[6](#fn_585.md)."

<span id="page_475">p. 475</span>

Dwelling in tents soon pitched and soon removed; wandering from place to
place, as men without a country, they weaned themselves from the follies
and fascinations of the world, and fixed their hearts firmly on that
place alone, "where true joys only are to be found." The only heritage
which they possessed was THE PROMISE; the only land which they purchased
was A BURIAL PLACE: the only rest for their bodies was THE GRAVE; the
only home of their souls was HEAVEN. "Wherefore God was not ashamed to
be called their God; for he hath prepared for them a city "--"a city
which hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God <span
id="fr_587"></span>[1](#fn_586.md)."

May all, who are partakers of the same abiding hope, partake with them
in the fruition of the same unfading glory!

THE END.

<span id="page_476">p. 476</span>

LONDON:  
GILBERT & RIVINGTON, PRINTERS,  
Sr. JOHN'S SQUARE.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_572"></span>[462:1](wos12.htm#fr_573.md) Psalm lxxxv. 10.

<span id="fn_573"></span>[466:1](wos12.htm#fr_574.md) Levit. xvii. 11.

<span id="fn_574"></span>[468:1](wos12.htm#fr_575.md) This expression is
first made use of in the Septuagint, Gen. xlix. 10; where the word
"Shiloh" is most wonderfully paraphrased--προσδοκία Ἐθνῶν. So that by
the confession of seventy-two elders chosen for their learning out of
the twelve tribes of Israel, the Redeemer of man, was "The expectation
of the Gentiles," *nearly three centuries before he was born*!

<span id="fn_575"></span>[469:1](wos12.htm#fr_576.md) Rom. ix. 5.

<span id="fn_576"></span>[470:1](wos12.htm#fr_577.md) Col. i. 19.

<span id="fn_577"></span>[470:2](wos12.htm#fr_578.md) Col. ii. 9.

<span id="fn_578"></span>[472:1](wos12.htm#fr_579.md) Gen. iv. 1. See
Faber, Hor. Mos. ii. 55.

<span id="fn_579"></span>[473:1](wos12.htm#fr_580.md) John i. 14---"dwelt
among us"--literally, "lived as in a tent;" or, "pitched his
tent."--ἐσκήνωσεν ἐν ἡμῖν.

<span id="fn_580"></span>[474:1](wos12.htm#fr_581.md) John viii. 56.

<span id="fn_581"></span>[474:2](wos12.htm#fr_582.md) Heb. xi. 20.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[474:3](wos12.htm#fr_583.md) Gen. xlix. 18.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[474:4](wos12.htm#fr_584.md) Numb. xxiv. 17.

<span id="fn_584"></span>[474:5](wos12.htm#fr_585.md) Heb. xi. 13.

<span id="fn_585"></span>[474:6](wos12.htm#fr_586.md) 1 Cor. x. 3.

<span id="fn_586"></span>[475:1](wos12.htm#fr_587.md) Heb. xi. 16, and 10.

 
