[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc11007)  [Next](cc11009.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 11: Psalms, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix"></span>

<span id="ix-p1"></span>PSALM 100

<span id="ix-p2"></span>The title of this psalm may serve for a summary
of its contents Moreover, its brevity renders a lengthened discourse
unnecessary. The Psalmist, in an especial manner, invites believers to
praise God, because he has chosen them to be his people, and has taken
them under his care.

<span id="ix.i"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p1"></span><span id="ix.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
100:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#001.md)<span id="ix.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p2"></span>A Psalm of Praise

<span id="ix.i-p3"></span>**1.** Let all the earth make a joyful noise
to Jehovah. **2.** Serve Jehovah with gladness: come into his presence
with joyfulness. **3.** Know ye that Jehovah himself is God: he made us,
and not we ourselves: we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.

<span id="ix.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.i-p5"></span><span id="ix.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p6"></span>**1** *Make a joyful noise* The Psalmist
refers only to that part of the service of God which consists in
recounting his benefits and giving thanks. And since he invites the
whole of the inhabitants of the earth indiscriminately to praise
Jehovah, he seems, in the spirit of prophecy, to refer to the period
when the Church would be gathered out of different nations. Hence he
commands (verse 2) that God should *be served with gladness,* intimating
that his kindness towards his own people is so great as to furnish them
with abundant ground for rejoicing. This is better expressed in the
third verse, in which he first reprehends the presumption of those men
who had wickedly revolted from the true God, both in fashioning for
themselves gods many, and in devising various forms of worshipping them.
And as a multitude of gods destroys and suppresses the true knowledge of
one God only, and tarnishes his glory, the prophet, with great
propriety, calls upon all men to bethink themselves, and to cease from
robbing God of the honor due to his name; and, at the same time,
inveighs against their folly in that, not content with the one God, they
were become vain in their imaginations. For, however much they are
constrained to confess with the mouth that there is a God, the maker of
heaven and earth, yet they are ever and anon gradually despoiling him of
his glory; and in this manner, the Godhead is, to the utmost extent of
their power, reduced to a nonentity. As it is then a most difficult
thing to retain men in the practice of the pure worship of God, the
prophet, not without reason, recalls the world from its accustomed
vanity, and commands them to recognize God as God. For we must attend to
this short definition of the knowledge of him, namely, that his glory be
preserved unimpaired, and that no deity be opposed to him that might
obscure the glory of his name. True, indeed, in the Papacy, God still
retains his name, but as his glory is not comprehended in the mere
letters of his name, it is certain that there he is not recognized as
God. Know, therefore, that the true worship of God cannot be preserved
in all its integrity until the base profanation of his glory, which is
the inseparable attendant of superstition, be completely reformed.

<span id="ix.i-p7"></span><span id="ix.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p8"></span>The prophet next makes mention of the great
benefits received from God, and, in an especial manner, desires the
faithful to meditate upon them. To say *God made us* is a very generally
acknowledged truth; but not to advert to the ingratitude so usual among
men, that scarcely one among a hundred seriously acknowledges that he
holds his existence from God, although, when hardly put to it, they do
not deny that they were created out of nothing; yet every man makes a
god of himself, and virtually worships himself, when he ascribes to his
own power what God declares belongs to him alone. Moreover, it must be
remembered that the prophet is not here speaking of creation in general,
(as I have formerly said,) but of that spiritual regeneration by which
he creates anew his image in his elect. Believers are the persons whom
the prophet here declares to be God’s workmanship, not that they were
made men in their mother’s womb, but in that sense in which Paul, in
<span id="ix.i-p8.1"></span>[Eph
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010.md)<span id="ix.i-p8.1"></span>,
calls them, <span id="ix.i-p8.2"></span>Τὸ ποιημα, *the workmanship* of
God, because they are created unto good works which God hath before
ordained that they should walk in them; and in reality this agrees best
with the subsequent context. For when he says, *We are his people, and
the sheep of his pasture,* he evidently refers to that distinguishing
grace which led God to set apart his children for his heritage, in order
that he may, as it were, nourish them under his wings, which is a much
greater privilege than that of merely being born men. Should any person
be disposed to boast that he has of himself become a new man, who is
there that would not hold in abhorrence such a base attempt to rob God
of that which belongs to him? Nor must we attribute this spiritual birth
to our earthly parents, as if by their own power they begat us; for what
could a corrupt seed produce? Still the majority of men do not hesitate
to claim for themselves all the praise of the spiritual life. Else what
mean the preachers of free-will, unless it be to tell us that by our own
endeavors we have, from being sons of Adam, become the sons of God? In
opposition to this, the prophet in calling us the *people of God,*
informs us that it is of his own good will that we are spiritually
regenerated. And by denominating us *the sheep of his pasture,* he gives
us to know that through the same grace which has once been imparted to
us, we continue safe and unimpaired until the end. It might be otherwise
rendered, *he made us his people,* etc.  <span
id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123.md) But as the meaning is not altered, I
have retained that which was the more generally received reading.

<span id="ix.ii"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p1"></span><span id="ix.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
100:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#004.md)<span id="ix.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p2"></span>**4.** Enter into his gates with praise, and
into his courts with rejoicing: give glory  <span
id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124.md) to him, and bless his name. **5.**
Because Jehovah is good, his mercy endureth for ever, and his truth from
generation to generation.

<span id="ix.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.ii-p5"></span><span id="ix.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p6"></span>**4** *Enter his gates* The conclusion of the
psalm is almost the same as the beginning of it, excepting that he
adopts a mode of speech which relates to the worship of God which
obtained under the law;  <span id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125.md) in
which, however, he merely reminds us that believers, in rendering thanks
to God, do not discharge their duty aright, unless they also continue in
the practice of a steady profession of piety. Meanwhile, under the name
of the temple, he signifies that God cannot be otherwise worshipped than
in strict accordance with the manner prescribed in his law. And,
besides, he adds, that *God’s mercy endureth for ever,* and that *his
truth also is everlasting,* to point out to us that we can never be at a
loss for constant cause of praising him. If, then, God never ceases to
deal with us in this manner, it would argue the basest ingratitude on
our part, if we wearied in rendering to Him the tribute of praise to
which he is entitled. We have elsewhere taken notice of the reason why
truth is connected with mercy. For so foolish are we, that we scarcely
feel the mercy of God while he openly manifests it, not even in the most
palpable displays of it, until he open his holy lips to declare his
paternal regard for us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_123"></span>[124](cc11008.htm#fr_123.md) <span
id="ix.i-p8.3"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p9"></span> The Hebrew text has a keri, which is <span
id="ix.i-p9.2"></span>ולו אנחנו, “and we are his,” instead of <span
id="ix.i-p9.3"></span>ולא אנחנו “and not ourselves.” The Septuagint
supports the latter reading, the ketib, <span id="ix.i-p9.4"></span>καὶ
οὐχ ἡμεῖς, “and not we ourselves;” in which it is followed by the Syriac
and Vulgate versions. Jerome agrees with the keri, <span
id="ix.i-p9.5"></span>*Ipse fecit nos*, *et ipsius sumus*; and so does
the Chaldee. “I am persuaded,” says Lowth, in Merrick’s Annotations,
“that the Masoretical correction, <span id="ix.i-p9.6"></span>ולו, (and
we are *his*,) is right: the construction and parallelism both favour
it.”

<span id="fn_124"></span>[125](cc11008.htm#fr_124.md) <span
id="ix.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="ix.ii-p3.1"></span>Donnez-luy
gloire.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[126](cc11008.htm#fr_125.md) <span
id="ix.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p7"></span> “<span id="ix.ii-p7.1"></span>Sinon qu’il
mesle des maniers de parler, qui se rapportent au service de Dieu qui
estoit sous la Loy.” — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 101](cc11009.md)
