[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc11014)  [Next](cc11016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 11: Psalms, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi"></span>

<span id="xvi-p1"></span>PSALM 107

<span id="xvi-p2"></span>The Psalmist teaches us, in the first place,
that human affairs are not regulated by the fickle and uncertain wheel
of fortune, but that we must observe the judgments of God in the
different vicissitudes which occur in the world, and which men imagine
happen by chance. Consequently, adversity and all the ills which mankind
endure, as shipwrecks, famines, banishments, diseases, and disasters in
war, are to be regarded as so many tokens of God’s displeasure, by which
he summons them, on account of their sins, before his judicial throne.
But prosperity, and the happy issue of events, ought also to be
attributed to his grace, in order that he may always receive the praise
which he deserves, that of being a merciful Father, and an impartial
Judge. About the close of the psalm, he inveighs against those ungodly
men who will not acknowledge God’s hand, amid such palpable
demonstrations of his providence.  <span
id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271)

<span id="xvi.i"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p1"></span><span id="xvi.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
107:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#001)<span id="xvi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p2"></span>**1.** Praise Jehovah, because he is good:
because his mercy endureth for ever. **2.** Let the redeemed of Jehovah
say this,  <span id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272) whom he hath redeemed
out of the hand of the afflicted.  <span
id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273) **3.** Whom he hath gathered out of
the lands, from the east, and from the west, from the north, and from
the south.  <span id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274) **4.** They wandered
from the way in the solitary desert,  <span
id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275) they did not find a city of
habitation. **5.** Both hungry and thirsty, so that their soul fainted
within them. **6.** In their straits they called upon Jehovah, and he
delivered them from all their afflictions. **7.** And he directed them
by a right way, that they might come to a city of habitation. **8.** Let
them praise the mercy of Jehovah in his prescience, and his marvelous
works in the presence of the sons of men. **9.** Because he hath
satisfied the longing soul, and hath filled the hungry soul with
goodness.

<span id="xvi.i-p7"></span> 

<span id="xvi.i-p8"></span><span id="xvi.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p9"></span>**1** *Praise Jehovah.* We have already
explained this verse, for it formed the commencement of the preceding
psalm. And it appears that it was not only frequently used among the
Jews, but also so incorporated with other psalms, that when one part of
the chorus on the one side was singing a portion of the psalm, the other
part of the chorus on the opposite side in its turn, after each
succeeding verse, responded, *Praise Jehovah, because he is good, etc*
The penman of this psalm, whoever he was, has, instead of the ordinary
preface, inserted this beautiful sentiment, in which praise and
thanksgiving to God were so frequently expressed by the Israelitish
Church. Immediately he proceeds to speak more particularly. And first,
he exhorts those to offer up a tribute of gratitude to God; who, after
having been delivered from slavery and imprisonment, and after a long
and painful journey, arrived in safety at their place of abode. These he
calls *the redeemed of God;* because, in wandering through the trackless
desert, and howling wilderness, they many a time would have been
prevented from returning home, had not God, as it were, with his
outstretched hand, appeared as their guard and their guide. He does not
here refer to travelers indiscriminately, but to such as either by
hostile power, or by any other kind of violence, or by stern necessity,
having been banished to distant regions, felt themselves to be in the
midst of imminent dangers; or it may be, that he refers to those who had
been made prisoners by enemies, pirates, or other robbers. He reminds
them that it was by no casual occurrence that they had been driven about
in that manner, and had been brought back to their native country, but
that all their wanderings had been under the superintending providence
of God.

<span id="xvi.i-p10"></span>But the second verse might be conjoined with
the first, as if the prophet were commanding the persons whom he was
addressing to sing this celebrated ode. It may with equal propriety be
read by itself thus: Let the redeemed of Jehovah, who have returned from
captivity to their own land, come forth now, and take part in the
celebration of God’s praises, and let them publish his loving-kindness
which they have experienced in their deliverance. Among the Jews, who
had occasion to undertake extensive journeys, such occurrences as these
were very common; because they could hardly leave their own land,
without from all quarters encountering ways rugged, and difficult, and
perilous; and the same observation is equally applicable to mankind in
general. He reminds them how often they wandered and turned aside from
the right way, and found no place of shelter; a thing by no means rare
in these lonely deserts. Were a person to enter a forest without any
knowledge of the proper direction, he would, in the course of his
wandering, be in danger of becoming the prey of lions and wolves. He
has, however, particularly in his eye those who, finding themselves
unexpectedly in desert places, are also in danger of perishing for
hunger and thirst. For it is certain that such persons are hourly in
hazard of death, unless the Lord come to their rescue.

<span id="xvi.i-p11"></span><span id="xvi.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p12"></span>**6** *In their straits they called upon
Jehovah* The verbs are here in the past tense, and according to
grammarians, represent a continued action. The meaning therefore is,
that those who are wandering in desert places are often pinched with
hunger and thirst in consequence of finding no place in which to lodge;
and who, when all hope of deliverance fails them, then cry unto God.
Doubtless, God grants deliverance to many when in straits, even though
they do not present their supplications to Him for aid; and hence it was
not so much the design of the prophet in this passage to extol the faith
of the pious, who call upon God with all their heart, as to describe the
common feelings of humanity. There may be not a few whose hope does not
center on God, who, nevertheless, are constrained, by some invisible
disposition of mind, to come to Him, when under the pressure of dire
necessity. And this is the plan which God sometimes pursues, in order to
extort from such persons the acknowledgement that deliverance is to be
sought for from no other quarter than from Himself alone; and even the
ungodly, who, while living voluptuously, scoff at Him, he constrains, in
spite of themselves, to invoke his name. It has been customary in all
ages for heathens, who look upon religion as a fable, when compelled by
stern necessity, to call upon God for help. Did they do so in jest? By
no means; it was by a secret natural instinct that they were led to
reverence God’s name, which formerly they held in derision. The Spirit
of God, therefore, in my opinion, here narrates what frequently takes
place, namely, that persons destitute of piety and faith, and who have
no desire to have any thing to do with God, if placed in perilous
circumstances, are constrained by natural instinct, and without any
proper conception of what they are doing, to call on the name of God.
Since it is only in dubious and desperate cases that they betake
themselves to God, this acknowledgement which they make of their
helplessness is a palpable proof of their stupidity, that in the season
of peace and tranquillity they neglect him, so much are they then under
the intoxicating influence of their own prosperity; and notwithstanding
that the germ of piety is planted in their hearts, they nevertheless
never dream of learning wisdom, unless when driven by the dint of
adversity; I mean, to learn the wisdom of acknowledging that there is a
God in heaven who directs every event. It is unnecessary to allude here
to the sarcastic retort of the ancient buffoon, who, on entering a
temple, and beholding a number of tablets which several merchants had
suspended there as memorials of their having escaped shipwreck, through
the kind interposition of the gods, smartly and facetiously remarked,
“But the deaths of those who have been drowned are not enumerated, the
number of which is innumerable.” Perhaps he might have some just cause
for scoffing in this manner at such idols. But even if a hundredfold
more were drowned in the sea than safely reach the harbour, this does
not in the least degree detract from the glory of the goodness of God,
who, while he is merciful, is at the same time also just, so that the
dispensing of the one does not interfere with the exercise of the other.
The same observation applies to travelers that stray from the path, and
wander up and down in the desert. If many of them perish for hunger and
thirst, if many are devoured by wild animals, if many die from cold,
these are nothing else than so many tokens of the judgments of God,
which he designs for our consideration. From which we infer that the
same thing would happen to all men, were it not the will of God to save
a portion of them; and thus interposing as a judge between them, he
preserves some for the sake of showing his mercy, and pours out his
judgments upon others to declare his justice. The prophet, therefore,
very properly adds, that by the hand of God they were led into the
*right way, where they may find a suitable place for lodging;* and
consequently he exhorts them to render thanks to God for this
manifestation of his goodness. And with the view of enhancing the
loving-kindness of God, he connects *his wondrous works* with his mercy;
as if he should say, in this kind interposition, God’s grace is too
manifest, either to be unperceived or unacknowledged by all; and for
those who have been the subjects of such a remarkable deliverance, to
remain silent regarding it, would be nothing less than an impious
attempt to suppress the wonderful doings of God, an attempt equally vain
with that of endeavoring to trample under their feet the light of the
sun. For what else can be said of us, seeing that our natural instinct
drives us to God for help, when we are in perplexity and peril; and
when, after being rescued, we forthwith forget him, who will deny that
his glory is, as it were, obscured by our wickedness and ingratitude?

<span id="xvi.ii"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
107:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#010)<span
id="xvi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p2"></span>**10.** They who dwell in darkness, and in
the shadow of death, being bound in trouble and iron; **11.** Because
they rebelled against the words of God, and spurned the counsel of the
Most High: **12.** When he humbled their heart with affliction; they
were brought low, and there was none to help them. **13.** In their
affliction they cried to Jehovah, and he delivered them from their
tribulations. **14.** He rescued them from darkness and from the shadow
of death, and broke off their chains. **15.** Let them praise the mercy
of Jehovah in his presence, and his marvelous works in the presence of
the sons of men. **16.** Because he hath broken the brazen gates, and
dashed in pieces the iron bars.  <span id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276)

<span id="xvi.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xvi.ii-p5"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p6"></span>**10.** *They who dwell in darkness* The
Spirit of God makes mention here of another species of danger in which
God manifestly discovers his power and grace in the protecting and
delivering of men. The world, as I said, calls these vicissitudes the
sport of fortune; and hardly one among a hundred can be found who
ascribes them to the superintending providence of God. It is a very
different kind of practical wisdom which God expects at our hands;
namely, that we ought to meditate on his judgments in the time of
adversity, and on his goodness in delivering us from it. For surely it
is not by mere chance that a person falls into the hands of enemies or
robbers; neither is it by chance that he is rescued from them. But this
is what we must constantly keep in view, that all afflictions are God’s
rod, and that therefore there is no remedy for them elsewhere than in
his grace. If a person fall into the hands of robbers or pirates, and be
not instantly murdered, but, giving up all hope of life, expects death
every moment; surely the deliverance of such a one is a striking proof
of the grace of God, which shines the more illustriously in proportion
to the fewness of the number who make their escape. Thus, then, should a
great number perish, this circumstance ought by no means to diminish the
praises of God. On this account the prophet charges all those with
ingratitude, who, after they have been wonderfully preserved, very soon
lose sight of the deliverance thus vouchsafed to them. And, to
strengthen the charge, he brings forward, as a testimony against them,
their sighs and cries. For when they are in straits, they confess in
good earnest that God is their deliverer; how happens it, then, that
this confession disappears when they are enjoying peace and quietness?

<span id="xvi.ii-p7"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p8"></span>**11.** *Because they rebelled* In assigning
the cause of their afflictions he corrects the false impressions of
those persons who imagine that these happen by chance. Were they to
reflect on the judgments of God, they would at once perceive that there
was nothing like chance or fortune in the government of the world.
Moreover, until men are persuaded that all their troubles come upon them
by the appointment of God, it will never come into their minds to
supplicate him for deliverance. Farther, when the prophet assigns the
reason for their afflictions, he is not to be regarded as speaking of
those persons as if they were notoriously wicked, but he is to be
considered as calling upon the afflicted carefully to examine some
particular parts of their life, and although no one accuse them, to look
into their hearts, where they will always discover the true origin of
all the miseries which overtake them. Nor does he only charge them with
having merely sinned, but with having rebelled against the word of God,
thus intimating that the best and only regulation for our lives consists
in yielding a prompt obedience to his commandments. When, therefore,
sheer necessity compels those who are in this manner convicted to cry
unto God, they must be insensate indeed, if they do not acknowledge that
the deliverance which, contrary to their expectation, they receive,
comes immediately from God. For brazen gates and iron bars are spoken of
for the purpose of enhancing the benefit; as if he said, the chains of
perpetual slavery have been broken asunder.

<span id="xvi.iii"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p1"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
107:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#017)<span
id="xvi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p2"></span>**17.** Fools are afflicted on account of
the way of their transgression, and by reason of their iniquities.
**18.** Their soul loatheth all food;  <span
id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277) and they approach the gates of death.
**19.** Then they cry unto Jehovah in their tribulation; He saves them
from their straits. **20.** He sendeth his word, and healeth them, and
rescues them from all their corruptions.  <span
id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278) **21.** Let them praise the mercy of
Jehovah in his presence, and his marvelous works in the presence of the
sons of men. **22.** And let them sacrifice the sacrifices of praise,
and declare his works with rejoicings.

<span id="xvi.iii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xvi.iii-p6"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p7"></span>**17** *Fools are afflicted on account of
the way of their transgression.* He comes to another species of
chastisement. For as he observed above, that those were given over to
captivity who refused to yield obedience to God, so now he teaches that
others have been visited by God with disease, as the fruit of their
transgressions. And when the transgressor shall find that it is God who
is administering correction to him, this will pave the way for his
arriving at the knowledge of his grace.

<span id="xvi.iii-p8"></span>He denominates those *fools,* who,
thoughtlessly giving themselves up to sensuality, bring destruction upon
themselves. The sin which they commit is not the result of ignorance and
error only, but of their carnal affections, which depriving them of
proper understanding, cause them to devise things detrimental to
themselves. The maxim, that the fear of God is wisdom, must never be
lost sight of. Hence it plainly follows, that they who shake off the
yoke of God, and surrender themselves to Satan and sin, are the victims
of their own folly and fury. And as constituting a principal ingredient
of this madness, the prophet employs the term *deletion* or
*transgression;* and subsequently he adds *iniquities;* because it
happens that when once a man departs from God, from that moment he loses
all self-control, and falls from one sin into another. But it is not of
the distempers which commonly prevail in the world to which a reference
is made in this passage, but to those which are deemed fatal, and in
which all hope of life is abandoned, so that the grace of God becomes
the more conspicuous when deliverance from them is obtained. When a man
recovers from a slight indisposition, he does not so plainly discern the
effects of God’s power, as when it is put forth in a wonderful and
notable manner to bring back some from the gates of death, and restores
them to their wonted health and rigour. He says, therefore, that they
are preserved from many *corruptions,* which is equivalent to his
saying, that they are delivered from as many deaths. To this purport are
the following words of the prophet, in which he says, *that they
approach the gates of death, and that they loathe all food* We have
already adverted to their calling upon God, namely, that when men are
reduced to the greatest straits, they, by thus calling upon God for aid,
acknowledge that they would be undone unless he wonderfully interposed
for their deliverance.

<span id="xvi.iii-p9"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p10"></span>**20** *He sendeth his word.* Again, in
saying that they are delivered from destruction, the prophet shows that
he is here alluding to those diseases which, in the opinion of men, are
incurable, and from which few are delivered. Besides, he contrasts God’s
assistance with all the remedies which are in the power of man to apply;
as if he should say, that their disease having baffled the skill of
earthly physicians, their recovery has been entirely owing to the
exertion of God’s power. It is proper also to notice the manner in which
their recovery is effected; God has but to will it, or to speak the
word, and instantly all diseases, and even death itself, are expelled. I
do not regard this as exclusively referring to the faithful, as many
expositors do. I own, indeed, that it is of comparatively little
consequence to us to be the subjects of bodily care, if our souls still
remain unsanctified by the word of God; and hence it is the intention of
the prophet that we consider the mercy of God as extending to the evil
and unthankful. The meaning of the passage, therefore, is, that diseases
neither come upon us by chance, nor are to be ascribed to natural causes
alone, but are to be viewed as God’s messengers executing his commands;
so that we must believe that the same person that sent them can easily
remove them, and for this purpose he has only to speak the word. And
since we now perceive the drift of the passage, we ought to attend to
the very appropriate analogy contained in it. Corporeal maladies are not
removed except by the word or command of God, much less are men’s souls
restored to the enjoyment of spiritual life, except this word be
apprehended by faith.

<span id="xvi.iii-p11"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p12"></span>*And let them sacrifice* This clause is
subjoined by way of explanation, the more strongly to express how God is
robbed of his due, if in the matter of sacrifice his providence be not
recognised. Even nature itself teaches that some kind of homage and
reverence is due to God; this is acknowledged by the heathens
themselves, who have no other instructor than nature. We know too, that
the practice of offering sacrifices has obtained among all nations; and
doubtless it was by the observance of this ritual, that God designed to
preserve in the human family some sense of piety and religion. To
acknowledge the bounty and beneficence of God, is the most acceptable
sacrifice which can be presented to him; to this subject, therefore, the
prophet intends to recall the attention of the insensate and indifferent
portion of men. I do not deny that there may be also an allusion to the
ceremonial law; but inasmuch as in the world at large sacrifices formed
part of the religious exercises, he charges those with ingratitude, who,
after having escaped from some imminent peril, forget to celebrate the
praises of their Great Deliverer.

<span id="xvi.iv"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p1"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
107:23-32](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#023)<span
id="xvi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p2"></span>**23.** They  <span
id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279) that go down to the sea in ships,
trading in the great waters, **24.** See the works of Jehovah, his
wonders in the deep. **25.** He speaks, and raiseth the stormy wind, and
causeth the billows thereof to mount on high. **26.** They mount up to
the heavens, they descend into the deeps; their soul breaketh because of
trouble. 27. They are tossed and totter like a drunken man, and all
their senses are overwhelmed.  <span id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280)
And they cry to Jehovah in their straits,  <span
id="fr_281"></span>[282](#fn_281) and he rescues them from their
troubles. **29.** He maketh the storm a calm, so that the waves thereof
are still. **30.** And they rejoice because they are calmed; and he
brings them to the coast which they desired. **31.** Let them celebrate
the mercy of Jehovah in his presence, and his wonders among the sons of
men; **32.** And let them exalt him in the congregation of the people,
and praise him in the assembly of the elders.  <span
id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282)

<span id="xvi.iv-p7"></span> 

<span id="xvi.iv-p8"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p9"></span>**23.** *They that go down to the sea in
ships* Here we have another instance of God’s superintending care
towards mankind pointed out to us by the prophet, exemplified in the
bringing of those who are shipwrecked to the harbour, and this, too, as
if he had raised them from the depth and darkness of the tomb, and
brought them to live in the light of day. I do not understand what is
here said about those who are accustomed to navigate the ocean *seeing
the wonders of God,* as referring generally to the many wonderful things
with which it abounds. Such persons are well fitted to bear testimony
regarding the works of God, because they there behold more vast and
various wonders than are to be seen upon earth. But it appears to me
preferable to connect this with the subsequent context, where the
prophet is his own interpreter, and where he shows how suddenly God
raises and calms the tempest.

<span id="xvi.iv-p10"></span>The sum of the matter is, that the scope of
the passage is to point out that the lives of those who navigate the
seas are often in great jeopardy by the storms which they encounter;
because, as often as the ocean heaves and is agitated, and the billows
rise and rage, so often does death stare them in the face. But he
furnishes us with a still more vivid picture of the providence of God;
for in telling us, that the sea does not of its own accord rise into a
tempest, he makes use of the verb, *he speaks,* intimating that the word
and providence of God make the winds blow, to agitate the sea. True,
indeed, the mariners imagine from certain phenomena, that a storm is
approaching, but sudden changes proceed only from the secret appointment
of God. Therefore, he gives not merely a historical narrative of the
manner in which squalls and storms arise, but, assuming the character of
a teacher, begins with the cause itself, and then directs to the
imminent danger with which the tempest is fraught; or rather, portrays,
as in a picture, the image of death, in order that the goodness of God
may appear the more conspicuous when the tempest happily ceases without
any loss of life. They *mount up,* says he, *to the heavens, they
descend into the deeps;* as if he should say, they mount up into the
air, so that their life may be destroyed, and then they tumble down
towards the caverns of the ocean, where they may be drowned.  <span
id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283) Next, he mentions the fears which
torment them, or rather which may deprive them of understanding;
intimating by these words, that however skilfully mariners may steer
their vessels, they may happen to be deprived of their senses; and being
thus paralysed, they could not avail themselves of aid, were it even at
hand. For though they collect all their tackling, cast their sounding
line into the deep, and unfurl their sails to all points, yet after
making every attempt, and all human skill is baffled, they give
themselves up to the mercy of wind and wave. All hope of safety being
cut off, no farther means are employed by them. And now that all human
aid fails, they cry unto God for deliverance, which is a convincing
evidence that they had been as it were dead.  <span
id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284)

<span id="xvi.iv-p18"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p19"></span>**29.** *He maketh the storm a calm* A
profane author, in narrating the history of such an event, would have
said, that the winds were hushed, and the raging billows were calmed;
but the Spirit of God, by this change of the storm into a calm, places
the providence of God as presiding over all; thereby meaning, that it
was not by human agency that this violent commotion of the sea and wind,
which threatened to subvert the frame of the world, was so suddenly
stilled. When, therefore, the sea is agitated, and boils up in terrific
fury, as if wave were contending with wave, whence is it that instantly
it is calm and peaceful, but that God restrains the raging of the
billows, the contention of which was so awful, and makes the bosom of
the deep as smooth as a mirror?  <span id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285)
Having spoken of their great terror, he proceeds next to mention *their
joy,* so that their ingratitude may appear the more striking, if they
forget their remarkable deliverance. For they are not in want of a
monitor, having been abundantly instructed by the storm itself, and by
the calm which ensued, that their lives were in the hand and under the
protection of God. Moreover, he informs them that this is a species of
gratitude which deserves not only to be acknowledged privately, or to be
mentioned in the family, but that it should be praised and magnified in
all places, even in the great assemblies. He makes specific mention of
*the elders,* intimating that the more wisdom and experience a person
has, the more capable is he of listening to, and being a witness of,
these praises.

<span id="xvi.v"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p1"></span><span id="xvi.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
107:33-41](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#033)<span id="xvi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p2"></span>**33.** He turneth rivers into a wilderness,
and springs of water into dryness; **34.** A fruitful land into
saltness,  <span id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286) because of the
wickedness of those who dwell in it. **35.** He turneth the desert into
a pool of water, and the land of barrenness into springs of water.
**36.** And there he maketh the hungry to dwell, that they may build a
city of habitation; **37.** And sow fields, and plant vineyards, and eat
the fruit of the increase. **38.** And he blesses them, and they
multiplied greatly; and he maketh not their cattle to decrease. **39.**
Afterwards they are lessened and dejected, by reason of anguish, misery,
and sorrow. **40.** He poureth contempt upon princes, and maketh them to
wander in a wilderness, where there is no way;  <span
id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287) **41.** And he raiseth the afflicted
out of misery, and maketh him families like a flock.

<span id="xvi.v-p5"></span> 

<span id="xvi.v-p6"></span><span id="xvi.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p7"></span>**33.** *He turneth rivers into a wilderness*
Here then is an account of changes which it would be the height of folly
to attribute to chance. Fruitful lands become unfruitful, and barren
lands assume the new aspect of freshness and fruitfulness. And how
happens it that one district becomes sterile, and another becomes fat
and fertile, contrary to what they were wont to be, but because that God
pours out his wrath upon the inhabitants of the one, by taking his
blessing from them, and renders the other fruitful to feed the hungry?
It may be ascribed to the thinness of the population, that many parts of
Asia and Greece, once exceedingly fruitful, now lie uncultivated and
unproductive; but we must ascribe to the providence of God, which the
prophet praises, the well authenticated fact, that in some places the
earth that was fruitful has now become barren and parched, while others
are beginning to be fertile.

<span id="xvi.v-p8"></span>It is, however, not sufficient merely to
observe, that these wonderful revolutions of the surface of the earth
are the result of God’s overruling purpose, unless we also observe, in
the second place, what the prophet does not omit, that the earth is
cursed by him on account of the iniquity of its inhabitants, who prove
themselves to be undeserving of being so amply sustained by his
bountiful hand. He has put *pools and springs of water* for fields or
countries where there is an abundance of water; because moisture is
required to nourish the plants by which fruit is produced. The term
*saltness* is employed metaphorically, inasmuch as there is nothing more
sterile than salt; hence that saying of Christ’s,

<span id="xvi.v-p9"></span>“If the salt have lost its saltness, what
further purpose will it serve?”  
<span id="xvi.v-p9.2"></span>[Mr
9:50](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#050)<span id="xvi.v-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p10"></span>not even indeed for barrenness. And,
consequently, when men designed to doom any place to remain
unproductive, they usually sowed it with salt. And probably it is in
allusion to this ancient custom, that the prophet says that the land was
covered with salt.

<span id="xvi.v-p11"></span><span id="xvi.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p12"></span>**35.** *He turneth the desert into a pool
of water* This change, in contrast with the former, places the
miraculous power of God in a more luminous position. Because, were the
fields ceasing to be so productive as in former times, men of the world,
as was common of old, would attribute this to the frequent crops which
exhausted their productive power. But whence is it that parched grounds
become so fruitful, that one would almost say that the atmosphere, as
well as the nature of the soil, had undergone a change, unless it be
that God hath there put forth a wonderful display of his power and
goodness? Wherefore, the prophet very justly says, that the *deserts
were turned into pools of water,* so that populous cities may rise up in
waste and uncultivated places, where once there was not a single
cottage. For it is as improbable that the nature of the soil is changed,
as that the course of the sun and stars is changed. The clause, *the
hungry are filled,* may mean, either that they themselves, after
considerable privations, have got what may supply their need, or that
those poor persons, living in a country where they cannot longer find
daily bread, being constrained to leave it, and to seek a new place of
abode, are there bountifully supplied by God. I am rather disposed to
think, that this clause refers to what frequently occurs, namely, that
the famishing, whose wants the world refuses to supply, and who are
expatriated, are comfortably accommodated in these desert places, where
God blesses them with abundance. The passage which I have translated,
*fruit of the increase,* is, by not a few Hebrew expositors, considered
as a repetition of two synonymous terms, and are for supplying a
copulative conjunction, making it, *fruit and increase* But it was
rather the intention of the prophet to refer to fruit yielded annually;
as if he said, the fertility of these regions is not temporary, or only
for a few years, it is perennial. For <span
id="xvi.v-p12.1"></span>תבואות*, tebuaoth,* is the term which, in the
Hebrew, denotes full-grown fruit annually produced by the earth. And
when he says, that the *new settlers sow and plant,* he gives us to
understand, that, prior to their arrival, cultivation was unknown in
these places, and, consequently, in becoming so unusually fertile, they
assumed a totally different aspect. And, in fine, he adds, that it was
entirely owing to the Divine blessing that those who were once oppressed
with poverty and want are now daily increasing in the good things of
this life.

<span id="xvi.v-p13"></span><span id="xvi.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p14"></span>**39.** *Afterwards they are lessened* Ere I
enter upon the consideration of the truths contained in this verse, I
must make some brief verbal observations. Some make the word <span
id="xvi.v-p14.1"></span>עוצר*, otser,* to signify *tyranny,* and
certainly <span id="xvi.v-p14.2"></span>עצר*, atsar,* does signify to
*bear rule.* But since it is used metaphorically for *anguish,* it
appears to me that this is the meaning which is most accordant with the
tenor of the passage. The last two words of the verse may be read as in
the nominative case, as I have rendered them, or in the genitive, the
*anguish of misery and sorrow* This lection appears to me preferable,
*through the anguish of misery,*  <span
id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288) *and through sorrow.*

<span id="xvi.v-p16"></span>We come now to notice shortly the main
things in the passage. And as we had formerly a description of the
changes which these districts underwent in relation to the nature of the
soil, so now we are informed that mankind do not for ever continue in
the same condition; because they both decrease in number, and lose their
place and property by being reduced by wars or by civil commotions, or
by other casualties. Therefore, whether they are wasted by the
pestilence, or are defeated in battle, or are cut off by intestine
broils, it is manifest that both their rank and condition undergo
alteration. And what is the occasion of this change, but that God
withdraws his grace, which hitherto formed the hidden spring from which
all their prosperity issued? And as there are a thousand casualties by
which cities may be ruined, the prophet brings forward one species of
change of all others the most palpable and remarkable. And since God’s
hand is not observed in that which relates to persons living in
comparative obscurity, he brings into view princes themselves, whose
name and fame will not permit any memorable event which befalls them to
remain in obscurity. For it seems that the world is made on their
account. When God, therefore, hurls them from their lofty estate, then
men, aroused as it were from their slumber, are prepared to regard his
judgments. Here, too, the mode of address which is employed must be
attended to; in saying, that *God poured contempt upon princes,* it is
as if it was his pleasure, so long as they retained their dignity, that
honor and respect should be paid to them. The words of Daniel are well
known,

<span id="xvi.v-p17"></span>“O king, God hath put the fear of thee in
the very fowls of the heaven and the beasts of the earth,” (<span
id="xvi.v-p17.1"></span>[Da 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#008)<span
id="xvi.v-p17.1"></span>)

<span id="xvi.v-p18"></span>And assuredly, though princes may clothe
themselves with power, yet that inward honor and majesty which God has
conferred upon them, is a greater safeguard than any human arm. Nor even
would a single village hold out for the space of three days, did not
God, by his invisible and invincible agency, put a restraint upon the
hearts of men. Hence, whenever God renders princes contemptible, their
magnificent power must of necessity be subverted. This is a fact
corroborated by history, that mighty potentates, who have been the
terror and dread of the whole world, when once denuded of their dignity
and power, have become the sport even of their own dependants. And
inasmuch as such a striking revolution as this should be regarded as a
wonderful display of God’s power, yet such is the obtuseness of our
minds, that we will not acknowledge his overruling providence. As a
contrast to these reverses, the prophet afterwards shows, that the poor
and ignoble are exalted, and their houses increased, and that those who
were held in no estimation, suddenly increase in wealth and power. In
these things men would assuredly recognize the providence of God, were
it not that the perversity of their minds rendered them insensate.

<span id="xvi.vi"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p1"></span><span id="xvi.vi-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
107:42-43](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#042)<span
id="xvi.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p2"></span>**42.** The righteous shall see that, and
shall rejoice: and all iniquity  <span id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289)
shall stop her mouth.  <span id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290) **43.**
Whosoever is wise, so as to observe these things, even they shall
understand the loving-kindness of Jehovah.

<span id="xvi.vi-p5"></span> 

<span id="xvi.vi-p6"></span><span id="xvi.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p7"></span>**42** *The righteous shall see that, and
shall rejoice* The prophet now draws the conclusion, that so many
evident tokens of God’s superintending and overruling providence could
not transpire before the righteous without attracting their notice, and
that their vision being illuminated by faith, these scenes are
contemplated by them with unfeigned delight; while the wicked remain
perplexed and mute. For he very judiciously makes a distinction between
these two classes of persons. In whatever manner the wicked may be
constrained to recognize God as the supreme ruler of the universe,
nevertheless, in seeing they see not, and derive nothing from the sight,
except that their conduct is rendered the more inexcusable. But the
righteous are not only able to form a good and sound judgment of these
events, they also spontaneously open their eyes to contemplate the
equity, goodness, and wisdom of God, the sight and knowledge of which
are refreshing to them. For the joy which they experience in this
exercise is a pledge that their thus observing these things was the
spontaneous effusion of their hearts. With regard to the despisers of
God, it is not meant that they are so deeply impressed as truly to
acknowledge that the world is under his superintending care, but that
they are merely so far kept in check as not to presume to deny the
existence of that providence as their natural inclination would lead
them to do; or, at least, that they meet with a vigorous repulse
whenever they attempt to speak in opposition to it. Although the
judgments of God are before their eyes, yet is their understanding so
darkened, that they cannot perceive the clear light. And this manner of
speaking is more energetic than if it had been said, that the wicked
themselves are become mute. In fact, they do not cease from murmuring
against God’s dispensations of providence; for we see with what
arrogance and contempt they set themselves in opposition to our faith,
and have the hardihood to pour forth horrid blasphemies against God.
This does not impeach the veracity of the prophet’s statement, that *the
mouth of wickedness is stopped,* because, in fact, the more proudly and
violently they assail God, the more notorious does their impiety appear.
Besides, the joy here mentioned arises from this, that there is nothing
more calculated to increase our faith, than the knowledge of the
providence of God; because, without it, we would be harassed with doubts
and fears, being uncertain whether or not the world was governed by
chance. For this reason, it follows that those who aim at the subversion
of this doctrine, depriving the children of God of true comfort, and
vexing their minds by unsettling their faith, forge for themselves a
hell upon earth. For what can be more awfully tormenting than to be
constantly racked with doubt and anxiety? And we will never be able to
arrive at a calm state of mind until we are taught to repose with
implicit confidence in the providence of God. Moreover, it is declared
in this verse, that God manifests his goodness to all men without
exception, and yet there are comparatively few of them who benefit by
it. Wherefore, when he formerly called upon all to celebrate the
goodness of God, it was in order that the ingratitude of the majority of
them might the more plainly appear.

<span id="xvi.vi-p8"></span><span id="xvi.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p9"></span>**43.** *Whosoever is wise, so as to observe
these things.* We are now informed that men begin to be wise when they
turn their whole attention to the contemplation of the works of God, and
that all others besides are fools. For however much they may pique
themselves upon their superior acuteness and subtilty, all this is of no
avail so long as they shut their eyes against the light which is
presented to them. In employing this interrogatory form of address, he
indirectly adverts to that false persuasion which prevails in the world,
at the very time when the most daring heaven-despiser esteems himself to
be the wisest of men; as if he should say, that all those who do not
properly observe the providence of God, will be found to be nothing but
fools. This caution is the more necessary, since we find that some of
the greatest of philosophers were so mischievous as to devote their
talents to obscure and conceal the providence of God, and, entirely
overlooking his agency, ascribed all to secondary causes. At the head of
these was Aristotle, a man of genius and learning; but being a heathen,
whose heart was perverse and depraved, it was his constant aim to
entangle and perplex God’s overruling providence by a variety of wild
speculations; so much so, that it may with too much truth be said, that
he employed his naturally acute powers of mind to extinguish all light.
Besides, the prophet not only condemns the insensate Epicureans, whose
insensibility was of the basest character, but he also informs us that a
blindness, still greater and more detestable, was to be found among
these great philosophers themselves. By the term, *observe,* he informs
us, that the bare apprehension of the works of God is not enough, — they
must be carefully considered in order that the knowledge of them may be
deliberately and maturely digested. And, therefore, that it may be
engraven upon our hearts, we must make these works the theme of our
attentive and constant meditation. When the prophet says, *Whosoever is
wise, even they shall understand,* the change of the singular into the
plural number is beautifully appropriate. By the one he tacitly
complains of the fewness of those who observe the judgments of God; as
if he should say, How seldom do we meet with a person who truly and
attentively considers the works of God! Then he adverts to the fact of
their being so visibly before all, that it is impossible that men could
overlook them, were it not that their minds are perverted by their own
wickedness. And if any person be disposed to inquire how it comes to
pass that the prophet, after treating of the judgments and severity of
God, now makes mention of his loving-kindness, I answer, that his
loving-kindness shines most conspicuously, and occupies a very prominent
place in all that he does; for he is naturally prone to loving-kindness,
by which also he draws us to himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_271"></span>[272](cc11015.htm#fr_271) <span
id="xvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi-p3"></span> “The author of this psalm is not known; but it
was probably David, although some think it better to consider it as
having been written after the return from the Babylonish captivity. This
psalm is of very singular construction, and was obviously intended to be
sung in responses. It has a frequently recurring double burden or
intercalary verse. The first burden is found in verses 6, 13, 19, 28;
the second 8, 15, 21, 31; that is, after the description of a class of
calamities comes the first chorus expressing the cry to the Lord for
deliverance; then a single verse describes the deliverance as granted,
after which follows the chorus of thanksgiving — and thus on to verse
35, where the system ends. The last two burdens are, however, separate
by two verses instead of one, as before. It will also be observed, that
the second chorus has sometimes annexed another reflective distich,
illustrative of the sentiment, as in verses 9, 16. There are many other
examples of a similar arrangement to be found in the Psalms; but in
Lowth’s opinion, few of them are equal, and none superior, to this.” —
*Illustrated Commentary upon the Bible.* The beauties of this very
interesting and highly instructive composition are many and striking, of
which the least intelligent reader who peruses it with any degree of
attention must be convinced. In point of poetical beauty, it may,
according to the best judges, be classed with the most admired
productions of Theocritus, Bion, Moschus, or Virgil. “It may undoubtedly
be enumerated,” remarks Lowth, “among the most elegant monuments of
antiquity; and it is chiefly indebted for its elegance to the general
plan and conduct of the poem. It celebrates the goodness and mercy of
God towards mankind, as demonstrated in the immediate assistance and
comfort which he affords, in the greatest calamities, to those who
devoutly implore his aid: in the first place, to those who wander in the
desert, and who encounter the horrors of famine; next, to those who are
in bondage; again, to those who are afflicted with disease; and,
finally, to those who are tossed about upon the ocean. The prolixity of
the argument is occasionally relieved by narration; and examples are
superadded of the divine severity in punishing the wicked, as well as of
his benignity to the devout and virtuous.” — *Lectures on the Sacred
Poetry of the Hebrews,* volume 2, page 376. “Had such an Idyl,” says Dr
Adam Clarke, “appeared in Theocritus or Virgil, or had it been found as
a scene in any of the Greek Tragedies, even in æschylus himself, it
would have been praised up to the heavens, and probably been produced as
their masterpiece.”

<span id="fn_272"></span>[273](cc11015.htm#fr_272) <span
id="xvi.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p3"></span> “*Let the redeemed of the Lord say,* viz.,
what is said in the latter part of the preceding verse, *that his mercy
endureth for ever.* — See <span id="xvi.i-p3.1"></span>[Ps
118:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#001)<span id="xvi.i-p3.1"></span>,
and following verses.” — *Phillips.*

<span id="fn_273"></span>[274](cc11015.htm#fr_273) <span
id="xvi.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p4"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p4.1"></span>מיד-צר*, from
the hand* or *power* *of* *the enemy.* Luther has translated it, *aus
Noth, from want*; in which translation he is followed by Hengstenberg,
who observes, that <span id="xvi.i-p4.2"></span>צר, *want,* ‘is here
personified, and is represented as a dangerous enemy, who has Israel in
his hand. In the whole psalm the discourse is not concerning enemies,
but only concerning want or misery.’ — See verses 6, 13. He is probably
right, for it is doubtful whether <span id="xvi.i-p4.3"></span>צר, ever
signifies an enemy, except, perhaps, in a few passages in the latter
books of the Bible.” — *Phillips.*

<span id="fn_274"></span>[275](cc11015.htm#fr_274) <span
id="xvi.i-p4.4"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p5"></span> The original word is <span
id="xvi.i-p5.1"></span>ומים, “and from the sea;” to which agree all the
ancient versions, and the Chaldee interprets it of the Southern Sea.
<span id="xvi.i-p5.2"></span>ים is often put for the Mediterranean Sea;
which being west of Judea, this word came to signify generally the west,
when employed to express one of the cardinal points, <span
id="xvi.i-p5.3"></span>[Ge 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#008)<span
id="xvi.i-p5.3"></span>; <span id="xvi.i-p5.4"></span>[Ex
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#019)<span id="xvi.i-p5.4"></span>.
But it is also used for *the Red Sea,* as in <span
id="xvi.i-p5.5"></span>[Ps 114:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#003)<span
id="xvi.i-p5.5"></span>, where <span id="xvi.i-p5.6"></span>ים is put
absolutely for <span id="xvi.i-p5.7"></span>סוף, which lay to the south
of Judea, and hence the word might denote the south point. Hare, Secker,
Kennicott, and Horsley, would read <span id="xvi.i-p5.8"></span>מימין,
“from the south.” Gesenius and Hengstenberg are of opinion, apparently
without sufficient reason, that <span id="xvi.i-p5.9"></span>ים, both in
this passage and in <span id="xvi.i-p5.10"></span>[Isa
49:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#012)<span id="xvi.i-p5.10"></span>,
where it is also joined with <span id="xvi.i-p5.11"></span>צפון, *the
north,* has the signification of *west.*

<span id="fn_275"></span>[276](cc11015.htm#fr_275) <span
id="xvi.i-p5.12"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p6"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p6.1"></span>Ou, Ils se
sont fourvoyez au desert tous seulets.” — *Fr*. *marg.* “Or, they
wandered solitary in the desert.”

<span id="fn_276"></span>[277](cc11015.htm#fr_276) <span
id="xvi.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p3"></span> To secure the gates of cities, it is
customary in the East, at the present day, to cover them with thick
plates of brass and iron. Maundrell speaks of the enormous gates of the
principal mosque at Damascus, formerly the Church of St John the
Baptist, being plated over with brass. Pitts informs us, that Algiers
has five gates, and some of these have two, some three, other gates
within them; and that some of them are plated all over with thick iron,
being made strong and convenient for what it is — a nest of pirates. —
*Harmer*’*s Observations,* volume 1, page 329. To such a practice,
which, in all probability, obtained in ancient times, there seems to be
here a reference. From this verse some have been inclined to think that
the psalm was written after the return of the Jews from the Babylonish
captivity. This deliverance was predicted, in precisely the same terms,
in that remarkable passage, where God promises to go before Cyrus his
anointed, and “break in pieces the gates of brass, and cut in sunder the
bars of iron,” (<span id="xvi.ii-p3.1"></span>[Isa
45:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#002)<span id="xvi.ii-p3.1"></span>)
This phraseology appropriately expresses the superior and almost
impregnable strength of Babylon. “Abydenus, quoted by Eusebius in his
<span id="xvi.ii-p3.2"></span>*Praeparatio Evangelica,* says that the
wall of Babylon had brazen gates. And Herodotus more particularly, — ‘In
the wall all around there are a hundred gates all of brass; and so, in
like manner, are the sides and the lintels.’ The gates likewise within
the city, opening to the river from the several streets, were of brass:
as were those also of the Temple of Belus.” — (*Lowth* on <span
id="xvi.ii-p3.3"></span>[Isa 45:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#002)<span
id="xvi.ii-p3.3"></span>) But still these brazen gates could not secure
the city and the empire from falling into the hands of the instrument
chosen by God for the deliverance of his people.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[278](cc11015.htm#fr_277) <span
id="xvi.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p3"></span> “The Psalmist is speaking of sick men, to
whom the most desirable food is often abhorrent.” — *Phillips.*

<span id="fn_278"></span>[279](cc11015.htm#fr_278) <span
id="xvi.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p4"></span> “<span id="xvi.iii-p4.1"></span>Ou,
fosses, ou pieges.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Pitfalls, or snares.”

<span id="fn_279"></span>[280](cc11015.htm#fr_279) <span
id="xvi.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p3"></span> This psalm is distinguished for beautiful
and inimitable description. In the preceding part of it, the weary and
bewildered traveler, — the forlorn and wretched captive, shut up in the
dungeon and bound in fetters, — the sick and dying man, — are painted in
the most striking and affecting manner. In this verse there is a
transition to ships, and the dangers of mariners foundering in a storm,
which is continued to the close of the 30th verse. This has often been
admired as one of the sublimest descriptions of a sea-storm anywhere to
be found, either in the Sacred Writings, or in profane authors.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[281](cc11015.htm#fr_280) <span
id="xvi.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p4"></span> Horsley reads, “And all their skill is
drowned;” “that is,” says he, “their skill in the art of navigation is
drowned; a metaphor taken from the particular danger which threatens
them.” Phillips reads, *And all their wisdom is absorbed* or *swallowed
up*; which, in like manner, he explains as denoting that “their alarm is
so great, that their knowledge deserts them; they lose all
self-possession, and become entirely unfit for managing the ship.”

<span id="fn_281"></span>[282](cc11015.htm#fr_281) <span
id="xvi.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p5"></span> Instead of *in their straits,* Phillips
reads, *from their prison-houses, places of confinement.* “By their
prison-houses,” says he, “we understand the ship in which they were
confined; to be liberated from which, and consequently from the risk of
a watery grave, they cried unto the Lord.”

<span id="fn_282"></span>[283](cc11015.htm#fr_282) <span
id="xvi.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p6"></span> “<span id="xvi.iv-p6.1"></span>עם, *the
people,* is here evidently opposed to <span
id="xvi.iv-p6.2"></span>זקנים, *elders,* and both signify the whole
assembly or congregation. For, among the Jews, the doctors, rulers of
the synagogue, and *elders,* had a distinct apartment from the *people,*
and the service being much in *antiphona,* or response, part was spoken
by them that officiated in the seat of the elders, and the rest by the
multitude of common men, the <span id="xvi.iv-p6.3"></span>ἰδιῶται, that
answered *Amen* at least, at their giving of thanks.” — *Hammond.*

<span id="fn_283"></span>[284](cc11015.htm#fr_283) <span
id="xvi.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p11"></span> “The men of the ship go up to heaven,
*i.e*., rise high in the air when the wave lifteth up the ship, and
afterwards, because of the wave they descend to the deep; and from thus
ascending and descending, the soul of the men of the ship melteth within
them on account of the danger in which they are placed.” — *Kimchi.*

<span id="fn_284"></span>[285](cc11015.htm#fr_284) <span
id="xvi.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p12"></span> The consternation into which those at sea
are thrown in a dangerous storm, and their deliverance by God in answer
to prayer, is so beautifully described in the well known and admirable
hymn of Addison, that we shall take the liberty to quote a part of it:

<span id="xvi.iv-p13"></span>“Think, O my soul! devoutly think,  
How with affrighted eyes,  
Thou saw’st the wide-extended deep,  
In all its horrors rise.

<span id="xvi.iv-p14"></span>“Confusion dwelt on every face,  
And fear in every heart;  
When waves on waves, and gulfs on gulfs,  
O’ercame the pilot’s art.

<span id="xvi.iv-p15"></span>“Yet then, from all my griefs, O Lord,  
Thy mercy set me free;  
Whilst in the confidence of prayer,  
My soul took hold on Thee.

<span id="xvi.iv-p16"></span>“For though in dreadful whirls we hung  
High in the broken wave,  
I knew Thou wert not slow to hear,  
Nor impotent to save.

<span id="xvi.iv-p17"></span>“The storm was laid, the winds retir’d,  
Obedient to thy will;  
The sea that roar’d at thy command,  
At thy command was still!”

<span id="fn_285"></span>[286](cc11015.htm#fr_285) <span
id="xvi.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p20"></span> Among the circumstances selected by the
prophet in this striking description of a storm at sea, God’s agency,
both in raising and calming it, is not to be overlooked. He is
introduced as first causing, by His omnipotent command, the tempest to
sweep over the ocean, whose billows are thus made to rise in furious
agitation mountains high: and, again, as hushing the winds into a calm,
and allaying the agitation of the waves. The description would be
utterly mutilated were the special reference to the Divine power in such
phenomena omitted. “How much more comfortable, as well as rational, is
the system of the Psalmist, than the Pagan scheme in Virgil, and other
poets, where one deity is represented as raising a storm, and another as
laying it. Were we only to consider the sublime in this piece of poetry,
what can be nobler than the idea it gives us of the Supreme Being, thus
raising a tumult among the elements, and recovering them out of their
confusion, thus troubling and becalming nature?” — *Spectator,* Number
485.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[287](cc11015.htm#fr_286) <span
id="xvi.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p3"></span> “<span id="xvi.v-p3.2"></span>למלחה, *into
saltness,* or *barrenness.* The word has here the force of sterility.
Pliny says, ‘<span id="xvi.v-p3.3"></span>Omnislocus in quo
reperitursal, sterilis est, nihilque gignit.’ — Hist. Nat. Lib. 31, cap.
7. Allusion is here made to the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, ‘The
whole land thereof is brimstone, and salt, and burning; that it is not
sown, nor beareth, nor any grass groweth therein, like the overthrow of
Sodom and Gomorrah, which the Lord overthrew in his anger, and in his
wrath,’ (<span id="xvi.v-p3.4"></span>[De
29:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#023)<span id="xvi.v-p3.4"></span>)
The Chaldee has paraphrased the verse as follows: ‘The land of Israel
which bore fruit he hath laid waste as Sodom, which was overturned on
account of the wickedness of its inhabitants.’” — *Phillips.*

<span id="fn_287"></span>[288](cc11015.htm#fr_287) <span
id="xvi.v-p3.5"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p4"></span> The words of this verse are found in <span
id="xvi.v-p4.1"></span>[Job 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#021),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#024)<span id="xvi.v-p4.1"></span>, from
which they are supposed, with great probability, to have been borrowed.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[289](cc11015.htm#fr_288) <span
id="xvi.v-p14.3"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p15"></span> “<span id="xvi.v-p15.1"></span>Par angoisse
de mal et par douleur.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[290](cc11015.htm#fr_289) <span
id="xvi.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p3"></span> “*Iniquity* is here personified, and
denotes the *iniquitous*; but the abstract is more poetical.” — *Dr*
*Geddes.*

<span id="fn_290"></span>[291](cc11015.htm#fr_290) <span
id="xvi.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p4"></span> The same critic reads, “While all iniquity
shall be tongue-tied.” “*Tongue tied,*” says he, “literally
*mouth-shut*: which perhaps might be not improperly vernacularised.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 108](cc11016)
