[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc11012)  [Next](cc11014.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 11: Psalms, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv"></span>

<span id="xiv-p1"></span>PSALM 105

<span id="xiv-p2"></span>The Psalmist magnifies the singular grace of
God displayed in selecting and freely adopting one people from amongst
all nations of the world. To show that it was not in word only that he
had made a covenant with Abraham and his offspring, God did not cease,
after having delivered them from Egypt, to confer upon them innumerable
benefits; and his design in this was, that those who had been delivered
might on their part faithfully keep his covenant, and devote themselves
unfeignedly to his service.  <span id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201.md)

<span id="xiv.i"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p1"></span><span id="xiv.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
105:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#001.md)<span id="xiv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p2"></span>**1.** Praise ye Jehovah; invoke his name:
announce his works among the peoples. **2.** Sing ye to him: sing psalms
to him: speak ye of all his wonders. **3.** Rejoice ye in his holy name:
 <span id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202.md) let the heart of those who seek
Jehovah rejoice. **4.** Seek ye Jehovah, and his strength: seek his face
continually. **5.** Remember the marvelous works which he hath
performed; his wonders, and the judgments of his mouth.

<span id="xiv.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiv.i-p5"></span><span id="xiv.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p6"></span>**1** *Praise ye Jehovah, etc.* The object of
these opening words simply is, that the offspring of Abraham should
place all their blessedness in the free adoption of God. It was indeed a
blessing not to be despised that they had been created men, that they
had been cherished in the world by God’s fatherly care, and that they
had received sustenance at his hand; but it was a far more distinguished
privilege to have been chosen to be his peculiar people. While the whole
human race are condemned in Adam, the condition of the Israelites was so
different from all other nations, as to give them ground to boast, that
they were consecrated to God. This is the reason why the prophet heaps
together so many words in commendation of this grace. He does not treat
of the government of the whole world as he did in the preceding psalm,
but he celebrates the fatherly favor which God had manifested towards
the children of Israel. He indeed names in general *his works,* and *his
wonders,* but he limits both to that spiritual covenant by which God
made choice of a church, that might lead on earth a heavenly life. He
does not intend to include as among these wonders, that the sun, moon,
and stars, daily rise to give light to the world, that the earth
produces its fruit in its seasons, that every living creature is
supplied with abundance of all good things for its food, and that the
human family are liberally provided with so many conveniences; but he
celebrates the sovereign grace of God, by which he chose for himself
from amongst the lost race of Adam a small portion to whom he might show
himself to be a father. Accordingly, he enjoins them *to rejoice in the
name of God,* and *to call upon him;* a privilege by which the Church
alone is distinguished. Whence it follows, that this language is
addressed to none but true believers, whom God would have to glory in
his name, since he has taken them under his special protection.

<span id="xiv.i-p7"></span><span id="xiv.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p8"></span>**4** *Seek ye Jehovah, and his strength*
 <span id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203.md) Although he had in the
preceding verse characterized the faithful by the honorable designation,
*those who seek God,* yet he again exhorts them to earnestness in
seeking him, which is not an unnecessary exhortation. Seeking God, it is
true, is the mark by which all genuine saints are particularly
distinguished from the men of the world; but they come far short of
seeking him with due ardor; and, accordingly, they have always need of
incitements, to urge them on to this exercise, although they run of
their own accord. Those whom the prophet here stirs up to seek God are
not fickle persons, nor such as are altogether indolent, and who cleave
to the impurities of earth, but those who with a prompt and ready mind
already aim at doing this; and he thus stimulates them, because he
perceives that they are obstructed by many impediments from advancing in
their course with sufficient rapidity. However willing then we may be,
we have notwithstanding, need of such incitement to correct our
slowness. *The strength* and *face of God,* doubtless refer to that kind
of manifestation by which God, accommodating himself to the rudeness of
the times, drew at that time true believers to himself. The ark of the
covenant is in many other places called both *the strength* and *the
face of God,* because by that symbol the people were reminded, that he
was near them, and also really experienced his power.  <span
id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204.md) The more familiarly then God showed
himself to them, with the more promptitude and alacrity would the
prophet have them to apply their hearts in seeking him; and the aid by
which God relieves our weakness should prove an additional stimulus to
our zeal. Modesty also is recommended to us, that, mindful of our
slowness in seeking God, we may keep the way which he has prescribed to
us, and may not despise the rudiments through which he by little and
little conducts us to himself. It is added *continually,* that no person
may grow weary in this exercise, or, inflated with a foolish opinion of
having reached perfection, may neglect the external aids of piety, as is
done by many, who, after having advanced a few degrees in the knowledge
of God, exempt themselves from the common rank of others, as if they
were elevated above the angels. Again, the injunction is given *to
remember the marvelous works which God had performed,* in the
deliverance of his people from Egypt, when he displayed his power in new
and unusual ways. By *the judgments of his mouth,* some understand the
law. But as I read all the three expressions, *his marvelous works, his
wonders, and the* *judgments of his mouth,* as referring to one series
of events, I prefer explaining it rather of the miracles by which God
subdued the pride of Pharaoh. Still, however, there is some doubt as to
the reason of this manner of speaking. Some are of opinion, that these
miracles are called the judgments of God’s mouth, because he had
foretold them by Moses, which is highly probable. At the same time, the
expression might be taken more simply, as denoting that the power of God
was manifested in an extraordinary manner in these miracles; from which
it would be easy to gather, that they were performed by him. I do not
mean to exclude the ministry of Moses, whom God had raised up to be a
prophet to the Egyptians, that in denouncing what was to come to pass,
he might show that nothing happened by chance. Yet I think there is an
allusion to the manifest character of the miracles, as if it had been
said, Although God had not uttered a word, the facts themselves
evidently showed, that he was the deliverer of his people.

<span id="xiv.ii"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
105:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#006.md)<span id="xiv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p2"></span>**6.** Ye seed of Abraham his servant, the
sons of Jacob his chosen. **7.** He is Jehovah our God: his judgments
are through all the earth. **8.** He hath remembered his covenant for
ever, the word which he commanded to a thousand generations;  <span
id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205.md) **9.** Which he made with Abraham; and
his oath which he swore to Isaac;  <span
id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206.md) **10.** And established it to Jacob
for a law, and to Israel for an everlasting covenant:  <span
id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207.md) **11.** Saying, I will give thee the
land of Canaan, the cord \[or measuring line  <span
id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208.md) \] of your inheritance.

<span id="xiv.ii-p7"></span> 

<span id="xiv.ii-p8"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p9"></span>**6** *Ye seed of Abraham his servant.* The
Psalmist addresses himself by name to his own countrymen, whom, as has
been stated, God had bound to himself by a special adoption. It was a
bond of union still more sacred, that by the mere good pleasure of God
they were preferred to all other nations. By calling them *the seed of
Abraham, and the sons of Jacob,* he reminds them that they had not
attained so great dignity by their own power, but because they were
descended from the holy fathers. He, however, affirms at the same time,
that the holiness of their fathers flowed exclusively from God’s
election, and not from their own nature. He expressly states both these
truths, first, that before they were born children of Abraham, they were
already heirs of the covenant, because they derived their origin from
the holy fathers; and, secondly, that the fathers themselves had not
acquired this prerogative by their own merit or worth, but had been
freely chosen; for this is the reason why Jacob is called *God’s chosen*
Although Abraham is also here called *God’s servant,* (<span
id="xiv.ii-p9.1"></span>[Ge 26:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#024.md)<span
id="xiv.ii-p9.1"></span>) because he purely and sincerely worshipped
him, yet in the second clause it is testified that the commencement of
this distinction was not to be traced to men, but to God alone, who
conferred upon the Israelites the honor of choosing them to be his
peculiar possession.

<span id="xiv.ii-p10"></span>From this covenant the Psalmist infers that
although the government of God extends through the whole world, and
although he executes his judgment in all places, he was nevertheless
especially the God of that one people, (verse 7) according to the
statement in the song of Moses,

<span id="xiv.ii-p11"></span>“When the Most High divided to the nations
their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds
of the people, according to the number of the children of Israel: For
the Lord’s portion is his people; Jacob is the lot of his inheritance.”
<span id="xiv.ii-p11.1"></span>[Deut.
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#008.md),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#009.md)<span id="xiv.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p12"></span>The prophet again intended to show that the
reason why the children of Israel excelled others was not because they
were better than others, but because such was the good pleasure of God.
If the divine judgments are extended through all the regions of the
globe, the condition of all nations is in this respect equal. Whence it
follows that the difference referred to proceeded from the love of God,
— that the source of the superiority of the Israelites to other nations
was his free favor. Although, then, He is the rightful proprietor of the
whole earth, it is declared that he chose one people over whom he might
reign. This is a doctrine which applies to us also at the present day.
If we duly ponder our calling, we will undoubtedly find that God has not
been induced from anything out of himself to prefer us to others, but
that he was pleased to do so purely from his own free grace.

<span id="xiv.ii-p13"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p14"></span>**8** *He hath remembered his covenant for
ever* The Psalmist now celebrates the effect and actual fulfillment of
the covenant, and proves from the deliverance wrought for the Israelites
what he had stated before, namely, That God, while he reigned alike over
all nations, extended his peculiar favor to the offspring of Abraham
alone. How comes it to pass that God, in delivering his people,
displayed the might of his arm by so many miracles, if it was not that
he might faithfully perform the promise which he had made to his
servants in time past? It is evident, then, that the ancient covenant
was the cause of the deliverance granted to the chosen tribes; for in
order that God might faithfully keep his promises, it behooved him first
to be merciful. As a long series of years had elapsed between the
promise and the performance, the prophet uses the word *remember,*
intimating that the Divine promises do not become obsolete by length of
time, but that even when the world imagines that they are extinguished
and wholly forgotten, God retains as distinct a remembrance of them as
ever, that he may accomplish them in due season. This is more strongly
confirmed in the next clause, where the correspondence between the form
or tenor of the covenant and the accomplishment is celebrated. It is not
for a day, he would say, or for a few days, that God has made a covenant
with Abraham, nor has he limited the continuance of his covenant to the
life of man, but he has promised to be the God of his seed even to a
thousand generations. Although, therefore, the fulfillment was for a
long time suspended, God nevertheless showed by the effect that his
promise did not fail by length of time.

<span id="xiv.ii-p15"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p16"></span>As Abraham was the first who was called
when he was mingled with idolaters, the prophet begins with him. He,
however, afterwards declares that the covenant was also confirmed in the
hand of his son and his son’s son. God then deposited his covenant with
Abraham, and by solemn oath engaged to be the God of his seed. But to
give greater assurance of the truth of his promise, he was graciously
pleased to renew it to Isaac and Jacob. The effect of such an extension
of it is, that his faithfulness takes deeper hold on the hearts of men;
and, besides, his grace, when it is thus testified on frequent recurring
occasions, becomes better known and more illustrious among men.
Accordingly, it is here declared by gradation how steadfast and
immovable this covenant is; for what is affirmed concerning each of the
patriarchs belongs equally to them all. It is said that God *swore to
Isaac.* But had he not sworn to Abraham before? Undoubtedly he had. It
is also *said that it was established to Jacob for a law, and for an
everlasting covenant* Does this mean that the covenant was previously
only temporal and transitory, and that then it had changed its nature?
Such an idea is altogether at variance with the meaning of the sacred
writer. By these different forms of expression he asserts that the
covenant was fully and perfectly confirmed, so that, if perhaps the
calling was obscure in one man, it might be more evident, by God’s
having transmitted the testimony of it to posterity; for by this means
the truth of it was the better manifested. Here again we must remember
that God with great kindness considers our weakness when, both by his
oath, and by frequently repeating his word, he ratifies what he has once
promised to us. Our ingratitude then appears the fouler in disbelieving
him when he not only speaks but also swears.

<span id="xiv.ii-p17"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p18"></span>**11.** *Saying, I will give thee the land
of Canaan* As this was only a small portion of the blessings offered to
the fathers, the prophet seems at first view too much to limit the
covenant of God, which extended even to the hope of an eternal
inheritance. But he considered it enough to show, by the figure
synecdoche, that a part of what God had promised to the fathers had
received its complete accomplishment. His drift is to intimate that they
did not possess the land of Canaan by any other right than because it
was the legitimate inheritance of Abraham according to the covenant
which God had made with him. If man exhibit the promised earnest of a
contract, he does not violate the contract. When, therefore, the prophet
proves by a visible symbol that God did not make a covenant with his
servants in vain, and that he did not disappoint their hope, he does not
take away or abolish the other blessings included in it. Nay, rather,
when the Israelites heard that they possessed the land of Canaan by
right of inheritance, because they were the chosen people of God, it
became them to look beyond this, and to take comprehensive view of all
the privileges by which He had vouchsafed to distinguish them. Hence it
is to be noted, that when He in part fulfills his promises towards us,
we are base and ungrateful if this experience does not conduce to the
confirmation of our faith. Whenever he shows himself to be a father
towards us, he undoubtedly really seals on our hearts the power and
efficacy of his word. But if the land of Canaan ought to have led the
children of Israel in their contemplations to heaven, since they knew
that they had been brought into it on account of the covenant which God
had made with them, the consideration that He has given to us his
Christ, “in whom all the promises are yea and amen,” (<span
id="xiv.ii-p18.1"></span>[2Co
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#020)<span id="xiv.ii-p18.1"></span>.md)
ought to have much greater weight with us. When it is said, *I will give
thee the measuring line of Your inheritance,* the change of the number
points out that God made a covenant with all the people in general,
though he spake the words only to a few individuals; even as we have
seen a little before that it was a decree or an everlasting law. The
holy patriarchs were the first and principal persons into whose hands
the promise was committed; but they did not embrace the grace which was
offered to them as what belonged only to themselves, but as what their
posterity in common with them were to became sharers of.

<span id="xiv.iii"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
105:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#012.md)<span
id="xiv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p2"></span>**12.** When they were but very few in
number; and strangers in it. **13.** And walked about from nation to
nation, and from one kingdom to another people. **14.** He did not
suffer men to hurt them; and rebuked kings for their sake; **15.**
Saying, Touch not my anointed ones, and do my prophets no wrong.  <span
id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209.md)

<span id="xiv.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiv.iii-p5"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p6"></span>**12.** *When they were but very few in
number* The prophet here recounts the benefits which God had conferred
upon the holy fathers from the commencement, to manifest that even long
before the deliverance from Egypt, the covenant was not ineffectual. The
great object aimed at in this recital, is to show that ever since God
took Abraham under his protection, he cherished him in a wonderful
manner, and also that his fatherly love and care were displayed in
maintaining and defending the other two patriarchs. When it is said,
that *they were but very few in number,* the power of God by this
circumstance is not only magnified, but the cause why he was so
beneficent towards them is also pointed out. We must then, in the first
place, attend to this, that the prophet, lest the Jews should arrogate
anything to themselves, expressly declares, that their fathers had
experienced the divine favor, even when they were feeble and despised,
wandering from place to place, in every respect poor and miserable
according to the flesh. Thus also Moses reproaches them,

<span id="xiv.iii-p7"></span>“The Lord did not set his love upon you,
nor choose you, because ye were more in number than any people; for ye
were the fewest of all people; but because the Lord loved you.” <span
id="xiv.iii-p7.1"></span>[Deut. 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#008.md)<span id="xiv.iii-p7.1"></span>,

<span id="xiv.iii-p8"></span>In short, in the choosing of this people,
no regard was had either to number, or to any excellence whatever. There
was only the house of Abraham, and yet it was barren. Isaac was
compelled to banish to a distance from him one of his two sons, and he
saw the other cut off from his family. The house of Jacob was indeed
more fruitful, but it was nevertheless of a low condition. Besides, they
were not only ignoble and despised when sojourning in a strange land,
but famine, and the want of other things also, compelled them frequently
to go from one place to another. All these things being taken into view,
the consideration of human worth falls to the ground, and it is clearly
seen, that all the blessings which God had bestowed upon them flowed
from no other fountain than his own free love. And the cause of this
love is not to be sought for out of himself. If the Holy Spirit is so
careful in magnifying the grace of God in these earthly blessings, how
much more must he observe this rule, when the subject of which he speaks
is the heavenly inheritance! When it is said, that *they walked about
from nation to nation,* this intimates the more plainly how wonderfully
the divine protection was displayed in preserving them. Had they found
any quiet nest in which to repose, such comfort would have been a
notable sign of the divine goodness; but when they were as exiles in
divers countries, and were driven from one place to another with bitter
scorn, as chaff is driven about by the wind, the guardianship which God
exercised over them shone forth much more conspicuously. Since their
life everywhere hung only by a thread, and the changing of their place
of sojourn exposed them from time to time to fresh injuries, it is
evident that it was the divine power alone which preserved them in
safety.

<span id="xiv.iii-p9"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p10"></span>**14.** *He did not suffer men to hurt
them* Abraham and his children had not merely two or three enemies: they
were harassed by whole nations. As then many rose up one after another
in troops against them, the Psalmist says indefinitely, that men were
withheld from hurting them; for <span id="xiv.iii-p10.1"></span>אדם,
*adam,* is the word here used, which is the one most generally employed
to signify *man* He next amplifies the love of God towards his servants,
in setting himself in opposition to kings for their sake. When God did
not spare even the kings of Egypt and Gerar, it is evident how precious
the welfare of Abraham and his offspring was in his sight. We have said
a little before that the holy fathers were of no estimation in the eyes
of the world. God therefore displayed his goodness so much the more
signally in preferring them to kings. Now we here see, that the Jews
were humbled in the person of their fathers, that they might not imagine
that they found favor in the sight of God by any merit of their own.

<span id="xiv.iii-p11"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p12"></span>**15.** *Saying, Touch not my anointed
ones* The Psalmist proceeds farther, affirming, that when God made war
against kings for the sake of his servants, they were defended by him,
not only as he is accustomed to succor the miserable and the unjustly
oppressed, but because he had taken them under his special guardianship.
God protects his people, not only upon a general ground, but because he
has declared on account of his free adoption, that he will maintain
them. This is the reason why these holy patriarchs are here honored with
two designations, *his prophets* and *his anointed ones* In speaking of
other men, God would have said, Touch not these men who have done wrong
to nobody, hurt not these poor wretched creatures who have deserved no
such treatment at your hands. But in the person of Abraham and his
children, he shows that there was another reason for his defending them.
He calls them *anointed ones,* because he had set them apart to be his
peculiar people. In the same sense, he designates them *prophets,* (a
title with which Abraham is also honored, <span
id="xiv.iii-p12.1"></span>[Ge
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#007)<span id="xiv.iii-p12.1"></span>.md)
not only because God had manifested himself more intimately to them, but
also because they faithfully spread around them divine truth, that the
memory of it might survive them, and flourish after their death.
Anointing, it is true, was not as yet in use, as it was afterwards under
the law; but the prophet teaches, that what God at a subsequent period
exhibited in the ceremonies of the law was really and in very deed in
Abraham, even as God engraves the mark of sanctification on all his
chosen ones. If God’s inward anointing was of such powerful efficacy,
even at the time when he had not yet appointed, or delivered the figures
of the law, with how much greater care will he defend his servants now,
after having exhibited to us the plenitude of anointing in his only
begotten Son!

<span id="xiv.iv"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p1"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
105:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#016.md)<span
id="xiv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p2"></span>**16.** And he called a famine upon the
land: he brake the whole staff of bread. **17.** He sent a man before
them; Joseph was sold for a slave. **18.** They afflicted his feet in
the stocks: the iron entered into his soul. **19.** Until the time that
his word came: the word of Jehovah tried him.

<span id="xiv.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiv.iv-p4"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p5"></span>**16.** *And he called a famine upon the
land* Here the inspired writer recounts a most illustrious proof of
divine providence towards the chosen people, at the time when the
covenant might seem to be void and disannulled. The inheritance of the
land of Canaan (as has been stated above) was added, as an earnest or
pledge for confirmation. The descent of Jacob into Egypt, which deprived
his house of the sight of the land, could not make the covenant to
perish. In this the constancy of God shone forth the brighter; yea, by
this trial he manifested more plainly how provident a father he was in
preserving the seed of Abraham. But it is better to consider each
particular in the verse. In the first place, it is taught, that the
famine which drove Jacob into Egypt did not happen by chance. Although
only one particular famine is here treated of, it is to be held as a
general principle, that there is no other cause of any scarcity of
sustenance except this, that God, in withdrawing his hand, takes away
the means of support. The curse of God is expressed more emphatically,
when it is said, that *the famine was called;* as if it were ready at
his command, as a minister of his wrath. By this we are instructed, that
famine, pestilence, and other scourges of God, do not visit men by
chance, but are directed by his hand whither it pleases him, and are
obedient to his will.  <span id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210.md) The
manner in which the famine was called is next stated, namely, when he
*brake the staff of bread* The metaphor of *staff* is very appropriate;
for God has put into bread the power and property of strengthening man,
by a secret virtue which fits it to sustain us. So long as it pleases
him to nourish us by such means, a staff as it were lies hidden within
it. This staff is broken in two ways; either, first, when he takes away
the supply of grain necessary for our nourishment, the sense in which it
seems to be used in Ezekiel

<span id="xiv.iv-p7"></span>“Moreover, he said unto me, Son of man,
behold, I will break the staff of bread in Jerusalem, and they shall eat
bread by weight, and with care; and they shall drink water by measure,
and with astonishment;” <span id="xiv.iv-p7.1"></span>[Eze
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#016.md)<span id="xiv.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p8"></span>or, secondly, when he breathes in anger upon
the bread itself, so that those who would satisfy themselves by
devouring it, instead of having their hunger thereby removed, remain
famished still. And certainly to the barrenness of the earth this second
is commonly added, namely, that he takes away the sustaining power which
is in bread; for, as it is declared in <span id="xiv.iv-p8.1"></span>[De
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#003.md)<span id="xiv.iv-p8.1"></span>,
bread does not give life of itself, but borrows its secret virtue from
the mouth of God.

<span id="xiv.iv-p9"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p10"></span>**17.** *He sent a man before them* This
whole passage graphically teaches us, that whatever befell that people
was by the hand and counsel of God. The simple recital would have been
to say, that the famine came upon the land, after Joseph had been sold
by his brethren, and carried into Egypt. But the prophet speaks
emphatically, declaring that Joseph by the divine counsel had been sent
before into Egypt, to support his father’s house, that afterwards the
famine was called, and that then, by God’s providence, a remedy was
presented beyond all hope. This, indeed, is generally true in human
affairs; but there is here commemorated a special care which God took in
governing and nourishing his Church. Moreover, the prophet mentions that
as second in place which was first in the order of time. Accordingly, in
regard to the word *send,* the pluperfect tense would better express the
sense, he *had sent;* implying that before God afflicted the land of
Canaan with famine, he had prepared a remedy for his servant Jacob, and
for his household, in having sent Joseph before as a steward to provide
them with food. Here two contraries as it were are stated, to render the
divine superintendence in the whole the more conspicuous. How was Joseph
sent of God? It was in this way:- When he was doomed to death, it
happened that his brethren preferred selling him to leaving him in his
grave. This selling, if considered merely by itself, like a cloud
interposed, obscured and concealed the divine providence. When counsel
was taken to put Joseph to death, who would have expected that he was to
be the sustainer of his father’s house? Afterwards a kind of death was
devised for him less cruel; but then he was cast into a well or pit, and
in that situation how could he succor others? The last hope was, that at
length being sold, he came forth from the pit. But again, he was well
nigh rotting all his life long in prison.

<span id="xiv.iv-p11"></span>Who could think that processes so intricate
and circuitous were controlled by divine providence? The prophet
therefore meets this difficulty by saying, that in respect of men, he
was indeed *sold;* but that he had nevertheless been previously sent by
the divine purpose. The passage is worthy of notice, admirably
vindicating, as it does, the providence of God against the perverse
stupidity of our corrupt nature. Resting on the second causes which meet
the eye, or ascribing to the direction of man whatever is done in this
world, or thinking that all things happen by chance, very few trace them
to the appointment of God. And yet the selling of Joseph is not here
interposed as a veil to hide divine providence; but is rather set forth
as a signal instance of it to teach us that whatever men may undertake,
the issues are in the hand of God; or rather, that by a secret
influence, he bends the hearts of men in whatever direction he pleases,
that by their instrumentality, whether they will or no, he may bring to
pass what he has determined should be done. Agreeably to this Joseph
said to his brethren, “Now, therefore, be not grieved nor angry with
yourselves that ye sold me hither; for God did send me before you to
preserve life,” (<span id="xiv.iv-p11.1"></span>[Ge
45:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#005)<span id="xiv.iv-p11.1"></span>.md)
Farther, God so governs human affairs by his secret controlling
influence, and overrules men’s wicked devices to a right end, as that
his judgments are notwithstanding uncontaminated by the depravity of
men. The brethren of Joseph wickedly conspire his death; they also
wrongfully sell him: the fault is in themselves. Contemplate now how God
directs and controls all. By the hand of these brethren he provides for
the good both of themselves and of their father Jacob, yea for that of
the whole Church. This holy purpose contracts no defilement or spot from
the malice of those who aimed at an entirely opposite end; even as
Joseph testified afterwards,

<span id="xiv.iv-p12"></span>“But as for you, ye thought evil against
me; but God meant it unto good, to bring to pass as it is this day, to
save much people alive,” (<span id="xiv.iv-p12.1"></span>[Ge
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#020)<span id="xiv.iv-p12.1"></span>.md)

<span id="xiv.iv-p13"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p14"></span>**18** *They afflicted his feet in the
fetters* It is not without cause that the Psalmist prosecutes the
winding course of Jacob’s early history, which might so confuse the
minds of men as to prevent them from directing their attention to the
counsel of God. What seemed less likely than to believe that God, by so
directly opposite and circuitous a path, meant to accomplish what he had
purposed? But his providence, by surmounting so many obstacles, is
brought out more conspicuously, than if he had despatched the whole
matter by a short and easy road. Had Joseph, as soon as he arrived in
Egypt, been presented to the king, and made its governor, the way to
what followed would have been easy. But when he was carried away to
prison, and lay there separated from the society of men, living as one
half-dead; and when his becoming known to the king was a long time
subsequent to this, and beyond all expectation, such a sudden change
renders the miracle much more evident. This circuitous course then,
which the prophet recounts, serves not a little to illustrate the
subject in hand. Joseph was many times dead before he was sold. Hence it
follows, that God as often showed his care of his Church by delivering
him who might be termed her father. When after, having been brought into
Egypt, Joseph was conveyed from hand to hand till he descended into
another grave, is it not the more clearly manifest from this that God,
while he seems to be asleep in heaven, is all the while keeping the
strictest watch over his servants, and that he is carrying forward his
purpose more effectually by these various windings, than if he had gone
straight forward, yea, than if he had run with rapid pace? For this
reason the prophet affirms that *his feet were afflicted in the
fetters;* a fact which, although not stated in the narrative of Moses,
he speaks of as well known. And no doubt, many things were delivered by
tradition to the Jews of which no mention is made in the Scriptures.
 <span id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211.md) It is also probable enough,
that, instead of being put at first under mild restraint, as was
afterwards the case, he was rigorously confined. Whether we read, *his
soul entered into the iron,* or *the iron entered into his soul,*  <span
id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212.md) the meaning, which, in either case, is
exactly the same, amounts to this, that the holy man was so galled with
fetters, that it seemed as if his life had been given over to the sword.
Whence it follows, that the safety of his life was as hopeless as the
restoration of life to a dead body.

<span id="xiv.iv-p17"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p18"></span>**19.** *Until the time that his word came*
Here the prophet teaches, that although, according to the judgment of
the flesh, God seems to be too tardy in his steps, yet he holds supreme
rule over all things, that he may at length accomplish in due time what
he has determined. As to the term *word,* it is here doubtless to be
taken, not for doctrine or instruction, but for a heavenly decree. The
relative *his* admits of being understood as well of God himself as of
Joseph; but its application to the latter appears to me to be
preferable, implying that Joseph remained in prison until the issue of
his affliction was manifested, which was hidden in the divine purpose.
It is always to be kept in mind, that the prophet calls back the minds
of men from that impious imagination, which would represent fortune as
exercising a blind and capricious control over human affairs. Since
nothing could be more involved in uncertainty than the welfare of the
Church, whilst Joseph was accounted as a condemned person, the prophet
here elevates our minds, and bids us look at the hidden word, that is,
the decree, the proper opportunity and time for the manifestation of
which had not yet arrived. After the same manner I explain what follows,
*the word of God tried him* To expound it of Joseph’s prophesying,
 <span id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213.md) as many do, seems too refined.
Until the happy issue appeared, which God kept long hidden and in
suspense, Joseph’s patience was severely tried. What worldly men, who
acknowledge not God to be the Governor of human affairs, call *fate,*
the prophet distinguishes by a more appropriate name, terming it *word,*
and the word of each man. Nor do I see any impropriety in using the
French word *destinée.* When the Stoics dispute, or rather babble, about
destiny, they not only involve themselves and the thing also of which
they treat in intricate mazes, but, at the same time, involve in
perplexity an indubitable truth; for in imagining a concatenation of
causes, they divest God of the government of the world. It is an impious
invention so to link together causes, interwoven with each other, as
that God himself should be tied to them. Our faith then ought to mount
up to his secret counsel, by which, uncontrolled, he directs all things
to their end. This passage also teaches us that God will continue the
afflictions of the godly only until they are thereby thoroughly proved.

<span id="xiv.v"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p1"></span><span id="xiv.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
105:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#020.md)<span id="xiv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p2"></span>**20.** The king sent and loosed him; even
the ruler of the people, and set him free. **21.** He made him lord over
his house; and ruler over all his substance: **22.** To bind his princes
 <span id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214.md) at his pleasure; and to teach
his elders wisdom. **23.** And Israel came into Egypt; and Jacob
sojourned in the land of Ham.  <span id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215.md)
**24.** And he greatly increased his people, and multiplied  <span
id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216.md) them above their oppressors.

<span id="xiv.v-p6"></span> 

<span id="xiv.v-p7"></span><span id="xiv.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p8"></span>**20.** *The king sent and loosed him* The
Psalmist celebrates in high terms the deliverance of Joseph; for God’s
singular power was conspicuously displayed in a matter so incredible.
What is of more rare occurrence than for a most powerful monarch to
bring a stranger out of prison to constitute him ruler over his whole
kingdom, and to raise him to a rank of honor, second only to himself?
The phrase in verse 22, *to bind his princes,* is commonly explained as
implying that Joseph was invested with the chief sovereignty in the
administration of the government, so that he could cast into prison, at
his pleasure, even the nobles of the realm. Others, conceiving this
interpretation to be somewhat harsh, derive the verb <span
id="xiv.v-p8.1"></span>לאסור, *lesor,* which Moses employs, not from
<span id="xiv.v-p8.2"></span>אסר, *asar,* which signifies *to bind,* but
from <span id="xiv.v-p8.3"></span>יסר, *yasar,* which signifies *to
instruct,* by changing the letter <span id="xiv.v-p8.4"></span>י, *yod,*
into <span id="xiv.v-p8.5"></span>א, *aleph.*  <span
id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217.md) But I am surprised that neither of
them have perceived the metaphor contained in this word, which is, that
Joseph held the lords of Egypt bound to him at his pleasure, or subject
to his power. What is here spoken of is not fetters, but the bond or
obligation of obedience, both the princes and all others being dependent
on his will. The expression, which is added a little after, *to teach
his elders wisdom,* evinces that Joseph did not bear sway like a tyrant,
difficult and rare a thing as it is for men, when invested with
sovereign power, not to give loose reins to their own humor: but that he
was a rule and a pattern, even to the chief of them, in the high degree
of discretion which he exemplified in the administering the affairs of
state.

<span id="xiv.v-p10"></span><span id="xiv.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p11"></span>**23.** *And Israel came into Egypt* The
prophet does not rehearse the whole history, nor was this necessary. He
only presents to our view how divine providence was concerned in it,
which very few consider in reading the narrative of Moses. He
accordingly declares, that after Joseph had been sent before into Egypt,
to be the means of supporting his father and the whole family, Jacob
then came into Egypt, that is, he did so when all things were admirably
arranged, that he might find abundance of bread among a people, the
proudest of the whole world,  <span id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218.md)
when all others were perishing for want of food. From this it appears,
that what is accounted to be slowness in God, tends to no other end than
to accomplish his work on the best possible occasion.

<span id="xiv.v-p13"></span><span id="xiv.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p14"></span>**24.** *And he greatly increased his
people* The singular favor of God towards his Church is now commended by
the additional circumstance, that within a short space of time, the
chosen people increased beyond the common proportion. In this matter the
wonderful blessing of God was strikingly displayed. So much the more
offensive then is the barking of some dogs, who insolently scoff at the
account given by Moses of the multiplying of the people, because it goes
far beyond what takes place in the ordinary course of things. Had the
people increased only at the common rate, these persons would have
immediately objected, that therein no work of God was to be seen. Thus
the object which they pursue by their cavillings is nothing else than to
make it to be believed, that the blessing of God had no connection with
the case. But we, who are persuaded that it is unwarrantable for us to
measure God’s power according to our own understandings, or according to
what happens by the common law of nature, reverently admire this
extraordinary work of his hand. The subsequent clause is a little
obscure, especially if we read, *The people were strengthened;*  <span
id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219.md) for the prophet does not seem to refer
to that period when the Israelites lived at ease and in prosperity, but
to the time when they were contemptuously and barbarously dealt with as
slaves. We may, however, understand the language as spoken by
anticipation, — as pointing to what was to happen. In the following
verse, it is affirmed, that the Egyptians having changed their mind,
began to treat the people with cruelty. Although then the Egyptians did
not as yet openly exercise their cruelty against the people, when they
were increasing both in number and strength, yet the prophet calls them
persecutors. It is certain, that the Israelites, even when they were
oppressed as slaves, were a terror to their enemies; and Moses plainly
affirms, (<span id="xiv.v-p15.4"></span>[Ex
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#012)<span id="xiv.v-p15.4"></span>.md)
that when they were under tyranny and wrongful oppression, it was still
abundantly manifest, that the blessing of God rested upon them.

<span id="xiv.vi"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p1"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
105:25-30](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#025.md)<span
id="xiv.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p2"></span>**25.** He turned their heart, so that they
hated his people, and dealt craftily with his servants. **26.** He sent
Moses his servant; Aaron whom he had chosen. **27.** They set among them
the words of his signs and his miracles in the land of Ham. **28.** He
sent darkness, and made it dark; and they were not rebellious against
his words. **29.** He turned their waters into blood, and killed their
fish. **30.** Their land brought forth frogs, yea, even within the
chambers of their kings.

<span id="xiv.vi-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiv.vi-p4"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p5"></span>**25.** *He turned their heart, so that they
hated his people* The Egyptians, though at first kind and courteous
hosts to the Israelites, became afterwards cruel enemies; and this also
the prophet ascribes to the counsel of God. They were undoubtedly driven
to this by a perverse and malignant spirit, by pride and covetousness;
but still such a thing did not happen without the providence of God, who
in an incomprehensible manner so accomplishes his work in the reprobate,
as that he brings forth light even out of darkness. The form of
expression seems to some a little too harsh, and therefore they
translate the verb passively, *their* (*i.e.,* the Egyptians’) *hearts
were turned.* But this is poor, and does not suit the context; for we
see that it is the express object of the inspired writer to put the
whole government of the Church under God, so that nothing may happen but
according to his will. If the delicate ears of some are offended at such
doctrine, let it be observed, that the Holy Spirit unequivocally affirms
in other places as well as here, that the minds of men are driven hither
and thither by a secret impulse, (<span id="xiv.vi-p5.1"></span>[Pr
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#001)<span id="xiv.vi-p5.1"></span>.md) so
that they can neither will nor do any thing except as God pleases. What
madness is it to embrace nothing but what commends itself to human
reason? What authority will God’s word have, if it is not admitted any
farther than we are inclined to receive it? Those then who reject this
doctrine, because it is not very grateful to the human understanding,
are inflated with a perverse arrogance. Others malignantly misrepresent
it, not through ignorance or by mistake, but only that they may excite
commotion in the Church, or to bring us into odium among the ignorant.
Some over-timid persons could wish, for the sake of peace, that this
doctrine were buried. They are surely ill qualified for composing
differences. This was the very cause why in former times the doctors of
the Church, in their writings, swerved from the pure and genuine truths
of the gospel, and turned aside to a heathen philosophy. Whence
originated the doctrine of free-will, whence that of the righteousness
of works, but because these good fathers were afraid of giving occasion
to evil-tongued or malignant men if they freely professed what is
contained in the sacred Scriptures? And had not God, as it were by a
strong hand, prevented Augustine, he would, in this respect, have been
exactly like the rest. But God, so to speak, polishing him with a
hammer, corrected that foolish wisdom, which rears its crest against the
Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit, we see, affirms that the Egyptians were so
wicked, that God turned their hearts to hate his people. The
middle-scheme men seek to evade and qualify this statement, by saying,
that his turning their hearts, denotes his permitting this;  <span
id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220.md) or, that when the Egyptians set their
hearts upon hating the Israelites, he made use of their malice, as what,
so to speak, came accidentally in his way; as if the Holy Spirit, from
being defective in the power of language, spoke one thing, when he meant
another. If the doctrine of this text, at first sight, seem strange to
us, let us remember that God’s judgments, in other places, are justly
called *“unsearchable,”* (<span id="xiv.vi-p6.1"></span>[Ro
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033)<span id="xiv.vi-p6.1"></span>.md)
and “a great deep,” (<span id="xiv.vi-p6.2"></span>[Ps
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006)<span id="xiv.vi-p6.2"></span>.md)
Did not our capacity fail in reaching the height of them, they would not
have that intricacy and mystery by which they are characterized. It is,
however, to be observed, that the root of the malice was in the
Egyptians themselves, so that the fault cannot be transferred to God. I
say, they were spontaneously and innately wicked, and not forced by the
instigation of another. In regard to God, it ought to suffice us to
know, that such was his will, although the reason may be unknown to us.
But the reason is also apparent, which vindicates his righteousness from
every objection. If we learn and keep in mind only this small word of
advice, That the revealed will of God ought to be reverently acquiesced
in, we will receive, without disputation, those mysteries which offend
either the proud, or such as would be over-careful to remove the
difficulties, in which, according to their view, such mysteries seem to
be involved.  <span id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221.md) The prophet next
expresses the manner in which the Egyptians wrought mischief against the
people of God: they did not assault them openly, that they might put
them to death, but they endeavored, in the way of craft and policy, to
oppress them by little and little. His expression is borrowed from Moses
himself. And it is purposely used, that we may not think that the hearts
of the ungodly are permitted without restraint to work our destruction.
It is a consideration which ought surely to satisfy our minds, that
whatever the devil and wicked men may plot against us, God nevertheless
represses their attempts. But it is a double confirmation of our faith,
when we hear that not only their hands are bound, but also their hearts
and thoughts, so that they can purpose nothing except what God pleases.

<span id="xiv.vi-p8"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p9"></span>**26** *He sent Moses his servant* Here the
prophet briefly adverts to such things regarding the deliverance of the
people as were worthy of particular notice. Had the Egyptians of their
own accord suffered the people to depart, neither the service of Moses
nor miracles would have been required. God then appointed that their
deliverance should take place in such a way, as would render the denial
of his being its author impossible. Moses is called *the servant of the
Lord,* to teach us that he was not self-elected to his office, and that
he attempted nothing by his own authority, but, being the minister of
God, executed the office with which he had been intrusted. The same
thing is expressed still more plainly with respect to Aaron, when he is
said *to have been chosen* What is attributed to each of these eminent
men in particular, applies equally to both, and therefore the sentence
ought to be explained thus: God sent Moses and Aaron, his servants, not
because of their own intrinsic fitness, or because they spontaneously
offered to him their service, but because he chose them. This passage
teaches us, that those who are engaged in active and useful service for
the Church, are not prepared exclusively by their own exertions, or
framed to it by their own talents, but are stirred up thereto by God.
Moses was a man of heroic virtue: but, considered merely in himself, he
was nothing. Accordingly, the prophet would have all that is accounted
worthy of remembrance in Moses, as well as in Aaron, to be ascribed to
God alone. Thus it appears that whatever men do for the welfare of the
Church, they owe the power of doing it to God, who, of his free
goodness, has been pleased thus to honor them.

<span id="xiv.vi-p10"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p11"></span>**27.** *They set among them the words of
his signs*  <span id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222.md) The prophet, in the
first place, briefly glances at those things which Moses has detailed at
greater length. Nor does he follow the order of the events observed in
the history; for he contents himself with showing, that the deliverance
of the chosen people was the work of God. He again distinguishes between
the power of God, and the ministry of Moses and Aaron. He indeed asserts
that these men performed *miracles,* but these miracles proceeded from
God, so that celestial power was not obscurely displayed by their
instrumentality.

<span id="xiv.vi-p13"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p14"></span>In the **28th** verse he specifics one of
these miracles, which yet was not the first in order, but from which it
is easy to gather that God was the author of the deliverance of Israel,
and in which the course of nature was entirely changed; for nothing is
more astonishing than to see the light turned into darkness. In the
second clause, he commends the faithfulness of Moses and Aaron, in
courageously executing whatever God had commanded them: *And they were
not rebellious against his words*  <span
id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223.md) There was, as if it had been said, the
most perfect harmony between the command of God and the obedience of
both his servants.

<span id="xiv.vi-p16"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p17"></span>**29.** *He turned their waters into blood*
How grievous this plague was to the Egyptians may be conjectured from
the consideration, that the element of water is one of the two great
means of supporting life. And the power of God shines forth the
brighter, from the fact, that although the land of Egypt is well
irrigated, yet the Egyptians were parched with drought amidst abundance
of water. It is afterwards said, that *frogs were brought forth,*  <span
id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224.md) and entered even *into the chambers of
the kings;* by which God manifestly evinced that he was the author of
the miracle; for although all Egypt swarmed with frogs, the courts of
the kings ought to have been exempt from this nuisance. By the term
*kings,* is denoted either the nobles of the realm, or the king’s sons,
who were brought up in the expectation of the royal power; for at that
time, as is well known, one king alone reigned over all Egypt. From this
we learn how easily, and as it were by a kind of mockery, God humbles
those who pride themselves in the flesh. He did not gather together an
army to fight against the Egyptians, nor did he forthwith arm his
angels, or thunder out of heaven, but brought forth frogs, which
contemptuously trampled upon the pride of that haughty nation, who held
in contempt the whole world beside. It would have been no disgrace for
them to have been conquered by powerful enemies; but how dishonorable
was it to be vanquished by frogs? God thus intended to show that he has
no need of powerful hosts to destroy the wicked; for he can do this, as
it were in sport, whenever he pleases.

<span id="xiv.vii"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.vii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
105:31-38](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#031.md)<span
id="xiv.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p2"></span>**31.** He spake, and there came a swarm of
flies,  <span id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225.md) and lice  <span
id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226.md) in all their borders. **32.** He gave
them hail for rain, and flaming fire upon their land. **33.** And he
smote their vines and their fig trees; and destroyed the trees
throughout their borders. **34.** He spake, and the grasshopper came,
and the caterpillar  <span id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227.md) without
number, **35.** And they devoured all the herbage in their land, and
consumed the fruit of their ground. **36.** And he smote all the
first-born in their country, even the beginning of all their strength.
 <span id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228.md) **37.** And he brought them
forth with silver and gold: nor was there a feeble person among his
tribes. **38.** Egypt rejoiced at their departure: for their terror had
fallen upon them.

<span id="xiv.vii-p7"></span> 

<span id="xiv.vii-p8"></span><span id="xiv.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p9"></span>**31.** *He spake, and there came a swarm
of flies* By the word *spake* the Psalmist intimates that *the flies*
and *lice* came not forth by chance. The command, we know, was uttered
by the mouth of Moses; for although God could have given the command
himself, he interposed Moses as his herald. God, however, gave no less
efficacy to his word, when he commanded it to be uttered by a man, than
if he himself had thundered from heaven. When the minister executes his
commission faithfully, by speaking only what God puts into his mouth,
the inward power of the Holy Spirit is joined with his outward voice.
Here again it is to be observed, that the Egyptians were afflicted with
the plague of the flies and lice, that God, with the greater ignominy,
might subdue their rebellion and obstinacy. When it is said, that he
*gave them hail for rain,* it denotes a hail of such appalling violence,
that it could not be attributed to natural causes. It is probable that
Egypt is not so subject to this annoyance as other countries, and it is
very seldom visited even with rain, being watered with the Nile. This
made it appear to the Egyptians the more wonderful that their country
was stricken with hail. To render this calamity the more dreadful, God
also mingled with it fire. The hail, then, was accompanied with a
tempestuous whirlwind, that the Egyptians who had hardened themselves
against the other miracles, inspired with terror, might know that they
had to deal with God.

<span id="xiv.vii-p10"></span><span id="xiv.vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p11"></span>**34.** *He spake, and the grasshopper
came* This calamity, which was brought upon the fields, could not be
attributed to Fortune; for the grasshoppers made their appearance
suddenly and in countless multitudes, so that they covered all the land
of Egypt. The miracle was very evident from the word spoken, by which it
was introduced. Its being announced as to happen, removed all doubt of
its being the work of the Most High. Accordingly, it is expressly said,
that grasshoppers and caterpillars rushed in at the commandment of God,
as if soldiers should run to battle at the sound of the trumpet.
Whenever these insects molest us and destroy the fruits of the earth,
they are assuredly the scourges of God, but it is here intended to point
out an extraordinary work of his hand. In fine, the prophet recites the
last miracle, which was wrought by the angel on the night previous to
the departure of the people, when he slew all the first-born throughout
Egypt. I only take a hasty and passing glance at this history, as I
have, in like manner, done of the other facts preceding, because they
have been more copiously treated elsewhere, and at this time it is
sufficient for us to know the design of the sacred writer. He, however,
amplifies this display of the Divine power by a repetition, declaring
that *the first-born and the flower of their strength were destroyed*
Some translate, but unhappily, *The beginning of their sorrow.* As man’s
strength shows itself in generation, the Hebrews term the first-begotten
*the beginning of strength,* as we have explained on <span
id="xiv.vii-p11.2"></span>[Genesis
49:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#003.md)<span id="xiv.vii-p11.2"></span>,
—

<span id="xiv.vii-p12"></span>“Reuben, thou art my first-born, my
might,  
and the beginning of my strength.”

<span id="xiv.vii-p13"></span><span id="xiv.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p14"></span>**37.** *And he brought them forth with
silver and gold*  <span id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229.md) The prophet,
on the other hand, celebrates the grace of God which preserved the
chosen people untouched and safe from all these plagues. If both parties
had been indiscriminately afflicted with them, the hand of God would not
have been so signally manifest. But now when the Israelites, amidst so
many calamities, experienced an entire exemption from harm, this
difference exhibits to us, as in a picture, God’s fatherly care about
his own people. For this reason, it is stated, *Nor was there a feeble
person,* or *one who stumbled;*  <span id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230.md)
for the verb <span id="xiv.vii-p16.3"></span>כשל*, kashal,* has both
these meanings. But I prefer taking it simply in this sense, That whilst
Egypt was hastening to destruction, the people of God were vigorous, and
free from every malady. When it is said, *He brought them forth,* and
when it is afterwards added, *in his tribes,* there is a change of the
number, which is quite common in the Hebrew language. Some refer the
word *his* to God; but this I am afraid is too forced.

<span id="xiv.vii-p17"></span><span id="xiv.vii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p18"></span>**38.** *Egypt rejoiced at their
departure* The Psalmist sets forth the power of God from the additional
circumstance, that the Egyptians willingly allowed the chosen people to
depart, when yet nothing was farther from their intention. Although they
wished them destroyed a hundred times, yet they thought that they had
the wolf by the ears, as we say;  <span
id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231.md) and thus the fear of revenge made them
more determined to blot out the memory of that people. Whence it
follows, that when they all at once laid aside their former purpose, it
was a secret work of divine providence.  <span
id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232.md) To the same effect is the statement in
the preceding verse, *that they were brought forth with gold and silver*
The Egyptians could never have had the heart voluntarily to strip
themselves, to enrich those whom they would have willingly deprived of
life. This was then the bounty of God, in whose hand, and at whose
disposal, are all the riches of the world. He might have taken by force
from the Egyptians what he had given them; but he bowed their hearts, so
that of their own accord they denuded themselves. The expression, *for
their terror had fallen upon them,* is to be understood passively; for
the Israelites were not afraid of the Egyptians, but, on the contrary,
were terrible to them. Nor does the prophet speak of an ordinary fear. A
little before fear had stirred them up to cruelty and tyranny; but as
even to that day, they had endeavored, with indomitable audacity, to
shake off all fear, God suddenly laid them prostrate by the
extraordinary terror which fell upon them. It is, therefore, here justly
reckoned among the displays of the wonderful power of God, that he
subdued the impetuous fury with which the Egyptians boiled before, that
they might allow those to depart free, whom they had determined to
handle rudely, and to waste in servile employments; which was like
rendering sheep terrible to wolves.

<span id="xiv.viii"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.viii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
105:39-43](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#039.md)<span
id="xiv.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p2"></span>**39.** He spread out a cloud for a
covering; and fire to give light during the night. **40.** He asked,
 <span id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233.md) and he brought quails, and
filled them with the bread of heaven. **41.** He opened the rock, and
the waters gushed out; they ran in the dry places like a river. **42.**
For he remembered his holy promise, which he had spoken to Abraham his
servant. **43.** And he brought forth his people with joy, and his
chosen with gladness.

<span id="xiv.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiv.viii-p5"></span><span id="xiv.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p6"></span>**39.** *He spread out a cloud for a
covering* The Psalmist enumerates certain miracles by which God
continued his grace towards his people in the wilderness. This order is
worthy of notice; for it was no small confirmation which was added to
that incomparable work of redemption, when God ceased not to show
himself the guide of their journey. Accordingly, after they had passed
through the Red Sea, he spread a cloud over them by day to protect them
from the heat of the sun; and during the night, he gave them light by a
pillar of fire, that even in the midst of the darkness they might have a
bright token of his presence. This continued display of his goodness was
surely an unquestionable proof of his perpetual love, an open
demonstration that he had adopted the children of Abraham, to foster
them under his protection even to the end. What follows concerning
*quails,* is introduced for a different purpose than that for which
reference is made to the same fact in <span
id="xiv.viii-p6.1"></span>[Ps
78:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#026.md)<span id="xiv.viii-p6.1"></span>.
In that passage, God’s bringing in an abundance of quails is ascribed
rather to his wrath than to his beneficence, that the people might
satiate the flesh; and we have seen in the exposition of that place,
that this is mentioned as a matter of reproach to them. But in the text
before us, passing over their ingratitude, the prophet celebrates the
unremitting exercise of the divine loving-kindness towards them. Some,
however, may be rather inclined to take the word *ask* in a bad sense,
because the people besought not God with humility,  <span
id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234.md) but through their impatience proceeded
at once to murmuring, or rather arrogantly spake against him. Thus
taken, the passage, by way of amplification, would mean that God,
departing from his own right, humoured even their unhallowed lust. As,
however, their fault is not here mentioned, let us rest in that meaning
which is the most simple, namely, that the blessings by which God
ratified the redemption which he had wrought are here clustered
together. It next follows, that *they were filled with the bread of
heaven* This appellation, as we have seen elsewhere, is given to the
manna by way of eminence. The natural way in which the food which we eat
is obtained is from the ground; but God then opened his hand more widely
to the Jews, and fed them even from heaven. As it was not enough for
them to be refreshed with food when they were hungry, unless they were
also supplied with drink, it is added, that *the rock was opened,* and
that *the waters flowed from it through the dry places, or the desert.*

<span id="xiv.viii-p8"></span><span id="xiv.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p9"></span>**42.** *For he remembered his holy
promise* The Psalmist again mentions the cause why God dealt so
graciously with that people, and sustained them so tenderly, namely,
that he might fulfill his promise; for he had entered into a covenant
with Abraham, engaging to be the God of his seed. Nor did the prophets
without cause teach so carefully as we find them doing, that the free
covenant is the fountain whence the deliverance, and the continual
welfare of the people flowed. Thereby the grace of God became better
known, since what took place, so far from happening upon the sudden, and
without anticipation, was only the fulfillment of what he had promised
four hundred years before. God then, for ages previous to this, gave the
light of his word of promise, that his grace and truth might be brought
the more distinctly into view. For this reason the prophet again
repeats, that God was not led from some new cause to deliver his people,
but that his design in doing so was to prove the faithfulness of his
covenant, and to give it effect; just as if a man should dig up from the
ground a treasure which he had buried in it. Nor is it to be doubted,
that the prophet aimed at leading the faith of his countrymen still
farther, — that his object was that their posterity might be persuaded
beyond all doubt, that as God had then proved, in the experience of that
generation, the sure and substantial truth of his promise delivered many
hundred years before, so he would not be to them otherwise than their
fathers had found him to be in times past. Accordingly, he signalises
this promise by the epithet, *holy,* intimating, that after the death of
Abraham it retained its virtue and efficacy unimpaired. God had spoken
it to Abraham; but the force of the covenant died not with him. God
continued to show himself faithful towards the posterity of the
patriarch.

<span id="xiv.viii-p10"></span><span id="xiv.viii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p11"></span>**43.** *And he brought forth his people
with joy* The prophet makes mention of *joy* and *gladness,* the more
highly to magnify the greatness of God’s grace. It was no small matter,
that at the very time when the Egyptians were afflicted by a severe and
dreadful plague, — when the whole kingdom was full of weeping and
howling, — and when in almost every house there was a dead body, — the
people who a little before were groaning in great distress, or rather
lay almost dead, went forth with joyful hearts. By the appellation *the
chosen of God,* they are reminded, that his favor was not thus exercised
towards them on account of their own merits, or on account of the worth
of their race, but because he had adopted them, that men having nothing
left them in which to vaunt themselves might learn to glory in God
alone.

<span id="xiv.ix"></span>

<span id="xiv.ix-p1"></span><span id="xiv.ix-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
105:44-45](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#044.md)<span
id="xiv.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ix-p2"></span>**44.** And he gave them the countries of
the nations: and they possessed the labor of the peoples.  <span
id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235.md) **45.** That they might observe his
ordinances, and keep his law. Hallelujah.

<span id="xiv.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiv.ix-p5"></span><span id="xiv.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ix-p6"></span>**44** *And he gave them the countries of
the nations* The Psalmist sets forth the final cause why God in so many
ways displayed his wonderful power in redeeming the people, why he did
not cease to cherish and defend them in the deserts — why he gave them
the possession of the land as he had promised; and this was, that they
might dedicate and devote themselves wholly to his service. And, in
fact, the end which God proposed in our election was, that he might have
on the earth a people by whom he should be called upon and served. The
more effectually to stir up the Jews to gratitude, the prophet magnifies
the greatness of the divine goodness, by declaring, that they occupied
far and wide *the countries of the nations,* and that all the property
which many states had acquired with great labor, they now possessed as
it were by right of inheritance. The plural number, both as to the word
*countries* and *nations,* serves to exhibit in a still more striking
light the divine goodness in this matter. The psalm concludes with
briefly defining the manner of glorifying God, *That they might keep his
law* It would not be enough to celebrate his grace only with the tongue.
To this there must be added practical and experimental piety. And as God
rejects all religious services of men’s invention, the only way of
rightly serving him which remains, consists in keeping his commandments.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_201"></span>[202](cc11013.htm#fr_201.md) <span
id="xiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiv-p3"></span> This psalm has no title in the Hebrew or
Chaldee, but in the Vulgate, Septuagint, Æthiopic, and Arabic versions,
the *hallelujah* which concludes the preceding psalm is prefixed as the
inscription. The first fifteen verses correspond with the first part of
a song of thanksgiving, which David composed to be sung after the ark
had been brought from Obed-edom to Zion. — See <span
id="xiv-p3.1"></span>[1Ch 15:8-22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#008.md)<span
id="xiv-p3.1"></span>. Hence some conclude, that David was its inspired
penman, and that he probably enlarged it at some subsequent period of
his history, that it might supply a more complete commemoration of God’s
signal and extraordinary goodness towards the Israelites from the days
of Abraham to their final settlement in the land of Canaan; while others
conclude, that it was enlarged by some Hebrew bard, at the restoration
of the Jews from the Babylonish captivity. This psalm bears a strong
resemblance to the 78th, as well in the subject as in the style, except
perhaps that the diction here is rather of a more simple cast.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[203](cc11013.htm#fr_202.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p3"></span> In the French version it is, “Praise ye his
holy name.” Hammond, agreeably to this, would read, “Praise ye the name
of his holiness;” thinking that <span id="xiv.i-p3.1"></span>ב, *beth,
in,* is a pleonasm.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[204](cc11013.htm#fr_203.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p9"></span> “For <span id="xiv.i-p9.1"></span>וזו, *his
strength,* the LXX. seem to have read <span id="xiv.i-p9.2"></span>עזו,
*be strengthened,* and accordingly render it <span
id="xiv.i-p9.3"></span>κραταιωθὢτε, the Latin ‘<span
id="xiv.i-p9.4"></span>confirmamini’, ‘be confirmed,’ and so the Syriac,
‘be strengthened.’ This the sense would well bear, ‘Seek the Lord, and
be confirmed;’ let all your strength be sought from him. So the Jewish
Arab, ‘Seek the Lord, and seek that he would strengthen you, *or*
strength from him, *or* you shall certainly be strengthened,’ if by
prayer you diligently seek him.” — *Hammond.* Horsley also reads, “Seek
the Lord, and be strong.”

<span id="fn_204"></span>[205](cc11013.htm#fr_204.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p9.5"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p10"></span> With this agrees the interpretation of
Lowth: “The *holy ark,* and the *shechinah* which remained upon it, the
symbol of the divine presence, is called the *face* *of God*; and to
seek the face of God, is to appear before the ark, to worship at the
sanctuary of God, which was required of the Israelites thrice a year. —
See <span id="xiv.i-p10.1"></span>[2Sa
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#001.md)<span id="xiv.i-p10.1"></span>;
<span id="xiv.i-p10.2"></span>[2Ch
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#014.md)<span id="xiv.i-p10.2"></span>;
<span id="xiv.i-p10.3"></span>[Ps
27:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#008.md)<span id="xiv.i-p10.3"></span>;
<span id="xiv.i-p10.4"></span>[Ex
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#017.md)<span id="xiv.i-p10.4"></span>, —
*Lectures on the* *Sacred Poetry of the Hebrews,* volume 2, page 24l.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[206](cc11013.htm#fr_205.md) <span
id="xiv.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p3"></span> See <span id="xiv.ii-p3.1"></span>[Gen.
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#017.md),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018.md), [Gen.
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#002.md), [Gen.
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#016.md), [Gen.
26:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#003.md), [Gen.
35:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#011.md)<span id="xiv.ii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[207](cc11013.htm#fr_206.md) <span
id="xiv.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p4"></span> See <span id="xiv.ii-p4.1"></span>[Ge
26:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#003.md)<span id="xiv.ii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[208](cc11013.htm#fr_207.md) <span
id="xiv.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p5"></span> To Jacob also he renewed at Beersheba all
the gracious assurances of the covenant which he had made with Abraham,
and ratified to Isaac, (<span id="xiv.ii-p5.1"></span>[Ge
28:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#010.md)<span
id="xiv.ii-p5.1"></span>;) and he again renewed them at Padan-aram,
(<span id="xiv.ii-p5.2"></span>[Gen.
35:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#009.md), [Gen.
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#001)<span id="xiv.ii-p5.2"></span>,.md)
when he changed his name from Jacob to Israel.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[209](cc11013.htm#fr_208.md) <span
id="xiv.ii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p6"></span> In our English version it is *lot.* But the
original word signifies a *cord* or *line.* There is here an illusion to
the several lots or portions into which the land of Canaan was divided
among the twelve tribes; which were measured by lines. See volume 1,
page 225, note 4. It being thought by some learned men that the
descendants of Heber possessed the land of Canaan before the Canaanites,
and that the latter unjustly dispossessed them, (see volume 3, page 264,
note 3;) Dimock supposes that the phrase, “the lot of your inheritance,”
refers to this prior and rightful possession. But the appellation given
them in verse 12th, as *strangers in it,* seems to militate against such
an opinion. Nor is it necessary for vindicating God to have recourse to
such a supposition. As he is the supreme proprietor of all the earth, he
has a right to give it to whomsoever he pleases; and the wickedness of
the Canaanites sufficiently justified their expulsion.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[210](cc11013.htm#fr_209.md) <span
id="xiv.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p3"></span> Dr Morison explains the 13th, 14th, and
15th verses thus: — “When they went from one part of Canaan to another,
which they found possessed by seven great nations, (<span
id="xiv.iii-p3.1"></span>[Ge 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#001.md)<span
id="xiv.iii-p3.1"></span>;) when they were driven from one kingdom to
another people, — sometimes in Egypt, (<span
id="xiv.iii-p3.2"></span>[Ge
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#010)<span id="xiv.iii-p3.2"></span>.md)
sometimes in Gerar, (<span id="xiv.iii-p3.3"></span>[Ge
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#001.md)<span id="xiv.iii-p3.3"></span>;
26,) and sometimes in the country of the East, from whence they came,
(<span id="xiv.iii-p3.4"></span>[Ge
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#001)<span id="xiv.iii-p3.4"></span>,.md)
he suffered no one to injure them; on the contrary, he raised up friends
for them, (<span id="xiv.iii-p3.5"></span>[Gen.
31:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#024.md),
[42](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#042)<span id="xiv.iii-p3.5"></span>,.md)
rebuked the kings of Egypt (<span id="xiv.iii-p3.6"></span>[Gen.
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#016.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#017)<span id="xiv.iii-p3.6"></span>.md)
and Gerar (<span id="xiv.iii-p3.7"></span>[Ge
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#003)<span id="xiv.iii-p3.7"></span>.md)
for their sakes, and counseled them in the most solemn terms not to
touch or injure the persons of his anointed servants, (<span
id="xiv.iii-p3.8"></span>[Gen. 26:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#011.md),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#029)<span id="xiv.iii-p3.8"></span>,.md)
by whom, that is by Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the Most High
communicated his will to his Church, pouring his Spirit upon them, and
making them kings and priests in the distinguished families to which
they belonged.”

<span id="fn_210"></span>[211](cc11013.htm#fr_210.md) <span
id="xiv.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p6"></span> “Famine is here finely represented as a
servant, ready to come and go at the ‘call’ and command of God; for
calamities, whether public or private, are the messengers of divine
justice.” — *Horne.*

<span id="fn_211"></span>[212](cc11013.htm#fr_211.md) <span
id="xiv.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p15"></span> The memory of this circumstance might,
therefore, have been preserved by tradition; or it may be simply a
conclusion drawn from Joseph’s being incarcerated, and from the crime of
which he was accused. When it is considered that prisoners were
ordinarily secured by chains, and when the magnitude of the crime
charged upon him, that of making an attempt upon the chastity of his
mistress, is farther taken into account, it is a very probable
inference, that when cast into prison, he was put in chains.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[213](cc11013.htm#fr_212.md) <span
id="xiv.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p16"></span> The first of these readings is the most
probable. The Hebrew is <span id="xiv.iv-p16.1"></span>ברזל באה נפשו.
“The verb being here in the feminine gender shows that the subject is
<span id="xiv.iv-p16.2"></span>נפשו, and that <span
id="xiv.iv-p16.3"></span>ברזל is accusative. In this manner the phrase
is rendered by the LXX. <span id="xiv.iv-p16.4"></span>Σίδηρον διὢλθεν ἡ
ψυχὴ αὐτοῦ, ‘his soul passed through iron;’ and so the Syriac, ‘his soul
went into iron;’ but the Chaldee, disregarding the gender, has taken it
the other way, ‘the chain of iron went into his soul.’” — (*Phillips*’
*Psalms in Hebrew, with a Critical, Exegetical, and Philological
Commentary.*)

<span id="fn_213"></span>[214](cc11013.htm#fr_213.md) <span
id="xiv.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p19"></span> It is so understood by Dr Kennicott. He
refers the first clause of the verse to the completion of Joseph’s
interpretation of the dreams of the chief butler and baker; an opinion
which cannot be admitted, for Joseph was not delivered at that time, but
*two years after* it, <span id="xiv.iv-p19.1"></span>[Ge
41:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#001.md)<span id="xiv.iv-p19.1"></span>.
He refers the second clause to the interpretation of Pharaoh’s dreams,
called the Word *or* Oracle of Jehovah, because sent by him to Pharaoh.
In this sense Hammond also interprets it. “*The word of the Lord.*” says
he, “is God’s showing him the meaning of those dreams, (<span
id="xiv.iv-p19.2"></span>[Ge
41:39](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#039)<span id="xiv.iv-p19.2"></span>.md)
God’s telling him, or revealing to him, the interpretation of them.”
Some who take this view explain the verb *tried,* not as referring to
the trial of Joseph’s patience, but as referring to the proof of his
innocence. “<span id="xiv.iv-p19.3"></span>צרפ,” says Street, “in its
primary sense, signifies *to refine metals,* or *to examine their purity
by fire*: by metaphor it is applied to the human heart, and signifies
*to purify, to prove, to examine*; but as metal, already free from
dross, would not be refined, but only *show its purity* on being
assayed, so here the Word seems to signify *showed him to be innocent.*
Joseph, protesting his innocence to Pharaoh’s butler, says, (<span
id="xiv.iv-p19.4"></span>[Ge
40:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#010)<span id="xiv.iv-p19.4"></span>.md)
‘Here also have I done nothing that they should put me in the dungeon;’
and Pharaoh assigns it as his reason for taking him from prison, and
setting him over the land of Egypt, (<span id="xiv.iv-p19.5"></span>[Ge
41:38](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#038)<span id="xiv.iv-p19.5"></span>.md)
‘Can ye find as this is a man in whom the Spirit of God is?’ His
interpreting, by the inspiration of God, their dreams, exempted him at
once from being any longer looked on as a criminal, and raised him to
the highest honors.” “This word,” says Phillips, “proved Joseph, or
purified him, as the verb literally means, for it made him appear pure
or innocent in the eyes of the people, who were thus assured that God
was with him, and that he must therefore be a pious person, and not
guilty of the crime for which he was thrown into a dungeon.”

<span id="fn_214"></span>[215](cc11013.htm#fr_214.md) <span
id="xiv.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p3"></span> “The meaning of *to bind his princes* is to
exercise control over the greatest men in the kingdom, which power was
conferred on Joseph by Pharaoh: see <span id="xiv.v-p3.1"></span>[Ge
41:40](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#040.md)<span id="xiv.v-p3.1"></span>;
also verses 43, 44. The capability of binding is to be regarded as an
evidence of authority; a power of compelling obedience; or, in default
thereof, of inflicting punishment.” — *Phillips.*

<span id="fn_215"></span>[216](cc11013.htm#fr_215.md) <span
id="xiv.v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p4"></span> “As the two members of the verse express
substantially the same thing, we infer the land of Ham to be the same as
Egypt. Ham, the son of Noah, was father to Mizraim, who is supposed to
have been the founder of the Egyptians, and hence the two names of the
country. Jerome, in his note on <span id="xiv.v-p4.1"></span>[Ge
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#006.md)<span id="xiv.v-p4.1"></span>,
observes that Egypt was called in his day, in the Egyptian language, by
the name of Ham.” — *Ibid.*

<span id="fn_216"></span>[217](cc11013.htm#fr_216.md) <span
id="xiv.v-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p5"></span> “<span id="xiv.v-p5.1"></span>Ou, fortifia.”
— *Fr.* *marg.* “Or, strengthened.”

<span id="fn_217"></span>[218](cc11013.htm#fr_217.md) <span
id="xiv.v-p8.6"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p9"></span> “For <span id="xiv.v-p9.1"></span>לאסר, the
LXX., Vulgate, and Jerome, certainly had <span
id="xiv.v-p9.2"></span>ליסר, ‘to tutor;’ or they took <span
id="xiv.v-p9.3"></span>אסר in the sense of <span
id="xiv.v-p9.4"></span>יסר, as they took it in Hosea, chapter 10:10.” —
*Horsley.*

<span id="fn_218"></span>[219](cc11013.htm#fr_218.md) <span
id="xiv.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p12"></span> “<span id="xiv.v-p12.1"></span>En un peuple
le plus superbe de tout le monde.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[220](cc11013.htm#fr_219.md) <span
id="xiv.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p15"></span> “The root <span
id="xiv.v-p15.1"></span>עצם,” says Phillips, “signifies *to be strong,*
not only with regard to physical force, but also with respect to number:
<span id="xiv.v-p15.2"></span>[Ps.
38:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#020.md), [Ps.
40:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#006.md), [Ps.
69:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#005.md)<span id="xiv.v-p15.2"></span>,
etc.; in German, a great number is called <span
id="xiv.v-p15.3"></span>*eine starke Anzahl, a strong number.* Number
seems to be referred to in this passage.”

<span id="fn_220"></span>[221](cc11013.htm#fr_220.md) <span
id="xiv.vi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p6"></span> “Chrysostom says that *he turned* is the
same as *he* *permitted to turn.* See his note on the verse.” —
*Phillips.*

<span id="fn_221"></span>[222](cc11013.htm#fr_221.md) <span
id="xiv.vi-p6.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p7"></span> “<span id="xiv.vi-p7.1"></span>Ou ceux qui
veulent estre trop prudens pour remedier aux inconvenions, ce leur
semble.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[223](cc11013.htm#fr_222.md) <span
id="xiv.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p12"></span> “*The words of his signs,* — *i.e.,*
declarations; which were afterwards confirmed by miracles.” —
*Cresswell.* “In this phrase,” says Hammond, “*the* *words of his signs*
or *prodigies,* <span id="xiv.vi-p12.1"></span>דברי, *words,* seems to
be somewhat more than a pleonasm. God had told them what signs they
should use, to convince the people first, and then Pharaoh, of their
mission; and so in each judgment God commands, and they show the sign;
and God’s thus telling or speaking to them is, properly, <span
id="xiv.vi-p12.2"></span>דברי, *words,* and the matter of these words
expressed by <span id="xiv.vi-p12.3"></span>אתותיו, *signs* or
*prodigies of his,* — viz., which as he directed, he would also enable
them to do among them.”

<span id="fn_223"></span>[224](cc11013.htm#fr_223.md) <span
id="xiv.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p15"></span> They executed the command of God, with
respect to the plagues brought on the Egyptians, although they knew that
in thus acting they would incur the heavy displeasure of Pharaoh, and
expose their lives to considerable danger. “The import of <span
id="xiv.vi-p15.1"></span>מרו לא, *they resisted not,*” says Hammond,
“seems no more than what is affirmed in the story, <span
id="xiv.vi-p15.2"></span>[Exod. 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#021.md),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#022.md)<span id="xiv.vi-p15.2"></span>,
‘The Lord said unto Moses, Stretch out thy hand. — And Moses stretched
forth his hand,’ — *i.e*., readily obeyed, and did what God directed,
and that at a time when Pharaoh was likely to be incensed, and
vehemently offended with him and Aaron. For which consideration the
story there gives us this farther ground: for as, verse 10, he had
before expressed some anger and threats, — ‘Look to it, for evil is
before you,’ and ‘they were driven from his presence,’ verse 11; so now,
upon the hardening his heart, which follows this plague of darkness, he
said to Moses, ‘Get thee from me, take heed to thyself, see my face no
more, for in that day thou seest my face thou shalt die the death,’
verse 28. This rage of Pharaoh, Moses in reason might well foresee, but
he dreaded it not; but boldly did as God directed, and that is the
meaning of “they resisted not God’s word.’”

<span id="fn_224"></span>[225](cc11013.htm#fr_224.md) <span
id="xiv.vi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p18"></span> The Hebrew verb for *brought forth* is
<span id="xiv.vi-p18.1"></span>שרף, *sharats,* which signifies *to
multiply exceedingly*; and “the noun is used for creeping things,
because they procreate in great abundance. It cannot therefore be more
fitly translated, as is observed by Hammond, than by *swarming*.” —
*Phillips.*

<span id="fn_225"></span>[226](cc11013.htm#fr_225.md) <span
id="xiv.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p3"></span> The original word for *a swarm of flies*
is <span id="xiv.vii-p3.1"></span>ערב, *arob.* For some account of the
noxious insects here meant, see volume 3, page 258, note 2.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[227](cc11013.htm#fr_226.md) <span
id="xiv.vii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p4"></span> The Hebrew word for *lice* is <span
id="xiv.vii-p4.1"></span>כנים, *kannim.* The reading in the Septuagint
is <span id="xiv.vii-p4.2"></span>σκνιφες, and in the Vulgate <span
id="xiv.vii-p4.3"></span>*sciniphes,* which signifies a species of
little gnats that sting painfully in the marshy country of Egypt; the
<span id="xiv.vii-p4.4"></span>*culex reptans* of Linnaeus, or the <span
id="xiv.vii-p4.5"></span>*culex molestus* of Forskal. In support of the
accuracy of this interpretation it has been said, that as the
translators of the Septuagint dwelt in Egypt, it can hardly be supposed
that they were ignorant of what was intended by the Hebrew name. Philo,
an Alexandrian Jew, and Origen, a Christian father, who likewise lived
at Alexandria, have also been produced as confirming this
interpretation. Both Philo and Origen represent these insects as being
very small, but very troublesome. The latter describes them as winged
insects, but so small as to escape any but the acutest sight; and says,
that when settled on the body, they wound it with a most sharp and
painful piercer. Jerome also supports this view, while Gesenius,
Boothroyd, and others, concur in it. The Jewish interpreters, however,
and Josephus, understand the original word as denoting *lice*; which has
been adopted by the translators of our English Bible, and which Bochart
likewise follows, with most of the modern commentators. Bochart argues
that gnats could not be intended: — 1. Because the creatures here
mentioned sprang from the dust of the earth, and not from the waters. 2.
Because they were both on men and cattle, which cannot be spoken of
gnats. 3. Because their name comes from a root which signifies to make
firm, fix, establish, which could not apply to gnats, flies, etc., as
they are almost constantly on the wing. 4. Because <span
id="xiv.vii-p4.6"></span>כנה, *kinah,* is the term given by the
Talmudists for *louse.* The translation given by Calvin, and in our
English Bible, appears the most correct, but whichever we adopt, it is
necessary to conclude (which the history expressly states) that the
creatures were brought in swarms, most extraordinary even for Egypt, and
thus a miraculous interposition was made manifest. This judgment was the
more noisome and disgraceful to the Egyptians, from the great external
purity which they affected, and from their being very nice both in their
persons and clothing; bathing and making ablutions continually. They
were particularly solicitous not to harbour any vermin, thinking it
would be a great profanation of the temple which they entered, if any
animalculae of this sort were concealed in their garments.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[228](cc11013.htm#fr_227.md) <span
id="xiv.vii-p4.7"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p5"></span> The Hebrew word translated *caterpillar*
is <span id="xiv.vii-p5.1"></span>ילק, *yelek.* This word is in our
English Bible rendered *caterpillar* here, and in <span
id="xiv.vii-p5.2"></span>[Jer
51:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#027.md)<span id="xiv.vii-p5.2"></span>;
but in <span id="xiv.vii-p5.3"></span>[Joel
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#004.md), [Joel
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#025.md)<span id="xiv.vii-p5.3"></span>,
and <span id="xiv.vii-p5.4"></span>[Na
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#015.md)<span id="xiv.vii-p5.4"></span>,
it is rendered *cankerworm.* In the passage in Nahum the creature is
spoken of as winged and bristled, whence some commentators suppose that
a kind of locust is intended. “It certainly means some insect remarkable
for destroying vegetables, probably the ‘chafer’ or ‘maybug,’ <span
id="xiv.vii-p5.5"></span>βρουχος*,* as the LXX. render it in five
passages out of eight wherein it occurs. The Vulgate throughout renders
it *bruchus,* the ‘chafer.’ Michaelis thinks it means the ‘chafer,’
particularly in its *vermicular* state, when it is much more destructive
to plants, namely, by gnawing, eating, and cankering their roots, than
after it has taken wing.” — *Parkhurst*’*s Lexicon on* <span
id="xiv.vii-p5.6"></span>ילק, *under* <span id="xiv.vii-p5.7"></span>לק,
2.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[229](cc11013.htm#fr_228.md) <span
id="xiv.vii-p5.8"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p6"></span> *The beginning,* or *the first-fruit of
all their strength,* is understood by Lowth to mean the first-born of
the mother. His note on the verse in *Merrick*’*s Annotations* is as
follows: — “<span id="xiv.vii-p6.1"></span>Απαρχὴν πόνου*,* <span
id="xiv.vii-p6.2"></span>*Primitias laboris* vel *partus* LXX. *Vulg.
Hieron.* Compare <span id="xiv.vii-p6.3"></span>[Ge
35:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#018.md)<span id="xiv.vii-p6.3"></span>.
This, I think, is the right translation. The first-born, that were slain
on this occasion, were those that opened the womb; the first-born of the
mother, not of the father, as it appears from the circumstances of the
history.” The first-born of cattle is no doubt also intended. — See
<span id="xiv.vii-p6.4"></span>[Ge
49:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#003.md)<span id="xiv.vii-p6.4"></span>;
and <span id="xiv.vii-p6.5"></span>[Ps
78:51](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#051.md)<span id="xiv.vii-p6.5"></span>

<span id="fn_229"></span>[230](cc11013.htm#fr_229.md) <span
id="xiv.vii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p15"></span> Allusion is made to the Israelites
carrying with them in their departure from Egypt, jewels of silver, and
jewels of gold, which they borrowed of the Egyptians, <span
id="xiv.vii-p15.1"></span>[Ex
12:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#036.md)<span id="xiv.vii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[231](cc11013.htm#fr_230.md) <span
id="xiv.vii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p16"></span> “*And there was not any one stumbling
among his tribes.* The LXX. have rendered <span
id="xiv.vii-p16.1"></span>כושל by <span
id="xiv.vii-p16.2"></span>ἀσθενης *infirm,* so that they understood the
Psalmist to say, there was no one incapable of following the multitude,
— no one was prevented by disease or infirmity from accomplishing the
journey.” — *Phillips.* What a striking contrast between their condition
and that of their oppressors! While in every Egyptian dwelling, death
had left his victim, not one of all the children of Israel was unable to
prosecute his heaven-directed flight from that land of bondage.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[232](cc11013.htm#fr_231.md) <span
id="xiv.vii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p19"></span> The meaning of this proverb is to be in
danger, or hard set on every side; for if you hold the wolf, he bites
you by the fingers; if you let him go, he may destroy you.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[233](cc11013.htm#fr_232.md) <span
id="xiv.vii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p20"></span> From the heavy and overwhelming judgments
inflicted upon Pharaoh and his people, for refusing to allow the
Israelites to depart, they came to associate the presence of that people
in their land, with the most terrible manifestations of divine
displeasure. This at last led them, after all their inveterate
impenitence, to hail with gratitude the departure of the hated tribes.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[234](cc11013.htm#fr_233.md) <span
id="xiv.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p3"></span> See volume 3, page 248, note.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[235](cc11013.htm#fr_234.md) <span
id="xiv.viii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p7"></span> “It does not appear from the history,
that the Israelites supplicated God at all, but only murmured against
Moses and Aaron for bringing them into the wilderness.” — *Phillips.*

<span id="fn_235"></span>[236](cc11013.htm#fr_235.md) <span
id="xiv.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ix-p3"></span> That is, the products of their labor; their
buildings, vineyards, cultivated fields, etc. The Israelites took
possession of the land of Canaan, and of course possessed themselves of
the advantages arising from its occupation, and cultivation by those who
previously inhabited it. — See <span id="xiv.ix-p3.1"></span>[Deut.
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#011.md)<span id="xiv.ix-p3.1"></span>;
<span id="xiv.ix-p3.2"></span>[Jos
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#013.md)<span id="xiv.ix-p3.2"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 106](cc11014.md)
