[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc11017)  [Next](cc11019) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 11: Psalms, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xix"></span>

<span id="xix-p1"></span>PSALM 110

<span id="xix-p2"></span>In this psalm David sets forth the perpetuity
of Christ’s reign, and the eternity of his priesthood; and, in the
*first* place, he affirms, That God conferred upon Christ supreme
dominion, combined with invincible power, with which he either conquers
all his enemies, or compels them to submit to him. In the *second*
place, he adds, That God would extend the boundaries of this kingdom far
and wide; and, in the *third* place, That Christ, having been installed
into the priestly office with all the solemnity of an oath, sustains the
honors of that equally with those of his regal office. *Finally,* That
this shall be a new order of priesthood, whose introduction shall put an
end to the Levitical priesthood, which was temporary, and that it shall
be everlasting.

<span id="xix-p3"></span>A Psalm of David.

<span id="xix-p4"></span>Having the testimony of Christ that this psalm
was penned in reference to himself, we need not apply to any other
quarter for the corroboration of this statement; and, even supposing we
neither had his authority, nor the testimony of the apostle, the psalm
itself would admit of no other interpretation;  <span
id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316) for although we should have a dispute
with the Jews, the most obstinate people in the world, about the right
application of it, we are able, by the most irresistible arguments, to
compel them to admit that the truths here stated relate neither to David
nor to any other person than the Mediator alone. It is acknowledged that
the kingdom of Christ is typified in the person of David, but it cannot
be asserted of him, or of any of his successors, that he should be a
king whose dominion should be widely extended, and who, at the same
time, was to be a priest, not according to the law, but according to the
order of Melchizedek, and that for ever; for, at that time, no new and
unusual priestly dignity could be instituted, without depriving the
house of Levi of this peculiar honor. Besides, the perpetuity which is
ascribed to the sacerdotal office cannot belong to any man, because,
with the exception of the man Christ Jesus, this honor terminates
immediately at the close of the short and uncertain course of the
present life. But as these topics will be considered, more at large, in
their proper place, it is sufficient that we have, at this time, briefly
alluded to them.

<span id="xix.i"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p1"></span><span id="xix.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
110:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001)<span id="xix.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p2"></span>**1.** Jehovah said to my Lord, Sit at my
right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool. **2.** Jehovah
shall send out of Zion the scepter of thy power: rule thou in the midst
of thine enemies. **3.** Thy people shall come with voluntary offerings,
at the time of the assembling of thine army,  <span
id="fr_317"></span>[318](#fn_317) in beauty of holiness:  <span
id="fr_318"></span>[319](#fn_318) from the womb as from the morning dawn
to thee has been the dew of thy youth.

<span id="xix.i-p5"></span> 

<span id="xix.i-p6"></span><span id="xix.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p7"></span>**1** *Jehovah said to my Lord*  <span
id="fr_319"></span>[320](#fn_319) What is here stated might to some
extent be applied to the person of David, inasmuch as he neither
ascended the royal throne illegally, nor did he find his way to it by
nefarious artifices, nor was he raised to it by the fickle suffrages of
the people, but it was by the direct authority of God that he reigned
over Israel. It may be justly affirmed of all the kings of the earth,
that they have been placed upon their thrones by the hand of God, for
the kingdoms of this world are appointed by the decree of heaven, and
“there is no power but of God,” (<span id="xix.i-p8.1"></span>[Ro
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001)<span id="xix.i-p8.1"></span>)
Besides, as this kingdom was altogether peculiar, it was the design of
David to make a distinction between it and all other kingdoms. God
indeed invests kings with authority, but they are not consecrated as
David was, that like him, in consequence of the holy anointing oil, they
might be elevated to the rank of Christ’s vicegerents. In the
eighty-second psalm they are called gods, because by the will of God
they hold their position, and in some respects are his representatives,
(all power being lodged in him;) but they are not clothed with that
sacred majesty by which David was honored to be a type of God’s only
begotten Son. Moreover, he justly observes that the kingdom was
conferred upon him in a totally different manner from other earthly
kings, who, while they acknowledge that it is by the grace of God they
reign, yet, at the same time, do not consider that they are sustained by
his power, but, on the contrary, imagine that they reign either by their
own policy, by hereditary right, or by the kindness of fortune; and,
therefore, in so far as it respects themselves, it must be affirmed,
that they have no legitimate title to reign. And since they do not
recognize the hand of God in what they derive from him, his command
cannot be properly addressed to them. David, who was well aware that he
was anointed by God to be king over Israel, and who maintained an
obscure and retired position until summoned to assume the reins of
government, shows good cause why he is not to be classed with the
ordinary kings of the earth; meaning that he reigned by a Divine right.
That the whole of what is stated in this verse cannot be entirely and
exclusively applied to David, is very obvious from Christ’s reply to the
Pharisees, (<span id="xix.i-p8.2"></span>[Mt
22:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#044)<span id="xix.i-p8.2"></span>)
They having said that Christ was to be the son of David, he saith unto
them, “How then doth David himself call him Lord?”

<span id="xix.i-p9"></span>The objection started by the Jews, that
Christ’s reply was captious, is entirely frivolous, because David does
not speak in his own name, but in that of the people. This objection is
easily repelled. For even granting that this psalm was penned in name of
the whole Church, yet as David himself constituted one of the number of
the godly, and was a member of the body under the same head, he could
not separate himself from that class, or be dissevered from this head;
what is more, he could not compose this psalm for others without, at the
same time, taking part with them in it. There is besides another thing
deserving of notice, the assumption of the principle or maxim then
generally admitted, that David spake by the spirit of prophecy, and
consequently prophesied of the future reign of Christ. This principle of
interpretation being admitted, it is plainly to be inferred that he had
a reference to Christ’s future manifestation in the flesh, because he is
the sole and supreme Head of the Church. From which it also follows,
that there is something in Christ more excellent than his humanity, on
account of which he is called the Lord of David his father. This view is
strengthened by what is stated in the second clause of the verse.
Earthly kings may indeed be said to sit at God’s right hand, inasmuch as
they reign by his authority; here, however, something more lofty is
expressed, in that one king is chosen in a peculiar manner, and elevated
to the rank of power and dignity next to God, of which dignity the
twilight only appeared in David, while in Christ it shone forth in
meridian splendor. And as God’s right hand is elevated far above all
angels, it follows that he who is seated there is exalted above all
creatures. We will not maintain that angels were brought down from their
high estate to be put in subjection to David. What, then, is the result,
but that by the spirit of prophecy Christ’s throne is exalted far above
all principalities in heavenly places? The simile is borrowed from what
is customary among earthly kings, that the person who is seated at his
right hand is said to be next to him, and hence the Son, by whom the
Father governs the world, is by this session represented as
metaphorically invested with supreme dominion.

<span id="xix.i-p10"></span>*Until I make thine enemies thy footstool*
 <span id="fr_320"></span>[321](#fn_320) By these words the prophet
affirms that Christ would subdue all the opposition which his enemies in
their tumultuous rage might employ for the subversion of his kingdom. At
the same time, he intimates that the kingdom of Christ would never enjoy
tranquillity until he had conquered his numerous and formidable enemies.
And even should the whole world direct their machinations to the
overthrow of Christ’s royal throne, David here declares that it would
remain unmoved and unmoveable, while all they who rise up against it
shall be ruined. From this let us learn that, however numerous those
enemies may be who conspire against the Son of God, and attempt the
subversion of his kingdom, all will be unavailing, for they shall never
prevail against God’s immutable purpose, but, on the contrary, they
shall, by the greatness of his power, be laid prostrate at Christ’s
feet. And as this prediction will not be accomplished before the last
day, it must be that the kingdom of Christ will be assailed by many
enemies from time to time until the end of the world; and thus
by-and-bye it is said, *rule thou in the midst of thine enemies* The
particle *until* does not refer to that which may happen after the
complete carnage of the enemies of Christ.  <span
id="fr_321"></span>[322](#fn_321) Paul certainly declares that he will
then deliver up the kingdom to God, even the Father, which he received
from him, (<span id="xix.i-p12.5"></span>[1Co
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024)<span id="xix.i-p12.5"></span>;)
but we are not to take these words as denoting that he shall cease to
reign, and become, as it were, a private individual; we are to regard
them as describing the manner of his reign, that is, that his Divine
majesty will be more conspicuous. Moreover, in this passage he is
speaking solely of the reprobate who fall under Christ’s feet to their
own ruin and destruction. All mankind are naturally opposed to Christ,
and hence it is, that ere they be brought to yield a willing obedience
to him, they must be subdued and humbled. This he does with regard to
some of them whom he afterwards makes partakers with him in his glory;
while he casts off others, so that they may remain for ever in their
lost state.

<span id="xix.i-p13"></span><span id="xix.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p14"></span>**2** *Jehovah shall send out of Zion the
scepter of thy power.* The Psalmist not only confirms, in different
terms, what he stated above, but also adds, that Christ’s kingdom shall
be vastly extended, because God would make his scepter stretch far and
wide. David did indeed render not a few of the surrounding nations
tributaries to him, but still his kingdom, when contrasted with other
monarchies, was always confined within narrow limits. There is in the
words an implied contrast, as if he had said, that Christ should not
reign as King upon mount Zion only, because God would cause his power to
extend to the remotest regions of the earth. And for this reason it is
denominated *the scepter of his power,*  <span
id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322) and how astonishing was it, that
though the whole world was leagued in opposition to Christ’s kingdom, it
yet continued to spread and prosper. In a word, David here animates the
hearts of the godly against being dispirited by the foolhardy attempts
on the part of those who presume to introduce discord and disorder into
the kingdom of Christ; for he shows them that God will put forth his
invincible power for the maintaining of the glory of his sacred throne.
What time, then, our minds are agitated by various commotions, let us
learn confidently to repose on this support, that however much the world
may rage against Christ, it will never be able to hurl him from the
right hand of the Father. Moreover, as he does not reign on his own
account, but for our salvation, we may rest assured that we will be
protected and preserved from all ills under the guardianship of this
invincible King. Doubtless our condition in this world is connected with
many hardships; but as it is the will of God that Christ’s kingdom
should be encompassed with many enemies, and that too with the design of
keeping us in a state of constant warfare, it becomes us to exercise
patience and meekness; and assured of God’s aid, boldly to set at nought
the rage of the whole world. From this passage we are instructed as to
the calling of the Gentiles. Because, if God had not told us in this
place respecting the extension of Christ’s kingdom, we would not this
day have been classed among his people. But as the wall is broken down,
(<span id="xix.i-p15.1"></span>[Eph
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span id="xix.i-p15.1"></span>)
and the gospel promulgated, we have been gathered together into the body
of the Church, and Christ’s power is put forth to uphold and defend us.

<span id="xix.i-p16"></span><span id="xix.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p17"></span>**3** *Thy people shall come*  <span
id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323) In this verse the Psalmist sets forth
the honors of Christ’s kingdom in relation to the number of his
subjects, and their prompt and cheerful obedience to his commands. The
Hebrew term, which he employs, frequently denotes *voluntary oblations;*
but, in the present case, it refers to the chosen people, those who are
truly Christ’s flock; declaring that they shall be a willing people,
spontaneously and cheerfully consecrating themselves to his service. *At
the time of the assembling of thine army,* that is to say, as often as
there shall be a convening of solemn and lawful assemblies, or the king
shall desire an account of his people; which may be expressed in French,
*au jour des montres,* — *in the day of the review.* Others render it,
*in the day of thy power;*  <span id="fr_324"></span>[325](#fn_324) but
the former is preferable, for when Christ shall wish to assemble his
people, immediately they will yield a prompt obedience, without being
forcibly constrained to it. Moreover, for the purpose of assuring us
that this, in preference to all other kingdoms, was set apart by God for
his peculiar services, it is added, *the beauties or honors of
holiness,* thereby intimating, that all who become Christ’s subjects
will not approach him as they would do an earthly king, but as they
would come into the presence of God himself, their sole aim being to
serve God.

<span id="xix.i-p20"></span>*Out of the womb of the morning,*  <span
id="fr_325"></span>[326](#fn_325) *etc.* It would not be for edification
to recount all the interpretations which have been given of this clause,
for when I have established its true and natural import, it would be
quite superfluous to enter upon a refutation of others. There does not,
indeed, appear to me any reason to doubt that, in this place, David
extols the Divine favor displayed in increasing the number of Christ’s
people; and hence, in consequence of their extraordinary increase, he
compares the youth or race which would be born to him to the dew.  <span
id="fr_326"></span>[327](#fn_326) As men are struck with astonishment at
seeing the earth moistened and refreshed with dew, though its descent be
imperceptible, even so, David declares that an innumerable offspring
shall be born to Christ, who shall be spread over the whole earth. The
youth, therefore, which, like the dew-drops, are innumerable, are here
designated *the dew of childhood* or *of youth* The Hebrew term, <span
id="xix.i-p22.3"></span>ילדות, *yalduth,* is used as a collective noun,
that is, a noun which does not point out a single individual only, but a
community or society.  <span id="fr_327"></span>[328](#fn_327) Should
any wish to attach a more definite and distinct signification to the
term, he may do so in the following manner: That an offspring,
innumerable as the dew-drops of the morning, shall issue from his womb.
The testimony of experience proves that there was good reason for
uttering this prediction. The multitude who, in so short a time, have
been gathered together and subjected to Christ’s sway, is incredible;
the more so, as this has been accomplished by the sound of the Gospel
alone, and that, too, in spite of the formidable opposition of the whole
world. Besides, it is not surprising that aged persons, who are recently
converted to Christ, should be designated children newly born, because
the spiritual birth, according to Peter, makes all the godly become as
new-born babes, (<span id="xix.i-p23.2"></span>[1Pe
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#002)<span id="xix.i-p23.2"></span>) To
the same purpose are the words of Isaiah, (<span
id="xix.i-p23.3"></span>[Isa
53:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010)<span id="xix.i-p23.3"></span>,)
that Christ “shall see a seed whose days shall be prolonged;” and under
his reign the Church has the promise of enjoying a season of
incalculable fertility. What has been said will serve to account for the
appellation given to the Church or children of God. And, assuredly, it
is matter of surprise that there should be any, though the number may be
few, gathered out of a world lying in ruins, and inhabited by the
children of wrath; and it is still more surprising, that such vast
multitudes are regenerated by the Spirit of Christ and by the word. At
the same time, we would do well to bear in mind, that to execute God’s
commands promptly and cheerfully, and to be guided solely by his will,
is the peculiar honor and privilege of his chosen; for Christ will
recognize none as his people, except those who willingly take his yoke
upon them, and come into his presence at the voice of his word. And that
no one may imagine that eye-service is a proper discharge of his duty,
the Psalmist very properly adds, that Christ will not be satisfied with
mere external ceremony, but that he must be worshipped with true
reverence, such as he himself instructs us to bring into the presence of
God.

<span id="xix.ii"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p1"></span><span id="xix.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004)<span id="xix.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p2"></span>**4.** Jehovah hath sworn, and will not
repent him,  <span id="fr_328"></span>[329](#fn_328) Thou art a priest
for ever, according to the manner of Melchizedek

<span id="xix.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xix.ii-p5"></span><span id="xix.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p6"></span>**4** *Jehovah hath sworn* This verse is a
satisfactory proof that the person here spoken of is none other than
Christ. When the Jews, with the view of mystifying this prediction,
render the term <span id="xix.ii-p6.1"></span>כוהן, *chohen, a prince,*
their translation is at once feeble and frivolous. I acknowledge,
indeed, that those of noble descent or of royal blood are in Hebrew
denominated <span id="xix.ii-p6.2"></span>כהנים, *chohanim;* but would
it have been saying any thing to the honor of Christ for David merely to
give to him the title of a chief, which is inferior to that of royal
dignity? Besides, what would be the import of saying that he was a
prince for ever, and according to the manner of Melchizedek? There can
be no question then, that the Holy Ghost here refers to something
specific and peculiar, as distinguishing and separating this king from
all other kings. This, too, is the well known title with which
Melchizedek was honored by Moses, (<span id="xix.ii-p6.3"></span>[Ge
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#018)<span id="xix.ii-p6.3"></span>) I
grant, indeed, that anciently among heathen nations kings were wont to
exercise the priestly office; but Melchizedek is called “the priest of
the most high God,” in consequence of his devoutly worshipping the only
true God. Among his own people, however, God did not permit the blending
of these offices. Hence Uzziah, David’s legitimate successor, was struck
with leprosy because he attempted to offer incense to God, (<span
id="xix.ii-p6.4"></span>[2Ch
26:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#021)<span id="xix.ii-p6.4"></span>.)
The circumstances connected with the lineage of David were vastly
different from those relating to Melchizedek. What these are it is not
difficult to ascertain, inasmuch as in this new King the holy office of
the priesthood shall be united with the crown and the throne. For
assuredly the imperial majesty was not so conspicuous in such an obscure
prince as Melchizedek, as on that account to warrant his being held out
as an example above all others. Salem, the sole seat of his throne, and
where he reigned by sufferance, was at that time a small obscure town,
so that with regard to him there was nothing deserving of notice saving
the conjunction of the crown and the priesthood. Ambitious of procuring
greater reverence for their persons, heathen kings aspired after the
honor of the sacerdotal office; but it was by divine authority that
Melchizedek was invested with both these functions.

<span id="xix.ii-p7"></span>All dubiety as to this being the meaning of
David ought to be banished from our minds by the authority of the
Apostle. And although the Jews may maintain the contrary as obstinately
as they please, yet reason manifestly declares that the *beauty of
holiness,* to which I formerly adverted, is here very clearly described.
To this a decisive and peculiar mark is appended, which elevates Christ
above all other kings with regard to the dignity of the priesthood, and
which at the same time tends to point out the difference between his
priesthood and that of Levi. In connection with his sacerdotal office,
mention is made of *God’s oath,* who was not wont to mingle his
venerable name with matters of minor importance; but, on the contrary,
to teach us by his own example to swear deliberately and reverently, and
never unless in weighty and important matters. Admitting, then, that God
had sworn that the Messiah would be the prince and governor of his
people, according as Melchizedek was, this would have been nothing else
than an unbecoming profanation of his name. When, however, it is quite
apparent that something unusual and peculiar was denoted in this place,
we may therefore conclude that the priesthood of Christ is invested with
great importance, seeing that it is ratified by the oath of God. And, in
fact, it is the very turning point upon which our salvation depends;
because, but for our reliance on Christ our Mediator, we would be all
debarred from entering into God’s presence. In prayer, too, nothing is
more needful for us than sure confidence in God, and therefore he not
only invites us to come to him, but also by an oath hath appointed an
advocate for the purpose of obtaining acceptance for us in his sight. As
for those who shut the door against themselves, they subject themselves
to the guilt of impeaching him with being a God of untruth and of
perjury. It is in this way that the Apostle argues the disannulling of
the Levitical priesthood; because, while that remained entire, God would
not have sworn that there should be a new order of priesthood unless
some change had been contemplated. What is more, when he promises a new
priest, it is certain that he would be one who would be superior to all
others, and would also abolish the then existing order.

<span id="xix.ii-p8"></span>Some translate the term <span
id="xix.ii-p8.1"></span>דברתי, *diberathi, according to my word,*  <span
id="fr_329"></span>[330](#fn_329) an interpretation which I am not
disposed entirely to reject, inasmuch as David would be represented as
affirming that the priesthood of Melchizedek is founded upon the call
and commandment of God. But as the letter <span
id="xix.ii-p9.4"></span>י, *yod,* is frequently redundant, I, in common
with the majority of interpreters, prefer translating it simply
*manner.* Moreover, as not a few of the fathers have misapprehended the
comparison between Christ and Melchizedek, we must learn from the
Apostle what that resemblance is; from which will be readily seen the
error into which they fell respecting it. For can there be any thing
more absurd than to overlook all the mysteries about which the Spirit,
by the mouth of the Apostle, hath spoken, and attend only to such as he
has omitted? Such persons argue solely about the bread and wine, which
they maintain were offered both by Melchizedek and Christ. But
Melchizedek offered bread and wine, not as a sacrifice to God, but to
Abraham as a repast to refresh him on his march. “In the holy Supper
there is not an offering of bread and wine as they erroneously imagine,
but a mutual participation of it among the faithful. As to the passage
under review, the similitude refers principally to the perpetuity of his
priesthood, as is obvious from the particle <span
id="xix.ii-p9.5"></span>לעולם, *leolam,* that is to say, *for ever.*
Melchizedek is described by Moses as if he were a celestial individual;
and, accordingly, David, in instituting a resemblance between Christ and
him, designs to point out the perpetuity of his priestly office. Whence
it follows, (a point which is handled by the Apostle,) that as death did
not intercept the exercise of his office, he has no successor. And this
circumstance demonstrates the accursed sacrilege of the Popish mass;
for, if the Popish priests will assume the prerogative of effecting a
reconciliation between God and men, they must of necessity denude Christ
of the peculiar and distinguishing honor which his Father has conferred
upon him.

<span id="xix.iii"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p1"></span><span id="xix.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
110:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#005)<span id="xix.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p2"></span>**5.** The Lord at thy right hand  <span
id="fr_330"></span>[331](#fn_330) hath broken in pieces kings in the day
of his wrath. **6.** He shalt judge among the heathen, he shall fill all
with ruins; he shall break the head over a great country. **7.** He
shall drink of the torrent in the way, and therefore shall he elevate
his head on high.

<span id="xix.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xix.iii-p5"></span><span id="xix.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p6"></span>**5.** *The Lord at thy right hand* In
these words David celebrates the dreadful nature of that power which
Christ possesses for the dispersion and destruction of his enemies; and
by this means he affirms, that though encompassed by bands of deadly
foes, yet their malignant attempts would not prevent God from upholding
the King whom he has set up. It is proper to consider the expression,
*in the day of his wrath,* by which we are instructed patiently to
endure the cross, if it happen that God, for a time, conceals himself
during the prevalence of the cruelty and fury of enemies; for he knows
well when the full and fit season arrives for executing vengeance upon
them. Next, he invests Christ with power over the nations, and the
people of uncircumcised lips; meaning, that he was not chosen King to
reign over the inhabitants of Judea only, but also to keep under his
sway distant nations, agreeably to what was predicated of him in <span
id="xix.iii-p6.1"></span>[Ps 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008)<span
id="xix.iii-p6.1"></span>. And because, in all parts of the earth, as
well as in the confines of Judea, there would be many rebellious and
disobedient persons, he adverts also to their destruction; thus
intimating, that all who should set themselves in opposition to Christ,
must be made to fall before him, and their obstinacy be subdued.

<span id="xix.iii-p7"></span><span id="xix.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p8"></span>**7** *He shall drink* Not a few
interpreters, in my opinion, expound this verse in a very harsh manner:
that the carnage would be so great, as to cause the blood of the slain
to flow in torrents, out of which Christ, the Conqueror, might drink
till he was satiated.  <span id="fr_331"></span>[332](#fn_331) Akin to
this is the exposition of those who would have it to be a figurative
representation of misery and grief, and thus descriptive of the many
afflictions to which Christ was liable during this transitory life. The
similitude seems rather to be drawn from the conduct of brave and
powerful generals, who, when in hot pursuit of the enemy, do not suffer
themselves to be diverted from their purpose by attending to luxuries;
but, without kneeling down, are content to quench their thirst by
drinking of the stream which they are passing. It was in this way that
Gideon found out the brave and warlike soldiers; regarding such as
kneeled down to drink as destitute of courage, he sent them back to
their homes, <span id="xix.iii-p9.3"></span>[Jud
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#005)<span id="xix.iii-p9.3"></span>. It
therefore appears to me that David figuratively attributes military
prowess to Christ, declaring that he would not take time to refresh
himself, but would hastily drink of the river which might come in his
way.  <span id="fr_332"></span>[333](#fn_332) This is designed to strike
his enemies with terror, intimating to them the rapid approach of
impending destruction. Should any one be disposed to ask, Where then is
that spirit of meekness and gentleness with which the Scripture
elsewhere informs us he shall be endued? <span
id="xix.iii-p10.1"></span>[Isa. 42:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#002),
Isa. 361:1, 2<span id="xix.iii-p10.1"></span>; I answer, that, as a
shepherd is gentle towards his flock, but fierce and formidable towards
wolves and thieves; in like manner, Christ is kind and gentle towards
those who commit themselves to his care, while they who wilfully and
obstinately reject his yoke, shall feel with what awful and terrible
power he is armed. In <span id="xix.iii-p10.2"></span>[Ps
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009)<span id="xix.iii-p10.2"></span>,
we saw that he had in his hand an iron scepter, by which he will beat
down all the obduracy of his enemies; and, accordingly, he is here said
to assume the aspect of cruelty, with the view of taking vengeance upon
them. Wherefore it becomes us carefully to refrain from provoking his
wrath against us by a stiff-necked and rebellious spirit, when he is
tenderly and sweetly inviting us to come to him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_316"></span>[317](cc11018.htm#fr_316) <span
id="xix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xix-p5"></span> In <span id="xix-p5.1"></span>[Mt
22:42-45](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#042)<span id="xix-p5.1"></span>,
Christ applies this portion of Scripture to himself; and this
application the Pharisees, before whom it was made, so far from
disputing, at once admitted, as appears from their inability to answer
our Lord’s question, which was founded upon it; for had the psalm been
differently interpreted by any party among the Jews, the Pharisees would
unquestionably have taken advantage of such diversity of opinion, to
escape from the difficulty in which they were placed by the question
addressed to them. The Messianic interpretation of this psalm is also
supported by the testimony of the apostles. The author of the Epistle to
the Hebrews (<span id="xix-p5.2"></span>[Heb
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#013)<span id="xix-p5.2"></span>)
quotes the first verse, to prove Christ’s superiority in dignity to
angels, to whom Jehovah had never said, “Sit on my right hand, until I
make thine enemies thy footstool.” In <span id="xix-p5.3"></span>[Acts
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#035)<span id="xix-p5.3"></span>, Peter
quotes the same passage, as prophetical of Christ’s ascension into
heaven. See also <span id="xix-p5.4"></span>[1Co
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#025)<span id="xix-p5.4"></span>;
<span id="xix-p5.5"></span>[Heb
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#017)<span id="xix-p5.5"></span>; <span
id="xix-p5.6"></span>[Eph 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020)<span
id="xix-p5.6"></span>, etc. The psalm is thus beyond all controversy, a
very clear prediction of the divinity, priesthood, victories, and
triumph of the Messiah. We have so many Scriptural helps to its
exposition, that we can be at no loss as to its meaning. Such also is
the strength of the internal evidence, in support of its application to
Christ, that although the Jews have taken a great deal of pains to wrest
it to another sense, yet several of the Rabbins have been forced to
acknowledge that it belongs to him.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[318](cc11018.htm#fr_317) <span
id="xix.i-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p3"></span> “<span id="xix.i-p3.1"></span>Au temps
d’assembler ton exercice.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[319](cc11018.htm#fr_318) <span
id="xix.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p4"></span> Calvin, in pointing this verse, has very
properly placed the colon after *holiness,* and not after *morning,* as
in our English Bible.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[320](cc11018.htm#fr_319) <span
id="xix.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p8"></span> “*The* Lord *said unto my Lord.* Heb.,
‘Jehovah assuredly said unto my *Adon,*’ which last word is used for
*lord* in every variety of rank, from the master of a family to the
sovereign of an empire. In its origin, this title seems similar to the
Italian *cardinal,* which means primarily a hinge, as Adon does a
socket; hence figuratively applied to executive magistrates, on whom the
government *rests,* and public affairs *turn*.” — *Williams.*

<span id="fn_320"></span>[321](cc11018.htm#fr_320) <span
id="xix.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p11"></span> The expression is borrowed from the Eastern
custom of conquerors putting their feet upon the necks of their enemies.
See <span id="xix.i-p11.1"></span>[Jos
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#024)<span id="xix.i-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[322](cc11018.htm#fr_321) <span
id="xix.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p12"></span> “*Until I make, etc.* It is remarked by
Genebrard, that the particle <span id="xix.i-p12.1"></span>עד is to be
taken emphatically, as if it were equivalent to <span
id="xix.i-p12.2"></span>*etiam donec,* and signifies *continuity*; not
the *exception* or *exclusion* of *future times.* Jehovah is, therefore,
speaking in substance as follows: — ‘Reign with me even until *I make
thy enemies thy footstool*; even at the time which seems opposed to thy
kingdom, and when thy enemies appear to reign, that is, before I have
prostrated thy enemies, and have caused them to make submission to thee.
*After* this subjection of thy adversaries, it is unnecessary to say,
Thou wilt continue to reign.’ If this be not the force of the passage,
then we must suppose that the reign of Christ will cease when he has
completely subjugated the world; which is contrary to what we are taught
elsewhere in Scripture. The particle is used in a similar manner in
<span id="xix.i-p12.3"></span>[Ps
123:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#003)<span id="xix.i-p12.3"></span>;
<span id="xix.i-p12.4"></span>[De
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#024)<span id="xix.i-p12.4"></span>.” —
*Phillips.*

<span id="fn_322"></span>[323](cc11018.htm#fr_322) <span
id="xix.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p15"></span> “*The rod of thy strength,* or *the scepter
of thy strength, i.e.,* thy powerful scepter, the scepter with which
thou rulest thy powerful kingdom.” — *Phillips.*

<span id="fn_323"></span>[324](cc11018.htm#fr_323) <span
id="xix.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p18"></span> “‘Thy people shall be willing in the day of
thy power.’ *Voluntaries,* a people of voluntarinesses or of
liberalities, (as <span id="xix.i-p18.2"></span>[Ps
68:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#010)<span id="xix.i-p18.2"></span>;)
that is, shall most freely, willingly, and liberally present themselves
and their oblations to thee, as <span id="xix.i-p18.3"></span>[Jud
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#009)<span id="xix.i-p18.3"></span>;
<span id="xix.i-p18.4"></span>[Acts
11:41](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#041)<span id="xix.i-p18.4"></span>
\[*sic*\]; <span id="xix.i-p18.5"></span>[Ex
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#002)<span id="xix.i-p18.5"></span>;
<span id="xix.i-p18.6"></span>[Ro
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)<span id="xix.i-p18.6"></span>;
<span id="xix.i-p18.7"></span>[Ps
48:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#010)<span id="xix.i-p18.7"></span>;
<span id="xix.i-p18.8"></span>[Ps
119:108](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#108)<span id="xix.i-p18.8"></span>;
<span id="xix.i-p18.9"></span>[So
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#011)<span id="xix.i-p18.9"></span>.” —
*Ainsworth.* “<span id="xix.i-p18.10"></span>נדבות is literally
*promptitudines, readinesses*; so that the term being plural and
abstract, may be regarded as highly emphatic, as if the Psalmist said,
*Thy people shall be very willing.* This noun also signifies *voluntary
oblations.* Thus Luther has rendered it by <span
id="xix.i-p18.11"></span>*williglich opfern* In this sense it is found
in many passages, as <span id="xix.i-p18.12"></span>[Exod.
35:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#029), [Exod.
36:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo036.htm#003)<span id="xix.i-p18.12"></span>;
<span id="xix.i-p18.13"></span>[De
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#024)<span id="xix.i-p18.13"></span>,
and several other places. It will be necessary, if this meaning be
assigned to it here, to supply some such verb as <span
id="xix.i-p18.14"></span>יביא. The Psalmist, however, is evidently
speaking of a battle, and, therefore, the admission of this meaning
would be incongruous ” — *Phillips.* “Since an army,” says Rosenmüller,
“is represented in this passage as called out to a warlike expedition,
we cannot understand <span id="xix.i-p18.15"></span>נדבות otherwise than
as signifying a prompt and willing mind, in which sense we find it,
<span id="xix.i-p18.16"></span>[Ho
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#005)<span id="xix.i-p18.16"></span>,
<span id="xix.i-p18.17"></span>*ultro, voluntarily,* of his own accord,
<span id="xix.i-p18.18"></span>[Ps
51:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#014)<span id="xix.i-p18.18"></span>;
<span id="xix.i-p18.19"></span>[Judg.
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#002),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#009)<span id="xix.i-p18.19"></span>.” —
*Messianic Psalms, Biblical Cabinet,* volume 32, page 271.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[325](cc11018.htm#fr_324) <span
id="xix.i-p18.21"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p19"></span> “I have rendered the words, <span
id="xix.i-p19.1"></span>ביום חילד, *in the day of thy power*; and I
understand that day as referring to the time when, in consequence of
Peter’s exhortation, three thousand persons made profession of the
Christian faith.” — *Dante on the Messianic Psalms, Biblical Cabinet,*
volume 32, page 318. With this corresponds the interpretation of
Hammond: “The Messiah, in the former verses, is set upon his throne, for
the exercise of his regal power, with a sword or scepter in his hand;
and, as such, he is supposed to rule in the world, to go out to conquer
and subdue all before him. The army which he makes use of to this end is
the college of apostles, sent out to *preach to all nations*; and the
time of their thus preaching is here called <span
id="xix.i-p19.2"></span>יום חילך ‘the day of his power’ or ‘forces,’ or
‘army.’” But Queen Elizabeth’s translators understood the phrase in the
same sense as Calvin, rendering it, “The people shall come willingly at
the time of assembling thine army.” In like manner, Rosemüller reads,
“*In* *the day of thy army*; that is,” says he, “in the day when thou
assemblest and leadest forth thine army. The word <span
id="xix.i-p19.3"></span>חיל, *militia,* is here used as in <span
id="xix.i-p19.4"></span>[De 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#004)<span
id="xix.i-p19.4"></span>; <span id="xix.i-p19.5"></span>[2Ki
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#015)<span id="xix.i-p19.5"></span>,
signifying military forces.” — *Ibid.* volume 32, page 273.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[326](cc11018.htm#fr_325) <span
id="xix.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p21"></span> “<span id="xix.i-p21.1"></span>*Des* *la
matrice,* comme de, *l*’*estoille du matin* ” — *Fr.* “*Out* *of the
womb,* as if from *or* out of *the star of the morning.*”

<span id="fn_326"></span>[327](cc11018.htm#fr_326) <span
id="xix.i-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p22"></span> “Among the earliest Greek writers, dew
seems to have been a figurative expression for the young of any animal.
Thus, <span id="xix.i-p22.1"></span>δροσος is used by æschylus for an
unfledged bird, (*Agamemn.* 145;) and <span
id="xix.i-p22.2"></span>ἑρση, by Homer, for a young lamb or kid, (*Od*.
1, 222.)” — *Horsley.*

<span id="fn_327"></span>[328](cc11018.htm#fr_327) <span
id="xix.i-p22.4"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p23"></span> “<span id="xix.i-p23.1"></span>Qui ne se
dit pas d’une personne seule, mais de quelque multitude et compagnie.” —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[329](cc11018.htm#fr_328) <span
id="xix.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p3"></span> The addition, “and will not repent,” is
intended to indicate the absolute character of the oath, that it cannot
be annulled or suspended in consequence of any altered circumstances;
that no change of counsel or of conduct in the parties concerned shall
cause any change in the divine purpose, so that it may be said, *Jehovah
repented,* as he is said to have repented of creating man on observing
the wickedness of the human race, (<span id="xix.ii-p3.1"></span>[Ge
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#006)<span id="xix.ii-p3.1"></span>.) A
similar form of expression is elsewhere employed to express the
immutability of what God declares or swears, (<span
id="xix.ii-p3.2"></span>[Nu 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#019)<span
id="xix.ii-p3.2"></span>; <span id="xix.ii-p3.3"></span>[1Sa
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#029)<span id="xix.ii-p3.3"></span>.)

<span id="fn_329"></span>[330](cc11018.htm#fr_329) <span
id="xix.ii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p9"></span> “<span id="xix.ii-p9.1"></span>על דברתי
<span id="xix.ii-p9.2"></span>Secundum meam constitutionem, (*q. d.*,)
Not according to the *Levitical order,* but according to *my
appointment,* the true Melchizedek. See <span
id="xix.ii-p9.3"></span>[Hebrews
7](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#000)<span id="xix.ii-p9.3"></span>.” —
*Goode*’*s New Version of the Book of Psalms, with Notes.*

<span id="fn_330"></span>[331](cc11018.htm#fr_330) <span
id="xix.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p3"></span> “*The Lord at thy right hand.* In this
psalm it is evident, verse 1, that <span id="xix.iii-p3.1"></span>יהוה
is the title of God the Father, and so again, verse 4, and <span
id="xix.iii-p3.2"></span>אדני of the Messiah God the Son, in respect of
that dignity, and dominion, and regal power, to which he was to be
exalted at his ascension, that ‘at the name of Jesus every knee should
bow.’ This is expressed, verse 1, by his ‘sitting at God’s right hand,’
for which the Apostle, <span id="xix.iii-p3.3"></span>[1Co
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#025)<span id="xix.iii-p3.3"></span>,
reads, ‘it must be that he reign.’ By this it is evident that, in this
verse, ‘The Lord at thy right hand,’ must be understood of the Messiah
instated in his regal power at the *right hand* of his father, and not
of the Father as his <span id="xix.iii-p3.4"></span>παραστάτης, to back
and help him, as <span id="xix.iii-p3.5"></span>[Ps
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#008)<span id="xix.iii-p3.5"></span>,
and elsewhere, the phrase is used. For of the Son thus exalted we know
it is that we read <span id="xix.iii-p3.6"></span>[Joh
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022)<span id="xix.iii-p3.6"></span>,
that ‘the Father has committed all judgment to the Son.’ Agreeable to
which it is that this ‘Adonai,’ or ‘Lord at Jehovah’s right hand here,
shall strike through kings in the day of his wrath;’ *i.e*., shall act
revenges most severely on the opposers of his kingdom; which revenges,
in the New Testament, are peculiarly attributed to Christ, and called
‘the coming of the Son of Man, coming in the clouds, coming with his
angels, and the approaching or coming of his kingdom.’” — *Hammond.* In
this 5th verse the Psalmist makes a sudden apostrophe to Jehovah.
Horsley is much inclined to indulge in a conjecture, which Dr Kennicott,
too, seems to have entertained, that the word <span
id="xix.iii-p3.7"></span>יהוה, *Jehovah,* has been lost out of the text
after the original word for *at thy right hand*; and that the passage
should run thus: “The Lord at thy right hand, O Jehovah!”

<span id="fn_331"></span>[332](cc11018.htm#fr_331) <span
id="xix.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p9"></span> This opinion is held by Michaelis and
Doederlein. But although a fearful carnage of God’s and his people’s
enemies is sometimes poetically described by His arrows being made drunk
with blood, <span id="xix.iii-p9.1"></span>[De
32:42](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#042)<span id="xix.iii-p9.1"></span>;
and as producing a stream of blood, in which his people, victorious over
them, might dip or wash their feet, as in <span
id="xix.iii-p9.2"></span>[Ps
68:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#024)<span id="xix.iii-p9.2"></span>;
yet neither He nor they are said to *drink* such *blood.* There is a
great difference between this latter and the two preceding metaphors;
and we cannot think that the idea of drinking human blood, much less of
making God drink it, would have entered the mind of any Israelite. The
idea is abhorrent to human nature, and must have appeared particularly
shocking to the Jews, who were strictly prohibited by the laws of Moses
from eating even the blood of beasts.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[333](cc11018.htm#fr_332) <span
id="xix.iii-p9.4"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p10"></span> Similar is the opinion of Grotius. He
regards the words as containing a description of a strenuous and active
warrior, whom no obstacle can prevent from prosecuting victory with the
utmost ardor; “Who,” to use his own language, “when pursuing the enemy,
does not seek for places of entertainment, that he may refresh himself
with wine, but is contented with water, which he takes hastily in
passing; and whenever he can find it, not only from a river, but from a
torrent.” “Schnurrer,” says Rosemüller, “seems to have perceived the
true meaning of the verse, which he gives in the following words: —
‘Though fatigued with the slaughter of his enemies, yet will he not
desist; but, having refreshed himself with water taken from the nearest
stream, will exert his renovated strength in the pursuit of the routed
foe.’” — *Messianic Psalms,* page 284.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 111](cc11019)
