[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc11025)  [Next](cc11027.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 11: Psalms, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxvii"></span>

<span id="xxvii-p1"></span>PSALM 118

<span id="xxvii-p2"></span>At the time when this psalm was penned,
whenever that was, David having attained to the possession of royal
power, and aware that he reigned for the common safety of the Church,
calls upon all the children of Abraham to ponder attentively this grace.
He also recounts his dangers, the magnitude and variety of which would
have slain him a hundred times, had not God wonderfully succored him.
From this it is obvious that he came to the throne of the kingdom,
neither by his own policy, nor by the favor of men, nor by any human
means. At the same time, he informs us that he did not rashly or by
wicked intrigues rush forward and take forcible possession of the
kingdom of Saul, but that he was appointed and established king by God
himself. Let us remember that it was the design of the Spirit, under the
figure of this temporal kingdom, to describe the eternal and spiritual
kingdom of God’s Son, even as David represented his person.  <span
id="fr_386"></span>[387](#fn_386.md)

<span id="xxvii.i"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p1"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
118:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#001.md)<span id="xxvii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Praise ye Jehovah; because he is
good: because his mercy endureth for ever. **2.** Let Israel now  <span
id="fr_387"></span>[388](#fn_387.md) say, that his mercy endureth for ever.
**3.** Let the house of Aaron now say, that his mercy endureth for ever.
**4.** Let those who fear Jehovah now say, that his mercy endureth for
ever.

<span id="xxvii.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxvii.i-p5"></span><span id="xxvii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p6"></span>**1** *Praise ye Jehovah* In this passage
we see that David does not merely in a private capacity render thanks to
God, but that he loudly summons the people to engage in the common
exercises of piety. This he does, not simply from his having been
divinely appointed to be the captain and teacher of others; but, God
having invested him with royal power, had manifested his sympathy with
his distressed Church. Hence he exhorts the Israelites to magnify the
grace of God, under whose kind protection he appears to re-establish
them in safety. In the beginning of the psalm he alludes generally to
the goodness and mercy of God, but he shortly instances himself as an
evidence of his goodness, as will be seen in its proper place. It
becomes us at present to recall to mind what I mentioned in the
preceding psalm, that a reason for praising God is given to us on
account of his mercy, in preference to his power or justice; because,
though his glory shine forth in them also, yet will we never promptly
and heartily sound forth his praises, until he win us by the sweetness
of his goodness. Accordingly, in <span id="xxvii.i-p6.1"></span>[Ps
51:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#017.md)<span id="xxvii.i-p6.1"></span>,
we found that the lips of the faithful were opened to praise God, when
they perceived that he was truly their deliverer. In restricting his
address to Israel, and to the children of Aaron, he is guided by a
regard to his own times, because, up to that period, the adoption did
not extend beyond that one nation. He again resumes the order which he
observed in <span id="xxvii.i-p6.2"></span>[Ps
116:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#001.md)<span id="xxvii.i-p6.2"></span>;
for, after exhorting the children of Abraham, who had been separated
from the Gentiles by the election of God, and also the sons of Aaron,
who, by virtue of the priesthood, ought to take the precedence in
conducting the psalmody, he directs his discourse to the other
worshippers of God; because there were many hypocrites among the
Israelites, who, occupying a place in the Church, were yet strangers to
it. This is not inconsistent with David’s here speaking by the spirit of
prophecy, respecting the future kingdom of Christ. That kingdom, no
doubt, extended to the Gentiles, but its commencement and first-fruits
were among God’s chosen people.

<span id="xxvii.ii"></span>

<span id="xxvii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxvii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
118:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#005.md)<span
id="xxvii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.ii-p2"></span>**5.** I called upon God in my distress,
and God heard me, by setting me at large. **6.** Jehovah is with me: ­I
will not fear what man may do unto me. **7.** Jehovah is with me among
those who help me, and I shall see my desire upon mine enemies. **8.**
It is better to hope in Jehovah than to confide in man: **9.** It is
better to hope in Jehovah than to confide in princes.

<span id="xxvii.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxvii.ii-p4"></span><span id="xxvii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.ii-p5"></span>**5** *I called upon God in my distress.*
We have here a particular application of the doctrine we formerly
mentioned, to the person of David; with which also is conjoined the
rejoicing of the whole Church, for whose public welfare God made
provision by upholding him. By his own example he establishes the
faithful, showing them that they ought not to faint in the day of
adversity. He seems designedly to anticipate an objection, which is apt
to arise in the minds of men the moment that the goodness of God is
proclaimed, “Why does he permit his servants to be so sore oppressed and
afflicted?” David therefore reminds them, notwithstanding, that God’s
mercy never fails, for we have in prayer, consolation and an antidote
for all our ills. The season, too, in which he says that he made
supplication, by means of which he obtained deliverance, was that of
distress, which touches us, that the time of sad adversity is most
proper for abounding in prayer.

<span id="xxvii.ii-p6"></span><span id="xxvii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.ii-p7"></span>**6** *Jehovah is with me among those who
help me* Confiding solely in God’s help, he sets at defiance not a few
enemies merely, but the whole world. “Defended by God’s hand, I may
boldly and safely set at nought all the machinations of men.” When all
the power of the universe is deemed as nothing, in comparison of God,
then, indeed, is due honor attributed to him. Thus he tacitly reproves
the unbelief of almost all men, who spontaneously alarm themselves with
groundless fears. All, indeed, desire peace of mind; but, in consequence
of robbing God of the praise due to his power, their own ingratitude
does not permit them to realize this blessing. Were they, as is fitting,
to submit in all things to the good pleasure and power of God, they
would be always ready boldly to surmount all those difficulties, the
dread of which from time to time annoys them. But paying more regard to
the mischievous attempts of men, than to the help which God can give
them, they deserve to tremble at the rustling of the falling leaf. It is
the wish of David, by his own example, to correct such perversity; and,
with this view, he affirms that, in the enjoyment of God’s favor, he
would fear no man, being fully persuaded that he could rescue him from
all the nefarious plots which were laid for him. Or if he composed this
psalm after his deliverance, we see how much he had profited by the
experience of the grace of God. Therefore, as frequently as God shall
succor us, let our confidence in him for the future be increased, and
let us not be unmindful of his goodness and power, which we experienced
in our extremity. Possibly, he relates the meditations which occurred to
him in the midst of his distresses; the former conjecture appears more
probable, that, after he obtained deliverance, he gloried, for the
future, in God’s continued assistance. Some refer the clause, *those who
are helpers with me,* to the small troop which David had drawn to him;
but this, in my opinion, is too refined; for it would tend little to the
honor of God to class him among the six hundred whom David commanded, as
if he were one of the troop. My interpretation is more simple, that he
calls God his helper. “It is enough for me that God is on my side.” Were
he deprived of all human aid, still he would have no hesitation in
opposing God against all his enemies.

<span id="xxvii.ii-p8"></span><span id="xxvii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.ii-p9"></span>**8** *It is better to trust in Jehovah*
He appears to state nothing but what is common-place, it being
unanimously admitted, that when God and men come into comparison, he
must be viewed as infinitely exalted above them, and therefore it is
best to trust in him for the aid which he has promised to his own
people. All make this acknowledgment, and yet there is scarcely one
among a hundred who is fully persuaded that God alone can afford him
sufficient help. That man has attained a high rank among the faithful,
who, resting satisfied in God, never ceases to entertain a lively hope,
even when he finds no help upon earth. The comparison, however, is
improper, inasmuch as we are not allowed to transfer to men even the
smallest portion of our confidence, which must be placed in God alone.
The meaning is by no means ambiguous; the Psalmist is ridiculing the
illusory hopes of men by which they are tossed hither and thither; and
declares, that when the world smiles upon them they wax proud, and
either forsake God or despise him. Some are of opinion that David
bitterly reproaches his enemies with their being deceived in depending
upon the favor of Saul. This appears to me to be too limited a view of
the passage; and I question not that David here proposes himself as an
example to all the faithful; in that he had reaped the full fruit of his
hope, when, depending solely upon God, he had patiently borne the loss
of all earthly succor. In the 9th verse, in which he substitutes
*princes* for *men,* there is an extension of the idea. “Not only those
who put their confidence in men of low degree act foolishly, but also,
those who confide even in the greatest potentates; for the trust that is
put in flesh shall at last be accursed, but the enjoyment of God’s favor
will convert even death itself into life.”

<span id="xxvii.iii"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxvii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
118:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#010.md)<span
id="xxvii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iii-p2"></span>**10.** All nations compassed me: but in
the name of Jehovah I will surely cut them off. **11.** They compassed
me; yea, they compassed me: in Jehovah’s name I will surely cut them
off. **12.** They compassed me as bees: they are quenched  <span
id="fr_388"></span>[389](#fn_388.md) as a fire of thorns: in Jehovah’s name
I will surely cut them off. **13.** Thrusting, thou hast thrust at me,
that I might fall:  <span id="fr_389"></span>[390](#fn_389.md) but Jehovah
helped me. **14.** God is my strength and song, and he hath saved me.

<span id="xxvii.iii-p7"></span> 

<span id="xxvii.iii-p8"></span><span id="xxvii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iii-p9"></span>**10.** *All nations compassed me* In
these verses he relates the wonderful deliverance which he had received,
that all might know that it was not of human but divine origin. Once and
again he declares, that he was compassed not by a few persons, but by a
vast multitude. The people, being all inflamed with anger and fury
against him, compassed him so that there were no means for his escape,
and he could procure help from no quarter but from heaven. Some consider
his complaint, that all nations were adverse to him, as referring to the
neighboring nations, by whom we know David was surrounded with danger.
His meaning, in my opinion, is, that the whole world was adverse to him;
because he places God’s help alone in opposition to the deadly and
furious hatred both of his own countrymen and of the neighboring nations
towards him, so that there was not a spot upon the earth where he could
be safe. There was, it is true, no army, collected from several nations,
besieging him; still he had no peaceable retreat except among the haunts
of wild beasts, from which also he was driven by terror. And in
proportion to the number of persons he encountered were the snares laid
to entrap him. It is, therefore, not wonderful that he said he was
compassed by all nations. Besides, this elliptical mode of speaking is
more forcible than if he had merely said that he trusted in God, by
reason of which he had become victorious. By publicly mentioning *the
name of God* alone, he maintains that no other means of deliverance were
within his reach, and that but for his interposition he must have
perished. It appears to me preferable to translate the particle <span
id="xxvii.iii-p9.1"></span>כי, *ki,* affirmatively.  <span
id="fr_390"></span>[391](#fn_390.md) “Besieged as I am on all sides by the
world, yet if the power of God help me, that will be more than adequate
for the extermination of all mine enemies.” Their obstinate and
implacable hatred is pointed out by him in the repetition of the phrase
*compassed about,* and their outrageous fury is set forth in comparing
them to *bees,* which, though not possessed of much strength, are very
fierce, and when in their insensate fury they attack a person, they
occasion no little fear. He shortly adds, *they are quenched as a fire
of thorns,* which at first makes a great crackling, and throws out a
greater flame than a fire of wood, but soon passes away. The amount is,
that David’s enemies had furiously assailed him, but that their fury
soon subsided. Hence he again repeats, that sustained by the power of
God, whatever opposition might rise against him would soon pass away.

<span id="xxvii.iii-p11"></span><span id="xxvii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iii-p12"></span>**13.** *Thou hast sorely thrust at me.*
He either now changes the person, or directs his discourse to Saul, his
principal enemy. In the person of one, he sets at defiance all his
enemies together. In saying that he *had been thrust at,* he admits that
he did not withstand the onset by his own bravery, as those who are
powerful enough to encounter opposition, sustain the assaults of their
enemies without flinching. The power of God is more illustriously
displayed in raising him up even from ruin itself.

<span id="xxvii.iii-p13"></span>In the subsequent verse he draws the
conclusion that God is *his strength and song.* By the former adjunct he
candidly acknowledges his weakness, and ascribes his safety exclusively
to God. And having admitted that his strength was in God alone, because
he was sustained by his power, immediately he adds, that God is *his
praise* or *his song,* which must be understood passively. “In myself
there was no ground for boasting, to God belongs entirely all the praise
of my safety.” The last clause of the verse, in which he says that *God
was his salvation,* refers to the same subject.

<span id="xxvii.iv"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xxvii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
118:15-21](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#015.md)<span
id="xxvii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iv-p2"></span>**15.** The voice of shouting and
salvation is in the tabernacles of the just: the right hand of Jehovah
hath done valiantly. **16.** The right hand of Jehovah is exalted, the
right hand of Jehovah hath done valiantly. **17.** I shall not die, yea,
I shall live, and speak of the works of God. **18.** God chastising has
chastised me; but he did not deliver me unto death. **19.** Open to me
the gates of righteousness; and having entered into them, I will praise
God. **20.** This is the gate of Jehovah, the just shall enter into it.
**21.** I will praise thee, because thou hast heard me, and hast been my
salvation.

<span id="xxvii.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxvii.iv-p4"></span><span id="xxvii.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iv-p5"></span>**15.** *The voice of shouting and
salvation is in the tabernacles of the just.* He affirms that the
kindness which God had conferred upon him was so extensive, that it
would not do to render thanks to him privately. In the benefits which he
had received, God’s power appeared both remarkable and memorable, and
the fruit of it also was extended to the whole Church. Therefore, as
David’s deliverance was wonderful and advantageous generally to all the
godly, he promises that he would make a public thanksgiving; and invites
them to join him in this holy exercise. By this circumstance, he chiefly
aims at magnifying the grace of God, and also by its effects to
demonstrate, that not merely his individual preservation, but that of
the whole Church, in his person, was accomplished. Intercommunion among
believers does, indeed, bind them alternately to render thanks to God
for each other; in David’s case, there was the specific reason which I
have mentioned, his wonderful preservation from many deaths, and his
having assigned to him the sovereignty of God’s chosen people. It is
worthy of notice, that he combines the voice of joy and gladness with
the praise of God, by which he shows that believers ought to mingle with
their mirth a sense of the grace of God. *To do valiantly,* is
tantamount to a magnificent display of his power, so that there may be a
bright manifestation of its effulgence. God ofttimes secretly, and when
apparently feeble, grants deliverance to his faithful people, that they
may be sensible that it comes from him; but this is not so well known to
others. Here, however, David asserts that the operation of God was so
plainly developed, no one could doubt whence his safety came. The other
phrase, *that the right hand of God was exalted,* refers to the same
subject, because, by working powerfully and unwontedly, God had exalted
his hand.

<span id="xxvii.iv-p6"></span><span id="xxvii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iv-p7"></span>**17.** *I shall not die* David speaks
like one emerging from the sepulcher. The very same person who says, *I
shall not die,* acknowledges that he was rescued from death, to which he
was near as one condemned to it. For a series of years his life was in
imminent danger, exposed every moment to a thousand deaths, and no
sooner was he delivered from one than he entered into another. Thus he
declares that *he would not die,* because he regained life, all hope of
which he had entirely abandoned. We, whose life is hid with Christ in
God, ought to mediate upon this song all our days, <span
id="xxvii.iv-p7.1"></span>[Col
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003.md)<span id="xxvii.iv-p7.1"></span>.
If we occasionally enjoy some relaxation, we are bound to unite with
David in saying, that we who were surrounded with death are risen to
newness of life. In the meantime, we must constantly persevere through
the midst of darkness: as our safety lies in hope, it is impossible that
it can be very visible to us. In the second member of the verse, he
points out the proper use of life. God does not prolong the lives of his
people, that they may pamper themselves with meat and drink, sleep as
much as they please, and enjoy every temporal blessing, but to magnify
him for his benefits which he is daily heaping upon them. Of this
subject we have spoken on <span id="xxvii.iv-p7.3"></span>[Psalm
115](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#000.md)<span id="xxvii.iv-p7.3"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iv-p8"></span><span id="xxvii.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iv-p9"></span>**18.** *In chastising God has chastised
me.* In these words David owns that his enemies assailed him unjustly,
that they were employed by God to correct him, that this was fatherly
chastisement, God not inflicting a deadly wound, but correcting him in
measure and in mercy. He seems to anticipate the perverse decisions of
perverse men which grievously pressed upon him, as if all the ills which
he had endured were so many evidences of his being cast off by God.
These calumnies which the reprobate cast upon him he applies very
differently, by declaring that his correction was mild and paternal. The
main thing in adversity is to know that we are laid low by the hand of
God, and that this is the way which he takes to prove our allegiance, to
arouse us from our torpidity, to crucify our old man, to purge us from
our filthiness, to bring us into submission and subjection to God, and
to excite us to meditate on the heavenly life.

<span id="xxvii.iv-p10"></span>If these things were recollected by us,
there is not one of us who would not shudder at the thought of fretting
against God, but would much rather yield submission to him with a mild
and meek spirit. Our champing the bit, and rushing forward impatiently,
certainly proceeds from the majority of men not looking upon their
afflictions as God’s rods, and from others not participating in his
paternal care. The last clause of the verse, therefore, merits
particular attention, That God always deals mercifully with his own
people, so that his correction proves their cure. Not that his paternal
regard is always visible, but that in the end it will be shown that his
chastisements, so far from being deadly, serve the purpose of a
medicine, which, though it produce a temporary debility, rids us of our
malady, and renders us healthy and vigorous.

<span id="xxvii.iv-p11"></span><span id="xxvii.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iv-p12"></span>**19** *Open unto me the gates of
righteousness*  <span id="fr_391"></span>[392](#fn_391.md) Under the
influence of ardent zeal, David here sets himself to testify his
gratitude, commanding the temple to be opened to him, as if the
oblations were all already prepared. He now confirms what he said
formerly, That he would render thanks to God publicly in the properly
constituted assembly of the faithful. It was the practice of the priests
to open the doors of the temple to the people; it appears, however, that
David here alludes to his long exile, which supposition is corroborated
by the following verse. Having been for a long period prevented from
having access to the sanctuary, and even from coming within sight of it,
he now rejoices and exults at being again admitted to offer sacrifice
unto God. And he declares that he will not approach as the hypocrites
were wont to do, whom God, by the prophet Isaiah, reproaches with
treading his courts in vain, but that he will come with the sacrifice of
praise, (<span id="xxvii.iv-p13.1"></span>[Isa
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#012)<span id="xxvii.iv-p13.1"></span>.md)
Fully persuaded that he drew near in the spirit of genuine devotion, he
says it is proper that the doors of the temple, which lately he durst
not enter, should be opened to him and such as he. *It is,* says he,
*the gate of Jehovah,* and, therefore, he will open it for the just. The
meaning is, that banished as David had been from the temple and from his
country, now that the kingdom is in a better condition, both he and all
the true worshippers of God regained their right to approach his
sanctuary. Thus he indirectly mourns over the profanation of the temple,
in that, while under the tyranny of Saul, it was occupied by the profane
contemners of God, as if it had been a kennel for dogs and other unclean
animals. This abomination, the temple being for a long time a den of
thieves, is here inveighed against; but now that it is patent to the
righteous, he declares it to be God’s holy house. What occurred in the
days of Saul is visible in these days, God’s bitter enemies most
wickedly and shamefully occupying his sanctuary. The Pope would not be
Antichrist if he did not sit in the temple of God, (<span
id="xxvii.iv-p13.2"></span>[2Th
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004)<span id="xxvii.iv-p13.2"></span>.md).
Having, by his vile pollutions, converted all temples into brothels, let
us endeavor as much as we can to purge them, and prepare them for the
pure worship of God. And as it has pleased Him to choose his holy
habitation among us, let us exert ourselves to remove all the
defilements and abominations which disfigure the purity of the Church.
David then relates briefly the reason of his offering the sacrifice of
praise to God, namely, that he had been preserved by his grace.

<span id="xxvii.v"></span>

<span id="xxvii.v-p1"></span><span id="xxvii.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
118:22-26](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022.md)<span
id="xxvii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.v-p2"></span>**22.** The stone which the builders
rejected is become the head of the corner.  <span
id="fr_392"></span>[393](#fn_392.md) **23.** This was done by Jehovah; it
is marvelous in our eyes. **24.** This is the day which Jehovah made;
let us rejoice and be glad in it. **25.** I beseech thee, O Jehovah!
save me; I beseech thee, I beseech thee, O Jehovah! give prosperity, I
beseech thee. **26.** Blessed is he who cometh in the name of Jehovah:
we bless you out of the house of Jehovah.

<span id="xxvii.v-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxvii.v-p6"></span><span id="xxvii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.v-p7"></span>**22** *The stone which the builders
rejected* In these words David boldly pours contempt on the calumnies
with which he was unjustly and undeservedly assailed. As there was
something ominous in his being condemned by the entire assemblage of the
nobles, and all those who were invested with authority, and as the
opinion was prevalent, that he was a wicked and rejected man; this error
he deliberately refutes, and vindicates his innocence in the face of the
principal men among them. “It is of little importance to me that I am
abandoned by the chief men, seeing I have been visibly chosen by the
judgment of God to be king over Israel.” The similitude which he employs
is appropriate, comparing himself to *a stone,* and the principal rulers
of the Church to *master-builders* It might, indeed, appear most
irrational on his part to assert that the heads of the realm, to whom
the government of the Church was intrusted, should be deprived of the
Spirit of God, and divested of a sound judgment. Hence, in opposition to
their perverse and erroneous judgment, he places the grace of God,
declaring that he was placed by the purpose and power of God to sustain
the whole building. In a word, he shows that splendid titles and high
rank, in which his enemies glory, are no obstruction to him, because,
relying upon the call of God, he possesses a glory superior to the
verdict of the whole world. It being a difficult matter to persuade them
of the truth of this, he magnifies and enlarges upon the grace of God,
in order that its authority might suppress all evil speaking and
clamorous surmises.

<span id="xxvii.v-p8"></span><span id="xxvii.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.v-p9"></span>*This,* says he, *is the doing of Jehovah*
“Go and quarrel with God, all ye that strenuously endeavor to eject me
from my throne, to which I have not been elevated accidentally, or by
human policy, but by the manifest power of God.” This he confirms by all
being constrained to wonder at what had occurred as a thing incredible.
Now, when God doeth marvellously, and in a manner that surpasses our
comprehension, his power cannot fail to be so much the more apparent
unto us. Should any prefer to interpret it thus:-Although this work may
fill men with astonishment, yet that is no reason for rejecting it; he
may do so. To me, however, it certainly appears more probable that David
employs the term *wonderful,* that the haughtiness of man may submit to
God, and that none may presume to breathe a whisper against him. The
fitness of these things being applied to Christ will be more properly
discussed when I come to consider the twenty-fifth verse.

<span id="xxvii.v-p10"></span><span id="xxvii.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.v-p11"></span>**24.** *This is the day which Jehovah
made* He now speaks of that as a happy and pleasant day, on which he was
at last established king over Israel, and the anointing of him by Samuel
ratified by this event. Doubtless, all days were created alike by God,
nevertheless David, by way of eminence, calls that *the day of God*
which, after a long period of darkness, had dawned for the weal of the
Church, because it was signalized by a notable event, deserving of being
remembered by succeeding generations; and because the Church had thus
emerged from a state of deep obscurity, he exhorts the faithful to mirth
and joy, and that, too, by reason of the ignorance which many still
displayed of the grace of God, or of their treating it with contempt,
and of others being so lettered by their perverse attachment to Saul,
that they could scarcely be brought to yield allegiance to David.

<span id="xxvii.v-p12"></span><span id="xxvii.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.v-p13"></span>**25** *I beseech thee, O Jehovah! save
me* As the term <span id="xxvii.v-p13.1"></span>נא*, na,* in Hebrew is
frequently used as an adverb of time, not a few render it, in this
place, *now:* Save, I beseech thee, now. It is also often used in the
form of asking, and this is the meaning I attach to it, and which
accords very well with this passage; for I am persuaded that the Holy
Spirit, in repeating the same phrase, designed, by the mouth of the
prophet, to stir up and stimulate the faithful to great earnestness and
ardor in prayer. If any prefer a different interpretation, it will not
be difficult to prevail on me to agree to it. One thing is plain, that
there is here a form of prayer prescribed to the chosen people, to seek
for prosperity to the kingdom of David, upon which the common safety of
all depended. In these words, too, he protested that he held his kingdom
by Divine legation, and, therefore, they who would not agree to wish
prosperity to his reign were unworthy of occupying a place in the
Church.

<span id="xxvii.v-p14"></span>In the verse following, a particular
request is subjoined, which the faithful must entertain; namely, that as
God had thus appointed David to be the minister of his grace, so he
would *also bless him* Those are said *to come in the name of the Lord,*
whom God employs for the welfare of his Church — such as prophets and
teachers, whom he raises up to gather together his Church; and generals
and governors, whom he instructs by his Spirit. But as David was a type
of Christ, his case was peculiar; it being the will of God that his
people should dwell under him and his successors till the advent of
Christ. The clause*, blessed is he that cometh,* may be viewed as a form
of congratulation; but seeing that the benediction of the priests is
immediately annexed, I am disposed rather to believe that the people
wished for David God’s grace and favor. To induce them to present this
petition with more alacrity, and thus be encouraged to receive the king
whom God appointed them, this promise is added in the person of the
priests, *We bless you out of the house of the Lord.*

<span id="xxvii.v-p15"></span>They speak in this manner agreeably with
the nature of their office, which enjoined on them the duty of blessing
the people, as appears from several passages in the books of Moses, and
particularly from <span id="xxvii.v-p15.1"></span>[Nu
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#023.md)<span id="xxvii.v-p15.1"></span>.
It is not without reason that they connect the welfare of the Church
with the prosperity of the kingdom, it being their desire to throw out
the suggestion, and to represent that the safety of the people would
remain as long as that kingdom continued to flourish, and that they
would all share in the blessings which would be conferred upon their
king, because of the indissoluble connection which exists between the
head and members. Knowing, as we now do, that when David was constituted
king, the foundation of that everlasting kingdom, which was eventually
manifested in the advent of Christ, was then laid, and that the temporal
throne upon which the descendants of David were placed was a type of the
eternal kingdom given to Christ by God his Father, in consequence of
which he obtained all power, both in heaven and on earth, there can be
no question that the prophet calls upon the faithful to pray fervently
and constantly for the prosperity and progress of this spiritual
kingdom; for it was incumbent on those who lived during the shadowy
dispensation to pray for David and his successors; but after all the
grandeur of that kingdom was overthrown, it behooved them to entreat the
more ardently that God, in fulfillment of his promise, would
re-establish it. In short, all that is here stated properly relates to
the person of Christ; and that which was dimly adumbrated in David was
brightly represented and fulfilled in Christ. The election of David was
secret; and after he was anointed by Samuel to be king, he was rejected
by Saul, and by all the heads of the people, and all abhorred him as if
he had been a person deserving of a hundred deaths. Thus disfigured and
dishonored, he did not appear to be a fit stone for occupying a place in
the building. Similar to this was the beginning of the kingdom of
Christ, who, being sent by his Father for the redemption of the Church,
not only was despised by the world, but also hated and execrated, both
by the common people and the dignitaries of the Church.

<span id="xxvii.v-p16"></span>But it may be asked, how the prophet
designates those master-builders who, so far from wishing the protection
of the Church, aim at nothing so much as the demolition of the entire
structure? We know, for instance, with what vehemence the scribes and
priests, in Christ’s time, labored to subvert all true piety. The reply
is not difficult. David refers solely to the office which they held, and
not to the inclinations by which they were actuated. Saul and all his
counsellors were subverters of the Church, and yet, in relation to their
office, they were chief-builders. To the ungodly the Holy Ghost is wont
to concede the honorable titles which belong to their office, until that
God remove them from it. How abandoned, oftentimes, were the priests
among the ancient people of God, and yet they retained the dignity and
honor which belonged to their office, until they were denuded of it.
Hence the words of Isaiah,

<span id="xxvii.v-p17"></span>“Who is blind, but my servant; and who is
foolish., but he whom I have sent?” <span id="xxvii.v-p17.1"></span>[Isa
42:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#019.md)<span id="xxvii.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.v-p18"></span>Now, though their intention was to
undermine the whole constitution of the Church, yet, as they were
divinely called for a different object, he calls them the servants and
the sent of God. In our day, also, the Pope and his filthy clergy, who
usurp the title of the priesthood, nevertheless continue the professed
enemies of Christ; from which it follows, that they are any thing rather
than God’s legitimate servants, -and occupying the position of pastors —
while they scatter the flock, their condemnation will be the greater.
Between them and the Levitical priests there is assuredly a wide
difference. As, however, they are invested with the usual authority,
there can be no harm in conceding the title to them, provided they do
not use it as a cloak to conceal their vile tyranny; for if the mere
title was sufficient to procure for them personal reverence, then Christ
must, of necessity, have been silenced, seeing that the priests rejected
his doctrine. This passage rather informs us, that those who are
intrusted with the office of ruling the Church, sometime, prove the
worst workmen. David, speaking by the Spirit, denominates chief-builders
those who attempted to destroy the Son of God and the salvation of
mankind, and by whom the worship of God was adulterated, religion wholly
corrupted, and the temple of God profaned. If, therefore, all who are
clothed with the ordinary authority must be listened to without
exception, as legally appointed pastors, then must Christ not speak,
because it very frequently occurs, that his bitterest enemies are
concealed under the garb of pastors.

<span id="xxvii.v-p19"></span>Here we behold with how strong and
impregnable a shield the Holy Ghost furnishes us against the empty
vauntings of the Papal clergy. Be it so, that they possess the name,
“chief-builders;” but if they disown Christ, does it necessarily follow
that we must disown him also? Let us rather contemn and trample under
our feet all their decrees, and let us reverence this precious stone
upon which our salvation rests. By the expression, *is become the head
of the corner,* we are to understand the real foundation of the Church,
which sustains the whole weight of the edifice; it being requisite that
the corners should form the main strength of buildings. I do not approve
of the ingenious opinion of Augustine, who makes Christ the
corner-stone, because he united both Jews and Gentiles, thus making the
corner the middle stone between the two different walls.

<span id="xxvii.v-p20"></span>David then proceeds to repeat, at some
length, as I have observed, that it is erroneous to estimate the kingdom
of Christ by the sentiments and opinions of men, because, in spite of
the opposition of the world, it is erected in an astonishing manner by
the invisible power of God. In the meantime, we ought to remember, that
all that was accomplished in the person of Christ extends to the gradual
development of his kingdom, even until the end of the world. When Christ
dwelt on the earth, he was despised by the chief priests; and now, those
who call themselves the successors of Peter and Paul, but who are truly
Ananiases and Caiaphases, giant-like wage war against the Gospel and the
Holy Ghost. Not that this furious rebellion ought to give us any
uneasiness: let us rather humbly adore that wonderful power of God which
reverses the perverse decisions of the world. If our limited
understandings could comprehend the course which God follows for the
protection and preservation of his Church, there would be no mention
made of a miracle. From this we conclude, that his mode of working is
incomprehensible, baffling the understandings of men.

<span id="xxvii.v-p21"></span>Was it necessary, it may be asked, that
Christ should be reproached by the master-builders? It would certainly
indicate a sad state of the Church, if she never had any pastors except
those who were deadly enemies to her welfare. When Paul styles himself
“a master-builder,” he informs us that this office was common to all the
apostles, (<span id="xxvii.v-p21.1"></span>[1Co
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#010)<span id="xxvii.v-p21.1"></span>.md).
My answer therefore is, that all who bear rule in the Church are not
charged with perpetual blindness; but that the Holy Spirit meets with
this stumblingblock, which, in other respects, is wont to prove a
hindrance to many when they witness the name of Christ enveloped with
worldly splendor. When God, for the purpose of making his glory shine
forth more brightly, looseth Satan’s rein, so that those who are
invested with power and authority reject Christ, then it is that the
Holy Spirit bids us be of good courage, and setting at nought all these
perverse decisions, receive with all respect the King whom God has
placed over us. From the first, we know that the master-builders have
endeavored to subvert the kingdom of Christ. The same thing is taking
place in our times, in those who are intrusted with the superintendence
of the Church having made every attempt to overturn that kingdom, by
directing against it all the machinery which they can devise. But if we
call to mind this prophecy, our faith will not fail, but will be more
and more confirmed; because, from these things it will the better appear
that the kingdom of Christ does not depend upon the favor of men, and
that it does not derive its strength from earthly supports, even as he
has not attained it by the suffrages of men. If, however, the
master-builders build well, the perverseness of those who will not
permit themselves to be appropriated to the sacred edifice will be so
much the less excusable. Moreover, as often as we shall, by this species
of temptation, be put to the trial, let us not forget that it is
unreasonable to expect that the Church must be governed according to our
understanding of matters, but that we are ignorant of the government of
it, inasmuch as that which is miraculous surpasses our comprehension.

<span id="xxvii.v-p22"></span>The next clause, *this is the day that God
hath made,* reminds us that there will be nothing but the reign of moral
darkness, until Christ the Sun of Righteousness illumine us by his
gospel. We are also reminded that this work is to be ascribed to God,
and that mankind must not arrogate to themselves any merit on account of
their own endeavors. The call to the exercise of gratitude, which
immediately follows, is intended to warn us against yielding to the
madness of our enemies, however furiously they rage against us, in order
to deprive us of the joy which Christ has brought to us. From him all
our happiness is derived, and, consequently, there is no cause for
surprise that all the ungodly fume with vexation, and feel indignant,
that we should be elevated to such a pitch of joy as to suppress all the
sorrows and soothe all the asperity of the trials we have to endure.
Prior to the advent of Christ, the prayer that follows was familiar to
the people, and even to the children, for the Evangelists declare that
Christ was received with this form of salutation. And certainly it was
the will of God to ratify, at that time, the prediction which he had
spoken by the mouth of David; or rather that exclamation clearly
demonstrates that the interpretation, against which the Jews now raise a
clamor, was unanimously admitted; and this renders their obstinacy and
malice the more inexcusable. I blame them not for their stupidity,
seeing that they purposely spread around them the mists of ignorance to
blind themselves and others. And as the Jews never ceased to put up this
prayer during that sad desolation, and those hideous devastations, their
perseverance ought to inspire us with new vigor in these days. At that
time they had not the honor of a kingdom, no royal throne, no name but
with God; and yet amid this deplorable and ruinous state of things, they
adhered to the form of prayer formerly prescribed to them by the Holy
Spirit. Instructed by their example, let us not fail to pray ardently
for the restoration of the Church, which, in our day, is involved in sad
desolation. Besides, in these words, we are also informed that Christ’s
kingdom is not upheld and advanced by the policy of men, but that this
is the work of God alone, for in his blessing solely the faithful are
taught to confide. Moreover, the very repetition of the words which, as
we have observed, renders them more forcible, ought to arouse us from
our lethargy, and render us more intensely ardent in breathing forth
this prayer. God can, indeed, of himself, and independently of the
prayer of any one, erect and protect the kingdom of his Son; but it is
not without good cause that he has laid this obligation on us, as there
is no duty more becoming the faithful than that of earnestly seeking for
the advancement of his glory.

<span id="xxvii.vi"></span>

<span id="xxvii.vi-p1"></span><span id="xxvii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
118:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#027.md)<span
id="xxvii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.vi-p2"></span>**27.** Jehovah is God, and has given
light to us: bind ye the lamb with cords, even to the horns of the
altar.  <span id="fr_393"></span>[394](#fn_393.md) **28.** Thou art my God,
and I will praise thee: my God, I will exalt thee. **29.** Praise ye
Jehovah; because he is good: because his mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="xxvii.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxvii.vi-p5"></span><span id="xxvii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.vi-p6"></span>**27.** *Jehovah is God* Here the prophet
establishes what he said formerly, that God, out of compassion to his
Church, dissipated the darkness, and introduced the light of his grace,
when David mounted the throne, for that was the harbinger of the
redemption which was anticipated to be effected in due time by Christ.
He also asserts that God was the author of that deliverance, so
wonderful and unlooked for, and he declares that, by the result, he
plainly showed himself to be truly God. These words, *Jehovah himself is
a strong God, because he has restored the light of life to us,* are
tacitly emphatical. For as the faithful, in consequence of the confused
state of the Church, were reduced almost to the brink of despair; the
ungodly imagined that all this had happened regarding the children of
Abraham, by reason of God himself having, as it were, forsaken them.
Wherefore he returns to offer up anew his thankful acknowledgments for
the divine grace. He commands the faithful to *bind the victim to the
horns of the altar,* because, according to the legal institute, they
could not render solemn thanks unto God without sacrifices. As David was
a strict observer of the Law, he would not omit the ceremonial
observances which God had enjoined. He would, however, always keep his
attention steadily fixed on their grand design, and would have recourse
to them only as helps to assist him in presenting a spiritual service
unto God. Now that the shadowy dispensation has passed away, it remains
that we offer unto God our thanksgivings through Christ, who sanctifies
them by his own immaculate offering, lest we should be debarred from
this exercise of godliness, by the corruptions of our flesh. And that
David turned his attention to the praises of God, is abundantly manifest
from the following verse, in which he promises that he *would celebrate
the name of God,* because he was his God, and he knew it; that is, he
felt from experience that from his hand he might calculate on receiving
sure and immediate assistance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_386"></span>[387](cc11026.htm#fr_386.md) <span
id="xxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii-p3"></span> Calvin ascribes this psalm to David; but, as
it is without any title, it is uncertain who was its author. On this
point, and the occasion of its composition, various opinions prevail
among commentators. According to Hengstenberg, it celebrates the return
of the Jews from the Babylonish captivity, and the laying the foundation
of the second temple; in support of which he refers to <span
id="xxvii-p3.1"></span>[Ezr 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#011.md)<span
id="xxvii-p3.1"></span>. Phillips thinks it “probable that it was
written for the occasion when David was to be anointed at Hebron king
over the tribes of Israel, (<span id="xxvii-p3.2"></span>[2Sa
5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#000)<span id="xxvii-p3.2"></span>;.md) for,
previously to his inauguration, he was subjected to many dangers, both
from avowed foes, as well as from Saul and his party. He was exposed to
the hostility of the Philistines (<span id="xxvii-p3.3"></span>[1Sa
29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1029.htm#000)<span id="xxvii-p3.3"></span>,.md) and
the Amalekites, (<span id="xxvii-p3.4"></span>[1Sa
30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#000)<span id="xxvii-p3.4"></span>;.md) from
the former he escaped in safety, and the latter he overcame in battle.
Again, although he had been long chosen king of Israel by God, for a
considerable period he was exposed to a severe persecution; he was
obliged to flee for safety from his country, and it was not till after
the death of Saul that his troubles ceased, and he ascended the throne,
which had long been his by Divine appointment. To David, therefore, at
Hebron, this psalm will apply; for he could then say, ‘All nations
compassed me about. The Lord hath chastised me, but he hath not given me
over unto death. The stone which the builders refused is become the
head-stone of the corner. This is the Lord’s doing; it is marvellous in
our eyes.’” Some assign it to the time of Hezekiah; and others to that
period of Israel’s history, which is adorned by the illustrious
achievements of the Maccabees. “I shall not presume,” says Walford, “to
decide which of these opinions is the most agreeable to truth. It will
be more to our purpose to observe, that the psalm was read on occasion
of a solemn procession that was formed by the king or chief magistrate,
whoever he might be, the priests and the people at large, of all ranks,
in order to perform public sacrifices of thanksgiving at the temple.”

<span id="fn_387"></span>[388](cc11026.htm#fr_387.md) <span
id="xxvii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.i-p3"></span> Horsley very properly translates the
Hebrew word <span id="xxvii.i-p3.1"></span>נא, *na,* in this and the two
following verses, by *O*, instead of *now*: — “*O,* Let Israel say —
*O*, Let the house of Aaron say — *O*, Let them that fear Jehovah say.”
“The word *now,*” he observes, “in our language is a particle of
entreaty, and is therefore used by our translators to express the
supplicatory particle of the Hebrew language, <span
id="xxvii.i-p3.2"></span>נא. But though *now,* in our language, is
indeed a particle of entreaty, it is only when the verb is in the
imperative mood, and in the second person; as, ‘Do, now, grant me this
favor;’ or, at least, in speaking to the person of whom the thing is
asked. When <span id="xxvii.i-p3.3"></span>נא is joined to a verb in the
third person, or when the person who is to grant the petition, or
perform the thing advised, is not immediately addressed, it should be
rendered by some other word or phrase. ‘By all means,’ or ‘of all
things,’ are equivalent phrases, in respect of the sense, but not
sufficiently dignified to suit the style of sacred poetry. *O* is
perhaps the best particle, in these cases, that our language furnishes.”

<span id="fn_388"></span>[389](cc11026.htm#fr_388.md) <span
id="xxvii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iii-p3"></span> The verb <span
id="xxvii.iii-p3.1"></span>דעכו, *doachu,* here used has ordinarily the
signification of *to quench.* But in this text it is rendered in all the
old versions in the sense of *to burn.* “This makes it probable,” says
Hammond, “that as many other words in the Hebrew language are used in
contrary senses, so <span id="xxvii.iii-p3.2"></span>דעך, which
signifies in other places passively *to be consumed,* or *extinguished,*
may signify here as an <span id="xxvii.iii-p3.3"></span>ἐναντιόσημον *to
flame,* or in an active sense, as in Arabic it is used, *violently to
break in* or *set upon,* as in war or contention when men violently rush
one on another.” And this seems most suitable to the connection in which
it stands. At first sight one would think it strange to say that the
adversaries of David *were quenched* (*i.e*., destroyed) *as the fire of
thorns*; and for the Psalmist afterwards to state, *In the name of the
Lord I will surely cut them off.* If the verb is here interpreted in the
sense of *to burn,* the main object of the metaphor must be to express,
by a figure frequently employed in Scripture, the impotence and quick
termination of the rage of those men, however fierce and apparently
formidable. It would soon expend itself, and their power of doing injury
be lost like a fire of thorns, which, although for a moment it makes a
great crackling, and rages violently as if it would quickly consume
every thing near, soon ceases, and nothing remains but the ashes. If the
verb is understood in the sense of *to quench,* the language is very
elliptical, and in the true genius of Hebrew poetry, which frequently
couches in a few words such images as in the hands of Homer would be
materials for an enlarged and dignified description, while it leaves
unexpressed more than half of what is intended to be understood. The
sudden quenching of the hostile army, like the extinction of a fire of
thorns, implies the previous comparison of such array to a fire. “It is
remarkable that, in a similar connection, Homer has such a comparison of
an hostile army to fire, in which he *expresses* what David left to be
understood, and omits (for he had no occasion to introduce) what David
expresses, namely, the sudden quenching of the fire: —

<span id="xxvii.iii-p4"></span>*‘As when devouring flames some forest
seize  
On the high mountains, splendid from afar  
The blaze appears, so, moving in the plain,  
The steel-clad host innum’rous flash’d to heav’n.’  
*Iliad *2, 516.* Cowper.*”*

<span id="xxvii.iii-p5"></span> — *Illustrated Commentary upon the
Bible.*

<span id="fn_389"></span>[390](cc11026.htm#fr_389.md) <span
id="xxvii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iii-p6"></span> Hammond reads, “Thou hast thrust sore at
me to ruin *or* filling.” “The full import of <span
id="xxvii.iii-p6.1"></span>לנפל,” says he, “is best expressed
gerundially, <span id="xxvii.iii-p6.2"></span>*ad cadendum, to falling,*
not only to express their desire who thus pressed and thrust at him,
*that* he might fall, for that is supposed in the violence of their
impulsion, expressed by repetition of the verb <span
id="xxvii.iii-p6.3"></span>דחיתני דחה, *thou hast by thrusting thrust
me,* but to signify the event or success of it, that I *was falling,* or
*ready to fall.* <span id="xxvii.iii-p6.4"></span>Του πεσεῖν*,* say the
LXX. in the infinitive mood gerundially, and so the Chaldee and the
Syriac; and so the Jewish Arab, ‘It is a long while that thou hast
driven *or* thrust me to falling.’ And this expresses the greatness and
seasonableness of the deliverance, that when he was falling, God helped
him.”

<span id="fn_390"></span>[391](cc11026.htm#fr_390.md) <span
id="xxvii.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iii-p10"></span> “I take <span
id="xxvii.iii-p10.1"></span>כי to be an affirmative adverb, surely, and
not a conjunction.” — *Lowth.*

<span id="fn_391"></span>[392](cc11026.htm#fr_391.md) <span
id="xxvii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.iv-p13"></span> The gates of the temple, or doors of the
tabernacle, are supposed to have been called *the gates of
righteousness,* because they were intended for the reception of those
only who were righteous.

<span id="fn_392"></span>[393](cc11026.htm#fr_392.md) <span
id="xxvii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.v-p3"></span> The learned Michaelis understands this
literally. “It appears,” says he, “that, probably at the building of
Solomon’s temple, one of those stones, which David had taken care to get
provided and made ready for use, was found faith with by the builders,
and declared to be useless, and that God, for altogether different
reasons, commanded by a prophet that this stone should be made the
corner-stone. The Orientals regard the corner-stone as the one
peculiarly holy stone in a temple, and that it confers sanctity upon the
whole edifice. It is, therefore, the more probable that, either by the
Urim and Thummim, (the sacred lot of the Jews,) or by a prophet, God was
consulted which stone he would direct to be taken for the corner-stone.
The answer was, that which they have perseveringly rejected, and
declared to be quite unserviceable. Certainly it must have been for a
very important reason, that God positively appointed this stone to be
the corner-stone. But the New Testament declares it to us in <span
id="xxvii.v-p3.1"></span>[Mt
21:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#042.md)<span id="xxvii.v-p3.1"></span>;
<span id="xxvii.v-p3.2"></span>[Ac
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#011.md)<span id="xxvii.v-p3.2"></span>;
and <span id="xxvii.v-p3.3"></span>[1Pe
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#007.md)<span id="xxvii.v-p3.3"></span>.
The Jewish nation would conduct themselves towards the Messiah precisely
as the builders did towards this stone, and would reject him; but God
would select him to be the corner-stone, which should support and
sanctify the whole Church.” — Quoted in Dr Pye Smith *on the Priesthood
of Christ,* page 150. Michaelis’ opinion, that the words literally
relate to a stone which the builders at first rejected, but which they
were subsequently induced to place in the most important part of the
building, is, however, mere conjecture. The prophetic sense in which
this verse is applicable to the Messiah, who was rejected by the chief
priests, elders, and Pharisees of his time, and who is now the
foundation of an ample and constantly increasing Church, rests on more
solid grounds; being sanctioned both by Christ himself and his apostles.

<span id="xxvii.v-p4"></span>*The head stone of the corner* does not
mean the top stone, but the chief stone of the foundation, answering to
what we call the first stone. — See <span id="xxvii.v-p4.1"></span>[Eph.
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020.md),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#021.md)<span id="xxvii.v-p4.1"></span>;
<span id="xxvii.v-p4.2"></span>[1 Pet.
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005.md)<span id="xxvii.v-p4.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_393"></span>[394](cc11026.htm#fr_393.md) <span
id="xxvii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxvii.vi-p3"></span> “*Yea even unto the horns of the altar* —
before these words must be understood *lead it*: for the victims were
bound to rings fixed in the floor. *The horns* were architectural
ornaments, a kind of capitals, made of iron or of brass, somewhat in the
form of the carved horns of an animal, projecting from the four angles
of the altar. The officiating priest, when he prayed, placed his hands
on them, and sometimes sprinkled them with the blood of the sacrifice:
comp. <span id="xxvii.vi-p3.1"></span>[Ex
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#003.md)<span id="xxvii.vi-p3.1"></span>;
<span id="xxvii.vi-p3.2"></span>[Lev.
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#007.md),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#018.md)<span id="xxvii.vi-p3.2"></span>.
At the end of this verse, the word *saying* must be supplied.” —
*Cresswell.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 119](cc11027.md)
