[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc11018)  [Next](cc11020.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 11: Psalms, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx"></span>

<span id="xx-p1"></span>PSALM 111  <span
id="fr_333"></span>[334](#fn_333.md)

<span id="xx-p3"></span>The title to this psalm supplies the place of an
argument; and, that others may be induced to engage in the praises of
God, the Psalmist points out the manner of doing so by his own example.
Then he gives a short account of the manifold benefits which, in olden
times, he conferred upon the faithful, and is daily conferring upon
them. The psalm is composed in alphabetical order, each verse containing
two letters. The first verse begins with a, <span id="xx-p3.1"></span>א
*aleph,* while the letter b, <span id="xx-p3.2"></span>ב *beth,* is
placed at the commencement of the next half of the verse. The last two
verses only are not divided into hemistiches; but each of these has
three letters. If, however, any one will closely examine the contents,
he will find that this has occurred through mistake or inadvertence; for
if we make these two verses into three,  <span
id="fr_334"></span>[335](#fn_334.md) the construction of the sentences
corresponds very well one with another; and consequently, the
transcribers have erred in not attending to the prophet’s distinction.

<span id="xx.i"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p1"></span><span id="xx.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
111:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#001.md)<span id="xx.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p2"></span>**1.** Praise ye Jehovah.  <span
id="fr_335"></span>[336](#fn_335.md) (<span id="xx.i-p3.1"></span>א,
aleph,) I will praise Jehovah with my whole heart, (<span
id="xx.i-p3.2"></span>ב, beth) In the congregation and assembly of the
just. **2.** (<span id="xx.i-p3.3"></span>ג, gimel,) The works of
Jehovah are great, (<span id="xx.i-p3.4"></span>ד, daleth,) Sought out
of all who have a desire to them. **3.** (<span id="xx.i-p3.5"></span>ה,
he,) His work is beautiful and magnificent: (<span
id="xx.i-p3.6"></span>ו, vau,) And his justice endureth for ever. **4.**
(<span id="xx.i-p3.7"></span>ז, zain,) He hath caused his marvellous
works to be remembered: (<span id="xx.i-p3.8"></span>ח, cheth,) Jehovah
is compassionate and merciful.

<span id="xx.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xx.i-p5"></span><span id="xx.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p6"></span>**1** *I will praise Jehovah* The best and
most efficient method of inculcating the performance of any duty is to
be exemplary; and, accordingly, we find that the prophet, in the present
instance, sets himself for an example, to lead others to engage in the
celebration of God’s praises. His resolution to praise God consists of
two parts; that he would celebrate God’s praises unfeignedly, with all
his heart, and that he would do it publicly, in the assembly of the
faithful. He very properly begins with heart-praise, because it is much
better to praise in secret, and when no one is conscious of it, than to
lift up our voice, and shout forth his praises with feigned lips. At the
same time, the person who, in secret, pours out his heart in grateful
emotions towards God, will also set forth his praises in swelling
strains, otherwise God would be deprived of one half of the honor which
is due to him. The prophet then determines to praise God with the whole
heart, that is, with an upright and honest heart; not that he engages to
come up to the full measure of his duty, but he declares that he would
not be like the hypocrites, who, coldly and with a double heart, or
rather guilefully and perfidiously, employ their lips only in the
praises of God. This is a point worthy of notice, lest any should be
discouraged, in consequence of not being able to cherish the hope of
attaining to that perfection of heart which is so desirable; for however
defective our praises may be, they may nevertheless be acceptable to
God, provided only we strive unfeignedly to render unto him this act of
devotion. We come now to the other part of his resolution, in which he
says he would proclaim the praises of God before men; for although the
Hebrew term <span id="xx.i-p6.1"></span>סוד*, sod,* denotes a private
assembly,  <span id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336.md) yet I think that, in
this passage, he employs two words of synonymous import. At the same
time, should any one be inclined to take a more refined view of the
passage, he may do so if he please. He says, *in the congregation of the
just,* because the principal object for which holy assemblies are
convened, is to afford the worshippers of God an opportunity of
presenting to him sacrifices of praise, agreeably to what is stated in
<span id="xx.i-p7.4"></span>[Ps
65:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#001.md)<span id="xx.i-p7.4"></span>,

<span id="xx.i-p8"></span>“Praise waits for thee, O Jehovah! in Zion.”

<span id="xx.i-p9"></span><span id="xx.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p10"></span>**2** *The works of Jehovah are great* He now
proceeds to inform us that there are abundant materials for praising
God, supplied by his works, to which at present he makes only a general
reference, and which he, subsequently, defines more explicitly in
relation to the government of the Church. The magnitude of God’s works
is a subject which, generally, eludes the observation of men, and,
therefore, few of them are acquainted with it. This ignorance the
prophet ascribes to the indifference and ingratitude of men,
comparatively few of whom condescend to notice the great wisdom,
goodness, justice, and power, which shine forth in these works.
Expositors are divided in their sentiments about the second clause of
the verse. Some translate it, *sought out for all their delights;* and,
indeed, the Hebrew term <span id="xx.i-p10.1"></span>חפף, *chaphets,*
signifies *good pleasure;* but as this is too harsh an interpretation of
the word, it is better to understand it as an adjective, expressing the
idea of *loving* or *desiring.* As to the participle, *sought out,*
which, according to the Hebrew verb, <span id="xx.i-p10.2"></span>דרש,
*darash,* properly denotes, *to search with diligence,* we yet find that
the works of Jehovah are, in this place, called <span
id="xx.i-p10.3"></span>דרושים, *derushim,* that is, *perceived or found
out.* Hence, in <span id="xx.i-p10.4"></span>[Isa
65:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001.md)<span id="xx.i-p10.4"></span>, it
is said, “I was found of them who sought, me not.” I must, however, not
lose sight of the prophet’s design, namely, that in consequence of so
few applying themselves to the study of the works of God, he teaches us
that that is the reason why so many are blind amidst a flood of light;
for, when he says that the excellency of the works of God is known to
all who desire it, he means that none are ignorant of it, except such as
are wilfully blind, or rather, malignantly and contemptuously quench the
light which is offered to them. We must, however, attend to the means
which we possess for arriving at the knowledge of these words because we
know, that as long as the faithful are on earth, their understandings
are dull and weak, so that they cannot penetrate the mysteries, or
comprehend the height of the works of God. But, incomprehensible as is
the immensity of the wisdom, equity, justice, power, and mercy of God,
in his works, the faithful nevertheless acquire as much knowledge of
these as qualifies them for manifesting the glory of God; only it
becomes us to begin the study of his works with reverence, that we may
take delight in them, contemptible though they be in the estimation of
the reprobate, who treat them with impious scorn. The LXX. having
rendered it, *sought out in all his wills,* Augustine has therefore
taken occasion, with philosophic finesse, to ask, How can there be, or,
at least, appear to be, a plurality of wills in God? And it is indeed a
pleasing consideration, that though God manifest his will in his law,
nevertheless there is another secret purpose by which he is guided in
the wonderful management of human affairs. This doctrine, however, is,
foreign to the exposition of this passage.

<span id="xx.i-p11"></span><span id="xx.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p12"></span>**3** *His work is beautiful* Others render
it *splendor.* The meaning of the clause is this, That every act of God
is replete with glorious majesty. In the following part of the verse he
specifies more clearly in what this beauty and magnificence consist, by
stating that *the justice of God* is everywhere conspicuous. It is not
the design of God to furnish us with such a display of his power and
sovereignty in his works, as might only fill our minds with terror, but
he also gives us a display of his justice in a manner so inviting as to
captivate our hearts. This commendation of the works and ways of God is
introduced in opposition to the clamor and calumny of the ungodly, by
which they impiously endeavor, to the utmost extent of their power, to
disfigure and deface the glory of the works of God. In the next verse,
he more especially extols the wonderful works in which God has
principally set forth his power. *To cause his marvellous works to be
remembered,* is equivalent to the doing of works worthy of being
remembered, or the renown of which shall continue for ever.  <span
id="fr_337"></span>[338](#fn_337.md) And having above called upon us to
contemplate his justice, now, in like manner, and almost in like terms,
he celebrates the grace and mercy of God, principally in relation to his
works, because that justice which he displays in the preservation and
protection of his people, issues from the source of his unmerited favor
which he bears towards them.

<span id="xx.ii"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p1"></span><span id="xx.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
111:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#005.md)<span id="xx.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p2"></span>**5.** (<span id="xx.ii-p2.1"></span>ט,
teth,) He hath given a portion to them that fear him: (<span
id="xx.ii-p2.2"></span>י, yod,) He will remember his covenant for ever.
**6.** (<span id="xx.ii-p2.3"></span>כ, caph,) He hath declared to his
people the power of his works, (<span id="xx.ii-p2.4"></span>ל, lamed,)
To give the heritage of the heathen to them. **7.** (<span
id="xx.ii-p2.5"></span>מ, mem,) The works of his hands are truth and
judgment; (<span id="xx.ii-p2.6"></span>נ, nun,) All his statutes are
true. **8.** (<span id="xx.ii-p2.7"></span>ס, samech,) They are
established for ever, (<span id="xx.ii-p2.8"></span>ע, ain,) And are
done in truth and righteousness.

<span id="xx.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xx.ii-p4"></span><span id="xx.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p5"></span>**5** *He hath given a portion to them that
fear him* The Church being a mirror of the grace and justice of God,
what the prophet said respecting them is here expressly applied to her;
not that he designs to treat of the justice of God, in general, but only
of that which he peculiarly displays towards his own people. Hence he
adds, that God’s care of his people is such as to lead him to make ample
provision for the supply of all their wants. The word <span
id="xx.ii-p5.1"></span>טרף, *tereph,* which we have translated
*portion,* is frequently taken for *a prey:*  <span
id="fr_338"></span>[339](#fn_338.md) others render it *meat;* but I rather
choose to render it *portion,* in which sense it is taken in <span
id="xx.ii-p6.7"></span>[Pr 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#008.md)<span
id="xx.ii-p6.7"></span>, and <span id="xx.ii-p6.8"></span>[Pr
31:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#015.md)<span id="xx.ii-p6.8"></span>; as
if he should say, that God had given his people all that was needful,
and that, considered as a portion, it was large and liberal; for we know
that the people of Israel were enriched, not in consequence of their own
industry, but by the blessing of God, who, like the father of a family,
bestows upon his household every thing necessary for their subsistence.
In the following clause of the verse, he assigns as the reason for his
care and kindness, his desire of effectually demonstrating that his
covenant was not null and void. And here it must be carefully observed,
that if, in former times, and from a respect to his gracious covenant,
he manifested so great kindness towards the people of Israel, in like
manner, the goodness which we receive from him is the result of our
adoption into his family; and because God is never weary in showing
kindness to his people, he says that the remembrance of his covenant
shall never be effaced. Moreover, as he daily and constantly loads us
with his benefits, so our faith must, in some measure, correspond with
it: it must not fail, but must rise above life and death.

<span id="xx.ii-p7"></span>The next verse is subjoined, by way of
exposition, for the purpose of showing that God, in bestowing upon his
people the heritage of the heathen, had manifested to them the power of
his works. He does indeed employ the term *show,* but he means a true
showing; because the possession of the Holy Land was not acquired by
mere human power, but it was given to them by Divine power, and through
the working of many miracles; and thus God, as it were, openly testified
to the descendants of Abraham with what incomparable power he is
invested. It is on this account that he sets up the people of Israel as
a match for so many other nations, who would assuredly never have
vanquished so many enemies, unless they had been sustained from on high.

<span id="xx.ii-p8"></span><span id="xx.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p9"></span>**7** *The works of his hands* In the first
clause of the verse he exclaims that God is known to be faithful and
upright in his works, and then he goes on to extol the same truth and
rectitude as pervading the doctrine of the law; the amount of which is,
that a beautiful harmony characterises all the sayings and doings of
God, because every where he shows himself to be just and faithful. We
have a memorable proof of this fact in the redemption of his ancient
people. Yet I doubt not, that, under the term, *works,* the prophet
comprehends the constant government of the Church; because God daily and
unceasingly shows that he is just and true, and unweariedly pursues the
same course. Among men it is reckoned to be of more importance for one
to be found just in practice than in profession; yet, as the doctrine of
the law was the very life and safety of the people, the prophet very
properly, and in several expressions, dwells upon the sentiment
contained in the second clause of the verse; saying, *all his statutes
are true, they are established for ever, and are drawn up in perfect
accordance with the strict law of truth and equity* And assuredly, but
for God’s having kept the people united to him by the sacred chain of
the law, the fruit of their redemption would have been very small, and
even that benefit would have soon been lost by them. We ought to
observe, then, that this subject is brought prominently forward in this
place; because, in attesting the eternal love of God, it became the
means of imparting life.

<span id="xx.iii"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p1"></span><span id="xx.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
111:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#009.md)<span id="xx.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p2"></span>**9.** (<span id="xx.iii-p2.1"></span>פ,
phe,) He sent redemption to his people; (<span
id="xx.iii-p2.2"></span>ץ, tzaddi,) he hath commanded His covenant for
ever: (<span id="xx.iii-p2.3"></span>ק, koph,) holy and terrible is his
name. **10.** (<span id="xx.iii-p2.4"></span>ר, resh,) The fear of
Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom: (<span id="xx.iii-p2.5"></span>ש,
schin,) good understanding have all they who do these things: (<span
id="xx.iii-p2.6"></span>ת, tau,) his praise endureth for ever.

<span id="xx.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xx.iii-p4"></span><span id="xx.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p5"></span>**9** *He sent redemption to his people*
What he had already stated is here repeated in different words. And as
the deliverance of his people was the commencement of their salvation,
it is first introduced; next is subjoined its confirmation in the law,
by reason of which it comes to pass that God’s adoption could never
fail. For though, long prior to this, God had established his covenant
with Abraham, which also was the occasion of the redemption of the
people; yet what is here mentioned refers exclusively to the law, by
which the covenant was ratified, never to be disannulled. The amount is,
that, in the deliverance of the people, God did not act the part of a
beneficial father, merely for a day, but that, in the promulgation of
the law, he also establishedhis grace, that the hope of eternal life
might continue for ever in the Church. Moreover, you must attend
carefully to what I have elsewhere cautioned you against, and to which I
shall advert more at length on <span id="xx.iii-p5.2"></span>[Psalm
119](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#000.md)<span id="xx.iii-p5.2"></span>,
where the law is spoken of, That the commandments must not be taken
always abstractly, for the Holy Spirit, in an especial manner, refers to
the promises which are in Christ, by which God, in gathering his chosen
people to himself, hath begotten them again to eternal life.

<span id="xx.iii-p6"></span><span id="xx.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p7"></span>**10.** *The fear of Jehovah* Having treated
of the kindness of God, and paid a well-merited tribute to the law, the
prophet goes on to exhort the faithful to reverence God, and be zealous
in the keeping of the law. In calling *the fear of God, The beginning or
source of wisdom,* he charges with folly those who do not render
implicit obedience unto God. As if he should say, They who fear not God,
and do not regulate their lives according to his law, are brute beasts:
and are ignorant of the first elements of true wisdom. To this we must
carefully attend; for although mankind generally wish to be accounted
wise almost all the world lightly esteem God, and take pleasure in their
own wicked craftiness. And as the very worst of men are reputed to be
superior to all others in point of wisdom; and, puffed up with this
confidence, harden themselves against God, the prophet declares all the
wisdom of the world, without the fear of God, to be vanity or an empty
shadow. And, indeed, all who are ignorant of the purpose for which they
live are fools and madmen. But to serve God is the purpose for which we
have been born, and for which we are preserved in life. There is,
therefore, no worse blindness, no insensibility so grovelling, as when
we contemn God, and place our affections elsewhere. For whatever
ingenuity the wicked may possess, they are destitute of the main thing,
genuine piety. To the same effect are the words which immediately
follow, *a good understanding have all they who keep God’s
commandments.* There is great emphasis upon the qualifying adjunct <span
id="xx.iii-p7.1"></span>טוב, *tob;* because the prophet, in inveighing
against the foolish opinion to which we have already adverted, tacitly
condemns those who delight in their own wicked craftiness. His meaning
is, I admit, that they are usually deemed wise who look well to their
own interests, who can pursue a temporising policy, who have the
acuteness and artifice of preserving the favorable opinion of the world,
and who even practice deception upon others. But even were I to grant
that this character belongs to them, yet is their wisdom unprofitable
and perverse, because true wisdom manifests itself in the observance of
the law. Next he substitutes the *keeping of God’s commandments* for the
fear of God. For though all men, without exception, boast that they fear
God, yet nothing is more common than for them to live in the neglect of
his law. Hence the prophet very properly inculcates upon us the
voluntary assumption of his yoke, and submission to the regulations of
his word, as the most satisfactory evidence of our living in the fear of
God. The term *beginning*  <span id="fr_339"></span>[340](#fn_339.md) has
misled some, leading them to imagine that the fear of God was
denominated the entrance of wisdom, as it were the alphabet, because it
prepares men for true piety. Such an opinion is scarcely deserving of
notice, seeing that, in <span id="xx.iii-p8.6"></span>[Job
28:28](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#028.md)<span id="xx.iii-p8.6"></span>,
it is called “wisdom.” In this passage fear is not to be understood as
referring to the first or elementary principles of piety, as in <span
id="xx.iii-p8.7"></span>[1Jo 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#018.md)<span
id="xx.iii-p8.7"></span>, but is comprehensive of all true godliness, or
the worship of God. The conclusion of the psalm requires no explanation;
it being the object of the prophet simply to inculcate upon the
faithful, that nothing is more profitable for them, than to spend their
lives in the celebration of the praises of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_333"></span>[334](cc11019.htm#fr_333.md) <span
id="xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx-p2"></span> This and the subsequent psalms, to the 119th,
are supposed to have been sung by the Jews at the celebration of the
Passover; and the subject-matter of them was peculiarly adapted to such
a purpose. “From the 111th to the 118th psalm, inclusive,” says Jebb, in
his recent work on the Psalms, “we find very interesting marks of a
ceremonial which, tradition asserts, was observed by the Jews at the
eating of the Passover, namely, the singing of the Gospel Hallel — that
hymn, in all likelihood, which our blessed Lord sang with his disciples
after the Last Supper. Dr Lightfoot informs us that there is
considerable discrepancy of opinion among the Jews as to what psalms
constituted the Greater Hallel; the various opinions extending or
contracting its range from the 113th to the 137th psalm. As usual, these
traditions are uncertain and ill defined, and have more respect to the
arbitrary dicta of the Rabbins than to the internal evidence of Holy
Scripture. Let us now examine this evidence. In the first place, we are
to remark, that all the psalms (except the 114th and 118th) which
precede the 119th, have *Hallelujah* (that is, Praise ye the Lord)
either prefixed or subjoined, or both, while those which are without
this burden are in evident connection; the 119th as evidently beginning
a new series. In the absence, then, of any consistent testimony, it
seems fair to assume, that this group of psalms formed the Greater
Hallel, the sentiment they contain being singularly applicable to the
festival, — to the great deliverance from Egypt, which it celebrated,
and to the second delivery from Babylon, which so strongly resembled it.
According to Dr Lightfoot, the 113th and 114th psalms were sung at one
period of the feast, at the second cup; and after the fourth cup, the
other psalms, namely, the 115th to the 118th, inclusive; and here the
feast ordinarily ended. They thus held the place of grace before or
after meat; and this division is very consistent, the latter psalms
being more evidently Eucharistical.” — *Jebb*’*s Literal Translation of
the Book of Psalms, with Dissertations,* volume 2, pages 269-271.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[335](cc11019.htm#fr_334.md) <span
id="xx-p3.3"></span>

<span id="xx-p4"></span> “These two verses,” says Dr Geddes, “might just
as well have made three, and then the whole of both psalms would be
regular.” According to Jerome, this is the first psalm that is *exactly*
alphabetical, the rest of this description, which precede it, being only
nearly so.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[336](cc11019.htm#fr_335.md) <span
id="xx.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p3"></span> The Hebrew for *Praise ye Jehovah* is
*Hallelujah.* This is probably the *title,* and no part of the psalm
itself. The alphabetical construction of the poem seems to confirm this
opinion. It is *acrostic,* and begins with *aleph,* and each succeeding
hemistich commences with the other letters of the alphabet in order; but
were *Hallelujah,* which begins with the fifth letter of the alphabet,
answering to our H, the first word of the psalm, that would destroy its
perfectly alphabetical character.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[337](cc11019.htm#fr_336.md) <span
id="xx.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p7"></span> “Aben Ezra and others think that <span
id="xx.i-p7.1"></span>עדה is put in opposition to <span
id="xx.i-p7.2"></span>סוד, which denotes a more secret assembly; and so
the verse, they say, means, in substance, as follows: ‘I will praise the
Lord with all my heart, both privately and publicly.’ This, however, I
think can scarcely be the sense: it is much more likely that <span
id="xx.i-p7.3"></span>סוד is here employed to express a congregation of
Israelites; because the rest of the world was excluded from such
assembly, and so far it partook of the character of *private* or
*secret.* This is the view taken by Luther, whose paraphrase of this
verse is as follows: ‘I thank the Lord here in this public assembly,
where we (Israelites) meet one another as in private counsel, and where
no heathen nor strangers can be present.’” — *Phillips.*

<span id="fn_337"></span>[338](cc11019.htm#fr_337.md) <span
id="xx.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p13"></span> “<span id="xx.i-p13.1"></span>זכר עשה. He
hath made a memorial for himself in his wonderful works. <span
id="xx.i-p13.2"></span>זכר, the same as <span
id="xx.i-p13.3"></span>זכרון in <span id="xx.i-p13.4"></span>[Nu
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#005.md)<span id="xx.i-p13.4"></span>. So
the LXX., in <span id="xx.i-p13.5"></span>[Ex
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#014.md)<span id="xx.i-p13.5"></span>,
render <span id="xx.i-p13.6"></span>זכר by <span
id="xx.i-p13.7"></span>ὄνομα*, name*; accordingly, <span
id="xx.i-p13.8"></span>זכר עשה may signify, *He hath made himself a
name*; *i.e*., His wonderful works will exist as memorials of his name.”
— *Phillips.*

<span id="fn_338"></span>[339](cc11019.htm#fr_338.md) <span
id="xx.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p6"></span> “*Given* *meat* — Heb*.,* ‘Prey;’ *i.e*.,
food. Some think this refers to the *manna* rained upon Israel in the
wilderness; we should rather think, to the quails. See <span
id="xx.ii-p6.1"></span>[Ps 105:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#040.md)<span
id="xx.ii-p6.1"></span>.” — *Williams*. “<span
id="xx.ii-p6.2"></span>טרף. This word is usually translated *prey,* and
the passage is thought, by some, to refer to the spoiling of the
Egyptians by the Israelites, mentioned in <span
id="xx.ii-p6.3"></span>[Ex 12:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#036.md)<span
id="xx.ii-p6.3"></span>. It is, however, more probable that <span
id="xx.ii-p6.4"></span>טרף signifies here *food,* and that allusion is
made to the manna with which the children of Israel were fed in the
wilderness. See <span id="xx.ii-p6.5"></span>[Pr
31:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#015.md)<span id="xx.ii-p6.5"></span>;
<span id="xx.ii-p6.6"></span>[Mal
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#010.md)<span id="xx.ii-p6.6"></span>. The
first hemistich is the consequence of what is stated in the second;
*i.e., because* God remembered his covenant, *therefore* he gave food to
them who fear him.” — *Phillips.*

<span id="fn_339"></span>[340](cc11019.htm#fr_339.md) <span
id="xx.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p8"></span> “*The beginning,* — the word, so
translated, also signifies *the prime, the chief part, the perfection*;
a sense which it may very well bear in this place: comp. <span
id="xx.iii-p8.1"></span>[Deut. 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#012.md),
[Job 28:28](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#028.md), [Prov.
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#007.md), [Prov.
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#010.md)<span id="xx.iii-p8.1"></span>” —
*Cresswell.* “<span id="xx.iii-p8.2"></span>ראשית this word may signify,
the first in time, and so it may denote the foundation of any thing;
hence the meaning of the Psalmist here is, that the foundation of all
wisdom is the fear of the Lord. But <span id="xx.iii-p8.3"></span>ראשית
has also the sense of being *first* in *dignity,* as well as in order of
time; thus <span id="xx.iii-p8.4"></span>ראשית חכמה*, wisdom is the
chief thing,* <span id="xx.iii-p8.5"></span>[Pr
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#007.md)<span id="xx.iii-p8.5"></span>.
Here it may be understood in the same manner; *i.e*., the fear of the
Lord is the chief wisdom.” — *Phillips.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 112](cc11020.md)
