[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc11019)  [Next](cc11021.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 11: Psalms, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi"></span>

<span id="xxi-p1"></span>PSALM 112

<span id="xxi-p2"></span>As the majority of mankind expect to prosper by
evil deeds, and as they generally endeavor to enrich themselves by
plunder, fraud, and every species of injustice, the prophet enumerates
the blessings of God which attend those who worship him in purity, in
order that we may know that, in aiming at a life of piety and morality,
we shall not lose our reward.  <span id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340.md)

<span id="xxi.i"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p1"></span><span id="xxi.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
112:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#001.md)<span id="xxi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p2"></span>**1.** Praise ye Jehovah! Blessed is the man
that feareth Jehovah; he will greatly delight in his commandments.
**2.** His seed shall be powerful in the earth:  <span
id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341.md) the generation of the righteous shall
be blessed. **3.** Wealth and riches shall be in his house: and his
righteousness endureth for ever.

<span id="xxi.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxi.i-p5"></span><span id="xxi.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p6"></span>**1** *Blessed is the man that feareth
Jehovah* Although the prophet begins with an exhortation, he has, as I
have already pointed out, something farther in view, than simply the
calling upon the faithful to praise God. To practice wickedness, and
perpetrate injustice, is, in all quarters, accounted a great happiness;
and, although integrity may be occasionally praised, nevertheless, there
is scarcely one among a hundred who pursues it, because all imagine that
they will be miserable unless, by one means or another, they seize as
booty every thing which comes in their way. In opposition to this, the
prophet tells us that more advantage is to be expected from God’s
paternal regard, than from the inflicting of every species of injury,
and the perpetrating of every kind of injustice in our power; and by
setting before us the certain hope of reward, he calls us back to the
practice of equity and beneficence. The following is the analysis which
I give of the verse: *Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord, and
delighteth himself in his commandments;* and thus, by the second clause
of the verse, the prophet specifies in what the fear of God consists.
And that the addition of this explanatory clause is called for, is quite
apparent from what we remarked towards the conclusion of the preceding
psalm. For, while the law is boldly contemned by mankind, yet nothing is
more common than to pretend that they fear God. Such impiety is well
refuted by the prophet, when he acknowledges none as belonging to the
worshippers of God, but he who endeavors to keep his law. The Hebrew
verb <span id="xxi.i-p6.1"></span>חפף, *chaphets,* is rather emphatical,
which is, as it were, to *take his pleasure,* and I have rendered *to
delight himself* For the prophet makes a distinction between a willing
and prompt endeavor to keep the law, and that which consists in mere
servile and constrained obedience. We must, therefore, cheerfully
embrace the law of God, and that, too, in such a manner, that the love
of it, with all its sweetness, may overcome all the allurements of the
flesh, otherwise, mere attention to it will be unavailing. Hence a man
cannot be regarded as a genuine observer of the law, until he has
attained to this — that the delight which he takes in the law of God
renders obedience agreeable to him. I now resume the consideration of
the passage at large. The prophet, in affirming that the worshippers of
God *are happy,* guards us against the very dangerous deception which
the ungodly practice upon themselves, in imagining that they can reap a
sort of happiness, I know not what, from doing evil.

<span id="xxi.i-p7"></span><span id="xxi.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p8"></span>**2** *His seed shall be powerful* For the
purpose of confirming the statement which he advanced respecting the
happiness of the man that fears Jehovah and takes delight in his
commandments, the prophet enumerates the tokens of God’s
loving-kindness, which he is wont to bestow upon his worshippers. And,
in the first place, he says that God’s fatherly kindness is not confined
to their own persons, it also extends to their posterity: agreeably to
what is said in the law, “I am merciful to a thousand generations,
towards them that love me and keep my commandments,” <span
id="xxi.i-p8.1"></span>[Ex 34:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#007.md)<span
id="xxi.i-p8.1"></span>. And in <span id="xxi.i-p8.2"></span>[Ps.
103:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#008.md),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#009.md)<span id="xxi.i-p8.2"></span>, and
other passages, we have formerly adverted to this doctrinal statement.
As, however, not a few are disposed to pervert this doctrine, by
applying it as the standard according to which God dispenses his
temporal favors, it is therefore proper to bear in mind what I have said
in <span id="xxi.i-p8.3"></span>[Ps
37:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#025.md)<span id="xxi.i-p8.3"></span>,
that these are bestowed according to the manner, and in the measure,
which God pleases. Sometimes it happens that a good man is childless;
and barrenness itself is considered a curse of God. Again, many of God’s
servants are oppressed with poverty and want, are borne down under the
weight of sickness, and harassed and perplexed with various calamities.
It is therefore necessary to keep this general principle in view, That
God sometimes bestows his bounty more profusely, and, at other times,
more sparingly, upon his children, according as he sees it to be most
for their good; and, moreover, he sometimes conceals the tokens of his
kindness, apparently as if he had no regard for his people at all.
Still, amid this perplexity, it constantly appears that these words were
not uttered in vain, *the righteous and their offspring are blessed* God
very frequently blasts the vain hopes of the ungodly, whose sole object
is to bear rule in the world, and to raise their children to places of
wealth and honor. On the other hand, as the faithful are satisfied with
bringing up their children in the fear of God, and contented to live
sparingly, God, as it were with an outstretched hand, exalts them to
honor. Add to this, that anciently, under the law, the truth of this
doctrine was more evident; because it was requisite for a people
inexperienced and feeble, to be trained gradually, by means of temporal
benefits, to entertain a better hope. And in our times, but for our
vices, God’s temporal kindness would shine more brightly upon us. For
experience demonstrates that what is immediately subjoined does not
uniformly hold true, *wealth and riches shall be in the houses of the
righteous* It is no uncommon occurrence for the virtuous and holy to
suffer hunger, and to be in want even of the most homely fare; and, for
this reason, it would not be for their good were God to bestow more
earthly benefits upon them. In afflicting circumstances, numbers of them
would be incapable of behaving in a manner becoming their profession. In
the meantime, we may observe, that the grace which the prophet commends
appears principally in this, that the good and sincere are satisfied
with their humble estate, whereas no portion, however large, even to the
extent of the world itself, will content the ungodly worldling. The old
adage holds true, That the covetous wants that which he has, as well as
that which he has not; because he is master of nothing, and is the slave
of his own wealth. In connection with this clause must also be taken
that which follows, *the righteousness of good men endureth for ever*
This, in fact, constitutes the true and proper difference between the
godly and ungodly; because the latter may, for a time, hoard up immense
wealth; yet, all that shall, according to the words of the prophet,
“suddenly vanish away at the blast of the Almighty,” <span
id="xxi.i-p8.4"></span>[Hag 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#009.md)<span
id="xxi.i-p8.4"></span>. And we daily see that what has been acquired by
violence and deceit, becomes the prey and property of others. But, to
the faithful, their integrity is the best and surest preserver of God’s
blessings.

<span id="xxi.ii"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
112:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#004.md)<span id="xxi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p2"></span>**4.** Light ariseth  <span
id="fr_342"></span>[343](#fn_342.md) in darkness to the righteous: he is
gracious, merciful, and just. **5.** A good man  <span
id="fr_343"></span>[344](#fn_343.md) showeth pity, and lendeth: he manages
his affairs uprightly. **6.** Surely he shall not be moved for ever: the
just shall be held in perpetual remembrance. **7.** He shall not be
afraid when he hears evil tidings: his heart is fixed, because he
confides in Jehovah. **8.** His heart is established, he shall not be
afraid, until  <span id="fr_344"></span>[345](#fn_344.md) he see his desire
 <span id="fr_345"></span>[346](#fn_345.md) upon his enemies.

<span id="xxi.ii-p7"></span> 

<span id="xxi.ii-p8"></span><span id="xxi.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p9"></span>**4** *Light ariseth* The Hebrew verb <span
id="xxi.ii-p9.1"></span>זרח, *zarach,* may be taken intransitively, as I
have inserted it in the text, or transitively, as in the marginal
reading; in either way the signification is the same. Whichsoever of
these translations you adopt, the words are susceptible of a twofold
interpretation; either, that as the sun shines on one part of the earth,
and all the other parts of it are enveloped in darkness, so God exempts
the righteous from the common calamities of human life; or, as day
succeeds night, so God, though he permit the hearts of his servants to
be in heaviness for a season, will cause a time of calmness and
clearness to return to them. If the latter exposition is adopted, then,
by *darkness,* or by the cloudy, and rainy, or stormy season, the
prophet means the afflictions to which God subjects his servants for the
trial of their patience. The former interpretation appears to be more
appropriate, That, when the whole world is overwhelmed with troubles,
God’s grace shines upon the faithful, who feel comfortable and happy,
because he is propitious towards them. It is thus that their condition
is properly distinguished from that which forms the common lot of other
men. For the ungodly, however they may exult in prosperity, are,
nevertheless, blind in the midst of light, because they are strangers to
God’s paternal kindness; and, in adversity, they are plunged into the
darkness of death; and, consequently, they never enjoy a season of calm
repose. On the contrary, the godly, upon whom the favor of God
constantly shines, though liable to the ills incident to humanity, are
never overwhelmed with darkness, and hence the propriety of what is here
stated, *light ariseth to them in darkness* If we give to the Hebrew
verb an active signification, then, in one respect, the construction of
the words will be preferable. For I have no doubt that the prophet
intends, as applicable to God, the epithets, *gracious, merciful, and
just* Therefore, if we read it as a neuter verb, *light ariseth,* then
the latter clause of the verse will be the reason for the statement made
in the former clause. As to the exposition, that the righteous and
humane do not diffuse darkness over the world, as the unrighteous and
wicked do; that they do not extract smoke from light, but light from
smoke; it must be viewed as nothing else than a perversion of the
prophet’s language.

<span id="xxi.ii-p10"></span><span id="xxi.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p11"></span>**5** *A good man* This is the commonly
received interpretation of the passage. I am disposed, however, to
prefer another, That it shall be well with those who are gracious and
communicative; because this is more in accordance with the purport of
the prophet’s language. It is his intention to show how greatly the
ungodly are deceived, when they aspire after happiness by nefarious and
unlawful practices; seeing that the favor of God is the source and cause
of all good things. Hence it becomes necessary to supply the relative
*who.* He proceeds, therefore, to put us on our guard as to the
deception which those practice upon themselves, who hasten to enrich
themselves by sordid parsimony and oppressive extortion; inasmuch as the
faithful, by their clemency and kindness, open up a channel, through
which the favor of God flows to them: for the term <span
id="xxi.ii-p11.1"></span>טוב, *tob,* though in the masculine gender,
signifying *good,* is often taken as if it were neuter, to denote that
which is good. He puts *lending* as if it were the fruit of mercy; for
the usurer also lends, but it is that, under the false pretense of
assisting the distressed, he may plunder them. It is, then, the truly
liberal, who, from compassion, and not with the design of ensnaring the
poor, grant relief to them, that God makes prosperous. The term <span
id="xxi.ii-p11.2"></span>דבים*, debarim,* in the end of the verse,
signifies *words;* but, along with David Kimchi, the most correct
expositor among the Rabbins, I take it to mean *affairs. Words* is a
very tame translation,  <span id="fr_346"></span>[347](#fn_346.md) not to
say, that, if this had been the prophet’s intention, he would have
expressed himself in more simple terms. The translation which I have
given is the proper one, that the righteous will manage their affairs
with prudence and discernment; so that, in their domestic affairs, they
will neither be too lavish nor sordidly parsimonious; but, in every
thing, they will study to combine frugality with economy, without giving
way to luxury. And, in all their mercantile transactions; they will
always be guided by the principles of equity and morality.

<span id="xxi.ii-p13"></span><span id="xxi.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p14"></span>**6** *Surely he shall not be moved.* The
Hebrew particle <span id="xxi.ii-p14.1"></span>כי, *ki,* may here be
taken in its natural or causal meaning, and thus be rendered *for,*
especially if in the preceding verse we adopt the marginal reading, *It
shall be well with the man.* For he refers in more explicit terms to
that happiness of which he spake, that God sustains the compassionate
and humane, so that amid all the vicissitudes of life they remain
unmoved; that he makes their innocence appear, and protects them from
unjust calumny. It is said *they are never moved* They are indeed liable
to the incidents common to humanity, and even may often appear as if
they were about to sink under the weight of their calamities; but their
confidence remains unshaken, and by invincible patience they surmount
all their adversities. With God as the defender of their righteousness,
they yet do not escape from being assailed by the slanders of the
ungodly, but it is enough for them that their name is blessed before
God, the angels, and the whole assembly of the godly.

<span id="xxi.ii-p15"></span><span id="xxi.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p16"></span>**7.** *He shall not be afraid when he
hears evil tidings* This may appear to be a confirmation of the
statement contained in the preceding verse, being as much as to say,
That the righteous are exempted from the infamous name which the
reprobate secure to themselves by their vicious conduct. I rather take
the meaning to be, that the righteous, unlike unbelievers, who tremble
at every even the slightest rumor, calmly and peacefully confide in
God’s paternal care, amid all the evil tidings which may reach them.
Whence is it that unbelievers are in constant agitation, but that they
imagine they are the sport of fortune on the earth, while God remains at
ease in heaven? No wonder, then, that the rustling of the falling leaf
troubles and alarms them. From such uneasiness the faithful are freed,
because they neither give heed to rumors, nor does the fear of them
prevent them from constantly invoking God. The children of God may also
manifest symptoms of fear at the prospect of impending danger; for were
they altogether regardless of calamities, such indifference would be the
result, not of confidence in God, but of insensibility. But should they
not be able to lay aside all fear and anxiety, yet, acknowledging God as
the guardian of their life, and pursuing the tenor of their way, they
intrust themselves to his preserving care, and cheerfully resign
themselves to his disposal. This is that magnanimity of the righteous,
under the influence of which the prophet declares they can disregard
those rumors of evil which strike others with alarm. Wisely, too, do
they rely upon God for support; because, encompassed on all sides with
deaths innumerable, we would sink into despair were we not borne up by
the confidence that we are secure under God’s protection. Genuine
stability, then, is that which the prophet here describes, and which
*consists* in reposing with unshaken confidence in God. On the other
hand, that presumptuous confidence with which the ungodly are
intoxicated exposes them the more, to the indignation of God, inasmuch
as they overlook the frailty of human life, and in their pride of heart
madly set themselves in opposition to him. Therefore, when “they shall
say, Peace and safety, then shall sudden destruction come upon them,”
(<span id="xxi.ii-p16.1"></span>[1Th
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#003)<span id="xxi.ii-p16.1"></span>..md)
But a sense of calamities, while it alarms and disconcerts the faithful,
does not make them faint-hearted, because it does not shake their faith,
by which they are rendered bold and steadfast. In a word, they are not
insensible to their trials,  <span id="fr_347"></span>[348](#fn_347.md) but
the confidence which they place in God enables them to rise above all
the cares of the present life. Thus they preserve calmness and
composedness of mind, and wait patiently till the fit season arrives for
taking vengeance upon the reprobate.

<span id="xxi.iii"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
112:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#009.md)<span
id="xxi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p2"></span>**9.** He has distributed, he has given to
the poor; his righteousness endureth for ever; his horn shall be exalted
with honor. **10.** The wicked shall see it, and be angry; he shall
gnash with his teeth, and melt away:  <span
id="fr_348"></span>[349](#fn_348.md) The desire of the wicked shall perish.

<span id="xxi.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxi.iii-p5"></span><span id="xxi.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p6"></span>**9** *He has distributed, he hath given to
the poor* Once more he affirms that the righteous never lose the fruit
and the reward of their liberality. And first, by *dispersing,* the
prophet intimates, that they did not give sparingly and grudgingly, as
some do who imagine that they discharge their duty to the poor when they
dole out a small pittance to them, but that they give liberally as
necessity requires and their means allow; for it may happen that a
liberal heart does not possess a large portion of the wealth of this
world. All that the prophet means is, that they are never so
parsimonious as not to be always ready to distribute according to their
means. Next he adds, *they give to the poor,* meaning that they do not
bestow their charity at random, but with prudence and discretion meet
the wants of the necessitous. We are aware that unnecessary and
superfluous expenditure for the sake of ostentation is frequently lauded
by the world; and, consequently, a larger quantity of the good things of
this life is squandered away in luxury and ambition than is dispensed in
charity prudently bestowed. The prophet instructs us that the praise
which belongs to liberality does not consist in distributing our goods
without any regard to the objects upon whom they are conferred, and the
purposes to which they are applied, but in relieving the wants of the
really necessitous, and in the money being expended on things proper and
lawful. This passage is quoted by Paul, (<span
id="xxi.iii-p6.2"></span>[2Co 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#009.md)<span
id="xxi.iii-p6.2"></span>) in which he informs us that it is an easy
matter for God to bless us with plenty, so that we may exercise our
bounty freely, deliberately, and impartially, and this accords best with
the design of the prophet. The next clause, *his righteousness endureth
for ever,* is susceptible of two interpretations. That immoderate
ambition which impels the ungodly to squander away their goods merits
not the name of virtue. It may, therefore, with propriety be said, that
it is a uniform course of liberality which is here praised by the
prophet, according to what he formerly observed, *that the righteous
manage their affairs with discretion.* If any prefer to refer it to the
fruit of righteousness, I have no objection. And, indeed, it appears to
be a repetition of the same sentence which lately came under our notice.
Then the prophet shows how God by his benefits preserves the glory of
that righteousness which is due to their liberality, and does not
disappoint them of their reward, in that he exalteth their horn more and
more, that is, their power or their prosperous condition.

<span id="xxi.iii-p7"></span><span id="xxi.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p8"></span>**10.** *The wicked shall see it.*  <span
id="fr_349"></span>[350](#fn_349.md) Here follows a contrast similar to
that which we met with in <span id="xxi.iii-p9.1"></span>[Ps
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#005.md)<span id="xxi.iii-p9.1"></span>,
which renders the grace of God towards the faithful the more
illustrious. His meaning is, that though the wicked may cast off all
regard to piety, and banish from their minds all thoughts of human
affairs being under the superintending providence of God, they shall yet
be made to feel, whether they will or no, that the righteous, in
compliance with God’s command, do not vainly devote themselves to the
cultivation of charity and mercy. Let them harden themselves as they
choose, yet he declares that the honor, which God confers upon his
children, shall be exhibited to them, the sight of which shall make them
gnash with their teeth, and shall excite an envy that shall consume them
by inches.  <span id="fr_350"></span>[351](#fn_350.md) In conclusion, he
adds, that *the wicked shall be disappointed of their desires* They are
never content, but are continually thirsting after something, and their
confidence is as presumptuous as their avarice is unbounded. And hence,
in their foolish expectations, they do not hesitate at grasping at the
whole world. But the prophet tells them that God will snatch from them
what they imagined was already in their possession, so that they shall
always depart destitute and famishing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_340"></span>[341](cc11020.htm#fr_340.md) <span
id="xxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxi-p3"></span> This psalm is also acrostic or alphabetical;
and the subject of it being only an enlargement upon the last verse of
the preceding, as Muis and others have observed, the same author, it is
not improbable, composed both.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[342](cc11020.htm#fr_341.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p3"></span> “*In the earth,* or rather, with Green, *in
the land*: as it seems to mean *the land* of Israel, to which the
promise of temporal blessings was limited.” — *Dimock.*

<span id="fn_342"></span>[343](cc11020.htm#fr_342.md) <span
id="xxi.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="xxi.ii-p3.1"></span>Ou, il a
fait reluire la lumiere.” — *Fr. marg.* “Or, he hath made light to arise
*or* to shine.” There is here perhaps, as Horsley supposes, an allusion
to what happened in Egypt, when the Israelites had light in all their
dwellings, while the land was wrapt in darkness. “The first hemistich,”
says Phillips, “is figurative. *Trouble* is represented by <span
id="xxi.ii-p3.2"></span>חשך, *darkness*; and *health* or *prosperity* by
<span id="xxi.ii-p3.3"></span>אור, *light.* A pious man shall be found
to enjoy prosperity, even when troubles come upon the rest of the world;
in such a period of general darkness there shall spring up a light to
the upright; viz., Jehovah himself, who is *gracious, and merciful, and
just.* The first two epithets of the second member are found, in <span
id="xxi.ii-p3.4"></span>[Ps 111:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#004.md)<span
id="xxi.ii-p3.4"></span>, applied to God.”

<span id="fn_343"></span>[344](cc11020.htm#fr_343.md) <span
id="xxi.ii-p3.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p4"></span> “<span id="xxi.ii-p4.1"></span>Ou, bien
*sera* a l’homme qui.” — *Fr. marg.* “Or, *it shall be* well with the
man who.” With this corresponds the translation of Archbishop Secker,
which is, “Happy is the man who,” etc. In proof that <span
id="xxi.ii-p4.2"></span>טוב signifies *happy,* he refers to <span
id="xxi.ii-p4.3"></span>[Isa 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#010.md)<span
id="xxi.ii-p4.3"></span>; <span id="xxi.ii-p4.4"></span>[Jer
44:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#017.md)<span id="xxi.ii-p4.4"></span>;
<span id="xxi.ii-p4.5"></span>[La
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#009.md)<span id="xxi.ii-p4.5"></span>

<span id="fn_344"></span>[345](cc11020.htm#fr_344.md) <span
id="xxi.ii-p4.6"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p5"></span> “*Until.* This is not to be taken as if his
freedom from fear would continue no longer, but is to be extended to all
future times.” *Walford.*

<span id="fn_345"></span>[346](cc11020.htm#fr_345.md) <span
id="xxi.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p6"></span> “*His desire* is a supplement made in the
French version, but not in the Latin; and, if it is admitted, we must be
careful not to understand it as implying any thing like revenge. The
good man has enemies of various kinds. Worldly and wicked men are often
his enemies. But he does not desire *their* destruction; for this would
be utterly inconsistent with the Christian spirit. According to Hammond,
the supplement is unnecessary. His reading is, “He shall behold *or*
look upon his oppressors *or* distressers;” which he explains thus, “He
shall behold them securely, confidently look in their faces, as we say,
as being now no longer under their power, being freed from their tyranny
and pressures.” In <span id="xxi.ii-p6.1"></span>[Ps
54:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#007.md)<span id="xxi.ii-p6.1"></span>, we
meet with a similar expression, which see explained, in reference to
David’s circumstances at that time, in volume 2, page 324, note. It is
used again in <span id="xxi.ii-p6.2"></span>[Ps
59:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#011.md)<span id="xxi.ii-p6.2"></span>,
“God shall let me see *or* look on mine enemies;” in <span
id="xxi.ii-p6.3"></span>[Ps 92:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#011.md)<span
id="xxi.ii-p6.3"></span>, “Mine eye hath looked on mine enemies, and
mine ear hath heard of them that rise up against me,” that is, hath seen
and heard of their destruction; and in <span id="xxi.ii-p6.4"></span>[Ps
118:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#007.md)<span id="xxi.ii-p6.4"></span>,
“I shall look upon my haters,” that is, having God for my helper, I
shall without fear look upon them.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[347](cc11020.htm#fr_346.md) <span
id="xxi.ii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p12"></span> It is so translated in some of the ancient
versions, and by several critics. In the Syriac it is, “will support his
words in judgment;” *i.e*., will never utter any thing but what is
strictly true. In like manner, Cocceius. In the Arabic, which is
followed by Castalio, it is, “will moderate his words in judgment;”
*i.e*., will speak as favourably of delinquents as he can consistently
with truth, contrary to the practice of the wicked. — <span
id="xxi.ii-p12.1"></span>[Ps
94:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#021.md)<span id="xxi.ii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[348](cc11020.htm#fr_347.md) <span
id="xxi.ii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p17"></span> “<span id="xxi.ii-p17.1"></span>Neque
ferrei sunt neque stipites.” — *Lat.* “<span
id="xxi.ii-p17.2"></span>Ils ne sont point de fer, ne semblables a des
souches.” — *Fr*. “They are not of iron, nor do they resemble blocks.”

<span id="fn_348"></span>[349](cc11020.htm#fr_348.md) <span
id="xxi.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p3"></span> “<span id="xxi.iii-p3.1"></span>ונמם, *And
shall melt away.* Root <span id="xxi.iii-p3.2"></span>מסס. It is said to
denote the total destruction of any thing by the process of melting The
verb is employed by way of figure, to express the annihilation of the
wicked, in <span id="xxi.iii-p3.3"></span>[Ps
68:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#003.md)<span id="xxi.iii-p3.3"></span>.”
— *Phillips.*

<span id="fn_349"></span>[350](cc11020.htm#fr_349.md) <span
id="xxi.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p9"></span> “*The wicked shall see it*; *i.e*., the
exalted horn ” — *Dimock*

<span id="fn_350"></span>[351](cc11020.htm#fr_350.md) <span
id="xxi.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p10"></span> “<span id="xxi.iii-p10.1"></span>Et par
une envie qu’ils auront les fera mourir a petit feu.” — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 113](cc11021.md)
