[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc11008)  [Next](cc11010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 11: Psalms, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x"></span>

<span id="x-p1"></span>PSALM 101

<span id="x-p2"></span>David was not as yet put in possession of the
kingdom, but having been already created king by the appointment of God,
he prepares himself for exercising the government in the best manner.
And he not only stirs up himself to perform faithfully the duties of his
kingly office by devoutly meditating on this subject, but also engages
by a solemn vow to be God’s faithful servant, in order to induce Him to
put him speedily in possession of the kingdom.

<span id="x.i"></span>

<span id="x.i-p1"></span><span id="x.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
101:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#001)<span id="x.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p2"></span>A Psalm of David.

<span id="x.i-p3"></span>**1.** I will sing of mercy and of judgment:
unto thee, O Jehovah! will I sing psalms. **2.** I will behave myself
prudently in a perfect way, till thou comest to me:  <span
id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126) I will walk in the integrity of my
heart in the midst of thy house. **3.** I will not set a wicked thing
before my eyes: I hate the work  <span id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127)
of those who turn aside; it shall not adhere to me. **4.** The perverse
heart shall depart from me: I will not know evil  <span
id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128) **5.** Whoso slandereth his neighbor
in secret, him will I destroy: the man whose eyes are lofty, and whose
heart is wide, I cannot endure.

<span id="x.i-p7"></span> 

<span id="x.i-p8"></span><span id="x.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p9"></span>**1** *I will sing of mercy and of judgment*
What David here says concerning singing must be understood by the reader
as intimating that this psalm contains the substance of his meditations
with himself, as to what kind of king he would be whenever he should be
put in possession of the sovereign power which had been promised him.
*To sing* therefore of *mercy and of judgment,* is equivalent to
declaring in solemn terms, that he would be a just and an upright king.
Augustine understands this as meaning that God is to be praised, whether
he punish men with severity, or whether he show himself merciful to
them; but this interpretation is too refined. David does not speak of
God’s secret judgments, but of the due administration of the kingdom,
that he might both by words and deeds fulfill his vocation. When he
asserts, *Unto thee, O Jehovah! will I sing psalms,* he acknowledges
that it was by the favor of God that he was appointed to so
distinguished and honorable an office; for it would have been an act of
presumptuous rashness for him to have thrust himself into it, at the
mere impulse of his own mind. He very properly comprehends all princely
virtues under these two particulars, *mercy and judgment;* for as it is
the principal duty of a king to yield to every man his own right, so he
is also required to possess a considerate love and compassion towards
his subjects. Solomon therefore justly says, (<span
id="x.i-p9.1"></span>[Pr 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#012)<span
id="x.i-p9.1"></span>) “The throne is established by righteousness.”

<span id="x.i-p10"></span><span id="x.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p11"></span>**2** *I will behave myself prudently in a
perfect way* David here shows that he carefully considered how weighty a
charge was laid upon him when he was made king. We know, and it is a
truth taught us by experience, that almost all kings are intoxicated
with the splendors of royalty; and the proverb was not used without
foundation in ancient times, “A king must be born either a king or a
fool.” It is indeed a mistake to say that kings are born fools. Men were
led to speak in this manner, because it commonly happens that those who
are invested with the government of kingdoms and empires are fools and
blockheads. And surely it is a remarkable instance of the vengeance of
God, that beasts, and such as are altogether unworthy to be numbered
among men, commonly possess the highest authority. But although kings
are not born fools, yet they are so blinded by their dignity, that they
think themselves in no respect indebted to their subjects, become
arrogant and haughty in their carriage, recklessly plunge into their
pleasures, and at length utterly forget themselves. David therefore
says, *I will behave myself prudently,* or, which amounts to the same
thing, I will look warily to myself; it being a rare virtue for the man
who may do as he pleases to exercise such moderation, as not to allow
himself liberty in any degree to do evil. He then who is exalted to
sovereign power, and yet, instead of attempting to go as far as he can
in doing mischief, restrains himself by self-control, is endued with
true understanding. In short, David protests that he will not be like
other kings who are infatuated by their own dignity; but that according
to the greatness of the charge imposed upon him, he would endeavor
wisely to perform his duty. It is to be observed, that he represents
wisdom as consisting *in a perfect way,* or in uprightness. From this we
learn that tyrants who employ their talents in forming wicked devices,
and who are daily contriving new methods for burdening and oppressing
their subjects; in short, who are ingenious only in doing mischief, are
not wise towards God. Many persons, it is true, dislike such craftiness;
but still, it is undeniable that, if kings are intent upon enlarging the
boundaries of their kingdom, and are masters in refined policy for
accomplishing such a purpose, this is accounted the most perfect wisdom
which they can possess, and is extolled to the skies. David, on the
contrary, covets no other wisdom but that which is the mistress of
integrity. *Till thou comest to me* These words may be read in two ways.
Some translate them interrogatively, *When wilt thou come?* as if David
besought God not to subject him to any longer delay. And truly he had
just ground to groan and lament, when he saw himself so long oppressed
with poverty, and driven from place to place a wretched exile. It had
been better for him to have lived obscure and unnoticed in his father’s
cottage, following his former occupation as a shepherd, than to be
anointed king, that, being driven out of his country, he might live in
utter dishonor and hatred. But I prefer reading the sentence without
interrogation, *until* or *when thou comest;* and yet even this I
interpret somewhat differently from the majority of commentators,
understanding it to mean, that although David still continued in the
condition of a private person, and did not enjoy the royal power which
had been promised him, he nevertheless did not cease in the meantime to
follow after uprightness. Thus he sets *the midst of his house* in
opposition to palaces and public buildings; as if he had said, Within my
private house or in my family.

<span id="x.i-p12"></span><span id="x.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p13"></span>**3** *I will not set a wicked thing before my
eyes* After having protested, that in leading a private life, he would
practice virtue and righteousness, even as it becomes good princes to
begin with this, he now adds, that in executing the office of prince, he
will be the enemy of all injustice and wickedness. *To set a wicked
thing before one’s eyes,* is equivalent to purposing to do something
that is wicked. He therefore declares, that he will turn away from all
wickedness; and it is certain, that no man can be a just and an
impartial punisher of wrongdoing, but he who abhors it with all his
heart. Whence it follows that kings, in order to the performance of
their duty, must keep themselves entirely free from all consent to
wickedness. Some join to the first sentence the word <span
id="x.i-p13.1"></span>עשוה, *asoh,* which we translate *work,* and
supply the letter <span id="x.i-p13.2"></span>ל*, lamed;* as if it had
been said, I will not set before my eyes any wickedness to do it, or,
nothing wicked will be acceptable to me to execute it. But the other
sense is more probable, which is, that David, after having declared that
he will not suffer any iniquity before his eyes, immediately adds for
the sake of confirmation, that he will be an enemy to all injustice. If
the last clause is referred to the persons who turn aside, there is a
change of the number. It may, however, be explained of the work itself,
implying that he would never have any share in wicked defections from
the path of rectitude.

<span id="x.i-p14"></span><span id="x.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p15"></span>**4** *The perverse heart shall depart from
me* Some by *perverse heart* understand perfidious men; but this I
reject as a sense too forced, and it is moreover inconsistent with the
context. As David has added in the second clause by way of exposition,
*I will not know evil,* he doubtless in the first protests that he will
be free from all perfidiousness and wickedness. The amount is, that he
will do his endeavor to keep himself from all wrong-doing, and that he
will not even know what it is to do wrong to his neighbors.

<span id="x.i-p16"></span><span id="x.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p17"></span>**5** *Whoso slandereth his neighbor*  <span
id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129) *in secret, him will I destroy.* In
this verse he speaks more distinctly of the duty of a king who is armed
with the sword, for the purpose of restraining evil-doers. Detraction,
pride, and vices of every description, are justly offensive to all good
men; but all men have not the power or right to cut off the proud or
detractors, because they are not invested with public authority, and
consequently have their hands bound. It is of importance to attend to
this distinction, that the children of God may keep themselves within
the bounds of moderation, and that none may pass beyond the province of
his own calling. It is certain, that so long as David lived merely in
the rank of a private member of society, he never dared to attempt any
such thing. But after being placed on the royal throne, he received a
sword from the hand of God, which he employed in punishing evil deeds.
He particularises certain kinds of wickedness, that under one species,
by the figure synecdoche, he might intimate his determination to punish
all sorts of wickedness. To detract from the reputation of another
privily, and by stealth, is a plague exceedingly destructive. It is as
if a man killed a fellow-creature from a place of ambush; or rather a
calumniator, like one who administers poison to his unsuspecting victim,
destroys men unawares. It is a sign of a perverse and treacherous
disposition to wound the good name of another, when he has no
opportunity of defending himself. This vice, which is too prevalent
every where, while yet it ought not to be tolerated among men, David
undertakes to punish.

<span id="x.i-p19"></span>He next characterises the proud by two forms
of expression. He describes them as those whose *eyes are lofty,* not
that all who are proud look with a lofty countenance, but because they
commonly betray the superciliousness of their proud hearts by the
loftiness of their countenance. He farther describes them as *wide*
 <span id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130) *of heart,* because those who
aspire after great things must necessarily be puffed up and swollen.
They are never satisfied unless they swallow up the whole world. From
this we learn that good order cannot exist, unless princes are
sedulously on the watch to repress pride, which necessarily draws after
it and engenders outrage and cruelty, contemptuous language, rapine, and
all kinds of ill treatment. Thus it would come to pass, that the simple
and the peaceable would be at the mercy of the more powerful, did not
the authority of princes interfere to curb the audacity of the latter.
As it is the will of God that good and faithful kings should hold pride
in detestation, this vice is unquestionably the object of his own
hatred. What he therefore requires from his children is gentleness and
meekness, for he is the declared enemy of all who strive to elevate
themselves above their condition.

<span id="x.ii"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p1"></span><span id="x.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
101:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#006)<span id="x.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p2"></span>**6.** My eyes are towards the faithful of the
land, that they may dwell with me: he who walketh in an upright way
shall minister to me. **7.** He who worketh \[or practiseth\] deceit
shall not dwell in the midst of my house: he who speaketh falsehoods
shall not abide in my sight. **8.** Early  <span
id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131) will I destroy all the wicked of the
land; that I may cut off all the workers of iniquity from the city of
Jehovah.

<span id="x.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.ii-p5"></span><span id="x.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p6"></span>**6** *My eyes are towards the faithful of the
land* David here lays down another virtue of a wise prince, when he
affirms that it will be his care to make all *the faithful of the land*
his intimate friends, — that he will avail himself of their good
offices, and have as domestic servants such only as are distinguished
for personal worth. Some understand the words, *that they may dwell with
me,* in a general sense thus: I will not neglect the good and
inoffensive, nor will I suffer them to be unjustly molested; but I will
secure, that under my administration, they shall live in a state of
peace and tranquillity. But his meaning rather is, that he will exercise
discretion and care, that, instead of taking persons into his service
indiscriminately, he may wisely determine each man’s character, so as to
have those who live a life of strict integrity as his most intimate
friends, and that he may intrust them with the offices of state. He
speaks of the *faithful* in the first place, because, although a man may
possess talents of a high order, yet if he is not devoted to fidelity
and integrity, he will never rightly execute the office of a judge. This
is worthy of special notice; for although a prince may be the best of
men, yet if his servants and officers are not of a corresponding
character his subjects will experience hardly any advantage from his
uncorrupted integrity. Servants are the hands of a prince, and whatever
he determines for the good of his subjects they will wickedly overthrow
it, provided they are avaricious, fraudulent, or rapacious. This has
been more than sufficiently demonstrated by experience. The greater part
of kings, indeed, passing over the good and the upright, or, which is
worse, driving them away from them, purposely seek to have as servants
those who are like themselves, and who may prove fit tools for their
tyranny; yea, even good and well disposed princes often manifest so much
indolence and irresolution as to suffer themselves to be governed by the
worst counsels, and inconsiderately prostitute the offices of state by
conferring them on the unworthy.

<span id="x.ii-p7"></span><span id="x.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p8"></span>**7** *He who worketh deceit shall not dwell
in the midst of my house* This verse may be explained of all magistrates
to whose charge the exercise of public judgments is committed, as well
as of household servants. But as David has just now spoken in general of
all officers, he seems now to speak properly of those who are near the
person of the king. When the chief counsellors of kings and other
intimate acquaintances who have gained possession of their ears, are
deceitful and crafty, this becomes the source of all corruptions; for by
their example they encourage others in evil, lifting up as it were the
banner of licentiousness. And it is impossible that he who does not
maintain good order in his own house, can be a fit person for holding
the government of a whole realm. The authority which cannot preserve its
influence under the domestic roof is of little worth in state affairs.

<span id="x.ii-p9"></span><span id="x.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p10"></span>**8** *Early will I destroy all the wicked of
the land* The Psalmist at length concludes by asserting, that he will
endeavor to the utmost of his power to purge the land from infamous and
wicked persons. He affirms that he will do this *early;* for if princes
are supine and slothful, they will never seasonably remedy the evils
which exist. They must therefore oppose the beginnings of evil. The
judge, however, must take care not to yield to the influence of anger,
nor must he act precipitately and without consideration. The original
word for *early* is in the plural number, (it being properly *at the
mornings*,) which denotes unremitted exertion. It were not enough that a
judge should punish the wicked sharply and severely in one or two
instances: he must continue perseveringly in that duty. By this word is
condemned the slothfulness of princes, when, upon seeing wicked men
daringly break forth into the commission of crime, they connive at them
from day to day, either through fear or an ill-regulated lenity. Let
kings and magistrates then remember, that they are armed with the sword,
that they may promptly and unflinchingly execute the judgments of God.
David, it is true, could not purge the land from all defilements,
however courageously he might have applied himself to the task. This he
did not expect to be able to do. He only promises, that without respect
of persons he will show himself an impartial judge, in cutting off all
the wicked. Timidity often hinders judges from repressing with
sufficient rigor the wicked when they exalt themselves. It is
consequently necessary for them to be endued with a spirit of invincible
fortitude, that relying upon Divine aid, they may perform the duties of
the office with which they are invested. Moreover, ambition and favor
sometimes render them pliant, so that they do not always punish offenses
alike, where this ought to be done. Hence we learn that the strictness,
which is not carried to excess, is highly pleasing to God; and, on the
other hand, that he does not approve of the cruel kindness which gives
loose reins to the wicked; as, indeed, there cannot be a greater
encouragement to sin than for offenses to be allowed to pass unpunished.
What Solomon says should therefore be remembered, (<span
id="x.ii-p10.1"></span>[Pr 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#015)<span
id="x.ii-p10.1"></span>) “He that justifieth the wicked, and he that
condemneth the just, even they both are abomination to the Lord.” What
David adds, *That I may cut off all the workers of iniquity from the
city of God,* is also emphatic. If even heathen kings are commanded in
common to punish crimes, David well knew that he was under obligations
of a more sacred kind to do so, since the charge of the Church of God
had been committed to him. And certainly if those who hold a situation
so honorable do not exert themselves to the utmost of their power to
remove all defilements, they are chargeable with polluting as much as in
them lies the sanctuary of God; and they not only act unfaithfully
towards men by betraying their welfare, but also commit high treason
against God himself. Now as the kingdom of David was only a faint image
of the kingdom of Christ, we, ought to set Christ before our view; who,
although he may bear with many hypocrites, yet as he will be the judge
of the world, will at length call them all to an account, and separate
the sheep from the goats. And if it seems to us that he tarries too
long, we should think of that morning which will suddenly dawn, that all
filthiness being purged away, true purity may shine forth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_126"></span>[127](cc11009.htm#fr_126) <span
id="x.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p4"></span> “<span id="x.i-p4.1"></span>Ou, quand
viendras-tu a moy?” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, when wilt thou come to me?”

<span id="fn_127"></span>[128](cc11009.htm#fr_127) <span
id="x.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="x.i-p5"></span> “<span id="x.i-p5.1"></span>*Toute* oeuvre.” —
*Fr*. “*All* the work.”

<span id="fn_128"></span>[129](cc11009.htm#fr_128) <span
id="x.i-p5.2"></span>

<span id="x.i-p6"></span> “<span id="x.i-p6.1"></span>Ou, le mauvais.” —
*Fr*. *marg*. “Or, the evil man.”

<span id="fn_129"></span>[130](cc11009.htm#fr_129) <span
id="x.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p18"></span> The reading of the Chaldee is striking, “He
who speaks with a *triple tongue*,” “*i* *e*.,” says Bythner, “*an*
*informer*, *calumniator*, *detractor*, who injures three souls, his
own, his hearers, and the calumniated; he inflicts a deep wound on his
own conscience, puts a lie into the mouth of his hearer, and injures the
subject of his slander; according to which, Herodotus has said, <span
id="x.i-p18.1"></span>Διαβολή ἐστι δεινότατον ἐν τὣ δύο μέν εἰσιν οἱ
ἀδικέοντες εἷς δε ὁ ἀδικεόμενος. ‘Calumny is most iniquitous, in which
there are two injuring and one injured.’” The word <span
id="x.i-p18.2"></span>מלושני, *meloshni* rendered *slandereth*, is from
the noun <span id="x.i-p18.3"></span>לשון, *lashon*, *the tongue* In
<span id="x.i-p18.4"></span>[Ps
140:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#012)<span id="x.i-p18.4"></span>, it
is said, “Let not <span id="x.i-p18.5"></span>איש לשון, *ish lashon*, *a
man of tongue*, (*i* *e*., a slanderer,) be established in the earth.”

<span id="fn_130"></span>[131](cc11009.htm#fr_130) <span
id="x.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p20"></span> The Hebrew noun <span
id="x.i-p20.1"></span>רחב, *rechab*, for *wide* or *large*, is derived
from <span id="x.i-p20.2"></span>רחב, *rachab*, <span
id="x.i-p20.3"></span>*dilatus est* “Applied to the heart or soul, it
denotes largeness of desires. — So <span id="x.i-p20.4"></span>[Pr
28:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#025)<span id="x.i-p20.4"></span>, ‘He
that is <span id="x.i-p20.5"></span>רחב נפש, large in soul;’ where the
LXX. fitly render <span id="x.i-p20.6"></span>רחב, by <span
id="x.i-p20.7"></span>ἄπληστος, ‘insatiable,’ applying it either to
wealth or honor, the insatiable desire of either of which (as there
follows) ‘stirs up strife.’ And so here they have rendered it again
<span id="x.i-p20.8"></span>ἄπλήστῳ καρδίᾳ, ‘he that cannot be filled in
the heart,’ *i* *e*., the covetous or ambitious man. The Syriac reads,
*wide* or *broad*; so the Jewish Arab, ‘Him that is high of eyes, and
wide of heart, I can have no patience with those two.’” — *Hammond*

<span id="fn_131"></span>[132](cc11009.htm#fr_131) <span
id="x.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="x.ii-p3.1"></span>Hebrews aux
matins.” “Hebrews at the mornings.” — *Fr* *marg* Courts of judicature
for the execution of public justice were wont to be held in the morning
in ancient times, as they are still with us, or at least began then, and
continued till the evening. Hugo Grotius and others think there is here
an allusion to these courts. “To this,” says Hammond, “most probably
<span id="x.ii-p3.2"></span>לבקרים in the plural, *in the mornings*,
here refers, the season wherein David, as a judge entering the tribunal,
*destroys* and *cuts* off the wicked doers. The former part of the psalm
contains his resolution for choice of counsellors and officers of state,
preferring the plain, honest, and not the subtlest contrivers; and this
last for the execution of justice, discountenancing and judicially
*cutting off all wicked men*.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 102](cc11010)
