[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc11016)  [Next](cc11018.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 11: Psalms, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii"></span>

<span id="xviii-p1"></span>PSALM 109

<span id="xviii-p2"></span>This psalm consists of three parts. It begins
with a complaint; next follows an enumeration of various imprecations;
and then comes a prayer with an expression of true gratitude. And
although David here complains of the injuries which he sustained, yet,
as he was a typical character, everything that is expressed in the psalm
must properly be applied to Christ, the Head of the Church, and to all
the faithful, inasmuch as they are his members; so that when unjustly
treated and tormented by their enemies, they may apply to God for help,
to whom vengeance belongs.  <span id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293.md)

<span id="xviii.i"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p1"></span><span id="xviii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
109:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#001.md)<span id="xviii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p2"></span>To the Chief Musician, a Psalm of David.

<span id="xviii.i-p3"></span>**1.** O God of my praise! be not silent;
**2.** Because the mouth of the wicked and the mouth of deceit are
opened upon me: they have spoken against me with the tongue of guile.
**3.** And they have encompassed me with the words of hatred, and have
contended with me without cause. **4.** On account of my love they have
been opposed to me; but I gave myself to prayer. **5.** They rendered to
me evil for good, and hatred for love.

<span id="xviii.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.i-p5"></span><span id="xviii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p6"></span>**1** *O God of my praise! be not silent*
In these words, which may be considered as an introduction to the psalm,
David declares that he neither could find nor would desire any other
than God to stand forward in vindication of the integrity of his heart.
For in denominating him *the God of his praise,* he intrusts to him the
vindication of his innocence, in the face of the calumnies by which he
was all but universally assailed. Some are of opinion that this clause
is to be understood as referring to David’s having actually declared
that he himself was the publisher of God’s praises; but the scope of the
passage is opposed to such an interpretation; for we find David
appealing to the judgment of God against the unjust and cruel hatred to
which he was subjected in the world. There is in the words an implied
contrast, because, when calumny is rampant, innocence is duly and
properly estimated by none but God only. The meaning of the passage is
this: Lord, although I may be regarded as the vilest of the vile, and
exposed to the reproach of the world, yet thou wilt maintain the
uprightness of my character, and on this account thou wilt also set
forth my praise.  <span id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294.md) This
interpretation corresponds well with that which is immediately
subjoined, *be not silent* For when we are overwhelmed by the aspersions
of the wicked, it would surely be improper on the part of God, who is
the witness of our innocence, to remain silent. At the same time, what I
formerly stated must not be forgotten, that while David mourns over the
injuries which he in particular was suffering, yet, in his own person,
he represented Christ, and the whole body of his Church. From this we
are taught, when we are subjected to every species of indignity by men,
to repose with perfect confidence under the protection of God alone. No
man, however, can, with sincerity of heart, surrender himself entirely
into the hand of God, except he has first formed the resolution of
treating with contempt the reproaches of the world, and is also fully
persuaded that he has God as the defender of his cause.

<span id="xviii.i-p8"></span><span id="xviii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p9"></span>**2** *Because the mouth of the wicked*
David here very plainly declares, that he was the more solicitous to
obtain help from God, in consequence of justice not being found among
men. And though it is probable that he was rashly and furiously
assailed, nevertheless, he complains that the mouth of deceit and fraud
had been opened against him, and that he was surrounded with false
tongues. Whence, to those who were ignorant of his real situation, there
would appear to be some plausible pretext for his being loaded with
reproaches, so much so indeed, that he would not be able to evade the
charge of criminality.

<span id="xviii.i-p10"></span><span id="xviii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p11"></span>**3** *And they have encompassed me* He
complains, that from all quarters he was assailed with the most hostile
and abusive epithets, and that, too, most undeservedly. And, under a
beautiful similitude, he shows that the tongues of his enemies were so
full of deadly poison, that it was harder for him to endure their
attacks than that of a great army, and the more so that he merited no
such treatment at their hands. This species of warfare, to the exercise
of which God very frequently summons his children, must be carefully
considered by us. For though Satan may assault them with open violence,
yet as he is the father of lies, he endeavors, by the amazing dexterity
which he possesses in heaping calumny upon them, to tarnish their
reputation, as if they were the most abandoned of mankind. Now, as that
which was prefigured by David was fulfilled in Christ, so we must
remember, that that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ is
daily filling up in believers, <span id="xviii.i-p11.1"></span>[Col
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#024.md)<span id="xviii.i-p11.1"></span>;
because, he having once suffered in himself, calls them to be sharers
and associates with him in his sufferings.

<span id="xviii.i-p12"></span><span id="xviii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p13"></span>**4** *On account of my love they have
been opposed to me*  <span id="fr_295"></span>[296](#fn_295.md) The
Psalmist had already solemnly declared, that his adversaries, unprovoked
by any injury inflicted upon them by him, and without any just cause,
became, through mere diabolical rage, his most implacable foes. Here he
confirms the truth of that declaration by saying, that he had been their
friend. For there is far more merit in showing kindness to an enemy than
simply abstaining from doing that which is evil. And from this we may
perceive, that the influence of Satan must be awfully powerful when he
takes the hearts of men captive at his will. For nothing can be more
unnatural than to hate and cruelly persecute those who love us. To
*love* he also adds deeds of kindness, meaning, that it was his aim to
secure their good will by outward acts of beneficence.

<span id="xviii.i-p15"></span><span id="xviii.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p16"></span>**5** *But I gave myself to prayer*  <span
id="fr_296"></span>[297](#fn_296.md) Some are of opinion, that these words
refer to David’s pouring out a prayer for his enemies at the very moment
when they were furiously assaulting him, and with this opinion
corresponds that which we have stated in <span
id="xviii.i-p17.2"></span>[Ps
35:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#013.md)<span id="xviii.i-p17.2"></span>.
But the more plain, and, to me, the preferable interpretation, is, that
when he was attacked in a cruel and hostile manner, he did not betake
himself to such unlawful means as the rendering of evil for evil, but
committed himself into the hand of God, fully satisfied that he alone
could guard him from all ill. And it is assuredly a great and desirable
attainment for a man so to restrain his passions as directly and
immediately to make his appeal to God’s tribunal, at the very time when
he is abused without a cause, and when the very injuries which he
sustains are calculated to excite him to avenge them. For there are some
persons who, while it is their aim to live in terms of friendship with
the good, coming in contact with ill men, imagine that they are at
perfect liberty to return injury for injury; and to this temptation all
the godly feel that they are liable. The Holy Spirit, however, restrains
us, so that though oftimes provoked by the cruelty of our enemies to
seek revenge, we yet abandon all fraudulent and violent means, and
betake ourselves by prayer to God alone. By this example, which David
here sets before us, we are instructed that we must have recourse to the
same means if we would wish to overcome our enemies through the power
and protection of God. In <span id="xviii.i-p17.3"></span>[Ps
69:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#013.md)<span id="xviii.i-p17.3"></span>,
we have a parallel passage: “They that sit in the gate spake against me;
and I was the song of those who drink strong drink. But my prayer was
made to thee, O Jehovah!” In that passage, as well as in the one under
review, the mode of expression is elliptical. Besides, it is the design
of David in these words to inform us, that although he was aware that
the whole world was opposed to him, yet he could cast all his cares upon
God, and this was enough to render his mind calm and composed. And as
the Holy Spirit taught David and all the godly to offer up prayers like
these, it must follow, that those who, in this respect, imitate them,
will be promptly helped by God when he beholds them reproachfully and
vilely persecuted.

<span id="xviii.ii"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xviii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
109:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#006.md)<span
id="xviii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p2"></span>**6.** Set  <span
id="fr_297"></span>[298](#fn_297.md) thou over him a wicked person; and let
the adversary stand at his right hand. **7.** When he is judged, let him
depart guilty, and let his prayer be turned into sin.  <span
id="fr_298"></span>[299](#fn_298.md) **8.** Let his days be few:  <span
id="fr_299"></span>[300](#fn_299.md) and let another receive his office.
**9.** Let his children be fatherless, and his wife a widow: **10.** And
 <span id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300.md) let his children wander without
any settled habitation, and let them be beggars, and let them seek food
out of their waste places.  <span id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301.md)
**11.** Let the extortioner  <span id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302.md)
seize  <span id="fr_303"></span>[304](#fn_303.md) all that belongs to him,
and let strangers spoil his labor.

<span id="xviii.ii-p12"></span> 

<span id="xviii.ii-p13"></span><span id="xviii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p14"></span>**6** *Set thou over him a wicked
person.*  <span id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304.md) Hitherto he poured out
his complaint against a vast number of persons; now he seems to direct
it against a single individual. Probably he speaks of each of them
individually. It is, however, equally probable that he refers in very
marked terms to some one in particular among these wicked persons, the
most notorious transgressor of any of them. Some conjecture, and not
without reason, that Doeg is the person here aimed at, who, by his
treason and revolt, sought to bring ruin, not only upon David, but also
upon all the holy priests; and we know that this psalm is applied by
Peter to Judas, (<span id="xviii.ii-p19.4"></span>[Ac
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#020)<span id="xviii.ii-p19.4"></span>.md)
But with equal propriety, and certainly not less forcibly, may this
complaint be considered as applicable to some most intimate and
particular friend of the Psalmist. Respecting the imprecations contained
in this psalm, it will be proper to keep in mind what I have said
elsewhere, that when David forms such maledictions, or expresses his
desires for them, he is not instigated by any immoderate carnal
propensity, nor is he actuated by zeal without knowledge, nor is he
influenced by any private personal considerations. These three matters
must be carefully weighed, for in proportion to the amount of
self-esteem which a man possesses, is he so enamoured with his own
interests as to rush headlong upon revenge. Hence it comes to pass, that
the more a person is devoted to selfishness, he will be the more
immoderately addicted to the advancement of his own individual
interests. This desire for the promotion of personal interest gives
birth to another species of vice. For no one wishes to be avenged upon
his enemies because that such a thing would be right and equitable, but
because it is the means of gratifying his own spiteful propensity. Some,
indeed, make a pretext of righteousness and equity in the matter, but
the spirit of malignity, by which they are inflamed, effaces every trace
of justice, and blinds their minds.

<span id="xviii.ii-p20"></span>When these two vices, selfishness and
carnality, are corrected, there is still another thing demanding
correction, the repressing the ardor of foolish zeal, in order that we
may follow the Spirit of God as our guide. Should any one, under the
influence of perverse zeal, produce David as an example of it, that
would not be an example in point; for to such a person may be very aptly
applied the answer which Christ returned to his disciples, “Ye know not
what spirit ye are of,” <span id="xviii.ii-p20.1"></span>[Lu
9:55](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#055.md)<span id="xviii.ii-p20.1"></span>.
How detestable a piece of sacrilege is it on the part of the monks, and
especially the Franciscan friars, to pervert this psalm by employing it
to countenance the most nefarious purposes! If a man harbour malice
against a neighbor, it is quite a common thing for him to engage one of
these wicked wretches to curse him, which he would do by daily repeating
this psalm. I know a lady in France who hired a parcel of these friars
to curse her own and only son in these words.

<span id="xviii.ii-p21"></span>But I return to David, who, free from all
inordinate passion, breathed forth his prayers under the influence of
the Holy Spirit. Then, as to the ungodly, who live as the contemners of
God, and who are constantly plotting the overthrow of the unsuspecting
and the good, casting off all restraint, so that neither modesty nor
honesty proves a check to them, surely they are deserving of the
punishment of *having a wicked person set over them* And since, by means
of intrigue and perfidy, they are constantly aiming at the extermination
of the good, they are most justly punished by God, who raises up against
them an adversary that should never depart from their side. Only let
believers be on their guard, lest they should betray too much haste in
their prayers, and let them rather leave room for the grace of God to
manifest itself in their behalf; because it may turn out that the man,
who to-day bears towards us a deadly enmity, may by to-morrow through
that grace become our friend.

<span id="xviii.ii-p22"></span><span id="xviii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p23"></span>**7** *When he is judged, let him depart
guilty* Another imprecation is, that, being summoned to judgment, he
might be punished without mercy, and that, though he humbly crave
forgiveness, the judge should remain inexorable. This might with
propriety be understood to relate not merely to his being judged at the
bar of men, but also at the tribunal of God. But as it accords very well
with the decisions awarded by an earthly judge, and as this is the
commonly received interpretation, I have no wish to depart from it.
There are two things which must be noticed here; that the wickedness of
the wicked may be so palpable as to leave no room to escape from the
execution of justice, and that all their entreaties for pardon may be
disregarded. Accordingly, the Psalmist represents him as a condemned
criminal leaving the presence of the judge, bearing the ignominy of the
condemnation which he righteously merited, having his nefarious deeds
disclosed and detected. With respect to the other interpretation which
places the ungodly before God’s judgment-seat, it by no means appears
absurd to say that their prayers should be turned against them to sin,
the more especially as we know that all their sacrifices are an
abomination unto him. And by how much they themselves are filthy, by so
much do all their plausible virtues become offensive and displeasing to
God. But as the scope of the passage is in favor of that interpretation
which applies it to earthly judges, I do not consider it necessary to
insist farther upon this point.

<span id="xviii.ii-p24"></span><span id="xviii.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p25"></span>**8** *Let his days be few* Although this
world is the scene of much toil and trouble, yet we know that these are
pledges and proofs of God’s loving-kindness, inasmuch as he frequently,
and as a token of his love, promises to prolong the lives of men; not
that it is absolutely necessary for us to remain long here, but that we
may have an opportunity of sharing of God’s fatherly love which he bears
towards us, by which we may be led to cherish the hope of immortality.
Now, in opposition to this, the brevity of human life is here introduced
as a mark of God’s disapprobation; for when he cuts off the wicked after
a violent manner, he thus testifies that they did not deserve to breathe
the breath of life. And the same sentiment is inculcated when, denuding
them of their honor and dignity, he hurls them from the place of power
and authority. The same thing may also happen to the children of God,
for temporal evils are common to the good and to the bad; at the same
time, these are never so mingled and blended together, but that one may
perceive occasionally the judgments of God in a very manifest and marked
manner. Peter, quoting this verse, <span id="xviii.ii-p25.1"></span>[Ac
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#020.md)<span id="xviii.ii-p25.1"></span>,
says it behoved to be fulfilled in Judas, because it is written here,
“let another take his bishopric.” And this, he does on the assumed
principle of interpretation that David here spoke in the person of
Christ. To this it cannot be objected, that the Hebrew term <span
id="xviii.ii-p25.2"></span>פקודה, *pekudah,* signifies generally
*superintendence,*  <span id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305.md) because
Peter very properly applies it to the apostleship of Judas. In
expounding this passage, sometimes in reference to a wife, or to the
soul, (which is a precious jewel in man,) or to wealth and property,
there is good reason to believe that, in doing so, the Jewish
interpreters are actuated by pure malice. What purpose can it serve to
pervert the sense of a word, the meaning of which is so pointed and
plain, unless that, under the influence of a malignant spirit, they
endeavor so to obscure the passage, as to make it appear not to be
properly quoted by Peter? From these words we learn, that there is no
cause why the ungodly should be proud while their reputation is high in
this world, seeing they cannot after all escape from that doom which the
Holy Spirit here declares awaits them. Here too we are furnished with
very valuable matter of comfort and patience, when we hear that, however
elevated may be their rank and reputation now, their downfall is
approaching, and that they will soon be stript of all their pomp and
power. In the two succeeding verses the malediction is extended both to
the wife and children; and the desire, that she may be left a widow and
they become fatherless, depends upon the brevity of that life to which
the prophet formerly adverted. Mention is likewise made of *beggary,*
and the want of all the necessaries of life, which is a proof of the
magnitude of their guilt; for assuredly the Holy Spirit would not
denounce against them a punishment so grievous and heavy for a trivial
offense. In delivering up his property  <span
id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306.md) as booty to the *extortioners,* David
must be understood as alluding to the poverty which was to overtake his
children; for he is not speaking of a poor and mean person who at his
death can leave nothing to his family, but of one who, regardless of
right or wrong, has amassed wealth to enrich his children, but from whom
God takes away the goods which he had unrighteously taken from others.

<span id="xviii.iii"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xviii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
109:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#012.md)<span
id="xviii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p2"></span>**12.** Let there be none prolonging
mercy to him: and let there be none to pity his fatherless children.
**13.** Let his posterity be cut off; in the next generation let their
name be effaced. **14.** Let the iniquity of his fathers be remembered
before Jehovah; and let not the sin of his mother be blotted out.
**15.** Let them be before Jehovah continually, and let him cut off
their memorial from the earth.  <span id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307.md)
**16.** Because he forgot to show mercy, but persecuted the afflicted
and poor man, and the sorrowful in heart, that he might slay him.

<span id="xviii.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.iii-p5"></span><span id="xviii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p6"></span>**12** *Let there be none prolonging
mercy to him.* To continue to show humanity and mercy is, according to
the Hebrew idiom, equivalent to constant and successive acts of
kindness; and it also sometimes denotes pity, or the being moved to
sympathy, when, through the lapse of years, anger is appeased, and even
one’s calamity melts the heart of the man who bore hatred towards him.
 <span id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308.md) Accordingly, there are some who
understand this clause to mean, that there will be none to show kindness
to his offspring; which interpretation is in conformity with the next
clause of the verse. David, however, includes also the wicked man
himself along with his children; as if he should say, Though he visibly
pine away under such calamities, and these descend to his children, yet
let no one show pity towards them. We are aware it not unfrequently
happens, that the long-continued misfortune of an enemy either excites
the sympathy of men of savage dispositions, or else makes them forget
all their hatred and malevolence. But in this part of the psalm, David
expresses a desire that his enemy and all his posterity may be so hated
and detested, that the people may never be wearied with beholding the
calamities which they endure, but may become so familiarised with the
spectacle, as if their hearts were of iron. At the same time, let it be
remarked, that David is not rashly excited by any personal anguish to
speak in this manner, but that it is as God’s messenger he declares the
punishment which was impending over the ungodly. And verily the law
accounts it as one of the judgments of God, his hardening men’s hearts,
so that they who have been passionately and unmercifully cruel, should
find no sympathy, <span id="xviii.iii-p7.2"></span>[De
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#030.md)<span id="xviii.iii-p7.2"></span>.
It is just that the same measure which they have used towards others,
should also be meted out to themselves.

<span id="xviii.iii-p8"></span><span id="xviii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p9"></span>**13.** *Let his posterity be cut off.*
This is a continuation of the same subject, upon the consideration of
which the prophet had just now entered, that God would visit the
iniquities of the fathers upon their children. And as he had to deal
with the whole court of Saul, and not with any single individual, he
here employs the plural number. But as in deeds of wickedness, there are
always some who are the prime movers, and act as the ringleaders of
others, we need not be surprised that having spoken of one person, he
next addresses the many, and then returns to the same person. The more
natural and simple mode of explanation is to refer it to his offspring,
for the Hebrew term which signifies *posterity* is collective, implying
a multitude, and not a single individual only. This is a heavier
imprecation than the former. It sometimes happens, that a family,
overthrown by an unexpected disaster, rises up again at a subsequent
period; here, however, it is the wish of the prophet, that the wicked
may be so completely ruined, as never to be able to regain their former
state; for thus much is implied in *their name being effaced in the next
generation,* or after the lapse of ages.

<span id="xviii.iii-p10"></span><span id="xviii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p11"></span>And as the destruction which he
denounces against the houses and families of the wicked is so extensive,
that God punishes them in the person of their posterity, so he desires
that *God may remember the iniquities of their fathers and mothers,* in
order that their condemnation may be complete; and this is a principle
in perfect accordance with the commonly received doctrine of Scripture.
God, out of regard to his covenant, which is in force to a thousand
generations, extends and continues his mercy towards posterity; but he
also punishes iniquity unto the third and fourth generation. In doing
this he does not involve the guiltless with the wicked indiscriminately,
but by withholding from the reprobate the grace and illumination of his
Spirit, he prepares the vessels of wrath for destruction, even before
they are born, <span id="xviii.iii-p11.1"></span>[Ro
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#021.md)<span
id="xviii.iii-p11.1"></span>. To the common sense of mankind, the
thought of such severity is horrifying: but then we must recollect, that
if we attempt to measure the secret and inscrutable judgments of God by
our finite minds, we do him wrong. Struck with horror at the severity of
this threatening, let us improve it as the means of filling us with
reverence and godly fear. In reference to the language of Ezekiel,

<span id="xviii.iii-p12"></span>“The son shall not bear the iniquity of
the father, but the soul that sinneth, it shall die;” <span
id="xviii.iii-p12.1"></span>[Eze
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#020.md)<span
id="xviii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p13"></span>we know that in these words he disproves
the groundless complaints of the people, who, boasting that they were
guiltless, imagined that they were punished wrongfully. When, however,
God continues his vengeance from the father to the children, he leaves
them no room for palliation or complaint, because they are all equally
guilty. We have already said, that vengeance commences when God in
withdrawing his Spirit, both from the children and the fathers, delivers
them over to Satan. Some may inquire how it comes to pass, that the
prophet, in desiring that their *sin may be continually before God’s
eyes,* does not likewise add, let their name be blotted out from heaven,
but merely wishes them *to be cut off, and to perish in the world?* My
reply is, that he spoke agreeably to the custom of the age in which he
lived, when the nature of spiritual punishments was not so well
understood as in our times, because the period had not yet arrived, when
the revelation of God’s will was to be full and complete. Besides, it is
the design of David, that the vengeance of God may be so manifest, that
the whole world may acquiesce in his equity as a judge.

<span id="xviii.iii-p14"></span><span id="xviii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p15"></span>**16.** *Because he forgot to show
mercy* The prophet comes now to show that he had good reason for
desiring such awful and direful calamities to be inflicted upon his
enemies, whose thirst for cruelty was insatiable, and who were
transported with rage, no less cruel than obstinate, against the
afflicted and poor man, persecuting him with as little scruple as if
they were attacking a dead dog. Even philosophers look upon cruelty,
directed against the helpless and miserable, as an act worthy only of a
cowardly and grovelling nature; for it is between equals that envy is
cherished. For this reason the prophet represents the malignity of his
enemies as being bitter in persecuting him when he was in *affliction
and poverty.* The expression, *the sorrowful in heart,* is still more
emphatic. For there are persons who, notwithstanding of their
afflictions, are puffed up with pride; and as this conduct is
unreasonable and unnatural, these individuals incur the displeasure of
the powerful. On the other hand, it would be a sign of desperate cruelty
to treat with contempt the lowly and dejected in heart. Would not this
be to fight with a shadow? This insatiable cruelty is still farther
pointed out by the phrase, *forgetting to show mercy;* the meaning of
which is, that the calamities, with which he beheld this guiltless and
miserable man struggling, fail to excite his pity, so that, out of
regard to the common lot of humanity, he should lay aside his savage
disposition. In this passage, therefore, the contrast is equally
balanced on the one side between such obstinate pride, and on the other,
the strict and irrevocable judgment of God. And as David spoke only as
he was moved by the Holy Spirit, this imprecation must be received as if
God himself should thunder from his celestial throne. Thus, in the one
case, by denouncing vengeance against the ungodly, he subdues and
restrains our perverse inclinations, which might lead us to injure a
fellow-creature; and on the other, by imparting comfort to us, he
mitigates and moderates our sorrow, so that we patiently endure the ills
which they inflict upon us. The wicked may for a time revel with
impunity in the gratification of their lusts; but this threatening shows
that it is no vain protection which God vouchsafes to the afflicted. But
let the faithful conduct themselves meekly, that their humility and
contrition of spirit may come up before God with acceptance. And as we
cannot distinguish between the elect and the reprobate, it is our duty
to pray for all who trouble us; to desire the salvation of all men; and
even to be careful for the welfare of every individual. At the same
time, if our hearts are pure and peaceful, this will not prevent us from
freely appealing to God’s judgment, that he may cut off the finally
impenitent.  <span id="fr_309"></span>[310](#fn_309.md)

<span id="xviii.iv"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xviii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
109:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#017.md)<span
id="xviii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p2"></span>**17.** As he loved cursing, so let it
come upon him:  <span id="fr_310"></span>[311](#fn_310.md) as he did not
take delight in blessing, so let it be far from him. **18.** And let him
be clothed with cursing as with a garment, and let it come as water into
his bowels, and as oil into his bones.  <span
id="fr_311"></span>[312](#fn_311.md) **19.** Let it be to him as a mantle
to cover him, and a girdle to gird himself with continually. **20.** Let
this be the work from Jehovah of those who are hostile to me, and of
those who speak evil against my soul.

<span id="xviii.iv-p5"></span> 

<span id="xviii.iv-p6"></span><span id="xviii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p7"></span>**17** *As he loved cursing* David still
continues to enumerate the sins of his adversaries, and is thus severe
in his treatment of them, in order to render it more apparent, that he
is strictly conforming to the judgment of God. For as often as we draw
near to the tribunal of God, we must take care that the equity of our
cause may be so sure and evident as to secure for it and us a favorable
reception from him. Fortified by the testimony of an approving
conscience, David here declares his readiness to commit the matter
between him and his enemies to the judgment of God. The words, which are
expressive of cursing and blessing, are in the past tense, *cursing came
upon him, and blessing was far from him,* but it is necessary to
translate them as expressive of a wish or desire; for David continues to
pray that his enemy may be visited with the same unparalleled ills which
he had inflicted upon others. A stranger to every act of kindness, and
taking pleasure in doing evil, it is the wish of the Psalmist that he
may now be subjected to every species of calamity. Some take
*malediction* to mean *cursing and imprecation,* thereby intimating that
this man was so addicted to execration, that mischief and malevolence
were constantly in his heart, and proceeding from his lips. While I do
not reject this opinion, I am yet disposed to take a more extended view
of the passage, That by injury and abuse, he aimed at the suppression
and abolition of every mark of kindness, and that he took delight in the
calamities which he beheld coming upon the unsuspecting and the good.

<span id="xviii.iv-p8"></span><span id="xviii.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p9"></span>Not a few interpreters translate the next
two verses in the past form, *he clothed himself with cursing, etc.,*
which would be tantamount to saying that the enemy was as fond of
cursing as of costly apparel, or that he clothed himself with it as with
a garment, and that, like an inveterate disease, it was deeply seated in
the marrow of his bones. The other interpretation is more simple, That
cursing should cleave to the wicked, that it should envelop him like a
cloak, gird him about as his girdle, and should even penetrate to his
bones. And that no one may rashly take for an example what David here
spoke by the special influence of the Holy Spirit, let him keep in mind
that the Psalmist is not pleading here in reference to any personal
interest, and that it is no ordinary character to whom he refers.
Belonging to the number of the faithful, he would not omit the law of
charity, in desiring the salvation of all men. But in this instance God
elevated his spirit above all earthly considerations, stript him of all
malice, and delivered him from the influence of turbulent passion, so
that he might, with holy calmness and spiritual wisdom, doom the
reprobate and castaway to destruction. Others, would have the phrase,
*he loved cursing,* to mean that he purposely drew down the vengeance of
God upon himself, as it were procuring destruction for himself by his
open hostility to him; but this is an unnatural construction of the
passage. The interpretation which I have given is preferable, That he
was so addicted to mischief and wrong, that no act of justice or
kindness was to be expected from him. In the meantime, let it be
observed, that all the machinations of the wicked will eventually recoil
upon their own heads, and that when they are raging more violently
against others, then it is that the mischief, which they so eagerly
desire may come upon them, falls upon themselves, even as the wind
called Cecias by blowing attracts the clouds unto him.

<span id="xviii.iv-p10"></span><span id="xviii.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p11"></span>**20** *Let this be the work from
Jehovah.* That is, let the gain or reward of the work be from God. In
pointing out the work as proceeding immediately from God, he intends to
show that, though deprived of all human aid, he yet entertained the hope
that God would grant him deliverance, and avenge the injuries of his
servant. From this verse we learn that David did not rashly, or
unadvisedly, utter curses against his enemies, but strictly adhered to
what the Spirit dictated. I acknowledge, indeed, that not a few, while
they pretend a similar confidence and hope, nevertheless, recklessly
rush beyond the bounds of temperance and moderation. But that which
David beheld by the unclouded eye of faith, he also uttered with a zeal
becoming a sound mind; for having devoted himself to the cultivation of
piety, and being protected by the hand of God, he was aware that the day
was approaching when his enemies would meet with merited punishment.
From which we also learn, that his trust was placed in God alone, and
that he did not regard the persons of men so as to direct his course
according as the world smiled or frowned upon him. And, assuredly,
whosoever places his dependence on men, shall find that the most
trifling incident will annoy him. Therefore, should the whole world
abandon us, it becomes us, in imitation of this holy man, to lift up our
heads to heaven, and thence look for our defender and deliverer. If it
be his intention to employ human instrumentality for our deliverance, he
will soon raise up those who will accomplish his purpose. Should he, for
the trial of our faith, deprive us of all earthly assistance, instead of
regarding that as any reflection upon the glory of his name, we ought to
wait until the proper time arrive when he will fully display that
decision in which we can calmly acquiesce.

<span id="xviii.v"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p1"></span><span id="xviii.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
109:21-27](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#021.md)<span
id="xviii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p2"></span>**21.** And thou, O Jehovah my Lord!
undertake for me, for thy name’s sake; deliver me, because thy mercy is
good; **22.** Because I am poor and needy, and my heart is wounded
within me. **23.** I walk about as a shadow when it declineth.  <span
id="fr_312"></span>[313](#fn_312.md) I am tossed as the locust.  <span
id="fr_313"></span>[314](#fn_313.md) **24.** My knees are become feeble
through fasting; and my flesh faileth of fatness. **25.** But I became a
reproach to them; when they see me they shake their head. **26.** Help
me, O Jehovah my God! save me according to thy mercy: **27.** And they
shall know that this is thy hand, and that thou, O Jehovah! hast done
it.

<span id="xviii.v-p5"></span> 

<span id="xviii.v-p6"></span><span id="xviii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p7"></span>**21** *And thou, O Jehovah my Lord!* From
the pouring out of complaints and imprecations against his enemies, the
Psalmist passes to prayers; or rather, after having betaken himself to
God as his guardian and deliverer, he appears to take occasion, from
this circumstance, to encourage himself in prayer; even as all the pious
reflections by which the faithful exercise and strengthen their faith,
stimulate them to call upon the name of God. At the same time, he does
not pique himself upon any service which he has rendered to God, as
deserving of his help, nor does he rely upon his own worthiness, but he
places all his confidence in the free grace and mercy of God. That
integrity of which he was conscious, he placed in opposition to his
enemies, for the purpose of making their iniquity more manifest; but he
does not aspire after any recompense from God, because he adopts the
nobler principle, that of owing every thing to God’s voluntary choice,
upon which also he acknowledges his safety depends. Were it lawful for
any one to boast of his virtues and merits, certainly David was not the
man who was least entitled to do so; and, moreover, he was the
representative of Christ, and of the whole Church. Hence it follows,
that all our prayers will vanish in smoke, unless they are grounded upon
the mercy of God. The case of Christ was indeed a peculiar one, inasmuch
as it was by his own righteousness that he appeased the wrath of his
Father towards us. As, however, his human nature was entirely dependant
on the good pleasure of God, so it was his will, by his own example, to
direct us to the same source. What can we do, seeing that the most
upright among us is constrained to acknowledge that he is chargeable
with the commission of much sin; surely we never can make God our
debtor? It follows, therefore, that God, on account of the benignity of
his nature, takes us under his protection; and that, because of the
goodness of his mercy, he desires his grace may shine forth in us. In
coming to God, we must always remember that we must possess the
testimony of a good conscience, and must beware of harbouring the
thought that we have any inherent righteousness which would render God
our debtor, or that we deserve any recompense at his hands. For if, in
the preservation of this short and frail life, God manifests the glory
of his name and of his goodness, how much more ought all confidence in
good works to be laid aside, when the subject-matter referred to is life
heavenly and eternal? If, in the prolonging of my life for a short time
on earth, his name is thereby glorified, by manifesting of his own
accord towards me his benignity and liberality; when, therefore, having
delivered me from the tyranny of Satan, he adopts me into his family,
washes away my impurity in the blood of Christ, regenerates me by his
Holy Spirit, unites me to his Son, and conducts me to the life of
heaven, — then, assuredly, the more bountifully he treats me, the less
should I be disposed to arrogate to myself any portion of the praise.
How different a part does David act, who, in order to procure favor for
himself, publishes his own poverty and misery? And as outward affliction
is of no avail, unless a man, at the same time, be humbled, and his
proud and rebellious spirit be subdued, the Psalmist here repeats, that
his heart was wounded within him. From which we may learn, that God will
be a physician to none, except to such as in the spirit of genuine
humility send up their sighs and groans to him, and do not become
hardened under their afflictions.

<span id="xviii.v-p8"></span><span id="xviii.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p9"></span>**23** *I walk about as a shadow.* These
are two very appropriate similitudes: to the first of them I formerly
adverted in <span id="xviii.v-p9.1"></span>[Ps
102:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#012.md)<span id="xviii.v-p9.1"></span>;
namely, that the afflicted person, and he who is almost lifeless, is
very fitly compared to the shadow of the evening. At sunrise, or when he
is shining in noon-day brightness, the constant shifting of the shadow
is not so perceptible; but, towards sunset, the shadow flits before us
during every moment that passes. By the other similitude, the transitory
nature of all sublunary things is pointed out. For as the locusts are
constantly skipping from one place to another, so David complains of his
life being ever rendered uneasy by incessant persecution, so that no
space was allowed him for repose; and this is similar to what he says in
<span id="xviii.v-p9.2"></span>[Ps
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001.md)<span id="xviii.v-p9.2"></span>,
that he was compelled to flee like a sparrow, for which the fowler lays
snares in all directions. In short, he mourns over his forlorn
situation, that he could find no place of safety, and that, even among
men, he could get no habitation. And, as in this psalm, he presents us
with a picture of the whole Church, we need not be surprised if God try
us, and arouse us from our lethargy, by an innumerable variety of
events. Accordingly, Paul, <span id="xviii.v-p9.3"></span>[1Co
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#011.md)<span id="xviii.v-p9.3"></span>,
speaking of himself and others, says, that they have no certain
dwelling-place; a description which is more or less applicable to all
the children of God.

<span id="xviii.v-p10"></span><span id="xviii.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p11"></span>**24** *My knees are become feeble.*
Though David had the necessaries of life, yet he emaciated himself by
voluntary abstinence, to which, as well as to prayer, he gave himself,
and therefore we may regard this verse as expressive of his sorrow and
sadness. We may also understand it as expressive of his having no relish
for meat or drink, knowing, as we do, that persons who are in sorrow and
sadness have no appetite for food; even life itself is burdensome to
them. Should any one prefer restricting the interpretation to David’s
being in want of the necessaries of life, when he hid himself in the
dens of wild beasts, to escape the fury of his enemies, and was then
subjected to hunger and thirst, he may do so. It appears to me, however,
that by this language he intends to point out the extreme anguish which
he felt, because, with death staring him in the face, he loathed all
food; and this is in accordance with the next clause, in which he says,
my *flesh faileth of fatness;* because “a sorrowful spirit drieth up the
bones,” (<span id="xviii.v-p11.1"></span>[Pr
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#022)<span id="xviii.v-p11.1"></span>.md)
By the term, fatness, some understand delicacies; meaning that he was
deprived of all that food which is pleasing to the palate. The more
natural way is to consider it as denoting his becoming emaciated by
reason of grief and fasting, inasmuch as the natural moisture was
wasted. Another proof of his sad situation arises from this, that,
according to what he states in <span id="xviii.v-p11.2"></span>[Ps
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#007.md)<span id="xviii.v-p11.2"></span>,
he was held in scorn by all. It is, indeed, a sad and bitter thing which
God’s children endure, when they are made to feel that the curse which
he denounces against the transgressors of his law is directed against
themselves; for the law says to the despisers of it,

<span id="xviii.v-p12"></span>“Thou shalt become an astonishment, a
proverb, and laughing-stock,” (<span id="xviii.v-p12.1"></span>[De
28:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#037)<span id="xviii.v-p12.1"></span>.md)

<span id="xviii.v-p13"></span>With this species of temptation David was
assailed; and he declares that he was not only regarded as a condemned
person, but also cruelly derided; God at the same time coming in for a
share of it; for it is usual with the ungodly to conduct themselves with
insolence and pride towards us when they see us oppressed under
afflictions, and, at the same time, to rail at our faith and piety,
because God renders us no help in our miseries.

<span id="xviii.v-p14"></span><span id="xviii.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p15"></span>**26** *Help me, O Jehovah!* The prophet
repeats his prayer, because the more we are assailed by the subtilty and
deceit of Satan, the more necessary is it for us to strive more
ardently, and display the greater boldness. We may, indeed, have the
full assurance of God being propitious towards us, yet when he delays to
manifest it, and when the ungodly slander us, it must be that various
doubts which keep intruding themselves upon us arise in our minds.
Hence, it is not without reason that David, in order that he might
withstand such attacks, places himself under the protection of that God
who, according to his mercy and goodness, helps his people in their time
of need. He implores that deliverance may be extended to him, not by
ordinary means, but by the peculiar and special display of God’s power,
so that his enemies may stand abashed, and not dare to open their
mouths; and we know that God sometimes secretly grants succor to his
servants, while, at other times, he stretches out his hand in such a
visible manner, that the ungodly, though they shut their eyes, are
constrained to acknowledge that there is divine agency connected with
their deliverance. For as his enemies had exalted themselves against
God, so it was his desire, after they shall have been subdued, to exult
over them in the name of God. In cherishing this desire, he has no wish
to procure for himself the renown of being valiant in war, but that
God’s power may be displayed, that no flesh may glory in his sight. The
words may also be viewed as referring both to his deliverance from his
enemies, and to his affliction; his desire being to attribute his
deliverance mainly to the grace of God; because, in opposing the hand of
God to fortune and to all human means of deliverance, it is plainly his
intention that God should be recognised as the alone author of it. This
deserves to be carefully considered by us, for however anxious we are to
be delivered by the hand of God, yet there is scarcely one among a
hundred who makes the manifestation of God’s glory his chief end; that
glory for which we ought to have a greater regard than for our own
safety, because it is far more excellent. Whosoever then is desirous
that the ungodly may be constrained to acknowledge the power of God,
ought the more carefully to take heed to the help of God which in his
own case he experiences; for it would be most absurd to point out the
hand of God to others, if our minds have not recognised it.

<span id="xviii.vi"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p1"></span><span id="xviii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
109:28-31](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#028.md)<span
id="xviii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p2"></span>**28.** They shall curse, but thou shalt
bless: when they arise, they shall be put to shame; but thy servant
shall rejoice. **29.** My adversaries shall be clothed with shame, and
covered with their own confusion, as with a garment. **30.** I will
praise Jehovah greatly with my mouth; and I will extol him in the midst
of the great,  <span id="fr_314"></span>[315](#fn_314.md) **31.** Because
he standeth at the right hand of the poor, to deliver his soul from
condemnations.  <span id="fr_315"></span>[316](#fn_315.md)

<span id="xviii.vi-p5"></span> 

<span id="xviii.vi-p6"></span><span id="xviii.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p7"></span>**28.** *They shall curse.* Interpreters
are divided in their opinions about the meaning of these words. One
class would render them as expressive of a desire or wish: *Let them
curse, provided that thou bless: let them arise, and be clothed with
confusion* Another class, and with them I readily agree, adopt the
future tense of the indicative mood, *They shall curse, etc.* Should any
prefer to understand the passage as indicating, on the part of the
Psalmist, his resolution to suffer and submit to the curses of his
enemies, I do not oppose their interpretation. In my opinion, however,
those who view the words as a prayer, misinterpret them; because David,
having already presented his petitions to God, and being secure in his
favor, seems now rather to boast that their cursing will do him no harm;
for Thou, says he, wilt bless me. By this means, he proves how little
and how lightly he regarded the menaces of his enemies, though they
might assail him by the poison of the tongue, and the power of the
sword. From the example of David, let us learn to form the resolution of
engaging God on our side, who can baffle all the designs of our enemies,
and inspire us with courage to set at defiance their malice, wickedness,
audacity, power, and fury.

<span id="xviii.vi-p8"></span>And then, indeed, it is that the
loving-kindness of God appears, when it banishes from our minds the
fears which we entertain of the threatenings of the world. Therefore,
relying upon the grace of God, boldly setting at nought the machinations
and attacks of his enemies, believing that they could not prevail
against God’s blessing, David raises the shout of triumph even in the
midst of the battle. This truth is still more impressively inculcated in
the succeeding clause of the verse: *Though they arise, yet shall they
be put to shame.* By these words it is obviously his design to intimate
that the ungovernable violence of his enemies is not yet subdued, but
that he can endure all their fury and foam so long as the hand of God is
stretched forth to maintain and defend him; and thus he animates and
fortifies himself against all the pride of the world, and, at the same
time, by his example emboldens all the faithful, so that they do not
feel dejected even when the perverseness of their enemies seems to get
the advantage over them, and to menace them with instant destruction.
Cherishing such a hope, he trusts that, for the future, he shall be
delivered from all his sorrows. Whence let us learn to bear patiently
and meekly our trials, until the fit season and the full time, which God
hath appointed, arrive for turning our weeping into joy. In the
following verse he proceeds in the same strain of exultation, because,
though he beholds the ungodly assuming a lofty air, yet, looking beyond
the present state of things with the eye of faith, he entertains no
doubt that God will frustrate all their designs, and pour contempt upon
all their schemes.

<span id="xviii.vi-p9"></span><span id="xviii.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p10"></span>**30.** *I will praise Jehovah greatly
with my mouth* These words clearly establish the truth of the
observation I formerly made, that David does not pray God to curse his
enemies, but, by the holy boldness of his faith, sets them at defiance;
for he prepares to offer up a tribute of gratitude to God, as if he had
already realised the object of his desire. The phrase*, with my mouth,*
is not, as some erroneously suppose, superfluous, but is to be
considered as a public acknowledgement, on his part, of his thanksgiving
to God for the deliverance vouchsafed to him; as if he should say, I
will, not only when alone and when no human eye beholds me, and in the
inward recesses of my heart, meditate upon the great goodness which I
have received from God, but also in the appointed sacrifice of praise
will I declare publicly, before men, how much I am indebted to his
grace. Agreeably to this meaning, he adds, *in the assembly of great,*
or of *many men;* for the term <span id="xviii.vi-p10.1"></span>רבים,
*rabbim,* is susceptible of being rendered both ways. I prefer rendering
it, *great men,* because it appears to me, that David refers to an
assembly of men of notable and noble rank. He declares that he will
acknowledge the goodness of God, not only in some obscure corner, but
also in the great assembly of the people, and among governors and those
of noble rank. In the celebration of God’s praises, there can be no
question that these must issue from the heart ere they be uttered by the
lips; at the same time, it would be an indication of great coldness, and
of want of fervor, did not the tongue unite with the heart in this
exercise. The reason why David makes mention of the tongue only is, that
he takes it for granted that, unless there be a pouring out of the heart
before God, those praises which reach no farther than the ear are vain
and frivolous; and, therefore, from the very bottom of his soul, he
pours forth his heart-felt gratitude in fervent strains of praise; and
this he does, from the same motives which ought to influence all the
faithful — the desire of mutual edification; for to act otherwise would
be to rob God of the honor which belongs to him.

<span id="xviii.vi-p11"></span><span id="xviii.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p12"></span>Moreover, he also subjoins the form in
which he rendered thanks; namely, *that God stood at the right hand of
the poor* By this language he intimates, that when God had apparently
forsaken and abandoned him, and stood far from him, even then he was
always near and ready to render him seasonable and needful help; and,
assuredly, his poverty and affliction gave some reason for suspecting
that he was forsaken of God, inasmuch as he then either withdrew or
concealed his loving-kindness. Notwithstanding of this seeming
departure, he acknowledges that, during his affliction and poverty, God
never ceased to be present to render him assistance. In saying *that he
was saved from the judges of his life,* he sets forth, in a still
stronger light, the very trying situation in which he was placed; his
having to deal with very formidable enemies, such as the king and the
princes of the realm, who, proudly presuming upon their grandeur and
greatness, and regarding his recovery hopeless, treated him as if he had
been a dead dog. It is my firm conviction, that in this passage he
complains both of the torturing cruelty of his enemies, and also that
his character had been unjustly aspersed by calumny and reproach; for we
know that he was borne down by the malignity and wickedness of those
who, being invested with authority, boastingly, yet falsely, pretended
that they wished to act as judges and as the executors of justice, which
plausible pretexts they adopt as a cloak for their iniquity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_293"></span>[294](cc11017.htm#fr_293.md) <span
id="xviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xviii-p3"></span> From the express application of a part of
this awfully prophetic poem to Judas by the Apostle Peter, (<span
id="xviii-p3.1"></span>[Ac 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#020.md)<span
id="xviii-p3.1"></span>) we learn that the punishment and sufferings of
that unhappy man form its subject. It has also been justly viewed as
shadowing forth, not merely the fate of the wretched Iscariot, and his
immediate associates, but the dreadful and justly-merited destiny of the
Jewish polity and nation. “The first five verses of this psalm,” says
Horsley, “clearly describe the treatment which our Lord met with from
the Jews. The curses that follow as clearly describe the judgments which
have fallen upon that miserable people. So that the whole is a
prediction of his sufferings, and of their punishment, delivered in the
form of complaint and imprecation.” Whatever, therefore, may be said as
to the primary reference of the psalm to the lamentations and
denunciations poured forth by David, in consequence of the perfidy and
cruelty of some inveterate foe, Christ must be principally understood as
the person who gives utterance to these lamentations and denunciations,
occasioned by the injurious treatment he received from his betrayer and
murderers. — See *Appendix.*

<span id="fn_294"></span>[295](cc11017.htm#fr_294.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p7"></span> The Septuagint and Vulgate attach the same
meaning to the Psalmist’s prayer. The reading of the former being, <span
id="xviii.i-p7.1"></span>Ω Θεὸς τὴν αἴνεσίν μου μὴ παρασιωπήσης, and
that of the latter, “<span id="xviii.i-p7.2"></span>Deus, laudem meam ne
tacueris,” *O* *God*! *be not silent of my praise.* The phrase, as it
stands in the Hebrew text, is, however, capable of a double
signification; for it may refer either to God’s praising David, or to
David’s praising God. In the one case, it will intimate that God was the
object of his praise; in which sense it is said, <span
id="xviii.i-p7.3"></span>[De
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#021.md)<span id="xviii.i-p7.3"></span>,
“He is thy praise, and He is thy God,” and will mean, Be not silent to
refuse, neglect not my praising of thee. In the other sense the prayer
is, as our author states, Whilst others reproach me, be not silent of my
praise, be thou my advocate, plead my causes, proclaim and justify my
innocence.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[296](cc11017.htm#fr_295.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p14"></span> “This expression,” says Hengstenberg,
“finds its full truth in Christ. Christ’s love to man was daily
manifested by his miraculous healing all the infirmities of the body,
which was returned by man’s hatred of Him, as displayed in his general
conduct.”

<span id="fn_296"></span>[297](cc11017.htm#fr_296.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p17"></span> In the Hebrew, the sentence is very short
and imperfect, “But I prayer;” I am a man of prayer; or, I betake myself
to prayer. Thus “I peace” is put for “I am for peace.” — <span
id="xviii.i-p17.1"></span>[Ps
120:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#007.md)<span id="xviii.i-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[298](cc11017.htm#fr_297.md) <span
id="xviii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p3"></span> “The spirit of prophecy is blended in a
high degree with all the denunciations which follow, and which have
relation to the impenitent Jews, and to the traitorous apostle.” —
*Morison.*

<span id="fn_298"></span>[299](cc11017.htm#fr_298.md) <span
id="xviii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p4"></span> “When his cause shall be examined, and
when sentence shall be pronounced, let him, as the original signifies,
go out guilty; in other words, let him be condemned; and when he pleads
for a pardon, or for a mitigation of his sentence, let his petition,
instead of receiving a favorable answer, be regarded as an aggravation
of his crime.” — *Morison.* Horsley understands the last clause as
referring to the Jewish worship, which, he affirms, is now become sin,
as it contains a standing denial of our Lord. Fry admits that Horsley’s
exposition of this line is ingenious. “But,” says he, “<span
id="xviii.ii-p4.1"></span>תפלה, \[which Calvin renders *prayer*,\] from
its etymology, and from its usage, <span id="xviii.ii-p4.2"></span>[Job
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#017.md)<span id="xviii.ii-p4.2"></span>,
may be understood to mean a judicial sentence, and the parallelism in
this place strongly argues for such an interpretation. Let the decision
on him be ‘Guilty.’” Accordingly, he reads, “On his trial let him come
forth condemned, and let the decision be, For sin.”

<span id="fn_299"></span>[300](cc11017.htm#fr_299.md) <span
id="xviii.ii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p5"></span> “*His days shall be few.* Hengstenberg
says this word means *few times,* as if he considered it a substantive
rather than an adjective; but it is doubtless an adjective belonging to
<span id="xviii.ii-p5.1"></span>ימיו, (*his days.*) The expression
denotes that the man here spoken of should not live to a full age, but
should meet with a premature death, either violently by the hands of
others or by his own, as was the case with Judas. An untimely death is
often mentioned in the Old Testament as a punishment on men who are
eminently guilty. ‘Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half
their days,’ <span id="xviii.ii-p5.2"></span>[Ps
55:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#023.md)<span id="xviii.ii-p5.2"></span>.
See also <span id="xviii.ii-p5.3"></span>[Pr
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#027.md)<span id="xviii.ii-p5.3"></span>.
This passage is applicable not to Judas only, but also to the Jews in
general, for after the crucifixion of our Lord, their days were few;
they were soon dispossessed of their country, and became the outcasts of
the earth.” — *Phillips.* Horsley also explains this of the days of the
Jewish commonwealth, which were very few after our Lord’s ascension; and
the subsequent clause, “let another receive his office,” he understands
as denoting that “the Christian Church is become the depository of
revelation, which was the particular charge of the Jewish race.”

<span id="fn_300"></span>[301](cc11017.htm#fr_300.md) <span
id="xviii.ii-p5.4"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p6"></span> “The 10th and 11th verses allude to the
state of the Jews in their dispersion, having nowhere any settled home.”
— *Horsley.*

<span id="fn_301"></span>[302](cc11017.htm#fr_301.md) <span
id="xviii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p7"></span> Horsley reads this verse as follows: —

<span id="xviii.ii-p8"></span>“Let his children be mere vagabonds, and
beg;  
Let them be driven out from the very ruins of their dwelling.”

<span id="xviii.ii-p9"></span>“For <span
id="xviii.ii-p9.1"></span>ידרשו,” says he, “the LXX. had <span
id="xviii.ii-p9.2"></span>יגרשו; ‘let them be driven out.’ This reading
Houbigant and Archbishop Secker approve. The image is, vagabonds seeking
a miserable shelter among the ruins of decayed and demolished buildings,
and not suffered to remain even in such places undisturbed.”

<span id="fn_302"></span>[303](cc11017.htm#fr_302.md) <span
id="xviii.ii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p10"></span> “Literally, ‘the lender’ or ‘creditor.’
But from the hard-heartedness of the Jews towards their debtors, of
which we have instances in <span id="xviii.ii-p10.1"></span>[2Ki
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#001.md)<span id="xviii.ii-p10.1"></span>;
<span id="xviii.ii-p10.2"></span>[Ne
5:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#001.md)<span
id="xviii.ii-p10.2"></span>; the word seems in latter times to have
carried a bad sense; and so it is rendered in our translation, ‘the
extortioner.’” — *Mant.*

<span id="fn_303"></span>[304](cc11017.htm#fr_303.md) <span
id="xviii.ii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p11"></span> “<span id="xviii.ii-p11.1"></span>ינקש
*shall catch,* or *secure.* It seems to denote, *to catch by laying
snares.* See <span id="xviii.ii-p11.2"></span>[Ps
38:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#013.md)<span
id="xviii.ii-p11.2"></span>. This sense suits very well this passage;
for the usurer is accustomed to obtain the substance of men by all kinds
of artifices.” — *Phillips.* Horsley renders, “draw his net over all
that he hath.” How striking a representation of the treatment which the
Jews, since the time of the last destruction of their city, and their
dispersion by the Romans, have received from almost all nations among
whom they have been scattered! For some time they have been permitted to
live in Britain, Holland, and Germany, unmolested; but what a tale of
misery does the tyrannical exactions of which they have been the prey
for centuries constitute!

<span id="fn_304"></span>[305](cc11017.htm#fr_304.md) <span
id="xviii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p15"></span> Dr Geddes translates the 6th verse thus:
—

<span id="xviii.ii-p16"></span>“May he be tried by a wicked judge;  
And at his right had be placed the accuser.”

<span id="xviii.ii-p17"></span>On which he has the following note: —
“*May he be tried by a wicked judge.* He alludes to courts of
judicature: and wishes that his enemy may have a *severe,* nay, *wicked*
judge, — certainly one of the greatest curses that can befall one. —
*And at his right hand be placed the accuser.* Instead of a friend or
advocate to stand by him, let his only attendant be an accuser. What
imagery this! But the height of the metaphor is in the next verse: —

<span id="xviii.ii-p18"></span>‘When he is judged, may he be found
guilty:  
And may his deprecation only aggravate his crime.’”

<span id="xviii.ii-p19"></span>With this corresponds the interpretation
of Phillips. With Hammond, he understands *to set over* as denoting *to
set over as a judge* or *inspector.* “This notion of setting over,” he
observes, “corresponds with the next member; for there it says, *and an
enemy shall stand at his right hand,* which shows that the wicked man
was to be appointed to act as a judge. The man at his right hand denotes
an accuser, agreeably to the custom which prevailed in a Jewish court of
justice, of placing the accuser at the right hand of the accused, (see
<span id="xviii.ii-p19.1"></span>[Zec
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001)<span id="xviii.ii-p19.1"></span>;.md)
and hence we understand in this verse <span
id="xviii.ii-p19.2"></span>רשע to be mentioned as acting in the capacity
of a judge, and <span id="xviii.ii-p19.3"></span>רטן in that of an
accuser.” Cresswell gives a similar explanation of the passage. Green,
who follows Dr Sykes in thinking that the imprecations from this verse
to verse 17 were pronounced not by David upon his enemies, but by
David’s enemies upon him, reads the verse thus: — “Set a wicked man over
him, *say they, to hear his cause,* and let a false accuser stand at his
right hand.”

<span id="fn_305"></span>[306](cc11017.htm#fr_305.md) <span
id="xviii.ii-p25.3"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p26"></span> “<span
id="xviii.ii-p26.1"></span>Paefecturam generaliter significat.” — *Lat.*
“<span id="xviii.ii-p26.2"></span>Signifie generallement
Superintendence.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[307](cc11017.htm#fr_306.md) <span
id="xviii.ii-p26.3"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p27"></span> “<span id="xviii.ii-p27.1"></span>Quand
il donne les biens en proye aux *exacteurs*.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_307"></span>[308](cc11017.htm#fr_307.md) <span
id="xviii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p3"></span> “Tarnovius says, the passage treats not
concerning all memory, but only of an honorable one.” *Phillips.*

<span id="fn_308"></span>[309](cc11017.htm#fr_308.md) <span
id="xviii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p7"></span> “<span id="xviii.iii-p7.1"></span>Et
mesmes la calamite de quelqu’un amollit le ceur de celuy qui luy portoit
haine.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[310](cc11017.htm#fr_309.md) <span
id="xviii.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p16"></span> “<span id="xviii.iii-p16.1"></span>Ut
desperatos omnes male perdat.” — *Lat.* “<span
id="xviii.iii-p16.2"></span>Afin qu’il extermine tous ceux qui sont du
tout desesperez.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[311](cc11017.htm#fr_310.md) <span
id="xviii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p3"></span> “This curse alludes to the imprecation by
which the Jews ventured to take upon themselves the guilt of our Lord’s
death, when Pilate pronounced him innocent. The blessing, ‘on which they
set not their heart,’ was that which they might have obtained from our
Lord.” — *Horsley.*

<span id="fn_311"></span>[312](cc11017.htm#fr_311.md) <span
id="xviii.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p4"></span> The Hebrew word for *garment* in this
verse signifies, according to Parkhurst, “a long robe, a garment
commensurate with the body.” See his Lexicon <span
id="xviii.iv-p4.1"></span>מר, 3. Horsley renders it, “a garment fitted
to him,” which he takes to be the precise sense of <span
id="xviii.iv-p4.2"></span>מרו. The phrase in the following verse he
renders, “as the close garment which wraps him.” In the second clause
there is probably an allusion to the water of jealousy. See <span
id="xviii.iv-p4.3"></span>[Nu
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#018.md)<span id="xviii.iv-p4.3"></span>.
More forcible language than that of this and the subsequent verse could
not be employed to convey the strength and perfection of that curse
which fell on the Jewish nation; and the condition of that people, ever
since their dispersion by the Romans, affords abundant evidence that the
terms here made use of, strong as they are, to predict this condition,
are but barely adequate to afford us a just notion of its sad reality.
“The curse that lighted on the Jewish nation,” observes Bishop Horne, in
illustration of this and the next verse, “is resembled, for its
universality and adhesion, to a ‘garment’ which covereth the whole man,
and is ‘girded’ close about his loins; for its diffusive and penetrating
nature to ‘water,’ which from the stomach passeth into the ‘bowels,’ and
is dispersed through all the vessels of the frame; and to ‘oil,’ which
imperceptibly insinuates itself into the very ‘bones.’ When that unhappy
multitude, assembled before Pontius Pilate, pronounced the words, ‘His
blood be on us and on our children,’ then did they put on the envenomed
garment, which has stuck to and tormented the nation ever since; then
did they eagerly swallow down that deadly draught, the effects whereof
have been the infatuation and misery of 1700 years.”

<span id="fn_312"></span>[313](cc11017.htm#fr_312.md) <span
id="xviii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p3"></span> Horsley translates, “I am just gone, like
the shadow stretched to its utmost length.” The allusion is to the state
of the shadows of terrestrial objects at sun-set, lengthening every
instant, and growing faint as they lengthen, and in the instant that
they shoot to an immeasurable length, disappearing. *As a shadow, when
it is extended* by the sun’s setting, is approaching to evanescence, so,
saith the speaker in this psalm, I am fast disappearing; that is, am
approaching the end of mortal life.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[314](cc11017.htm#fr_313.md) <span
id="xviii.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p4"></span> The Hebrew word for *locust* is in the
singular number; but the Septuagint reads in the plural, and a plurality
may be intended. Locusts are accustomed to fly in great numbers, and the
swarms of them are sometimes so numerous in Eastern countries, that they
fly in the air like a succession of clouds, forming enormous compact
bodies. But when the wind blows briskly, locusts being weak and feeble
creatures, these swarms are often tossed, broken into separate masses,
thrown one upon another, and driven over the sea, into which they fall
when no longer able to sustain their flight. — See <span
id="xviii.v-p4.1"></span>[Exod. 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#013.md),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#019.md)<span id="xviii.v-p4.1"></span>. So
powerless was the speaker in this psalm before his persecuting enemies.
He was driven by them from place to place, without the power to offer
any resistance. Hammond, who considers the psalm as having been composed
by David when forced to flee from Jerusalem by the rebellion of his son
Absalom, after referring to this explanation of the metaphor, observes:
“Another possible way there is of understanding the resemblance. The
locust is but a large sort of grasshopper, which hath no set
abiding-place or rest, but leaps to and fro, roves about the field: so
we have the ‘running to and fro of locusts,’ <span
id="xviii.v-p4.2"></span>[Isa
33:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#004.md)<span id="xviii.v-p4.2"></span>.
And this uncertain, unsettled condition of those creatures, may be
proper also to express David’s condition in his flight, when he had not
where to lay his head, but wandered from place to place uncertainly. But
the former, that is founded in the bands of locusts, is fitter to
express David and the company with him, his weak fugitive army, than
that which is founded in the manner of the single locust or
grasshopper.”

<span id="fn_314"></span>[315](cc11017.htm#fr_314.md) <span
id="xviii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p3"></span> “<span id="xviii.vi-p3.1"></span>En
l’assemblee des grans.” — *Fr*. “In the assembly of the great.”

<span id="fn_315"></span>[316](cc11017.htm#fr_315.md) <span
id="xviii.vi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p4"></span> “<span id="xviii.vi-p4.1"></span>C’est,
de ceux qui ont juge et condamne son ame a la mort.” — *Fr*. *marg.*
“That is, from those who have judged and condemned his soul to death.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 110](cc11018.md)
