[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](eiu03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1425496466/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Earths in the Universe*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1758\], tr. by John
Whitehead \[1892\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Earths in the Universe

<span class="margnote"><span id="151.">151.</span></span>

They then represented their sanctuaries before the spirits of our earth,
who said that they had seen nothing more magnificent; and as I also saw
them, I can therefore describe them. They are constructed of trees, not
cut down, but growing in their native soil. They said that on their
earth there were trees of wonderful growth and height. These from their
beginnings they arrange in order, so that they serve for porticos and
walks, and by cutting and pruning the branches when they are tender,
they fit and prepare them so that while they are growing they may
intertwine and unite to make the base and floor of the sanctuary, and
rise on the sides for the walls, and bend above into arches for the
roof. By these means they construct the sanctuary with admirable art,
elevated high above the earth, and they also prepare an ascent into it
by successive branches of the trees extending out and firmly connected.
Moreover they adorn the sanctuary without and within in various ways, by
bending the leafy bows into various forms. Thus they build entire
groves. But what these sanctuaries are within, I was not permitted to
see. It was only told me that the light of their sun is let into them
through apertures between the branches, and is here and there
transmitted through crystals, by which the light falling on the walls is
variegated into colors like the rainbow, especially the colors blue and
orange, which they love more than the rest. Such is their architecture,
which they prefer to the most magnificent palaces of our earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="152.">152.</span></span>

They said, further, that the inhabitants do not live in high places, but
on the earth in low cottages, for the reason that high places are for
the Lord, who is in heaven, and low places for men, who are on earth.
Their cottages were also shown to me. They were oblong, having within
along the walls a continuous couch, on which they lie one after another.
On the side opposite the door is a semicircular recess, before which is
a table, and behind this a fireplace, by which the whole room is
lighted. In the fireplace there is not a burning fire, but luminous wood
which gives out as much light as the flame of a wood fire. They said
that those pieces of wood appear in the evening like a fire of burning
coals.

<span class="margnote"><span id="153.">153.</span></span>

They said that they do not live in societies, but each house is by
itself; and that they are societies when they meet for worship, and that
then those who teach walk below the sanctuary, and the rest in the
porticos at the sides; and that in those meetings they have interior
joys, from the sight of the sanctuary, and from the worship therein.

<span class="margnote"><span id="154.">154.</span></span>

Respecting Divine worship they said that they acknowledge God under the
Human form, thus our Lord; for whoever acknowledge the God of the
universe under the Human form, are accepted by our Lord and led by Him.
The rest cannot be led, because they think without a form. They added
that the inhabitants of their earth are instructed in the things of
heaven by a kind of immediate interaction with angels and spirits, into
which they can be led by the Lord more easily than others, because they
reject what is corporeal from their thought and affection. I asked what
becomes of those among them who are evil. They said that on their earth
it is not permitted to be wicked; but that if any one thinks and does
evil, he is reproved by a certain spirit, who threatens death to him if
he persists in so doing; and that when he persists, he dies in a swoon;
and that in this way the men of that earth are preserved from the
contamination of the evil. One such spirit was also sent to me, and
spoke with me as he did with his own people. Moreover he brought
something of pain to the region of my abdomen, saying that thus he does
to those who think and do evil, and threatens death to them, if they
persist. They said that those who profane holy things are severely
punished; and that before the punishing spirit comes there appear to
them in vision the jaws of a lion, wide open, of a livid color, which
seems as if it would swallow their head, and tear it from the body,
whereby they are seized with horror. They call the punishing spirit the
devil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="155.">155.</span></span>

As they desired to know how it is with regard to revelation on our
earth, I said that it is effected by writing and by preaching from the
Word, and not by immediate interaction with spirits and angels; and that
what is written can be printed and published, and be read and
comprehended by entire communities, and thus the life may be amended.
They wondered greatly that such an art, entirely unknown elsewhere,
should exist here. But they comprehended that on this earth, where
corporeal and earthly things are so much loved, Divine things from
heaven cannot flow in and be received in any other way; and that it
would be dangerous for them to speak with angels.

<span class="margnote"><span id="156.">156.</span></span>

The spirits of that earth appear above in the plane of the head, toward
the right. All spirits are distinguished by their situation with respect
to the human body; and this for the reason that the whole heaven
corresponds to all things of man. <span
id="fr_49"></span>[156-1](#fn_49) These spirits keep themselves in that
plane and at that distance because their correspondence is not with the
externals in man, but with the interiors. Their action is into the left
knee, above and a little below, with a certain very sensible vibration;
which is a sign that they correspond to the conjunction of natural and
heavenly things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="157.">157.</span></span>

A FOURTH EARTH IN THE STARRY HEAVEN, ITS SPIRITS AND INHABITANTS. I was
conducted to still another earth in the universe beyond our solar
system, which was effected by changes of the state of my mind, and thus
as to the spirit. For, as has been sometimes said before, the spirit is
conducted from place to place in no other way than by changes of the
state of its interiors, which changes appear to it altogether like
movements from place to place, or like journeyings. These changes lasted
continuously for about ten hours, before from the state of my life I
arrived at the state of their life; thus before I was brought thither as
to my spirit. I was borne toward the east to the left, and I seemed to
be sensibly elevated above the plane of the horizon. It was also given
me to observe very clearly the progression and advance from the place
where I had been before, until at length those from whom I departed were
no longer in sight. Meanwhile I spoke on various subjects with the
spirits who went with me. A certain spirit was also with us, who when he
lived in the world had been a primate and a preacher, and likewise a
very pathetic writer. From my idea of him the accompanying spirits
supposed that in heart he must be eminently a Christian. For in the
world an idea is received and a judgment formed from one's preaching and
writings, and not from his life, unless this is conspicuous; and if
there appears anything inconsistent in his life, still it is excused;
for the idea, or the thought and perception concerning any one, draws
everything to its own side.

<span class="margnote"><span id="158.">158.</span></span>

After I had observed that as to my spirit I was in the starry heaven far
beyond the world of our sun, for this might be observed from the changes
of state and from the apparent continual progression thence, which
lasted nearly ten hours, I at length heard spirits speaking near some
earth, which was afterward also seen by me. When I came near to them,
after some conversation, they said that visitors sometimes come to them
from elsewhere, who speak with them about God and confuse the ideas of
their thought. They also showed the way by which they come, from which
it was perceived that they were of the spirits from our earth. Being
then asked wherein their thoughts were confused, they answered that it
was by those spirits saying that one must believe in the Divine as
distinguished into three Persons, which they still call one God. And
when they examine the idea of their thoughts, it is presented as a trine
not continuous, but discrete; and with some, as three persons speaking
together one to another; and with some, as two seated together, and a
third hearkening to them, and then going from them; and though they call
each Person God, and have a different idea concerning each, they still
call them one God. They complained exceedingly that they confuse them by
thinking three and saying one, when yet one ought to think as he speaks,
and speak as he thinks. The spirit who in the world had been a primate
and a preacher, and was with me, was then examined as to what idea he
had concerning one God and three Persons. He represented three Gods, but
these as one by continuity, but he presented this trinal one as
invisible because Divine; and when he presented this, it was perceived
that he then thought only of the Father, and not of the Lord; and that
his idea of the invisible God was no other than as of nature in its
firsts; from which it resulted that to him the inmost of nature was his
Divine, and thus that from this he could be easily led to acknowledge
nature as God. It is to be known that in the other life the idea of any
one upon any subject is presented to the life; and that by this means
every one is explored as to what thought and perception he has
concerning matters of faith; and that the idea of the thought concerning
God is the chief of them all; for by that, if it is genuine, conjunction
is effected with the Divine, and thence with heaven. Being then asked
what idea they had of God, these spirits answered that they did not
conceive of God as invisible, but as visible under the Human form; and
that they know this not only from interior perception, but also from His
appearing to them as a Man; adding that if according to the idea of some
visitors they should conceive of God as invisible, thus without form and
quality, they could not think at all of God, since what is thus
invisible does not fall into any idea of thought. On hearing this, it
was given me to say to them that they do well to think of God under the
Human form; and that many from our earth think in like manner,
especially when they think of the Lord; and that the ancients thought in
no other way. I then told them about Abraham, Lot, Gideon, and Manoah
and his wife, and what is related of them in our Word, namely, that they
saw God under the Human form and acknowledged Him thus seen as the
Creator of the universe, and called Him Jehovah, and this also from
interior perception; but that at this day that interior perception has
perished in the Christian world, and only remains with the simple who
are in faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="159.">159.</span></span>

Before this was said, they believed that our company also was of those
who wished to confuse them by the idea of three concerning God. When
therefore they heard these things, they were affected with joy, and said
that some were also sent to them by God, whom they then called the Lord,
who teach them concerning Him; and that they were not willing to admit
visitors who disturb them, especially by the idea of three Persons in
the Divinity, since they know that God is one, consequently that the
Divine is one, and not a unanimity of three, unless they would think of
God as of an angel, in whom the inmost of life is something invisible,
from which he thinks and is wise, and the external of life what is
visible under the human form, from which he sees and acts, and the
proceeding of life that which is the sphere of love and faith from him,
for from every spirit and angel proceeds a sphere of life by which he is
known at a distance; and as to the Lord, that the proceeding of life
from Him is the Divine Itself which fills and constitutes the heavens,
because it proceeds from the esse itself of the life of love and faith.
They said that in this and in no other way could they perceive a Trine
and a One at the same time. On hearing this, it was given me to say that
such an idea of a Trine and a One together agrees with the angelic idea
of the Lord; and that it is from the Lord's own teaching concerning
Himself; for He teaches that the Father and He are one; that the Father
is in Him, and He in the Father; that whoso sees Him, sees the Father;
and that He who believes in Him, believes in the Father and knows Him;
also that the Comforter, by whom is meant the proceeding Divine, and
whom He calls the Spirit of truth, as also the Holy Spirit, proceeds
from Him, and speaks not from Himself, but from Him. Moreover, that the
idea of a Trine and of One at the same time agrees with the esse and
existere of the Lord's life, when He was in the world. The esse of His
life was the Divine Itself, for He was conceived of Jehovah, and the
esse of any one's life is that from which he is conceived; the existere
of life from that esse is the Human in form. The esse of every man's
life which he has from his father, is called the soul; and the existere
of life therefrom is called the body. The soul and the body constitute
one man. The likeness between both is like that between that which is in
effort and that which is in the act thence, for the act is the effort
acting, and so the two are one. Effort in man is called the will, and
effort acting is called action. The body is the instrument, by which the
will, which is the principal, acts; and the instrument and the principal
in acting are one; thus the soul and the body are one. The angels in
heaven have such an idea concerning the soul and the body; and thus they
know that the Lord made His Human Divine from the Divine in Himself,
which He had as His soul from the Father. The faith also received
everywhere in the Christian world does not dissent from this, for it
teaches: "Although Christ is God and Man, yet He is not two, but one
Christ; yea, He is altogether a one and only Person; for as the body and
the soul are one man, so also God and Man is one Christ." <span
id="fr_50"></span>[159-1](#fn_50) Because there was such a union, or
such a One in the Lord, He therefore, otherwise than any man, rose not
only as to the soul, but also as to the body, which He glorified in the
world; concerning which He also instructed His disciples, saying: Handle
Me and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see Me
have. <span id="fr_51"></span>[159-2](#fn_51) These things those spirits
well understood, for such things fall into the understanding of angelic
spirits. They then added that the Lord alone has power in the heavens,
and that the heavens are His. To which it was given me to respond that
the church on our earth also knows this, from the mouth of the Lord
Himself, before He ascended into heaven; for He then said:- All power is
given unto Me in heaven and in earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="160.">160.</span></span>

I afterward spoke with those spirits concerning their earth; for all
spirits know about their earth when their natural or external memory is
opened by the Lord; since they have this with them from the world, but
it is not opened except by the good pleasure of the Lord. The spirits
then said respecting their earth from which they were, that when leave
is given them, they appear to the inhabitants of their earth, and speak
with them as men; and that this is done by their being let into their
natural or external memory, and thus into such thought as they were in
when they lived in the world; and that the inhabitants then have their
interior sight, or the sight of their spirit, opened, from which they
see them. They added that the inhabitants do not know that they are not
men of their earth, and first perceive that they are not, when they are
suddenly taken away from their sight. I told them that such was the case
on our earth in ancient times, as with Abraham, Sarah, Lot, the
inhabitants of Sodom, Manoah and his wife, Joshua, Mary, Elizabeth, and
the prophets in general; and that the Lord appeared in like manner, and
those who saw Him did not know otherwise than that He was a man of the
earth, before He revealed Himself. But that this is rarely done at this
day, lest by such things men should be compelled to believe; for a
compelled faith, such as is that which enters through miracles, does not
remain fixed, and would also be hurtful to those with whom faith might
be implanted through the Word in a state not compelled.

<span class="margnote"><span id="161.">161.</span></span>

The spirit who in the world had been a primate and a preacher, did not
at all believe that there were any other earths than ours, because he
had thought in the world that the Lord was born on this earth only, and
that no one has salvation without the Lord. He was therefore reduced to
such a state as the spirits are reduced when they appear on their earth
as men (see just above), and thus was sent to that earth, so as not only
to see it, but also to speak with its inhabitants. When this was done,
communication was also thereby granted me, so that I in like manner saw
the inhabitants, and some things also upon that earth (see above, n.
135). There then appeared four kinds of men, but one kind after another
in succession. First were seen men clothed; next men naked of the color
of human flesh; afterward men naked, but with bodies inflamed; and
lastly black men.

<span class="margnote"><span id="162.">162.</span></span>

When the spirit who had been a primate and a preacher was with those who
were clothed, there appeared a woman of a very beautiful face, dressed
in a simple garment, with a tunic that hung gracefully behind her and
was brought up over the arms. She had a beautiful headdress, in the form
of a chaplet of flowers. That spirit was greatly delighted at the sight
of this virgin, and spoke with her, and also took her hand. But as she
perceived that he was a spirit, and not of that earth, she hurried away
from him. There afterward appeared to him on the right many other women,
who were tending sheep and lambs, which they were then leading to a
watering trough that was supplied with water by a small ditch from a
lake. They were similarly clothed, and held shepherds' crooks in their
hands, by which they guided the sheep and lambs to drink. They said that
the sheep went in the way to which they pointed with their crooks. The
sheep seen were large, with woolly tails, both broad and long. The faces
of the women when seen nearer were full and beautiful. The men were also
seen, and their faces were of the color of human flesh, as on our earth;
but with the difference, that the lower part of the face, in place of a
beard, was black, and the nose more the color of snow than of flesh.
Afterward the spirit above mentioned, who had been a preacher in the
world, was led on further, but unwillingly, because his thought was
still on that woman with whom he was delighted, as was made manifest by
somewhat of a shadow from him still appearing in the former place. He
then came to those who were naked, and who were seen walking together
two and two, being husband and wife, girded with a covering about the
loins and a certain covering upon the head. That spirit when with them
was led into that state in which he was in the world when he wished to
preach, and said that he would preach to them the Lord crucified. But
they said that they were not willing to hear any such thing, because
they did not know what this meant, but they knew that the Lord lives. He
then declared that he wished to preach the Lord living. But this also
they refused to hear, saying that they perceived in his speech something
not heavenly, because it had much regard to himself, his fame and honor,
for they can tell from the very tone of one's voice whether it is from
the heart, or not, and because he was such, he could not teach them. On
this he was silent, for in the world he had had much pathetic power, so
that he could strongly move his hearers to holiness; but this power had
been acquired by art, and thus it was from himself and the world, and
not from heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="163.">163.</span></span>

They said further, that they have a perception whether the conjugial
exists with those of their nation who are naked; and it was shown that
they perceive this from a spiritual idea of marriage, which was
communicated to me, to the effect that a similarity of interiors is
formed by the conjunction of good and truth, thus of love and faith, and
from that conjunction flowing down into the body conjugial love exists.
For all things of the mind are presented in a certain natural appearance
in the body, thus in the appearance of conjugial love, when the
interiors of two mutually love each other, and from that love desire
also to will and to think the one like the other, and so to be together
and to be conjoined as to the interiors which are of the mind. Thus
spiritual affection, which is of the minds, becomes natural affection in
the body, and clothes itself with the sense of conjugial love. The
spiritual affection which is of their minds is the affection of good and
truth, and their conjunction; for all things of the mind, or of the
thought and will, have relation to truth and good. They said also that
what is given between one man and several wives is not at all conjugial,
since the marriage of good and truth, which is of the minds, can be
given only between two.

<span class="margnote"><span id="164.">164.</span></span>

The spirit mentioned above then came to those who were naked, but with
bodies inflamed, and at last to those that were black, of whom some were
naked, and some clothed; but these different people dwelt in different
places on the same earth, for a spirit can be led in a moment to remote
parts of an earth, since he does not proceed and is not borne, as a man
is, through spaces, but through changes of state (see above, n. 125,
127). <span id="fr_52"></span>[164-1](#fn_52)

<span class="margnote"><span id="165.">165.</span></span>

At length I spoke with the spirits of that earth about the belief of the
inhabitants of our earth concerning the resurrection, that they cannot
conceive of men's coming into the other life immediately after death,
and then appearing like men as to face, body, arms, feet, and all the
senses, both external and internal; and still less of their being then
clothed with garments and having mansions and dwellings. And the reason
is that most of them there think from the sensual things which are of
the body, and therefore believe in the existence of nothing which they
do not see and touch. And few of them can be drawn away from external
sensual things to what is interior, and so be elevated into the light of
heaven in which such interior things are perceived. Hence it is, that in
regard to their soul or spirit they cannot have any idea of it as a man,
but as of wind, air, or breath, without form, in which there is yet
something vital. This is why they do not believe they are to rise until
the end of the world, which they call the Last Judgment; when they
believe the body, though fallen into dust and dissipated to all the
winds, will be brought back and joined to its soul and spirit. I added
that they are permitted to believe this, for the reason that those who
think from what is external and sensual, as has been said, can form no
other idea than that one's soul or spirit can live as a man in the human
form, only by regaining the body which it bore about in the world. And
therefore, unless it were said that this would rise again, they would
reject in heart the doctrine of a resurrection and eternal life, as
incomprehensible. But still that thought about the resurrection has this
use in it, that they believe in a life after death, from which belief it
follows that when they lie sick in bed and do not think as before from
what is worldly and corporeal, thus not from things sensual, they then
believe that they shall live immediately after death. They also speak
then about heaven, and about the hope of living there immediately after
death, laying aside their doctrine about the Last Judgment. I told these
spirits further, that I sometimes wondered that when those who are in
faith speak of the life after death, and of their friends who are dying
or who have died, and do not at the same time think of the Last
Judgment, they believe that they will live as men immediately after
death. But this idea, as soon as the thought of the Last Judgment flows
in, is changed into a material idea about their earthly body, that it is
to be again joined to its soul. For they do not know that every man is a
spirit as to his interiors, and that it is the spirit which lives in the
body and in all its parts, and not the body of itself; and that it is
from the spirit of every one that the body has its human form, and thus
it is the spirit which is chiefly the man, and in a similar form, but
invisible to the eyes of the body, yet visible to the eyes of spirits.
Hence also when the sight of a man's spirit is opened, which takes place
by the removal of the sight of the body, angels appear as men. Thus did
the angels appear to the ancients, as related in the Word. I have also
spoken sometimes with spirits whom I knew when they lived as men in the
world, and have asked them whether they wished to be clothed again with
their earthly body, as they had once thought. On hearing which, at the
mere idea of conjunction with the body they fled away, being struck with
amazement that in the world they should have thus thought from blind
faith without any understanding.

<span class="margnote"><span id="166.">166.</span></span>

Moreover, their dwellings on that earth were seen by me, and were long
low houses, with windows on the sides according to the number of rooms
or chambers into which they were divided. The roof was arched, and there
was a door on each side at the end. They said that they were built of
earth and roofed with sods, and the windows of threads of grass, so
woven together that the light shone through. Children were also seen.
And they said that their neighbors visited them, especially for the sake
of their children, that they might be in company with other children,
under the sight and auspices of their parents. There also appeared
fields then whitening with the nearly ripened harvest. The seeds or
grains of this harvest were shown, and they were like the grains of
Chinese wheat. We were shown also loaves made of the grain, which were
small in size and square in form. Moreover there also appeared grassy
plains, with flowers therein, and trees with fruits similar to
pomegranates; also shrubs, which were not vines, yet bearing berries
from which wine is prepared.

<span class="margnote"><span id="167.">167.</span></span>

Their sun which to us is a star, appears flaming there, and about
one-fourth as large as our own sun. In their year are about two hundred
days, and the days of fifteen hours length, as compared with the days on
our earth. The earth itself is among the smallest in the starry heavens,
being scarcely five hundred German miles\* in circumference. This I
learned from angels by comparison with such things as they saw in me, or
in my memory, in relation to our earth. They formed these conclusions by
angelic ideas, by which the measures of spaces and times are immediately
known in their just relation to the spaces and times elsewhere. In such
comparisons angelic ideas, which are spiritual, immensely exceed human
idea which are natural. \* Or two thousand English geographical miles.

<span class="margnote"><span id="168.">168.</span></span>

A FIFTH EARTH IN THE STARRY HEAVEN, ITS SPIRITS AND INHABITANTS. I was
led again to another earth which is in the universe out of our solar
system, and this also by changes of state, continued for nearly twelve
hours. There were in company with me several spirits and angels from our
earth, with whom I discoursed in the way or in that progression. I was
carried at times obliquely upwards and obliquely downwards, continually
towards the right, which in the other life is towards the south. In only
two places I saw spirits, and in one I spoke with them. In the way or
progression I was enabled to observe how immense is the Lord's heaven,
which is for angels and spirits; for from the parts uninhabited I was
led to conclude that it was so immense, that if there were many myriads
of earths, and on each earth a multitude of men as great as in ours,
there would still be a place of abode for them to eternity, and it would
never be filled. This I was enabled to conclude from a comparison made
with the extent of the heaven which is about our earth and designed for
it, which extent was respectively so small, that it did not equal a
hundred millionth part of the extent uninhabited.

<span class="margnote"><span id="169.">169.</span></span>

When the angelic spirits who were from that earth came into view, they
accosted us, asking who we were, and what we wanted. We said that we
came for the sake of journeying, that we were directed thither, and that
they had nothing to fear from us; for they were afraid we were of those
who disturb them in regard to God, to faith, and things of a like
nature, on account of whom they had betaken themselves to that quarter
of their earth, shunning them as much as possible. We asked them by what
they were disturbed. They replied, by an idea of three, and by an idea
of the Divine without the Human, in God, when yet they know and perceive
that God is one, and that He is Man. It was then perceived that they who
disturbed them, and whom they shunned, were from our earth. This was
manifest also from this, that there are from our earth those who thus
wander about in the other life in consequence of their fondness for and
delight in travelling, which they have contracted in the world; for on
other earths there is no such custom of travelling as on ours. It was
then discovered that they were monks, who had traveled on our globe from
the zeal of converting the Gentiles; wherefore we told them they did
well to shun them, because their intention was not to teach, but to
secure gain and dominion; and that they study by various arts first to
captivate men's minds, but afterwards to subject them to themselves as
slaves. Moreover, that they did well in not suffering their ideas
concerning God to be disturbed by such. They said further, that the
above spirits confuse them by asserting that they ought to have faith
and to believe the things they say; but they replied to them, that they
know not what faith is nor what is meant by believing, since they
perceive in themselves whether a thing be true or not. They were of the
Lord's celestial kingdom, where all know from an interior perception the
truths which with us are called the truths of faith, for they are in
enlightenment from the Lord; but it is otherwise with those who are in
the spiritual kingdom. That the angelic spirits of that earth were of
the Lord's celestial kingdom, it was granted me to see from the flaming
light whence their ideas flowed; for the light in the celestial kingdom
is flaming, and in the spiritual kingdom it is white. They who are of
the celestial kingdom, when the discourse is about truths, say no more
than yea, yea, or nay, nay, and never reason about truths whether they
be so or not so. These are they of whom the Lord speaks: Let your
discourse be yea, yea, and nay, nay, for whatsoever is more than this is
from evil. Hence it was that those spirits said that they did not know
what is meant by having faith or believing. They consider this, like a
person's saying to his companion who sees houses or trees with his own
eyes, that he ought to have faith or to believe that they are houses and
trees, when he sees clearly that they are so. Such are they who are of
the Lord's celestial kingdom, and such were these angelic spirits. <span
id="fr_53"></span>[169-1](#fn_53) We told them that there are few on our
earth who have interior perception, because in their youth they learn
truths and do not do them. For man has two faculties, which are called
the understanding and the will; they who admit truths no further than
into the memory, and thence in some small degree into the understanding,
and not into the life, that is, into the will, these, inasmuch as they
are not capable of any enlightenment or interior sight from the Lord,
say that those truths are to be believed, or that they are objects of
faith, and also reason concerning them whether they be truths or not;
yea, they are not willing that they should be perceived by any interior
sight, or by any enlightenment in the understanding. They say this,
because truths with them are without light from heaven, and to those who
see without light from heaven, falsities may appear like truths, and
truths like falsities; hence so great blindness has seized many there,
that although they do not do truths or live according to them, still
they say that they can be saved by faith alone, as if it were the
knowledge of the things of faith which constitutes man, and not the life
according to that knowledge. We afterwards discoursed with them
concerning the Lord, concerning love to Him, concerning love toward the
neighbor, and concerning regeneration; saying that to love the Lord is
to love the commandments which are from Him, which is to live according
to them from love. <span id="fr_54"></span>[169-2](#fn_54) That love
toward the neighbor is to will good and thence do good to a
fellow-citizen, to one's country, to the church, and to the Lord's
kingdom, not for the sake of self, to be seen, or to merit, but from the
affection of good. <span id="fr_55"></span>[169-3](#fn_55) Concerning
regeneration, we observed that they who are regenerated by the Lord, and
commit truths immediately to life, come into an interior perception
concerning them; but that they who receive truths first in the memory,
and afterwards will them and do them, are they who are in faith; for
they act from faith, which is then called conscience. They said that
they perceived these things to be so, and thus perceived also what faith
is. I discoursed with them by spiritual ideas, whereby such things may
be exhibited and comprehended in light.

<span class="margnote"><span id="170.">170.</span></span>

The spirits with whom I now discoursed were from the northern part of
their earth. I was afterwards led to others who were on the western
part. These also, wishing to discover who and what I was, immediately
said that there was nothing in me but evil, thinking thus to deter me
from approaching nearer. It was perceived that this was their manner of
accosting all who came to them; but it was granted me to reply that I
well knew it to be so, and that with them also there was nothing but
evil, by reason that every one is born in evil, and therefore whatever
comes from man, spirit, and angel, as from what is his own, or his
proprium, is nothing but evil, inasmuch as all good with every one is
from the Lord. Hence they perceived that I was in the truth, and I was
admitted to speak with them. They then showed me their idea concerning
evil with man, and concerning good from the Lord, how they are separated
from each other. They placed one near the other, almost contiguous, but
still distinct, yet as it were bound together in a manner inexpressible,
so that the good led the evil, and restrained it, insomuch that it was
not allowed it to act at pleasure; and thus the good bent the evil in
whatever direction desired, without the evil knowing it. In this manner
they exhibited the dominion of good over evil, and at the same time a
state of freedom. They then asked how the Lord appeared with the angels
from our earth. I said that He appears in the sun as Man, encompassed
therein with solar fire, whence the angels in the heavens have all
light; and that the heat which proceeds thence is the Divine good, and
that the light which proceeds thence is the Divine truth, each from the
Divine love, which is the fire appearing around the Lord in that sun.
That sun, however, appears only to the angels in heaven, and not to the
spirits who are beneath, since they are more removed from the reception
of the good of love and of the truth of faith, than the angels who are
in the heavens (see above, n. 40). It was granted them thus to inquire
concerning the Lord, and concerning His appearance before the angels
from our earth, because it then pleased the Lord to present Himself
before them, and to reduce into order the things which had been
disturbed by the evil spirits of whom they complained. This also was the
reason why I was led thither, that I might see these things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="171.">171.</span></span>

There was then seen a dark cloud toward the east, descending from on
high, which in descending gradually appeared bright and in the human
form; and this form at length appeared in a flaming radiance, around
which were little stars of the same color. In this manner the Lord
presented Himself before the spirits with whom I was speaking. To this
Presence were then gathered together from every side all the spirits who
were there; and when they came, the good were separated from the evil,
the good to the right and the evil to the left, and this at once, as of
their own accord. And those on the right were arranged according to the
quality of their good, and those on the left according to the quality of
their evil. The good were then left to form a heavenly society among
themselves; but the evil were cast into the hells. I saw afterward that
this flaming radiance descended quite deep into the lower parts of the
earth there; and then it appeared, now flamy verging to brightness, now
bright verging to obscurity, and now in obscurity. And I was told by
angels that the appearance is according to the reception of truth from
good, and of falsity from evil, with those who inhabit the lower parts
of that earth; and that the flamy radiance itself did not at all undergo
such variations. They said also that the lower parts of that earth were
inhabited as well by the good as by the evil; but well separated, in
order that the evil might be ruled through the good by the Lord. They
added that the good were by turns taken up thence into heaven by the
Lord, and others succeed in their place, and so on continually. In that
descent the good were in like manner separated from the evil, and all
things were reduced into order. For the evil, by various arts and crafty
devices, had introduced themselves into the dwellings of the good there,
and infested them; and this was the cause of that visitation. That
cloud, which in descending gradually appeared bright and in the human
form, and then as a flamy radiance, was an angelic society, in the midst
of which was the Lord, From this it wan given to know what is meant by
the Lord's words in the Evangelists, where He speaks of the Last
Judgment: That He will come with the angel in the clouds of heaven with
glory and power.

<span class="margnote"><span id="172.">172.</span></span>

Afterward some monkish spirits were seen, namely, those who had been
travelling monks or missionaries in the world, and who have been spoken
of above; and a crowd of spirits was also seen, who were from that
earth, most of them evil, whom they had drawn over and seduced to their
side. These were seen at the eastern quarter of that earth, from which
they drove away the good, who betook themselves to the northern side of
that earth, and have been spoken of above. That crowd, together with
their seducers was collected into one body, to the number of some
thousands, and was separated when the evil were cast into the hells. I
was granted to speak with one spirit who was a monk, and to ask what he
did there. He replied that he taught them concerning the Lord. I asked,
what besides. He said, concerning heaven and hell. I asked, what
further. He said, concerning a belief in all that he should say. I
asked, what further. He said, concerning the power of remitting sins,
and of opening and shutting heaven. He was then examined as to what he
knew concerning the Lord, concerning the truths of faith, concerning the
remission of sins, concerning man's salvation, and concerning heaven and
hell; and it was discovered that he knew scarcely anything, and that he
was in obscurity and falsity concerning all and each of them, and that
he was possessed solely by the lust of gain and dominion which he had
contracted in the world and brought with him thence. Wherefore he was
told that, because he had traveled so far led by that lust, and was such
as to doctrine, he must needs deprive the spirits of that earth of
celestial light, and bring in the darkness of hell, and thus bring them
under the dominion of hell, and not of the Lord. Moreover he was cunning
in seducing, but stupid as to those things which are of heaven. Because
he was such he was then cast thence into hell. Thus the spirits of that
earth were liberated from them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="173.">173.</span></span>

The spirits of that earth mentioned also, among other things, that those
strangers, who, as has been said, were monkish spirits, used all their
endeavors to persuade them to live together in society, and not separate
and solitary; for spirits and angels dwell and associate in like manner
as in the world; they who have dwelt in communities in the world, dwell
also in a similar state in the other life; and they who have dwelt in a
separate state, divided into houses and families, dwell also in a
separate state in another life. These spirits on their earth, while they
lived there as men, had dwelt in a separate state, house and house,
families and families, and thus nation and nation apart, and hence they
knew not what it was to dwell together in society. Wherefore when it was
told them that those strangers wished to persuade them to dwell in
society, to the intent that they might rule and have dominion over them,
and that they could not otherwise subject them to themselves and make
them slaves, they replied that they were totally ignorant what was meant
by ruling and domineering. That they flee away at the very idea of rule
and dominion, was made manifest to me from this, that one of them, who
accompanied us back again, when I showed him the city in which I dwelt,
at the first sight of it fled away, and was no more seen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="174.">174.</span></span>

I then spoke with the angels who were with me concerning dominion,
saying that there are two kinds of dominion, one of love towards the
neighbor, and the other of self-love; and that the dominion of love
towards the neighbor is among those who dwell separated into houses,
families, and nations; whereas the dominion of self-love is among those
who dwell together in society. Among those who live separated into
houses, families, and nations, he has dominion who is the father of the
nation, and under him the father of families, and under these the father
of each house. He is called the father of the nation from whom the
families originate, from which families the houses are derived; but all
these exercise dominion from love, like that of a father towards his
children, who teaches them how they ought to live, does good to them,
and as far as he can, gives them of his own. It never enters into his
mind to subject them to himself, as subjects or as servants, but he
loves that they should obey him as sons obey their father. And because
this love increases in descending, as is known, therefore the father of
the nation acts from a more interior love than the father himself from
whom the sons are next descended. Such also is the dominion in the
heavens, inasmuch as such is the Lord's dominion; for His dominion is
from the Divine love towards the whole human race. But the dominion of
self-love, which is opposite to the dominion of love towards the
neighbor, began when man alienated himself from the Lord; for in
proportion as man does not love and worship the Lord, in the same
proportion he loves and worships himself, and so far also he loves the
world. Then from necessity that they might be safe, the nations with
their families and houses, formed themselves into one body, and
established governments under various forms. For in proportion as
self-love increased, in the same proportion all kinds of evil, as
enmity, envy, hatred, revenge, cruelty and deceit, increased with it,
being exercised against all who opposed them. For from the proprium in
which they are who are in self-love, nothing but evil springs, inasmuch
its man's proprium is nothing but evil, and because the proprium is
evil, it does not receive good from heaven. Hence self-love, while it
has dominion, is the father of all such evils. <span
id="fr_56"></span>[174-1](#fn_56) And that love is also of such a nature
that as far as the reins are relaxed it rushes on, until at length every
one possessed by it wishes to domineer over all others in the whole
world, and to possess all the goods of others. Yea, even this is not
enough, but he wishes to have dominion over the whole heaven, as may be
evident from the Babylon of this day. This then is the rule of
self-love, from which the rule of the love of the neighbor differs as
much as heaven does from hell. But however great such dominion of
self-love is in societies or in kingdoms and empires, still even in
these is found also the dominion of love towards the neighbor among
those who are wise from faith in and love to God; for these love the
neighbor. That these also dwell in the heavens distinguished into
nations, families, and houses, although in societies together, but
according to spiritual affinities, which are those of the good of love
and the truth of faith, will by the Divine mercy of the Lord be told
elsewhere.

<span class="margnote"><span id="175.">175.</span></span>

I afterward questioned those spirits about various things on the earth
from which they were, and first about their Divine worship and
revelation. In regard to worship they said that the nations with their
families assemble at one place every thirtieth day, and hear preaching;
and that the preacher then, from a pulpit raised a little above the
earth, teaches them Divine truths, which lead to the good of life.
Concerning revelation they said that it came in the early morning, in a
state midway between sleep and wakefulness, when they are in interior
light not yet interrupted by the bodily senses and by worldly things.
And that they then hear angels of heaven speaking of Divine truths, and
of a life according to them; that when they awaken, an angel in a white
garment appears to them by the bed, who then suddenly disappears from
their sight; and that from this they know that what they have heard is
from heaven. In this way Divine vision is distinguished from vision not
Divine; for in vision not Divine no angel appears. They added that
revelations are made in this manner to their preachers, also sometimes
to others.

<span class="margnote"><span id="176.">176.</span></span>

To an inquiry concerning their houses, they said that they are low, of
wood, with a flat roof, around which project caves sloping downward; and
that in the front part dwell the husband and wife, in the next adjoining
part the children, and after them the maid-servants and men-servants. Of
their food they said that they drink milk with water, and that they have
the milk from cows, which are woolly like sheep. Of their life they said
that they walk naked, and that to them nakedness is not a cause of
shame; also that their social interaction is with those who are within
their families.

<span class="margnote"><span id="177.">177.</span></span>

In regard to the sun of that earth they related that to the inhabitants
it has a flamy appearance; that the length of their years is two hundred
days, and that a day equals nine hours of our time, which they could
conclude from the length of the days of our earth perceived in me. And
further, that they have perpetual spring and summer, and consequently
that the fields are ever green, and the trees ever bearing fruit. The
reason of this is, because their year is so short, being equal only to
seventy-five days of our year; and when the years are so short, the cold
does not continue long in winter nor the heat in summer, whence the
ground is continually verdant.

<span class="margnote"><span id="178.">178.</span></span>

Concerning betrothals and marriages in that earth, they related that a
daughter, when she arrives at a marriageable age, is kept at home, nor
is she allowed to leave the house till the day she is to be married;
that then she is conducted to a certain connubial house, where there are
also many other young women of marriageable age brought together, and
there they are placed behind a screen, which reaches to the middle of
the body, so that they appear naked as to the breast and face: and that
then the young men come thither to choose for themselves a wife. And
when a young man sees one that seems suited to him, and to whom his mind
draws him, he takes her by the hand; and if she then follows him, he
leads her to a house prepared, and she becomes his wife. For they see
from the face whether they agree in mind, inasmuch as there every one's
face is an index of the mind, and in nothing does it dissemble and
deceive. That all things may be done decently and without
lasciviousness, an old man is seated behind the virgins, and an old
woman at the side of them, to make their observations. There are many
such places to which the young women are conducted: and also stated
times for the young men to make their choice. For if they do not find a
maid to suit them in one place, they go to another; and if not at one
time, they return again at a future time. They said further, that a
husband has only one wife, and never more than one, because this is
contrary to Divine order.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_49"></span>[156-1](eiu04.htm#fr_49) Heaven corresponds to
the Lord, and man as to each and all things corresponds to heaven, and
hence heaven, before the Lord, is a man in a large effigy, and may be
called the Greatest Man (n. 2996, 2998, 3624-3649, 3636-3643, 3741-3745,
4625) Concerning the correspondence of man, and of all things pertaining
to him, with the Greatest Man, which is heaven, in general, from
experience (n. 3021, 3624-3649, 3741-3751, 3883-3896, 4039-4051,
4215-4228, 4318-4331, 4403-4421, 4527-4533, 4622-4633, 4652-4660,
4791-4805, 4931-4953, 5050-5061, 5171-5189, 5377-5396, 5552-5573,
5711-5727, 10,030).

<span id="fn_50"></span>[159-1](eiu04.htm#fr_50) From the Athanasian
Creed.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[159-2](eiu04.htm#fr_51) Man rises again as to
his spirit immediately after death, and he is the human form, and that
as to each and every particular he is a man (n. 4527, 5006, 5078, 8939,
8991, 10,594, 10,597, 10,758). Man rises again only as to his spirit,
and not as to his body (n. 10,593, 10,594). The Lord alone rose again as
to the body also (n. 1729, 2083, 5078, 10,825).

<span id="fn_52"></span>[164-1](eiu04.htm#fr_52) Movements,
progressions, and changes of place in the other life are changes of
state of the interiors of the life, and still they appear to spirits and
angels as real changes of place (n. 1273-1277, 1377, 3356, 5605,
10,734).

<span id="fn_53"></span>[169-1](eiu04.htm#fr_53) Heaven is distinguished
into two kingdoms, one of which is called the celestial kingdom, the
other the spiritual kingdom (n. 3887, 4138). The angels in the celestial
kingdom know innumerable things and are immensely more wise than the
angels in the spiritual kingdom (n. 2718). The celestial angels do not
think and speak from faith, like the spiritual angels, but from an
internal perception that a thing is so (n. 202, 597, 607, 784, 1121,
1387, 1398, 1442, 1919, 7680, 7877, 8780). The celestial angels say only
concerning the truths of faith, yea, yea, or nay, nay, but the spiritual
angels reason whether it be so or not so (n. 202, 337, 2715, 3246, 4448,
9196).

<span id="fn_54"></span>[169-2](eiu04.htm#fr_54) To love the Lord is to
live according to His commandments (n. 10,143, 10,153, 10,310, 10,578,
10,648).

<span id="fn_55"></span>[169-3](eiu04.htm#fr_55) To love the neighbor is
to do what is good, just, and right, in every work and in every
function, from the affection of what is good, just, and right (n.
8120-8122, 10,310, 10,336). A life of love towards the neighbor is a
life according to the Lord's commandments (n. 3249).

<span id="fn_56"></span>[174-1](eiu04.htm#fr_56) Man's proprium, which
he derives from his parents, is nothing but dense evil (n. 210, 215,
731, 874, 876, 987, 1047, 2307, 2318, 3518, 3701, 3812, 8480, 8550,
10,283, 10,284, 10,286, 10,731). Man's proprium consists in loving
himself more than God, and the world more than heaven, and in making
light of his neighbor in respect to himself, except it be for the sake
of himself, and thus from motives of self-love and the love of the world
(n. 694, 731, 4317, 5660). All evils flow from self-love and the love of
the world, when they have dominion (n. 1307, 1308, 1321, 1594, 1691,
3413, 7255, 7376, 7480, 7488, 8318, 9335, 9348, 10,038, 10,742). These
evils are contempt of others, enmity, hatred, revenge, cruelty, and
deceit (n. 6667, 7372-7374, 9348, 10,038, 10,742). And that from these
evils every falsity flows (n. 1047, 10,283, 10,284, 10,286).
