[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends/Sagas](../index) 
[Arthur](../eng/index.htm#arthurian)  [Index](index)  [Previous](frr06) 
[Next](frr08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

# CHAPTER IV

### TAMMUZ AND ADONIS

### PART I. TAMMUZ

In the previous chapter we considered certain aspects of the attitude
assumed by our Aryan forefathers towards the great processes of Nature
in their ordered sequence of Birth, Growth, and Decay. We saw that while
on one hand they, by prayer and supplication, threw themselves upon the
mercy of the Divinity, who, in their belief, was responsible for the
granting, or withholding, of the water, whether of rain, or river, the
constant supply of which was an essential condition of such ordered
sequence, they, on the other hand, believed that, by their own actions,
they could stimulate and assist the Divine activity. Hence the dramatic
representations to which I have referred, the performance, for instance,
of such a drama as the <u>R</u>ishyaç<u>r</u>iñga, the ceremonial
'marriages,' and other exercises of what we now call sympathetic magic.
To quote a well-known passage from Sir J. G. Frazer: "They commonly
believed that the tie between the animal and vegetable world was even
closer than it really is--to them the principle of life and fertility,
whether animal or vegetable, was one and indivisible. Hence actions that
induced fertility in the animal world were held to be equally
efficacious in stimulating the reproductive energies of the
vegetable <span id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36)." How deeply this idea was
rooted in the minds of our ancestors we, their descendants, may learn
from its survival to our own day.

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

The ultimate, and what we may in a general sense term the classical,
form in which this sense of the community of the Life principle found
expression was that which endowed the vivifying force of Nature with a
distinct personality, divine, or semi-divine, whose experiences, in
virtue of his close kinship with humanity, might be expressed in terms
of ordinary life.

At this stage the progress of the seasons, the birth of vegetation in
spring, or its revival after the autumn rains, its glorious fruition in
early summer, its decline and death under the maleficent influence
either of the scorching sun, or the bitter winter cold, symbolically
represented the corresponding stages in the life of this
anthropomorphically conceived Being, whose annual progress from birth to
death, from death to a renewed life, was celebrated with a solemn ritual
of corresponding alternations of rejoicing and lamentation.

Recent research has provided us with abundant material for the study of
the varying forms of this Nature Cult, the extraordinary importance of
which as an evolutionary factor in what we may term the concrete
expression of human thought and feeling is only gradually becoming
realized <span id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37).

Before turning our attention to this, the most important, section of our
investigation, it may be well to consider one characteristic difference
between the Nature ritual of the *Rig-Veda*, and that preserved to us in
the later monuments of Greek antiquity.

In the *Rig-Veda*, early as it is, we find the process of religious

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

evolution already far advanced; the god has separated himself from his
worshippers, and assumed an anthropomorphic form. Indra, while still
retaining traces of his 'weather' origin, is no longer, to borrow Miss
Harrison's descriptive phrase, 'an automatic explosive thunder-storm,'
he wields the thunderbolt certainly, but he appears in heroic form to
receive the offerings made to him, and to celebrate his victory in a
solemn ritual dance. In Greek art and literature, on the other hand,
where we might expect to find an even more advanced conception, we are
faced with one seemingly more primitive and inchoate, *i.e.*, the idea
of a constantly recurring cycle of Birth, Death, and Resurrection, or
Re-Birth, of all things in Nature, this cycle depending upon the
activities of an entity at first vaguely conceived of as the 'Luck of
the Year,' the *Eniautos Daimon*. This Being, at one stage of evolution
theriomorphic--he might assume the form of a bull, a goat, or a snake
(the latter, probably from the close connection of the reptile with the
earth, being the more general form)--only gradually, and by distinctly
traceable stages, assumed an anthropomorphic shape <span
id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38). This gives to the study of Greek
antiquity a special and peculiar value, since in regard to the body of
religious belief and observance with which we are here immediately
concerned, neither in what we may not improperly term its ultimate
(early Aryan), nor in what has been generally considered its proximate
(Syro-Phoenician), source, have these intermediate stages been
preserved; in each case the ritual remains are illustrative of a highly
developed cult, distinctly anthropomorphic in conception. I offer no
opinion as to the critical significance of this fact, but I would draw
the attention of scholars to its existence.

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

That the process of evolution was complete at a very early date has been
proved by recent researches into the Sumerian-Babylonian civilization.
We know now that the cult of the god Tammuz, who, if not the direct
original of the Phoenician-Greek Adonis, is at least representative of a
common parent deity, may be traced back to 3000 B.C., while it persisted
among the Sabeans at Harran into the Middle Ages <span
id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39).

While much relating to the god and his precise position in the
Sumerian-Babylonian Pantheon still remains obscure, fragmentary
cuneiform texts connected with the religious services of the period have
been discovered, and to a considerable extent deciphered, and we are
thus in a position to judge, from the prayers and invocations addressed
to the deity, what were the powers attributed to, and the benefits
besought from, him. These texts are of a uniform character; they are all
'Lamentations,' or 'Wailings,' having for their exciting cause the
disappearance of Tammuz from this upper earth, and the disastrous
effects produced upon animal and vegetable life by his absence. The woes
of the land and the folk are set forth in poignant detail, and Tammuz is
passionately invoked to have pity upon his worshippers, and to end their
sufferings by a speedy return. This return, we find from other texts,
was effected by the action of a goddess, the mother, sister, or
paramour, of Tammuz, who, descending into the nether world, induced the
youthful deity to return with her to earth. It is perfectly clear from
the texts which have been deciphered that Tammuz is not to be regarded
merely as representing the Spirit of Vegetation; his influence is
operative, not only

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

in the vernal processes of Nature, as a Spring god, but in all its
reproductive energies, without distinction or limitation, he may be
considered as an embodiment of the Life principle, and his cult as a
Life Cult.

Mr Stephen Langdon inclines to believe that the original Tammuz typified
the vivifying waters; he writes: "Since, in Babylonia as in Egypt, the
fertility of the soil depended upon irrigation, it is but natural to
expect that the youthful god who represents the birth and death of
nature, would represent the beneficent waters which flooded the valleys
of the Tigris and Euphrates in the late winter, and which ebbed away,
and nearly disappeared, in the canals and rivers in the period of Summer
drought. We find therefore that the theologians regarded this youthful
divinity as belonging to the cult of Eridu, centre of the worship of Ea,
lord of the nether sea <span id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40)." In a note
to this passage Mr Langdon adds: "He appears in the great theological
list as *Dami-zi, ab-zu*, 'Tammuz of the nether sea,' *i.e.*, 'the
faithful son of the fresh waters which come from the earth <span
id="fr_41"></span>[2](#fn_41).'"

This presents us with an interesting analogy to the citations given in
the previous chapter from the *Rig-Veda*; the Tammuz cult is specially
valuable as providing us with evidence of the gradual evolution of the
Life Cult from the early conception of the vivifying power of the
waters, to the wider recognition of a common principle underlying all
manifestations of Life.

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

This is very clearly brought out in the beautiful Lament for Tammuz,
published by Mr Langdon in *Tammuz and Ishtar*, and also in *Sumerian
and Babylonian Psalms* <span id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42).

"In Eanna, high and low, there is weeping,  
Wailing for the house of the lord they raise.  
The wailing is for the plants; the first lament is 'they grow not.'  
The wailing is for the barley; the ears grow not.  
For the habitations and flocks it is; they produce not.  
For the perishing wedded ones, for perishing children it is; the
dark-headed people create not.  
The wailing is for the great river; it brings the flood no more.  
The wailing is for the fields of men; the gunū grows no more.  
The wailing is for the fish-ponds; the dasu<u>h</u>ur fish spawn not.  
The wailing is for the cane-brake; the fallen stalks grow not.  
The wailing is for the forests; the tamarisks grow not.  
The wailing is for the highlands; the masgam trees grow not.  
The wailing is for the garden store-house; honey and wine are produced
not.  
The wailing is for the meadows; the bounty of the garden, the
si<u>h</u>tū plants grow not.  
The wailing is for the palace; life unto distant days is not."

Can anything be more expressive of the community of life animating the
whole of Nature than this poignantly worded lament?

A point which differentiates the worship of Tammuz from the kindred, and
better known, cult of Adonis, is the fact that we have no liturgical
record of the celebration of the resurrection of the deity; it certainly
took place, for the effects are referred to:

"Where grass was not, there grass is eaten,  
Where water was not, water is drunk,  
Where the cattle sheds were not, cattle sheds are built <span
id="fr_43"></span>[2](#fn_43)."

 

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

While this distinctly implies the revival of vegetable and animal life,
those features (*i.e.*, resurrection and sacred marriage), which made
the Adonis ritual one of rejoicing as much as of lamentation, are absent
from liturgical remains of the Tammuz cult <span
id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44).

A detail which has attracted the attention of scholars is the lack of
any artistic representation of this ritual, a lack which is the more
striking in view of the important position which these 'Wailings for
Tammuz' occupy in the extant remains of Babylonian liturgies. On this
point Mr Langdon makes an interesting suggestion: "It is probable that
the service of wailing for the dying god, the descent of the mother, and
the resurrection, were attended by mysterious rituals. The actual
mysteries may have been performed in a secret chamber, and consequently
the scenes were forbidden in Art. This would account for the surprising
dearth of archaeological evidence concerning a cult upon which the very
life of mankind was supposed to depend <span
id="fr_45"></span>[2](#fn_45)."

In view of the fact that my suggestion as to the possible later
development of these Life Cults as Mysteries has aroused considerable
opposition, it is well to bear in mind that such development is held by
those best acquainted with the earliest forms of the ritual to have been
not merely possible, but to have actually taken place, and that at a
very remote date. Mr Langdon quotes a passage referring to "Kings who in
their day played the *rôle* of Tammuz in the mystery of this cult"; he
considers that here we have to do with kings who, by a symbolic act,
escaped

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

the final penalty of sacrifice as representative of the Dying God <span
id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46).

The full importance of the evidence above set forth will become more
clearly apparent as we proceed with our investigation; here I would
simply draw attention to the fact that we now possess definite proof
that, at a period of some 3000 years B.C., the idea of a Being upon
whose life and reproductive activities the very existence of Nature and
its corresponding energies was held to depend, yet who was himself
subject to the vicissitudes of declining powers and death, like an
ordinary mortal, had already assumed a fixed, and practically final,
form; further, that this form was specially crystallized in ritual
observances. In our study of the later manifestations of this cult we
shall find that this central idea is always, and unalterably, the same,
and is, moreover, frequently accompanied by a remarkable correspondence
of detail. The chain of evidence is already strong, and we may justly
claim that the links added by further research strengthen, while they
lengthen, that chain.

### PART II. ADONIS

While it is only of comparatively recent date that information as to the
exact character of the worship directed to Tammuz has been available and
the material we at present possess is but fragmentary in character, the
corresponding cult of the Phoenician-Greek divinity we know as Adonis
has for some years been the subject of scholarly research. Not only have
the details of the ritual been examined and discussed, and the surviving
artistic evidence described and illustrated, but from the
anthropological side attention has been forcibly directed to its
importance as a factor in the elucidation of certain widespread
Folk-beliefs and practices <span id="fr_47"></span>[2](#fn_47).

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

We know now that the worship of Adonis, which enjoyed among the Greeks a
popularity extending to our own day, was originally of Phoenician
origin, its principal centres being the cities of Byblos, and Aphaka.
From Phoenicia it spread to the Greek islands, the earliest evidence of
the worship being found in Cyprus, and from thence to the mainland,
where it established itself firmly. The records of the cult go back to
700 B.C., but it may quite possibly be of much earlier date. Mr Langdon
suggests that the worship of the divinity we know as Adonis, may, under
another name, reach back to an antiquity equal with that we can now
ascribe to the cult of Tammuz. In its fully evolved classical form the
cult of Adonis offers, as it were, a halfway house, between the
fragmentary relics of Aryan and Babylonian antiquity, and the wealth of
Medieval and Modern survivals to which the ingenuity and patience of
contemporary scholars have directed our attention.

We all know the mythological tale popularly attached to the name of
Adonis; that he was a fair youth, beloved of Aphrodite, who, wounded in
the thigh by a wild boar, died of his wound. The goddess, in despair at
his death, by her prayers won from Zeus the boon that Adonis be allowed
to return to earth for a portion of each year, and henceforward the
youthful god divides his time between the goddess of Hades, Persephone,
and Aphrodite. But the importance assumed by the story, the elaborate
ceremonial with which the death of Adonis was mourned, and his
restoration to

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

life fêted, the date and character of the celebrations, all leave no
doubt that the personage with whom we are dealing was no mere favourite
of a goddess, but one with whose life and well-being the ordinary
processes of Nature, whether animal or vegetable, were closely and
intimately concerned. In fact the central figure of these rites, by
whatever name he may be called, is the somewhat elusive and impersonal
entity, who represents in anthropomorphic form the principle of animate
Nature, upon whose preservation, and unimpaired energies, the life of
man, directly, and indirectly, depends <span
id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48).

Before proceeding to examine these rites there is one point, to which I
have alluded earlier, in another connection, upon which our minds must
be quite clear, *i.e.*, the nature of the injury suffered. Writers upon
the subject are of one accord in considering the usual account to be but
a euphemistic veiling of the truth, while the close relation between the
stories of Adonis and Attis, and the practices associated with the cult,
place beyond any shadow of a doubt the fact that the true reason for
this universal mourning was the cessation, or suspension, by injury or
death, of the reproductive energy of the god upon whose virile activity
vegetable life directly, and human life indirectly, depended <span
id="fr_49"></span>[2](#fn_49).

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

\[paragraph continues\] What we have need to seize and to insist upon is
the overpowering influence which the sense of Life, the need for Life,
the essential Sanctity of the Life-giving faculty, exercised upon
primitive religions. Vellay puts this well when he says: "En réalité
c'est sur la conception de la vie physique, considérée dans son origine,
et dans son action, et dans le double principe qui l'anime, que repose
tout le cycle religieux des peuples Orientaux de l'Antiquité <span
id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50)."

Professor von Schroeder says even more precisely and emphatically: "In
der Religion der Arischen Urzeit ist Alles auf Lebensbejahung gerichtet,
Mann kann den Phallus als ihr Beherrschendes Symbol betrachten <span
id="fr_51"></span>[2](#fn_51)." And in spite of the strong opposition to
this cult manifested in Indian literature, beginning with the
*Rig-Veda*, and ripening to fruition in the *Upanishads*, in spite of
the rise of Buddhism, with its opposing dictum of renunciation, the
'Life-Cult' asserted its essential vitality against all opposition, and
under modified forms represents the 'popular' religion of India to this
day.

Each and all of the ritual dramas, reconstructed in the pages of
*Mysterium und Mimus* bear, more or less distinctly, the stamp of their
'Fertility' origin <span id="fr_52"></span>[3](#fn_52), while outside
India the pages of Frazer and Mannhardt, and numerous other writers on
Folk-lore and Ethnology, record the widespread, and persistent, survival
of these rites, and their successful defiance of the spread of
civilization.

It is to this special group of belief and practice

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

that the Adonis (and more especially its Phrygian counterpart the Attis)
worship belong, and even when transplanted to the more restrained and
cultured environment of the Greek mainland, they still retained their
primitive character. Farnell, in his *Cults of the Greek States*, refers
to the worship of Adonis as "a ritual that the more austere State
religion of Greece probably failed to purify, the saner minds, bred in a
religious atmosphere that was, on the whole, genial, and temperate,
revolted from the din of cymbals and drums, the meaningless ecstasies of
sorrow and joy, that marked the new religion <span
id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_53)."

It is, I submit, indispensable for the purposes of our investigation
that the essential character and significance of the cults with which we
are dealing should not be evaded or ignored, but faced, frankly admitted
and held in mind during the progress of our enquiry.

Having now determined the general character of the ritual, what were the
specific details?

The date of the feast seems to have varied in different countries; thus
in Greece it was celebrated in the Spring, the moment of the birth of
Vegetation; according to Saint Jerome, in Palestine the celebration fell
in June, when plant life was in its first full luxuriance. In Cyprus, at
the autumnal equinox, *i.e.*, the beginning of the year in the
Syro-Macedonian calendar, the death of Adonis falling on the 23rd of
September, his resurrection on the 1st of October, the beginning of a
New Year. This would seem to indicate that here Adonis was considered,
as Vellay suggests, less as the god of Vegetation than as the superior
and nameless Lord of Life (Adonis = Syriac *Adôn*, Lord), under whose
protection the year was placed <span id="fr_54"></span>[2](#fn_54). He
is the *Eniautos Daimon*.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

In the same way as the dates varied, so, also, did the order of the
ritual; generally speaking the elaborate ceremonies of mourning for the
dead god, and committing his effigy to the waves, preceded the joyous
celebration of his resurrection, but in Alexandria the sequence was
otherwise; the feast began with the solemn and joyous celebration of the
nuptials of Adonis and Aphrodite, at the conclusion of which a Head, of
papyrus, representing the god, was, with every show of mourning,
committed to the waves, and borne within seven days by a current (always
to be counted upon at that season of the year) to Byblos, where it was
received and welcomed with popular rejoicing <span
id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55). The duration of the feast varied from two
days, as at Alexandria, to seven or eight.

Connected with the longer period of the feast were the so-called
'Gardens of Adonis,' baskets, or pans, planted with quick growing seeds,
which speedily come to fruition, and as speedily wither. In the modern
survivals of the cult three days form the general term for the flowering
of these gardens <span id="fr_56"></span>[2](#fn_56).

The most noticeable feature of the ritual was the prominence assigned to
women; "ce sont les femmes qui le pleurent, et qui l'accompagnent à sa
tombe. Elles sanglotent éperdument pendant les nuits,--c'est leur dieu
plus

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

que tout autre, et seules elles veulent pleurer sa mort, et chanter sa
résurrection <span id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_57)."

Thus in the tenth century the festival received the Arabic name of
*El-Bûgat*, or 'The Festival of the Weeping Women <span
id="fr_58"></span>[2](#fn_58).'

One very curious practice during these celebrations was that of cutting
off the hair in honour of the god; women who hesitated to make this
sacrifice must offer themselves to strangers, either in the temple, or
on the market-place, the gold received as the price of their favours
being offered to the goddess. This obligation only lasted for one
day <span id="fr_59"></span>[3](#fn_59). It was also customary for the
priests of Adonis to mutilate themselves in imitation of the god, a
distinct proof, if one were needed, of the traditional cause of his
death <span id="fr_60"></span>[4](#fn_60).

Turning from a consideration of the Adonis ritual, its details, and
significance, to an examination of the Grail romances, we find that
their *mise-en-scène* provides a striking series of parallels with the
Classical celebrations, parallels, which instead of vanishing, as
parallels have occasionally an awkward habit of doing, before closer
investigation, rather gain in force the more closely they are studied.

Thus the central figure is either a dead knight on a bier (as in the
*Gawain* versions), or a wounded king on a litter; when wounded the
injury corresponds with that suffered by Adonis and Attis <span
id="fr_61"></span>[5](#fn_61).

Closely connected with the wounding of the king is the destruction which
has fallen on the land, which will be removed when the king is healed.
The version of *Sone de Nansai* is here of extreme interest; the
position is stated with so much

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

clearness and precision that the conclusion cannot be evaded--we are
face to face with the dreaded calamity which it was the aim of the
Adonis ritual to avert, the temporary suspension of all the reproductive
energies of Nature <span id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62).

While the condition of the king is the cause of general and vociferous
lamentation, a special feature, never satisfactorily accounted for, is
the presence of a weeping woman, or several weeping women. Thus in the
interpolated visit of Gawain to the Grail castle, found in the C group
of *Perceval* MSS., the Grail-bearer weeps piteously, as she does also
in *Diû Crône* <span id="fr_63"></span>[2](#fn_63).

In the version of the prose *Lancelot* Gawain, during the night, sees
twelve maidens come to the door of the chamber where the Grail is kept,
kneel down, and weep bitterly, in fact behave precisely as did the
classical mourners for Adonis--"Elles sanglotent éperdument pendant la
nuit <span id="fr_64"></span>[3](#fn_64)." --

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

behaviour for which the text, as it now stands, provides no shadow of
explanation or excuse. The Grail is here the most revered of Christian
relics, the dwellers in the castle of Corbenic have all that heart can
desire, with the additional prestige of being the guardians of the
Grail; if the feature be not a belated survival, which has lost its
meaning, it defies any explanation whatsoever.

In *Diû Crône* alone, where the Grail-bearer and her maidens are the
sole living beings in an abode of the Dead, is any explanation of the
'Weeping Women' attempted, but an interpolated passage in the Heralds'
College MS. of the *Perceval* states that when the Quest is achieved,
the hero shall learn the cause of the maiden's grief, and also the
explanation of the Dead Knight upon the bier:

 "del graal q'vient aprés  
E purquei plure tut adés  
La pucele qui le sustient  
De la biere qu'aprés vient  
Savera la vérité adonques  
Ceo que nul ne pot saveir onques  
Pur nule rien qui avenist."  fo. 180*vo*-181.

Of course in the *Perceval* there is neither a Weeping Maiden, nor a
Bier, and the passage must therefore be either an unintelligent addition
by a scribe familiar with the *Gawain* versions, or an interpolation
from a source which did contain the features in question. So far as the
texts at our disposal are concerned, both features belong exclusively to
the *Gawain*, and not to the *Perceval* Quest. The interpolation is
significant as it indicates a surviving sense of the importance of this
feature.

In the *Perlesvaus* we have the curious detail of a maiden who has lost
her hair as a result of the hero's failure to ask the question, and the
consequent sickness of the Fisher King. The occurrence of this detail
may be purely fortuitous,

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

but at the same time it is admissible to point out that the Adonis cults
do provide us with a parallel in the enforced loss of hair by the women
taking part in these rites, while no explanation of this curious feature
has so far as I am aware been suggested by critics of the text <span
id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65).

We may also note the fact that the Grail castle is always situated in
the close vicinity of water, either on or near the sea, or on the banks
of an important river. In two cases the final home of the Grail is in a
monastery situated upon an island. The presence of water, either sea, or
river, is an important feature in the Adonis cult, the effigy of the
dead god being, not buried in the earth, but thrown into the water <span
id="fr_66"></span>[2](#fn_66).

It will thus be seen that, in suggesting a form of Nature worship,
analogous to this well-known cult, as the possible ultimate source from
which the incidents and *mise-en-scène* of the Grail stories were
derived, we are relying not upon an isolated parallel, but upon a group
of parallels, which alike in incident and intention offer, not merely a
resemblance to, but also an explanation of, the perplexing problems of
the Grail literature. We must now consider the question whether
incidents so remote in time may fairly and justly be utilized in this
manner.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_36"></span>[32:1](frr07.htm#fr_36) Cf. Frazer, *Adonis,
Attis, Osiris*, p. 5.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[33:1](frr07.htm#fr_37) In this connection not
only the epoch-making works of Mannhardt and Frazer, which are more
specifically devoted to an examination of Folk-belief and practice
should be studied, but also works such as *The Mediaeval Stage*, E. K.
Chambers; Themis, J. E. Harrison; *The Origin of Attic Comedy*, F.
Cornford; and Sir Gilbert Murray's essay on the evolution of the Greek
Drama, published in Miss Harrison's *Themis*. The cumulative evidence is
most striking.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[34:1](frr07.htm#fr_38) A full study of this
evolutionary process will be found in Miss Harrison's *Themis, A Study
of Greek Social Origins*, referred to above.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[35:1](frr07.htm#fr_39) Baudissin, in his
exhaustive study of these cults, *Adonis und Esmun*, comes to the
conclusion that Tammuz and Adonis are different gods, owing their origin
to a common parent deity. Where the original conception arose is
doubtful; whether in Babylon, in Canaan, or in a land where the common
ancestors of Phoenicians and Babylonian Semites formed an original unit.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[36:1](frr07.htm#fr_40) Cf. *Tammuz and Ishtar*,
S. Langdon, p. 5.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[36:2](frr07.htm#fr_41) It may be well to note
here the 'Life' deity has no proper name; he is only known by an
appellative; *Damu-zi, Damu*, 'faithful son,' or 'son and consort,' is
only a general epithet, which designates the dying god in a theological
aspect, just as the name *Adōni*, 'my lord,' certainly replaced a more
specific name for the god of Byblos. *Esmun* of Sidon, another type of
Adonis, is a title only, and means simply, 'the name.' Cf. Langdon, *op.
cit.* p. 7. Cf. this with previous passages on the evolution of the
Greek idea from a nameless entity to a definite god. Mr Langdon's
remarks on the evolution of the Tammuz cult should be carefully studied
in view of the theory maintained by Sir W. Ridgeway--that the Vegetation
deities were all of them originally men.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[37:1](frr07.htm#fr_42) From a liturgy employed
at Nippur in the period of the Isin dynasty. Langdon, *op. cit.* p. 11.
Also, *Sumerian and Babylonian Psalms*, p. 338.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[37:2](frr07.htm#fr_43) Cf. Langdon, *Tammuz and
Ishtar*, p. 23.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[38:1](frr07.htm#fr_44) What we have been able
to ascertain of the Sumerian-Babylonian religion points to it rather as
a religion of mourning and supplication, than of joy and thanksgiving.
The people seem to have been in perpetual dread of their gods, who
require to be appeased by continual acts of humiliation. Thus the 9th,
15th, 19th, 28th, and 29th of the month were all days of sack-cloth and
ashes, days of wailing; the 19th especially was 'the day of the wrath of
Gulu.'

<span id="fn_45"></span>[38:2](frr07.htm#fr_45) Cf. Langdon, *op. cit.*
p. 24.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[39:1](frr07.htm#fr_46) Cf. Langdon, *op. cit.*
p. 26.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[39:2](frr07.htm#fr_47) The most complete
enquiry into the nature of the god is to be found in <span
id="page_40">p. 40</span> Baudissin, *Adonis und Esmun*. For the details
of the cult cf. Farnell, *Cults of the Greek States*, Vol. II.; Vellay,
*Adonis* (*Annales du Musée Guimet*). For the Folk-lore evidence cf.
Mannhardt, *Wald un Feld-Kulte*; Frazer, *The Golden Bough*, and
*Adonis, Attis and Osiris*. These remarks apply also to the kindred cult
of Attis, which as we shall see later forms an important link in our
chain of evidence. The two cults are practically identical and scholars
are frequently at a loss to which group surviving fragments of the
ritual should be assigned.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[41:1](frr07.htm#fr_48) In this connection note
the extremely instructive remarks of Miss Harrison in the chapter on
Herakles in the work referred to above. She points out that the
*Eniautos Daimon* never becomes entirely and Olympian, but always
retains traces of his 'Earth' origin. This principle is particularly
well illustrated by Adonis, who, though, admitted to Olympus as the
lover of Aphrodite, is yet by this very nature forced to return to the
earth, and descend to the realm of Persephone. This agrees well with the
conclusion reached by Baudissin (*Adonis und Esmun*, p. 71) that Adonis
belongs to "einer Klasse von Wesen sehr unbestimmter Art, die wohl über
den Menschen aber unter den grossen Göttern stehen."

<span id="fn_49"></span>[41:2](frr07.htm#fr_49) Cf. Vellay, *op. cit.*
p. 93. Dulaure, *Des Divinités Génératrices*. If Baudissin is correct,
and the introduction of the Boar a later addition to the story, it would
seem to indicate the intrusion of a phallic element into <span
id="page_42">p. 42</span> ritual which at first, like that of Tammuz,
dealt merely with the death of the god. The Attis form, on the contrary,
appears to have been phallic from the first. Cf. Baudissin, *Adonis und
Esmun*, p. 160.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[42:1](frr07.htm#fr_50) *Op. cit.* p. 83.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[42:2](frr07.htm#fr_51) Cf. L. von Schroeder,
*Vollendung den Arischen Mysterium*, p. 14.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[42:3](frr07.htm#fr_52) It may be well to
explain the exact meaning attached to these terms by the author. In
Professor von Schroeder's view *Mysterium* may be held to connote a
drama in which the gods themselves are actors; *Mimus* on the contrary,
is the term applied to a drama which treats of the doings of mortals.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[43:1](frr07.htm#fr_53) *Op. cit.* Vol. II. p.
647.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[43:2](frr07.htm#fr_54) *Op. cit.* p. 115. Much
of the uncertainty as to date is doubtless due to the reflective
influence of other forms of the cult; the Tammuz celebrations were held
from June 20th, to July 20th, when the Dog-star Sirius was in the
ascendant, and vegetation failed beneath the heat of the summer sun. In
other, and more temperate, climates the date would fall later. Where,
however, the cult was an off-shoot of a Tammuz original (as might be the
case through emigration) the tendency would be to retain the original
date.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[44:1](frr07.htm#fr_55) Cf. Vellay, *op. cit.*
p. 55; Mannhardt, Vol. II. pp. 277-78, for a description of the feast.
With regard to the order and sequence of the celebration cf. Miss
Harrison's remark, *Themis*, p. 415: "In the cyclic monotony of the
*Eniautos Daimon* it matters little whether Death follows Resurrection,
or Resurrection, Death."

<span id="fn_56"></span>[44:2](frr07.htm#fr_56) Cf. Mannhardt, *supra*,
p. 279.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[45:1](frr07.htm#fr_57) Cf. Vellay, *op. cit.*
p. 103. This seems also to have been the case with Tammuz, cf. Ezekiel,
Chap. viii. v. 14.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[45:2](frr07.htm#fr_58) Cf. Frazer, *The Golden
Bough*, under heading *Adonis*.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[45:3](frr07.htm#fr_59) Vellay, p. 130,
Mannhardt, Vol. II. p. 287; note the writer's suggestion that the women
here represent the goddess, the stranger, the risen Adonis.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[45:4](frr07.htm#fr_60) Cf. Vellay, p. 93.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[45:5](frr07.htm#fr_61) *Vide supra*, pp.
[20](frr05.htm#page_20). [21](frr05.htm#page_21).

<span id="fn_62"></span>[46:1](frr07.htm#fr_62) *Supra*, [p.
21](frr05.htm#page_21).

<span id="fn_63"></span>[46:2](frr07.htm#fr_63) Cf. Potvin, appendix to
Vol. III.; *Sir Gawain and the Grail Castle*, pp. 41, 44, and note.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[46:3](frr07.htm#fr_64) My use of this parallel
has been objected to on the ground that the prose *Lancelot* is a late
text, and therefore cannot be appealed to as evidence for original
incidents. But the *Lancelot* in its original form was held by so
competent an authority as the late M. Gaston Paris to have been one of
the earliest, if not the very earliest, of French prose texts. (Cf. M.
Paris's review of Suchier and Birch-Hirschfield's *Geschichte der Franz.
Litt.*) The adventure in question is a 'Gawain' adventure; we do not
know whence it was derived, and it may well have been included in an
early version of the romance. Apart from the purely literary question,
from the strictly critical point of view the adventure is here obviously
out of place, and entirely devoid of *raison d'être*. If the origins of
the Grail legend is really to be found in these cults, which are not a
dead but a living tradition (how truly living, the exclusively literary
critic has little idea), we are surely entitled to draw attention to the
obvious parallels, no matter in which text they appear. I am not engaged
in reconstructing the original *form* of the Grail story, but in
endeavoring to ascertain the ultimate *source*, and it is surely
justifiable to point out that, in effect, no matter what version we
take, we find in that version points of contact with one special group
of popular belief and practice. If I be wrong in my conclusions my
critics have only to suggest another origin for this particular feature
of the romance--as a matter of fact, they have failed to do so.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[48:1](frr07.htm#fr_65) Cf. *Perlesvaus*, Branch
II. Chap. I.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[48:2](frr07.htm#fr_66) Throwing into, or
drenching with, water is a well known part of the 'Fertility' ritual; it
is a case of sympathetic magic, acting as a rain charm.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Medieval and Modern Forms of Nature Ritual](frr08)
