[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends/Sagas](../index) 
[Arthur](../eng/index.htm#arthurian)  [Index](index)  [Previous](frr08) 
[Next](frr10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

# CHAPTER VI

### THE SYMBOLS

In the previous chapters we have discussed the Grail Legend from a
general, rather than a specific, point of view; *i.e.*, we have
endeavoured to ascertain what was the real character of the task imposed
upon the hero, and what the nature and value of his achievement.

We have been led to the conclusion that that achievement was, in the
first instance, of an altruistic character--it was no question of
advantages, temporal or spiritual, which should accrue to the Quester
himself, but rather of definite benefits to be won for others, the
freeing of a ruler and his land from the dire results of a punishment
which, falling upon the King, was fraught with the most disastrous
consequences for his kingdom.

We have found, further, that this close relation between the ruler and
his land, which resulted in the ill of one becoming the calamity of all,
is no mere literary invention, proceeding from the fertile imagination
of a twelfth century court poet, but a deeply rooted popular belief, of
practically immemorial antiquity and inexhaustible vitality; we can
trace it back thousands of years before the Christian era, we find it
fraught with decisions of life and death to-day.

Further, we find in that belief a tendency to express itself in certain
ceremonial practices, which retain in a greater or less degree the
character of the ritual observances of which they are the survival. Mr
E. K. Chambers, in *The Mediaeval Stage*, remarks: "If the comparative
study of Religion proves anything it is, that the traditional beliefs

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

and customs of the mediaeval or modern peasant are in nine cases out of
ten but the *detritus* of heathen mythology and heathen worship,
enduring with but little external change in the shadow of a hostile
faith. This is notably true of the village festivals and their *ludi*.
Their full significance only appears when they are regarded as fragments
of forgotten cults, the naïve cults addressed by a primitive folk to the
beneficent deities of field and wood and river, or the shadowy populace
of its own dreams <span id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_84)." We may, I think,
take it that we have established at least the possibility that in the
Grail romances we possess, in literary form, an example of the
*detritus* above referred to, the fragmentary record of the secret
ritual of a Fertility cult.

Having reached this hypothetical conclusion, our next step must be to
examine the Symbols of this cult, the group of mysterious objects which
forms the central point of the action, a true understanding of the
nature of these objects being as essential for our success as
interpreters of the story as it was for the success of the Quester in
days of old. We must ask whether these objects, the Grail itself,
whether Cup or Dish; the Lance; the Sword; the Stone--one and all
invested with a certain atmosphere of awe, credited with strange
virtues, with sanctity itself, will harmonize with the proposed
solution, will range themselves fitly and fairly within the framework of
this hypothetical ritual.

That they should do so is a matter of capital importance; were it
otherwise the theory advanced might well, as some of my critics have
maintained, 'never get beyond the region of ingenious speculation,' but
it is precisely upon the fact that this theory of origin, and so far as
criticism has gone, this theory alone, does permit of a natural and
unforced interpretation of these related symbols that I rely as one of
the most convincing proofs of the correctness of my hypothesis.

 

Before commencing the investigation there is one point which I would
desire to emphasize, *viz.*, the imperative necessity for treating the
Symbols or Talismans, call them what we will, on the same principle as
we have treated the incidents of the story, *i.e.*, as a connected
whole. That they be not separated the one *from* the other, and made the
subject of independent treatment, but that they be regarded in their
relation the one *to* the other, and that no theory of origin be held
admissible which does not allow for that relation as a primitive and
indispensable factor. It may be the modern tendency to specialize which
is apt to blind scholars to the essential importance of regarding their
object of study as a whole, that fosters in them a habit of focussing
their attention upon that one point or incident of the story which lends
itself to treatment in their special line of study, and which induces
them to minimize, or ignore, those elements which lie outside their
particular range. But, whatever the cause, it is indubitable that this
method of 'criticism by isolation' has been, and is, one of the main
factors which have operated in retarding the solution of the Grail
problem.

So long as critics of the story will insist on pulling it into little
pieces, selecting one detail here, another there, for study and
elucidation, so long will the *ensemble* result be chaotic and
unsatisfactory. We shall continue to have a number of monographs, more
or less scholarly in treatment--one dealing with the Grail as a
Food-providing talisman, and that alone; another with the Grail as a
vehicle of spiritual sustenance. One that treats of the Lance as a Pagan
weapon, and nothing more; another that regards it as a Christian relic,
and nothing less. At one moment the object of the study will be the
Fisher King, without any relation to the symbols he guards, or the land
he rules; at the next it will be the relation of the Quester to the
Fisher

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

\[paragraph continues\] King, without any explanation of the tasks
assigned to him by the story. The result obtained is always quite
satisfactory to the writer, often plausible, sometimes in a measure
sound, but it would defy the skill of the most synthetic genius to
co-ordinate the results thus obtained, and combine them in one
harmonious whole. They are like pieces of a puzzle, each of which has
been symmetrically cut and trimmed, till they lie side by side,
un-fitting, and un-related.

And we have been pursuing this method for over fifty years, and are
still, apparently, content to go on, each devoting attention to the
symmetrical perfection of his own little section of the puzzle, quite
indifferent to the fact that our neighbour is in possession of an
equally neatly trimmed fragment, which entirely refuses to fit in with
our own!

Is it not time that we should frankly admit the unsatisfactory results
of these years of labour, and honestly face the fact that while we now
have at our disposal an immense mass of interesting and suggestive
material often of high value, we have failed, so far, to formulate a
conclusion which, by embracing and satisfying the manifold conditions of
the problem, will command general acceptance? And if this failure be
admitted, may not its cause be sought in the faulty method which has
failed to recognize in the Grail story an original whole, in which the
parts--the action, the actors, the Symbols, the result to be obtained,
incident, and intention--stood from the very first in intimate relation
the one to the other? That while in process of utilization as a literary
theme these various parts have suffered modification and accretion from
this, or that, side, the problem of the *ultimate* source remains
thereby unaffected?

Such a reversal of method as I suggest will, I submit, not only provide
us with a critical solution capable of general acceptance, but it will
also enable us to utilize, and appreciate at their due value, the result
of researches which

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

at the present moment appear to be mutually destructive the one of the
other. Thus, while the purely Folk-lore interpretation of the Grail and
Lance excludes the Christian origin, and the theory of the exclusively
Christian origin negatives the Folk-lore, the pre-existence of these
symbols in a popular ritual setting would admit, indeed would invite,
later accretion alike from folk belief and ecclesiastical legend.

We are the gainers by any light that can possibly be thrown upon the
process of development of the story, but studies of the separate symbols
while they may, and do, afford valuable *data* for determining the
character and period of certain accretions, should not be regarded as
supplying proof of the origin of the related group.

Reference to some recent studies in the Legend will make my meaning
clear. A reviewer of my small *Quest of the Holy Grail* volume remarked
that I appeared to be ignorant of Miss Peebles's study *The Legend of
Longinus* "which materially strengthens the evidence for the Christian
origin <span id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_85)." Now this is precisely what,
in my view, the study in question, which I knew and possessed, does not
do. As evidence for the fact that the Grail legend has taken over
certain features derived from the popular 'Longinus' story (which,
incidentally, no one disputed), the essay is, I hold, sound, and
valuable; as affording material for determining the source of the Grail
story, it is, on the other hand, entirely without value.

On the principle laid down above no theory which purports to be
explanatory of the source of one symbol can be held satisfactory in a
case where that symbol does not stand alone. We cannot accept for the
Grail story a theory of origin which concerns itself with the Lance, as
independent

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

of the Grail. In the study referred to the author has been at immense
pains to examine the different versions of the 'Longinus' legend, and to
trace its development in literature; in no single instance do we find
Longinus and his Lance associated with a Cup or Vase, receptacle of the
Sacred Blood.

The plain fact is that in Christian art and tradition Lance and Cup are
not associated symbols. The Lance or Spear, as an instrument of the
Passion, is found in conjunction with the Cross, Nails, Sponge, and
Crown of Thorns, (anyone familiar with the wayside Crosses of Catholic
Europe will recognize this), not with the Chalice of the Mass <span
id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86). This latter is associated with the Host,
or *Agnus Dei*. Still less is the Spear to be found in connection with
the Grail in its Food-providing form of a Dish.

No doubt to this, critics who share the views of Golther and Burdach
will object, "but what of the Byzantine Mass? Do we not there find a
Spear connected with the Chalice <span id="fr_87"></span>[2](#fn_87)?"

I very much doubt whether we do--the so-called 'Holy Spear' of the
Byzantine, and present Greek, liturgy is simply a small silver
spear-shaped knife, nor can I discover that it was ever anything else. I
have made careful enquiries of liturgical scholars, and consulted
editions of Oriental liturgies, but I can find no evidence that the
knife (the use of which is to divide the Loaf which, in the Oriental
rite, corresponds to the Wafer of the Occidental, in a manner
symbolically corresponding to the Wounds actually inflicted on the
Divine Victim) was ever other than what it is to-day. It seems obvious,
from the method of employment, that an

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

actual Spear could hardly have been used, it would have been an
impossibly unwieldy instrument for the purpose.

Nor is the 'procession' in which the elements are carried from the
Chapel of the Prothĕsis to the Sanctuary of a public character
comparable with that of the Grail castle; the actual ceremony of the
Greek Mass takes place, of course, behind a veil. A point of
considerable interest, however, is, what caused this difference in the
Byzantine liturgy? What were the influences which led to the
introduction of a feature unknown to the Western rite? If, as the result
of the evidence set forth in these pages, the ultimate origin of the
Grail story be finally accepted as deriving from a prehistoric ritual
possessing elements of extraordinary persistence and vitality, then the
*mise-en-scène* of that story is older than the Byzantine ritual.
Students of the subject are well aware that the tradition of ancient
pre-Christian rites and ceremonies lingered on in the East long after
they had been banished by the more practical genius of the West. It may
well prove that so far from the Grail story being a reminiscence of the
Byzantine rite, that rite itself has been affected by a ritual of which
the Grail legend preserves a fragmentary record.

In my view a Christian origin for Lance and Cup, as associated symbols,
has not been made out; still less can it be postulated for Lance and Cup
as members of an extended group, including Dish, Sword, and Stone.

On this point Professor Brown's attempt to find in Irish tradition the
origin of the Grail symbols is distinctly more satisfactory <span
id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_88).

I cannot accept as decisive the solution proposed, which seems to me to
be open to much the same criticism as that which would find in the Lance
the Lance of Longinus--both are occupied with details, rather than with
*ensemble*;

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

both would find their justification as offering evidence of accretion,
rather than of origin; neither can provide us with the required
*mise-en-scène*.

But Professor Brown's theory is the more sound in that he is really
dealing with a group of associated symbols; in his view Lance and Grail
alike belong to the treasures of the Tuatha de Danann (that legendary
race of Irish ancestors, who were at once gods and kings), and therefore
*ab initio* belong together. But while I should, on the whole, accept
the affiliation of the two groups, and believe that the treasures of the
Tuatha de Danann really correspond to the symbols displayed in the hall
of the Grail castle, I cannot consider that the one is the origin of the
other. There is one very fundamental difference, the importance of which
I cannot ignore, but which, I believe, has hitherto escaped Professor
Brown's attention.

The object corresponding to the Grail itself is the cauldron of the
Dagda, "No company ever went from it unthankful" (or
'unsatisfied') <span id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_89).

Now this can in no sense be considered as a Cup, or Vase, nor is it the
true parallel to a Dish. The connection with the Grail is to be found
solely and exclusively in the food-providing properties ascribed to
both. But even here the position is radically different; the impression
we derive from the Irish text and its analogous parallels is that of
size (it is also called a 'tub'), and inexhaustible content, it is a
cauldron of plenty <span id="fr_90"></span>[2](#fn_90). Now, neither of
these qualities can be postulated of the Grail; whatever its form, Cup
or Dish, it can easily be borne (in uplifted hands, *entre ses mains
hautement porte*) by a maiden, which certainly could not be postulated
of a cauldron! Nor is there any proof

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

that the Vessel itself contained the food with which the folk of the
Grail castle were regaled; the texts rather point to the conclusion that
the appearance of the Grail synchronized with a mysterious supply of
food of a choice and varied character. There is never any hint that the
folk feed *from the Grail*; the only suggestion of such feeding is in
the 'Oiste,' by which the father of the Fisher King (or the King
himself) is nourished.

In certain texts the separation of the two is clearly brought out; in
*Joseph of Arimathea*, for instance, the Fish caught by Brons is to be
placed at one end of the table, the Grail at the other. In Gawain's
adventure at the Grail castle, in the prose *Lancelot*, as the Grail is
carried through the hall "forthwith were the tables replenished with the
choicest meats in the world," but the table before Gawain remains void
and bare <span id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_91). I submit that while the
Grail is in certain phases a food-supplying talisman it is not one of
the same character as the cauldrons of plenty; also while the food
supply of these latter has the marked characteristic of *quantity*, that
of the Grail is remarkable rather for *quality*, its choice character is
always insisted upon.

The perusal of Professor Brown's subsequent study, *Notes on Celtic
Cauldrons of Plenty and The Land-Beneath-the-Waves*, has confirmed me in
my view that these special objects belong to another line of tradition
altogether; that which deals with an inexhaustible submarine source of
life, examples of which will be found in the 'Sampo' of the Finnish
*Kalewala*, and the ever-grinding mills of popular folk-tale <span
id="fr_92"></span>[2](#fn_92). The fundamental idea here seems to be
that of the origin of all Life from Water, a very ancient idea, but one
which, though akin to the Grail tradition, is yet quite

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

distinct therefrom. The study of this special theme would, I believe,
produce valuable results <span id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_93).

On the whole, I am of the opinion that the treasures of the Tuatha de
Danann and the symbols of the Grail castle go back to a common original,
but that they have developed on different lines; in the process of this
development one 'Life' symbol has been exchanged for another <span
id="fr_94"></span>[2](#fn_94).

But Lance and Cup (or Vase) were in truth connected together in a
symbolic relation long ages before the institution of Christianity, or
the birth of Celtic tradition. They are sex symbols of immemorial
antiquity and world-wide diffusion, the Lance, or Spear, representing
the Male, the Cup, or Vase, the Female, reproductive energy <span
id="fr_95"></span>[3](#fn_95).

Found in juxtaposition, the Spear upright in the Vase, as in the
*Bleheris* and *Balin* (both, be it noted, Gawain) forms, their
signification is admitted by all familiar with 'Life' symbolism, and
they are absolutely in place as forming part of a ritual dealing with
the processes of life and reproductive vitality <span
id="fr_96"></span>[4](#fn_96).

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

A most remarkable and significant use of these symbols is found in the
ceremonies of the Samurai, the noble warrior caste of Japan. The
aspirant was (I am told still is) admitted into the caste at the age of
fourteen, when he was given over to the care of a guardian at least
fifteen years his senior, to whom he took an oath of obedience, which
was sworn upon the Spear. He remained celibate during the period covered
by the oath. When the Samurai was held to have attained the degree of
responsibility which would fit him for the full duties of a citizen, a
second solemn ceremony was held, at which he was released from his
previous vows, and presented with the Cup; he was henceforth free to
marry, but intercourse with women previous to this ceremony was at one
time punishable with death <span id="fr_97"></span>[1](#fn_97).

That Lance and Cup are, *outside* the Grail story, 'Life' symbols, and
have been such from time immemorial, is a fact; why, then should they
not retain that character inside the framework of that story? An
acceptance of this interpretation will not only be in harmony with the
general *mise-en-scène*, but it will also explain finally and
satisfactorily, (*a*) the dominant position frequently assigned to the
Lance; (*b*) the fact that, while the Lance is borne in procession by a
youth, the Grail is carried by a maiden--the sex of the bearer
corresponds with the symbol borne <span id="fr_98"></span>[2](#fn_98).

But Lance and Cup, though the most prominent of the Symbols, do not
always appear alone, but are associated

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

with other objects, the significance of which is not always apparent.
Thus the Dish, which is sometimes the form assumed by the Grail itself,
at other times appears as a *tailléor*, or carving platter of silver,
carried in the same procession as the Grail; or there may be two small
*tailléors*; finally, a Sword appears in varying *rôles* in the story.

I have already referred to the fact, first pointed out by the late Mr
Alfred Nutt <span id="fr_99"></span>[1](#fn_99), that the four treasures
of the Tuatha de Danann correspond generally with the group of symbols
found in the Grail romances; this correspondence becomes the more
interesting in view of the fact that these mysterious Beings are now
recognized as alike Demons of Fertility and Lords of Life. As Mr Nutt
subsequently pointed out, the 'Treasures' may well be, Sword and
Cauldron certainly are, 'Life' symbols.

Of direct connection between these Celtic objects and the Grail story
there is no trace; as remarked above, we have no Irish Folk or Hero tale
at all corresponding to the Legend; the relation must, therefore, go
back beyond the date of formation of these tales, *i.e.*, it must be
considered as one of origin rather than of dependence.

But we have further evidence that these four objects do, in fact, form a
special group entirely independent of any appearance in Folk-lore or
Romance. They exist to-day as the four suits of the Tarot.

Students of the Grail texts, whose attention is mainly occupied with
Medieval Literature, may not be familiar with the word Tarot, or aware
of its meaning. It is the name given to a pack of cards, seventy-eight
in number, of which twenty-two are designated as the 'Keys.'

These cards are divided into four suits, which correspond with those of
the ordinary cards; they are:

Cup (Chalice, or Goblet)--Hearts.<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>  
Lance (Wand, or Sceptre)--Diamonds.  
Sword--Spades.  
Dish (Circles, or Pentangles, the form varies)--Clubs.

To-day the Tarot has fallen somewhat into disrepute, being principally
used for purposes of divination, but its origin, and precise relation to
our present playing-cards, are questions of considerable antiquarian
interest. Were these cards the direct parents of our modern pack, or are
they entirely distinct therefrom <span id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_100)?

Some writers are disposed to assign a very high antiquity to the Tarot.
Traditionally, it is said to have been brought from Egypt; there is no
doubt that parallel designs and combinations are to be found in the
surviving decorations of Egyptian temples, notably in the astronomic
designs on the ceiling of one of the halls of the palace of Medinet
Abou, which is supported on twenty-two columns (a number corresponding
to the 'keys' of the Tarot), and also repeated in a calendar sculptured
on the southern façade of the same building, under a sovereign of the
XXIII dynasty. This calendar is supposed to have been connected with the
periodic rise and fall of the waters of the Nile <span
id="fr_101"></span>[2](#fn_101).

The Tarot has also been connected with an ancient Chinese monument,
traditionally erected in commemoration of the drying up of the waters of
the Deluge by Yao. The face of this monument is divided up into small
sections corresponding in size and number with the cards of the Tarot,
and bearing characters which have, so far, not been deciphered.

What is certain is that these cards are used to-day by the Gipsies for
purposes of divination, and the opinion of those

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

who have studied the subject is that there is some real ground for the
popular tradition that they were introduced into Europe by this
mysterious people.

In a very interesting article on the subject in *The Journal of the
Gipsy-Lore Society* <span id="fr_102"></span>[1](#fn_102), Mr De la
Hoste Ranking examines closely into the figures depicted on the various
cards, and the names attached to the suits by the Gipsies. He comes to
the conclusion that many of the words are of Sanskrit, or Hindustani,
origin, and sums up the result of the internal evidence as follows: "The
Tarot was introduced by a race speaking an Indian dialect. The figure
known as 'The Pope' shows the influence of the Orthodox Eastern Faith;
he is bearded, and carries the Triple Cross. The card called 'The King'
represents a figure with the head-dress of a Russian Grand-Duke, and a
shield bearing the Polish eagle. Thus the people who used the Tarot must
have been familiar with a country where the Orthodox Faith prevailed,
and which was ruled by princes of the status of Grand-Dukes. The general
result seems to point to a genuine basis for the belief that the Tarot
was introduced into Europe from the East."

As regards the group of symbols in general, Mr W. B. Yeats, whose
practical acquaintance with Medieval and Modern Magic is well known,
writes: "(1) Cup, Lance, Dish, Sword, in slightly varying forms, have
never lost their mystic significance, and are to-day a part of magical
operations. (2) The memory kept by the four suits of the Tarot, Cup,
Lance, Sword, Pentangle (Dish), is an esoterical notation for
fortune-telling purposes <span id="fr_103"></span>[2](#fn_103)."

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

But if the connection with the Egyptian and Chinese monuments, referred
to above, is genuine, the original use of the 'Tarot' would seem to have
been, not to foretell the Future in general, but to predict the rise and
fall of the waters which brought fertility to the land.

Such use would bring the 'Suits' into line with the analogous symbols of
the Grail castle and the treasures of the Tuatha de Danann, both of
which we have seen to be connected with the embodiment of the
reproductive forces of Nature.

If it is difficult to establish a direct connection between these two
latter, it is practically impossible to argue any connection between
either group and the 'Tarot'; no one has as yet ventured to suggest the
popularity of the works of Chrétien de Troyes among the Gipsies! Yet the
correspondence can hardly be fortuitous. I would suggest that, while
Lance and Cup, in their associated form, are primarily symbols of Human
Life energy, in conjunction with others they formed a group of
'Fertility' symbols, connected with a very ancient ritual, of which
fragmentary survivals alone have been preserved to us.

This view will, I believe, receive support from the evidence of the
ceremonial Dances which formed so important a part of 'Fertility'
ritual, and which survive in so many places to this day. If we find
these symbols reappearing as a part of these dances, their real
significance can hardly be disputed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_84"></span>[63:1](frr09.htm#fr_84) *Op. cit.* Vol. I. p.
94.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[66:1](frr09.htm#fr_85) *The Legend of
Longinus*, R. J. Peebles (Bryn Mawr College monographs, Vol. IX.).

<span id="fn_86"></span>[67:1](frr09.htm#fr_86) I discussed this point
with Miss Lucy Broadwood, Secretary of the Folk-Song Society, who has
made sketches of these Crosses, and she entirely agrees with me. In my
*Quest of the Holy Grail*, pp. 54 *et seq.*, I have pointed out the
absolute dearth of ecclesiastical tradition with regard to the story of
Joseph and the Grail.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[67:2](frr09.htm#fr_87) Cf. *Littaturzeitung*,
XXIV. (1903), p. 2821.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[68:1](frr09.htm#fr_88) Cf. *The Bleeding
Lance*, A. C. L. Brown.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[69:1](frr09.htm#fr_89) Cf. Brown, *op. cit.* p.
35; also A. Nutt, *Studies in the Legend of the Holy Grail*, p. 184.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[69:2](frr09.htm#fr_90) Cf. Brown, *Notes on
Celtic Cauldrons of Plenty*, p. 237.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[70:1](frr09.htm#fr_91) Cf. *Queste*, Malory,
Book XIII. Chap. 7, where the effect is the same.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[70:2](frr09.htm#fr_92) Cf. *Germanische Elben
und Götter beim Estenvolke*, L. von Schroeder (Wien, 1906).

<span id="fn_93"></span>[71:1](frr09.htm#fr_93) I suggested this point
in correspondence with Dr Brugger, who agreed with me that it was worth
working out.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[71:2](frr09.htm#fr_94) Before leaving the
discussion of Professor Brown's theory, I would draw attention to a
serious error made by the author of *The Legend of Longinus*. On p. 191,
she blames Professor Brown for postulating the destructive qualities of
the Lance, on the strength of 'an unsupported passage' in the 'Mons'
MS., whereas the Montpellier text says that the Lance shall bring peace.
Unfortunately, it is this latter version which is unsupported, all the
MSS., without even excepting B.N. 1429, which as a rule agrees with
Montpellier, give the 'destructive' version.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[71:3](frr09.htm#fr_95) Cf. Dulaure, *Des
Divinités Génératrices*, p. 77. Also additional chapter to last edition
by Van Gennep, p. 333; L. von Schroeder, *Mysterium und Mimus*, pp.
279-80, for symbolic use of the Spear. McCulloch, *Religion of the
Celts*, p. 302, suggests that it is not impossible that the cauldron =
Hindu *yoni*, which of course would bring it into line with the above
suggested meaning of the Grail. I think however that the real
significance of the cauldron is that previously indicated.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[71:4](frr09.htm#fr_96) It is interesting to
note that this relative position of Lance and Grail lingers on in late
and fully Christianized versions; cf. Sommer, *The Quest of the Holy
Grail*, *Romania*, XXXVI. p. 575.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[72:1](frr09.htm#fr_97) My informant on this
point was a scholar, resident in Japan, who gave me the facts within his
personal knowledge. I referred the question to Prof. Basil Hall
Chamberlain, who wrote in answer that he had not himself met with the
practice but that the Samurai ceremonies differed in different
provinces, and my informant might well be correct.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[72:2](frr09.htm#fr_98) This explanation has at
least the merit of simplicity as compared with that proposed by the
author of *The Legend of Longinus*, pp. 209 *et seq.*, which would
connect the feature with an obscure heretical practice of the early
Irish church. It would also meet Professor Brown's very reasonable
objections, *The Bleeding Lance*, p. 8; cf. also remarks by Baist quoted
in the foot-note above.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[73:1](frr09.htm#fr_99) Cf. my *Legend of Sir
Perceval*, Vol. II. pp. 314-315, note.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[74:1](frr09.htm#fr_100) Mr A. E. Waite, who
has published a book on the subject, informs me that the 17 cards
preserved in the Bibliothèque du Roi (Bibl. Nationale?) as specimens of
the work of the painter Charles Gringonneur, are really Tarots.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[74:2](frr09.htm#fr_101) Falconnier, in a
brochure on *Les XXII Lames Hermétiques du Tarot*, gives reproductions
of these Egyptian paintings.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[75:1](frr09.htm#fr_102) *Journal of the
Gipsy-Lore Society*, Vol. II. New Series, pp. 14-37.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[75:2](frr09.htm#fr_103) From a private letter.
The ultimate object of Magic in all ages was, and is, to obtain control
of the sources of Life. Hence, whatever was the use of these objects (of
which I know nothing), their appearance in this connection is
significant.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. The Sword Dance](frr10)
