[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe20078)  [Next](sbe20080) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

# THE EIGHTH KHANDHAKA.

#### REGULATIONS AS TO THE DUTIES OF THE BHIKKHUS TOWARDS ONE ANOTHER.

#### 1.

1\. Now at that time the Blessed One was staying at Sâvatthi, in Anâtha
Pi*nd*ika's Ârâma.

Now at that time incoming Bhikkhus entered the Ârâma with their sandals
on <span id="fr_757"></span>[1](#fn_743), or with sunshades held up over
them <span id="fr_758"></span>[2](#fn_744), or with their heads muffled
up <span id="fr_759"></span>[3](#fn_745), or with their upper robe
carried in a bundle on their heads <span
id="fr_760"></span>[4](#fn_746); and they washed their feet in the
drinking-water; and they did not salute resident Bhikkhus senior to
them, nor ask them where they (the incomers) should sleep.

And a certain incoming Bhikkhu undid the bolt <span
id="fr_761"></span>[5](#fn_747) of an unoccupied room (Vihâra), and
opened the door <span id="fr_762"></span>[6](#fn_748), and so entered by
force; and a snake fell

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

on to his back from the lintel above <span
id="fr_763"></span>[1](#fn_749), and he was terrified, and made an
outcry <span id="fr_764"></span>[2](#fn_750).

The Bhikkhus, running up, asked him why he did so. He told them that
matter. Then those Bhikkhus who were moderate in their desires were
vexed and indignant, and murmured, saying, 'How can incoming Bhikkhus
enter the Ârâma . . . .? (&c., as before, down to) . . . . where they
should sleep <span id="fr_765"></span>[3](#fn_751).'

They told the matter to the Blessed One (&c., as usual, I, 1, 2, 3, down
to) he addressed the Bhikkhus, and said, 'Therefore, O Bhikkhus, do I
establish a rule of conduct for incoming Bhikkhus, according to which
they ought to behave.

2\. 'An incoming Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, when he knows he is about to enter
an Ârâma, ought to take off his sandals, turn them upside down <span
id="fr_766"></span>[4](#fn_752), beat them (to get the dust) off, take
them (up again) in his

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

hand, put down his sunshade, uncover his head, arrange his upper robe on
his back <span id="fr_767"></span>[1](#fn_753), and then carefully and
slowly enter the Ârâma.

'When he enters the Ârâma he ought to notice where the resident Bhikkhus
are gone to; and whithersoever they are gone--whether to the service
hall, or to the portico (ma*nd*apa), or to the foot of a tree--thither
he ought to go, and laying his bowl on one side, and his robe on one
side, he ought to take a suitable seat, and sit down.

'He ought to ask as to the drinking-water, and the water for
washing <span id="fr_768"></span>[2](#fn_754), which is appropriated to
the one use, and which to the other. If he has need of drinking-water,
he ought to fetch it and drink. If he has need of water for washing, he
ought to fetch it, and wash his feet. In washing his feet he ought to
pour the water over them with one hand, and wash them with the other; he
ought not to pour the water over them and wash them with one and the
same hand.

'He ought to ask for the cloths with which sandals are cleaned, and
clean his sandals. In cleaning his sandals he ought first to wipe them
with a dry cloth, and afterwards with a wet cloth: and then he ought to
wash the cloths, and lay them on one side <span
id="fr_769"></span>[3](#fn_755).

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

'If the resident Bhikkhu be senior, he ought to be saluted; if junior,
he ought to be made to salute (the incomer). The incomer ought to ask as
to the lodging-place, which has fallen (to his lot) <span
id="fr_770"></span>[1](#fn_756), and whether it is occupied or
unoccupied. He ought to ask as to lawful and unlawful resorts <span
id="fr_771"></span>[2](#fn_757), and as to what families have been
officially declared to be in want <span id="fr_772"></span>[3](#fn_758).

 <span id="fr_773"></span>[4](#fn_759)'He ought to ask as to the
retiring-places, (where they are), and as to the drinking-water, and as
to the water for washing, and as to the staves for walking with, and as
to the place for the conferences of the Sa*m*gha, (and as to) the time
at which he ought to enter (it) and at which he ought to leave it.

3\. 'If the Vihâra be unoccupied, he ought to knock at the door, then to
wait a minute, then to undo the bolt, and open the door, and then, still
standing outside, to look within.

'If that Vihâra is covered with dust <span
id="fr_774"></span>[5](#fn_760), or the beds or chairs are piled one
upon another, and the bedding put in a heap on the top of them <span
id="fr_775"></span>[6](#fn_761),--then if

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

he can do so he ought to clean up the Vihâra. <span
id="fr_776"></span>[1](#fn_762) And when cleaning the Vihâra, he ought
to take the floor matting out and put it down on one side, and the
supports of the bedsteads <span id="fr_777"></span>[2](#fn_763), and the
bolsters <span id="fr_778"></span>[3](#fn_764) and pillows, and the mat
which is used as a seat. Putting the bedsteads and chairs down on to the
ground, and carefully avoiding scratching (the floor with them) or
knocking them up against (the door-posts), he ought to take them outside
the door, and put them down on one side. The spittoon and the board to
lean up against <span id="fr_779"></span>[4](#fn_765) ought to be taken
out, and put down on one side <span id="fr_780"></span>[5](#fn_766).

'If the Vihâra is covered with cobwebs, they should first be removed
with a cloth <span id="fr_781"></span>[6](#fn_767). The casements should
be dusted, especially in the corners and joints.

'If the wall which had been plastered and red-washed, or the floor which
had been laid (with earth) and black-washed <span
id="fr_782"></span>[7](#fn_768), has become dirty in the corners <span
id="fr_783"></span>[8](#fn_769), they should be wiped down with a

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

duster <span id="fr_784"></span>[1](#fn_770) that has been first wetted
and wrung out. If the floor has not been so prepared, it should be
sprinkled over with water and swept <span
id="fr_785"></span>[2](#fn_771), lest the Vihâra should be spoilt <span
id="fr_786"></span>[3](#fn_772) by dust. The sweepings should be
gathered together, and cast aside.

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

4\. 'The floor coverings <span id="fr_787"></span>[1](#fn_773) should be
dried in the sun, cleaned, beaten to get the dust out, taken back, and
spread out again in the place to which they belonged <span
id="fr_788"></span>[2](#fn_774). The supports of the bed should be dried
in the sun, dusted, taken back, and put in the place to which they
belonged. The bed (ma*ñk*a) and the chairs (pî*th*a) should be aired in
the sun, cleaned, beaten to get the dust out, turned upside down, taken
back, carefully avoiding scratching them against the floor, or knocking
them up against the door-posts, and then put in the place to which they
belonged <span id="fr_789"></span>[3](#fn_775). The bolsters and
pillows, and the

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

mats used as seats, should be aired in the sun, cleaned; beaten to get
the dust out, *t*aken back, and put in the place to which they belonged.
The spittoon, and the board for leaning up against, should be put in the
sun, dusted, taken back, and put in the place to which they belonged.

 <span id="fr_790"></span>[1](#fn_776)5. '(Then the incoming Bhikkhu)
should put away his bowl and his robe. In putting away his bowl, he
should hold it in one hand while he feels under the bed or the chair
with the other, and then put it away; and he should not put it on a part
of the floor which has been left bare. In putting away his robe, he
should hold it in one hand while he feels along the bamboo or the rope
used for hanging robes on with the other; and then hang it up with the
border turned away from him, and the fold turned towards him.

 <span id="fr_791"></span>[2](#fn_777) 'If the winds, bearing dust with
them <span id="fr_792"></span>[3](#fn_778), blow from the East, West,
North, or South, the window spaces <span id="fr_793"></span>[4](#fn_779)
on the side in question should be closed up (with shutters or lattices).
If it is cold weather, the lattices should be opened by day, and closed
by

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

night: if it is hot weather, they should be closed by day, and opened by
night.

 <span id="fr_794"></span>[1](#fn_780)'If the cell, or the store-room,
or the refectory, or the room where the fire is kept, or the privy, is
covered with dust, it should be swept out. If there is no
drinking-water, or water for washing, they should be provided. If there
is no water in the rinsing-pot <span id="fr_795"></span>[2](#fn_781),
water should be poured into it.

'This, O Bhikkhus, is the rule of conduct for incoming Bhikkhus,
according to which they ought to behave.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_743"></span>[272:1](sbe20079.htm#fr_757) That this was a
sign of disrespect is clear from Mahâvagga V. 12, and the 61st and 62nd
Sekhiyas.

<span id="fn_744"></span>[272:2](sbe20079.htm#fr_758) See our discussion
of the sunshade question in the note on *K*ullavagga V, 23, 2.

<span id="fn_745"></span>[272:3](sbe20079.htm#fr_759) Ogu*nth*itâ. See
the 23rd and the 67th Sekhiyas.

<span id="fn_746"></span>[272:4](sbe20079.htm#fr_760) Sîse katvâ.
Compare VIII, 6, 3.

<span id="fn_747"></span>[272:5](sbe20079.htm#fr_761) Gha*t*ikâ. This
word is discussed at *K*ullavagga V, 14, 3.

<span id="fn_748"></span>[272:6](sbe20079.htm#fr_762) Such an act has
been already guarded against by the rule laid down at the end of
*K*ullavagga V, 9. 5, where the same expression is made use of.

<span id="fn_749"></span>[273:1](sbe20079.htm#fr_763) Upari-pi*tth*ito.
On pi*tth*a (which we should possibly read here), as the lintel of a
door, see our note above at *K*ullavagga V, 14, 3. It recurs immediately
below, VIII, I, 3.

<span id="fn_750"></span>[273:2](sbe20079.htm#fr_764) Vissara*m* akâsi.
As Childers, sub voce, expresses doubt as to the meaning of this word,
it may be well to note that this phrase occurs above, *K*ullavagga V,
10, 2 and VI, 3, 4, and also in the Bhikkhunî-vibhaṅga, Pâ*k*ittiya LX,
and always in the sense here given. The meaning of the allied idiom,
vissaro me bhavissati, might be just doubtful as used in a peculiar
connection at Bhikkhunî-vibhaṅga, Pârâ*g*ika I, 1, and Sa*m*ghâdisesa
III, 3, were it not clear from ibid., Pâ*k*ittiya LXXXVI, that it means
simply 'there will be an outcry against me.'

<span id="fn_751"></span>[273:3](sbe20079.htm#fr_765) The form of this
speech bears very clear testimony to the artificial way in which these
introductory stories are put together, for the speech does not arise out
of the story. Similar instances are not infrequent. See VIII, 5, I.

<span id="fn_752"></span>[273:4](sbe20079.htm#fr_766) Nî*k*a*m* katvâ.
So also at VIII, 6, 2. The word is used below and at Mahâvagga I, 25, II
and 15 of a bedstead and chair, and below, VIII, 4, 4, of a bowl when it
is being washed.

<span id="fn_753"></span>[274:1](sbe20079.htm#fr_767) See the note below
on VIII, 8, 2.

<span id="fn_754"></span>[274:2](sbe20079.htm#fr_768) On these
expressions, compare the note above on *K*ullavagga IV, 4, 4 (at the
end), and *K*ullavagga VIII, 2, 5 = Mahâvagga I, 25, 19.

<span id="fn_755"></span>[274:3](sbe20079.htm#fr_769) These cloths
(*k*olaka*m*) are not specially permitted anywhere in the Khandhakas, as
cloths for wiping the face and feet are in Mahâvagga VIII, 18, and
*K*ullavagga VI, 19, respectively. The word is used for 'duster' below,
VIII, 2, 3, and for 'tinder' at Milinda Pa*ñ*ha, p. 53.

<span id="fn_756"></span>[275:1](sbe20079.htm#fr_770) See the rules as
to the division of lodging-places according to the number of applicants
at *K*ullavagga VI, 21, 2, and especially VI, II, 3.

<span id="fn_757"></span>[275:2](sbe20079.htm#fr_771) Go*k*aro
ago*k*aro. There were some places or families to which the Bhikkhus of a
particular residence were not allowed to resort for alms. See the rule
as to 'turning down the bowl' with respect to a person at *K*ullavagga
V, 20.

<span id="fn_758"></span>[275:3](sbe20079.htm#fr_772) Sekha-sammatâni
kulâni. See the note on the 3rd Pâ*t*idesaniya.

<span id="fn_759"></span>[275:4](sbe20079.htm#fr_773) All the following
expressions have occurred together at *K*ullavagga IV, 4, 4, where an
example is given of the course of proceeding here laid down. And they
are repeated below, VIII, 2, 2.

<span id="fn_760"></span>[275:5](sbe20079.htm#fr_774) Uklâpo. Compare
*K*ullavagga VI, 3, 9, and below, § 5.

<span id="fn_761"></span>[275:6](sbe20079.htm#fr_775) This was the way
in which a Bhikkhu, on going away from it <span id="page_276">p.
276</span> was to leave his Vihâra. See below, VIII, 3, 2, and on the
details of the terms used, see our note below on VIII, 1, 4.

<span id="fn_762"></span>[276:1](sbe20079.htm#fr_776) The rest of this
section is repeated in full below, VIII, 7, 2.

<span id="fn_763"></span>[276:2](sbe20079.htm#fr_777) Pa*t*ipâdakâ.
Doubtless the same as forms part of the âha*kk*a-ma*ñk*a mentioned in
the 18th Pâ*k*ittiya and above, VI, 2, 5.

<span id="fn_764"></span>[276:3](sbe20079.htm#fr_778) Bhisi. See the
note on Mahâvagga VIII, 13.

<span id="fn_765"></span>[276:4](sbe20079.htm#fr_779)
Apassena-phalaka*m*. See the note on *K*ullavagga VI, 20, 2.

<span id="fn_766"></span>[276:5](sbe20079.htm#fr_780) All the
expressions in this sentence and the next are the same as those used in
a similar connection at Mahâvagga I, 25, 15.

<span id="fn_767"></span>[276:6](sbe20079.htm#fr_781) Ullokâ. See the
note at *K*ullavagga VI, 2, 7, according to which our rendering at
Mahâvagga I, 25, 15 should be corrected.

<span id="fn_768"></span>[276:7](sbe20079.htm#fr_782) On this mode of
preparing walls and floors, see the notes above on *K*ullavagga VI, 20.

<span id="fn_769"></span>[276:8](sbe20079.htm#fr_783) Ka*nn*akitâ. See
our note above on *K*ullavagga V, II, 3. <span id="page_277">p.
277</span> The translation of our present passage at Mahâvagga I, 25,
15, must be corrected accordingly.

<span id="fn_770"></span>[277:1](sbe20079.htm#fr_784) *K*olaka. See the
note on this word in last section.

<span id="fn_771"></span>[277:2](sbe20079.htm#fr_785) Samma*gg*ati is to
sweep (not to scrub), as is apparent from Mahâvagga VI, 34, I.

<span id="fn_772"></span>[277:3](sbe20079.htm#fr_786) Ûha*ññ*i. So also
at Mahâvagga I, 25, 15. At Mahâvagga I, 49, 4, we should have rendered
'defiled their beds' instead of 'threw their bedding about,' correcting
uhananti of the text there into ûhadanti. Ûhan (originally 'to throw
up,' 'raise,' &c.) seems, like samûhan, to have acquired the meaning of
to destroy, injure, spoil. From this meaning of spoiling, ûhan evidently
came to be used for, or confounded in the MS. with, ûhad, 'to defile
(with excrement).' So the phrase 'ûhananti pi ummihanti pi' (at
Mahâvagga I, 49, 4) exactly corresponds in meaning to 'omuttenti pi
ûhadayanti pi' in Dhammapada, p. 283. There are other passages showing
the same confusion. (1) The gerund, ûha*kk*a, which occurs in *G*âtaka
II, p. 71 ('idâni kho (ahan) ta*m* ûha*kk*a'), is explained by the
commentator to mean 'va*kk*an te sîse katva.' (2) ûhanti, in Gâtaka II,
p. 73 ('aggihutta*ñ* *k*a ûhanti, tena bhinnâ kama*nd*alûti'), must mean
the same and be = ûhadeti. For the monkey here referred to is said to
have been guilty of the following dirty trick:--'ku*nd*ikâ bhindati,
aggisâlâya va*kk*a*m* karoti.' (3) mutteti ohaneti at *K*ariyâ Pi*t*aka
II, 5, 4, represents u*kk*âra-pasâvam katvâ at *G*âtaka II, 385. In the
first of these passages uha*kk*a may well be a copyist's blunder,
arising from the similarity of the words, for uha*gg*a. Dr. Morris, to
whom we owe the comparison of these passages and the suggested
emendation of Mahâvagga I, 49, 4, is rather of opinion that the words
were confounded by the writers. For it is not an uncommon thing to find
two words, not very remote in form or meaning, confounded together. It
is well known that the English word livelihood properly and originally
meant 'liveliness,' and has only afterwards replaced the earlier
livelode, to which the sense of livelihood properly belongs. And
something of this kind <span id="page_278">p. 278</span> must have
occurred, he thinks„in Pâli in the use of ûhan for it had. The past
participle ûhata occurs at *K*ullavagga VIII, 10, 3.

<span id="fn_773"></span>[278:1](sbe20079.htm#fr_787)
Bhummatthara*n*a*m*; usually, no doubt, matting of various kinds, but
occasionally also skins or rugs of the kinds specially allowed by VI,
14, 2.

<span id="fn_774"></span>[278:2](sbe20079.htm#fr_788) Yathâbhâga*m*. The
use of this word here constitutes the only variation between our passage
and that in the Mahâvagga I, 25 = below, VIII, 7, 2, where it is
replaced by yathâ*tth*âne or yathâpa*ññ*atta*m*.

<span id="fn_775"></span>[278:3](sbe20079.htm#fr_789) This passage
throws a welcome light on the meaning of ma*ñk*a and pî*th*a: for as
they were to be beaten to get the dust out, it is clear that they were
upholstered. The ma*ñk*a, or bed, must have been a wooden framework,
stuffed (probably with cotton), covered at the top with cotton cloth,
and made underneath and at the sides of wood. It had no legs fixed to
it, but was supported on movable tressels--the pa*t*ipâdakâ. When using
it, the sleeper covered it with a mat, or a cotton sheet, and had over
him a coverlet of some kind; and these articles, which he would also use
if he slept on the ground, constituted, together with the bolster and
pillows, the senâsana*m* or bedding,--that is, in the more special and
limited use of that term (as, for instance, above, § 3, and perhaps
below, 7, 1). In its larger sense the same word is used, putting the
part for the whole, for the whole sleeping apparatus, and is nearly
equivalent to seyyâyo (so, for instance, in VI, 11 and 12, and below,
VIII, 2, I; 6, 2 and perhaps VIII, 7, 1; whereas the latter term is used
in the same connection at VI, 6, <span id="page_279">p. 279</span> and
VI, II, 3). Sayana, in VI, 8, is a generic term including bed, couch,
sofa, and divan, but probably with special reference to these three
latter things used in the day-time.

<span id="fn_776"></span>[279:1](sbe20079.htm#fr_790) The following
paragraph occurs, word for word, at Mahâvagga I, 25, II, and below,
VIII, 7, 2.

<span id="fn_777"></span>[279:2](sbe20079.htm#fr_791) The following
paragraph is the same as Mahâvagga I, 25,18.

<span id="fn_778"></span>[279:3](sbe20079.htm#fr_792) Sara*g*â vâtâ.
These are the well-known hot winds (like the sand-bearing simoom that
blows from North Africa over Italy), against which modern residents
endeavour to protect themselves by the use of 'tats.'

<span id="fn_779"></span>[279:4](sbe20079.htm#fr_793) There were, of
course, no windows in our modern sense, but only spaces left in the wall
to admit light and air, and covered by lattices of three kinds allowed
by VI, 2, 2.

<span id="fn_780"></span>[280:1](sbe20079.htm#fr_794) The following
paragraph is the same as Mahâvagga I, 25, 19, and part of it is repeated
below, VIII, 10, 3.

<span id="fn_781"></span>[280:2](sbe20079.htm#fr_795) Â*k*amana-kumbhi.
This formed part of the sanitary apparatus for use in the privy. See
above, Mahâvagga V, 8, 3, and below, *K*ullavagga VIII, 9 and 10.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](sbe20080)
