[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe20034)  [Next](sbe20036.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 20.

1\. Now at that time Va*ddh*a the Li*kkh*avi was a friend of the
Bhikkhus who were followers of Mettiya and Bhumma*g*aka <span
id="fr_314"></span>[1](#fn_308.md). Now Va*ddh*a the Li*kkh*avi went up to
the place where those Bhikkhus were, and on arriving there he said to
them, 'My salutation to you, Sirs!' When he had thus spoken, the
Bhikkhus who were followers of Mettiya and Bhumma*g*aka gave him no
reply. And a second and a third time \[he said the same words, and still
received no reply\].

'Wherein have I offended you, Sirs? Why do you give me no reply?'

'Therein, that you, friend, sit contented while we are being molested by
Dabba the Mallian.'

'But what, Sirs, can I do?'

'If you wished it, friend, to-day even would the Blessed One expel Dabba
the Mallian.'

'But what shall I do, Sirs? What is that it is in my power to do?'

'Come then, friend Va*ddh*a. Do you go up to the place where the Blessed
One is, and when you have come there, say as follows: "This, Lord, is
neither fit nor becoming that the very quarter of the heavens which
ought to be safe, secure, and free from danger,

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

that from that very quarter should arise danger, calamity, and
distress--that where one ought to expect a calm, that just there one
should meet a gale! Methinks the very water has taken fire! My wife has
been defiled by Dabba the Mallian!"'

2\. 'Very well, Sirs!' said Va*ddh*a the Li*kkh*avi, accepting the word
of the followers of Mettiya and Bhumma*g*aka. And he went up to the
Blessed One \[and spake even as he had been directed\].

Then the Blessed One, on that occasion and in that connection, convened
a meeting of the Bhikkhu-sa*m*gha, and asked the venerable Dabba the
Mallian:

'Are you conscious <span id="fr_315"></span>[1](#fn_309.md), Dabba, of
having done such a thing as this Va*ddh*a says?'

'As my Lord, the Blessed One, knows.'

\[And a second, and a third time, the Blessed One asked the same
question, and received the same reply.\]

'The Dabbas, O Dabba, do not thus repudiate. If you have done it, say
so. If you have not done it, say you have not.'

'Since I was born, Lord, I cannot call to mind that I have practised
sexual intercourse, even in a dream, much less when I was awake!'

3\. Then the Blessed One addressed the Bhikkhus, and said: 'Let then the
Sa*m*gha, O Bhikkhus, turn the bowl down <span
id="fr_316"></span>[2](#fn_310.md) in respect of Va*ddh*a the Li*kkh*avi,

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

and make him incapable of granting an alms to the Sa*m*gha <span
id="fr_317"></span>[1](#fn_311.md).

'There are eight things, O Bhikkhus, which when they characterise an
Upâsaka, the bowl is to be turned down in respect of him;--when he goes
about to bring loss of gifts on the Bhikkhus, when he goes about to
bring harm to the Bhikkhus, when he goes about to cause the Bhikkhus to
want a place of residence, when he reviles or slanders the Bhikkhus,
when he causes divisions between Bhikkhus and Bhikkhus;--when he speaks
in dispraise of the Buddha,;--when he speaks in dispraise of the
Dhamma;--when he speaks in dispraise of the Sa*m*gha. I allow you, O
Bhikkhus, to turn down the bowl in respect of an Upâsaka who is
characterised by these eight things <span
id="fr_318"></span>[2](#fn_312.md).'

4\. 'And thus, O Bhikkhus, is the bowl to be turned down. Some able and
discreet Bhikkhu is to lay the matter before the Sa*m*gha, saying,

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

'"Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. Vaddha the Li*kkh*avi has brought
a groundless charge against the venerable Dabba the Mallian of a breach
of morality. If the time seems meet to the Sa*m*gha, let the Sa*m*gha
turn down the bowl as respects Va*ddh*a the Li*kkh*avi, and make him as
one who has no dealings with the Sa*m*gha.

'"This is the motion (*ñ*atti).

'"Vaddha the Li*kkh*avi has brought a groundless charge against Dabba
the Mallian of a breach of morality. The Sa*m*gha turns down the bowl as
respects Va*ddh*a the Li*kkh*avi, and makes him as one who has no
dealings with the Sa*m*gha. Whosoever of the venerable ones approves of
the bowl being turned down as regards Vaddha the Li*kkh*avi, and of
making him as one who has no dealings with the Sa*m*gha, let him keep
silence. Whosoever approves not thereof, let him speak.

'"The bowl is turned down by the Sa*m*gha as regards Vaddha the
Li*kkh*avi, he is as one who has no dealings with the Sa*m*gha. The
Sa*m*gha approves thereof. Therefore is it silent. Thus do I
understand."'

5\. Then the venerable Ânanda, having dressed himself early in the
morning, went, duly bowled and robed, to the residence of Vaddha the
Li*kkh*avi. And when he had come there he spake to Va*ddh*a the
Li*kkh*avi, and said: 'The bowl, friend Va*ddh*a, has been turned down
by the Sa*m*gha as regards you, and you are as one who has no dealings
with the Sa*m*gha.' And Va*ddh*a the Li*kkh*avi, on hearing that saying,
immediately <span id="fr_319"></span>[1](#fn_313.md) fainted and fell.

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

'Then the friends and companions of Va*ddh*a the Li*kkh*avi, and his
relatives of one blood with him, said to him: 'It is enough, friend
Va*ddh*a. Weep not, neither lament. We will reconcile <span
id="fr_320"></span>[1](#fn_314.md) the Blessed One to you, and the Order of
Bhikkhus.'

And Va*ddh*a the Li*kkh*avi, with his wife and his children, and with
his friends and companions, and with his relatives of one blood with
him, went up, with wet garments and with streaming hair, to the place
where the Blessed One was; and when he had come there, he cast himself
down with his head at the feet of the Blessed One, and said: 'Sin has
overcome me, Lord--even according to my weakness, according to my folly,
according to my unrighteousness--in that without ground I brought a
charge against Dabba the Mallian of a breach of morality. In respect
thereof may my Lord the Blessed One accept the confession I make of my
sin in its sinfulness <span id="fr_321"></span>[2](#fn_315.md), to the end
that I may in future restrain myself therefrom <span
id="fr_322"></span>[3](#fn_316.md).'

'Verily, O friend Va*ddh*a, sin hath overcome you--even according to
your weakness, and according to your folly, and according to your
unrighteousness--in that you brought without ground against Dabba the
Mallian a charge of breach of morality. But since you, O friend
Va*ddh*a, look upon your sin as sin, and make amends for it as is meet,
we do accept at your hands your confession of it. For this, O friend
Va*ddh*a, is the advantage of

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

the discipline of the noble one, that he who looks upon his sin as sin,
and makes amends for it as is meet, he becomes able in future to
restrain himself therefrom <span id="fr_323"></span>[1](#fn_317.md).'

6\. Then the Blessed One addressed the Bhikkhus, and said: 'Let then the
Sa*m*gha turn up the bowl again as regards Va*ddh*a the Li*kkh*avi, and
make him as one who has dealings with the Sa*m*gha.

'There are eight things, O Bhikkhus, which when they characterise an
Upâsaka the bowl should be turned up again as regards him;--when he goes
not about to bring loss of gifts on the Bhikkhus, when he goes not about
to bring harm to the Bhikkhus, when he goes not about to cause the
Bhikkhus to want a place of residence, when he reviles or slanders not
the Bhikkhus, when he causes not divisions between Bhikkhus and
Bhikkhus;--when he speaks not in dispraise of the Buddha;--when he
speaks not in dispraise of the Dhamma;--when he speaks not in dispraise
of the Sa*m*gha.

7\. 'And thus, O Bhikkhus, is the bowl to be turned up <span
id="fr_324"></span>[2](#fn_318.md). That Va*ddh*a the Li*kkh*avi should go
before the Sa*m*gha, with his upper robe arranged over one
shoulder <span id="fr_325"></span>[3](#fn_319.md), and squatting down, and
raising

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

his hands with the palms joined together, should speak as follows:

'"The bowl has been turned down against me, Sirs, by the Sa*m*gha, and I
am become as one having no dealings with the Sa*m*gha. I am conducting
myself, Sirs, aright in accordance thereto, and am broken in
spirit <span id="fr_326"></span>[1](#fn_320.md), and I seek for release;
and I request the Sa*m*gha for a turning up again of the bowl."

'And a second time he is to prefer the same request, and a third time he
is to prefer the same request in the same words.

'Then some discreet and able Bhikkhu should lay the matter before the
Sa*m*gha, saying,

'"Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. The bowl has been turned down by
the Sa*m*gha against Va*ddh*a the Li*kkh*avi, and he is conducting
himself aright in accordance thereto, and is broken in spirit, and seeks
for release, and requests the Sa*m*gha for a turning up again of the
bowl. If the time seems meet to the Sa*m*gha, let the Sa*m*gha turn up
the bowl again as regards Va*ddh*a the Li*kkh*avi, and make him as one
who has dealings with the Sa*m*gha.

'"This is the motion (*ñ*atti).

'"Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. The bowl has been turned down
(&c., as before), and he is conducting himself (&c., as before), and he
requests the Sa*m*gha (&c., as before). The Sa*m*gha turns up again the
bowl as regards Va*ddh*a the Li*kkh*avi, and makes him as one who has
dealings with the

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sa*m*gha.
Whosoever of the venerable ones approves thereof, let him keep silence;
whosoever approves not thereof, let him speak.

'"The bowl is turned up again by the Sa*m*gha as regards Va*ddh*a the
Li*kkh*avi, and he is as one who has dealings with the Sa*m*gha. The
Sa*m*gha approves thereof. Therefore is it silent. Thus do I
understand."'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_308"></span>[118:1](sbe20035.htm#fr_314.md) These are two of
the *Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhus; and the evil deeds of the followers form the
subject of *K*ullavagga IV, 4, 5 and following sections. Our sections 1,
2 are nearly the same as g 8, 9 there.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[119:1](sbe20035.htm#fr_315.md) See the note above
on IV, 4, 9.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[119:2](sbe20035.htm#fr_316.md) Patta*m*
nikku*gg*atu. This phrase is used in the ordinary signification above,
V, 9, 4. It is characteristic of the mildness of early Buddhism that
this should be the only penalty imposed upon a layman. Compare H.O.'s
remarks in his 'Buddha, sein Leben, seine Lehre, seine Gemeinde,' pp.
391-393. The house of such a layman becomes then an ago*k*aro, 'an
unlawful resort.' (*K*ullavagga VIII, 1, 2.)

<span id="fn_311"></span>[120:1](sbe20035.htm#fr_317.md) Asambhoga*m*
sa*m*ghena karotu. This phrase is used in regard to a Bhikkhu at
*K*ullavagga I, 25, 1, as the distinctive mark of the Act of Suspension
(Ukkhepaniya-kamma), and there means 'depriving him of his right to eat
and dwell with the other Bhikkhus.' Sambhoge anâpatti at Mahâvagga I,
79, 2 (at the end), means that it is not an offence for the Bhikkhus to
eat and dwell together with a guilty Bhikkhu under certain conditions
there specified. As an Upâsaka never, under any circumstances, either
eats or dwells together with the Bhikkhus (in Pâ*k*ittiya 5 the
reference is to sâma*n*eras), the meaning here must be to make him one
who has no dealings with the Sa*m*gha, to withdraw his privilege of
providing food or lodging for the Sa*m*gha. The sabho*g*ana*m* kula*m*
in the 43rd Pâ*k*ittiya has probably nothing to do with this.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[120:2](sbe20035.htm#fr_318.md) When a Bhikkhu
behaves towards the laity in any one of the first five of these eight
ways the Pa*t*isâra*n*iya-kamma is to be carried out against him--that
is to say, he has to ask pardon of the layman against whom he has
offended. See I, 20. The whole eight recur below, § 6.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[121:1](sbe20035.htm#fr_319.md) Literally, 'on
that very spot.'

<span id="fn_314"></span>[122:1](sbe20035.htm#fr_320.md) This is precisely
the expression made use of in the converse case, when a Bhikkhu has
offended against the laity. See I, 22, 3.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[122:2](sbe20035.htm#fr_321.md) A*kk*aya*m*
a*kk*ayato pa*t*iga*n*hâtu. See the parallel passages in Mahâvagga IX,
1, 9; *K*ullavagga VII, 3, 6, &c.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[122:3](sbe20035.htm#fr_322.md) Âyati*m*
sa*m*varâya. So also above of an offending Bhikkhu, IV, 14, 30.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[123:1](sbe20035.htm#fr_323.md) Sa*m*vara*m*
âpa*gg*ati. Compare the use of vikappa*m* âpa*gg*eyya in the 8th
Nissaggiya.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[123:2](sbe20035.htm#fr_324.md) The following
paragraphs are precisely the same as those in which the revocation of
the Ta*gg*aniya-kamma is described in the reverse case of a Bhikkhu,
above, I, 8.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[123:3](sbe20035.htm#fr_325.md) Eka*m*sa*m*
uttarâsaṅga*m* karitvâ. Unless these words have been introduced by
mistake from the corresponding passage in I, 8 (which is not probable),
they show that the uttarâsaṅga (on which see the note on Mahâvagga VIII,
13, 4) was also worn by laymen. But this is the only passage known to
<span id="page_124">p. 124</span> us in the earlier literature in which
such a use of it is mentioned or implied. Compare Rh. D.'s note on the
'Book of the Great Decease,' VI, 26.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[124:1](sbe20035.htm#fr_326.md) Loma*m* pâtemi.
See the note on *K*ullavagga I, 6, 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](sbe20036.md)
