[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe20068)  [Next](sbe20070) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 17.

1\. Now when the Blessed One had remained at the Ki*t*â Hill as long as
he thought fit, he proceeded on his journey towards Â*l*avî; and in due
course he arrived at Â*l*avî, and there, at Â*l*avî, the Blessed One
stayed at the Aggâ*l*ava Shrine.

Now at that time the Bhikkhus of Â*l*avî <span
id="fr_604"></span>[2](#fn_594) used to

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

give new building operations in charge (to one or other of their
number) <span id="fr_605"></span>[1](#fn_595), such as the
following <span id="fr_606"></span>[2](#fn_596) when some clay or earth
had merely to be put aside in heaps, when a wall had merely to be
re-plastered, when a door had merely to be made, when the socket for a
bolt had merely to be made, when some joinery-work had merely to be done
to a window, when some whitewashing merely had to be done, or some black
colouring laid on, or some red colouring <span
id="fr_607"></span>[3](#fn_597), or some roofing-work, or some joinery,
or a bar had to be fixed to a door <span
id="fr_608"></span>[4](#fn_598), when breaches or decay had merely to be
repaired <span id="fr_609"></span>[5](#fn_599), or the flooring to be
re-plastered <span id="fr_610"></span>[6](#fn_600); and they assigned
this office to one another for terms of twenty or thirty years, or

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

for life; or they gave in charge a completely finished Vihâra to a
Bhikkhu for such time as should elapse till the smoke rose (from the
funeral pyre on which his body should be burnt <span
id="fr_611"></span>[1](#fn_601)).

The moderate Bhikkhus murmured, &c. (as usual, down to) The Blessed One
said to the Bhikkhus:

'You are not, O Bhikkhus, to confer the office of building overseer when
clay has merely to be put aside in heaps . . . . (&c., as before, down
to) body shall be burnt. Whosoever shall so confer it, shall be guilty
of a dukka*t*a. I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to give a Vihâra not yet begun,
or not yet finished <span id="fr_612"></span>[2](#fn_602), in charge as
a new building. And with reference to the work on a small Vihâra, it may
be given in charge as a navakamma for a period of five or six years,
that on an A*ddh*ayoga for a period of seven or eight years, that on a
large Vihâra or a Pâsâda for ten or twelve years.'

2\. Now at that time the Bhikkhus gave the whole of a Vihâra as a
navakamma (to one Bhikkhu to superintend)--or two Vihâras to one
Bhikkhu--or the Bhikkhu who had taken the work in charge got another
(Bhikkhu to live there and take charge for him)--or the Bhikkhu who had
taken in charge a

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

building belonging to the Sa*m*gha kept exclusive possession of it--or
the Bhikkhus gave work in charge to one not at that time within the
boundary <span id="fr_613"></span>[1](#fn_603)--or Bhikkhus who had once
taken charge kept exclusive possession for all time.

They told \[each of\] these matters to the Blessed One.

'You are not, O Bhikkhus, to do \[any one of these things\]. Whosoever
does, he is guilty of a dukka*t*a. And the Bhikkhu in charge may take
one good sleeping-place into his exclusive possession for the three
months of the rainy, but not during the dry season.'

3\. Now at that time Bhikkhus who had taken charge of building
operations left the place \[or otherwise became incompetent in one or
other of the twenty and three ways set out in the next paragraph <span
id="fr_614"></span>[2](#fn_604)\].

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'In case that occurs, O Bhikkhus, as soon as he has taken charge, or
before the building has been completed, let the office be given to
another lest there should be loss to the Sa*m*gha. In case the building
has been completed, O Bhikkhus, if he then leaves the place, it (the
office and its privileges) is still his--if he then returns to the
world, or dies, or admits that he is a sâma*n*era, or that he has
abandoned the precepts, or that he has become guilty of an extreme
offence, the Sa*m*gha

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

becomes the owner <span id="fr_615"></span>[1](#fn_605)--if he then
admits that he is mad, or that his mind is unhinged, or that he is
afflicted with bodily pain, or that he has been suspended for his
refusal to acknowledge an offence, or to atone for an offence, or to
renounce a sinful doctrine, it (the office and its privileges) is still
his--if he then admits that he is a eunuch, or that he has furtively
attached himself to the Sa*m*gha, or that he has gone over to the
Titthiyas, or that he is an animal, or that he has murdered his mother,
or his father, or an Arahat, or that he has violated a Bhikkhunî, or
that he has caused a schism in the Sa*m*gha, or that he has shed (a
Buddha's) blood, or that he is an hermaphrodite, then the Sa*m*gha
becomes the owner.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_594"></span>[212:2](sbe20069.htm#fr_604) The Bhikkhus of
Â*l*avî are frequently mentioned in connection <span id="page_213">p.
213</span> with offences in relation to the navakamma*m*. See, for
instance, Pârâ*g*ika III, 5, 30.

<span id="fn_595"></span>[213:1](sbe20069.htm#fr_605) For the rule
authorising such giving in charge in general cases, see above, VI, 5.

<span id="fn_596"></span>[213:2](sbe20069.htm#fr_606) For most of the
following technical terms in building, see our notes above on
*K*ullavagga V, 11, and V, 1, 2.

<span id="fn_597"></span>[213:3](sbe20069.htm#fr_607) See our note on
this phrase above, V, 11, 6.

<span id="fn_598"></span>[213:4](sbe20069.htm#fr_608)
Ga*nd*ikadhâna-mattenâ ti dvâra-bâhâna*m*
upari-kapo*t*a-ga*nd*ika-yo*g*ana-mattena (B.). Ga*nd*i is used in this
sense at *G*âtaka I, 237. Compare the use of Dhamma-ga*nd*ikâ, 'block of
execution,' at *G*âtaka I, 150, II, 124. The word ga*nd*ikâ occurs also
at *G*âtaka I, 474 (last line), in the sense of 'bunch:' but it is there
probably a misprint; for Oldenberg, in the parallel passage at
Bhikkhunî-vibhaṅga, Pâ*k*ittiya I, 1, reads bha*nd*ike. That the two
words are easily confused in Burmese writing is shown by the fact that
the Berlin (Burmese) copy of Buddhaghosa reads here also
bha*nd*ikâdhâna-mattenâ ti, &c., and again afterwards bha*nd*ika.

<span id="fn_599"></span>[213:5](sbe20069.htm#fr_609) See our note on
this phrase above, VI, 5, 2.

<span id="fn_600"></span>[213:6](sbe20069.htm#fr_610)
Paribha*nd*a-kara*n*a-mattenâ ti
gomaya-paribha*nd*a-kasâva-parikara*n*a-mattena (B.). The very same
expression is used in a wholly doubtful sense, and of some process of
tailoring, in. Mahâvagga VII, 1, 5.

<span id="fn_601"></span>[214:1](sbe20069.htm#fr_611) Dhûmakâlikan ti
ida*m* yâv’ assa *k*itaka-dhûmo na pa*ññ*âyatîti tâva aya*m* vihâro
etass’ evâ ti eva*m* dhûma-kâle apaloketvâ kata-pariyosita*m* vihâra*m*
denti (B.). The word recurs below, applied to sikkhâpada*m*, in XI, 1,
9.

<span id="fn_602"></span>[214:2](sbe20069.htm#fr_612) Vîppakatan ti
ettha vippakato nâma yâva gopânasiyo na ârohanti. Gopânasîsu pana
âru*l*hâsu bahukato nâma hoti: tasmâ tato pa*tth*âya na dâtabbo (B.).
The use of bahukato is noteworthy. for in the only other passage where
we have found the word (Mahâvagga VI, 36, 2), it has a totally different
application. There is possibly a misreading in the one MS. available. (?
pakato.)

<span id="fn_603"></span>[215:1](sbe20069.htm#fr_613) See above, VI, 11,
3.

<span id="fn_604"></span>[215:2](sbe20069.htm#fr_614) See Mahâvagga II,
22, 3, and II, 36, 1-3. In the latter of these two passages the three
cases are omitted. In Mahâvagga IX, 4, 2, and 8, the whole 23 are given.

<span id="fn_605"></span>[216:1](sbe20069.htm#fr_615) That is, the
navakammiko loses his privileges (his lien on the best sleeping-place,
&c.).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](sbe20070)
