[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe20099)  [Next](sbe20101.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

### 9.

1\. Now when the Blessed One had stayed at Vesâlî as long as he thought
fit, he sat out towards Sâvatthi; and, journeying straight on, he in due
course arrived thereat. And there, at Sâvatthi, the Blessed One remained
in the *G*etavana, Anâtha Pi*nd*ika's Park.

Now at that time the *Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhus threw dirty water over
Bhikkhunîs, thinking, perhaps, they would fall in love with them <span
id="fr_882"></span>[1](#fn_868.md).

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'A Bhikkhu is not, O Bhikkhus, to throw dirty water at a Bhikkhunî.
Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka*t*a. I allow a penalty, O
Bhikkhus, to be imposed on that Bhikkhu.

Then the Bhikkhus thought: 'What penalty is it that ought to be imposed
on him?' They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'That Bhikkhu is to be declared to be one who is not to be saluted by
the Bhikkhunî-sa*m*gha <span id="fr_883"></span>[2](#fn_869.md).'

Now at that time the *Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhus uncovered their bodies, or
their thighs, or their private parts, and showed them to Bhikkhunîs, or
addressed Bhikkhunîs with wicked words, or associated with Bhikkhunîs,
thinking, perhaps, they would fall in love with them <span
id="fr_884"></span>[3](#fn_870.md).

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

'A Bhikkhu is not, O Bhikkhus, to do \[any of these things\]. Whosoever
does, shall be guilty of a dukka*t*a. I allow, O Bhikkhus, a penalty to
be imposed on that Bhikkhu.'

Then the Bhikkhus thought: 'What penalty is it that ought to be imposed
on him?' They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'That Bhikkhu is to be declared to be one who is not to be saluted by
the Bhikkhunî-sa*m*gha.'

2\. \[The last section repeated of the *Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhunîs, the
decision being the same down to\]

Then the Bhikkhus thought: 'What penalty is it that ought to be imposed
on her?' They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to prohibit her (from entering a Vihâra) <span
id="fr_885"></span>[1](#fn_871.md).'

When the prohibition was laid upon them, they would not accept it. They
told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to inhibit them from the Exhortation.'

3\. Then the Bhikkhus thought: 'Is it lawful to hold Uposatha with a
Bhikkhunî who has been inhibited from the Exhortation, or is it not
lawful?'

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'You are not, O Bhikkhus, to hold Uposatha with a Bhikkhunî who has been
inhibited from the Exhortation until such time as her case has been
settled.'

Now at that time the venerable Udâyi, after having inhibited the
Exhortation (to one or more Bhikkhunîs), went away on a journey. The
Bhikkhunîs

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

murmured, were indignant, and complained, saying: 'How can the venerable
Udâyi \[act so\]?'

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'You are not, O Bhikkhus, to go on a journey after having inhibited the
Exhortation. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka*t*a.'

Now at that time foolish and incompetent Bhikkhus inhibited the
Exhortation,

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'The Exhortation is not, O Bhikkhus, to be inhibited by a foolish,
incompetent Bhikkhu. When such a one does so, he shall be guilty of a
dukka*t*a.'

Now at that time Bhikkhus inhibited the Exhortation without grounds and
without cause.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'You are not, O Bhikkhus, to inhibit the Exhortation without ground and
without cause. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka*t*a.'

Now at that time Bhikkhus, who had inhibited the Exhortation, would not
give a decision (on the matter out of which the inhibition arose).

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'When, O Bhikkhus, you have inhibited the Exhortation, you are not to
abstain from giving a decision (on the matter out of which the
inhibition arose). Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka*t*a.'

4\. Now at that time Bhikkhunîs did not go to the Exhortation. They told
this matter to the Blessed One.

'A Bhikkhunî, O Bhikkhus, is not to omit going to the Exhortation.
Whosoever does so, shall be dealt with according to the rule <span
id="fr_886"></span>[1](#fn_872.md).'

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

Now at that time the whole Bhikkhunî-sa*m*gha went to the Exhortation
together. The people murmured, were indignant, and complained, saying:
'There are their wives, there are their mistresses; now will they take
pleasure together.'

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'The whole Bhikkhunî-sa*m*gha is not, O Bhikkhus, to go to the
Exhortation together. And if it should so go, it is guilty of a
dukka*t*a. I allow, O Bhikkhus, four or five Bhikkhunîs to go together.'

\[The same when four or five went the decision ending,\]

'I allow, O Bhikkhus, two or three Bhikkhunîs to go together to
Exhortation; and let them go up to some one Bhikkhu, and arrange their
robes over one shoulder, and, sitting down on their heels, let them
stretch forth their joined palms, and thus address him: "The
Bhikkhunî-sa*m*gha salutes the feet of the Bhikkhu-sa*m*gha, and
requests permission to come for the purpose of the Exhortation being
held; may that be granted, they say, to the Bhikkhunî-sa*m*gha."

'Then he who is entrusted with the recitation of the Pâtimokkha is to
ask: "Is there any Bhikkhu who has been appointed to hold the
Exhortation of the Bhikkhunîs?"

'If a Bhikkhu has been appointed thereto, the reciter of the Pâtimokkha
is to say: "Such and such a Bhikkhu has been appointed to hold
Exhortation to the Bhikkhunîs. Let the Bhikkhunî-sa*m*gha come to him
accordingly."

'If no Bhikkhu has been appointed thereto the reciter of the Pâtimokkha
is to say: "Which of the venerable ones is able to hold Exhortation to

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

the Bhikkhunîs?" If any one is able to do so, and is possessed of the
eight qualifications <span id="fr_887"></span>[1](#fn_873.md), he is to
appoint him thereto, and is to say: "Such and such a Bhikkhu is
appointed to hold Exhortation to the Bhikkhunîs. Let the
Bhikkhunî-sa*m*gha come to him."

'If no one is able to do so, the reciter of the Pâtimokkha is to say:
"There is no Bhikkhu appointed to hold Exhortation to the Bhikkhunîs.
May the Bhikkhunî-sa*m*gha obtain its desire in peace <span
id="fr_888"></span>[2](#fn_874.md)."'

5\. Now at that time Bhikkhus did not accept the (office of holding)
Exhortation. They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'The Exhortation is not, O Bhikkhus, to be declined. Whosoever shall not
accept it, shall be guilty of a dukka*t*a.'

Now at that time a certain Bhikkhu was stupid. To him the Bhikkhunîs
went, and said: 'Sir, please to accept the (duty of holding)
Exhortation.'

'I, sister, am stupid. How can I accept the Exhortation?'

'You should take it, Sir; for thus has it been laid down by the Blessed
One: "Bhikkhus are to accept the (duty of holding) Exhortation to the
Bhikkhunîs."'

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow, O Bhikkhus, all the rest, save the stupid, to accept the
Exhortation.'

\[The same repeated of a sick Bhikkhu, and a

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Bhikkhu on a
journey. The same case put of a Bhikkhu living in the jungle. The
decision is,\]

'I allow a Bhikkhu living in the jungle, O Bhikkhus, to accept the
Exhortation, and to appoint a time and place for the meeting <span
id="fr_889"></span>[1](#fn_875.md), saying: "There will I perform it."'

Now at that time Bhikkhus accepted the Exhortation, but did not perform
it. They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'The Exhortation, O Bhikkhus, is not to be neglected. Whosoever does so,
shall be guilty of a dukka*t*a.'

Now at that time Bhikkhunîs did not attend at the place appointed. They
told this matter to the Blessed One.

'A Bhikkhunî is not, O Bhikkhus, to omit attending at the place
appointed. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka*t*a.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_868"></span>[335:1](sbe20100.htm#fr_882.md) On sâra*gg*eyyun
compare sâra*gg*ati at V, 3, I.

<span id="fn_869"></span>[335:2](sbe20100.htm#fr_883.md) On this decision
compare the 'sending to Coventry' of *Kh*anna for levity of conduct
towards Bhikkhus at Mahâ-parinibbâna Sutta VI, 4, and *K*ullavagga XI,
1, 12 (where the penalty is called Brahma-da*nd*a).

<span id="fn_870"></span>[335:3](sbe20100.htm#fr_884.md) On sampayo*g*eti
compare *K*ullavagga I, 5, at the end.

<span id="fn_871"></span>[336:1](sbe20100.htm#fr_885.md) Âvara*n*an ti
vihârapavesane nivâra*n*a*m*, says Buddhaghosa.

<span id="fn_872"></span>[337:1](sbe20100.htm#fr_886.md) Bhikkhunî
Pâ*k*ittiya LVIII.

<span id="fn_873"></span>[339:1](sbe20100.htm#fr_887.md) These are given at
length in the Sutta Vibhaṅga, Pâ*k*ittiya XXI, 2, 1.

<span id="fn_874"></span>[339:2](sbe20100.htm#fr_888.md) Pâsâdikena
sampâdetu, on which Buddhaghosa has no note. Perhaps 'by means of faith'
would be a better rendering.

<span id="fn_875"></span>[340:1](sbe20100.htm#fr_889.md) On sa*m*keta*m*,
see our note above on Mahâvagga VIII, 23, 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](sbe20101.md)
