[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe20006)  [Next](sbe20008.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 6.

1\. 'There are three cases, O Bhikkhus, in which grants of dispensation
for those who are no longer insane are not valid: and three cases in
which such grants are valid.

'What are the three cases in which grants of dispensation for those who
are no longer insane are not valid?

'In the first place, O Bhikkhus, in case a Bhikkhu have committed an
offence: and in respect thereof either the Sa*m*gha, or a number of
Bhikkhus, or a single Bhikkhu, warn him, saying, "Does the venerable one
call to mind that he has been guilty of such and such an offence?" And
he, notwithstanding that he does remember it, says, "I do not remember,
Sirs, that I have been guilty of such and such an offence." Then if the
Sa*m*gha grant him the dispensation of those who are no longer insane,
that grant is not valid.

'Again, O Bhikkhus, in case a Bhikkhu (&c., as before, down to) And he,
notwithstanding that he does remember it, says, "I remember it, Sirs,
but as if in a dream." Then if the Sa*m*gha grant him

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

the dispensation of those who are no longer insane, that grant is not
valid.

Again, O Bhikkhus, in case a Bhikkhu have committed an offence, and in
respect thereof either the Sa*m*gha, or a number of Bhikkhus, or a
single Bhikkhu, warn him, saying, "Does the venerable one call to mind
that he has been guilty of such and such an offence?" And he, though he
is not insane, acts in the (deceptive) way of an insane person <span
id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_36.md), saying, "I act so, and you act so
likewise. It beseems me, and it likewise beseems you." Then if the
Sa*m*gha grant him the dispensation of those who are no longer insane,
that grant is not valid.

These are the three cases, O Bhikkhus, in which a grant of the
dispensation for those who are no longer insane is not valid.

2\. 'What are the three cases in which grants of dispensation for those
who are no longer insane are valid?

'In the first place, O Bhikkhus, in case a Bhikkhu be insane and out of
his mind; and by him, when so insane and out of his mind, many things
unworthy of a sama*n*a have been committed, as well in speech as in act.
And either the Sa*m*gha, or a number of Bhikkhus, or a single Bhikkhu,
warns him in respect thereof, saying, "Does the venerable one call to
mind that he has committed such and such an offence?" And he really not
remembering it, answers, "I do not remember, Sirs, that I have been
guilty of such and such an offence." Then if the Sa*m*gha grants him the
dispensation for those who are no longer insane, that grant is valid.

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

'Again, O Bhikkhus, in case a Bhikkhu be insane and out of his mind
(&c., as before, down to) And he, not really remembering it, answers, "I
remember it, Sirs, but as if in a dream." Then if the Sa*m*gha grants
him the dispensation for those who are no longer insane, that grant is
valid.

'Again, O Bhikkhus, in case a Bhikkhu be insane and out of his mind
(&c., as before, down to) "Does the venerable one call to mind that he
has been guilty of such and such an offence?" And he, being still
insane, acts in the way of an insane person, saying, "I act so, and you
act so likewise. It beseems me, and it likewise beseems you." Then if
the Sa*m*gha (afterwards) grant him the dispensation for those who are
no longer insane, that grant is valid.

'These are the three cases, O Bhikkhus, in which the grant of the
dispensation for those who are no longer insane is valid.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_36"></span>[21:1](sbe20007.htm#fr_37.md) Ummattakâlaya*m*
karoti, on which Buddhaghosa says nothing. The word recurs in the
following section.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](sbe20008.md)
