[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe20013)  [Next](sbe20015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 13 <span id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_60).

1\. Now at that time, while the Bhikkhus were continuing in quarrels,
strifes, and disputes, they had been guilty of many things unworthy of a
Sama*n*a, as well in word as in deed, and it occurred to the Bhikkhus,
'Whilst we were continuing, &c. . . . we have been guilty, &c. . . . as
well in word as in deed. If we now deal one with another for those
offences, it may happen that that proceeding may result in harshness, in
ill-feeling, in divisions. How now should we manage?'

And they told the matter to the Blessed One.

In case, O Bhikkhus, whilst the Bhikkhus are continuing, &c. . . . they
are guilty, &c. . . . as well in word as in deed. And it occurs to them,
"Whilst we were continuing, &c. . . . we have been guilty, &c. . . . If
we now deal, &c. . . . How now shall

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

we manage?" I enjoin upon you, O Bhikkhus, to settle a matter of this
kind by Ti*n*avatthâraka (the Covering over as with grass) <span
id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_61).

2\. 'And thus, O Bhikkhus, is it to be settled. All are to meet together
in one spot. When they have met together some able and discreet Bhikkhu
is to bring the matter before the Sa*m*gha, saying,

'"Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. While we were continuing, &c. . .
. we have been guilty, &c. . . . as well in word as in deed. And it
occurred to us (&c., down to) If we now deal one with another, &c. . . .
it may result in harshness, in ill-feeling, in divisions. If the time
seems meet to the Sa*m*gha; let the Sa*m*gha settle this matter by the
Covering over as with grass--except only as regards serious
offences <span id="fr_63"></span>[2](#fn_62), and as regards those
things in which the laity have been concerned."

'Then some discreet and able Bhikkhu among those Bhikkhus who belong to
the one party is to bring the matter before his own party, saying,

'"May the venerable ones hear me. While we were continuing, &c. . . . we
have been guilty, &c. . . . as well in word as in deed. And it occurred
to us, &c. . . . (down to) in divisions. If the time seems meet to you,
venerable Sirs, I would confess in the midst of the Sa*m*gha, both on
your behalf, venerable Sirs, and on my own behalf, both such offence as
is yours, venerable Sirs, and such offence

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

as is mine own, to the end that it may be covered over as with grass,
except only as regards serious offences, and as regards those things in
which the laity have been concerned."

'And some discreet and able Bhikkhu among the Bhikkhus belonging to the
other party is to bring the matter before his own party, saying, "May
the venerable ones hear me \[&c., as before in the last paragraph, down
to the end\]."

Then the discreet and able Bhikkhu among the Bhikkhus belonging to the
one party is to bring the matter before the Sa*m*gha, saying, "May the
venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. While we (&c., as before, down to) in
divisions. If the time seems meet to the Sa*m*gha, I would confess <span
id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_63) in the midst of the Sa*m*gha, both on
behalf of these venerable ones and on my own behalf, both such offence
as is theirs and such offence as is mine own, to the end that it may be
covered over as with grass, except only as regards serious offences, and
as regards those things in which the laity have been concerned. This is
the motion Patti). May the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. While we (&c., as
before, down to) in divisions. I confess (&c., as before, down to) in
which the laity have been concerned. Whosoever of the venerable ones
approves of the confession of these our offences, to the end that they
may so be covered over as with grass, except as before mentioned, let
him keep silence. Whosoever approves not thereof, let him speak. These
our offences are confessed in the midst of the Sa*m*gha, to the end that
they may be covered over as with grass, except

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

as before mentioned. The Sa*m*gha approves thereof. Therefore is it
silent. Thus do I understand."

'And the discreet and able Bhikkhu among the Bhikkhus belonging to the
other party is to bring the matter before the Sa*m*gha, saying, "Let the
venerable Sa*m*gha hear me (&c., as before in the last paragraph, down
to the end)."

'Then thus, O Bhikkhus, those Bhikkhus are absolved of those offences,
except as regards serious offences, and as regards those things in which
the laity have been concerned, and except also as regards those who
express their disapproval of the proceedings, or who are not present at
them <span id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_64).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_60"></span>[31:1](sbe20014.htm#fr_61) The whole of this
chapter recurs below, IV, 14, 33.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[32:1](sbe20014.htm#fr_62) Buddhaghosa's
commentary on this expression will be found in the notes to H.O.'s
edition of the text, pp. 313, 314.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[32:2](sbe20014.htm#fr_63) Buddhaghosa (H.O.
loc. cit.) explains this as meaning either Pârâ*g*ika or Sa*m*ghâdisesa
offences. So also he explains Du*tth*ullâ âpatti at Mahâvagga X, 5, 4.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[33:1](sbe20014.htm#fr_64) Deseyya*m*. Compare
IV, 14, 33, at the end.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[34:1](sbe20014.htm#fr_65) On these phrases
Buddhaghosa has the following note Di*tth*âvikamman ti ye pana na me
ta*m* khamatî ti a*ññ*ama*ññ*â di*tth*âvikamma*m* karonti tehi vâ
saddhi*m* âpatti*m* âpa*gg*itvâ pi, tattha anâgatâ âgantvâ vâ
*kh*anda*m* datvâ parive*n*âdisu nisinnâ, te âpattîhi na vu*tth*ahanti.
This is more an exegesis on the rule than an explanation of the words
Di*tth*âvikamma*m* *th*apetvâ, the exact meaning of which remains
doubtful. The literal rendering would be 'except as regards the
manifestation of opinion.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](sbe20015)
