[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe20037)  [Next](sbe20039.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 23.

1\. Now at that time a mosquito-fan had come into the possession of the
Sa*m*gha.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of mosquito-fans.'

A châmara (a tail of the Bos Gruniens or Tibetan ox, mounted on a stick,
to be used by

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

an attendant to whisk off flies) had come into the possession of the
Sa*m*gha.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'You are not, O Bhikkhus, to make use of a châmara. Whosoever does so,
shall be guilty of a dukka*t*a <span id="fr_343"></span>[1](#fn_336.md). I
allow, O Bhikkhus, three kinds of flywhisks--those made of bark, those
made of Usîra-grass, and those made of peacocks' tails <span
id="fr_344"></span>[2](#fn_337.md).'

2\. \[Similar paragraph ending\]

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of sun-shades <span
id="fr_345"></span>[3](#fn_338.md).'

Now at that time the *Kh*abbaggiyas went about with sun-shades up. And
at that, time a certain Upâsaka went to a garden with a number of men
who were followers of the Â*g*îvakas (naked ascetics). And those
followers of the Â*g*îvakas saw the *Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhus coming along
in the distance with sun-shades held over them; and on seeing them, they
said to that Upâsaka:

'Are these, Sir, the men whom you reverence coming along, like lords of
the treasury, there with sun-shades held over them?'

'No, Sirs. These are not Bhikkhus; they are Paribbâ*g*akas (wandering
mendicants).'

So they made a bet whether they were Bhikkhus or not. And when that
Upâsaka recognised them, when they came up, he murmured, was annoyed,
and was indignant, saying, 'How can their reverences go about with
sun-shades held over them?'

The Bhikkhus heard of that Upâsaka's thus murmuring, &c.

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And those Bhikkhus
told the matter to the Blessed One.

'Is it true, O Bhikkhus, as they say?'

'It is true, Lord.'

The Blessed Buddha rebuked them, saying (&c., as usual, see I, 1, 2, 3).
And when he had rebuked them, and had delivered a religious discourse,
he, addressed the Bhikkhus, and said:

'You are not, O Bhikkhus, to have sun-shades held over you. Whosoever
does so, shall be guilty of a dukka*t*a.'

3\. Now at that time a certain Bhikkhu was sick, and without a sun-shade
(being held over him) he was ill at ease.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow, O Bhikkhus, a sun-shade for the sick.'

Now at that time the Bhikkhus, thinking, 'It is for the sick only that
sun-shades have been allowed by the Blessed One, and not for those who
are not sick,' were afraid to use sun-shades in the Ârâma, or in the
precincts of the Ârâma.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow, O Bhikkhus, either a sick man, or one who is not sick, to have
a sun-shade held over him either in the Ârâma, or in the precincts of
the Ârâma <span id="fr_346"></span>[1](#fn_339.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_336"></span>[132:1](sbe20038.htm#fr_343.md) Probably because
this, like a white umbrella, was considered an appanage of royalty.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[132:2](sbe20038.htm#fr_344.md) Mora-pi*ñkh*a.
This word is spelt pi*ñg*a by Childers, and by Fausböll, *G*âtaka I, 38,
207.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[132:3](sbe20038.htm#fr_345.md) See the note at
the end of the chapter.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[133:1](sbe20038.htm#fr_346.md) There is an
ambiguity, either in the use of the word *kh*atta, or in the use of the
verb dhâreti, or both, running through this chapter. As a matter of
fact, the Bhikkhus now use sun-shades (usually those made of paper in
China) of the same shape as the umbrellas now used in England; and they
make no distinction as to the place in which they use them. But there is
another shape for shades, to be carried by a dependant walking behind
the person to be shaded, in which the handle is fastened to the rim at
the side of, and not in the middle underneath that part of it which
<span id="page_134">p. 134</span> actually keeps off the sun. Both kinds
are figured on the most ancient Buddhist sculptures. The Old Commentary
on the corresponding rule for the nuns (Bhikkhunî-vibhaṅga, Pâ*k*ittiya
LXXXIV, 2, 1) says that suit-shades are either white, or made of
matting, or made of leaves (doubtless of the talipot palm); and it adds
that they are either ma*nd*ala-baddha*m* or salâka-baddha*m*, which
apparently refers to these two ways in which the handle was joined on to
the shading-part. In the 57th Sekhiya (compare also the 23rd and the
67th), and in *K*ullavagga VIII, 1, 1, will be found rules of etiquette
which show that it was a sign of courtesy or of respect to put down a
sun-shade.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 24](sbe20039.md)
