[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe20054)  [Next](sbe20056) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

### 3.

1\. Now at that time the sleeping-rooms of the Titthiyas were
whitewashed, the floors of their rooms were coloured black, and the
walls coloured with red chalk <span id="fr_491"></span>[1](#fn_482).
Much people went to look at their sleeping-rooms.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow, O Bhikkhus, the use in your Vihâras of whitewash, black
colouring, and red colouring.'

Now at that time the whitewash would not lie on to the rough walls.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to apply the husks of grain made up into
little balls; and when you have thus removed the unevenness with your
hands <span id="fr_492"></span>[2](#fn_483), to lay on the whitewash.'

The whitewash would not adhere.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to apply soft clay; and when you have thus
removed the unevenness with your hands <span
id="fr_493"></span>[2](#fn_483), to lay on the whitewash.'

(Still) the whitewash would not adhere.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of slime <span
id="fr_494"></span>[3](#fn_484) (of trees) or of paste <span
id="fr_495"></span>[4](#fn_485).'

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

Now at that time the colouring matter of red chalk would not lie on the
rough walls.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to apply the husks of grain made up into
little balls; and when you have thus removed the unevenness with your
hands, to lay on the colouring matter of red chalk.'

The red colour would not adhere.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to apply clay mixed with the red powder which
adheres to the grain of rice under the husks <span
id="fr_496"></span>[1](#fn_486); and when you have so taken off the
unevenness with your hands to lay on the red colouring matter.'

Still the red colouring matter would not adhere.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of a paste made of mustard seed <span
id="fr_497"></span>[2](#fn_487), and of oil of beeswax <span
id="fr_498"></span>[3](#fn_488).'

It lay on the wall too thickly in great drops <span
id="fr_499"></span>[4](#fn_489).

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to wipe it down with a cloth <span
id="fr_500"></span>[5](#fn_490).'

Now at that time the black colouring matter did not lie on the rough
ground.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to apply husks of grain

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

made up into little balls; and when you have thus removed the unevenness
with your hands, to lay on the black colouring matter.'

The black colouring matter would not adhere.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to apply clay mixed with (the excrement of)
earth-worms <span id="fr_501"></span>[1](#fn_491); and when you have
thus removed the unevenness with your hands, to lay on the black
colouring matter.'

Still the black colouring matter would not adhere.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of slime and astringent liquid <span
id="fr_502"></span>[2](#fn_492).'

2\. Now at that time the *Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhus had imaginative
drawings <span id="fr_503"></span>[3](#fn_493) painted on their
Vihâras--figures of men, and figures of women.

People, when they saw them on going to visit the Vihâras; murmured, &c.,
saying, 'Like those who still enjoy the pleasures of the world.'

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'You are not, O Bhikkhus, to have imaginative drawings painted figures
of men, and figures of

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

women. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka*t*a. I allow you, O
Bhikkhus, representations of wreaths and creepers and bone hooks and
cupboards <span id="fr_504"></span>[1](#fn_494).'

3\. Now at that time the Vihâras had too low a basement (&c., as in V,
11, 6 as to roofing, stairs, and balustrade).

Now at that time the Vihâras were crowded with people <span
id="fr_505"></span>[2](#fn_495). The Bhikkhus were ashamed to lie down
to sleep.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, the use of curtains.'

They lifted up the curtains and looked in.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to put up a lath and plaster wall half the
height of the Vihâra.'

They looked on from over this half-wall.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to make inner chambers of three
kinds--chambers in shape like a palankeen <span
id="fr_506"></span>[3](#fn_496), chambers in shape like a quart
measure <span id="fr_507"></span>[4](#fn_497), and chambers on an upper
storey <span id="fr_508"></span>[5](#fn_498).'

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

Now at that time the Bhikkhus made inner chambers in the middle of small
Vihâras, and there was no room to move about in.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to make the inner chambers at one side of
small Vihâras, and in the middle of large ones <span
id="fr_509"></span>[1](#fn_499).'

4\. Now at that time the lower part of the lath and plaster wall of the
Vihâra decayed.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, buttresses of timber <span
id="fr_510"></span>[2](#fn_500).'

Rain leaked through on to the lath and plaster wall of the Vihâra <span
id="fr_511"></span>[3](#fn_501).

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, a protecting arrangement <span
id="fr_512"></span>[4](#fn_502) and cement <span
id="fr_513"></span>[5](#fn_503).'

Now at that time a snake fell from the roof on to the back of a certain
Bhikkhu. He was terrified, and made an outcry <span
id="fr_514"></span>[6](#fn_504). The Bhikkhus, running up, said to that
Bhikkhu: 'Why, Sir, do you make an outcry?' Then that Bhikkhu told the
matter to

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

the Bhikkhus, and they told the matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, a ceiling-cloth.'

5\. Now at that time the Bhikkhus hung their bags at the feet of the
bedsteads, and at the feet of the chairs; and they were gnawed by the
mice and white ants.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, pins in the wall, and bone hooks <span
id="fr_515"></span>[1](#fn_505).'

Now at that time the Bhikkhus laid aside their robes on the bedsteads
and on the chairs, and the robes were torn.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, bamboos to hang your robes on, and strings to
hang your robes on <span id="fr_516"></span>[2](#fn_506).'

Now at that time the Vihâras had no verandahs, and no defences <span
id="fr_517"></span>[3](#fn_507).

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, verandahs <span
id="fr_518"></span>[4](#fn_508), covered terraces <span
id="fr_519"></span>[5](#fn_509), inner verandahs <span
id="fr_520"></span>[6](#fn_510), and over-hanging eaves <span
id="fr_521"></span>[7](#fn_511).'

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

The verandahs were. too public; and the Bhikkhus were ashamed to lie
down in them to sleep.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, an arrangement in form of a curtain that can
be drawn aside <span id="fr_522"></span>[1](#fn_512), or an arrangement
in form of a moveable screen <span id="fr_523"></span>[2](#fn_513).'

6\. Now at that time the Bhikkhus, when taking their midday meal in the
open air, were troubled by cold and heat.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, a Service Hall.'

The Service Hall had too low a basement (&c., as in V, 11, 6, down to
the end).

Now at that time the Bhikkhus spread their robes out on the ground in
the open air, and they became dirty.

'I allow, O Bhikkhus, bamboos to hang robes on, and strings to hang
robes in, in the open air.

7\. The water became warm.

'I allow, O Bhikkhus, a water-room and a water-shed.'

The water-room had too low a basement (&c., as in V, 11, 6, down to the
end).

There were no vessels for the water.

'I allow, O Bhikkhus, chank shells and saucers for the water.'

8\. Now at that time the Vihâras had no fence round them.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to enclose them with

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

ramparts (Pâkâra) of three kinds--brick walls, stone walls, and wooden
fences.'

There was no store-room <span id="fr_524"></span>[1](#fn_514).

'I allow, O Bhikkhus, a store-room.'

The store-room had too low a basement, and it was flooded with water.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to make it with a high basement.'

The store-room had no door.

'I allow, O Bhikkhus, a door; with door-posts and lintel, with hollows
like a mortar for the door to revolve in, with projections to revolve in
those hollows, with rings on the door for the bolt to work along in,
with a block of wood fixed into the edge of the door-post, and
containing a cavity for the bolt to go into (called the Monkey's Head),
with a pin to secure the bolt by, with a connecting bolt, with a
key-hole, with a hole for a string with which the door may be closed,
and with a string for that purpose <span
id="fr_525"></span>[2](#fn_515).'

Grass and plaster fell from the store-room.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus (&c., as in V, 14, 4. down to the end of V, 14,
5, as to roofing, flooring, drains, &c.).'

9\. Now at that time the Bhikkhus made fire-places here and there in the
Parive*n*a, and the Parive*n*a was covered with the remains of the
fires <span id="fr_526"></span>[3](#fn_516).

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to make a separate room for the fire at one
side.'

The fire-room had too low a basement (&c., as in V, 11, 6, as to
flooring, stairs, and balustrade, followed by the paragraph as to the
door, and the facing, as in V, 14, 3, &c.).

10\. Now at that time the Ârâmas had no fences to them, and goats and
cattle injured the plantations <span id="fr_527"></span>[1](#fn_517).

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to surround them with fencing of three
kinds--bamboo fences, thorn fences, and ditches.'

There was no gateway (k o t l h a k a), and goats and cattle, even so,
injured the plantations.

'I allow, O Bhikkhus, a gateway, with gates made of stakes interlaced
with thorny brakes <span id="fr_528"></span>[2](#fn_518), with fences
(across the gateway) made of the akka plant <span
id="fr_529"></span>[3](#fn_519), with ornamental screen-work over the
gateway <span id="fr_530"></span>[4](#fn_520), and with bars.'

\[Then the paragraphs allowing the roofing, &c., of this ko*tth*aka as
in V, 11, 6, and drains for the Ârâma, as in V, 14, 3.\]

11\. Now at that time Seniya Bimbisâra, the king of Magadha, wanted to
build a pâsâda <span id="fr_531"></span>[5](#fn_521) (residence),

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

covered with cement and clay, for the use of the Sa*m*gha. And it
occurred to the Bhikkhus, 'What kind of roof now has been allowed by the
Blessed One, and what kind of roof has not been allowed?'

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow, O Bhikkhus, roofing of five kinds--brick roofing, stone
roofing, cement roofing, straw roofing, and roofing of leaves.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

End of the First Bhâ*n*avâra (or Portion for Recitation).

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_482"></span>[170:1](sbe20055.htm#fr_491) See V, 11, 6,
where all these words recur.

<span id="fn_483"></span>[170:2](sbe20055.htm#fr_493) Pâ*n*ikâya.
Buddhaghosa says nothing.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[170:3](sbe20055.htm#fr_494) Ikkâsa, on which
we have nothing to add to Buddhaghosa's note at p. 321 of the edition of
the text. It recurs below again in this section.

<span id="fn_485"></span>[170:4](sbe20055.htm#fr_495) Pi*tth*a-maddan ti
pi*tth*a-khala*m* (B.). Compare the Sanskrit m*ri*d.

<span id="fn_486"></span>[171:1](sbe20055.htm#fr_496) Ku*nd*aka-mattikan
ti ku*nd*aka-missaka-mattika*m* (B.). Compare ku*nd*aka-pûvam in the
*G*âtaka Commentary I, 423 (cakes made of flour mixed with this powder).

<span id="fn_487"></span>[171:2](sbe20055.htm#fr_497) Sâsapa-ku*tt*an ti
sâsapa-pi*tth*am. The word has occurred already at Mahâvagga VI, 14, 5,
where the reading is ku*tt*a instead of ku*dd*a given in the text here.
The latter should be altered in accordance with that passage, and with
Buddhaghosa here.

<span id="fn_488"></span>[171:3](sbe20055.htm#fr_498) Sittha-telakan ti
vilîna-madhu-sitthaka*m* (B.). It is mentioned as used for hair-oil at
*K*ullavagga V, 2, 3.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[171:4](sbe20055.htm#fr_499) A*kk*ussanna*m*
hotî ti bindu*m* bindu*m* hutvâ ti*tth*ati, says Buddhaghosa.

<span id="fn_490"></span>[171:5](sbe20055.htm#fr_500) *K*olakena
pa*kk*uddharitu*m*. Buddhaghosa says pa*kk*uttharitun ti mu*ñk*itu*m*;
but compare for the right form V, 17, 1.

<span id="fn_491"></span>[172:1](sbe20055.htm#fr_501) Ga*nd*u-mattikan
ti ga*nd*uppâda-gûtha-mattika*m* (B.).

<span id="fn_492"></span>[172:2](sbe20055.htm#fr_502) Kasâvan ti
âmalaka-hari*t*akâna*m* kasâva*m* (B.). Compare Mahâvagga VI, 4.

<span id="fn_493"></span>[172:3](sbe20055.htm#fr_503)
Pa*t*ibhâna-*k*itta*m*. The Bhikkhunîs were forbidden by the 41st
Pâ*k*ittiya of the Bhikkhunî-vibhaṅga to go and see such paintings.
(Sutta-vibhaṅga II, 298, where a picture gallery, *K*ittâgâra, belonging
to King Pasenadi of Kosala, is mentioned.) We. are not quite sure of the
connotation of the term, which appears to imply some reproach. Perhaps
it means 'suggestive.' Figures as such were not forbidden; and remains
of statues and bas reliefs erected in the Vihâras, illustrative of
every-day life, have been found in great numbers. In the introductory
story to the 26th Pâ*k*ittiya it certainly means 'indecent.'

<span id="fn_494"></span>[173:1](sbe20055.htm#fr_504) All these words
occur above at V, 11, 6, and V, 14, 4. The meaning of the two last is
very doubtful. Perhaps it is intended that these should occupy the space
on the walls instead of any ornamentation.

<span id="fn_495"></span>[173:2](sbe20055.htm#fr_505) Âlakamandâ,
literally, 'like Kuvera's city in heaven.' Buddhaghosa tells us why.
Âlakamandâ ti ekaṅganâ manussâbhiki*nn*â. Âki*nn*a-yakkhâ, corresponding
to this last word, recurs in the standing description of Âlakamandâ at
Mahâ-parinibbâna Sutta V, 43 = Mahâ Sudassana Sutta I, 3. The name of
the city is spelt in both those passages with *l* not l.

<span id="fn_496"></span>[173:3](sbe20055.htm#fr_506) Sivikâ-gabbho ti
*k*aturassa-gahbho says Buddhaghosa.

<span id="fn_497"></span>[173:4](sbe20055.htm#fr_507) Nâ*li*kâ-gabbho ti
vitthârato dvigu*n*a-tigu*n*-âyâmo dîgha-gabbho (B.). That na*li*kâ is
used like nâ*li* for a bushel measure follows from a comparison of
*G*âtaka 1,124, last lines, with I, 126, line 3.

<span id="fn_498"></span>[173:5](sbe20055.htm#fr_508) Hammiya-gahbho ti
âkâsa-tale ku*t*âgâra-gabbho muda*nd*a-*kkh*adana-gabbho <span
id="page_174">p. 174</span> vâ (B.). Compare our note on Mahâvagga I,
30, 4.

<span id="fn_499"></span>[174:1](sbe20055.htm#fr_509) There is a similar
injunction at V, 14, 3, with respect to fire-places in bath-rooms.

<span id="fn_500"></span>[174:2](sbe20055.htm#fr_510) Kulaṅka-pâdaka*m*.
See Buddhaghosa's note at p. 321 of the edition of the text. The remedy
here is different from that provided in the similar case, at V, 14, 3,
with respect to bath-houses.

<span id="fn_501"></span>[174:3](sbe20055.htm#fr_511) On the use of
ovassati compare V, 16, 1, and VIII, 3, 3.

<span id="fn_502"></span>[174:4](sbe20055.htm#fr_512)
Parittâna-ki*t*ikan ti tassa parittânattha*m* ki*t*ika*m* is all that
Buddhaghosa says. Compare the end of § 5.

<span id="fn_503"></span>[174:5](sbe20055.htm#fr_513) Uddha-sudhan ti
va*kkh*aka-gomayena *k*a *kh*arikâya *k*a saddhi*m* maddita-mattika*m*
(B.).

<span id="fn_504"></span>[174:6](sbe20055.htm#fr_514) Vissara*m* akâsi.
See the note on *K*ullavagga VIII, I, where the whole incident is
similar.

<span id="fn_505"></span>[175:1](sbe20055.htm#fr_515) The use of these
has been already referred to at V, 9. 5.

<span id="fn_506"></span>[175:2](sbe20055.htm#fr_516) These have already
been allowed in *K*ullavagga V, It, 6, and V, 14, 3. The license under
the present rule extends only to their use in Vihâras.

<span id="fn_507"></span>[175:3](sbe20055.htm#fr_517) Apa*t*issaranâ,
which must have some special, technical, meaning unknown to us.
Buddhaghosa says nothing.

<span id="fn_508"></span>[175:4](sbe20055.htm#fr_518) Âlindo nâma
pamukha*m* vu*kk*ati (B.). Compare Abhidhâna-ppadîpikâ, verse 218.

<span id="fn_509"></span>[175:5](sbe20055.htm#fr_519) Paghana*m* nâma
ya*m* nikkhamantâ *k*a pavisantâ *k*a pâdehi hananti. Tassa vihâra-dvâre
ubhato ku*tt*a*m* (?) niharitvâ katapadesass’ eta*m* adhiva*k*ana*m*.
Paghânan ti pi vu*kk*ati (B.).

<span id="fn_510"></span>[175:6](sbe20055.htm#fr_520) Paku*tt*an ti
ma*ggh*e gabbhassa samantâ pariyâgâro vu*kk*ati. Paku*t*an ti pi pâ*th*o
(B.).

<span id="fn_511"></span>[175:7](sbe20055.htm#fr_521) Osarako ti
anâ*li*ndake vihâre va*m*sa*m* datvâ tato da*nd*ake <span
id="page_176">p. 176</span> osâretvâ kata*m* *kh*adana-pamukha*m* (B.).
At *G*âtaka III, 446, it is said of a dying man 'niharitvâ osârake
nipa*gg*âpesu*m*.'

<span id="fn_512"></span>[176:1](sbe20055.htm#fr_522)
Sa*m*sara*n*a-ki*t*iko nâma *k*akkala-yutto ki*t*iko (B.). *K*akkala
should be compared with *k*akkhalikâ at VI, 2, 2, and *k*akkhali at VI,
19.

<span id="fn_513"></span>[176:2](sbe20055.htm#fr_523)
Ugghâ*t*ana-ki*t*iko, on which Buddhaghosa says nothing.

<span id="fn_514"></span>[177:1](sbe20055.htm#fr_524) Ko*tth*aka. See
our note above on V, J4, 4, as to the various allied meanings of this
word. Perhaps 'gateway' should be chosen as the rendering here, as it
clearly must be in the closely allied passage in the next section but
one (§ 10). As the chamber supposed always to be built over the gateway
could be used as a store-room, the difference is not very essential.

<span id="fn_515"></span>[177:2](sbe20055.htm#fr_525) The whole as above
in V, 14, 3, where see the note.

<span id="fn_516"></span>[177:3](sbe20055.htm#fr_526) Uklâpo. On this
use of the word compare *K*ullavagga VIII. 1, 3.

<span id="fn_517"></span>[178:1](sbe20055.htm#fr_527) Uparope. Compare
Uparopaka at *G*âtaka II, 345.

<span id="fn_518"></span>[178:2](sbe20055.htm#fr_528) Apesiyam. See p.
321 of the edition of the text, reading of course ka*nth*aka.

<span id="fn_519"></span>[178:3](sbe20055.htm#fr_529) Akkavâ*t*a, on
which Buddhaghosa says nothing. A kind of dress made from the stalks of
the akka plant is mentioned in Mahâvagga VIII, 28, 2.

<span id="fn_520"></span>[178:4](sbe20055.htm#fr_530) Tosa*n*a, which is
the ornamental erection over a gateway of which such excellent examples
in stone have been found at the Sânchi and Bharhut Topes.

<span id="fn_521"></span>[178:5](sbe20055.htm#fr_531) The exact meaning
of the word Pâsâda at the time when this <span id="page_179">p.
179</span> book was written has not yet been precisely ascertained. In
later times it meant a building of several storeys, each successive
storey being smaller in superficial area than the one immediately
beneath it. Compare the Mahâ-loha-pâsâda so often mentioned in the
Mahâva*m*sa (pp. 161-257), the stone pillars of the lowest stories of
which are still one of the sights of Anurâdhapura.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](sbe20056)
