[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe20088)  [Next](sbe20090) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 3.

1\. Now at that time the *Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhus thinking, 'No one knows
that we are guilty' listened to the Pâtimokkha. The Thera Bhikkhus, who
understood the thoughts of other men, told the Bhikkhus, saying, 'Such
and such a one, Sirs, and such and such a one, *Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhus,
thinking, "No one knows that we are guilty," are listening to the
Pâtimokkha.'

When the *Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhus heard that, they, thinking 'the good
Bhikkhus will (otherwise) first interdict the Pâtimokkha to us,'
interdicted the Pâtimokkha to the Bhikkhus who were pure and innocent
before (they had time to do so to them), and this without ground and
without cause.

Those Bhikkhus who were moderate murmured, &c (as usual, down to) told
the matter to the Blessed One.

'Is it true, O Bhikkhus, that the *Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhus have \[acted
thus\]?'

'It is true, Lord!'

Then he rebuked them, and when he had delivered a religious discourse,
he said: 'The Pâtimokkha is not, O Bhikkhus, to be interdicted to pure
and innocent Bhikkhus without ground and without cause. Whosoever does
so, shall be guilty of a dukka*t*a.

2\. 'There is one kind of inhibition of the Pâtimokkha, O Bhikkhus,
which is illegal, and one

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

which is legal. There are two . . . ., three . . . ., four (&c., up to)
ten kinds of inhibition of the Pâtimokkha which are illegal, and one,
two (&c., up to) ten which are legal.

3\. 'Which is the one kind of inhibition of the Pâtimokkha which is
illegal? When one inhibits the Pâtimokkha for a breach of morality
without ground. This is the one kind, &c.

'And which is the one kind of inhibition of the Pâtimokkha which is
legal? When one inhibits the Pâtimokkha for a breach of morality with
good ground. This is the one kind, &c.

'And which are the two kinds of inhibition of the Pâtimokkha which are
illegal? When one inhibits the Pâtimokkha for a breach of morality, or
for an offence against conduct, and each of them without ground. These
are the two kinds, &c.

'And which are the two kinds of inhibition of the Pâtimokkha which are
legal? When one inhibits the Pâtimokkha for a breach of morality, and
for an offence against conduct, and each of them with good ground. These
are the two kinds, &c

'And which are the three kinds, &c.? \[as the last two, adding "offence
against doctrine."\]

'And which are the four kinds, &c.? \[as the last, adding "offence
against the right mode of livelihood."\]

'And which are the five kinds of inhibition of the Pâtimokkha which are
illegal? When one inhibits the Pâtimokkha for a Pârâ*g*ika, or for a
Sa*m*ghâdisesa, or for a Pâ*k*ittiya, or for a Pâ*t*idesanîya, or for a
Dukka*t*a, and each of them without ground. These are the five kinds,
&c.

'And which are the five kinds of inhibition of the

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pâtimokkha which
are legal? \[Same as the last, "with good ground."\]

'And which are the six kinds of inhibition of the Pâtimokkha which are
illegal? When one inhibits the Pâtimokkha for an offence against
morality . . . . conduct . . . . doctrine <span
id="fr_848"></span>[1](#fn_834) . . . . without ground, the offence
being one of omission--when one inhibits the Pâtimokkha for an offence
against morality . . . . conduct . . . . doctrine . . . . without
ground, the offence being one of commission <span
id="fr_849"></span>[2](#fn_835). These are the six, &c.

'And which are the six kinds of inhibition of the Pâtimokkha which are
legal? \[Same as the last, "with good ground."\]

'And which are the seven kinds of inhibition of the Pâtimokkha which are
illegal? When one inhibits the Pâtimokkha for a Pârâ*g*ika, or for a
Sa*m*ghâdisesa, or for a Thulla*kk*aya, or for a Pâ*k*ittiya, or for a
Pâ*t*idesanîya, or for a Dukka*t*a, or for a Dubbhâsita, and each of
them without ground. These are the seven kinds, &c.

'And which are the seven kinds of inhibition of the Pâtimokkha which are
legal? \[Same as the last, "with good ground."\]

'And which are the eight kinds of inhibition of the Pâtimokkha which are
illegal? \[The same as the six, adding "offence against the right means
of livelihood."\]

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

'And which are the nine kinds of inhibition of the Pâtimokkha which are
illegal . . . . legal? \[The same as the six, adding for each kind of
offence, "the offence being one both of omission and of commission."\]

'And which are the ten kinds of inhibition of the Pâtimokkha which are
illegal? When (a Bhikkhu) who has been guilty of a Pârâ*g*ika is not
seated in that assembly <span id="fr_850"></span>[1](#fn_836),--when no
discussion is still going on (in the assembly) as to a Pârâ*g*ika
offence (supposed to have been committed by a Bhikkhu then
present),--when (a Bhikkhu) who has abandoned the precepts <span
id="fr_851"></span>[2](#fn_837) is not seated in that assembly,--when no
discussion is still going on (in the assembly) in respect of (a Bhikkhu
then present having been charged with) abandoning the precepts,--when
(the person charged) submits himself to the legally prescribed concord
(of the assembly) <span id="fr_852"></span>[3](#fn_838),--when (the
person charged) does not withdraw his acceptance of the legally
prescribed concord (of the assembly) <span
id="fr_853"></span>[4](#fn_839),--when no discussion is still going on
(in the assembly) in respect of the withdrawal of (any member's)
acceptance of the legally (prescribed) concord (of the assembly),--when
(the Bhikkhu charged) has not been suspected of an offence against
morality, nor seen (to have committed one), nor heard (to have committed
one)--. . . . of an offence against conduct--. . . . of an

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

offence against doctrine These are the ten kinds, &c.

And which are the ten kinds of inhibition of the Pâtimokkha which are
legal? \[The same as the last, positive instead of negative.\]

4\. 'And how (can it be legally said that) a Bhikkhu who has been guilty
of a Pârâ*g*ika offence is seated in the assembly?

'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu sees that (another) Bhikkhu is incurring
a Pârâ*g*ika offence by those means, marks, and signs by which the
incurring of a Pârâ*g*ika offence is brought about. Or in case a Bhikkhu
does not himself see that (another) Bhikkhu is incurring a Pârâ*g*ika
offence, but another Bhikkhu inform the (first-mentioned) Bhikkhu,
saying, "Such and such a Bhikkhu, Sir, has been guilty of a Pârâ*g*ika
offence." Or in case a Bhikkhu does not himself see that another Bhikkhu
is incurring a Pârâ*g*ika offence, but that one himself inform the
(first-mentioned) Bhikkhu, saying, "I, Sir, have been guilty of a
Pârâ*g*ika offence."

'(In either of these cases), O Bhikkhus, if he seem to do so, the
Bhikkhu may, on the ground of what he has seen and heard and suspected,
bring forward the following resolution on an Uposatha day, on the
fourteenth or fifteenth day of the month, at a time when that individual
is present in the midst of the Sa*m*gha: "Let the venerable Sa*m*gha
hear me. Such and such an individual has been guilty of a Pârâ*g*ika
offence. I interdict for him the Pâtimokkha, to the effect that the
Pâtimokkha ought not to be recited at a time when he is present." That
is a legal inhibition of the Pâtimokkha.

'If, when the Pâtimokkha his been inhibited for

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

that Bhikkhu, the assembly should rise on account of any one or other of
the Ten Dangers <span id="fr_854"></span>[1](#fn_840)--danger arising
from the king, or from thieves, or from fire, or from water, or from
human beings, or from non- human beings, or from beasts of prey, or from
creeping things, or danger of life, or danger against chastity--the
Bhikkhu may, if he desire to do so, bring forward the following
resolution, either in that circle of residence or in another circle of
residence, at a time when that individual is present in the midst of the
assembly: "Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. A discussion had
commenced with regard to a Pârâ*g*ika offence of such and such a person,
but that matter was not decided. If the time seems meet to the Sa*m*gha,
let the Sa*m*gha decide that matter." If he thus succeed, it is well. If
not, then on an Uposatha day, on the fourteenth or fifteenth day of the
month, at a time when that individual is present in the midst of the
Sa*m*gha, let him bring forward the following resolution: "Let the
venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. A discussion had commenced with regard to a
Pârâ*g*ika offence of such and such a person, but that matter was not
decided. I interdict the Pâtimokkha for him to the effect that the
Pâtimokkha ought not to be recited at a time when he is present." That
is a legal inhibition of the Pâtimokkha.

5\. 'And how (can it be legally said that a Bhikkhu) who has abandoned
the precepts is seated in the assembly?'

\[The same as last, reading 'abandoned the precepts,' &c., for
'Pârâ*g*ika offence,' &c.\]

6\. 'And how (can it be legally said that the person

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

charged) does not submit himself to the legally (prescribed) concord (of
the assembly)?'

\[Same as last, reading 'not submit himself to the legally (prescribed)
concord of the assembly,' &c., instead of 'abandon the precepts,' &c.\]

7\. 'And how (can it be legally said that the person charged) withdraws
his acceptance of the legally (established) concord (of the assembly)?'

\[Same as last, reading 'withdraws his acceptance,' &c., for 'does not
submit,' &c.\]

8\. 'And how can it be legally said that the person charged has been
seen or heard or suspected of having committed an offence against
morality . . . . an offence against conduct . . . . an offence against
doctrine?'

\[Same as 4, reading 'offence against morality,' &c., for 'Pârâ*g*ika
offence.\]

These are the ten kinds of the inhibition of Pâtimokkha which are legal.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Here ends the First Portion for Recitation.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_834"></span>[309:1](sbe20089.htm#fr_848) The paragraph is
repeated in the section full for each of these cases.

<span id="fn_835"></span>[309:2](sbe20089.htm#fr_849) Kata . . . . akatâ
. . . . katâkatâ we have rendered here and below as offence of
omission--of commission--of both, as seems imperatively demanded by the
context. Buddhaghosa, however, says, Akatâya ti tena puggalena sâ
vipatti katâ vâ hotu akatâ vâ pâtimokkha-*th*apanakassa sa*ññ*â
amûlika-vasena amûlikâ hoti. Katâkatâyâ ti kata*ñ* *k*a akata*ñ* *k*a
ubhaya*m* gahetvâ vutta*m*.

<span id="fn_836"></span>[310:1](sbe20089.htm#fr_850) This and the
following phrase are further enlarged upon in 6 4 and the following
sections.

<span id="fn_837"></span>[310:2](sbe20089.htm#fr_851) See our note on
Mahâvagga II, 22, 3.

<span id="fn_838"></span>[310:3](sbe20089.htm#fr_852) See Mahâvagga X,
5, 13, &c.

<span id="fn_839"></span>[310:4](sbe20089.htm#fr_853) Pa*kk*âdîyati.
Buddhaghosa says here, pa*kk*âdîyatî ti puna kâtabba*m* kamma*m*
pa*kk*âdîyati. Tena ukko*t*anake pâ*k*ittiya*m* âpa*gg*ati.

<span id="fn_840"></span>[312:1](sbe20089.htm#fr_854) See the rule laid
down in Mahâvagga II, 15, 4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](sbe20090)
