[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe20022)  [Next](sbe20024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 8 <span id="fr_160"></span>[1](#fn_155).

1\. Now at that time the Se*tth*i of Râ*g*agaha had acquired a
block <span id="fr_161"></span>[2](#fn_156) of sandal-wood of the most
precious sandal-wood flavour. And the Se*tth*i of Râ*g*agaha thought,
'How would it be if I were to have a bowl carved out of this block of
sandal-wood, so that the chips <span id="fr_162"></span>[3](#fn_157)
shall remain my property, and I can give the bowl away?' And the
Se*tth*i of Râ*g*agaha had a bowl turned out of that block of
sandal-wood, and put it in a balance, and had it lifted on to the top of
a bamboo <span id="fr_163"></span>[4](#fn_158), and tying that bamboo at
the top of a succession of bamboos, he let it be known, saying, 'If any
Sama*n*a or Brahman be an Arahat and possessed of Iddhi, let him get
down the bowl. It is a gift to him!'

Then Pûra*n*a Kassapa went to the Se*tth*i of Râ*g*agaha, and said to
him, 'I, O householder, am

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

an Arahat and possessed of Iddhi. Give me the bowl.'

'If, Sir, you are an Arahat and possessed of Iddhi, let your reverence
get down the bowl!'

Then Makkhali Gosâla, and A*g*ita Kesa-kambalî, and Pakudha Ka*kk*âyana,
and Sa*ñg*aya Bela*tth*iputta, and Niga*nth*a Nâta-putta went severally
to the Se*tth*i of Râ*g*agaha, \[and preferred the same request, and
received the same reply.\]

Now at that time the venerable Mahâ Moggallâna and the venerable
Pi*nd*ola Bhâradvâ*g*a, having dressed themselves early in the morning,
went into Râ*g*agaha, duly bowled and robed, for alms. And the venerable
Pi*nd*ola Bhâradvâ*g*a said to the venerable Mahâ Moggallâna: 'The
venerable Mahâ Moggallâna is both an Arahat and possessed of Iddhi. Go,
friend Moggallâna, and fetch down this bowl, for this bowl belongs to
thee.'

'The venerable Pi*nd*ola Bhâradvâ*g*a also is both an Arahat and
possessed of Iddhi. Go, friend Bhâradvâ*g*a, and fetch down the bowl,
for this bowl belongs to thee.'

Then the venerable Pi*nd*ola Bhâradvâ*g*a, rising up in the air, took
the bowl, and went thrice round Râ*g*agaha (in the air). And at that
time the Se*tth*i of Râ*g*agaha stood in his dwelling-place with his
wife and children, and holding up his clasped hands in reverent
salutation, he exclaimed, 'May the venerable Bhâradvâ*g*a be pleased to
descend upon our dwelling-place.' And the venerable Bhâradvâ*g*a
descended into his dwelling-place. Then the Se*tth*i of Râ*g*agaha took
the bowl from the hands of the venerable Bhâradvâ*g*a, and filled it
with costly food, and presented it to the venerable Bhâradvâ*g*a. And

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

the venerable Bhâradvâ*g*a took the bowl, and departed to his Ârâma.

2\. Now the people heard, 'The venerable Pi*nd*ola Bhâradvâ*g*a, they
say, has got down the Râ*g*agaha Se*tth*i's bowl.' And those people,
with shouts loud and long, followed in the steps of Pi*nd*ola
Bhâradvâ*g*a. And the Blessed One heard the shouts loud and long, and on
hearing them he asked the venerable Ânanda, 'What now, Ânanda, does this
so great shouting mean?'

The venerable Pi*nd*ola Bhâradvâ*g*a, Lord, has got down the Râ*g*agaha
Se*tth*i's bowl; and the people thereof are following in his steps with
shouts loud and long.'

Then the Blessed One, on that occasion and in that connection, convened
a meeting of the Bhikkhu-Sa*m*gha, and asked Pi*nd*ola Bhâradvâ*g*a, 'Is
it true, as they say, that you, Bhâradvâ*g*a, have got down the
Râ*g*agaha Se*tth*i's bowl?'

'It is true, Lord.'

The Blessed Buddha rebuked him, saying, 'This is improper, Bhâradvâ*g*a,
not according to rule, unsuitable, unworthy of a Sama*n*a, unbecoming,
and ought not to be done. How can you, Bhâradvâ*g*a, for the sake of a
miserable wooden pot, display before the laity the superhuman quality of
your miraculous power of Iddhi? Just, Bhâradvâ*g*a, like a woman who
displays herself for the sake of a miserable piece of money <span
id="fr_164"></span>[1](#fn_159), have you, for the sake of a miserable

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

wooden pot displayed before the laity the superhuman quality of your
miraculous power of Iddhi. This will not conduce, Bhâradvâ*g*a, either
to the conversion of the unconverted, or to the increase of the
converted; but rather to those who have not been converted remaining
unconverted, and to the turning back of those who have been converted.'

And when he had rebuked him, and had delivered a religious
discourse <span id="fr_165"></span>[1](#fn_160), he addressed the
Bhikkhus, and said: 'You are not, O Bhikkhus, to display before the
laity the superhuman power of Iddhi. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty
of a dukka*t*a <span id="fr_166"></span>[2](#fn_161). Break to pieces, O
Bhikkhus, that wooden bowl; and when you have ground it to powder, give
it to the Bhikkhus as perfume for their eye ointments <span
id="fr_167"></span>[3](#fn_162). And you are not, O Bhikkhus, to use
wooden bowls. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka*t*a <span
id="fr_168"></span>[4](#fn_163).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_155"></span>[78:1](sbe20023.htm#fr_160) A Burmese version
of the following legend is translated by Bishop Bigandet in his 'Legend
of the Burmese Buddha,' vol. ii, pp. 212-216 (Third Edition).

<span id="fn_156"></span>[78:2](sbe20023.htm#fr_161) *K*andana-gan*th*î
uppannâ hoti ti *k*andana-gha*tt*ikâ uppannâ hoti (B.). Compare
ga*nth*ikâ at *G*âtaka I, 150 = ga*nd*ikâ at ibid. II, 124, and our note
below on that word at V, 29, 3.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[78:3](sbe20023.htm#fr_162) Lekha*m*. It is
clear from V, 9, 2, below, and Buddhaghosa's note there, that likhitu*m*
is used in the sense of 'to plane' or 'to adze' wood or metal; and the
Sinhalese MSS. read here likha*m* instead of lekha*m*. It cannot be 'to
turn,' as the turning lathe is quite a modern invention.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[78:4](sbe20023.htm#fr_163) A similar
proceeding is related of a Bhikkhu at 24, 1.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[80:1](sbe20023.htm#fr_164) Mâsaka-rûpassa. On
the mâsaka, see Rh. D.'s 'Ancient Coins and Measures, &c.,' p. 13. It is
evident from the use of the word rûpa here that stamped pieces of money
were known in the valley of the Ganges as early as the time when the
*K*ullavagga <span id="page_81">p. 81</span> was composed. The word
occurs also below at *K*ullavagga XII, 1, X.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[81:1](sbe20023.htm#fr_165) See *K*ullavagga I,
1, 2.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[81:2](sbe20023.htm#fr_166) Compare the 4th
Pârâ*g*ika.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[81:3](sbe20023.htm#fr_167) The use of
sandal-wood for this purpose is allowed by the closing words of
Mahâvagga VI, 11.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[81:4](sbe20023.htm#fr_168) This injunction is
repeated below in the summary at V, 37.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](sbe20024)
