[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe20047)  [Next](sbe20049) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 33.

1\. Now at that time there were two brothers, Bhikkhus, by name Yame*l*u
and Tekula <span id="fr_414"></span>[3](#fn_406), Brâhmans

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

by birth, excelling in speech, excelling in pronunciation. These went up
to the place where the Blessed One was, and when they had come there,
they saluted the Blessed One, and took their seats on one side. And so
sitting those Bhikkhus spake to the Blessed One thus:

'At the present time, Lord, Bhikkhus, differing in name, differing in
lineage, differing in birth, differing in family, have gone forth (from
the world). These corrupt the word of the Buddhas by (repeating it in)
their own dialect. Let us, Lord, put the word of the Buddhas into
(Sanskrit) verse <span id="fr_415"></span>[1](#fn_407).'

'How can you, O foolish ones, speak thus, saying, "Let us, Lord, put the
word of the Buddhas into verse?" This will not conduce, O foolish ones,
either to the conversion of the unconverted, or to the increase of the
converted; but rather to those who have not been converted being not
converted, and to the turning back of those who have been converted.'

And when the Blessed One had rebuked those Bhikkhus, and had delivered a
religious discourse  <span id="fr_416"></span>[2](#fn_408), he addressed
the Bhikkhus, and said:

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

'You are not, O Bhikkhus, to put the word of the Buddhas into (Sanskrit)
verse. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka*t*a. I allow you, O
Bhikkhus, to learn the word of the Buddhas each in his own dialect <span
id="fr_417"></span>[1](#fn_409).'

2\. Now at that time the *Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhus learnt the Lokâyata
system <span id="fr_418"></span>[2](#fn_410).

People murmured, &c., saying, 'Like those who still enjoy the pleasures
of the world!'

The Bhikkhus heard of the people thus murmuring; and those Bhikkhus told
the matter to the Blessed One.

'Now can a man who holds the Lokâyata as valuable reach up, O Bhikkhus,
to the full advantage of, or attain to full growth in, to full breadth
in this doctrine and discipline <span id="fr_419"></span>[3](#fn_411)?'

'This cannot be, Lord.'

'Or can a man who holds this doctrine and discipline to be valuable
learn the Lokâyata system?'

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

'This cannot be, Lord.'

'You are not, O Bhikkhus, to learn the Lokâyata system. Whosoever does
so, shall be guilty of a dukka*t*a.'

Now at that time the *Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhus taught the Lokâyata system.

People murmured, &c., saying, 'Like those still enjoying the pleasures
of the world!'

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'You are not, O Bhikkhus, to teach the Lokâyata system. Whosoever does
so, shall be guilty of a dukka*t*a.'

\[Similar paragraphs to the last, ending\]

'You are not, O Bhikkhus, to learn--to teach--the low arts <span
id="fr_420"></span>[1](#fn_412) (of divination, spells, omens,
astrology, sacrifices to gods, witchcraft, and quackery).'

3\. Now at that time the Blessed One when, surrounded by a great
assembly, he was preaching the Dhamma, sneezed. The Bhikkhus raised a
great and mighty shout, 'Long life to our Lord the Blessed One! Long
life to the Happy One!' and by the sound thereof the discourse was
interrupted. Then the Blessed One said to the Bhikkhus:

'Now if when a man has sneezed, O Bhikkhus, some one says, "Long life to
you," can he live or die on that account?'

'Not so, Lord.'

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

'You are not, O Bhikkhus, when one has sneezed, to call out, "Long life
to you." Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka*t*a <span
id="fr_421"></span>[1](#fn_413).'

Now at that time people said to the Bhikkhus when they sneezed, 'Long
life to your reverence!' and the Bhikkhus, fearing to offend, gave no
reply. The people murmured, were annoyed, and were indignant, saying,
'How can the Sakya-puttiya Sama*n*as omit to reply when people say,
"Long life to your reverence?"'

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'Laymen, O Bhikkhus, are given to lucky phrases <span
id="fr_422"></span>[2](#fn_414). I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to reply, "May
you live long!" to laymen who say to you, "Long life to your
reverence!"'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_406"></span>[149:3](sbe20048.htm#fr_414) Yame*l*utekulâ. It
is possible that this compound should be dissolved into Yame*l*a and
Utekula. Compare the word Yame*l*e at verse 35 of the Uddâna (which
stands where a nominative should stand, judging by the form of the other
words in the Uddâna). A comma has there been omitted by misprint after
Yame*l*e.

<span id="fn_407"></span>[150:1](sbe20048.htm#fr_415) We think that in
these words (*kh*andaso âropema) there does lie a reference to the
earlier Sanskrit. And this especially for four reasons: firstly, this is
required by the antithesis to 'their own dialect;' secondly, the use of
the word *kh*andasi in Pâ*n*ini, where it always means precisely 'in the
Veda-dialect,' requires it; thirdly, it is difficult to understand
otherwise the mention of 'Brâhmans by birth;' and fourthly, this is in
accordance with the traditional interpretation of the passage handed
down among the Bhikkhus. Buddhaghosa says, *kh*andaso âropemâ ti Veda*m*
viya sakka*t*a-bhâsâya vâ*k*anâ-magga*m* âropema. Sakka*t*a is of course
Sa*m*sk*ri*ta.

<span id="fn_408"></span>[150:2](sbe20048.htm#fr_416) See the substance
intended at *K*ullavagga I,1, 3.

<span id="fn_409"></span>[151:1](sbe20048.htm#fr_417) On the historical
conclusions which may be drawn from this tradition, see H.O.'s
introduction to the text of the Mahâvagga, pp. xlix and following.

<span id="fn_410"></span>[151:2](sbe20048.htm#fr_418) This is mentioned
also in the Assalâyana Sutta (at the beginning), and in the same terms
in the Milinda Pa*n*ha, p. 10, as one of the branches of learning
distinctive of well-educated Brâhmans. It is condemned among other 'low
arts' in the very ancient Mahâ Sîla, § 5. (See Rh. D.'s 'Buddhist Suttas
from the Pâli; p. 199, and his note on the age of this work, ibid. p.
188.) Among later works, the Nepalese Buddhists refer to it as one of
the things with which a Bodhisattva will not condescend to occupy
himself (Lotus of the Good Law, ch. xiii, Burnouf's version, p. 168),
and in which good disciples will take no pleasure (ibid. p. 280).
Buddhaghosa has a note on the passage in the Mahâ Sib. (quoted by
Childers sub voce), which shows that it was understood in his time to
be, or rather to have been, a system of casuistry.

<span id="fn_411"></span>[151:3](sbe20048.htm#fr_419) So also in the
*K*etokhila Sutta 2 (translated in Rh. D.'s 'Buddhist Suttas from the
Pâli,' p. 223).

<span id="fn_412"></span>[152:1](sbe20048.htm#fr_420)
Tira*kkh*âna-vi*gg*â. Literally, 'brutish, or beastly, wisdom.' These
are set out in full in the seven sections of the Mahâ Sîla (translated
in Rh. D.'s 'Buddhist Suttas from the Pâli,' pp. 196-200). As noticed
above, the Lokâyata system is there mentioned (§ 5) as one of them.
Learning or teaching these things are forbidden in almost identical
terms to the Bhikkhunîs in the Bhikkhunî-vibhaṅga, Pâ*k*ittiyas XLIX and
L.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[153:1](sbe20048.htm#fr_421) This story forms
the Introductory Story also to the Gagga *G*âtaka (No. 155 in Fausböll's
edition). On the superstition here condemned, see Dr. Morris's remarks
in the 'Contemporary Review' for May, 1881.

<span id="fn_414"></span>[153:2](sbe20048.htm#fr_422) Gihî bhikkhave
maṅgalikâ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 34](sbe20049)
