[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe20004)  [Next](sbe20006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 4 <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_5).

1\. Now at that time the Blessed Buddha was staying at Râ*g*agaha, in
the Kalandaka Nivâpa, in the Bamboo Grove.

Now at that time the venerable Dabba the Mallian, who had realised
Arahatship when he was seven years old, had entered into possession of
every (spiritual gift) which can be acquired by a disciple; there was
nothing left that he ought still to do, nothing left that he ought to
gather up of the fruit of his past labour <span
id="fr_7"></span>[2](#fn_6). And when the venerable Dabba the Mallian
had retired into solitude, and was sunk in thought, the following
consideration presented itself to his mind: 'Arahatship had I

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

acquired when I was seven years old. I have gained everything that a
learner can reach to. There is nothing further left for me to do,
nothing to gather up of the fruit of that which I have done. What
service is it possible for me to render to the Sa*m*gha?' And it
occurred to the venerable Dabba the Mallian: 'It would be a good thing
for me to regulate the lodging-places for the Sa*m*gha, and to apportion
the rations of food.'

2\. And when, at eventide, the venerable Dabba the Mallian had arisen
from his meditations, he went to the place where the Blessed One was;
and when he had come there he saluted the Blessed One, and took his seat
on one side; and when he was so seated the venerable Dabba the Mallian
spake thus to the Blessed One:

'When I had retired, Lord, into solitude and was sunk in thought, the
following consideration presented itself to my mind (&c., as before,
down to) It would be a good thing for me to regulate the lodging-places
for the Sa*m*gha, and to apportion the rations of food. I desire, Lord,
\[so to do\].'

'Very good, Dabba. Do you then regulate the lodging-places for the
Sa*m*gha, and apportion the rations of food!'

'It is well, Lord,' said the venerable Dabba the Mallian, accepting the
word of the Blessed One.

3\. And the Blessed One on that occasion and in that connection, when he
had delivered a religious discourse, addressed the Bhikkhus, and said:

'Let then the Sa*m*gha, O Bhikkhus, appoint Dabba the Mallian as the
regulator of lodging-places, and as the apportioner of rations. And
thus, O Bhikkhus, should the appointment be made.

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

'First Dabba should be asked (whether he is willing to undertake the
office). When he has been asked, some able and discreet Bhikkhu should
lay the resolution before the Sa*m*gha, saying,

'"Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me.

'"If it be convenient to the Sa*m*gha, let the Sa*m*gha appoint Dabba
the Mallian as regulator of lodging-places, and as apportioner of
rations. '"This is the resolution (*ñ*atti).

'"Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me.

'"The Sa*m*gha appoints the venerable Dabba the Mallian as regulator of
lodging-places, and as apportioner of rations. Whosoever of the
venerable ones agrees that Dabba should be so appointed, let him remain
silent; whosoever does not agree, let him speak. The venerable Dabba is
appointed by the Sa*m*gha as regulator of the lodging-places, and as
apportioner of rations. The Sa*m*gha approves thereof. Therefore is it
silent. Thus do I understand."'

4\. And the venerable Dabba the Mallian, being so chosen, appointed one
lodging-place in the same place for the Bhikkhus who belonged to the
same division. For those Bhikkhus who were repeaters of the Suttantas he
appointed a lodging-place together, thinking, 'They will be able to
chant over the Suttantas to one another.' For those Bhikkhus who were in
charge of the Vinaya he appointed a lodging-place together, thinking,
'They will be able to discuss the Vinaya one with another.' For those
Bhikkhus who were preachers of the Dhamma he appointed a lodging-place
together, thinking, 'They will be able to talk over the Dhamma one with
another.' For those Bhikkhus who were given to

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

meditation <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_7) he appointed one
lodging-place together, thinking, 'They will not disturb one another.'
For those Bhikkhus who were wise in worldly lore, and abounding in
bodily vigour <span id="fr_9"></span>[2](#fn_8), he appointed one
lodging-place together, thinking, 'These venerable ones, too, will thus
remain settled according to their pleasure.' And for such Bhikkhus as
came in late, for them he caught fire <span
id="fr_10"></span>[3](#fn_9), and by the light of the flame thereof he
pointed out to them a lodging-place.

So much so <span id="fr_11"></span>[4](#fn_10) that Bhikkhus of set
purpose would come in late, thinking, 'We shall thus behold the power of
the Iddhi of the venerable Dabba the Mallian.' And they went up to the
venerable Dabba the Mallian, and said: 'Appoint us, O venerable Dabba, a
lodging-place.'

And to them the venerable Dabba the Mallian would speak thus: 'Where do
the venerable ones desire to rest? Where shall I appoint it?'

And they of set purpose would designate some place afar, saying, 'May
the venerable Dabba appoint us a lodging-place on the Vulture's Peak;
may the venerable one appoint us a lodging-place at the Robber's Cliff;
may the venerable one appoint us a lodging-place at the Black Rock on
the Isigili Passa; may the venerable one appoint us a lodging on the
Vebhâra Passa; may the venerable one appoint us a lodging-place in the
Sattapa*nn*i Cave; may the

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

venerable one appoint us a lodging-place in the mountain cave of the
Snake's Pool in Sîta's Wood; may the venerable one appoint us a
lodging-place in the Goma*t*a Grotto; may the venerable one appoint us a
lodging-place in the cave of the Tinduka Tree; may the venerable one
appoint us a lodging-place at the Tapoda Ghât; may the venerable one
appoint us a lodging-place in the Tapoda Ârâma; may the venerable one
appoint us a lodging-place in *G*îvaka's Mango Grove; may the venerable
one appoint us a lodging-place in the deer-park at Maddaku*kkh*i.'

And the venerable Dabba the Mallian would burst into flame, and walk on
in front of them with his finger burning, and they by the light thereof
would follow close upon the venerable Dabba the Mallian. And the
venerable Dabba the Mallian would appoint them a lodging-place, saying,
'This is the couch, and this the stool, and this the mat, and this the
pillow, and this the privy place, and this the drinking-water <span
id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_11), and this the water for washing, and this
the staff <span id="fr_13"></span>[2](#fn_12), and this the form of (the
result of) the consultation of the Sa*m*gha <span
id="fr_14"></span>[3](#fn_13), that at such and such a time are you to
enter thereon, and at such and such a time are you to depart
therefrom <span id="fr_15"></span>[4](#fn_14).' And when the

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

venerable Dabba the Mallian had thus appointed unto them their
lodging-place, he would return back again to the Bamboo Grove.

5\. Now at that time the Bhikkhus who were followers of Mettiya and
Bhumma*g*aka <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_15) had been but recently
received into the Sa*m*gha, and were wanting in merit, and such among
the lodging-places appertaining to the Sa*m*gha as were inferior fell to
their lot, and the inferior rations <span id="fr_17"></span>[2](#fn_16).

Now at that time the people of Râ*g*agaha were desirous of presenting to
the Thera Bhikkhus a wishing-gift <span id="fr_18"></span>[3](#fn_17),
to wit, ghee and oil and dainty bits <span
id="fr_19"></span>[4](#fn_18); while to the Bhikkhus who were followers
of Mettiya and Bhumma*g*aka they used to give an ordinary gift according
to their ability, to wit, scraps of food and sour gruel with it <span
id="fr_20"></span>[5](#fn_19).

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

When they had returned from their receipt of alms, and had eaten their
meal, they asked the Thera Bhikkhus, 'What did you get, Sirs, at the
place of alms; what did you get?'

Some of the Theras answered, Sirs; 'We had ghee, we had oil, we had
dainty bits.'

The Bhikkhus who were followers of Mettiya and Bhumma*g*aka replied: 'We
got nothing at all, Sirs; just an ordinary gift such as they could
manage, scraps of food, and sour gruel with it.'

6\. Now at that time a certain householder, possessed of good food <span
id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_20), used to give a perpetual alms to the
Sa*m*gha, a meal for four Bhikkhus. He with his wife and children used
to stand at the place of alms and serve; and offer to some Bhikkhus
boiled rice, and to some congey, and to some oil, and to some dainty
bits.

Now at that time the meal for the Bhikkhus who were followers of Mettiya
and Bhumma*g*aka had been fixed for the morrow at the house of this
prosperous

householder. 'And the prosperous householder went to the Ârâma for some
business or other, and went up to the place where the venerable Dabba
the Mallian was. And when he had come there, he saluted the venerable
Dabba the Mallian, and took his seat on one side. And him so seated did
the venerable Dabba instruct, and arouse, and gladden, and incite with
religious discourse.

And when the prosperous householder had thus been instructed, and
aroused, and gladdened, and incited by the venerable Dabba the Mallian
with

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

religious discourse, he said to the venerable Dabba the Mallian: 'For
whom, Sir, has the meal been appointed to-morrow at our house?'

'The meal has been appointed, my friend, at your house to-morrow for
those Bhikkhus who are followers of Mettiya and Bhumma*g*aka.'

Then the prosperous householder was ill-pleased, thinking, 'How can bad
Bhikkhus enjoy themselves at our house?' And going home he gave command
to the slave-girl: 'For those who come to-morrow for the meal, spread
out the mats in the entrance hall <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_21),
and serve them with scraps of food,, and with sour gruel with it!'

'Even so, Sir!' said the slave-girl, accepting the word of the
householder.

7\. Then the Bhikkhus who were followers of Mettiya and Bhumma*g*aka
spake one to another: 'Yesterday a meal has been appointed for us at the
house of the prosperous householder. To-morrow he, with his wife and
children, will attend upon us at the place of alms, and serve us. And he
will offer to some of us boiled rice, and to some congey, and to some
oil, and to some dainty bits. And through joy thereat they slept
uneasily that night.

Then the Bhikkhus who were followers of Mettiya and Bhumma*g*aka, having
robed themselves in the early morning, went duly bowled and robed to the
dwelling-place of the prosperous householder. And that slave-girl saw
the Bhikkhus who were followers

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

of Mettiya and Bhumma*g*aka approaching from afar; and spreading out the
mats in the entrance hall, she said to them, 'Be seated, Sirs.'

And the Bhikkhus who were followers of Mettiya and Bhumma*g*aka thought:
'For a certainty the meal cannot yet be ready, since we are told to take
our seats in the entrance.'

Then the slave-girl coming up with scraps of food, and sour gruel with
it, said to them, 'Eat, Sirs!'

'We, sister, are of those for whom perpetual meals are provided.'

'I know, Sirs, that you are so. But only yesterday I received command
from the householder that for them who should come to-morrow for the
meal I was to spread out the mats in the entrance hall, and serve them
with scraps of food, and some gruel with it. Eat, Sirs!'

Then the Bhikkhus who were followers of Mettiya and Bhumma*g*aka
thought: 'It was yesterday that the householder, the prosperous one,
came to the Ârâma to visit Dabba the Mallian. For a certainty the
householder must have been set against us by Dabba the Mallian.' And
through sorrow thereat they ate uneasily. And the Bhikkhus who were
followers of Mettiya and Bhumma*g*aka, when they had finished their
meal, returned from the receipt of alms, went to the Ârâma, and laid
aside their bowls and their robes, and sat down outside the porch of the
Ârâma, squatting against their waist cloths <span
id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_22),

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

silent, and ashamed, with fallen hearts <span
id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_23), and sunken faces, moody, and
bewildered <span id="fr_25"></span>[2](#fn_24).

8\. Now the Bhikkhunî Mettiyâ came up to the place where the Bhikkhus
who were followers of Mettiya and Bhumma*g*aka were: and when she had
come there she said to them: 'My salutation to you, Sirs <span
id="fr_26"></span>[3](#fn_25)!'

When she had so said the Bhikkhus who were followers of Mettiya and
Bhumma*g*aka did not speak to her. So a second time she said to them:
'My salutation to you, Sirs!' and they did not speak. And a third time
she said to them: 'My salutation to you, Sirs!' Still the third time the
Bhikkhus who were followers of Mettiya and Bhumma*g*aka did not speak.
And she said: 'Wherein have I offended you, Sirs? Wherefore do you not
speak to me?'

'Are you then so indifferent <span id="fr_27"></span>[4](#fn_26),
sister, when we are tormented by Dabba the Mallian?'

'But what can I do, Sirs?'

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

'If you like, sister, you could this very day make the Blessed One expel
the venerable Dabba the Mallian.'

'But what shall I do, Sirs? What is it that it is in my power to do?'

'Come now, sister; do you go to the place where the Blessed One is, and
when you have come there say as follows: "This, Lord, is neither fit nor
proper that the very quarter of the heavens which should be safe,
secure, and free from danger, that from that very quarter should come
danger, calamity, and distress--that where one might expect a calm, one
should meet a gale. Methinks the very water has taken fire. I have been
defiled, Lord, by Dabba the Mallian!'

'Very well, Sirs!' said the Bhikkhunî Mettiyâ, accepting the word of the
followers of Mettiya and Bhumma*g*aka. And she went to the Blessed One
\[and spake even as she had been directed\].

9\. Then the Blessed One, on that occasion and in that connection,
convened a meeting of the Sa*m*gha, and asked the venerable Dabba the
Mallian:

'Are you conscious <span id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_27), Dabba, of having
done such a thing as this Bhikkhunî says?'

'Even as my Lord, the Blessed One, knows me.' \[And a second and a third
time the Blessed One asked the same question, and received the same
reply.\]

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

Then said the Blessed One: 'The Dabbas, O Dabba, do not thus
repudiate <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_28). If you have done it, say
so. If you have not done it, say you have not.'

'Since I was born, Lord, I cannot call to mind <span
id="fr_30"></span>[2](#fn_29) that I have practised sexual intercourse
even in a dream, much less when I was awake!'

And the Blessed One addressed the Bhikkhus, and said: 'Expel then, O
Bhikkhus, the Bhikkhunî Mettiyâ, and examine those Bhikkhus about it.'
And so saying he rose from his seat and entered into the Vihâra.

Then those Bhikkhus expelled the Bhikkhunî Mettiyâ. But the Bhikkhus who
were followers of Mettiya and Bhumma*g*aka said to those Bhikkhus: 'Do
not, Sirs, expel the Bhikkhunî Mettiyâ. She has not committed any
offence. She has been set on by us with angry and bitter intentions of
causing his fall.'

'What then, Sirs? is it you who are thus harassing the venerable Dabba
the Mallian with a groundless charge and breach of morality?'

'That is true, Sirs.'

Then those Bhikkhus who were moderate were indignant and annoyed and
complained, saying, 'How can these Bhikkhus the followers of Mettiya and
Bhumma*g*aka harass the venerable Dabba the Mallian with a groundless
charge of breach of

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

morality?' And they told the matter to the Blessed One.

'Is this true, O Bhikkhus?'

'It is true, Lord.'

Then he rebuked them, and when he had delivered a religious discourse,
he addressed the Bhikkhus, and said:

Let then the Sa*m*gha grant to Dabba the Mallian, whose conscience in
respect of this matter is quite clear, the Proceeding for the
consciously innocent <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_30).

10\. 'And thus, O Bhikkhus, is it to be granted.

'Let that Dabba the Mallian go before the Sa*m*gha, and having arranged
his robe over one shoulder, let him bow down at the feet of the senior
Bhikkhus; and crouching down <span id="fr_32"></span>[2](#fn_31), let
him stretch

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

forth his hands with the palms joined together, and let him say, "These
Bhikkhus, Sirs, the followers of Mettiya and Bhumma*g*aka, are harassing
me by a groundless charge of breach of morality. But I, Sirs, in respect
thereof have a clear conscience, and I ask the Sa*m*gha for the
acquittal to be accorded to those who are conscious of innocence." Then
some able and discreet Bhikkhu is thus to lay the resolution (*ñ*atti)
before the Sa*m*gha. "Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. These
Bhikkhus, Sirs, the followers of Mettiya and Bhumma*g*aka, are harassing
the venerable Dabba the Mallian with a groundless charge of a breach of
morality, and the venerable Dabba the Mallian has in respect thereof a
conscience that is clear, and asks the Sa*m*gha for the acquittal of
those who are conscious of innocence. If the time is convenient to the
Sa*m*gha, let the Sa*m*gha accord to the venerable Dabba the Mallian the
acquittal of those who are conscious of innocence. This is the
resolution. Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. These Bhikkhus (&c., as
before, down to) asks the Sa*m*gha for the acquittal of those who are
conscious of innocence. The Sa*m*gha accords to the venerable Dabba the
Mallian the acquittal of those who are consciously innocent. Whosoever
of the venerable ones approves of the grant to Dabba the Mallian of the
acquittal of those who are conscious of innocence, let him keep silence,
Whosoever approves not thereof, let him speak. And a second time I say
the same thing. And a third time I say the same thing. Let the venerable
Sa*m*gha hear me. These Bhikkhus (&c., as before, down to) let him
speak. The acquittal of those who are conscious of innocence has been

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

granted by the Sa*m*gha to Dabba the Mallian. The Sa*m*gha approves
thereof. Therefore is it silent. Thus do I understand <span
id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_32)."'

11\. 'There are five things which make a grant of acquittal to those who
are conscious of innocence to be according to law. The Bhikkhu must be
innocent and without offence, others must have censured him, he must ask
the Sa*m*gha for acquittal as being conscious of innocence, the Sa*m*gha
must grant it, the Sa*m*gha must be duly held and duly constituted.
These, O Bhikkhus, are the five things which make a grant of the
acquittal of those who are conscious of innocence to be according to
law.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[4:1](sbe20005.htm#fr_6) The whole of the
following story of Dabba down to the end of section 9 (except the last
sentence) recurs in the Sutta-vibhaṅga as the Introductory Story to the
Eighth Sa*m*ghâdisesa. The Samanta Pâsâdikâ has therefore no commentary
upon it here, and the few extracts that we give from it are taken from
the notes of that work on the corresponding passage in the
Sutta-vibhaṅga. The stupidity of Udâyi, who once supplanted Dabba the
Mallian in the performance of his duty as bhattuddesaka, forms the
burthen of the Introductory Story to the *G*âtaka on 'the Measure of
Rice' (No. 5 in the *G*âtaka book; 'Buddhist Birth Stories,' pp. 172 and
following).

<span id="fn_6"></span>[4:2](sbe20005.htm#fr_7) On this phrase compare
Mahâvagga V, 1, 21, and the verses at V, 1, 27.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[7:1](sbe20005.htm#fr_8) *Gh*âyino possibly used
with the technical connotation of, being addicted to the practice of the
Four *Gh*âna meditations; but compare Mahâvagga I, 1, 3, 5, 7.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[7:2](sbe20005.htm#fr_9) See the comment as
quoted by H.O.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[7:3](sbe20005.htm#fr_10) Compare the use of
te*g*odhâtu*m* samâpa*gg*itvâ at Mahâvagga I, 15, 4.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[7:4](sbe20005.htm#fr_11) Compare api ssu at
*K*ullavagga I, 9, 1.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[8:1](sbe20005.htm#fr_12) That
paribho*g*aniya*m* does not mean drinking-water, as Childers renders it,
is clear from VIII, 1, 2, where it is implied that it is to be used for
washing feet. Our translation of Mahâvagga II, 20, 5 should be corrected
accordingly.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[8:2](sbe20005.htm#fr_13) Compare below, VIII,
6, 3.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[8:3](sbe20005.htm#fr_14) Katika-sa*nth*âna*m*.
Compare *G*âtaka I, 81, and Mahâvagga VIII, 32, and *K*ullavagga VIII,
1, 2.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[8:4](sbe20005.htm#fr_15) That this is the
correct rendering of this otherwise doubtful <span id="page_9">p.
9</span> passage is clear from the closing words of VIII, 1, 2, where
most of these phrases recur. In the text, for the last word
nikkhipitabba*m* read nikkhamitabba*m*, as pointed out in the note at p.
363 of the edition of the text.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[9:1](sbe20005.htm#fr_16) These were two of the
six leaders of the notorious *Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhus.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[9:2](sbe20005.htm#fr_17) Compare the 22nd
Nissaggiya.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[9:3](sbe20005.htm#fr_18) Abhisa*m*khârika*m*;
that is, a gift by the giving of which the donor expressly wished that a
particular result (as, for stance, that the donor should be re-born as a
king or queen, or should enter the paths, or have opportunity to hear a
Buddha preach) should be brought about by the normal effect of that good
act in a future birth. There are not a few instances of such wishes, and
of their fulfilment, recorded in various parts of the sacred literature.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[9:4](sbe20005.htm#fr_19) Uttaribhaṅgam. See the
passages quoted in the note on Mahâvagga VI, 14, 3. These three things
are also mentioned together at VIII, 4, 4.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[9:5](sbe20005.htm#fr_20) These expressions
recur at *G*âtaka I, 228. The Samanta Pâsâdikâ says merely *k*a*n*âgakan
ti sakuntaka-bhatta*m*. Bilaṅgadutiyan ti *k*a*ñg*ika-dutiya*m*.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[10:1](sbe20005.htm#fr_21) The Samanta Pâsâdikâ
says simply kalyâ*n*a*m* bhatta*m* assâ ti kalyâ*n*a-bhattiko.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[11:1](sbe20005.htm#fr_22) Ko*tth*ake, which
means the battlemented gateway which formed the entrance to an important
house; and in which there was a room. See *G*âtaka I, 227.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[12:1](sbe20005.htm#fr_23)
Sa*m*ghâ*t*i-pallatthikâya. There is a misprint in the text (°ttikâya).
On this curious expression, see below, V, 28, 2.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[13:1](sbe20005.htm#fr_24) Pattakkhandhâ, which
the Samanta Pâsâdikâ explains by patitakkhandhâ. Khandhâ here seems to
mean 'faculties.' Compare the use of Dhammâ in a similar connection at
Mahâ-parinibbâna Sutta II, 32 = Mahâvagga V, 13, 9; and see
Buddhaghosa's commentary on that passage, quoted by Rh. D. in 'Buddhist
Suttas from the Pâli,' p. 36.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[13:2](sbe20005.htm#fr_25) Appa*t*ibhânâ.
Pa*t*ibhâna*m* is the rapid suggestion of an idea in a case of doubt or
difficulty, an illumination; so that pa*t*ibhânako, the man of ready
wit, may be compared with upâya-kusalo, the man fertile in resource.
'Absent-minded' would be an incorrect rendering; they had no idea what
to think or do, and the appearance of the nun on the scene (in the next
paragraph) supplied the want. Till then they hesitated, drifted.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[13:3](sbe20005.htm#fr_26) The following
narrative, down to § 9, is repeated almost word for word in V, 20, only
that the person there persuaded to bring the false accusation is
different.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[13:4](sbe20005.htm#fr_27) A*ggh*upekkhati.
Compare *G*âtaka I, 147.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[14:1](sbe20005.htm#fr_28) Literally, 'Do you
recollect?' But it is quite clear from the technical words at the close
of this section that the verb sarati had already acquired the secondary
meaning 'to be conscious of.' The whole story is peculiarly valuable as
illustrating the growth of the connotation of the verb and its allied
meanings, and indirectly the origin and growth of the idea of
'conscience' which has played so great a part in theological and ethical
speculation.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[15:1](sbe20005.htm#fr_29) That is, 'Men of
character and standing such as yours, O Dabba, are not in the habit of
repudiating a charge in so indirect a manner by adverting merely to
their standing and known character.'

<span id="fn_29"></span>[15:2](sbe20005.htm#fr_30) Here the word used is
abhi*g*ânâmi.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[16:1](sbe20005.htm#fr_31) Dabbassa
sati-vepulla-ppattassa sati-vinaya*m* detu. The explanation of the
compound sati-vepulla-ppatto given by Childers, though it rests on so
good an authority as that of Vi*g*esi*m*ha Mudaliar, cannot be right. He
makes it mean 'a man of great intellectual development.' But sati must
here refer to the fact that Dabba has been formally called upon to
remember (sarîto) whether he did or did not commit the offence. And
though the exact sense of the compound is subject to some doubt, the
general sense of the clause must be very much as we have conjecturally
rendered it. On this formal appeal to the conscience, or memory (sati),
of a Bhikkhu charged with an offence, or supposed to have offended, see
*K*ullavagga I, 2, and 5 at the end; and X, 20.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[16:2](sbe20005.htm#fr_32) Ukku*t*ika*m*
nisîditvâ. This verb does not mean 'to sit on the hams,' as rendered by
Childers. The exact posture, unknown in Europe, is to crouch down on the
feet (keeping both toes and heels on the ground) in such a way that the
hams do not touch the ground, but come within an inch or two of it.
Europeans find it very difficult to retain this posture for any length
of time, but the natives of India find it easy, and it is regarded in
the Pi*t*akas as a posture of humility.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[18:1](sbe20005.htm#fr_33) This section is
repeated below, chap. 14, § 27, with the necessary alterations for a
general rule instead of a particular case.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](sbe20006)
