[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe20096)  [Next](sbe20098) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 6.

1\. Now at that time the Pâtimokkha was not recited to the Bhikkhunîs.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow the Pâtimokkha, O Bhikkhus, to be recited to the Bhikkhunîs.'

Now it occurred to the Bhikkhunîs: 'By whom should the Pâtimokkha be
recited to the Bhikkhunîs?'

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow, O Bhikkhus, the Pâtimokkha to be recited to Bhikkhunîs by
Bhikkhus.'

Now at that time Bhikkhus went to the residence of the Bhikkhunîs and
recited the Pâtimokkha to the Bhikkhunîs there. The people murmured, and
were indignant, saying: 'There are their wives, there are their
mistresses; now will they take pleasure together.'

The Bhikkhus heard this, and told the matter to the Blessed One.

'Bhikkhus are not, O Bhikkhus, to recite the

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pâtimokkha to the
Bhikkhunîs at their residence. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a
dukka*t*a. I allow Bhikkhunîs, O Bhikkhus, to recite the Pâtimokkha to
the Bhikkhunîs.'

The Bhikkhunîs did not know how to recite the Pâtimokkha. They told this
matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, to tell Bhikkhunîs how to recite the
Pâtimokkha.'

2\. Now at that time the Bhikkhunîs did not confess the faults (they had
committed).

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'A Bhikkhunî, O Bhikkhus, is not to leave a fault unconfessed. Whosoever
does so, shall be guilty of a dukka*t*a.'

The Bhikkhunîs did not know how to confess their faults. They told this
matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, to tell Bhikkhunîs how they should
confess their faults.'

Then it occurred to the Bhikkhus: 'By whom ought the confession of a
fault to be received from the Bhikkhunîs?' They told this matter to the
Blessed One.

'I allow Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, to receive the confession of a fault from
Bhikkhunîs.'

Now at that time Bhikkhunîs, on seeing a Bhikkhu on the road, or in a
street closed at one end, or at the place where four cross-roads met,
would place their bowl on the ground, and arranging their robes over one
shoulder, would crouch down on their heels, and stretch forth their
joined hands, and confess a fault. The people murmured, were indignant,
and complained, saying: 'There are their wives, there are their
mistresses; they are asking

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

pardon now after having treated them scornfully overnight.'

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'Bhikkhus are not, O Bhikkhus, to receive the confessions of a fault
from Bhikkhunîs. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka*t*a. I
allow Bhikkhunîs, O Bhikkhus, to receive the confession of a fault from
Bhikkhunîs.'

The Bhikkhunîs did not know how to receive the confession of a fault.
They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, to tell Bhikkhunîs how to receive the
confession of a fault.'

3\. Now at that time disciplinary proceedings (Kammas) were not carried
out against Bhikkhunîs. They told that matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow disciplinary proceedings, O Bhikkhus, to be carried out against
Bhikkhunîs.'

Then the Bhikkhus thought: 'By whom ought disciplinary proceedings to be
carried out against Bhikkhunîs?' They told this matter to the Blessed
One.

'I allow Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, to carry out disciplinary proceedings
against Bhikkhunîs.'

Now at that time Bhikkhunîs who had been subjected to disciplinary
proceedings, on seeing a Bhikkhu on the road, or in a street closed at
one end, or at the place where four cross-roads met, would place their
bowls on the ground, and arranging their robes over one shoulder, would
crouch down on their heels, and stretching out their joined palms would
ask for pardon, thinking that that was the proper time for doing so. The
people murmured \[&c., as before\].

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'Bhikkhus are not, O Bhikkhus, to carry out disciplinary proceedings
against the Bhikkhunîs. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a
dukka*t*a.' I allow Bhikkhunîs, O Bhikkhus, to carry out disciplinary
proceedings against Bhikkhunîs.'

The Bhikkhunîs did not know how to carry out the disciplinary
proceedings. They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, to tell the Bhikkhunîs how to carry out
disciplinary proceedings.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](sbe20098)
