[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe20119)  [Next](sbe20121) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

# TWELFTH KHANDHAKA.

#### ON THE COUNCIL OF VESÂLÎ.

### 1.

1\. Now at that time, a century <span id="fr_991"></span>[1](#fn_973)
after the death of the Blessed One, the Bhikkhus of Vesâlî, Va*gg*ians,
promulgated at Vesâlî the ten theses:--(1) that storing salt in a horn
vessel was permissible; (2) that the midday meal might be eaten when the
sun's shadow showed two finger breadths after noon; (3) that he who
intends to go into the village could begin to eat again after he had
once left off; (4) that a number of Bhikkhus residing within the same
boundary might hold Uposatha separately; (5) that a Sa*m*gha not at
unity within itself might carry out an official act, undertaking to
inform Bhikkhus of it; (6) that it was permissible for a Bhikkhu to do
anything adopted as a practice by his Upa*ggh*âya; (7) that curds might
be eaten by one who had already finished his midday meal; (8) that it
was permissible to drink unfermented toddy; (9) that a rug or mat need
not be of the limited size prescribed if it had no fringe; (10) that it
was permissible to receive gold and silver <span
id="fr_992"></span>[2](#fn_974).

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

Now at that time the venerable Yasa, the son of Kâka*nd*aka, who was
wandering through the Va*gg*ian country, arrived at Vesâlî; and there
the venerable Yasa stayed at the Mahâvana, in the Kû*t*âgâra Hall.

Now at that time the Va*gg*ian Bhikkhus of Vesâlî, on Uposatha day,
filled a copper pot with water and placed it in the midst of the
Bhikkhu-sa*m*gha, and said to such of their Vesâlian lay disciples as
came there: 'Give, Sirs, to the Sa*m*gha a kahâpa*n*a <span
id="fr_993"></span>[1](#fn_975), or half a one, or a pâda, or a mâsaka.
It will be wanted for the Sa*m*gha, for the provision of various
utensils.'

When they had thus spoken, the venerable Yasa, the son of Kâka*nd*aka,
said to the lay disciples: 'Do, Sirs, nothing of the kind. The use of
gold and silver is not allowed to the Sakyaputtiya Sama*n*as. The
Sakyaputtiya Sama*n*as neither allow it to be given to them, nor take
charge of it. The Sakyaputtiya Sama*n*as are men whose gems and jewelry
have been laid aside, and who are without silver and without gold.'

Though the lay disciples from Vesâlî had been thus addressed by the
venerable Yasa, the son of Kâka*nd*aka, they gave money to the Sa*m*gha.
And the Va*gg*ian Bhikkhus of Vesâlî, at the close of the night,
reserving one portion <span id="fr_994"></span>[2](#fn_976), divided
that money according to the number of the Bhikkhus. And they said to the
venerable Yasa, the son of Kâka*nd*aka:

'This, friend Yasa, is thy due portion of the money.'

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

'I have no due portion in that money. I do not allow any money to be
given to me.'

2\. Then the Va*gg*ian Bhikkhus of Vesâlî said one to another: 'This
brother, Yasa, the son of Kâka*nd*aka, upbraids and reviles, and renders
dissatisfied believing and faithful followers. Come, let us carry out
against him the Act of Reconciliation <span
id="fr_995"></span>[1](#fn_977).' And they did so.

Then the venerable Yasa, the son of Kâka*nd*aka, said to them: 'It has
been laid down, Sirs, by the Blessed One, that a companion shall be
appointed to go as messenger with a Bhikkhu against whom the Act of
Reconciliation has been carried out <span
id="fr_996"></span>[2](#fn_978). Appoint, Sirs, a Bhikkhu, as companion
messenger to me.' And the Va*gg*ian Bhikkhus of Vesâlî deputed a Bhikkhu
to that work, and gave him as a companion messenger to the venerable
Yasa.

And the venerable Yasa, taking the companion Bhikkhu with him, entered
into Vesâlî, and said to the believing laymen there:

'I am said, Sirs, to be upbraiding and reviling, and rendering
dissatisfied believing and faithful followers, thereby that I have said
what is against the Dhamma to be against the Dhamma, and what is Dhamma
to be Dhamma, and what is against the Vinaya to be against the Vinaya,
and what is Vinaya to be Vinaya.

3\. 'Now the Blessed One was once, Sirs, staying at Sâvatthi in the
*G*etavana, Anâtha Pi*nd*ika's pleasure-ground. And there, Sirs, the
Blessed One exhorted the Bhikkhus, and said:

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

'"There are, O Bhikkhus, four obstructions of the sun and moon, by which
when the sun and moon are affected, they give no heat and they give no
light, and they are no longer glorious. And what are the four? They are
clouds and fog and dusty smoke and Râhu <span
id="fr_997"></span>[1](#fn_979), by which when the sun and the moon are
affected they give neither heat nor light nor sheen. Just so, O
Bhikkhus, there are four stains by which when Sama*n*as and Brâhmans are
affected they give neither heat nor light nor sheen. And what are the
four? There are some Sama*n*as and Brâhmans who drink strong drink, and
things intoxicating, abstaining not therefrom <span
id="fr_998"></span>[2](#fn_980). This is the first of such stains. And
further, O Bhikkhus, there are some Sama*n*as and Brâhmans who practise
sexual intercourse, and abstain not therefrom. This is the second of
such stains. And further, O Bhikkhus, there are some Sama*n*as and
Brâhmans who accept silver and gold, abstaining not from the use
thereof. This is the third of such stains. And lastly, O Bhikkhus, there
are some Sama*n*as and Brâhmans who gain their livelihood by low
arts <span id="fr_999"></span>[3](#fn_981), abstaining not from such
means of life. This is the fourth of such stains."

'Thus spoke, Sirs, the Blessed One: and when the Happy One had thus
spoken, the Master further said:

'"Stained by lust and malice, some Sama*n*as and Brâhmans, <span
id="page_390">p. 390</span>  
Men blinded by ignorance, praise things that seem to have delight.  
Strong drink they drink and fierce, indulge in sensual acts,  
Devoid of wisdom, silver and gold they take.  
And by low arts some Sama*n*as and Brâhmans live.  
Stains are such actions called by the Buddha of the Solar race,  
Stains--by which defiled some Sama*n*as and Brâhmans,  
Impure brutes and unclean, give neither heat nor light.  
Covered rather by darkness, purblind, enslaved by craving lusts,  
They enlarge the realm of death <span id="fr_1000"></span>[1](#fn_982),
and dread rebirth they gain."

'It is for upholding this opinion that I, Sirs, have been said to be
upbraiding and reviling and rendering dissatisfied believing and
faithful followers, in that I have said what is against the Dhamma to be
against the Dhamma, and what is Dhamma to be Dhamma; what is against the
Vinaya to be against the Vinaya, and what is Vinaya to be Vinaya.

4\. 'And once the Blessed One was staying, Sirs, at Râ*g*agaha, in the
Ve*l*uvana, at the Kalandaka Nivâpa. Now at that time among the royal
attendants sitting together in the women's apartment in the palace, the
following saying was heard: "Silver and gold is allowed to the
Sakyaputtiya Sama*n*as.

<span id="page_391">p. 391</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The Sakyaputtiya
Sama*n*as accept it, and take it in charge." Now at that time
Ma*n*i*k*û*l*aka, a village headman, was present. And he said to the
people there: "Say not so, Sirs. Neither is silver and gold allowed to
the Sakyaputtiya Sama*n*as, nor do they accept it, nor take it in
charge. The Sakyaputtiya Sama*n*as are men who have laid aside gems and
jewelry, and are without silver, and without gold." And the headman,
Ma*n*i*k*û*l*aka, succeeded in satisfying them.

'Then the headman, Ma*n*i*k*û*l*aka, went to the place where the Blessed
One was and saluted him, and took his seat on one side. And he told the
Blessed One the whole matter <span id="fr_1001"></span>[1](#fn_983), and
said:

'"Now am I, Lord, in maintaining as I did, one who speaks according to
the word of the Blessed One, one who does not falsely represent the
Blessed One, one who does not put forth minor matters in the place of
the true Dhamma? And is there anything that leads to blame in such
discussion, this way and that, as touching the observance of the rules
of the order <span id="fr_1002"></span>[2](#fn_984)?"

'"Most certainly, Ma*n*i*k*û*l*aka, in maintaining thus you speak in
accordance with my word, and do not represent me falsely, nor put forth
minor matters as the true Dhamma. Nor is there any thing leading to
blame in such discussions. For gold and silver is not allowed,
Ma*n*i*k*û*l*aka, to the Sakyaputtiya Sama*n*as, nor ought they to
accept it, nor take it in charge. Men who have laid aside gems and
jewelry are the Sakyaputtiya Sama*n*as,

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

men without silver and without gold. For to whomsoever,
Ma*n*i*k*û*l*aka, gold and silver are allowed, to him also the five
kinds of sensual pleasure <span id="fr_1003"></span>[1](#fn_985) are
allowed. And to whomsoever these five kinds of pleasure are allowed, him
you may know of a certainty to be following neither the rule of the
Sama*n*as, nor the rule of the sons of Sâkya. Although,
Ma*n*i*k*û*l*aka, I have said that he who is in need of grass may seek
for grass, and he who is in need of wood may seek for wood, and he who
is in need of a conveyance may seek for a conveyance, and he who is in
need of a servant may seek for a servant; yet have I never said in any
way whatever that gold or silver may be sought after or accepted."

'It is for maintaining this opinion that I, Sirs, have been said to be
upbraiding and reviling and rendering dissatisfied believing and
faithful followers, in that I have said what is against the Dhamma to be
against the Dhamma, and what is Dhamma to be Dhamma; that what is
against the Vinaya is against the Vinaya, and what is Vinaya is Vinaya.'

5\. 'And once, Sirs, the Blessed One at the same place, at Râ*g*agaha,
on the occasion of the matter of Upananda, the Sâkyan, distinctly laid
down a precept by which gold and silver were forbidden <span
id="fr_1004"></span>[2](#fn_986).

'It is for maintaining this opinion that I, Sirs, have been said to be
upbraiding and reviling and rendering dissatisfied believing and
faithful followers, in that I have said what is against the

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Dhamma to be
against the Dhamma, and what is Dhamma to be Dhamma; that what is
against the Vinaya is against the Vinaya, and what is Vinaya is Vinaya.'

6\. When he had thus spoken, the lay brethren said to Yasa, the son of
Kâka*nd*aka There is but one, Sirs <span
id="fr_1005"></span>[1](#fn_987), who is a Sakyaputtiya Sama*n*a, our
master, Yasa, the son of Kâka*nd*aka. All the rest are no Sama*n*as,
neither Sakyaputtiyas. Let the venerable Yasa, the son of Kâka*nd*aka,
dwell among us. We will exert ourselves to provide him with robes, and
food, and medicine, and the necessaries for the sick.'

Then the venerable Yasa, the son of Kâka*nd*aka, having gained over the
lay brethren, returned with the companion Bhikkhu to the Ârâma,

7\. And the Va*gg*ian Bhikkhus of Vesâlî asked the companion Bhikkhu:
'Did Yasa, the son of Kâka*nd*aka, obtain, Sir, the forgiveness of the
lay brethren?'

'Evil, Sirs, hath been wrought against us. Yasa, the son of Kâka*nd*aka,
and he alone has been decided to be a Sakyaputtiya Sama*n*a, and all of
us neither Sama*n*as nor Sakyaputtiyas.'

Then the Va*gg*ian Bhikkhus of Vesâlî said: 'The venerable Yasa, the son
of Kâka*nd*aka, without being deputed by us, has proclaimed to laymen (a
false doctrine) <span id="fr_1006"></span>[2](#fn_988). Come, let us
carry out the Act of Suspension <span id="fr_1007"></span>[3](#fn_989)
against him.' And

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

they assembled together with the intention of doing so.

But the venerable Yasa, the son of Kâka*nd*aka, rose up into the sky and
descended at Kosambî. And he sent messengers to the Bhikkhus of the
Western country, and of Avanti, and of the Southern country <span
id="fr_1008"></span>[1](#fn_990), saying, 'Let your reverences come! We
must take in charge this legal question before what is not Dhamma is
spread abroad, and what is Dhamma is put aside; before what is not
Vinaya is spread abroad, and what is Vinaya is put aside; before those
who argue against the Dhamma become powerful, and those who argue in
favour of the Dhamma become weak; before those who argue against the
Vinaya become powerful, and those who argue in favour of the Vinaya
become weak.'

8\. Now at that time the venerable Sambhûta Sâ*n*avâsî <span
id="fr_1009"></span>[2](#fn_991) was dwelling on the Ahogaṅga Hill <span
id="fr_1010"></span>[3](#fn_992). And thither the venerable Yasa, the
son of Kâka*nd*aka, went; and on his arrival he saluted the venerable
Sambhûta Sâ*n*avâsî, and took his seat on one side: and being so seated
he said to him:

'Lord, these Va*gg*ian Bhikkhus of Vesâlî have

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

put forward ten theses.' And he told him what they were <span
id="fr_1011"></span>[1](#fn_993), and added: 'Come now, Lord, let us
take in charge this last question before what is not Dhamma is spread
abroad, and what is Dhamma is put aside; before what is not Vinaya is
spread abroad, and what is Vinaya is put aside; before those who argue
against the Dhamma become powerful, and those who argue in favour of the
Dhamma become weak; before those who argue against the Vinaya become
powerful, and those who argue in favour of the Vinaya become weak.'

'Even so, Lord,' said the venerable Sambhûta Sâ*n*avâsî, in assent to
the venerable Yasa Kâka*nd*aka-putta.

Then about sixty Bhikkhus from the Western country, all of whom were
hermits, all of whom lived only on alms, all of whom dressed only in
cast-off clothes, and kept only three robes, and all of whom were
Arahats, assembled together at the Ahogaṅga Hill. And about eighty-eight
from Avanti and the Southern country, some of whom were hermits, and
some of whom, lived only on alms, and some of whom dressed only in
cast-off clothes, and some of whom kept only three robes, but all of
whom were Arahats, met together with them on the Ahogaṅga Hill.

9\. And the Thera Bhikkhus, consulting together, came to this
conclusion: 'This legal question, now, is hard and subtle. How can we
obtain such support that we may have the greater power at the decision
thereof <span id="fr_1012"></span>[2](#fn_994)?'

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

Now at that time the venerable Revata was dwelling at Soreyya, and he
was wise in the traditions, one who had learned the Agamas (the four
Nikâyas), and knew by heart the Dhamma, the Vinaya, and the Mâtikâs;
intelligent, discreet, and wise, modest, conscientious, devoted to the
precepts <span id="fr_1013"></span>[1](#fn_995). And the Thera Bhikkhus
thought that if they could gain him over to their side, they would
attain their end.

And the venerable Revata, by the divine ear, clear and surpassing that
of men, heard the Thera Bhikkhus as they were thus consulting together;
and he thought: 'This legal question is both hard and subtle, it would
not become me to hold back therefrom. But even now those Bhikkhus (the
Va*gg*ians) will be coming. It would be unpleasant travelling for me
were I to fall in with them. Let me go on before them.'

So the venerable Revata went from Soreyya to Sa*m*kassa. And when the
Thera Bhikkhus went to Soreyya, and asked: 'Where is the venerable
Revata?' they said: 'He is gone to Sa*m*kassa.'

Now the venerable Revata had gone on from Sa*m*kassa to Ka*nn*aku*gg*a.
And when the Thera Bhikkhus came to Sa*m*kassa, and asked: 'Where is the
venerable Revata?' they said: 'He is gone on to Ka*nn*aku*gg*a.' And in
the same way they followed him thither, and to Udumbara, and to
Aggalapura, and to Saha*g*âti, and there they met with the venerable
Revata.

10\. And the venerable Sambhûta Sâ*n*avâsî said to the venerable Yasa,
the son of Kâka*nd*aka:

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

'Friend, the brother Revata is wise in the traditions, has learnt the
Agamas, knows by heart the Dhamma, the Vinaya, and the Mâtikâs, he is
intelligent, discreet, and wise, modest, conscientious, and devoted to
the precepts. If we ask the venerable Revata a puzzling question, he is
capable of spending the whole night on that one question. And even now
the venerable Revata will call upon a Bhikkhu who is an intoner <span
id="fr_1014"></span>[1](#fn_996), and a pupil of his. Do you, therefore,
when the Bhikkhu has concluded, go to the venerable Revata and ask him
concerning these ten theses (points).'

'Even so, Sir,' said the venerable Yasa, the son of Kâka*nd*aka, in
assent to the venerable Sambhûta Sâ*n*avâsî.

And the venerable Revata called upon the Bhikkhu, the pupil of his, the
intoner. And when the Bhikkhu had concluded, the venerable Yasa, the son
of Kâka*nd*aka, went to the venerable Revata, and saluted him, and took
his seat beside him. And, so seated, he said to the venerable
Revata <span id="fr_1015"></span>[2](#fn_997):

'Is the horn-salt-license, Lord, allowable?'

'What, Sir, is this horn-salt-license?'

'Is it allowable, Lord, to carry about salt in a horn with the intention
of putting it into food which has not been salted?'

'No, Sir, it is not allowable.'

'Is the two-inch-license, Lord, allowable?'

'What, Sir, is this two-inch-license?'

'Is it allowable, Lord, to eat the midday meal

<span id="page_398">p. 398</span>

beyond the right time, provided only that the shadow has not yet turned
two inches?'

'No, Sir, it is not allowable.'

'Is the village-trip-license, Lord, allowable?'

'What, Sir, is this village-trip-license?'

'Is it allowable, Lord, for one who has once finished his meal, and
refused any more, to eat food which has not been left over, on the
ground that he is about to proceed into the village?'

'No, Sir, it is not allowable.'

'Is the circuit-license, Lord, allowable?'

'What, Sir, is this circuit-license?'

'Is it allowable, Lord, for a number of Bhikkhus who dwell within the
same circuit, within the same boundary, to hold separate Uposathas?'

'No, Sir, it is not allowable.'

'Is the indemnity-license, Lord, allowable?'

'What, Sir, is this indemnity-license?'

'Is it allowable, Lord, for a Sa*m*gha, which is not legally
constituted <span id="fr_1016"></span>[1](#fn_998), to perform an
official act on the ground that they will afterwards obtain the sanction
of such Bhikkhus who may subsequently arrive?'

'No, Sir, it is not allowable.'

'Is the precedent-license, Lord, allowable?'

'What, Sir, is this precedent-license?'

'Is it allowable, Lord, to do a thing on the ground that, "My preceptor
(upa*ggh*âya) has practised this; or my teacher (â*k*ariya) has
practised that?"'

'In some cases, Sir, this is allowable, and in some not <span
id="fr_1017"></span>[2](#fn_999).'

<span id="page_399">p. 399</span>

'Is the churn-license, Lord, allowable?'

'What, Sir, is this churn-license?'

'Is it allowable, Lord, for one who has once finished his meal, and has
refused any more, to drink milk not left over from the meal, on the
ground that it has left the condition of milk, and has not yet reached
the condition of curds <span id="fr_1018"></span>[1](#fn_1000)?'

'No, Sir, it is not allowable.'

'Is it allowable, Lord, to drink toddy?'

'What, Sir, is this toddy?'

'Is it allowable, Lord, to drink spirits which have left the condition
of not being spirits, and yet have not acquired intoxicating
properties <span id="fr_1019"></span>[2](#fn_1001)?'

'No, Sir, it is not allowable?'

'Is a rug or mat (when it is beyond the prescribed size) lawful, Lord,
because it is unfringed?'

'No, Sir, it is not allowable.'

'Is gold and silver, Lord, allowable?'

'No, Sir, it is not allowable.'

These are the ten theses, Lord, which these Va*gg*ian Bhikkhus of Vesâlî
have put forth. Come, Lord, let us take this legal question in hand
before that which is not Dhamma is spread abroad, and that which is
Dhamma is put aside; before that which is not Vinaya is spread abroad,
and that which is Vinaya is put aside; before those who argue against
the Dhamma become powerful, and those

<span id="page_400">p. 400</span>

who argue in favour of the Dhamma become weak; before those who argue
against the Vinaya become powerful, and those who argue in favour of the
Vinaya become weak.'

'Even so, Sir,' said the venerable Revata, in assent to the venerable
Yasa, the son of Kâka*nd*aka.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Here ends the First Portion for Recitation.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_973"></span>[386:1](sbe20120.htm#fr_991) As pointed out at
xxii of our Introduction, we believe this number ought not to be taken
too literally, but to be considered a round number.

<span id="fn_974"></span>[386:2](sbe20120.htm#fr_992) The above terms
are explained below, §§ 1, 10, and 2, 8.

<span id="fn_975"></span>[387:1](sbe20120.htm#fr_993) About a penny; on
this and the following terms, see Rh. D.'s 'Ancient Coins and Measures,
&c.,' p. S.

<span id="fn_976"></span>[387:2](sbe20120.htm#fr_994) Pa*t*iviso. See
Mahâvagga VIII, 27, 4.

<span id="fn_977"></span>[388:1](sbe20120.htm#fr_995)
Pa*t*isâra*n*iya-kamma. See *K*ullavagga I, 18.

<span id="fn_978"></span>[388:2](sbe20120.htm#fr_996) On Anudûta, see
*K*ullavagga I, 20-22.

<span id="fn_979"></span>[389:1](sbe20120.htm#fr_997) That is, eclipse.

<span id="fn_980"></span>[389:2](sbe20120.htm#fr_998) It is curious that
this matter is not, like all the following, referred to in the Sîlas.
See Rh. D.'s 'Buddhist Suttas,' p. 190.

<span id="fn_981"></span>[389:3](sbe20120.htm#fr_999) Those, namely,
which are set out in the Mahâ Sîla (Rh. D.'s Buddhist Suttas,' pp.
196-203).

<span id="fn_982"></span>[390:1](sbe20120.htm#fr_1000) That is, by being
repeatedly reborn they continually die. Va*ddh*enti ka*t*asin ti
punappuna*m* kalevara-nikkhipamâna-bhûmi*m* va*ddh*enti, says
Buddhaghosa. The word occurs at *G*âtaka I, 146.

<span id="fn_983"></span>[391:1](sbe20120.htm#fr_1001) The whole is
repeated in the text.

<span id="fn_984"></span>[391:2](sbe20120.htm#fr_1002) The whole of this
speech recurs, nearly word for word, in the Mahâvagga VI, 31, 4.

<span id="fn_985"></span>[392:1](sbe20120.htm#fr_1003) Compare
*K*ullavagga VII, 1, 2.

<span id="fn_986"></span>[392:2](sbe20120.htm#fr_1004) This is set out
in full in the Sutta Vibhaṅga in the Introduction to the 18th Nissaggiya
Pâ*k*ittiya,

<span id="fn_987"></span>[393:1](sbe20120.htm#fr_1005) They are speaking
to Yasa and the anudûta.

<span id="fn_988"></span>[393:2](sbe20120.htm#fr_1006) This cannot refer
to the 9th Pâ*k*ittiya, which only speaks of making known grievous
offences. Aṅguttara II, 5, 2 refers to laymen as well as to sâma*n*eras.

<span id="fn_989"></span>[393:3](sbe20120.htm#fr_1007)
Ukkhepaniya-kamma. See *K*ullavagga I, 25.

<span id="fn_990"></span>[394:1](sbe20120.htm#fr_1008) On these terms,
compare note on Mahâvagga VII, 1, 1.

<span id="fn_991"></span>[394:2](sbe20120.htm#fr_1009) Sâ*n*avâsî is,
literally, he who wears a hempen dress. In the traditions of the
Sanskrit Buddhist literature we find mentioned a Sâ*n*avâsika, said to
be a predecessor, in the teacher and pupil line, of Upagupta (Wassilief,
p. 44). The Nepalese call him So*n*avâsî (Rajendralâl Mitra, 'Sanskrit
Buddhist Literature of Nepâl,' p. 10). He is the hero of the Sâ*n*avâsi
Avadâna part of the Bodhisatva Avadâna Kalpalatâ (Mitra, p. 67, Bendall
'Catalogue of Cambridge MSS.,' p. 42), where the name is explained: 'I
wished for an ochre-coloured robe (so*n*a); hence I was called
Sâ*n*avâsi.'

<span id="fn_992"></span>[394:3](sbe20120.htm#fr_1010) See, for the
position of this mountain, our note last quoted.

<span id="fn_993"></span>[395:1](sbe20120.htm#fr_1011) In the text the
full words of I, 1 are here repeated.

<span id="fn_994"></span>[395:2](sbe20120.htm#fr_1012) Compare below,
XII, 2, I.

<span id="fn_995"></span>[396:1](sbe20120.htm#fr_1013) These adjectives
have occurred above at Mahâvagga X, I, 2, and *K*ullavagga I, 11, 1.

<span id="fn_996"></span>[397:1](sbe20120.htm#fr_1014) Sarabhâ*n*aka*m*.
See our note above at *K*ullavagga V, 3, 2.

<span id="fn_997"></span>[397:2](sbe20120.htm#fr_1015) The whole of the
following questions and answers recur below at XII, 2, 8, where the
reasons of the answers also appear.

<span id="fn_998"></span>[398:1](sbe20120.htm#fr_1016) Vaggena. See our
note on the 21st Pâ*k*ittiya, and *K*ullavagga V, 2, 1.

<span id="fn_999"></span>[398:2](sbe20120.htm#fr_1017) That is, of
course, according as the thing enjoined is, or is not, <span
id="page_399">p. 399</span> lawful. Eka*kk*o kappatî ti ida*m* dhammikam
âki*nn*a*m* sandhâya vutta*m*, says Buddhaghosa.

<span id="fn_1000"></span>[399:1](sbe20120.htm#fr_1018) That is, which
is neither liquid nor solid: something apparently like buttermilk.

<span id="fn_1001"></span>[399:2](sbe20120.htm#fr_1019) It is a question
constantly arising under the excise laws in India and Ceylon, whether
the liquor in the case has become arrack, or is only arrack in the
making, and unfermented. This last is called unfermented toddy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](sbe20121)
