[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe20089)  [Next](sbe20091.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 4.

1\. Now the venerable Upâli <span id="fr_855"></span>[1](#fn_841.md) went
up to the Blessed One, and bowed down before him, and took his seat on
one side. And when he was so seated, the venerable Upâli said to the
Blessed One:

'When a Bhikkhu, Lord, intends to take upon himself the conduct (of any
matter that has to be

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

decided) <span id="fr_856"></span>[1](#fn_842.md), under what conditions
should he take the conduct thereof upon himself <span
id="fr_857"></span>[2](#fn_843.md)?'

'A Bhikkhu, Upâli, who intends to take upon himself the conduct of any
matter, should take such conduct upon himself under five conditions.

'(In the first place.) A Bhikkhu, Upâli, who intends to take the conduct
of any matter upon himself, should thus consider: "The conduct of this
matter which I intend to take upon myself; is it now the right time for
the taking charge of the conduct thereof, or is it not?" If that
Bhikkhu, Upâli, so considering, come to the conclusion that it is not
the right time, he should not, Upâli, take charge of it.

'(Secondly.) If that Bhikkhu, Upâli, so considering, come to the
conclusion that it is the right time, he should, Upâli, further consider
thus: "The conduct of this matter which I intend to take upon myself, is
it just, or is it not?" If that Bhikkhu, Upâli, so considering, come to
the conclusion that it would not be just, he should not take charge of
it.

'(Thirdly.) If that Bhikkhu, Upâli, so considering, come to the
conclusion that it would be just, he should, Upâli, further consider
thus: "The conduct of this matter which I intend to take upon myself;
would it tend to advantage, or would it not?" If that Bhikkhu, Upâli, so
considering, come to the conclusion that it would not tend to advantage,
he should not, Upâli, take charge of it.

'(Fourthly.) If that Bhikkhu, Upâli, so considering, come to the
conclusion that it would tend to

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

profit, he should, Upâli, further consider thus: "While I am taking the
conduct of this matter upon myself, shall I find that the Bhikkhus who
are my intimates and associates are on my side in accordance with the
Dhamma and the Vinaya, or shall I not?" If that Bhikkhu, Upâli, so
considering, come to the conclusion that he will not, he should not,
Upâli, take charge of it.

(Fifthly.) If that Bhikkhu, Upâli, so considering, come to the
conclusion that he will find them so, he should further, Upâli, consider
thus: "Whilst I am taking the conduct of this matter upon myself, will
the Sa*m*gha, as a result thereof, fall into strife, quarrel,
contention, or dispute, or will there arise a split in the Sa*m*gha,
disunion in the Sa*m*gha, diversity of position in the Sa*m*gha,
diversity of action in the Sa*m*gha <span
id="fr_858"></span>[1](#fn_844.md)?" If that Bhikkhu, Upâli, so
considering, come to the conclusion that that will happen, he should not
take charge of it. But if that Bhikkhu, Upâli, thus considering, should
come to the conclusion that that will not happen, he should take charge
of it. The taking charge of a matter, Upâli, subject to these five
conditions, will not give cause to subsequent remorse.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_841"></span>[313:1](sbe20090.htm#fr_855.md) No doubt in his
rôle of a chief of the Vinaya-dharas, as in Mahâvagga IX, 6, &c.

<span id="fn_842"></span>[314:1](sbe20090.htm#fr_856.md) As, for instance,
in the last chapter (§§ 4 and following) the Bhikkhu who lays the matter
before the Sa*m*gha.

<span id="fn_843"></span>[314:2](sbe20090.htm#fr_857.md) Attâdâna*m*
âdîyati, in our explanation of which we follow Buddhaghosa.

<span id="fn_844"></span>[315:1](sbe20090.htm#fr_858.md) This list has
occurred above, Mahâvagga X, 1, 6; X, 5, 13; *K*ullavagga VII, 5, 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](sbe20091.md)
