[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe20081)  [Next](sbe20083) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 4.

1\. Now at that time the Bhikkhus did not give thanks in the place where
a meal was served. People murmured, &c.; the Bhikkhus heard, &c.; the
Blessed One on that occasion, &c. <span id="fr_803"></span>[1](#fn_789)
said to the Bhikkhus:

'I allow, O Bhikkhus, the giving of thanks.'

Then the Bhikkhus thought, 'By whom should the thanks be given?'

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow, O Bhikkhus, the elder Bhikkhu (present) to give thanks in the
place where a meal is served.'

Now at that time (the turn to provide) the Sa*m*gha with a meal had
fallen to a certain company <span id="fr_804"></span>[2](#fn_790); and
the venerable Sâriputta was the senior (Bhikkhu in that) Sa*m*gha. The
Bhikkhus, thinking, 'The Blessed One has permitted the senior Bhikkhu to
return thanks in the place where a meal is served,' went away, leaving
the venerable Sâriputta alone. And the venerable Sâriputta gave thanks
to those people, and then came away alone.

The Blessed One saw the venerable Sâriputta coming from the distance;
and on seeing him, he said to him: 'Did the meal, then, Sâriputta, pass
off well <span id="fr_805"></span>[3](#fn_791)?'

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

'The meal, Lord, passed off well. But the Bhikkhus went away and left me
alone.'

Then the Blessed One, in that connection, having delivered a religious
discourse, said to them:

'I allow, O Bhikkhus, four or five of the Bhikkhus, who are senior or
next to the seniors, to wait.'

Now at that time a certain elder waited in the dining hall, though he
wanted to retire, and through holding himself back, he fainted and fell.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, if necessity should arise, to leave the hall
after informing the Bhikkhu sitting immediately next <span
id="fr_806"></span>[1](#fn_792) (to the one who wants to go).'

2\. Now at that time the *Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhus went to the place where
a meal was to be served with their under-garments or their robes
improperly put on, and not decently attired; and turning aside <span
id="fr_807"></span>[2](#fn_793), they pushed on in front of the senior
Bhikkhus; and they encroached on (the space intended for) the senior
Bhikkhus <span id="fr_808"></span>[3](#fn_794) when taking their seats,
and they compelled the junior Bhikkhus to give up their seats to them;
and spreading out their upper robes

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (as mats) <span
id="fr_809"></span>[1](#fn_795) they took their seats in the space
between the houses <span id="fr_810"></span>[2](#fn_796).

The moderate Bhikkhus murmured, &c. . . . told the Blessed One, &c. . .
. he said to the Bhikkhus:

'Therefore, O Bhikkhus, do I establish a rule of conduct for the
Bhikkhus at a meal, which they are to observe thereat.

 <span id="fr_811"></span>[3](#fn_797)3. 'When time has been called in
the Ârâma, a Bhikkhu should put on his waistcloth so as to cover himself
all round from above the navel to below the knees, tie his belt round
his waist, fold <span id="fr_812"></span>[4](#fn_798) his upper robes
and put them on, fasten the block on <span
id="fr_813"></span>[5](#fn_799), wash (his hands), take his alms-bowl,
and then slowly and carefully proceed to the village. He is not to turn
aside (from the direct route) and push on in front of senior
Bhikkhus <span id="fr_814"></span>[6](#fn_800). He is to go amidst the
houses properly clad, with (his limbs) under control, with downcast eye,
with (his robes) not tucked up, not laughing, or speaking loudly, not
swaying his body or his arms or his head about, not with his arms
akimbo, or his robe pulled over his head, and without walking on his
heels. And he is co take his

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

seat amidst the houses properly clad (&c., all as before, down to) not
with his arms akimbo, or his robes pulled over his head, and without
lolling, and without encroaching on (the space intended for) the senior
Bhikkhus, or ejecting the junior Bhikkhus from the seats, or spreading
his upper robe out (as a mat).

4\. 'When the water is being given out (before the meal), he is to hold
his bowl with both hands, receive the water (in it), lower the bowl
carefully down to the ground so as to avoid scratching the floor, and
then wash it. If there be (a person there) whose duty it is to take away
the water (which has been so used), (the Bhikkhu) should lower (his bowl
on to the ground) and pour the water into the waste tub <span
id="fr_815"></span>[1](#fn_801) without splashing the person in
question, nor the Bhikkhus near, nor (his own) robes. If there be no
such person, he should lower his bowl on to the earth and pour the water
away, without splashing the Bhikkhus near or (his own) robes.

'When the boiled rice is being given out, he should hold his bowl with
both hands, and receive the rice in it. Room should be left for the
curry. If there is ghee, or oil, or delicacies <span
id="fr_816"></span>[2](#fn_802), the senior Bhikkhu should say: "Get an
equal quantity for all." The alms (given) are to be accepted with mind
alert, paying attention to the bowl, with equal curry, and equally
heaped up <span id="fr_817"></span>[3](#fn_803). And the senior

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Bhikkhu is not to
begin to eat until the boiled rice has been served out to all.

 <span id="fr_818"></span>[1](#fn_804)5. 'The alms given are to be eaten
with mind alert, paying attention to the bowl, with equal curry, and
equally heaped up; without pressing down from the top; without covering
up the curry or the condiment with the rice, desiring to make it nicer;
and without asking for either rice or curry for the Bhikkhu's own
particular use, unless he be sick. Others' bowls are not to be looked at
with envious thoughts. The food is not to be rolled up (by the fingers)
into balls that are too large, but into round mouthfuls. The door of the
mouth is not to be opened till the ball is brought close to it. When
eating, the whole hand is not to be put into the mouth. He is not to
talk with his mouth full, nor to toss the food into his mouth as he
eats, nor to nibble at the balls of food, nor to stuff his cheeks out as
he eats, nor to shake (particles of food off) his hands, nor to scatter
lumps of rice about, nor to put out his tongue, nor to smack his lips,
nor to make a hissing sound as he eats, nor to lick his fingers, or his
bowl, or his lips. And the jar containing drinking-water is not to be
taken hold of with hands soiled with food.

6\. 'The senior Bhikkhu is not to accept water (to rinse out his bowl
with) until all Bhikkhus have finished eating. When water is being given
out (after the meal . . . . &c., as in the first paragraph of § 4, down
to the end). The water that has been used for washing the bowl is not to
be thrown with the rinsings in it into the inner court <span
id="fr_819"></span>[2](#fn_805).

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

'In returning, the junior Bhikkhus are to go back first, and the senior
Bhikkhus after them. Each Bhikkhu is to pass amidst the houses properly
clad . . . . (&c., as above, § 3, down to) without walking on his heels.

'This, O Bhikkhus, is the rule of conduct that I establish for Bhikkhus
at a meal, which they are to observe thereat.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Here ends the First Portion for Recitation.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_789"></span>[284:1](sbe20082.htm#fr_803) For the passages
here implied, see I, 1, 2, 3.

<span id="fn_790"></span>[284:2](sbe20082.htm#fr_804) A*ññ*atarassa
pûgassa. This sentence has already occurred at V, 5, 2.

<span id="fn_791"></span>[284:3](sbe20082.htm#fr_805) On this use of
iddho, compare ovâdo iddho in the Bhikkhunî-vibhaṅga, Pâ*k*ittiya LVI.

<span id="fn_792"></span>[285:1](sbe20082.htm#fr_806) Anantarika*m*
bhikkhu*m*. See the note on this phrase at VI, 10, 1. Ânantarika*m* in
the text (with long â) is a misprint.

<span id="fn_793"></span>[285:2](sbe20082.htm#fr_807) Vokkamma, which is
not, as Childers supposes, equal to okkamma with euphonic v, but to
vyavakramya or vyutkramya.

<span id="fn_794"></span>[285:3](sbe20082.htm#fr_808) Anupakha*gg*a:
which is here used, not in the sense it has at IV, 14, 1, but in the
sense in which it is used in the 16th and 43rd Pâ*k*ittiyas, in both
which passages it is explained by the Old Commentary by anupavisitvâ.
This clause and the next occur also at Mahâvagga I, 25, 13.

<span id="fn_795"></span>[286:1](sbe20082.htm#fr_809) Sa*m*ghâ*t*i*m*
ottharitvâ. This use of the Sa*m*ghâ*t*i is referred to at *G*âtaka I,
212, and above, I, 13, 2.

<span id="fn_796"></span>[286:2](sbe20082.htm#fr_810) Antaraghare. See
Sekhiyas 3-26, repeated in the next section. It is perhaps doubtful
whether this word may not mean here. (as in Sekhiya 27--below, § 6) the
inner courtyard of a house which is surrounded by buildings; but we
follow the interpretation we have adopted, loc. cit.

<span id="fn_797"></span>[286:3](sbe20082.htm#fr_811) The following
section repeats the Sekhiyas, Nos. 3-26, where see further notes. Much
of it recurs below in VIII, 5, 2.

<span id="fn_798"></span>[286:4](sbe20082.htm#fr_812) Sagu*n*a*m* katvâ.
Compare Mahâvagga I, 25, 9.

<span id="fn_799"></span>[286:5](sbe20082.htm#fr_813) Ga*nth*ika*m*. See
the note on V, 29, 3. It was to prevent the robe being blown up by the
wind. The word occurs again in VIII, 5, 2.

<span id="fn_800"></span>[286:6](sbe20082.htm#fr_814) The following
sentence is repeated, word for word, below, § 6.

<span id="fn_801"></span>[287:1](sbe20082.htm#fr_815) Pa*t*iggahe. See
the note on V, 10, 3. Avakkâra-pâtî, at Mahâvagga IV, 1, 2 =
*K*ullavagga VIII, 5, 3, seems to have very nearly the same meaning. The
whole of this paragraph is repeated below, § 6.

<span id="fn_802"></span>[287:2](sbe20082.htm#fr_816) Uttaribhaṅga*m*.
See the note on VI, 4, I.

<span id="fn_803"></span>[287:3](sbe20082.htm#fr_817) On the expressions
in this sentence, compare the notes on Sekhiyas 27-32.

<span id="fn_804"></span>[288:1](sbe20082.htm#fr_818) This paragraph
repeats Sekhiyas 31-55, where see our notes.

<span id="fn_805"></span>[288:2](sbe20082.htm#fr_819) This is the 57th
Sekhiya.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](sbe20083)
