[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe20020)  [Next](sbe20022) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 6 <span id="fr_155"></span>[4](#fn_150).

1\. Now at that time a certain Bhikkhu died of the bite of a snake. They
told the matter to the Blessed One.

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

'Now surely, that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, had not let his love flow out
over the four royal breeds of serpents! Had he done so, he would not die
of the bite of a snake. And which are the four royal breeds of serpents?
The Virûpakkhas are a royal breed. The Erâpathas are a royal breed. The
*Kh*abyâputtas are a royal breed. The Ka*n*hâgotamakas are a royal
breed. Now surely that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, had not let his love flow
out over the four royal breeds of serpents! Had he done so, he would not
die of the bite of a snake. I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to make use of a
safeguard for yourselves for your security and protection, by letting
your love flow out over the four royal breeds of serpents. And thus, O
Bhikkhus, are you to do so.

'"I love Virûpakkhas, the Erâpathas I love.

'"I love *Kh*abyâputtas, the Ka*n*hâgotamakas I love.

'"I love live things that have no feet, the bipeds too I love.

'"I love four-footed creatures, and things with many feet.

'"Let no footless thing do hurt to me, nor thing that has two feet.

'"Let no four-footed creature hurt, nor thing with many feet.

'"Let all creatures, all things that live, all beings of whatever kind,

'"Let all behold good fortune <span id="fr_156"></span>[1](#fn_151) and
let none fall into sin.

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

'"Infinite is the Buddha, infinite the Truth, infinite the Order. Finite
are creeping things; snakes, scorpions and centipedes, spiders and
lizards, rats and mice.

'"Made is my safeguard, made my defence. Let living things retreat,

'"Whilst I revere the Blessed One, the Buddhas seven supreme <span
id="fr_157"></span>[1](#fn_152)."'

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to let blood <span
id="fr_158"></span>[2](#fn_153).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_150"></span>[75:4](sbe20021.htm#fr_155) This ancient legend
has been expanded into a *G*âtaka story, under the title of
Khandha-vatta *G*âtaka, No. 203 in Professor Fausböll's edition (vol.
ii, pp. 144-148), in which recur all the verses here given as a
snake-charm. The names of the serpents are derived from the ancient
mythology, and are not to be supposed to refer to actual breeds of real
snakes. Below, *K*ullavagga VI, 2, 5, where a Bhikkhu is bitten by a
snake, the simple precaution enjoined is the use of a higher bedstead.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[76:1](sbe20021.htm#fr_156) This phrase occurs
in the passage at Mahâ-parinibbâna Sutta I, 31, by which Buddhaghosa is
so much perplexed.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[77:1](sbe20021.htm#fr_157) This is only one of
the many passages from which it is evident that in the oldest Buddhism
only the seven Buddhas, from Vipassi down to Gotama inclusive, were
known by name to the members of the Buddhist community. Compare Rh. D.'s
'Hibbert Lectures, 1881,' p. 142. It is nevertheless probable that, with
their ideas as to the infinite number of worlds which had succeeded one
another in the past, they considered that the number of previous Buddhas
had also been infinite.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[77:2](sbe20021.htm#fr_158) This last
injunction, which comes in here so tamely, is omitted in the *G*âtaka
story, and is merely a hook on which to hang an excuse for introducing
this ancient and evidently favourite prescription into the Vinaya. That
it is quite out of place is sufficiently evident from the fact that it
has already been laid down in identical terms in the Mahâvagga VI, 14,
4, where it is found in its natural connection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](sbe20022)
