[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cms06)  [Next](cms08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874778662/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Creative Mind and Success, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1919\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### UNCONSCIOUS CREATION.

THE author once attended a patient who was suffering from a large
growth. She was operated on and about fifty pounds of water were
removed. In a few days the growth had returned. Where did it come from?
Not from eating or drinking. Neither did it move from one part of the
body to another part, as that would not have increased her weight. It
must have been created from elements which she took in from the air. It
had to come from something not physically seen, something appearing from
nothing that we see. What we call "creation" is the same thing--the
visible appearing from the invisible. Was not this phenomenon a
creation?

Cases as remarkable as this are occurring every day. We should not deny
this fact but try to explain it. In the case of this woman there must
have been an activity of thought molded forth into form, else how could
this

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

growth have appeared? There is nothing manifest but that there is a
cause for the manifestation. Investigation proves that behind every
condition, whether of body or environment, there has been some thought,
conscious or unconscious, which produced that condition. In the case of
this woman the thought was not conscious. But creation is going on all
the time; we should realize this and learn how to control it so that
there may be created for us the things that we desire and not those that
we do not want. Is it any wonder that the Bible says, "With all thy
getting get understanding"?

Jesus understood all this, and so it was no more effort for Him to do
what He did than it is for us to breathe or to digest our food. He
*understood*, that is all. Because Jesus did understand and did use
these great laws with objective consciousness, people thought He must be
God. And when to-day something unusual occurs, people think that a
miracle has been performed. Jesus was not God. He was the manifestation
of God; and so are all people. "I say that ye are gods, and every one of
you sons of the Most High."

A thinking person will be compelled to admit, in view of all this, that
creation is first spiritual, through mental law, and then physical in
its manifestation.

Man does not really create. He uses creative power that already is.
Relatively speaking, he is the creative power in his own life; and so
far as his thought goes, there is something that goes with it that has
the power to bring forth into manifestation the thing thought of.
Hitherto men have used this creative power in ignorance and so have
brought upon themselves all kinds of conditions, but

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

today hundreds of thousands are beginning to use these great laws of
their being in a conscious, constructive way. Herein lies the great
secret of the New Thought movements under their various names and cults
and orders. All are using the same law even though some deny to others
the real revelation. We should get into an attitude of mind wherein we
should recognize the truth wherever we may find it. The trouble with
most of us is that unless we see sugar in a sugar bowl we think it must
be something else, and so we stick to our petty prejudices instead of
looking after principles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: First Steps](cms08)
