[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cms11)  [Next](cms13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874778662/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Creative Mind and Success, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1919\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

### HOW TO ATTRACT FRIENDS.

THE man who has learned to love all people, no matter who they may be,
will find plenty of people who will return that love to him. This is not
mere sentiment, and it is more than a religious attitude of mind; it is
a deep scientific fact, and one to which we should pay attention. The
reason is this: As all is mind, and as we attract to us what we first
become, until we learn to love we are not sending out love vibrations,
and not until we send out love vibrations can we receive love in return.

One of the first things to do is to learn to love everybody. If you have
not done this, begin to do so at once. There is always more good than
bad in people, and seeing the good tends to bring it forth. Love is the
greatest healing and drawing power on earth. It is the very reason for
our being, and that explains why it is that people should have something
or somebody to love.

The life that has not loved has not lived; it is still dead. Love is the
sole impulse for creation; and the man who does not have it as the
greatest incentive in his life has never developed the real creative
instinct. No one can swing out into the Universal without love, for the
whole universe is based upon it.

When we find that we are without friends, the thing to do is at once to
send our thought out to the whole world,--send it full of love and
affection. Know that this thought will meet the desires of some other
person who is wanting the same thing, and in some way the two will be
drawn together. Get over thinking that people are queer. That

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

kind of thought will only produce misunderstanding and cause us to lose
the friends that we now have. Think of the whole world as your friend;
but you must also be the friend of the whole world. In this way and with
this simple practice you will draw to you so many friends that the time
will be too short to enjoy them all. Refuse to see the negative side of
anyone. Refuse to let yourself misunderstand or be misunderstood. no not
be morbid. Know that everyone wants you to have the best; affirm this
wherever you go and then you will find things just as you wish them to
be.

The atmosphere created by a real lover of the race is so powerful that
although his other shortcomings may be many, still the world will love
him in return. "To him who loveth much, much will be forgiven." People
are dying for real human interest, for someone to tell them that they
are all right. Which person do we like the better: the one who is always
full of trouble and faultfinding, or the one who looks at the world as
his friend and loves it? The question does not need to be asked; we know
that we want the company of the person who loves and loving, forgets all
else.

The only reason we think other people are "queer" is because they do not
happen to think as we do. We must get over this little, petty attitude
and see things in the large. The person who sees what he wants to see,
regardless of what appears, will some day experience in the outer what
he has so faithfully seen within.

From selfish motives alone, if from no loftier reason, we cannot afford
to find fault or to hate or even to hold in mind anything against any
living soul. The God who is

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

love cannot hear the prayer of the man who is not love. Love and
co-operation will yet be found to be the greatest business principle on
earth. "God is Love."

We will make our unity with all people, with all life. We will affirm
that God in us is unified with God in all. This One is now drawing into
our life all love and fellowship. I am one with all people, with all
things, with all life. As I listen in the silence the voice of all
humanity speaks to me and answers the love that I hold out to it.

This great love that I now feel for the world is the love of God, and it
is felt by all and returned from all. Nothing comes in between because
there is nothing but love to come in between. I understand all people
and that understanding is reflected back to me from all people. I help,
therefore I am helped. I uplift, therefore I am uplifted. Nothing can
mar this perfect picture of myself and my relations with the world; it
is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. I am now
surrounded by all love, all friendship, all companionship, all health,
all happiness, all success. I am one with life. I wait in the silence
while the Great Spirit bears this message to the whole world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Control of Thought](cms13)
