[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cms19)  [Next](cms21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874778662/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Creative Mind and Success, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1919\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### OLD AGE AND OPPORTUNITY.

ONE of the besetting errors of people is a belief that they are too old
to do things. This comes from a lack of understanding what life really
is. Life is consciousness and not years. The man or woman who is seventy
years old should be better able to demonstrate than the man who is only
twenty. He should have evolved a higher thought, and it is thought and
not conditions that we are dealing with.

Amelia Barr was fifty-three before she wrote a book. After that she
wrote over eighty, all of which had a large circulation. Mary Baker Eddy
was sixty before she began her work, and she attended to all of her
great activities until she passed from this plane to a higher one. The
author of this book once took a man who was over sixty,

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

one who thought his chance for success had gone, and through teaching
him these principles in a year's time made him a prosperous business
man. He is now doing well and was never before in his life so happy. The
last time he was interviewed he said that business was increasing every
day and that he had not begun yet. Every day he stands in his store and
claims more activity. He speaks the word and realizes increase all the
time. If this were not true then life would not be worth the living.
What is a few years in eternity? We must get over these false notions
about age and competition. In the truth the word competition is never
mentioned. The people who think about it have never known the truth.

Life is what we make it from within and never from without. We are just
as old as we think we are, no matter what the number of years may have
been that we have lived on this planet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Demonstrating Success in Business](cms21)
