[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cms30)  [Next](cms32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874778662/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Creative Mind and Success, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1919\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

### UNUSUAL EXPERIENCE.

IN demonstrating the truth of supply we do not have to experience any
peculiar emotion or psychic experience. We do not have to feel any
thrills or anything of that sort. While it is true that some of these
things may come, yet we should remember that what we are doing is
dealing with law, and that as law it will obey us, when we comply with
its nature and contact it in the right way. What we are doing, is
stating something into Mind, and if the impression is clear in our own
minds *that it is* and *that it is done* we have put all the activity we
can put into it, until such a time as something happens in the external
for us to work upon. So many people say, "I do wish that I could feel
something, when I give a treatment." All this is a mistake and is an
attempt to give a physical reason for life. What we do need to feel is
that, since God is all and is good, he wants us to have only the good;
and feeling this we should take what is already made for us. Our
attitude towards such a good Father should constantly be one of
thanksgiving. When we begin to prove the power of the truth we will
always maintain this attitude. Know that you are dealing with a sure
thing and that all you have to do is to know positively into it and wait
for the results to come in the outer. Then do what your own good sense
tells you to do, for this is the thought of God through you. More and
more you will find that you are being led out of difficulty into that
freedom which is the Divine birthright of every living soul. Go ahead,
then, looking only at the things desired and never at the things not
wanted. Victory will always be on the side that the majority of your
thoughts rest on in absolute acceptance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Visualizing](cms32)
