[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cms48) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874778662/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Creative Mind and Success, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1919\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE FINAL WORD.

IN the last analysis, man is just what he thinks himself to be; he is
big in capacity if he thinks big thoughts; he is small if he thinks
small thoughts. He will attract to himself what he thinks most about. He
can learn to govern his own destiny when he learns to control his
thoughts. In order to do this he must first realize that everything in
the manifest universe is the result of some

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

inner activity of Mind. This Mind is God, producing a universe by the
activity of His own divine thoughts; man is in this Mind as a thinking
center, and what he thinks governs his life, even as God's thought
governs the Universe, by setting in motion all the cosmic activities.
This is so easy to understand, and so plain as to use that we often
wonder why we have been so long finding out this, the greatest of all
truths of all the ages. Believing; thinking what is believed to be true;
thinking into Mind each day that which is wished to be returned;
eliminating negative thoughts; holding all positive thoughts; giving
thanks to the Spirit of Life that it is so trusting always in the higher
law; never arguing with one's self or with others; using; these are the
steps which, when followed, will bring us to where we shall not have to
ask if it be true, for, having demonstrated, we shall know.

The seed that falls into the ground shall bear fruit of its own kind;
and nothing shall hinder it.

"He that hath ears to hear, let him hear."

 

 

 

THE END.

 

 
