[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cms44)  [Next](cms46) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874778662/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Creative Mind and Success, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1919\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

### RACE CONSCIOUSNESS.

ONE of the things which greatly hinders us from demonstrating a greater
degree of prosperity we may call race thought or race consciousness.
This is the result of all that the race has thought or believed. We are
immersed in it, and those who are receptive to it are controlled by it.
All thought seeks expression along the lines of least resistance. When
we become negative or fearful we attract that kind of thought and
condition. We must be sure of ourselves; we must be positive; we must
not be aggressive, but absolutely sure and poised within. Negative
people are always picking up negative conditions; they get into trouble
easily: Persons who are positive draw positive things; they are always
successful. Few people realize that the law of thought is the great
reality; that thoughts produce things. When we come to understand this
power of thought, we will carefully watch our thinking to see that no
thought enters that we should not want made into a thing.

We can guard our minds by knowing that no negative thought can enter; we
can daily practice by saying that no race thought of limitation can
enter the mind; that Spirit forms itself around us and protects us from
all fear and from all limitation. Let us clothe ourselves in the great
realization that all power is ours and that nothing else can enter; let
us fill the atmosphere of our homes, and places of business with streams
of positive thought. Other people will feel this and will like to be
near us and enter into the things that we enter into. In this way we
shall be continually drawing only the best.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Developing Intuition](cms46)
