[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tll07)  [Next](tll09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Size and Consistency of Man's Body.

The evolution of this Lemurian race, therefore, constitutes one of the
most obscure, as well as one of the most interesting, chapters of man's
development, for during this period not only did he reach true humanity,
but his body underwent the greatest physical changes, while the
processes of reproduction were twice altered.

In explanation of the surprising statements which will have to be made
in regard to the size and consistency of man's body at this early period
it must be remembered that while the animal, vegetable and mineral
kingdoms pursued the normal course, on this the fourth globe, during the
Fourth Round of this Manvantara, it was ordained that humanity should
run over in rapid succession the various stages through which its
evolution had passed during the previous rounds of the present
Manvantara. Thus the bodies of the First Root Race in which these almost
mindless beings were destined to gain experience, would have appeared to
us as gigantic phantoms--if indeed we could have seen them at all, for
their bodies were formed of astral matter. The astral forms of the First
Root Race were then gradually enveloped in a more physical casing. But
though the Second Root Race may be called physical--their bodies being
composed of ether--they would have been equally invisible to eyesight as
it at present exists.

It was, we are told, in order that the Mann, and the Beings who aided
him, might take means for improving the physical type

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

of humanity that this epitome of the process of evolution was ordained.
The highest development which the type had so far reached was the huge
ape-like creature which had existed on the three physical planets, Mars,
the Earth and Mercury in the Third Round. On the arrival of the human
life-wave on the Earth in this the Fourth Round, a certain number,
naturally, of these apelike creatures were found in occupation--the
residuum left on the planet during its period of obscuration. These, of
course, joined the in-coming human stream as soon as the race became
fully physical. Their bodies may not then have been absolutely
discarded; they may have been utilized for purposes of reincarnation for
the most backward entities, but it was an improvement on this type which
was required, and this was most easily achieved by the Manu, through
working out on the astral plane in the first instance, the architype
originally formed in the mind of the Logos.

From the Etheric Second Race, then, was evolved the Third--the Lemurian.
Their bodies had become material, being composed of the gases, liquids
and solids which constitute the three lowest sub-divisions of the
physical plane, but the gases and liquids still predominated, for as yet
their vertebrate structure had not solidified into bones such as ours,
and they could not, therefore, stand erect. Their bones in fact were
pliable as the bones of young infants now are. It was not until the
middle of the Lemurian period that man developed a solid bony structure.

To explain the possibility of the process by which the etheric form
evolved into a more physical form, and the soft-boned physical form
ultimately developed into a structure such as man possesses to-day, it
is only necessary to refer to the permanent physical atom. <span
id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13) Containing as it does the essence of all
the forms through which

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

man has passed on the physical plane, it contained consequently the
potentiality of a hard-boned physical structure such as had been
attained during the course of the Third Round, as well as the
potentiality of an etheric form and all the phases which lie between,
for it must be remembered that the physical plane consists of four
grades of ether as well as the gases, liquids and solids which so many
are apt to regard as alone constituting the physical. Thus, every stage
of the development was a natural process, for it was a process which had
been accomplished in ages long past, and all that was needed was for the
Manu and the Beings who aided him, to gather round the permanent atom
the appropriate kind of matter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[21:1](tll08.htm#fr_13) For a further account of
the permanent atoms on all the planes, and the potentialities contained
in them with reference to the processes of death and re-birth, see
"Man's Place in Universe." pp. 76-80.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Organs of Vision](tll09)
