[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tll09)  [Next](tll11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Description of Lemurian Man.

The following is a description of a man who belonged to one of the later
sub-races-probably the fifth. "His stature was gigantic, somewhere
between twelve and fifteen feet. His skin was very dark, being of a
yellowish brown colour. He had a long lower jaw, a strangely flattened
face, eyes small but piercing and set curiously far apart, so that he
could see sideways as well as in front, while the eye at the back of the
head--on which part of the head no hair, of course, grew--enabled him to
see in that direction also. He had no forehead, but there seemed to be a
roll of flesh where it should have been. The head sloped backwards and
upwards in a rather curious way. The arms and legs (especially the
former) were longer in proportion than ours, and could not be perfectly
straightened either at elbows or knees; the hands and feet were
enormous, and the heels projected backwards in an ungainly way. The
figure was draped in a loose robe of skin, something like rhinoceros
hide, but more

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

scaly, probably the skin of some animal of which we now know only
through its fossil remains. Round his head, on which the hair was quite
short, was twisted another piece of skin to which were attached tassels
of bright red, blue and other colours. In his left hand he held a
sharpened staff, which was doubtless used for defence or attack. It was
about the height of his own body, viz., twelve to fifteen feet. In his
right hand was twisted the end of a long rope made of some sort of
creeping plant, by which he led a huge and hideous reptile, somewhat
resembling the Plesiosaurus. The Lemurians actually domesticated these
creatures, and trained them to employ their strength in hunting other
animals. The appearance of the man gave an unpleasant sensation, but he
was not entirely uncivilised, being an average common-place specimen of
his day."

Many were even less human in appearance than the individual here
described, but the seventh sub-race developed a superior type, though
very unlike any living men of the present time. While retaining the
projecting lower jaw, the thick heavy lips, the flattened face, and the
uncanny looking eyes, they had by this time developed something which
might be called a forehead, while the curious projection of the heel had
been considerably reduced. In one branch of this seventh sub-race, the
head might be described as almost egg-shaped--the small end of the egg
being uppermost, with the eyes wide apart and very near the top. The
stature had perceptibly decreased, and the appearance of the hands, feet
and limbs generally had become more like those of the negroes of to-day.
These people developed an important and long-lasting civilisation, and
for thousands of years dominated most of the other tribes who dwelt on
the vast Lemurian continent, and even at the end, when racial decay
seemed to be overtaking them, they secured another long lease of life
and power by inter-marriage with the Rmoahals--the first sub-race of the

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Atlanteans. The progeny, while retaining many
Third Race characteristics, of course, really belonged to the Fourth
Race, and thus naturally acquired fresh power of development. Their
general appearance now became not unlike that of some American Indians,
except that their skin had a curious bluish tinge not now to be seen.

But surprising as were the changes in the size, consistency, and
appearance of man's body during this period, the alterations in the
process of reproduction are still more astounding. A reference to the
systems which now obtain among the lower kingdoms of nature may help us
in the consideration of the subject.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Processes of Reproduction](tll11)
