[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sdo05)  [Next](sdo07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PREPARATION OF THE CANDIDATE.

Soon after the public announcement of the relation of Mentor and
Candidate, the Mentor should require the Candidate to enter a sweatlodge
to *ini*, or vitalize. *Inipi*, or vitalizing, is an act of more or less
ceremony to stimulate the *ni*, or vitality, so that it may increase
strength and purify the body. Vitalizing may be merely a means of
refreshment, a remedial measure for disease, or to purify the body for
some important undertaking. It ought always to be done as a preliminary
to ceremonies pertaining to the *Wakan Tanka*, or the Great Gods. In its
simplest form, it is done by releasing the spirit-like of water in a
confined space so that it may enter the body. This spirit-like
stimulates the vitality so that it overcomes harmful things that may be
in the body and the spirit-like of the water washes them out of the body
and they appear upon the skin like sweat and can be washed or wiped
away. Thus, the vitality is strengthened and the body purified. If the
vitalizing is a remedy for disease, medicines may be added to the water
so that their potency, or spirit-like, may be released and enter the
body, and there cause the desired effect.

The methods for vitalizing according to the customs of the Oglala are: A
lodge is made by thrusting slender saplings into the ground in a circle,

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

the diameter of which is a little longer than the height of a tall man.
The tops of these saplings are bent and bound together so as to form a
dome-like support for a covering. This support is covered with robes so
as to confine the vapor from boiling water, this vapor being the
spirit-like of the water released. At any place on the border of the
covering, except toward the north, an opening that may be tightly
closed, should be made large enough so that a man can crawl through it.
This is the *ini ti* or vitalizing lodge. The equipment necessary for
vitalizing is:--

1\. Heated stones.  
2. Water.  
3. A pipe.  
4. Smoking material.

To these can he added such other equipment as may be required by the
ceremony that is to be performed while vitalizing. One who is to
vitalize should strip and crawl naked into the vitalizing lodge, taking
with him the pipe and tobacco. Assistants, usually women, heat the
stones in a fire near the lodge and, when the occupants are within,
should bring the stones and pass them through the opening, then pass the
water into the lodge and tightly close the opening. Those inside should
place the hot stones at the center of the lodge and at intervals pour
small quantities of water on them. This releases the spirit-like of the
water and as it cannot escape upward, it must enter the bodies of those
exposed to it. It is propitiated with smoke from the pipe and will
stimulate the vitality. When it appears again upon the surface of the
body, like sweat, it will have in it the harmful things that were in the
body, and it should be wiped away, or better, it should be washed away,
which is best done by plunging into water. One vitalizing in the
simplest manner should sing an appropriate song while pouring the water
on the hot stones. The time required for vitalizing in its simplest form
may be as long as is required to smoke two pipefuls. A single person may
vitalize alone, but as many as can get into the lodge may vitalize
together. The process of vitalizing is elaborated to the purposes for
which it is done and may he a complex ceremony supervised by a Shaman,
and prolonged for a day and night or even longer.

When the Mentor has required the Candidate to vitalize, the Mentor,
Candidate, and attendant should occupy the vitalizing lodge and the
Mentor should take into the lodge his fetish and wisps of sage and
sweetgrass and the assistants should pass coals of fire so that they may
burn in the lodge. While vitalizing, the Shaman should first sprinkle
bits of sage on the burning coals so as to make an incense and expel the
evil powers from the lodge. Then he should sprinkle bits of sweetgrass
on the coals, making an incense

<span id="page_68 ">p. 68</span>

that will propitiate the powers for good. While doing this, he should
invoke his fetish, either in song or prayer, in order that its potency
may aid him in what he is about to do. Having done these things, he
should require the Candidate to seek a vision and instruct him as to the
manner of his doing so, as follows:--

If an Oglala contemplates an important undertaking, he ought to seek a
vision, and if he has the vision he should be governed according to the
interpretation of it. To seek a vision one should strip and wear only a
robe, a breechclout, and moccasins. Clothed thus, he should take a pipe,
smoking materials, and a knife, and go to the top of a high place where
others are not likely to intrude. There he should remove every living or
growing thing from a space on the ground sufficiently large for him to
sit or lie upon. Then he should go, to this space and remain on it until
he has a vision, or until he is convinced that he will have none. When
he enters the cleared space, he should invoke the Four Winds in order
that they may not bring inclement weather upon him. Then he should await
a vision, meditating continuously upon his quest. He may invoke the
gods, verbally or mentally, either in song or prayer. He may stand, sit,
or lie awake or asleep, but he must not go away from the space he has
prepared. He may smoke as often as he wishes, but he must neither drink
nor eat while making the quest.

The vision may come to him, either when he is awake, or when he is
asleep. It may appear in the form of anything that breathes or as some
inanimate thing. If it communicates with him, it may speak intelligibly
to him, or it may use words that he does not understand, or speak in the
language of birds or beasts. By something that it says or does it will
make known to him that it is the vision be seeks. He should wait for
such a vision until he receives it, or until he is so exhausted that he
can wait no longer without danger of losing his life: If he should
receive a vision, he should return to his tipi singing a song of
victory. If one seeks a vision and it is not granted to him, he should
meekly come from the quest as privately as possibly. If a vision appears
to one in the form of a dog, a shore lark, a swallow, a night hawk, a
frog, a lizard, or a dragon fly, it has been granted by *Wakinyan*, the
Winged God, for these creatures are His *akicita*, or representatives,
and when either of them speaks to one in a vision the one spoken to must
become *heyoka* and ever afterwards speak and act anti-natural, or as a
buffoon. A Candidate to dance the Sun Dance who receives a vision from
*Wakinyan* must, during the ceremony in the dance lodge, act as a clown,
and in every manner attempt to make the people laugh. He must appear to
enjoy the tortures inflicted during the dance and should make sport of
his fellow dancers.

One who seeks a vision and receives it, ought to consult a Shaman
relative

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

to an interpretation of it, even if the communication received in the
vision is apparently intelligible and easily understood. If he is a
Candidate to dance the Sun Dance, he must consult his Mentor, and be
guided by him. It may be that the vision prohibits the Candidate from
dancing the Sun Dance, and if so, he should proceed no further in the
matter.

After the Candidate's quest of a vision, his Mentor should consecrate
him, his tipi, implements, utensils, and apparel, in the following
manner:--The Mentor should make an altar in the tipi of the Candidate,
between the fireplace, which is at the center of the tipi, and the place
of honor. An Oglala Shaman makes an altar by removing everything that
breathes or grows from the space where the altar is to be. This should
be done because the altar is a sacred thing which should have nothing in
or upon it except that which may be an offering acceptable to the Gods.
Any other thing that may touch this space while it is an altar should
either be destroyed or purified in an incense of sage and then in one of
sweetgrass. This space must be square, for the altar must have four
sides of equal length, because each side pertains to one of the Four
Winds and each of these must receive equal consideration in every
respect.

The sides of the altar should be toward the west, the north, the east,
and the south, so that one side will be toward the tipi of each of the
Four Winds. The sides should measure not less than four hand breadths,
nor more than the height of a man, They may vary anywhere between these
extremes. The smallest altars should be made in tipis and the largest in
the Sun Dance Lodge. At each angle of this square, a pointed space
should project halfway between two of the directions. These are the
horns of the altar that guard it against all malevolent beings. The
square space and horns should be dug to the depth of a finger length and
the loosened soil removed and freed from everything. Then it should be
pulverized, replaced, level. The one who replaces and levels the soil
should utter an and made appropriate invocation, or sing an appropriate
song, or both, for in this manner the altar is consecrated to the
purposes for which it is made. The Mentor should place on the altar in
the tipi of the Candidate, a buffalo skull with the horns attached, so
that the nostril cavities will face towards the place of honor. He
should then decorate this skull with stripes of red paint, one across
the forehead and one lengthwise on each side of the skull; at the same
time, he should paint a red stripe across the forehead of the Candidate.
The stripes across the forehead indicate that the Buffalo God has
adopted the Candidate as a *hunka*, or relative by ceremony. The red
stripes on the sides of the skull indicate that the Buffalo God will
give especial protection to the Candidate. The horns of the skull should
be adorned with any ornaments that the Candidate may apply. Then the
Mentor should

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

fill and light a pipe and he and the Candidate should smoke it in
communion, alternately blowing the smoke into the nostril cavities of
the skull, thus smoking in communion with the Buffalo God. This should
be done in order that the potency of the pipe may harmonize all those
communing.

When this rite is completed the Mentor should instruct the Candidate
that this altar should be maintained in his tipi until he enters the
Sacred Lodge in the ceremonial camp; that anything placed upon the altar
must be considered an offering to the Gods; that he should so place a
portion of each thing he eats or drinks in the tipi; that others may
also do so; that no one should touch the altar, or anything upon it,
except those whose hands are painted red; and that no one should step
over the altar or pass between it and the place of honor if this can be
avoided. This is because the altar is a sacred place occupied by the
potency of the God, the Buffalo, and should be reverenced as the God is
reverenced. Also, that if anything of any kind should otherwise come
upon this altar it should be removed and be destroyed or purified in the
incense of sage and then of sweetgrass.

When the altar and instructions are completed, the Mentor should prepare
a meditation couch for the Candidate by making a bed of sage at the
rear, outside the tipi and projecting from it, and should instruct him
to occupy this bed most of the time when not with his Mentor, meditating
on his preparation for the Sun Dance. This bed should be made of sage
because this herb is pleasing to the Benevolent Gods and repulsive to
all malevolent beings; therefore, it will keep all harmful things and
thoughts from one occupying a bed made of it. When the sage bed is
prepared the Mentor should place the Candidate's cedar tree, or rack.
This should be of cedar because the cedar is favored by Wakinyan, the
Winged God, and he will not visit one protected by it, nor cause such a
one to act foolishly. The bark should be taken from it and its larger
end should be as large as a man's leg. It should be long enough so that
when fixed upright in the ground it will be as high as a man's
shoulders. It should have portions of branches left on it so that they
will be convenient prongs for hanging articles. The Mentor should paint
it red and fix it upright in the ground at the foot of the bed of sage
and instruct the Candidate to place all his implements of war and the
chase on it and keep them there until after he has danced the Sun Dance.
He also instructs him that if he dances the Sun Dance to its completion
he will be entitled to place such a rack beside his tipi during the
remainder of his life; that anything placed upon such a rack is taboo to
all of mankind, except the owner of the rack; that while he is a
candidate, things placed upon this rack by others thereby become
offerings to the Sun and so are his property; that friends wishing to
give presents to him as a Candidate should place such presents on this
rack. When the rack has been placed, if the Mentor is a Shaman, he
should consecrate the person of the Candidate.

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

\[paragraph continues\] If he is not a Shaman, he should employ a Shaman
to do this in the following manner:--

In his tipi the Candidate should strip and sit beside the altar facing
the Shaman who should sit at the place of honor. The attendant should
fill and light a pipe and offer it to the Shaman, and he, the Mentor,
Candidate, and Attendant smoke in communion. Then, while the attendant
sounds either the drum or rattles, the Shaman should paint the
Candidate's hands red, meanwhile singing an appropriate song or making
an appropriate invocation. He should then instruct the Candidate that
the sacred color, red, upon the hands sanctifies them so that they may
handle sacred things; that while he is a Candidate his hands should he
painted red; and if he dances the Sun Dance to completion he will be
entitled to paint his hands red at any time during the remainder of his
life. Then he should braid wisps of sweetgrass into the semblance of a
scalplock, bind it with red, give it to the Candidate, and instruct him
that if he dances the Sun Dance to its completion he will be entitled to
attach such a braid of sweetgrass to his person or implements at any
time during his life; that such a braid will insure the favor of the
Feminine God to one who rightfully possesses it. Then the Shaman should
paint in red on the chest of the Candidate a design which he has devised
and instruct him that if he completes his undertaking, this design will
become his insignum indicating that he has danced, the second, third, or
fourth form of the Sun Dance to completion; and that he will be entitled
to place it on his person or property and use it as his signature. When
the person of the Candidate has been thus consecrated, his clothing,
implements, and utensils should be incensed with sage while the Shaman
utters or sings an appropriate invocation which will consecrate them.
The things thus consecrated must be used by none other than the
Candidate until after the Sun Dance is danced.

When these consecrations are completed, the Mentor should teach the
Candidate the invariable rules that should govern a Candidate to dance
the second, third, or fourth form of the Sun Dance. These are:--

1\. He must subordinate himself to his Mentor.  
2. He must mediate continually upon his undertaking.  
3. He must speak little with others than his Mentor.  
4. He must use only his consecrated implements and utensils.

 

1\. He must not become angry.  
2. He must not hear ribald speech.  
3. He must not go into the water.  
4. He must not have sexual intercourse.

If a Candidate disregards any of these rules, he must do such penance as
his Mentor may prescribe before he can proceed with his undertaking.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Instruction Of A Shaman](sdo07)
