[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sdo07)  [Next](sdo09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECRET INSTRUCTIONS FOR A SHAMAN.

When the Mentor is satisfied that the Candidate understands the social
customs of the Oglala sufficiently well to know when a Shaman may, or
may not, interfere with them, he should then instruct him relative to
the doctrines and ceremonials pertaining to the Gods. Some of these are
known to the people, but most of them are known only by the Shamans and
they hide these in a ceremonial language known only by them. This
language is made up of common words to which an esoteric meaning is
given and of strange words that are known only by the Shamans. The
sacred mysteries

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

are thus hidden from the people because they are unfitted to know them.
But one who is to become a Shaman should be instructed relative to these
mysteries, in substance as follows:--

The Supernatural is *Wakan Tanka*, or the Great Mystery that no one of
mankind can comprehend. It may be pleased or displeased by the conduct
of any one of mankind. It may be propitiated or placated by a proper
ceremony correctly performed. Its aid may be secured by appropriate
sacrifice. Therefore, it is the Great God.

This Great God communicates with mankind through various media and in
various manners. The chosen medium is a *Wicasa Wakan*, or Shaman. Other
media are called *Akicita Wakan*, or Sacred Messengers. A Sacred
Messenger may be anything animate or inanimate, other than mankind,
which makes itself known as such. It may be either permanent or
temporary. A permanent messenger is one that is always the medium of
communication from a certain God. A temporary Sacred Messenger is such
only during one communication and may be the medium for any God other
than those who have permanent messengers. A communication from a God may
be either unsolicited or solicited. An unsolicited communication is
transmitted through a Shaman. Solicited communications are granted
through the Sacred Messengers. These may be either intelligible or
unintelligible to the recipient, and if unintelligible, they should be
interpreted by a Shaman.

The Shamans should teach these doctrines to the people and exhort them
to practise the four great virtues which, named in the order of their
importance, are:--

1\. Bravery.  
2. Fortitude.  
3. Generosity.  
4. Fidelity.

The doctrines which only the Shamans know are these:--

Wakan Tanka is one, yet It is many who are:--  
    *Wakan Tanka Waste*, the Benevolent Gods.  
    *Wakan Tanka Sica*, the Malevolent Gods.

The Benevolent Gods are of two kinds who are:

Wakan Kin, the Gods.  
*Taku Wakan*, Gods Kindred.

The Gods are of two classes which are:

Wakan *Ankanta*, the Superior Gods.  
Wakan *Kolaya*, the Associate Gods.

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

The Gods Kindred are of two classes which are:

Wakan Kuya, the Subordinate Gods.  
Wakanlapi, the Gods-like.

Each of these four classes consists of four individuals as follows:

The individuals of the Superior Gods:--  
     *Wi*, the Sun, the Chief of the Gods.  
     *Skan*, the Sky, the Great Spirit.  
     *Maka*, the Earth, the All-mother.  
     *Inyan*, the Rock, the All-father.

The individuals of the Associate Gods:--

Hanwi, the Moon, the Associate of *Wi*.  
*Tate*, the Wind, the Associate of *Skan*.  
*Wohpe*, the Feminine, the Associate of *Maka*.  
*Wakinyan*, the Winged God, the Associate of *Inyan*.

The individuals of the Subordinate Gods:

Tatanka, the Buffalo God.  
*Hunonpa*, the Bear God.  
*Tatetob*, the Four Winds.  
*Yumni*, the Whirlwind.

The individuals of the Gods-like:--

Nagi, the Spirit.  
*Niya*, the Ghost.  
*Nagila*, the Spirit-like.  
*Sicun*, the imparted Supernatural Potency.

The following are four individuals, but they should be considered as
only one, the Chief God:

The Sun.  
The Moon.  
The Buffalo.  
The Spirit.

The following are four individuals, but they should be considered as
only one, the Great Spirit:--

The Sky.  
The Wind.  
The Bear.  
The Ghost.

The following are four individuals, but they should be considered as
only one, the Creator God:

The Earth.  
The Feminine.  
The Four Winds.  
The Spirit-like.

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

The following are four individuals, but they should bc considered as
only one, the Executive God:--

The Rock.  
The Winged.  
The Whirlwind.  
The Potency.

The following are but as one, and that One is Wakan Tanka, the Great
Mysterious:--

The Chief God.  
The Great Spirit.  
The Creator.  
The Executive.

The individualities of the Great Mysterious have properties that may be
described as follows:--

Except for the Four Winds, They had no beginning, though some were
before others and some bear the relation of parent and offspring. This
is *akan*, for no one of mankind can comprehend it. They will have no
end.

The Sun is a material God whose substance is always visible and He ranks
first among the Superior Gods, though the other three were before He
was. He may be addressed as the Great God, the Revered One, or Our
Father. His domain is the spirit world and the regions under the world.
His will prevails though the Wind thwart his purposes. The Sky gave Him
His power and can withhold it, but he is more powerful than the Sky.
Daily He makes His journey above the domain of the Sky and at night He
rests with His people in the regions under the World and there communes
with his comrade, the Buffalo. He is the patron of the four great
virtues, but is indifferent to small affairs. His favor may be secured
by appropriate offerings and ceremonies and He may grant a communication
to one who dances the Sun Dance. His potency abides in fire and cannot
be imparted to any other thing. His symbolic color is red and because He
is the Chief of the Gods, red is the sacred color.

The Sky is an immaterial God whose substance is never visible. He ranks
second among the Superior Gods. His titles given by the people are *Taku
Skan-skan* and *Nagi Tanka*, or the Great Spirit, and those given by the
Shamans are *Skan* and *To*, or blue. The concept expressed by the term
*Taku Skan-skan* is that which gives motion to anything that moves. That
expressed by the Shamans by the word, *Skan*, is a vague concept of
force or energy and by the word, *To*, is the immaterial blue of the sky
which symbolizes the presence of the Great Spirit. His domain is all
above the world beginning at the ground. He is the source of all power
and motion and is the patron of directions and trails and of encampment.
He imparts

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

to each of mankind at birth a spirit, a ghost, and a sicun, and at the
death of each of mankind He hears the testimony of the ghost and
adjudges the spirit. He may sit in judgment on other Gods. His word is
unalterable, except by Himself. He only can undo that which is done. His
people are the stars and the Feminine is His daughter. His potency can
be imparted only to mysterious things and by much ceremony correctly
performed by wise Shamans. The Fetish that has His potency can prevail
in all things. Only Shamans may have such a Fetish. His symbolic color
is blue.

The Earth is a material God, whose substance is always visible. She
ranks third of the Superior Gods, though she existed next after the
first in existence. She is most often addressed as the All-mother, for
She is an ancestor of all material things, except the Rock. Her domain
is the world and She is the patron of all things that grow from the
ground, of drink and food, and the tipi. Her potency may be imparted to
anything that has grown from the ground. Her symbolic color is green.

The Rock is a material God whose substance may always be seen. He ranks
fourth of the Superior Gods, but existed first of all. He is most often
addressed as the All-father, for He is the ancestor of all things and
all the Gods. The All-father and the All-mother never were related as
husband and wife and neither has a child by the other. The Rock is the
father of *Iktomi*, whose other parent is the Winged God, and the father
of *Iya*, or *Ibom*, the Great God of Evil, whose other parent is an
*Unktehi*, or one of the Monsters.

The domain of the Rock is the mountains; but His authority extends
through all the domain of the Earth. He is the patron of authority and
vengeance, of construction and destruction, and of implements and
utensils. His potency can be imparted to anything that is hard as stone.
His symbolic color is yellow.

The symbolic colors of the four Superior Gods, red, blue, green, and
yellow, are sacred, when applied by a Shaman with ceremony and each
symbolizes the God to which it pertains. If red alone is ceremonially
applied, it signifies consecration. Black is also a ceremonial color,
its significance being intensity of emotion or firmness of purpose.

The Moon is a material God whose substance is visible or partly
invisible, as She wills. She governs the third time, which is a moon,
and combats *Anog Ite*, the double-woman, who incites contention. She
has no domain and Her potency cannot be imparted to anything. She fixes
the time for the more important undertakings of mankind but She is
indifferent to ceremonies and cannot be influenced by them.

Tate is an immaterial God whose substance is never visible, for He is

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

as a Spirit. He is the father of the Four Winds whose mother is *Anog
Ite*. He governs the fourth time, which is a year, and the coming and
going of the four seasons. He abides at the entrance of the spirit trail
and hides it from mankind. He admits or excludes spirits from this
entrance, according to the judgment of the Great Spirit, *Skan*. He
cannot be influenced by sacrifice or ceremony and His potency cannot be
imparted to anything.

The Feminine is a material God whose substance may be visible or
invisible as She wills. She is most often addressed as the Woman, the
Beautiful One, or the Gracious One. She is the daughter of Skan, the
Sky, and is of the star people. She abides in the tipi of *Okaga*, the
South Wind, and is His associate. Her potency, which cannot be imparted
to anything, is in the smoke of the pipe and the smoke of sweetgrass.
Her functions are to harmonize and are effective when the pipe is smoked
or sweetgrass burned. She is a mediator between the Gods, between the
Gods and mankind, and between mankind. She is the protector of chastity
and of little children and the patron of adornment and pleasure. She
should be invoked in every ceremony and there has precedence over all
the Gods.

Wakinyan is a material God whose substance is visible only when He so
wills. His properties are akan and anti-natural. He abides in his lodge
on the top of the mountain at the edge of the world where the Sun goes
down to the regions under the world. He is many, but they are as only
one; he is shapeless, but has wings with four joints each; be has no
feet, yet he has huge talons; be has no head, yet has a huge beak with
rows of teeth in it, like the teeth of the wolf; his voice is the
thunder clap and rolling thunder is caused by the beating of His wings
on the clouds; he has an eye, and its glance is lightning. In a great
cedar tree beside His lodge He has His nest made of dry bones, and in it
is an enormous egg from which His young continuously issue. He devours
His young and they each become one of His many selves. He had issue by
the Rock and it was *Iktomi*, the oldest son of the Rock. He flies
through all the domain of the Sky, hidden in a robe of clouds, and if
one of mankind sees His substance he is thereby made a *heyoka*, and
must ever afterwards speak and act clownishly in an anti-natural manner.
Yet, if He so wills, He may appear to mankind in the form of a giant
man, and if so, He is then the God, Heyoka. One who looks upon the God,
Heyoka, is not thereby made a heyoka. The potency of the Winged God
cannot be imparted to anything. His functions are to cleanse the world
from filth and to fight the Monsters who defile the waters and to cause
all increase by growth from the ground.

The acceptable manner of addressing Him is by taunt and villification,
the opposite of the intent of the address. He may be visualized as a
bird whose wings have four joints. His symbol is a zigzag red line
forked at

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

each end. His *akicita* are the dog, swallow, snowbird, night hawk,
lizard, frog, and dragon fly, and if either of these is seen in a vision
the one to whom it appears is thereby made a *heyoka*.

The Buffalo is a material God whose substance is visible only when He so
wills. His form is that of a great beast, but he may appear to mankind
as a man. He abides with the buffalo people in the regions under the
world, and roams throughout all the domain of the Earth. He is the
patron of sexual relations, generosity, industry, fecundity, and
ceremonies. He is the protector of maidens and of the very old. He is
the comrade of the Sun and in ceremonies pertaining to the Sun, His
potency prevails. He controls the chase and gives or withholds success
to hunters. His potency abides in the skull of the animal buffalo and
can be imparted to anything that has been a part of a buffalo.

The Bear is a material God, whose substance is invisible at His will. He
may appear to mankind as a huge bear, or as a very old man. He is the
patron of wisdom, medicine, and magic. Those who would know the lore of
the Lakota should have His aid. His potency can be imparted to anything
that is strange or unusual.

The Four Winds is an immaterial God, whose substance is never visible.
He is *akan* and therefore no one of mankind can comprehend him. While
He is one God, He is four individuals:--

He may be addressed as the Four, or, the Four Quarters, or, as the Wind
of the Four Directions, or as the Sons. They are the sons of *Tate* and
their mother is *Anog Ite*. They were born at one birth, but *Yata* came
first. *Eya*, the second-born, displaced Yata and holds the birthright
of the firstborn. *Yanpa* was third born and *Okaga* the last-born son.
They have their tipis at the edge of the world, that of *Eya* on the
mountain beside the lodge of the Winged God; that of *Yata* under the
stars that never come down to the edge of the world; that of *Yanpa*
where the Sun begins His daily journey over the world; that of *Okaga*
is under where the Sun pauses at midday when His journey is half done.
They do not abide in these tipis, for they are continually traveling on
the trail that circles the edge of the world, and where they are, or
whence they may come, no man can tell. In ceremonies, they should be
addressed as the one God, the Four Winds, and have precedence over all
the Gods, except *Wohpe*, the Feminine. They are jealous of their
precedence and of that among themselves. In every ceremony of importance
they should be invoked after the Feminine, in the following manner:--

1\. *Eya*, the West Wind.  
2. *Yata*, the North Wind.  
3. *Yanpa*, the Wind.  
4. *Okaga*, the South Wind.

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

The lighted pipe should be elevated with its mouthpiece toward the tipi
of *Eya* and carried so that the mouthpiece, pointing toward the edge of
the world, circles until it points toward the tipi of *Yata*, where it
should be held for an instant, then carried in the same manner until it
points toward the tipi of *Yanpa*, and held there an instant; then it
should be carried in the same manner and held an instant toward the tipi
of *Okaga*; thence in the same manner until it returns toward the tipi
of *Yata*. Thus, the potency of the Feminine is tendered in the proper
order of precedence to each and all of the Four Winds. While the Four
travels continually on the trail around the edge of the world, when He
comes on the world, that individual of himself that prevails will give
the direction from which He comes. As the four sons of *Tate*, the Wind,
they established the four directions on the world and then, by the
decree of Their father, were to travel forever on the trail around at
the edge of the world. Each such completion from beginning to end is the
fourth time, or, a year. Therefore, a circle is an emblem of all four of
the units of time, each of which, day, night, moon, and year, goes in a
circle. While they are one as a God, as the sons of *Tate*, they are
four individuals. The personality of these individuals differs each from
the other. *Eya* is a burly, boisterous God. He is the associate of the
Winged God and accompanies Him when He flies through the domain of the
Sky and aids Him in cleansing the world. *Eya* is reckless and often
does His work harshly, when He prevails and sweeps the world. His
*akicita* is the hawk. *Yata* is a strong, cold, and surly God. He is
forever contesting with *Okaga*, because He desired to have *Wohpe*, the
Feminine, as His own, but *Okaga* won Her as His companion. Because of
His surly selfishness He was deposed from the birthright of the
first-born son and it was given to *Eya*. His *akicita* is the magpie.
*Yanpa* is an indolent God whose *akicita* is the crow. *Okaga* is a
pleasing God and when He prevails all things rejoice. The Feminine,
*Wohpe*, dwells in His tipi and is His companion, often traveling with
Him. The little son of *Tate*, the Whirlwind, also dwells in the tipi of
*Okaga*, and comes forth only when *Okaga* prevails, for He fears
*Yata*. The *akicita* of *Okaga* are all the waterfowls. The functions
of the God, the Four Winds, are to be the messengers of *Skan*, the
Great Spirit, and of *Tate*, their father, and to control the weather.

Yumni is a merry God. He is the little son of *Tate* and his mother is
*Anog Ite*, but because of a curse placed upon her, be was not born as
other children are, and for this reason He remains little, and is not
counted with the other sons of *Tate*, who are counted as His four sons
and *Yumni* as His little son. *Wohpe* taught *Yumni* all the sports and
games and gave him control over them, so that He is the patron of all
gambling, friendly contests, sports, games, and courtship. He has no
*akicita* and never appears

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

in a vision. His potency may be imparted to any implements for sport or
games and to philters by *wicasa hmunga*, or wizards.

The *Wakanlapi* are immaterial Gods that abide or have abided in
material things. While there are four kinds there are many of each kind.
But all of each kind should be considered as only one when considering
them as Gods.

Nagi, the Spirit, is an immaterial God whose substance may be visible at
its will and who can communicate with mankind, directly or through the
medium of a Shaman. *Skan* imparts a spirit to each of mankind at birth.
It abides with its recipient until death, controlling the disposition
and actions of the person. At death, it leaves the body, but lingers
near the haunts of the person, awaiting its endowment for the spirit
world. When it is thus endowed it appears before *Skan* for judgment,
and, if adjudged worthy, *Tate* admits it through the entrance to the
spirit trail, on which it travels to the spirit world. When it is there
it is allotted a place according to its endowment and then it becomes
the Spirit.

A spirit is endowed with the *nagila*, or spirit-like, of things in the
following manner:--One who wishes to contribute to the endowment
abandons the thing to be contributed, in the name of the deceased, when
the spirit-like of the thing becomes the possession of the spirit. The
material of the things thus abandoned is taboo to those who abandon them
and becomes the property of any others who may take them. Thus, the
family of a deceased man may abandon all their possessions, endowing his
spirit with them, for by so doing, the spirit-like of these things is
taken by his spirit to the spirit land, and if the spirits of those who
contribute arrive there, they will enjoy these things in the spirit
world. If the deceased has killed an enemy and taken his scalp, he has
thereby gained control of the spirit of the enemy whose spirit cannot
enter on the spirit trail until the one who controls it does so and even
then it must serve the controlling spirit to the end of the trail. If a
spirit is adjudged by *Skan* as unworthy to go on the spirit trail, it
thereby becomes a *sicun*, or wandering spirit, and must wander over the
world until *Tate* deems it fitted, when He may permit it to pass
through the entrance. Such wandering spirits can communicate with
mankind, but their communications are uncertain and not to be relied
upon. They often serve *Anog Ite*, whisper malicious things to tattling
women, or excite men to jealousy. They may become the familiars of the
very old and do their bidding.

The *Niya* is an immaterial god whose substance is visible when It so
wills. A *niya* is imparted by *Skan* to each of mankind at birth and
abides with the person like a shadow until death, when it lingers with
the spirit until the latter goes before *Skan* for judgment. Then it
appears to testify regarding

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

the conduct of the spirit and upon its testimony the spirit is adjudged.
When *Skan* has given judgment, the ghost returns whence it came and is
no more. Its functions during the life of the person are to cause
vitality, to forewarn of good and evil, and to give the power to
influence others. When it departs from the body, this is death, though
it may depart and return again if the spirit has not left the body.

The *Nagiya* is an immaterial God whose substance may at will be seen in
any form it chooses to appear. As separate individuals they are the
immaterial selves of material things other than mankind. A *nagiya* is
imparted by *Skan* to each thing at its beginning, remains with it until
it ceases to be, and then returns whence it came. It can be with the
thing and separate from it at the same time, as for instance, when it is
with the thing it may at the same time have been given in the endowment
of a spirit and taken to the spirit world. It may possess any other
thing; for instance, the *nagiya* of the wolf may possess a tree, when
the tree will have the nature of a wolf; or, it may possess one of
mankind, for example, the *nagiya* of a bear may possess a man when the
man will have the nature of a bear. By proper ceremony, its potency can
be imparted to inanimate things, as, the potency of the *nagiya* of a
poison herb may be imparted to powdered clay, or, the potency of a
medicinal thing may be imparted to one of mankind. A thing may be caused
by its *nagiya* to speak or act in a supernatural manner and to
communicate with mankind.

The *Sicun* is an immaterial God whose substance is never visible. It is
the potency of mankind and the emitted potency of the Gods. Considered
relative to mankind It is many, but apart from mankind It is one. *Skan*
imparts a *sicun* to each of mankind at birth. It remains with the
person until death, when it returns whence it came. Its functions are to
enable its possessor to do those things which the beasts cannot do and
to give courage and fortitude. It may be pleased or displeased with its
possessor and may be operative or inoperative according to its pleasure.
It may be invoked by ceremony or prayer, but it cannot be imparted to
any other person or thing. Most of the Gods can emit their potencies and
when so emitted their potencies become *sicunpi*. Such a *sicun* can be
imparted to material things by a proper ceremony correctly performed by
a Shaman.

A *sicun* so imparted must be clothed by proper wrappings about the
material It pervades. The wrappings may be in the form of a pouch, bag,
bundle, or any receptacle that will cover and hide the material. The
wrapping, the material, and the *sicun*, all together make a *wasicun*.
A *sicun* is operative only when It is a part of a *wasicun*. The Oglala
concept of a *wasicun* is most nearly expressed in English by the word
Fetish, and this word will be so used hereinafter. While a Fetish may be
operative

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

independent of the source of its potency It must be treated with the
veneration due to the God that emits its *Sicun*, for in all Its
properties It is as that God. Thus, while the *sicun* ranks lowest among
the Gods, a Fetish may have the potency of any God, except that of
*Skan*, the Great Spirit, and of the Sun, the Chief of the Gods. A
Fetish whose *sicun* is a *nagila*, or spirit-like, is potent only to
remedy wounds or diseases, or to impose disorders on mankind. Such a
Fetish is called *piyaha*, or a medicine bag. The contents of a medicine
bag may be either the material, the spirit-like of which is the potency,
or material to which potency has been imparted.

Any Oglala who is eligible for conducting a ceremony may choose and have
a Shaman prepare for him a Fetish whose potency is commensurable with
the ceremonies he may perform. As only Shamans should undertake to
conduct ceremonies that pertain to the Superior Gods, so should they
only choose Fetishes having the higher potencies. If the potency of any
God abides in anything that thing should be the material enclosed in the
wrapping of the Fetish pertaining to that God. As the potency of the Sun
abides in fire and cannot be imparted to any other thing and as fire
cannot be clothed with wrappings, a Fetish having the potency of the Sun
cannot be prepared. As the Great Spirit is the source of all power, a
Fetish having His potency is not permissible to mankind. The functions
of a Fetish are to serve Its possessor with Its supernatural powers
which are effective when properly invoked. When preparing a Fetish, the
Shaman devises a formula which must be repeated to invoke Its powers.

Other sicun are the dissociated spirits that wander over the world; but
they are classed with the Malevolent Gods. The Malevolent Gods are
dissociated, but rank as follows:--

Iya or *Ibom* is a material God whose substance is visible only at his
will. His form is that of an enormous giant man and his predominant
property is his appetite. He is the last born son of the Rock and his
mother is an *Unktehi* or monster. He has no abiding place and wanders
over the world seeking to devour all that he gets into his power, He can
swallow at one gulp a host of people or a herd of animals. His breath is
a miasma and the cause of many diseases. He is stupid and frequently the
butt of pranks by his older brother, *Iktomi*. As *Iya*, he is Lord over
other malevolent Gods and shares in the evils that they devise; as
*Ibom* he is a destructive cyclone. He abhors ceremony, fears fire, and
flies from an incense of sage or sweetgrass. The smoke of the pipe is
repugnant to him.

Gnaski, the Demon, is a material God, whose substance is visible at his
will. His form is that of the bull buffalo, like that of the Buffalo
God. The people call him the crazy buffalo. He is fierce and cruel, but
he may appear as if he were the Buffalo God and thus for the purpose of
inciting to

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

crime or cruelty. He may possess a person and if he controls the spirit,
the person is insane; or, if he controls the ghost, the person is
paralyzed. He may be exorcised by the incense of sage and sweetgrass and
can be controlled by the Fetish of a Shaman.

The *Unktehi* or Monsters, are material gods, whose substance is
visible, but they hide under the deep waters. Their forms are those of
huge reptiles with horns that can be projected to the Clouds and tails
that beat down forests. They tear the ground with their claws and make
deep ravines; they defile waters and make then unfit for use by mankind;
they lurk near shore to capture children, and in deep waters to take
adults. These they hold in bondage under the waters or transmogrify them
to water animals. The Winged God is forever at war with them and in
battle with them they gore the ground making the bad lands, where may be
seen the bones of *Unktehi* that were slain. A Shaman whose fetish is of
the highest potency can subdue the *Unktehi* and drive them away and can
undo their magic deeds.

The *Mini Watu* or Water Sprites are material beings whose substance is
visible, except when too small to be seen. Their form is that of maggots
and they cause things to rot. They ever seek entrance into the bodies of
mankind and lurk in the waters to do so. When in the body they pinch the
bowels, or pull the cords of the joints, or beat upon the brain, for
they delight in the suffering of mankind. They ever war against the
*niya*, or ghost, and if they prevail, the ghost leaves the body. But
they may be exorcised in a vitalizing lodge by a Shaman or a
medicineman.

The *Can Oti* or Forest Dwellers are elves who wander in lonely places
and bewilder mankind so that directions and locations are not
recognized. These elves can assume the forms of beasts or birds for the
purpose of enticing mankind into their power. The smoke of the pipe or
the potency of the Four Winds, can defeat their purposes.

The *Ungla* are goblins who haunt deserted places and lurk at night near
tipis where they may appear like gibbering ghosts. They frighten timid
people and children and cause distressing dreams. They fear the potency
of the Sun and fly from it as it is shown in the light from a fire.

The *Gica* are cunning and malicious manikins who are visible or
invisible at their will. They, cause accidents and mishaps and prowl at
night to do mysterious provoking things. The potency of the Buffalo, or
of the Bear, can ward off their activities.

The *nagilapi* of noxious things are classed with the Malevolent Gods.

The potency of a Malignant God can be imparted to a material by a
*wicasa hmunga*, or wizard. The material thing is thereby made potent to
do that which the God can do and is subservient to its possessor. A
Shaman

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

can invoke the potency of either, or of all the Malevolent Gods, and
make it operative or impotent. The being other than the Gods, with whom
a Shaman may have to deal and whose activities the powers of a Fetish
can control are as follows:--

Iktomi, the first-born son of the Rock was a God until the Great Spirit
dissociated him from the Gods and condemned him to wander forever over
the world without friend or associate. He is a material being whose
substance is visible or invisible at his will. Because his other parent
is the shapeless Winged God, his normal shape is queer, but he may
appear as a handsome young man. He has the potencies of a God, but is a
misanthropic being, and delights in making others the butts of ridicule.
He is crafty and cruel, but is often the victim of his own schemes. He
invented languages and gave common names to all things. He can converse
with mankind and with the *nagilapi*, but he talks more often with other
things. He is often with *Iya*, his younger brother, and then he
exercises his birthright of the first-born son, demands obedience of
*Iya* and causes him to do ridiculous things. If *Iktomi* is present
during a ceremony, he will scheme to make it ridiculous and an offense
to the Gods, for he is an imp of mischief. In whatsoever form he may
appear, a Shaman can detect him and by the aid of the Fetish restore him
to his normal shape and drive him away.

Waziya is the Old Man, the Wizard, who received from *Iktomi* the
potencies of a God; because of this the Great Spirit decreed that his
ghost should remain with him forever and that he should dwell alone on
the world. He is the husband of *Kanka* and the father of *Anog Ite*,
and thus the grandfather of the Four Winds. His tipi is the same as that
of *Yata*, the North Wind, but *Yata* does not abide in it. He is always
seen coming from the direction of his tipi and can enter a tipi or lodge
only when the door opens toward the north. In summer and winter he is
heavily clothed with furs, for he is cold and his presence causes
chilliness. His presence at a ceremony will chill the rites and make the
Gods indifferent to them. He is an irascible being and quick to vent his
anger, but he may be kind and helpful to one who pleases him. The
wandering spirits are his familiars and they do his bidding. He is the
adversary of the Shamans and interferes with their works. Sage is
repugnant to him and he will not come near it and will leave whenever
incense is made of it.

Wakanka is the Old Woman, the Witch, the wife of *Wazi*, and the mother
of *Anog Ite*, and so, the grandmother of the Four Winds. She is a seer
and because of this she induced her husband to purloin the potency of a
God and incited her daughter to profane the disposition of the Sun. She
schemed with *Iktomi* to accomplish these things. Because of this the
Great Spirit doomed her forever to dwell alone in the world. Her tipi is
old, smoky,

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

and ragged, and is where she places it. She appears to young men and
young women as a decrepit woman in want of something, and begs of them
for what she wants. According to the disposition that they manifest in
their treatment of her, she foretells their good or evil fortune, and
may give that which will make her prediction true. If her purposes be
evil, a Shaman by the aid of his fetish can thwart her.

Anog Ite is the daughter of *Wazi* and *Kanka*. She was the wife of
*Tate* and gave Him four sons at one birth. She was the most beautiful
of womankind, but was vain. When she was again with child she was
incited by the scheming of her mother and *Iktomi*, to attempt an
intrigue with the Sun; and thus desecrated the seat of the Moon and
brought shame upon *Tate*. Because of this the Great Spirit doomed her
to abide on the world forever and to have two faces, one enticingly
beautiful, the other so horrible that one seeing it would either flee
from her or go mad; to give forth heir child without birth, so that it
would always be little; and that her children should know her no more as
a mother. Having sat in the seat of a God she thereby gained occult
powers and so abides on the world. She became ruthless and vindictive
and vents her spite on mankind. With her beautiful face she lures men to
embrace her and then shows them her horrid features and drives them to
distraction. She foments scandal and jealousies and torments pregnant
women; she plagues babes with pains and fears; she promotes illicit love
affairs and adultery; she is afraid of old men and old women and abhors
the bark and twigs of the cottonwood, for they will fend against her
scheming. The Shamans should oppose her, for with the aid of their
Fetishes they can overcome her and her works.

The Stars are a supernatural people, the people of the Sky. They are
indifferent to the affairs of mankind, but they may come down to the
world and mingle with the people, and some of them have married among
the Lakota. They are beyond the province of a Shaman, for they are the
people of the Great Spirit, who controls them.

The Buffalo People are those who dwell in the regions under the world,
and are the people of the Sun. *Waziya* was their chief, but when he was
deposed they chose the Buffalo God to be their chief and He is so. They
have the power to transmogrify and may appear on the world as animals or
as of mankind, and may mingle with the Lakota and become their spouses.
They can transmogrify their spouses and take them to the regions under
the world.

The offspring of a buffalo person and a Lakota has the powers of its
buffalo parent and controls Its other parent. A Lakota espoused to a
buffalo person, or having buffalo children, can be freed from their
control only by a Shaman whose fetish has the potency of the Buffalo
God.

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

A very old man, or a very old woman, because of age and experience may
have supernatural powers which they can use for good or evil, and only a
Shaman can defeat their harmful purposes.

A woman, during her menstrual flow, is susceptible to control by
*Gnaski* and *Anog Ite* and is an easy dupe of *Iktomi*. During this
time she should live alone and a Shaman should not permit her presence
during a Ceremony.

To have game animals submit to their fate and become food for mankind, a
Shaman should explain to a captured one that this is its destiny, then
decorate it as a mark of friendship, and, freeing it, bid it tell its
kind what he said and did to it. A man may so offend game animals that
they will escape from hunters, and if so a Shaman should penalize the
offending one by making taboo to him some portion of the offended
animals.

A Shaman should receive an honorarium for whatsoever he says or does for
the benefit of others. The practices of a Shaman must be learned by
association with other Shamans.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Regalia of the Candidate](sdo09.md)
