[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sdo09)  [Next](sdo11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE CEREMONY.

When these provisions are made, the Mentor should instruct the Candidate
relative to his conduct while in the Sacred Lodge, as follows:--

Before entering the Sacred Lodge a Candidate should strip and wear

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

only a breechclout and moccasins. While in the Lodge he must wear no
other clothing, though his attendant may provide him with a robe to wrap
about himself to lie upon. After entering the Lodge, he should not leave
it until he goes on the trail of the Sun. His attendant should provide
the food and drink that he will be permitted to take and should care for
his other necessities. While in the lodge he should converse with no one
other than the occupants of the lodge; the Mentors, and attendants. He
should meditate continually on his undertaking and talk little of other
things. He may smoke the pipe and make incense with sage or sweetgrass
as often as he pleases. While he is in the Sacred Lodge is a fit time
for him to compose a song that will be known as his song. Then, if he
becomes a person of distinction the women will sing his song to honor
him. He must fast and take no drink from the beginning of the last day
lie occupies the Sacred Lodge until he has danced the Sun Dance. Only a
Shaman can release him from any of the requirements for his conduct
while in the Sacred Lodge.

The Mentor, having instructed the Candidate relative to his correct
behavior in the Sacred Lodge, should then inform him of the tortures
inflicted as part of the rites of the Sun Dance. Such torture should
cause the blood to flow, for when the blood flows as a token, it is the
surest guarantee of sincerity, and without such a guarantee the people
or the Sun may doubt the professed purposes of the dancer. They should
cause pain, for to endure pain willingly for the accomplishment of a
purpose proves fortitude, the greatest virtue that he must manifest when
in the presence of the people he appears before the face of the Sun. The
first great virtue, bravery, is made most manifest by enduring the
greatest flow of blood and the most suffering that the rites of the Sun
Dance demand.

A dancer should endure the torture of gazing at the Sun while dancing,
so that no one can say that he did not dare to look into the face of the
Sun when making a request of Him. One who endures the tortures to the
uttermost of the demand of the rites of the ceremony performs his part
in a manner acceptable to the Gods and can expect a communication from
them. He is thereby fitted for the accomplishment of the purposes of his
dance. These instructions should be continued until the Candidate
becomes a dancer in the Dance Lodge, when his formal relation with his
Mentor ceases.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Duties of the People](sdo11)
