[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sdo13)  [Next](sdo15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE SECOND DAY.

Early on the second day the council of the Bear God should assemble at
the council lodge. This council is composed of the Superior, the
Mentors, the Candidates, and such Shamans, chiefs, and councilors as may
wish to take part in their deliberations. The Superior should fill and
light a pipe, offer it to the Four Winds and ask a blue day of Him, and
then to the Bear God and pray Him for wisdom to control the
deliberations of the council. Then he should again fill and light the
pipe and pass it so that all may smoke in communion. While they are
smoking he should incense with sweetgrass. When all are thus harmonized
and the potency of the Mediator made

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

effective, the mothers who wish to have their babes' ears pierced should
announce the fact and the names of those they have chosen to fulfil this
rite. Next, the parents who wish to place their children in the
procession to the Sacred Tree should announce their names. Then the
maidens who wish to be appointed as female attendants for the dancers
should announce their desires. Then the women who wish to chop the
Sacred Tree should announce the reasons for their eligibility. Then
anyone may propose another for appointment to any of these offices. When
these matters have been placed before the council it should deliberate
upon them. Then the council should partake of the Feast of the Bear God
which should be provided by the women who appeared before the council.
The principal food of this feast should be the flesh of the dog. This
feast completes the formalities of the second day of the preliminary
camp. The red-striped marshals should urge that every article of the
equipment for the performance of the ceremony be provided before the
establishment of the ceremonial camp.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Third Day](sdo15.md)
