[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sdo17)  [Next](sdo19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

### SACRED LODGE ERECTED.

When this location is established the Sacred Lodge should be erected in
the following manner. It should be the new tipi and poles provided with
the equipment. The women who are to chop the Sacred Tree should erect
these poles and then the Superior should paint a dab of red on the inner
side of each pole and paint red on the ears and door flap of the
covering. When this is done the women should place and pin the covering.

When this lodge is thus erected the mentors should prepare it for
occupation by the Candidates by each making a bed of sage in it for his
Candidate and the Superior should prepare in it an altar between the
fireplace and the place of honor. Then he should place beside the altar
the ornamented buffalo head, so that it will face toward the place of
honor.

When the Sacred Lodge is thus prepared the Candidates should enter it.
They should be conducted through the door and to their beds by their
Mentors. The first to enter the lodge should be the one who first
announced his candidacy, but if he has declined this honor the
Candidates should choose another to take it. The first who enters should
be conducted to the place of honor and seated there. He is thereby made
the leader of the Sun Dance. When all the Candidates have entered the
Sacred Lodge, the Superior should fill and light a pipe, and pass it so
that all in the lodge may smoke in communion. When all have been thus
harmonized, the Mentors should give such instructions as they deem
necessary, and then depart. After this, the attendants may come and go
into the Sacred Lodge as the wants of the Candidates may demand; but
only the Mentors and the attendants should come near the Sacred Lodge or
attempt to talk with its occupants. Soon after the Candidates occupy the
lodge the attendants should bring them the robes that have been
provided.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Scouting For The Tree](sdo19)
