[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sdo26)  [Next](sdo28.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PREPARATION OF THE CANDIDATES.

When they arrive at the Sacred Lodge they should go around it four
times, enter, and array the Candidates for the dance. Each Mentor should
paint his candidate's feet and hands red: Then he should place the
symbolic color of the Sky on him so as to indicate the form of the dance
lie is to do. If lie is to dance the second form, a stripe of blue
should be painted across his shoulders; if the third form, across his
shoulders and chest; if the fourth form, across his chest and forehead.
Then he should paint on the person of the Candidate the design he
devised to be the Candidate's totem. Then he should fasten about the
Candidate's waist the red skirt, place around his shoulders the
otterskin cape, oil his arms the buffalo hair armlets, around his ankles
the rabbitskin anklets, and then place such insignia as the Candidate is
entitled to wear. He should then place on the Candidate's head, a
wreathe of sage and in his, right hand a wisp of sage.

When all the Candidates are arrayed, the leader should lift the
ornamented buffalo head and carry it as if it were looking in the
direction he moves. Then the Candidates and Mentors should come out of
the Sacred Lodge, the leader first. They should form for a procession,
the Superior in front, next after him the leader, and then the other
Candidates and Mentors, side by side. When they come out of the Sacred
Lodge, the attendants should immediately take it down, and carrying the
robes of the Candidates, follow ill the procession. The procession
should move on the trail of the Sun, on the south side of the stakes. As
they approach a stake anyone wishing to make an offering to the Sun may
place it on the stake and anyone who wishes to do so may take the
offering, when it becomes the property of the one who takes it. When the
arrives at a stake he should pause a moment and after the Candidates
pass a stake the attendants

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

should immediately pull it from the ground. Thus, the Sacred Lodge and
the Sun trail are demolished as soon as the Candidates have used them,
so that no one can profane them. While marching on the Sun Trail the
Candidates should wail as if mourning, and the Mentors should intone
prayers to their Fetishes.

When the procession arrives at the Dance Lodge it should pause at the
entrance and the Candidates should face the Sun and wail. Then the
procession should pass four times around the Dance Lodge, pausing each
time it comes to the entrance, and each time the Candidates should wail
as before. Then the procession should enter the Dance Lodge and go on
the left side to the place of honor. The leader should make three feints
at placing the ornamented buffalo head on the altar, and at the fourth,
should place it there so that it will face the Sacred Pole. The
attendants should place the robes of the Candidates, that of the leader
beside the place of honor, and the others toward the entrance on the
left covered space.

Then the Candidates with the Mentor beside each, should recline on his
robe and the Superior should seat himself at the place of honor. When
the Mentors and Candidates are placed, the others who are entitled to
occupy the Dance Lodge should enter and take their places; the musicians
grouped about the drum; the female attendants near them; the women who
chopped the Sacred Tree between them and the entrance; the mothers whose
babes' ears are to be pierced beside the sage beds they have prepared.

Then such people as wish to occupy the Dance Lodge may enter and take
places in the right covered space; these usually are those who have
previously danced the Sun Dance; those who are to dance the first form;
and men prominent in the various bands. A woman seldom occupies a place
on the right covered space. If a stranger, or a very old person is seen
in the Dance Lodge at any time, the red marshals should investigate him,
and if he cannot satisfactorily explain his presence they should expel
him from the lodge, for *Waziya*, the wizard, may thus attempt to be
present. A strange young man should be treated in like manner, so that
*Iktomi* may not play his tricks during the ceremony.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Installation of the Dancers](sdo28.md)
