[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sdo36)  [Next](sdo38.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE CEREMONY.

At dawn of the next day the people were astir, preparing the morning
meal, and for the ceremony of the day. As the sun appeared over the
horizon, the Conductor faced it and chanted an invocation to *Wi*,
invoking that God to speak for the people to *Taku Wakan*, the Gods of
the weather. While he was doing so the people remained in a reverential
attitude. Immediately after his invocation, women erected a large tipi
to be used as the ceremonial lodge with its door toward the entrance of
the camp circle, that is, toward the east. Near the south side of the
area, with its door toward the south, they erected a smaller tipi to be
used as the preparation tipi. On the previous day, the Conductor had
appointed an akicita, or marshal, of the camp, and he now appeared, with
three black stripes painted perpendicularly on his right cheek as the
insignum of his office.

Soon after the Conductor returned to his tipi he began chanting and
drumming in a low tone and continued so for some time. Then the people
began to appear in gala attire, painted and decorated according to their
fancies, and wearing such insignia as they were entitled to have: the
*Hunkayapi*, with the red stripes on their foreheads; the buffalo women
with their hair partings marked in red. When the Conductor came from his
tipi his hands and body were painted red and his face was striped in
red; red zigzag lines decorated his arms. These decorations were all
symbolical, as explained in the section on the Sun dance ([p.
82](sdo08.htm#page_82).md). His regalia as the Conductor consisted of a
headdress or cap made of tanned skin, to which a small buffalo horn was
attached at each side so as to stand out from the head as the horns do
on a buffalo. The cap was further adorned with hawk quills and strips of
white weaselskin. In his right hand he held the ceremonial pipe and in
his left a hawkskin. The latter was his *wasicun*, or

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

ceremonial pouch. As he came forth, he chanted a song, the substance of
which was that he was wise and powerful and could communicate with the
Gods. He ordered the Assistant and the Recorder to prepare the
ceremonial lodge. This they did by smoothing and levelling the *catku*
and preparing an altar between it and the fireplace. They placed a stone
beside the altar and a buffalo skull on it. Then they erected the
scaffold at the south side of the altar. The father of the younger man
brought meat, both fat and lean, and hung it on the scaffold. A drum was
placed inside at the left by the door of the lodge.

When this was done the Conductor inspected the lodge and then brought
from his tipi the wands, rattles, and counting rod, and gave them to
those chosen to take charge of them, the Assistant having the fire
carrier and the Recorder the counting rod. The Conductor then began
chanting and marching around the area inside the camp circle, a
procession forming and following him in this order: first, those who
were to participate in the ceremony, then the *Hunkayapi*, and finally,
the people. The procession marched four times around, some of the people
soberly, and others jovially talking and laughing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Symbolic Capture](sdo38.md)
