[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sdo32)  [Next](sdo34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### COMPLETION OF THE CEREMONY.

The Sun-Gazing dance should continue until all the captives have
escaped, or until the next day has dawned, when, if they have not
escaped, they should be freed from their bonds and the sticks removed
from their wounds, and it will be considered that they have been
rescued, which is as meritorious as an escape. When all have escaped or
been rescued from captivity, the leader should stand at the entrance of
the Dance Lodge and announce that the Sun Dance is finished. The red
herald should proclaim this announcement throughout the camp and
immediately all should come out of the Dance Lodge and the organization
of the ceremonial camp is terminated and the ordinary, organization of
the camps revived.

The marshals of the camps should require that the tipis and lodges,
except the Dance Lodge, be quickly taken down and moved from the
ceremonial camp circle. They may permit the people to take such parts of
the Dance Lodge as they wish, but they should not permit any one to
disturb the Sacred Pole. It should be left to stand with the Fetish and
banner of the Shamans at its top until the Four Winds or the Winged God
cast it down. When the tipis are moved from the ceremonial camp circle,
each band should go its way and resume its ordinary vocations, but the
individuals who have danced the Sun Dance may expect a vision in which
there will be a communication from the Sun. This may be granted at any
place or time before the dispersion of the next winter camp. One who
danced the Sun Dance for the purpose of becoming a Shaman should choose
a Shaman for his tutor and should be that Shaman's pupil until he
pronounces

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

him to be fit to have the Fetish and exercise the functions of a Shaman.
Those who have danced the Sun Dance for other purposes should fit
themselves for such purposes

A Shaman may alter or forbid any rite or custom pertaining to the Sun
Dance, to effect either or all of the constituents. In fact, the form of
the ceremony rests with the Shamans, they being the sole authority.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Hunka Ceremony](sdo34)
