[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sdo31)  [Next](sdo33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE SCALP-STAFF DANCE.

During any period anyone who has danced the Sun Dance to its completion
may cause blood to flow from a wound on his person, lay a suitable
offering to the Sun on the altar and join the dancers, dancing the first
form for as many periods as he wishes. Anyone may join the singing of
the songs by the musicians. During the intermission the Superior may
permit haranguing, or the performance of anything not inconsistent with
the Sun Dance. During the fourth intermission the Scalp-Staff dance
should be given in the following manner:--Only tried warriors should
dance this dance and it should be conducted by one who carries a
scalp-staff. The dancers should form side by side in line from near the
entrance of the Dance Lodge, across the left side of the uncovered space
toward the place of honor, with the conductor nearest the entrance. The
musicians should sing a scalp song, sounding the drum and rattles in
time to it, and the warriors should dance without moving from the place
where they stand, except that the conductor should dance from his
position and along in front of the line, waving the scalp on his staff
down and up in front of each warrior and then

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

dance behind the line back to his position, waving the scalp up and down
behind each warrior. Then each warrior who carries a scalp-staff should
dance along the line in a like manner. While dancing, the warriors may
utter the cry of "U-hu-hu-hu," as it is uttered to express intense
satisfaction. They may utter it repeatedly. When all who carry
scalp-staffs have danced along the line this dance is completed.

During an intermission the woman's dance ought to be danced in the
following manner:--The women who wish to dance should form side by side
in a line or lines where the warriors formed and the musicians should
sing a woman's dance song, sounding the drum and rattles in unison with
it. The women should dance the woman's step without moving from the
place where they stand. While dancing they may sing, or utter the cry of
"U-wu-wu-wu," as it is uttered by women to express pleasure. When the
song is sung four times this dance is finished.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Completion of the Ceremony](sdo33)
