[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sdo39)  [Next](sdo41.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE MEAT OFFERING.

While the Conductor was smoking, the Assistant arranged the meat on the
scaffold, the lean meat at one end, the fat at the other. Then the
Conductor addressed the skull and said, "*Hunka* of *Tatanka*, this meat
was yours, but you gave it to me. If there is any part of it that you
wish, tell us and we will give it to you." In this address it is assumed
that the meat is the flesh and fat of a buffalo. The spirit in the skull
is addressed as *Hunka* of *Tatanka*, the Buffalo God. The allusion is
to the doctrine that the Buffalo God caused the spirits of the buffalo
to give their meat to the Lakota; and that when a buffalo was killed for
its meat, a portion should be left as an offering to propitiate the
spirit.

The Conductor then sprinkled a powder on the meat and said, "My medicine
is good. It will make this meat sacred." He then gave the

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Assistant sweetgrass and he made incense by
sprinkling it on the fire. Over this incense the Conductor prayed as
follows:--"Great Spirit be with us this day; West Wind, keep the Winged
God in your tipi this day; Sun, we ask that You keep *Iktomi* and *Anog
Ite* from this camp this day." The doctrine is that the God, the West
Wind, is the comrade of and has controlling influence over the Winged
God, whose voice is thunder, and the glance of whose eye is lightning;
that *Iktomi* is an imp of mischief who delights in making ceremonies of
no effect and *Anog Ite* is a double, or two-faced woman who foments
discord and licentiousness.

Then the Conductor addressed the people and said, "I am a Shaman. I know
how to wave the horse-tails as did our grandfathers. I will do it that
way now. The young people forget how to do this. Shamans will soon be
cold and hungry. This young man wishes to be *Hunka*. I will make him
*Hunka* as our grandfathers were made *Hunkayapi*. The Sun looks on us
and the Wind is pleased. The Wolf has gone to the hills. The Earth and
the Rock and the Buffalo are in this lodge. These Gods will help me make
this young man *Hunka*."

It was taught that the wolf and coyote were the accomplices of *Iktomi*
and *Wazi*, the wizard, and did their bidding. The allusive meaning of
the latter part of the address is that the Chief of the Gods, the Sun is
favorable; the principal God controlling the weather, the Wind; was
propitiated; that the accomplices of the mischievous beings had fled
from the camp; that the potencies of the Great God, the Earth, were in
the altar, and that of the great God, the Rock in the stone on the
altar, and that of the *Taku Wakan*, or Relative God, the Buffalo in the
buffalo skull, were present in the lodge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pronouncing Them Hunka](sdo41.md)
