[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sdo40)  [Next](sdo42.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PRONOUNCING THEM HUNKA.

The Conductor then carefully emptied the ceremonial pipe on the chopping
board which accompanies the ceremonial pipe and gave it to the
Assistant, who put the residuum on the fire. This must be done in a
formal manner whenever a ceremonial pipe is smoked, for it was
considered a sacrilege to dispose of the residuum in a ceremonial pipe
in such a manner that it might be trodden under foot. The Conductor then
formally filled the pipe with *cansasa*, and lighted it as before, and
standing in the door of the lodge, pointed the mouthpiece toward the
sun, and said, "Grandfather , we will bring you a grandson this day."
This alludes to the custom of the *Hunkayapi*, who often addressed the
Great God, the Sun, as Grandfather, thus indicating that He is the
patron God of the *Hunkaya* relationship; and the address meant that
another *Hunka* would be made

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

that day. The Conductor then sat at the *catku* and gave sweetgrass to
the Assistant who made incense with it. The Conductor then addressed the
younger man, saying, "I will now make you a *Hunka*. I will teach you
how to live as a *Hunka*. These men before you whose bodies are painted
red are *Mihunkayapi*. They will be *Hunkayapi* to you. When they speak
your ears should be open."

Then each of the seven *Mihunka* present made a speech, the substance of
each speech being commendation of *Hunkaya*, or a statement of the
obligation of a *Hunka* to his *Hunka* and to the *Hunkayapi*, the
substance of the latter being that a *Hunka* should give preference to
his *Hunka* above all others of mankind, and that they should be willing
to give anything to, or do anything for, each other; that they should
listen to the Shamans so that they may please all the Gods; that if the
*Hunkayapi* do this it will please the Gods, and They will give success
in forays against the enemy to get women or horses; that when they seek
the enemy the women will sing their songs in their praise; that their
offerings to the Rock will please the Earth and the Buffalo, and They
will give industrious women who will bear many children; that the Great
Spirit will direct their arrows, and harden their shields, and put
breath in their horses when they are old; that the Buffalo will provide
them with robes and moccasins, and a place of honor in their tipis and
that their spirits shall not wander over the world.

An explanation of the allusive portions of these addresses is that
before going on a foray each Lakota should compose a song which will be
known as his song. If he does a notable thing, then the women will sing
his song as a meed of praise for him; that before going on such a foray
each one should make an offering to the Rock, the patron God of success
in war, and this will propitiate the Earth, the patron God of fertility,
and the Buffalo, the patron God of nuptials and fecundity; that the
Great Spirit is the God that gives movement to anything that moves, and
controls the direction of a movement, and He also gives vitality to
everything that breathes. The Buffalo is also the patron God of the
chase and of providing. The doctrine is, that the spirit of a man that
is adjudged unworthy to go to the spirit world, is condemned to wander
forever over the world.

During all these rites the people were quiet and attentive. When the
*Mihunkayapi* ceased speaking there was an intermission of about half an
hour, during which some of the women began preparation for the feast.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Waving the Wands](sdo42.md)
