[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sdo45)  [Next](sdo47.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE SECRET CEREMONY.

He then directed that the older man who was to be the *Hunka* of the
younger sit beside the younger. He did so and the Assistant and Recorder
held a robe so that it hid the older and younger man from view. The
Conductor took two small globular packages wrapped in deerskin, colored
red, and with them in hand went under the cover. While there, he
murmured something. The interpreter said that the packages were
talismans and that the Conductor was giving one to each of the *Hunka*
and telling the secrets of their potency.

When the Conductor went under the cover the drummer sounded the

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

drum and began singing in which the people joined. When this song was
sung they sang another. When they ceased singing, the Assistant and
Recorder removed the covering and the Conductor went and sat at the
*catku*. When the two *Hunka* were exposed they were bound together with
thongs, arm to arm, side to side, and leg to leg, and each had a stripe
of red paint across his right cheek from forehead to chin, the older man
having an additional red stripe parallel to the other, to indicate that
the *Hunka* ceremony had been performed for him on a previous occasion.

The Conductor then said to the younger man, "You are bound to your
*Hunka*, and he is as yourself. When you put the red stripe on your face
remember this. What you have is his. What he has he will give you if you
wish it. You must help him in time of need. If one harms him You should
take revenge, for it is as if you had been harmed. If you have horses,
or captive women, or robes, or meat, they are his as they are yours. His
children will be as your children and your children will be as his. If
he is killed in war you should not be satisfied until you have provided
a companion for his spirit. If he takes the sweatbath or seeks a vision,
you should aid him and help to pay the Shaman. If he is sick, you should
make presents to the Shamans and to the medicinemen. The *Hunkayapi* are
your people. If you are a true *Hunka*, they will not let you be in
want. You should heed the words of your *Hunka* Ate. You should be as
his son."

The Conductor arose and standing, said, "My friends, this young man is
now *Hunka*."

This concluded the ceremony. The people first went from the lodge, then
the two newly-made *Hunka*, bound together as they were, went to the
preparation tipi and there clothed themselves in the ordinary manner.
The Conductor remained alone in the lodge and through the door he was
observed to wrap the implements used during the ceremony into a bundle;
then he turned the buffalo skull with the horns down and pressed them
into the ground; then carefully set the stone into the ground so that
the painted portion was uppermost; then he destroyed the altar,
extinguished the fire, and came from the lodge.

Soon the women took down the lodge, but left the skull and stone as the
Conductor had placed them. These things were done because the people
believed that when a tipi had been used as a ceremonial lodge, it should
be used for no other purpose until after it has been taken down and set
up again.

After the ceremony, there was a "give-away" of presents, with much
enthusiasm, so that probably the new *Hunka* and his friends were
recompensed for all they had given in preparation for the occasion. This
was followed by a feast that continued far into the night.

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

The author was present at another performance of the ceremony when a man
adopted a boy about twelve years of age. At this time no one other than
the man and the boy took part in the ceremony. It was performed in a
tipi erected for that purpose, in which were the altar, the buffalo
skull, and the implements for the ceremony, but no stone. All told,
there were eleven persons present. The man's hands were painted red and
he performed the ceremony in a much abridged manner, himself doing all
the rites, except that he did not hide the boy under cover, nor give him
a talisman, nor bind him with thongs. The presents given were few, and
the feast, small. In this case the man became *Hunka Ate* and the boy
*Hunka*.

Short-bull, a Brulé chief of prominence among the Oglala, at one time
waved a horse-tail over the author and placed a stripe of red paint on
the author's forehead, and, with no further ceremony, declared the
author his *Hunka*, and ever afterwards addressed him as such.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Buffalo Ceremony](sdo47.md)
