[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sdo54)  [Next](sdo56.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SICUN.

(As explained by One-star, July 8th, 1897 and interpreted by Elmer
Red-eyes.)

A *Sicun* is like a spirit. It is the *ton-ton sni*, that is, it is
immortal and cannot die. A Lakota may have many *Sicunpi*, but he always
has one. It is *Wakan*, that is, it is like *Wakan Tanka*. It may be the
spirit of anything. A Shaman puts the spirit in a *Sicun*. The Bear
taught the shamans how to do this. A Lakota should know the songs and if
he sings them his sicun will do as he wishes. One *Sicun* may be more
powerful than another. The *Sicun* may be of the Great Spirit. If it is
opposed by

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

the *Sicun* of herbs it is the most powerful. The *Sicun* of a good
spirit is more powerful than the *Sicun* of a bad spirit. The power of
sweetgrass is always the spirit of the spirit that is with the south
wind. This is always pleasing to the good spirits. The bad spirits do
not like the smoke of the sweetgrass. The smoke of sage will drive bad
spirits away. A medicineman knows the songs of his medicines and they
are his *Sicun*. The *Sicun* that has the power of the spirit should be
colored. Red is the color of the sun; blue, the color of the moving
spirit; green the color of the spirit of the earth; and yellow is the
color of the spirit of the rock. These colors are also for other
spirits. Blue is the color of the wind; red is the color of all spirits.
The colors are the same for the friends of the Great Spirits. Black is
the color of the bad spirits. A man who paints red is pleasing to the
spirits. A *Sicun* is a man's spirit. A man's real spirit is different
from his *Sicun* spirit. *Ni* is also like a spirit. It is a man's
breath. It is the spirit of smoke. It is the spirit of steam. It is the
spirit of the sweatlodge. It purifies the body. The bear taught these
things to the shamans.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Autobiographical Note by Sword](sdo56.md)
