[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sdo57)  [Next](sdo59) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE CIRCLE.

(By Tyon.)

The Oglala believe the circle to be sacred because the Great Spirit
caused everything in nature to be round except stone. Stone is the
implement of destruction. The sun and the sky, the earth and the moon
are round like a shield, though the sky is deep like a bowl. Everything
that breathes is round like the body of a man. Everything that grows
from the ground is round like the stem d a tree. Since the Great Spirit
has caused everything to be round mankind should look upon the circle as
sacred for it is the symbol of all things in nature except stone. It is
also the symbol of the circle that marks the edge of the world and
therefore of the four winds that travel there. Consequently, it is also
the symbol of a year. The day, the night, and the moon go in a circle
above the sky. Therefore the circle is a symbol of these divisions of
time and hence the symbol of all time.

For these reasons the Oglala make their tipis circular, their camp
circle circular, and sit in a circle in all ceremonies. The circle is
also the symbol of the tipi and of shelter. If one makes a circle for an
ornament and it is not divided in any way, it should be understood as
the symbol of the world and of time. If, however, the circle be filled
with red, it is the symbol of the sun; if filled with blue, it is the
symbol of the sky. If the circle is divided into four parts, it is the
symbol of the four winds; if it is divided into more than four parts, it
is the symbol of a vision of some kind. If a half circle is filled with
red it represents a day; filled with black, the night; filled with
yellow, a moon or month. On the other hand, if a half circle is filled
with many colors, it symbolizes a rainbow.

One may paint or otherwise represent a circle on his tipi or his shield
or his robe The mouth of a pipe should always be moved about in a circle
before the pipe is formally smoked.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Four Great Virtues](sdo59)
