[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sdo50)  [Next](sdo52.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

### CONCEPTION OF ENERGY.

(The following is a literal transcript of a conversation with Finger, a
distinguished shaman, March 25, 1914.)

I heard you exclaim when a meteorite fell and heard you address the
people immediately afterwards. Then I saw you burning sweetgrass. Will
you tell me why you did this? You are a white man's medicineman and you
want to know the mysteries of the Lakota. Why do you want to know these
things?

The old Indians who know these things will soon be dead and gone and as
the younger Indians do now know them they will be lost. I wish to write
them so they will be preserved and your people can read them in years to
come. Will you tell them to me? My father was a shaman and he taught me
the mysteries of the shamans and I will tell them to you. What is it you
want to know?

When the meteor fell you cried in a loud voice, "*Wohpa. Wohpe-e-e-e*."
Why did you do this? Because that is *wakan*.

What is *wohpa*? It is what you saw. It is one of the stars falling.

What causes the stars to fall? *Taku Skanskan*.

Why does *Taku Skanskan* cause the stars to fall? Because He causes
everything that falls to fall and he causes everything to move that
moves.

When you move what is it that causes you to move? *Skan*.

If an arrow is shot from a bow what causes it to move through the air.
*Skan*.

What causes a stone to fall to the ground when I drop it? *Skan*.

If I lift a stone from the ground what causes the movement? *Skan*. He
gives you power to lift the stone and it is He that causes all movement
of any kind.

Has the bow anything to do with the movement of an arrow shot from it?
*Taku Skanskan* gives the spirit to the bow and he causes it to send the
arrow from it.

What causes smoke to go upward? *Taku Skanskan*.

What causes water to flow in a river? *Skan*.

What causes the clouds to move over the world? *Skan*.

Are *Taku Skan* and *Skan* one and the same? Yes. When the people speak
to Him, they say *Taku Skanskan*. When a shaman speaks of Him, he says
*Skan*. *Skan* belongs to the *wakan* speech used by the shamans.

Is *Skan*, *Wakan Tanka*? Yes.

Is he *Wakan Tanka Kin*? No. That is *Wi*, the Sun.

Are *Wi* and *Skan* one and the same? No. *Wi* is *Wakan Tanka Kin* and
*Skan* is *Nagi Tanka*, the Great Spirit.

Are they both *Wakan Tanka*? Yes.

Are there any other *wakan* that are *Wakan Tanka*? Yes. *Inyan*, the
Rock and *Maka*, the Earth.

Are there any others? Yes. *Wi Han*, the Moon; *Tate*, the wind;
*Wakinyan*, the Winged; and *Wohpe*, the Beautiful Woman.

Are there any others that are *Wakan Tanka*? No.

Then there are eight *Wakan Tanka*, are there? No, there is but one.

You have named eight and say there is but one. How can this be? That is
right. I have named eight. There are four, *Wi*, *Skan*, *Inyan*, and
*Maka*. These are the *Wakan Tanka*.

You named four others, the Moon, the Wind, the Winged, and the Beautiful
Woman and said they were *Wakan Tanka*, did you not? Yes. But these four
are the same as the *Wakan Tanka*. The Sun and the Moon are the same,
the *Skan* and the Wind are the same, the Rock and the Winged are the
same, and the Earth and

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

the Beautiful Woman are the same. These eight are only one. The shamans
know how this is, but the people do not know. It is *wakan* (a mystery).

Did the *Wakan Tanka* always exist? Yes, the Rock is the oldest. He is
grandfather of all things.

Which is the next oldest? The earth. She is grandmother of all things.

Which is next oldest? *Skan*. He gives life and motion to all things.

Which is the next oldest after *Skan*? The Sun. But He is above all
things and above all *Wakan Tanka*.

Lakota have told me that the Sun and *Taku Skanskan* are one and the
same. Is that true? No. Many of the people believe that it is so, but
the shamans know that it is not so. The Sun is in the sky only half the
time and *Skan* is there all the time.

Lakota have told me the *Skan* is the sky. Is that so? Yes. *Skan* is a
Spirit and all that mankind can see of Him is the blue of the sky. But
He is everywhere.

Do you pray to *Wakan Tanka*? Yes, very often.

To which of the eight you have named do you pray? When I pray I smoke
the pipe and burn sweetgrass and *Wohpe* carries my prayer to the *Wakan
Tanka*. If the prayer is about things of great importance, it is carried
to the Sun; if about my health or my strength it goes to *Skan*; if
about my implements, to *Inyan*; if about food or clothing and such
things, to the Earth.

Are such prayers ever carried to the Moon, or the Wind, or the Winged,
or to *Wohpe*? They may be carried to the Moon and to the Wind; but this
is the same as if to the Sun or *Skan*. Lakota do not pray to the
Winged. They defy Him. They do not pray to *Wohpe*, for She carries all
prayers. The Lakota may pray to any *Wakan*, but if to a *Wakan* that is
below *Wakan Tanka*, such must be named in the prayer and it will be
carried to the one named.

You say *wohpa* is a falling star. Is *Wohpe* in any way related to a
falling star? She first came like a falling star.

Where did she come from. From, the stars.

What are the stars? *Waniya*.

What are *waniya*? They are ghosts. *Skan* takes from the stars a ghost
and gives it to each babe at the time of its birth and when the babe
dies the ghost returns to the stars.

Is *Wohpe* a ghost? She is *Wakan Tanka*. A ghost is *Wakan*, but it is
not *Wakan Tanka*.

Has a Lakota ever seen *Wohpe*? Yes. When She gave the pipe to the
Lakota She was in their camp for many days.

How did she appear at that time? Like a very beautiful young woman. For
this reason the people speak of Her as the Beautiful Woman. The people
do not speak of Her as *Wohpe*. Only the shamans call her that.

Lakota have told me that Her *ton* is in the pipe and in the smoke of
the sweetgrass. Is that true? It was a shaman who told you that. When
the people say *ton*, they mean something that comes from a living
thing, such as the birth of anything or the discharge from a wound or a
sore or the growth from a seed. Only shamans speak of the *ton* of the
Wakan. Such *ton* is *wakan* and the shamans only know about it. The
people are afraid to talk of such *ton* because it is *wakan*. The
people smoke the pipe and burn sweetgrass because *Wohpe* will do no
harm to anyone.

You say the Rock is the grandfather of all things and the Earth the
grandmother of all things. Are the Rock and the Earth as a man and wife?
Some Shamans think they are, and some think they are not.

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

Who were the father and mother of all things? The, *Wakan* have no
father or mother. Anything that has a birth will have a death. The
*Wakan* were not born and they will not die.

Is anything about a Lakota *wakan*? Yes. The spirit, the ghost, and the
*sicun*. Do these die? No. They are *wakan*.

What becomes of them when the body dies? The spirit goes to the spirit
world, the ghost goes to where *Skan* got it, and the *sicun* returns to
the *Wakan* it belongs to.

What is the *sicun*? It is the *ton* of a *Wakan*. Skans gives it at the
time of the birth.

What are its functions? It remains with the body during life, to guard
it from danger and help it in a wakan manner.

How does the spirit get to the spirit world? It goes on the spirit
trail.

Where is the spirit trail? It can be seen in the sky at night. It is a
white trail across the sky.

Is it made of stars? No. It is like the clouds, so that nothing but
*wakan* can travel on it. No man knows where it begins or where it ends.
The Wind alone knows where it begins. It moves about. Sometimes it is in
one direction and sometimes in another.

How does the ghost go to the place where *Skan* got it? The ghost is
like smoke and it goes upward until it arrives at the stars.

What becomes of the body when it dies? It rots and becomes nothing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Concept Ni](sdo52.md)
