[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sdo65)  [Next](sdo67) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### HOW THE NORTH WIND LOST HIS BIRTHRIGHT.

The directions moved from place to place over the world so the Wind told
the Four Winds to mark the directions so that each of them would know
where be belonged. He told them that the North Wind, as the oldest,
ought to have the

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

first direction, which must be farthest from the Sun. He told them to
put a great pile of stones at each direction so that it would be forever
marked. When they were going to the edge of the world to mark the
directions, the wizard met them. Because the North Wind was surly and a
coward he took from him the birthright of the oldest and gave it to the
West wind. Then he made it cloudy so that the Sun could not be seen, and
guided them to the edge of the world. A little bird told them to set up
a pile of stones there. They did so. When the Sun was leaving the world
He passed very near them. Then they knew that that was the direction of
the West Wind and that it would always be considered the first. Then the
Four Winds traveled together until they came to the place where the Sun
was furthest from them. There they saw the tipi of the wizard and he
invited them inside. They all went inside except the North Wind who said
that his tipi should be where the tipi of the wizard stood and that he
was afraid of the wizard. Then he told a magpie to sit on the poles of
the tipi and befoul the wizard when he came through the door. When
magpie did this the wizard said that because of this it should befoul.
its nest forever. So to this time magpies befoul their nests. Then he
told the North Wind that because he had told the magpie to do a nasty
thing, he should be his messenger forever and that the wizard would take
the first place in the name of the direction of the North Wind. This is
why the direction of the North Wind is called Waziyata.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How the West Wind Became the Companion of the Winged God](sdo67)
