[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sdo63)  [Next](sdo65.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE OLD WOMAN.

There once was a very industrious woman. Her man provided for her so
that her tipi was large and there were plenty of robes and clothing. Her
children were all boys and the family was very happy. Her mother gave
her a charm which made her more beautiful as she grew older.

The chief was a very brave, strong, and handsome man. He had four women,
but he also wanted this beautiful woman. When he talked to her she would
not listen to him. He told her mother that he would teach her how to
become a witch if she would persuade her daughter to listen to him. The
mother agreed. She became a witch through his teaching and made a
philter for him. With this philter the chief gained an influence over
the beautiful woman and they intrigued. She neglected her tipi and her
children and became a wicked woman, but continued to grow more beautiful
every day. Her husband still loved her and he did not cut her

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

nose nor sear her face. She caused much trouble among the women, but the
chief could do nothing to punish her. When her mother saw what she had
caused, she became old and feeble and wanted to die.

The wicked woman boasted that she was more beautiful than the Moon, so
the Moon blackened her face and complained to the Sky. The Sky told the
chief that because he had intrigued with this woman and caused her to
forget her tipi and her children, his tipi should be placed outside the
camp circle as long as he lived. The Sky told the woman that as long as
she lived she would have the face of a terrible beast. The Sky informed
the Old Woman that she would be stronger than the strongest man and
would never die.

The Old Woman never erects her tipi in a camp. She appears withered and
feeble, but is always the friend of the helpless. She may appear to
young men and young women and bring them good fortune, if they deserve
it. But she can bring misfortune on anyone. She is Wakanka, the Old
Woman, the Witch.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: When Wohpe Came to the World](sdo65.md)
