[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sdo61)  [Next](sdo63) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### WHEN THE PEOPLE LAUGHED AT HANWI.

Wazi was chief of the people who dwell under the world, and his woman,
Kanka, was a seer. Their daughter, Ite, the wife of Tate, was the most
beautiful of women. She gave birth -to four sons at one time which
proved these children to be gods. Yet Wazi was not content, for he
wished to have powers like a god. Iktomi knew this and he schemed to
have Wazi play his pranks. He told Wazi that he should have the powers
he wished for if he would help make others ridiculous. Wazi was afraid,
but he told Kanka what Iktomi had said. She said that if they had the
power of the gods no one could take it from them and then they could
laugh at Iktomi. Iktomi, lurking near, heard her say this and smiled.

He went and sat in the tipi of Kanka. He told her that she was a wise
woman and a seer and that for a long time he had thought she ought to
have power to do as she liked. He said he would be pleased if he could
help her get such power so that she could do much good for the people.
He then talked of the beauty of her daughter, Ite. He said that because
of her beauty she was the wife of a god and the mother of gods and
therefore ought to have a seat with the gods. He talked much like this.
Kanka asked him how he could help her get power to do as she wished to
do. He said he would think about this and then tell her.

When Iktomi had gone, Wazi told Kanka that if she was not careful Iktomi
would make the people laugh at her. Again, Iktomi came and told Kanka
that if she would help him play his pranks he would give her power to do
as the gods do. Kanka said that if he would first give her and Wazi such
powers and they could prove that they had them, then they would help him
to do what he wished. Iktomi agreed to this and gave them the powers
they wished for. Then he talked of the beauty of their daughter until
the night was almost gone.

Early the next morning he came and told Wazi and Kanka that they could
prove their powers by making anyone more beautiful. He showed them how
to make a charm that would make more beautiful anyone who would carry it
on the body. He

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

then went to the tipi of Ite and sat and talked with her. He told her
that she was very industrious and modest, that she was as beautiful as
Hanwi, and that if she were more beautiful she would be the most
beautiful of all beings.

Ite told her mother what Iktomi had said and Kanka told her that she
would sit with the gods. Again, Iktomi sat and talked with Ite. He told
her that Wi, the chief of the gods, had noticed her beauty and had
spoken of it. Again, Ite told her mother what Iktomi had said, and Kanka
said that Ite would sit with the chief of the gods. She gave her
daughter the charm and bade her carry it on her body. Ite carried the
charm and grew more beautiful each night. Iktomi told Wi that the wife
of Tate was the most beautiful of all beings, that she was the wife of a
god and the mother of gods, and that she ought to have a seat with the
gods. He then sat and talked with Kanka and told her that it would
please Wi to see Ite.

Wazi told Kanka to be careful or Iktomi would cause the people to laugh
at her. She said that they could laugh at Iktomi, for he could not take
from them the powers he had given them; that when the people that now
lived were forgotten, people would speak of Wazi and Kanka because their
daughter sat with the chief of the gods. Iktomi lurked near and heard
her say this and he smiled.

Ite adorned herself, but there was no fire in her tipi, neither was
there food nor drink, and her little sons cried because they were
hungry. She walked with her father and mother, and they passed before
the face of Wi. Wi saw that Ite was very beautiful and then he
remembered what Iktomi had said to him. So he talked with her and
invited her to sit at the feast of the gods.

Iktomi sat in the tipi of Ite and talked with her. He told her that Wi
was tired of his companion, Hanwi, and wished for a younger and a more
beautiful companion. Then Ite told him that Wi had invited her to sit at
the feast of the gods. He told her that when all were seated at the
feast, she must take the vacant seat. Kanka helped her daughter to adorn
herself and foretold that Ite would live forever like the gods.

When the feast was ready, Iktomi was talking with Hanwi. He told her
that Wi thought that a woman, Ite, was the most beautiful of all beings
and had invited her to sit at the feast of the gods. So Hanwi stayed to
adorn herself and came late to the feast. Ite came early and when all
were seated, she saw a vacant seat beside Wi, and she took it. Wi did
not frown. He smiled and talked with Ite. Hanwi came and saw a woman
sitting on her seat. She covered her head with her robe and stood behind
Ite. The people saw this, and they laughed at her. Iktomi laughed
loudest and longest. Kanka sang a song of joy, but Wazi was afraid. Tate
left the feast and went to the tipi of Ite. He painted his face and the
faces of his little sons, black.

After the feast, Hanwi stood before Skan hiding her face with her robe.
Skan asked her why she hid her face. She replied because she was shamed
by Wi who had permitted a woman to sit in her place so the people
laughed at her and Iktomi laughed loudest and longest.

Then Skan asked Wi why he had permitted a woman to sit on the seat of
Hanwi. Wi replied that because of the beauty of the woman he had
forgotten his companion, Hanwi.

Skan asked Ite why she sat on the seat of Hanwi. She replied that her
mother foretold that she would sit beside the chief of the gods and had
made her more beautiful, that Iktomi had told her that she was the most
beautiful of all beings, that Wi was tired of Hanwi and wished for a
younger and more beautiful companion, and that Wi invited her to sit at
the feast of the gods, that she had seen the vacant seat beside him and
sat on it.

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

Skan asked Kanka why she had schemed to have her daughter sit on the
seat of Hanwi. She replied that as a seer she foresaw that Ite would sit
beside the chief of the gods, and that she and Wazi had gotten from
Iktomi the powers to do as the gods do. By these powers they had made
their daughter more beautiful, so that Wi would not be ashamed of her
when she sat beside him, and that Iktomi had told her that Wi was
pleased to see Ite.

Skan asked Wazi why he had gotten the powers from Iktomi. He replied
that he wished for the powers so that he could do more good.

Then Skan told Wi that the chief of the gods must not forget; that
because he had permitted the beauty of a woman to cause him to forget
his companion, she would be his companion no more, that she could go her
own way and travel as she pleased; that he and she had ruled the two
periods of time, day and night, but that forever after she would rule
the third period, the interval between the time she went from him until
she returned to him; that because he had caused her to hide her face for
shame she would forever hide her face when near him, and only uncover it
when she was far from him.

Skan told Ite that because she had forgotten her husband and little sons
she would be with them no more; that her unborn child would come before
its time and it would forever be a little child and abide with Tate;
that because she was so vain of her beauty that she dared try to usurp
the place of Hanwi, she should go to the world and there live forever
without friends; that she should keep her beautiful face forever, but
she would have another face so horrid that those who looked upon it
would fly from her or go mad; and that she would be known as Anog Ite,
the Double-Woman, or the Two-Faced.

Skan told Kanka that because she had obtained the powers of a god by
fraud she should go to the world and there live alone forever, until she
could use her powers to help little children and young people, and that
she would forever be known as Wakanka, the Old Woman, the Witch.

Skan told Wazi that because he had not used his powers to do good, but
to cause shame for his kindred and the gods, he should live forever
alone in the world until he could use his powers to help his grandsons
and that he should forever be known as Wazi, the Old Man, the Wizard.

Then Iktomi laughed loud and long and taunted Wakanka, and said that she
would have cheated him to get the powers of a god and then would have
laughed at him, but that he had made her and her kindred ashamed.

Skan then asked Iktomi why he had schemed to make Wakanka and her
kindred ashamed and to cause shame for Hanwi. Iktomi said that he was a
god and the son of a god, that his father, the rock, was. the oldest of
the gods, that he had named all things that are named and made all
languages that are spoken, that he had done much good and should be
treated as a god; but because his other parent, the flying god, had no
shape his form was queer and all laughed at him; that when he did good
all laughed at him as if he were making sport, that because everyone
laughed at him he would laugh at everyone; that he had made the chief of
the gods and the most beautiful of the gods ashamed; that he had made
the chief of the people and the most beautiful of women ashamed; and
that he would make all the gods and all the people ashamed.

Then Skan told him that because he laughed when others were shamed or
suffered and because he threatened the gods, he must go to the world and
remain there forever without friends; that all of mankind would hate
him, and all the gods despise him, and that the sound of the rattles
would be torture to him.

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

Then Iktomi laughed loud and long. Skan asked him why he laughed. He
replied that Skan had forgotten the birds and the beasts; that he would
dwell with them and talk with each in its own language, and that he
would have pleasure and would make fools of mankind.

Then Tate blackened his face and with his four sons sat before Skan.
Skan called him his comrade and asked him what he wished. Tate told Skan
to look upon his f ace and the faces of his little children that were
blackened because their mother was taken from them forever. He said Ite
was but a woman and that others stronger than she had caused her to
forget the woman's place, that though his sons were gods, they were
little children and wept for their mother's care. He begged Skan to let
him bear the punishment of Ite and let her remain with her children.

Skan told Tate that because of his love for Anog Ite he could dwell near
her until the fourth period of time and then he could do with the woman
as he wished, that he could send a token to Tate and then Tate would
send four sons to establish the directions on the world and they would
make the fourth period of time.

Hanwi blackened her face and mourned with Tate and the people laughed at
her no more.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: When the Wizard Came](sdo63)
