[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sdo77)  [Next](sdo79.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE SUN DANCE TAUGHT TO THE LAKOTA.

In their winter camp the Lakota were hungry and the little children
cried for meat. In a visitation a shaman was told that if a man would go
west he would be taught how the people could get food. At the council a
young man offered to go, so the people gave him a pouch with a little
food in it. He went westward and saw an old woman. She asked him for
food and he gave her his pouch. She ate ravenously and he thought she
would eat all his food, but he sang a song of joy and looked westward
while she ate. She watched him and when she had finished eating she
returned the pouch to him and told him that she was Wakanka, the Old
Woman, and because he had cheerfully given her all his food he should
never be hungry. He looked at the pouch and it was full of good food.
Ever after it remained full, no matter how often or how much he took
from it. The old woman said that the weather was cold and the snow deep,
and no one would travel except from necessity.

She then gave him a robe made of woven rabbitskins, very light and very
warm, and moccasins lined with otter fur, the soles of which were thick
and springy like a bow. She told him to go to a hill in the west and
there someone would ten him where to go. He went as she told him. The
robe was so light that it kept him from sinking in the snow and the
soles of his moccasins so springy that they shot him forward like an
arrow. Soon he came to a hill and saw an old man sitting on it. The old
man said he was very cold for he had no robe. The young man gave him the
rabbitskin robe. The old man said, "I am Wazi, the Wizard. Because you
have given me your robe you shall never be cold." He told him to go to a
cave and someone there would guide him, but if he should see a young man
not to listen to him.

The young man went westward; the weather was warm and there was no snow.
He saw another young man going westward and soon overtook him. This
young man asked him where he was going and why he traveled so fast. The
young man did not answer and continued to travel. The stranger traveled
with him and as fast as he did, asking many questions, but the young man
would not speak. Then the stranger said he could tell how the young man
could travel still faster. When the young man asked how that could be
done, he said that his two moccasin soles made him travel fast, but that
if he had four moccasin soles he would travel twice as fast. The young
man asked how he could have four moccasin soles, and the stranger said

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

it was easy to make four moccasin soles from the two, for if the two
soles were cut into halves, there would be four moccasins. The young man
cut across his moccasin soles and made four pieces of them; but when he
put his moccasins on, the soles would not spring, and he could travel no
faster than he could before he had the magical moccasins. Then the
stranger laughed loudly and long. When the young man asked him who he
was, he said he was Iktomi, and that when the people told about the
young man who went to get meat for the children they would laugh because
he cut the soles of his moccasins.

Now the young man felt ashamed and he took his pouch of food into his
hands, for that was all that was left of what the old woman had given
him. When he took it in his hands it rattled like a rattle and he shook
it toward Iktomi, causing Iktomi to flee in terror.

Then the young man laughed at Iktomi and went on his way toward the
cave. When he came to the cave he saw a new tipi beside it and stood
looking at it. A beautiful young woman came out of it, took his hand,
led him through the door and sat him on the man's seat in the tipi. She
then sat at the woman's place finishing a pair of moccasins. The young
man was so surprised that he only stared at her. When she had finished
the moccasins she said that now she had husbanded her tipi and had made
moccasins for her man. So she gave them to the young man and bade him
put them on. He did so and then he asked her who she was. She replied
that she was his woman and would serve him as long as he would abide
with her. He then told her that the children of his people cried for
meat, that he was going to the west to learn how to get meat for them,
and so could not stop and abide with her. She said that she had led him
by the hand through the door of her tipi, seated him at the man's place
in her tipi, and thus bound him to herself, and that by putting on the
moccasins she had made for him he had consented to be her man, according
to the customs of his people. The young man said that he could not let
the little children of his people die of hunger, and that he must go and
learn how to get meat for them. She replied that if he would abide with
her in her tipi that night she would go with him and guide him to where
he could learn how to get plenty of meat.

The young man stayed with her that night and in the morning they
traveled together in the cave, she guiding. Thus, they came down to
where the buffalo people live and found them dancing. The young woman
gave her man a whistle and told him to dance with the buffalo people. He
did so, learning how to dance as they did. Then his woman told him to
sit with the musicians. He did so, learning the songs they sang.

When the dance was over the woman told the young man that the buffalo
people had been dancing before the sun because they wished the sun to do
something for them, and that when they pleased the sun in this manner,
the sun would do that which they wished to be done. Then she took her
man's hand and led him to the tipi of the chief of the buffalo people
and told her father that she had led this man through the door and
seated him at the man's place in her tipi and that he had put on the
moccasins she had made for him; that the little children of his people
cried for meat, and he had come to learn how he could get meat for them.
The chief told him that as he had accepted his daughter as his woman, he
thus became the same as a buffalo man. Hence, the chief would tell how
the buffalo people pleased the sun, so that the sun would give them what
they wanted.

He said that when the people danced as they did when the young man came,
it pleased the sun, and he would give what the people needed. He then
told the young

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

man to return to his people and tell them that if they would vow to
dance before the sun when the snow was gone, and ask the sun for meat he
would give them plenty of meat. The young man returned to his people and
his woman went with him. He told his people all that he had seen and all
that had been told him, and the people vowed to dance before the sun
when the snow was gone. Then the shaman asked the sun to give them meat.
Then the buffalo woman stood before the council and told them to have
all the men prepare for killing game, and she would guide them to where
they could kill enough to give plenty of meat.

When the women saw her stand before the council and heard her speak,
they raised a great outcry, and said that she was the two-faced woman,
and wanted to entice their men away from them, and called attention to
her brown hair and blue eyes as proof that she was a wicked being. Then
the men doubted her. The young man stood beside his woman and said he
was wearing the moccasins she made for him, and he wrapped his robe
about her and himself. He said there was meat for the little children,
and if the men were afraid to go and bring it he would go with his woman
to her people. Then the shaman stood before the people and they were
silent. He filled and lighted a pipe and smoked it. Then he filled and
lighted the pipe and passed it, and the council smoked in communion.
While they smoked he made incense, first with sage, and then with
sweetgrass.

Then he stood and the people were silent. He said that those who would
not do as the young man had told them should suffer. Then the council
ordered that all the men prepare as if for the chase and go, guided by
the woman: She guided them to the other side of a hill and there they
found a great herd of buffalo. The men killed until they were satisfied.
The women had followed from the camp, wailing the songs that are sung
for one who is departing on a perilous journey, but when they came to
the top of the hill and saw the men killing, they hurried back to the
camp, shouting and singing joyfully. They brought their implements and
made meat of the dead buffalo.

There was meat enough for many moons. The women prepared a great feast
and when all were feasting the woman stood, and the women painted the
parting of her hair red, and the shaman painted a red stripe across her
forehead, thus making her the daughter of the people. The young man
stood beside her, wrapping his robe about her and himself, and the young
women sang songs in praise of them.

The raccoon moon came and the snow was gone and the people went their
ways. Only the young man, his woman, and the shaman remained at the
place of the winter camp. The young man sat with his robe over his head,
for he had reminded the people of their vows to dance before the sun.
They had replied that they had plenty of meat and soon they could hunt
the buffalo and get more. Thus, the young man. was ashamed for his
people.

The people hunted, but found no game, and their meat was all gone. Then
they remembered their vows, and came to ask the shaman what they should
do. It was then the moon of ripe chokecherries. The shaman told the
people that they had not been sincere when-they vowed to the sun and
that now they must manifest their sincerity by causing their blood to
flow from wounds, and fulfill their vows by dancing before the sun; but,
because the women had doubted that the sun would give meat they should
not dance before the face of the sun. Then the buffalo woman showed the
people how to make the camp circle and the dance lodge, and the young
man taught the men the songs and the dance. The buffalo came and there
was plenty of meat, and the woman showed the women how to prepare the
buffalo tongues for the

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

feasts. The shaman told them how their blood must flow and how they must
suffer because they had been insincere. When the moon was round all were
ready, the women gave feasts and the men danced before the face of the
sun and the sun was pleased. Since that time when a Lakota very much
wishes for something he vows to dance the Sun dance if the sun will give
him what he wishes. If he does so he should dance the Sun dance when the
chokecherries are ripe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How Big-Foot Got His Name](sdo79.md)
