[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Native California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mim02)  [Next](mim04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

# STORIES BY THOMAS WILLIAMS

## 1. THE THEFT OF FIRE

The Black Geese asked the White Geese to help them. They gathered in the
assembly house.

Lizard lay on top of the rock and looked into the valley. It was then
that he found the fire. He saw the flames issuing from the smoke hole in
the top of a large assembly house. Then Lizard told Coyote that he saw
the fire below. Coyote doubted him. Lizard said, "Come up here on top of
the rock, look below, and you will see sparks coming from the assembly
house." Coyote asked, "Where do you see the fire? I see no fire in that
direction." Then Lizard said, "Watch. There goes another spark." Coyote
said to the Geese, "It is strange that we cannot see it. He saw it
again.'' The Geese did not believe him. They said that he was deceiving
them.

After sundown Coyote saw the fire, entered the assembly house, and told
everyone about it. Flute-player (Mouse) said nothing. The people told
Flute-player to go out and look at the fire. Flute-player merely said,
"Yes." He took with him four flutes, but told no one

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

when he left. He played two flutes while he journeyed into the valley.
When he arrived at the assembly house in the valley, he did not know how
to enter. Bear, Rattlesnake, and Mountain Lion guarded the door, so that
none might enter. Flute-player climbed on top of the assembly house.
There he found Eagle with his wing over the smoke hole, so that none
might enter. Eagle, however, slept. Flute-player was puzzled, for he did
not know how to enter the house undetected. Finally, he cut two feathers
from Eagle's wing and thereby entered.

When he descended into the assembly house, he found the people asleep.
He went to the fire and filled two of his flutes with coals. Again he
visited the fire, filling two more. He filled four flutes with the fire.

Then he started for home. All of the people awoke and looked for him.
They ran all over the hills, but did not find him. Eagle sent in pursuit
Wind, then Rain, then Hail. Hail caught flute-player. Flute-player,
however, placed his flutes in the water before Hail caught him. He told
Hail that he had nothing. He said that he would take no one's fire. Hail
believed him and departed.

Flute-player then recovered his flutes and played upon them after Hail
departed. He still had his fire. He said to himself, "I have my fire."

Finally, he arrived at home, arrived with his fire in the four flutes.
Coyote came down the mountains to search for him, for he feared that
someone had killed Flute-player. Flute-player sent Coyote back ahead of
him to tell the people that he was returning with the fire. Coyote ran
back and told the people to gather wood, told them that Flute-player was
bringing the fire.

Flute-player proceeded slowly, so that Coyote, becoming impatient, went
to meet him again. He met him when he was nearly home.

Upon his arrival, Flute-player climbed on top of the assembly house.
Then he played his flute. Everyone inside was cold. When Flute-player
finished playing one flute he dropped coals through the smoke hole into
the assembly house. Then he started to play a second flute. Before he
finished play the second one, Coyote interrupted him by shouting. Coyote
told Flute-player to continue playing.

The people in the middle received the fire; the others received but
little fire--the north people, the south people, the east people, and
the west people. The west people did not talk very distinctly, because
they received so little fire; the east people the same; the north people
the same; the south people the same. Those who were close to the

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

fire talked distinctly. Coyote, who stayed at the door, received but
little fire. He tried to talk, but shouted instead.

The people in the middle cooked their food. The, others ate theirs raw.
They talked different languages from the people in the middle. The west
people talked differently; the south people talked differently; the
north people talked differently; the east people talked differently. The
middle people talked correctly, for they were around the fire. The
people who were around the fire cooked their food. The people in the
middle obtained the acorns and the manzanita. The others had nothing to
eat. That which they ate was always raw. It was Coyote's fault, that the
others talked incorrectly. If Coyote had said nothing, all would have
received fire. He spoiled the scheme, when he shouted at Flute-player,
for Flute-player stopped. He stopped before he had played the fourth
flute and before he had distributed all of the fire.

All of those who received the fire talked the same language. All of
those who were close to the fire had the same language. Some received
the fire. Some did not receive it. That is why they did not speak the
same language.

If Lizard had not found the fire, all would have died. He found the fire
and saved the people. Lizard found the fire below. Flute-player went
below to steal the fire to save the people from death. Coyote shouted to
Flute-player to drop one coal in front of him. Then he dropped the coal
and one went without fire. All of the middle people understand each
other. The others do not hear one another very plainly. They would all
have talked correctly, if they had all received fire. The people fought
each other, because they did not understand each other's speech.

\[The assembly house of the valley people was upon the west side of the
San Joaquin River. The assembly house of the Geese was at Goodwin's
Ranch, near Montezuma, Tuolumne County.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. Bear and the Fawns](mim04)
