[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Native California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mim12)  [Next](mim14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

# 11. VALLEY QUAIL'S ADVENTURES

"I am going to visit my father," said young Valley Quail, "I am going up
the mountain to visit my father. Give me my father's 'poison'. His
father's ''poison" consisted of yellowjackets and other stinging
insects, which he kept in a bag. "I am going up the up the mountain,"
said young Quail.

He tried his father's poison. He said to himself, "I will try it and now
my father uses it." That is what young Quail said when he saw the deer.
He saw a large band of deer. Then he opened his bag of yellowjackets.
When he opened it, they flew to the deer and killed them. He killed all
of the deer in his father's poison.

"No one will bother me," said young Quail. Then he went up the mountains
through the deep canyons and forests.

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

He found Coyote. Coyote saw him and asked him what he carried in the
bag. He told Coyote that he cancel. His father's poison. Coyote did not
believe him and told young Quail that he was too small to carry poison.
"1 think you have something good to eat in that bag," said Coyote. Young
Quail retorted, "No, I have nothing good to eat. If I open this bag, you
will die. I am taking this poison to my father."

Coyote was not satisfied, but begged young Quail to open the bag. Quail
became angry and gave Coyote the bag, telling him to open it and eat
what he found within. When Coyote opened it, the yellowjackets flew out
and stung him to death. Then young Quail called his poison back into the
bag. All of the yellowjackets entered the bag at his request. He
proceeded upon his way.

Next he met a bear. He said to himself, "I do not know what I am going
to do with that bear. I do not think my poison will kill him. I will try
it, anyhow." So saying, he opened the bag. The yellowjackets flew to the
bear, to a number of bears under the trees. The yellowjackets killed all
of the bears. Then young Quail recalled them.

He did not know which way to go after the yellowjackets had returned to
the bag. He was very tired, but he said, "I will continue on my way."
Proceeding farther, he found a mountain lion in a large tree. He did not
know what to do when he saw the mountain lion. He said, "Mountain lion
will eat me, I fear." Then he sat on a rock. He feared to pass the tree
in which the mountain lion sat. He said to himself, "I think I shall not
reach my father's place. I fear this mountain lion will kill me. I do
not know what to do. I think that this animal in the tree is the one my
father has always warned me about. I think this is a mountain lion, the
king that slaps people. I fear that I cannot kill him, but I will try.
"He turned loose his yellowjackets. They killed the mountain lion. After
he had killed the mountain lion, he recalled his yellowjackets.

"That is the way I will do to anything that attempts to hurt me." Then
he proceeded upon his way. He found a spring between two large rocks.
Just as he stooped to drink he saw a mountain sheep. He said to himself,
"Mountain sheep is all that my father eats. I think that I will try to
kill this one." Then he opened his bag. The yellowjackets flew to the
mountain sheep and stung him to death. He went over to look at the
mountain sheep after he had killed him. The mountain sheep, being dead,
was unable to attack him. Young Quail called his yellowjackets into the
bag and went on his way.

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

After he had gone a distance, he found a rattlesnake. "I do not know
what I shall do with him," said young Quail. "I think this is
rattlesnake, of which my father has told me. At any rate, I will try to
kill him." So saying he opened the bag and sent the yellowjackets to the
rattlesnake. After they had killed the rattlesnake, he called them back,
called them back.

After his yellowjackets had re-entered the bag, he journeyed until he
came to the immense rattlesnake Hamaua. "I do not know what I shall do
now. Hamaua reaches almost a quarter of the distance to my father's
place. I fear he will kill me here. I do not know what to do. I do not
know what I shall do. I will try to kill him with my father's poison.
Then he released the yellowjackets. They killed Hamaua. After he killed
Hamaua, he said, "My father always takes the skin of Hamaua. I think I
will take it too." He skinned Hamaua. After he had taken the skin, he
called the yellowjackets back.

Then he continued up the mountain. He saw another mountain sheep much
larger than the one which he had already killed. "I think I will kill
that one. I think I will try to kill him. That is a mountain sheep, for
which my father always searches."

He next met a band of black bears. He became so frightened that he
climbed a tree. "I will try to kill them," he said, "but I fear that I
cannot." Then he opened his bag and released his yellowjackets. They
pursued the bears and made them run. Then they killed all of the bears.
After they had killed the bears, he called them back into the bag and
then continued up the mountain.

At last he arrived at his father's house. His father asked, "Who brought
you?" Young Quail replied, "I came alone. I felt lonely below. I worried
every day about you."

His father asked him if he had not seen something coming up the road,
Young Quail replied, "I killed many things." His father asked him if he
had seen Hamaua. Then his father asked him if he had skinned Hamaua. He
told his father that he had. Young Quail said, ''You told me to test
those yellowjackets, when I came to see you. I tried them and killed
that everything that I saw. I brought this poison to you.

His father asked him what he proposed to do with the yellowjackets,
asked him if he wanted them for himself. "If you want me to try my
poison, you may do so," his father said. Young Quail then proceeded up
the mountain beyond his father's home. He found a deer and killed it in
the usual way. His father watched him. At first his father said, "I do
not know how he will do it." Then Young Quail

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

turned loose his yellowjackets. His father laughed and asked him if that
was what he did as he came up the road. "Who taught you?" asked his
father. "How do you recall the yellowjackets?" Young Quail replied, "I
recall them. Nobody taught me. I learned by myself. You did not teach
me."

Then his father stopped questioning him and told him that he might do
whatever he pleased. Young Quail replied, "I will return tomorrow the
same way that I came. I just came up to see how you were faring, so that
I might stop worrying about you." His father said, "All right, you may
return, but I would rather keep you hen, with me. However, I suppose you
like it better below. All right, you may go tomorrow." Young Quail said,
"But I will return to see you. I will go back the same way. I shall
arrive home sometime if nothing happens to me on the way."

\[The story-teller said that young Quail started from his camp on the
west side of the San Joaquin River and visited his father, who lived
high in the Sierra Nevada.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 12. The Theft of Fire](mim14)
