[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[1 Esdras Index](es1.md)  
  [Previous](es1004)  [Next](es1006.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1 Esdras 5

[Apo](../apo/es1005.md)

1 After this were the principal men of the families chosen according to
their tribes, to go up with their wives and sons and daughters, with
their menservants and maidservants, and their cattle.

2 And Darius sent with them a thousand horsemen, till they had brought
them back to Jerusalem safely, and with musical \[instruments\] tabrets
and flutes.

3 And all their brethren played, and he made them go up together with
them.

4 And these are the names of the men which went up, according to their
families among their tribes, after their several heads.

5 The priests, the sons of Phinees the son of Aaron: Jesus the son of
Josedec, the son of Saraias, and Joacim the son of Zorobabel, the son of
Salathiel, of the house of David, out of the kindred of Phares, of the
tribe of Judah;

6 Who spake wise sentences before Darius the king of Persia in the
second year of his reign, in the month Nisan, which is the first month.

7 And these are they of Jewry that came up from the captivity, where
they dwelt as strangers, whom Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon had
carried away unto Babylon.

8 And they returned unto Jerusalem, and to the other parts of Jewry,
every man to his own city, who came with Zorobabel, with Jesus,
Nehemias, and Zacharias, and Reesaias, Enenius, Mardocheus. Beelsarus,
Aspharasus, Reelius, Roimus, and Baana, their guides.

9 The number of them of the nation, and their governors, sons of Phoros,
two thousand an hundred seventy and two; the sons of Saphat, four
hundred seventy and two:

10 The sons of Ares, seven hundred fifty and six:

11 The sons of Phaath Moab, two thousand eight hundred and twelve:

12 The sons of Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and four: the sons of
Zathul, nine hundred forty and five: the sons of Corbe, seven hundred
and five: the sons of Bani, six hundred forty and eight:

13 The sons of Bebai, six hundred twenty and three: the sons of Sadas,
three thousand two hundred twenty and two:

14 The sons of Adonikam, six hundred sixty and seven: the sons of Bagoi,
two thousand sixty and six: the sons of Adin, four hundred fifty and
four:

15 The sons of Aterezias, ninety and two: the sons of Ceilan and Azetas
threescore and seven: the sons of Azuran, four hundred thirty and two:

16 The sons of Ananias, an hundred and one: the sons of Arom, thirty
two: and the sons of Bassa, three hundred twenty and three: the sons of
Azephurith, an hundred and two:

17 The sons of Meterus, three thousand and five: the sons of Bethlomon,
an hundred twenty and three:

18 They of Netophah, fifty and five: they of Anathoth, an hundred fifty
and eight: they of Bethsamos, forty and two:

19 They of Kiriathiarius, twenty and five: they of Caphira and Beroth,
seven hundred forty and three: they of Pira, seven hundred:

20 They of Chadias and Ammidoi, four hundred twenty and two: they of
Cirama and Gabdes, six hundred twenty and one:

21 They of Macalon, an hundred twenty and two: they of Betolius, fifty
and two: the sons of Nephis, an hundred fifty and six:

22 The sons of Calamolalus and Onus, seven hundred twenty and five: the
sons of Jerechus, two hundred forty and five:

23 The sons of Annas, three thousand three hundred and thirty.

24 The priests: the sons of Jeddu, the son of Jesus among the sons of
Sanasib, nine hundred seventy and two: the sons of Meruth, a thousand
fifty and two:

25 The sons of Phassaron, a thousand forty and seven: the sons of Carme,
a thousand and seventeen.

26 The Levites: the sons of Jessue, and Cadmiel, and Banuas, and Sudias,
seventy and four.

27 The holy singers: the sons of Asaph, an hundred twenty and eight.

28 The porters: the sons of Salum, the sons of Jatal, the sons of
Talmon, the sons of Dacobi, the sons of Teta, the sons of Sami, in all
an hundred thirty and nine.

29 The servants of the temple: the sons of Esau, the sons of Asipha, the
sons of Tabaoth, the sons of Ceras, the sons of Sud, the sons of
Phaleas, the sons of Labana, the sons of Graba,

30 The sons of Acua, the sons of Uta, the sons of Cetab, the sons of
Agaba, the sons of Subai, the sons of Anan, the sons of Cathua, the sons
of Geddur,

31 The sons of Airus, the sons of Daisan, the sons of Noeba, the sons of
Chaseba, the sons of Gazera, the sons of Azia, the sons of Phinees, the
sons of Azare, the sons of Bastai, the sons of Asana, the sons of Meani,
the sons of Naphisi, the sons of Acub, the sons of Acipha, the sons of
Assur, the sons of Pharacim, the sons of Basaloth,

32 The sons of Meeda, the sons of Coutha, the sons of Charea, the sons
of Charcus, the sons of Aserer, the sons of Thomoi, the sons of Nasith,
the sons of Atipha.

33 The sons of the servants of Solomon: the sons of Azaphion, the sons
of Pharira, the sons of Jeeli, the sons of Lozon, the sons of Israel,
the sons of Sapheth,

34 The sons of Hagia, the sons of Pharacareth, the sons of Sabi, the
sons of Sarothie, the sons of Masias, the sons of Gar, the sons of
Addus, the sons of Suba, the sons of Apherra, the sons of Barodis, the
sons of Sabat, the sons of Allom.

35 All the ministers of the temple, and the sons of the servants of
Solomon, were three hundred seventy and two.

36 These came up from Thermeleth and Thelersas, Charaathalar leading
them, and Aalar;

37 Neither could they shew their families, nor their stock, how they
were of Israel: the sons of Ladan, the son of Ban, the sons of Necodan,
six hundred fifty and two.

38 And of the priests that usurped the office of the priesthood, and
were not found: the sons of Obdia, the sons of Accoz, the sons of Addus,
who married Augia one of the daughters of Barzelus, and was named after
his name.

39 And when the description of the kindred of these men was sought in
the register, and was not found, they were removed from executing the
office of the priesthood:

40 For unto them said Nehemias and Atharias, that they should not be
partakers of the holy things, till there arose up an high priest clothed
with doctrine and truth.

41 So of Israel, from them of twelve years old and upward, they were all
in number forty thousand, beside menservants and womenservants two
thousand three hundred and sixty.

42 Their menservants and handmaids were seven thousand three hundred
forty and seven: the singing men and singing women, two hundred forty
and five:

43 Four hundred thirty and five camels, seven thousand thirty and six
horses, two hundred forty and five mules, five thousand five hundred
twenty and five beasts used to the yoke.

44 And certain of the chief of their families, when they came to the
temple of God that is in Jerusalem, vowed to set up the house again in
his own place according to their ability,

45 And to give into the holy treasury of the works a thousand pounds of
gold, five thousand of silver, and an hundred priestly vestments.

46 And so dwelt the priests and the Levites and the people in Jerusalem,
and in the country, the singers also and the porters; and all Israel in
their villages.

47 But when the seventh month was at hand, and when the children of
Israel were every man in his own place, they came all together with one
consent into the open place of the first gate which is toward the east.

48 Then stood up Jesus the son of Josedec, and his brethren the priests
and Zorobabel the son of Salathiel, and his brethren, and made ready the
altar of the God of Israel,

49 To offer burnt sacrifices upon it, according as it is expressly
commanded in the book of Moses the man of God.

50 And there were gathered unto them out of the other nations of the
land, and they erected the altar upon his own place, because all the
nations of the land were at enmity with them, and oppressed them; and
they offered sacrifices according to the time, and burnt offerings to
the Lord both morning and evening.

51 Also they held the feast of tabernacles, as it is commanded in the
law, and offered sacrifices daily, as was meet:

52 And after that, the continual oblations, and the sacrifice of the
sabbaths, and of the new moons, and of all holy feasts.

53 And all they that had made any vow to God began to offer sacrifices
to God from the first day of the seventh month, although the temple of
the Lord was not yet built.

54 And they gave unto the masons and carpenters money, meat, and drink,
with cheerfulness.

55 Unto them of Zidon also and Tyre they gave carrs, that they should
bring cedar trees from Libanus, which should be brought by floats to the
haven of Joppa, according as it was commanded them by Cyrus king of the
Persians.

56 And in the second year and second month after his coming to the
temple of God at Jerusalem began Zorobabel the son of Salathiel, and
Jesus the son of Josedec, and their brethren, and the priests, and the
Levites, and all they that were come unto Jerusalem out of the
captivity:

57 And they laid the foundation of the house of God in the first day of
the second month, in the second year after they were come to Jewry and
Jerusalem.

58 And they appointed the Levites from twenty years old over the works
of the Lord. Then stood up Jesus, and his sons and brethren, and Cadmiel
his brother, and the sons of Madiabun, with the sons of Joda the son of
Eliadun, with their sons and brethren, all Levites, with one accord
setters forward of the business, labouring to advance the works in the
house of God. So the workmen built the temple of the Lord.

59 And the priests stood arrayed in their vestments with musical
instruments and trumpets; and the Levites the sons of Asaph had cymbals,

60 Singing songs of thanksgiving, and praising the Lord, according as
David the king of Israel had ordained.

61 And they sung with loud voices songs to the praise of the Lord,
because his mercy and glory is for ever in all Israel.

62 And all the people sounded trumpets, and shouted with a loud voice,
singing songs of thanksgiving unto the Lord for the rearing up of the
house of the Lord.

63 Also of the priests and Levites, and of the chief of their families,
the ancients who had seen the former house came to the building of this
with weeping and great crying.

64 But many with trumpets and joy shouted with loud voice,

65 Insomuch that the trumpets might not be heard for the weeping of the
people: yet the multitude sounded marvellously, so that it was heard
afar off.

66 Wherefore when the enemies of the tribe of Judah and Benjamin heard
it, they came to know what that noise of trumpets should mean.

67 And they perceived that they that were of the captivity did build the
temple unto the Lord God of Israel.

68 So they went to Zorobabel and Jesus, and to the chief of the
families, and said unto them, We will build together with you.

69 For we likewise, as ye, do obey your Lord, and do sacrifice unto him
from the days of Azbazareth the king of the Assyrians, who brought us
hither.

70 Then Zorobabel and Jesus and the chief of the families of Israel said
unto them, It is not for us and you to build together an house unto the
Lord our God.

71 We ourselves alone will build unto the Lord of Israel, according as
Cyrus the king of the Persians hath commanded us.

72 But the heathen of the land lying heavy upon the inhabitants of
Judea, and holding them strait, hindered their building;

73 And by their secret plots, and popular persuasions and commotions,
they hindered the finishing of the building all the time that king Cyrus
lived: so they were hindered from building for the space of two years,
until the reign of Darius.

[Sep](../sep/es1005.md)

1 μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ἐξελέγησαν ἀναβῆναι ἀρχηγοὶ οἴκου πατριῶν κατὰ φυλὰς
αὐτῶν καὶ αἱ γυναῖκες αὐτῶν καὶ οἱ υἱοὶ καὶ αἱ θυγατέρες καὶ οἱ παῖδες
αὐτῶν καὶ αἱ παιδίσκαι καὶ τὰ κτήνη αὐτῶν

2 καὶ Δαρεῖος συναπέστειλεν μετ᾽ αὐτῶν ἱππεῖς χιλίους ἕως τοῦ
ἀποκαταστῆσαι αὐτοὺς εἰς Ιερουσαλημ μετ᾽ εἰρήνης καὶ μετὰ μουσικῶν
τυμπάνων καὶ αὐλῶν

3 καὶ πάντες οἱ ἀδελφοὶ αὐτῶν παίζοντες καὶ ἐποίησεν αὐτοὺς συναναβῆναι
μετ᾽ ἐκείνων

4 καὶ ταῦτα τὰ ὀνόματα τῶν ἀνδρῶν τῶν ἀναβαινόντων κατὰ πατριὰς αὐτῶν
εἰς τὰς φυλὰς ἐπὶ τὴν μεριδαρχίαν αὐτῶν

5 οἱ ἱερεῖς υἱοὶ Φινεες υἱοῦ Ααρων Ἰησοῦς ὁ τοῦ Ιωσεδεκ τοῦ Σαραιου καὶ
Ιωακιμ ὁ τοῦ Ζοροβαβελ τοῦ Σαλαθιηλ ἐκ τοῦ οἴκου τοῦ Δαυιδ ἐκ τῆς γενεᾶς
Φαρες φυλῆς δὲ Ιουδα

6 ὃς ἐλάλησεν ἐπὶ Δαρείου τοῦ βασιλέως Περσῶν λόγους σοφοὺς ἐν τῷ
δευτέρῳ ἔτει τῆς βασιλείας αὐτοῦ μηνὶ Νισαν τοῦ πρώτου μηνός

7 εἰσὶν δὲ οὗτοι ἐκ τῆς Ιουδαίας οἱ ἀναβάντες ἐκ τῆς αἰχμαλωσίας τῆς
παροικίας οὓς μετῴκισεν Ναβουχοδονοσορ βασιλεὺς Βαβυλῶνος εἰς Βαβυλῶνα

8 καὶ ἐπέστρεψαν εἰς Ιερουσαλημ καὶ τὴν λοιπὴν Ιουδαίαν ἕκαστος εἰς τὴν
ἰδίαν πόλιν οἱ ἐλθόντες μετὰ Ζοροβαβελ καὶ Ἰησοῦ Νεεμιου Ζαραιου Ρησαιου
Ενηνιος Μαρδοχαιου Βεελσαρου Ασφαρασου Βορολιου Ροϊμου Βαανα τῶν
προηγουμένων αὐτῶν

9 ἀριθμὸς τῶν ἀπὸ τοῦ ἔθνους καὶ οἱ προηγούμενοι αὐτῶν υἱοὶ Φορος δύο
χιλιάδες καὶ ἑκατὸν ἑβδομήκοντα δύο

10 υἱοὶ Σαφατ τετρακόσιοι ἑβδομήκοντα δύο υἱοὶ Αρεε ἑπτακόσιοι
πεντήκοντα ἕξ

11 υἱοὶ Φααθμωαβ εἰς τοὺς υἱοὺς Ἰησοῦ καὶ Ιωαβ δισχίλιοι ὀκτακόσιοι δέκα
δύο

12 υἱοὶ Ωλαμου χίλιοι διακόσιοι πεντήκοντα τέσσαρες υἱοὶ Ζατου
ἐννακόσιοι τεσσαράκοντα πέντε υἱοὶ Χορβε ἑπτακόσιοι πέντε υἱοὶ Βανι
ἑξακόσιοι τεσσαράκοντα ὀκτώ

13 υἱοὶ Βηβαι ἑξακόσιοι εἴκοσι τρεῖς υἱοὶ Ασγαδ χίλιοι τριακόσιοι εἴκοσι
δύο

14 υἱοὶ Αδωνικαμ ἑξακόσιοι ἑξήκοντα ἑπτά υἱοὶ Βαγοι δισχίλιοι ἑξήκοντα
ἕξ υἱοὶ Αδινου τετρακόσιοι πεντήκοντα τέσσαρες

15 υἱοὶ Ατηρ Εζεκιου ἐνενήκοντα δύο υἱοὶ Κιλαν καὶ Αζητας ἑξήκοντα ἑπτά
υἱοὶ Αζουρου τετρακόσιοι τριάκοντα δύο

16 υἱοὶ Αννιας ἑκατὸν εἷς υἱοὶ Αρομ υἱοὶ Βασσαι τριακόσιοι εἴκοσι τρεῖς
υἱοὶ Αριφου ἑκατὸν δέκα δύο

17 υἱοὶ Βαιτηρους τρισχίλιοι πέντε υἱοὶ ἐκ Βαιθλωμων ἑκατὸν εἴκοσι τρεῖς

18 οἱ ἐκ Νετεβας πεντήκοντα πέντε οἱ ἐξ Ενατου ἑκατὸν πεντήκοντα ὀκτώ οἱ
ἐκ Βαιτασμων τεσσαράκοντα δύο

19 οἱ ἐκ Καριαθιαριος εἴκοσι πέντε οἱ ἐκ Καπιρας καὶ Βηροτ ἑπτακόσιοι
τεσσαράκοντα τρεῖς

20 οἱ Χαδιασαι καὶ Αμμιδιοι τετρακόσιοι εἴκοσι δύο οἱ ἐκ Κιραμας καὶ
Γαββης ἑξακόσιοι εἴκοσι εἷς

21 οἱ ἐκ Μακαλων ἑκατὸν εἴκοσι δύο οἱ ἐκ Βαιτολιω πεντήκοντα δύο υἱοὶ
Νιφις ἑκατὸν πεντήκοντα ἕξ

22 υἱοὶ Καλαμω ἄλλου καὶ Ωνους ἑπτακόσιοι εἴκοσι πέντε υἱοὶ Ιερεχου
τριακόσιοι τεσσαράκοντα πέντε

23 υἱοὶ Σαναας τρισχίλιοι τριακόσιοι τριάκοντα

24 οἱ ἱερεῖς υἱοὶ Ιεδδου τοῦ υἱοῦ Ἰησοῦ εἰς τοὺς υἱοὺς Ανασιβ ἐννακόσιοι
ἑβδομήκοντα δύο υἱοὶ Εμμηρου χίλιοι πεντήκοντα δύο

25 υἱοὶ Φασσουρου χίλιοι διακόσιοι τεσσαράκοντα ἑπτά υἱοὶ Χαρμη χίλιοι
δέκα ἑπτά

26 οἱ δὲ Λευῖται υἱοὶ Ἰησοῦ καὶ Καδμιηλου καὶ Βαννου καὶ Σουδιου
ἑβδομήκοντα τέσσαρες

27 οἱ ἱεροψάλται υἱοὶ Ασαφ ἑκατὸν εἴκοσι ὀκτώ

28 οἱ θυρωροί υἱοὶ Σαλουμ υἱοὶ Αταρ υἱοὶ Τολμαν υἱοὶ Ακουβ υἱοὶ Ατητα
υἱοὶ Σωβαι οἱ πάντες ἑκατὸν τριάκοντα ἐννέα

29 οἱ ἱερόδουλοι υἱοὶ Ησαυ υἱοὶ Ασιφα υἱοὶ Ταβαωθ υἱοὶ Κηρας υἱοὶ Σουα
υἱοὶ Φαδαιου υἱοὶ Λαβανα υἱοὶ Αγγαβα

30 υἱοὶ Ακουδ υἱοὶ Ουτα υἱοὶ Κηταβ υἱοὶ Αγαβα υἱοὶ Συβαϊ υἱοὶ Αναν υἱοὶ
Καθουα υἱοὶ Γεδδουρ

31 υἱοὶ Ιαϊρου υἱοὶ Δαισαν υἱοὶ Νοεβα υἱοὶ Χασεβα υἱοὶ Γαζηρα υἱοὶ Οζιου
υἱοὶ Φινοε υἱοὶ Ασαρα υἱοὶ Βασθαι υἱοὶ Ασανα υἱοὶ Μαανι υἱοὶ Ναφισι υἱοὶ
Ακουφ υἱοὶ Αχιβα υἱοὶ Ασουρ υἱοὶ Φαρακιμ υἱοὶ Βασαλωθ

32 υἱοὶ Μεεδδα υἱοὶ Κουθα υἱοὶ Χαρεα υἱοὶ Βαρχους υἱοὶ Σεραρ υἱοὶ Θομοι
υἱοὶ Νασι υἱοὶ Ατιφα

33 υἱοὶ παίδων Σαλωμων υἱοὶ Ασσαφιωθ υἱοὶ Φαριδα υἱοὶ Ιεηλι υἱοὶ Λοζων
υἱοὶ Ισδαηλ υἱοὶ Σαφυθι

34 υἱοὶ Αγια υἱοὶ Φακαρεθ-σαβιη υἱοὶ Σαρωθιε υἱοὶ Μασιας υἱοὶ Γας υἱοὶ
Αδδους υἱοὶ Σουβας υἱοὶ Αφερρα υἱοὶ Βαρωδις υἱοὶ Σαφατ υἱοὶ Αμων

35 πάντες οἱ ἱερόδουλοι καὶ οἱ υἱοὶ τῶν παίδων Σαλωμων τριακόσιοι
ἑβδομήκοντα δύο

36 οὗτοι ἀναβάντες ἀπὸ Θερμελεθ καὶ Θελερσας ἡγούμενος αὐτῶν Χαρααθ Αδαν
καὶ Αμαρ

37 καὶ οὐκ ἠδύναντο ἀπαγγεῖλαι τὰς πατριὰς αὐτῶν καὶ γενεὰς ὡς ἐκ τοῦ
Ισραηλ εἰσίν υἱοὶ Δαλαν τοῦ υἱοῦ Τουβαν υἱοὶ Νεκωδαν ἑξακόσιοι
πεντήκοντα δύο

38 καὶ ἐκ τῶν ἱερέων οἱ ἐμποιούμενοι ἱερωσύνης καὶ οὐχ εὑρέθησαν υἱοὶ
Οββια υἱοὶ Ακκως υἱοὶ Ιοδδους τοῦ λαβόντος Αυγιαν γυναῖκα τῶν θυγατέρων
Φαρζελλαιου καὶ ἐκλήθη ἐπὶ τῷ ὀνόματι αὐτοῦ

39 καὶ τούτων ζητηθείσης τῆς γενικῆς γραφῆς ἐν τῷ καταλοχισμῷ καὶ μὴ
εὑρεθείσης ἐχωρίσθησαν τοῦ ἱερατεύειν

40 καὶ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς Νεεμιας καὶ Ατθαριας μὴ μετέχειν τῶν ἁγίων αὐτούς
ἕως ἀναστῇ ἀρχιερεὺς ἐνδεδυμένος τὴν δήλωσιν καὶ τὴν ἀλήθειαν

41 οἱ δὲ πάντες ἦσαν Ισραηλ ἀπὸ δωδεκαετοῦς χωρὶς παίδων καὶ παιδισκῶν
μυριάδες τέσσαρες δισχίλιοι τριακόσιοι ἑξήκοντα παῖδες τούτων καὶ
παιδίσκαι ἑπτακισχίλιοι τριακόσιοι τριάκοντα ἑπτά ψάλται καὶ ψαλτῳδοὶ
διακόσιοι τεσσαράκοντα πέντε

42 κάμηλοι τετρακόσιοι τριάκοντα πέντε καὶ ἵπποι ἑπτακισχίλιοι τριάκοντα
ἕξ ἡμίονοι διακόσιοι τεσσαράκοντα πέντε ὑποζύγια πεντακισχίλια
πεντακόσια εἴκοσι πέντε

43 καὶ ἐκ τῶν ἡγουμένων κατὰ τὰς πατριὰς ἐν τῷ παραγίνεσθαι αὐτοὺς εἰς
τὸ ἱερὸν τοῦ θεοῦ τὸ ἐν Ιερουσαλημ εὔξαντο ἐγεῖραι τὸν οἶκον ἐπὶ τοῦ
τόπου αὐτοῦ κατὰ τὴν αὐτῶν δύναμιν

44 καὶ δοῦναι εἰς τὸ ἱερὸν γαζοφυλάκιον τῶν ἔργων χρυσίου μνᾶς χιλίας
καὶ ἀργυρίου μνᾶς πεντακισχιλίας καὶ στολὰς ἱερατικὰς ἑκατόν

45 καὶ κατῳκίσθησαν οἱ ἱερεῖς καὶ οἱ Λευῖται καὶ οἱ ἐκ τοῦ λαοῦ ἐν
Ιερουσαλημ καὶ τῇ χώρᾳ οἵ τε ἱεροψάλται καὶ οἱ θυρωροὶ καὶ πᾶς Ισραηλ ἐν
ταῖς κώμαις αὐτῶν

46 ἐνστάντος δὲ τοῦ ἑβδόμου μηνὸς καὶ ὄντων τῶν υἱῶν Ισραηλ ἑκάστου ἐν
τοῖς ἰδίοις συνήχθησαν ὁμοθυμαδὸν εἰς τὸ εὐρύχωρον τοῦ πρώτου πυλῶνος
τοῦ πρὸς τῇ ἀνατολῇ

47 καὶ καταστὰς Ἰησοῦς ὁ τοῦ Ιωσεδεκ καὶ οἱ ἀδελφοὶ αὐτοῦ οἱ ἱερεῖς καὶ
Ζοροβαβελ ὁ τοῦ Σαλαθιηλ καὶ οἱ τούτου ἀδελφοὶ ἡτοίμασαν τὸ θυσιαστήριον
τοῦ θεοῦ τοῦ Ισραηλ

48 προσενέγκαι ἐπ᾽ αὐτοῦ ὁλοκαυτώσεις ἀκολούθως τοῖς ἐν τῇ Μωυσέως βίβλῳ
τοῦ ἀνθρώπου τοῦ θεοῦ διηγορευμένοις

49 καὶ ἐπισυνήχθησαν αὐτοῖς ἐκ τῶν ἄλλων ἐθνῶν τῆς γῆς καὶ κατώρθωσαν τὸ
θυσιαστήριον ἐπὶ τοῦ τόπου αὐτοῦ ὅτι ἐν ἔχθρᾳ ἦσαν αὐτοῖς καὶ κατίσχυσαν
αὐτοὺς πάντα τὰ ἔθνη τὰ ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς καὶ ἀνέφερον θυσίας κατὰ τὸν καιρὸν
καὶ ὁλοκαυτώματα τῷ κυρίῳ τὸ πρωινὸν καὶ τὸ δειλινὸν

50 καὶ ἠγάγοσαν τὴν τῆς σκηνοπηγίας ἑορτήν ὡς ἐπιτέτακται ἐν τῷ νόμῳ καὶ
θυσίας καθ᾽ ἡμέραν ὡς προσῆκον ἦν

51 καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα προσφορὰς ἐνδελεχισμοῦ καὶ θυσίας σαββάτων καὶ
νουμηνιῶν καὶ ἑορτῶν πασῶν ἡγιασμένων

52 καὶ ὅσοι εὔξαντο εὐχὴν τῷ θεῷ ἀπὸ τῆς νουμηνίας τοῦ ἑβδόμου μηνὸς
ἤρξαντο προσφέρειν θυσίας τῷ θεῷ καὶ ὁ ναὸς τοῦ θεοῦ οὔπω ᾠκοδόμητο

53 καὶ ἔδωκαν ἀργύριον τοῖς λατόμοις καὶ τέκτοσι καὶ βρωτὰ καὶ ποτὰ καὶ
χαρα τοῖς Σιδωνίοις καὶ Τυρίοις εἰς τὸ παράγειν αὐτοὺς ἐκ τοῦ Λιβάνου
ξύλα κέδρινα διαφέρειν σχεδίας εἰς τὸν Ιοππης λιμένα κατὰ τὸ πρόσταγμα
τὸ γραφὲν αὐτοῖς παρὰ Κύρου τοῦ Περσῶν βασιλέως

54 καὶ τῷ δευτέρῳ ἔτει παραγενόμενος εἰς τὸ ἱερὸν τοῦ θεοῦ εἰς
Ιερουσαλημ μηνὸς δευτέρου ἤρξατο Ζοροβαβελ ὁ τοῦ Σαλαθιηλ καὶ Ἰησοῦς ὁ
τοῦ Ιωσεδεκ καὶ οἱ ἀδελφοὶ αὐτῶν καὶ οἱ ἱερεῖς οἱ Λευῖται καὶ πάντες οἱ
παραγενόμενοι ἐκ τῆς αἰχμαλωσίας εἰς Ιερουσαλημ

55 καὶ ἐθεμελίωσαν τὸν ναὸν τοῦ θεοῦ τῇ νουμηνίᾳ τοῦ δευτέρου μηνὸς τοῦ
δευτέρου ἔτους ἐν τῷ ἐλθεῖν εἰς τὴν Ιουδαίαν καὶ Ιερουσαλημ

56 καὶ ἔστησαν τοὺς Λευίτας ἀπὸ εἰκοσαετοῦς ἐπὶ τῶν ἔργων τοῦ κυρίου καὶ
ἔστη Ἰησοῦς καὶ οἱ υἱοὶ καὶ οἱ ἀδελφοὶ καὶ Καδμιηλ ὁ ἀδελφὸς καὶ οἱ υἱοὶ
Ἰησοῦ Ημαδαβουν καὶ οἱ υἱοὶ Ιωδα τοῦ Ιλιαδουν σὺν τοῖς υἱοῖς καὶ
ἀδελφοῖς πάντες οἱ Λευῖται ὁμοθυμαδὸν ἐργοδιῶκται ποιοῦντες εἰς τὰ ἔργα
ἐν τῷ οἴκῳ τοῦ θεοῦ

57 καὶ ᾠκοδόμησαν οἱ οἰκοδόμοι τὸν ναὸν τοῦ κυρίου καὶ ἔστησαν οἱ ἱερεῖς
ἐστολισμένοι μετὰ μουσικῶν καὶ σαλπίγγων καὶ οἱ Λευῖται υἱοὶ Ασαφ
ἔχοντες τὰ κύμβαλα ὑμνοῦντες τῷ κυρίῳ καὶ εὐλογοῦντες κατὰ Δαυιδ βασιλέα
τοῦ Ισραηλ

58 καὶ ἐφώνησαν δι᾽ ὕμνων ὁμολογοῦντες τῷ κυρίῳ ὅτι ἡ χρηστότης αὐτοῦ
καὶ ἡ δόξα εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας παντὶ Ισραηλ

59 καὶ πᾶς ὁ λαὸς ἐσάλπισαν καὶ ἐβόησαν φωνῇ μεγάλῃ ὑμνοῦντες τῷ κυρίῳ
ἐπὶ τῇ ἐγέρσει τοῦ οἴκου τοῦ κυρίου

60 καὶ ἤλθοσαν ἐκ τῶν ἱερέων τῶν Λευιτῶν καὶ τῶν προκαθημένων κατὰ τὰς
πατριὰς αὐτῶν οἱ πρεσβύτεροι οἱ ἑωρακότες τὸν πρὸ τούτου οἶκον πρὸς τὴν
τούτου οἰκοδομὴν μετὰ κραυγῆς καὶ κλαυθμοῦ μεγάλου

61 καὶ πολλοὶ διὰ σαλπίγγων καὶ χαρᾶς μεγάλῃ τῇ φωνῇ

62 ὥστε τὸν λαὸν μὴ ἀκούειν τῶν σαλπίγγων διὰ τὸν κλαυθμὸν τοῦ λαοῦ ὁ
γὰρ ὄχλος ἦν ὁ σαλπίζων μεγαλωστὶ ὥστε μακρόθεν ἀκούεσθαι

63 καὶ ἀκούσαντες οἱ ἐχθροὶ τῆς φυλῆς Ιουδα καὶ Βενιαμιν ἤλθοσαν
ἐπιγνῶναι τίς ἡ φωνὴ τῶν σαλπίγγων

64 καὶ ἐπέγνωσαν ὅτι οἱ ἐκ τῆς αἰχμαλωσίας οἰκοδομοῦσιν τὸν ναὸν τῷ
κυρίῳ θεῷ Ισραηλ

65 καὶ προσελθόντες τῷ Ζοροβαβελ καὶ Ἰησοῦ καὶ τοῖς ἡγουμένοις τῶν
πατριῶν λέγουσιν αὐτοῖς συνοικοδομήσομεν ὑμῖν

66 ὁμοίως γὰρ ὑμῖν ἀκούομεν τοῦ κυρίου ὑμῶν καὶ αὐτῷ ἐπιθύομεν ἀπὸ
ἡμερῶν Ασβασαρεθ βασιλέως Ἀσσυρίων ὃς μετήγαγεν ἡμᾶς ἐνταῦθα

67 καὶ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς Ζοροβαβελ καὶ Ἰησοῦς καὶ οἱ ἡγούμενοι τῶν πατριῶν
τοῦ Ισραηλ οὐχ ὑμῖν καὶ ἡμῖν τοῦ οἰκοδομῆσαι τὸν οἶκον κυρίῳ τῷ θεῷ ἡμῶν

68 ἡμεῖς γὰρ μόνοι οἰκοδομήσομεν τῷ κυρίῳ τοῦ Ισραηλ ἀκολούθως οἷς
προσέταξεν ἡμῖν Κῦρος ὁ βασιλεὺς Περσῶν

69 τὰ δὲ ἔθνη τῆς γῆς ἐπικείμενα τοῖς ἐν τῇ Ιουδαίᾳ καὶ πολιορκοῦντες
εἶργον τοῦ οἰκοδομεῖν

70 καὶ ἐπιβουλὰς καὶ δημαγωγίας καὶ ἐπισυστάσεις ποιούμενοι ἀπεκώλυσαν
τοῦ ἐπιτελεσθῆναι τὴν οἰκοδομὴν πάντα τὸν χρόνον τῆς ζωῆς τοῦ βασιλέως
Κύρου

71 καὶ εἴρχθησαν τῆς οἰκοδομῆς ἔτη δύο ἕως τῆς Δαρείου βασιλείας

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Esdras 6](es1006.md)
