[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[2 Esdras Index](es2.md)  
  [Previous](es2002)  [Next](es2004.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 2 Esdras 3

[Apo](../apo/es2003.md)

1 In the thirtieth year after the ruin of the city I was in Babylon, and
lay troubled upon my bed, and my thoughts came up over my heart:

2 For I saw the desolation of Sion, and the wealth of them that dwelt at
Babylon.

3 And my spirit was sore moved, so that I began to speak words full of
fear to the most High, and said,

4 O Lord, who bearest rule, thou spakest at the beginning, when thou
didst plant the earth, and that thyself alone, and commandedst the
people,

5 And gavest a body unto Adam without soul, which was the workmanship of
thine hands, and didst breathe into him the breath of life, and he was
made living before thee.

6 And thou leadest him into paradise, which thy right hand had planted,
before ever the earth came forward.

7 And unto him thou gavest commandment to love thy way: which he
transgressed, and immediately thou appointedst death in him and in his
generations, of whom came nations, tribes, people, and kindreds, out of
number.

8 And every people walked after their own will, and did wonderful things
before thee, and despised thy commandments.

9 And again in process of time thou broughtest the flood upon those that
dwelt in the world, and destroyedst them.

10 And it came to pass in every of them, that as death was to Adam, so
was the flood to these.

11 Nevertheless one of them thou leftest, namely, Noah with his
household, of whom came all righteous men.

12 And it happened, that when they that dwelt upon the earth began to
multiply, and had gotten them many children, and were a great people,
they began again to be more ungodly than the first.

13 Now when they lived so wickedly before thee, thou didst choose thee a
man from among them, whose name was Abraham.

14 Him thou lovedst, and unto him only thou shewedst thy will:

15 And madest an everlasting covenant with him, promising him that thou
wouldest never forsake his seed.

16 And unto him thou gavest Isaac, and unto Isaac also thou gavest Jacob
and Esau. As for Jacob, thou didst choose him to thee, and put by Esau:
and so Jacob became a great multitude.

17 And it came to pass, that when thou leadest his seed out of Egypt,
thou broughtest them up to the mount Sinai.

18 And bowing the heavens, thou didst set fast the earth, movedst the
whole world, and madest the depths to tremble, and troubledst the men of
that age.

19 And thy glory went through four gates, of fire, and of earthquake,
and of wind, and of cold; that thou mightest give the law unto the seed
of Jacob, and diligence unto the generation of Israel.

20 And yet tookest thou not away from them a wicked heart, that thy law
might bring forth fruit in them.

21 For the first Adam bearing a wicked heart transgressed, and was
overcome; and so be all they that are born of him.

22 Thus infirmity was made permanent; and the law (also) in the heart of
the people with the malignity of the root; so that the good departed
away, and the evil abode still.

23 So the times passed away, and the years were brought to an end: then
didst thou raise thee up a servant, called David:

24 Whom thou commandedst to build a city unto thy name, and to offer
incense and oblations unto thee therein.

25 When this was done many years, then they that inhabited the city
forsook thee,

26 And in all things did even as Adam and all his generations had done:
for they also had a wicked heart:

27 And so thou gavest thy city over into the hands of thine enemies.

28 Are their deeds then any better that inhabit Babylon, that they
should therefore have the dominion over Sion?

29 For when I came thither, and had seen impieties without number, then
my soul saw many evildoers in this thirtieth year, so that my heart
failed me.

30 For I have seen how thou sufferest them sinning, and hast spared
wicked doers: and hast destroyed thy people, and hast preserved thine
enemies, and hast not signified it.

31 I do not remember how this way may be left: Are they then of Babylon
better than they of Sion?

32 Or is there any other people that knoweth thee beside Israel? or what
generation hath so believed thy covenants as Jacob?

33 And yet their reward appeareth not, and their labour hath no fruit:
for I have gone here and there through the heathen, and I see that they
flow in wealth, and think not upon thy commandments.

34 Weigh thou therefore our wickedness now in the balance, and their's
also that dwell the world; and so shall thy name no where be found but
in Israel.

35 Or when was it that they which dwell upon the earth have not sinned
in thy sight? or what people have so kept thy commandments?

36 Thou shalt find that Israel by name hath kept thy precepts; but not
the heathen.

[Sep](../sep/es2003.md)

1 καὶ ἔφθασεν ὁ μὴν ὁ ἕβδομος καὶ οἱ υἱοὶ Ισραηλ ἐν πόλεσιν αὐτῶν καὶ
συνήχθη ὁ λαὸς ὡς ἀνὴρ εἷς εἰς Ιερουσαλημ

2 καὶ ἀνέστη Ἰησοῦς ὁ τοῦ Ιωσεδεκ καὶ οἱ ἀδελφοὶ αὐτοῦ ἱερεῖς καὶ
Ζοροβαβελ ὁ τοῦ Σαλαθιηλ καὶ οἱ ἀδελφοὶ αὐτοῦ καὶ ᾠκοδόμησαν τὸ
θυσιαστήριον θεοῦ Ισραηλ τοῦ ἀνενέγκαι ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸ ὁλοκαυτώσεις κατὰ τὰ
γεγραμμένα ἐν νόμῳ Μωυσῆ ἀνθρώπου τοῦ θεοῦ

3 καὶ ἡτοίμασαν τὸ θυσιαστήριον ἐπὶ τὴν ἑτοιμασίαν αὐτοῦ ὅτι ἐν
καταπλήξει ἐπ᾽ αὐτοὺς ἀπὸ τῶν λαῶν τῶν γαιῶν καὶ ἀνέβη ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸ
ὁλοκαύτωσις τῷ κυρίῳ τὸ πρωὶ καὶ εἰς ἑσπέραν

4 καὶ ἐποίησαν τὴν ἑορτὴν τῶν σκηνῶν κατὰ τὸ γεγραμμένον καὶ
ὁλοκαυτώσεις ἡμέραν ἐν ἡμέρᾳ ἐν ἀριθμῷ ὡς ἡ κρίσις λόγον ἡμέρας ἐν ἡμέρᾳ
αὐτοῦ

5 καὶ μετὰ τοῦτο ὁλοκαυτώσεις ἐνδελεχισμοῦ καὶ εἰς τὰς νουμηνίας καὶ εἰς
πάσας ἑορτὰς τὰς ἡγιασμένας καὶ παντὶ ἑκουσιαζομένῳ ἑκούσιον τῷ κυρίῳ

6 ἐν ἡμέρᾳ μιᾷ τοῦ μηνὸς τοῦ ἑβδόμου ἤρξαντο ἀναφέρειν ὁλοκαυτώσεις τῷ
κυρίῳ καὶ ὁ οἶκος κυρίου οὐκ ἐθεμελιώθη

7 καὶ ἔδωκαν ἀργύριον τοῖς λατόμοις καὶ τοῖς τέκτοσιν καὶ βρώματα καὶ
ποτὰ καὶ ἔλαιον τοῖς Σηδανιν καὶ τοῖς Σωριν ἐνέγκαι ξύλα κέδρινα ἀπὸ τοῦ
Λιβάνου πρὸς θάλασσαν Ιόππης κατ᾽ ἐπιχώρησιν Κύρου βασιλέως Περσῶν ἐπ᾽
αὐτούς

8 καὶ ἐν τῷ ἔτει τῷ δευτέρῳ τοῦ ἐλθεῖν αὐτοὺς εἰς οἶκον τοῦ θεοῦ εἰς
Ιερουσαλημ ἐν μηνὶ τῷ δευτέρῳ ἤρξατο Ζοροβαβελ ὁ τοῦ Σαλαθιηλ καὶ Ἰησοῦς
ὁ τοῦ Ιωσεδεκ καὶ οἱ κατάλοιποι τῶν ἀδελφῶν αὐτῶν οἱ ἱερεῖς καὶ οἱ
Λευῖται καὶ πάντες οἱ ἐρχόμενοι ἀπὸ τῆς αἰχμαλωσίας εἰς Ιερουσαλημ καὶ
ἔστησαν τοὺς Λευίτας ἀπὸ εἰκοσαετοῦς καὶ ἐπάνω ἐπὶ τοὺς ποιοῦντας τὰ
ἔργα ἐν οἴκῳ κυρίου

9 καὶ ἔστη Ἰησοῦς καὶ οἱ υἱοὶ αὐτοῦ καὶ οἱ ἀδελφοὶ αὐτοῦ Καδμιηλ καὶ οἱ
υἱοὶ αὐτοῦ υἱοὶ Ιουδα ἐπὶ τοὺς ποιοῦντας τὰ ἔργα ἐν οἴκῳ τοῦ θεοῦ υἱοὶ
Ηναδαδ υἱοὶ αὐτῶν καὶ ἀδελφοὶ αὐτῶν οἱ Λευῖται

10 καὶ ἐθεμελίωσαν τοῦ οἰκοδομῆσαι τὸν οἶκον κυρίου καὶ ἔστησαν οἱ
ἱερεῖς ἐστολισμένοι ἐν σάλπιγξιν καὶ οἱ Λευῖται υἱοὶ Ασαφ ἐν κυμβάλοις
τοῦ αἰνεῖν τὸν κύριον ἐπὶ χεῖρας Δαυιδ βασιλέως Ισραηλ

11 καὶ ἀπεκρίθησαν ἐν αἴνῳ καὶ ἀνθομολογήσει τῷ κυρίῳ ὅτι ἀγαθόν ὅτι εἰς
τὸν αἰῶνα τὸ ἔλεος αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ Ισραηλ καὶ πᾶς ὁ λαὸς ἐσήμαινον φωνὴν
μεγάλην αἰνεῖν τῷ κυρίῳ ἐπὶ θεμελιώσει οἴκου κυρίου

12 καὶ πολλοὶ ἀπὸ τῶν ἱερέων καὶ τῶν Λευιτῶν καὶ ἄρχοντες τῶν πατριῶν οἱ
πρεσβύτεροι οἳ εἴδοσαν τὸν οἶκον τὸν πρῶτον ἐν θεμελιώσει αὐτοῦ καὶ
τοῦτον τὸν οἶκον ἐν ὀφθαλμοῖς αὐτῶν ἔκλαιον φωνῇ μεγάλῃ καὶ ὄχλος ἐν
σημασίᾳ μετ᾽ εὐφροσύνης τοῦ ὑψῶσαι ᾠδήν

13 καὶ οὐκ ἦν ὁ λαὸς ἐπιγινώσκων φωνὴν σημασίας τῆς εὐφροσύνης ἀπὸ τῆς
φωνῆς τοῦ κλαυθμοῦ τοῦ λαοῦ ὅτι ὁ λαὸς ἐκραύγασεν φωνῇ μεγάλῃ καὶ ἡ φωνὴ
ἠκούετο ἕως ἀπὸ μακρόθεν

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Esdras 4](es2004.md)
