[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[2 Esdras Index](es2)  
  [Previous](es2001)  [Next](es2003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 2 Esdras 2

[Apo](../apo/es2002)

1 Thus saith the Lord, I brought this people out of bondage, and I gave
them my commandments by menservants the prophets; whom they would not
hear, but despised my counsels.

2 The mother that bare them saith unto them, Go your way, ye children;
for I am a widow and forsaken.

3 I brought you up with gladness; but with sorrow and heaviness have I
lost you: for ye have sinned before the Lord your God, and done that
thing that is evil before him.

4 But what shall I now do unto you? I am a widow and forsaken: go your
way, O my children, and ask mercy of the Lord.

5 As for me, O father, I call upon thee for a witness over the mother of
these children, which would not keep my covenant,

6 That thou bring them to confusion, and their mother to a spoil, that
there may be no offspring of them.

7 Let them be scattered abroad among the heathen, let their names be put
out of the earth: for they have despised my covenant.

8 Woe be unto thee, Assur, thou that hidest the unrighteous in thee! O
thou wicked people, remember what I did unto Sodom and Gomorrha;

9 Whose land lieth in clods of pitch and heaps of ashes: even so also
will I do unto them that hear me not, saith the Almighty Lord.

10 Thus saith the Lord unto Esdras, Tell my people that I will give them
the kingdom of Jerusalem, which I would have given unto Israel.

11 Their glory also will I take unto me, and give these the everlasting
tabernacles, which I had prepared for them.

12 They shall have the tree of life for an ointment of sweet savour;
they shall neither labour, nor be weary.

13 Go, and ye shall receive: pray for few days unto you, that they may
be shortened: the kingdom is already prepared for you: watch.

14 Take heaven and earth to witness; for I have broken the evil in
pieces, and created the good: for I live, saith the Lord.

15 Mother, embrace thy children, and bring them up with gladness, make
their feet as fast as a pillar: for I have chosen thee, saith the Lord.

16 And those that be dead will I raise up again from their places, and
bring them out of the graves: for I have known my name in Israel.

17 Fear not, thou mother of the children: for I have chosen thee, saith
the Lord.

18 For thy help will I send my servants Esau and Jeremy, after whose
counsel I have sanctified and prepared for thee twelve trees laden with
divers fruits,

19 And as many fountains flowing with milk and honey, and seven mighty
mountains, whereupon there grow roses and lilies, whereby I will fill
thy children with joy.

20 Do right to the widow, judge for the fatherless, give to the poor,
defend the orphan, clothe the naked,

21 Heal the broken and the weak, laugh not a lame man to scorn, defend
the maimed, and let the blind man come into the sight of my clearness.

22 Keep the old and young within thy walls.

23 Wheresoever thou findest the dead, take them and bury them, and I
will give thee the first place in my resurrection.

24 Abide still, O my people, and take thy rest, for thy quietness still
come.

25 Nourish thy children, O thou good nurse; stablish their feet.

26 As for the servants whom I have given thee, there shall not one of
them perish; for I will require them from among thy number.

27 Be not weary: for when the day of trouble and heaviness cometh,
others shall weep and be sorrowful, but thou shalt be merry and have
abundance.

28 The heathen shall envy thee, but they shall be able to do nothing
against thee, saith the Lord.

29 My hands shall cover thee, so that thy children shall not see hell.

30 Be joyful, O thou mother, with thy children; for I will deliver thee,
saith the Lord.

31 Remember thy children that sleep, for I shall bring them out of the
sides of the earth, and shew mercy unto them: for I am merciful, saith
the Lord Almighty.

32 Embrace thy children until I come and shew mercy unto them: for my
wells run over, and my grace shall not fail.

33 I Esdras received a charge of the Lord upon the mount Oreb, that I
should go unto Israel; but when I came unto them, they set me at nought,
and despised the commandment of the Lord.

34 And therefore I say unto you, O ye heathen, that hear and understand,
look for your Shepherd, he shall give you everlasting rest; for he is
nigh at hand, that shall come in the end of the world.

35 Be ready to the reward of the kingdom, for the everlasting light
shall shine upon you for evermore.

36 Flee the shadow of this world, receive the joyfulness of your glory:
I testify my Saviour openly.

37 O receive the gift that is given you, and be glad, giving thanks unto
him that hath led you to the heavenly kingdom.

38 Arise up and stand, behold the number of those that be sealed in the
feast of the Lord;

39 Which are departed from the shadow of the world, and have received
glorious garments of the Lord.

40 Take thy number, O Sion, and shut up those of thine that are clothed
in white, which have fulfilled the law of the Lord.

41 The number of thy children, whom thou longedst for, is fulfilled:
beseech the power of the Lord, that thy people, which have been called
from the beginning, may be hallowed.

42 I Esdras saw upon the mount Sion a great people, whom I could not
number, and they all praised the Lord with songs.

43 And in the midst of them there was a young man of a high stature,
taller than all the rest, and upon every one of their heads he set
crowns, and was more exalted; which I marvelled at greatly.

44 So I asked the angel, and said, Sir, what are these?

45 He answered and said unto me, These be they that have put off the
mortal clothing, and put on the immortal, and have confessed the name of
God: now are they crowned, and receive palms.

46 Then said I unto the angel, What young person is it that crowneth
them, and giveth them palms in their hands?

47 So he answered and said unto me, It is the Son of God, whom they have
confessed in the world. Then began I greatly to commend them that stood
so stiffly for the name of the Lord.

48 Then the angel said unto me, Go thy way, and tell my people what
manner of things, and how great wonders of the Lord thy God, thou hast
seen.

[Sep](../sep/es2002)

1 καὶ οὗτοι οἱ υἱοὶ τῆς χώρας οἱ ἀναβαίνοντες ἀπὸ τῆς αἰχμαλωσίας τῆς
ἀποικίας ἧς ἀπῴκισεν Ναβουχοδονοσορ βασιλεὺς Βαβυλῶνος εἰς Βαβυλῶνα καὶ
ἐπέστρεψαν εἰς Ιερουσαλημ καὶ Ιουδα ἀνὴρ εἰς πόλιν αὐτοῦ

2 οἳ ἦλθον μετὰ Ζοροβαβελ Ἰησοῦς Νεεμιας Σαραιας Ρεελιας Μαρδοχαιος
Βαλασαν Μασφαρ Βαγουι Ρεουμ Βαανα ἀνδρῶν ἀριθμὸς λαοῦ Ισραηλ

3 υἱοὶ Φορος δισχίλιοι ἑκατὸν ἑβδομήκοντα δύο

4 υἱοὶ Σαφατια τριακόσιοι ἑβδομήκοντα δύο

5 υἱοὶ Ηρα ἑπτακόσιοι ἑβδομήκοντα πέντε

6 υἱοὶ Φααθμωαβ τοῖς υἱοῖς Ιησουε Ιωαβ δισχίλιοι ὀκτακόσιοι δέκα δύο

7 υἱοὶ Αιλαμ χίλιοι διακόσιοι πεντήκοντα τέσσαρες

8 υἱοὶ Ζαθουα ἐννακόσιοι τεσσαράκοντα πέντε

9 υἱοὶ Ζακχου ἑπτακόσιοι ἑξήκοντα

10 υἱοὶ Βανουι ἑξακόσιοι τεσσαράκοντα δύο

11 υἱοὶ Βαβι ἑξακόσιοι εἴκοσι τρεῖς

12 υἱοὶ Ασγαδ τρισχίλιοι διακόσιοι εἴκοσι δύο

13 υἱοὶ Αδωνικαμ ἑξακόσιοι ἑξήκοντα ἕξ

14 υἱοὶ Βαγοι δισχίλιοι πεντήκοντα ἕξ

15 υἱοὶ Αδιν τετρακόσιοι πεντήκοντα τέσσαρες

16 υἱοὶ Ατηρ τῷ Εζεκια ἐνενήκοντα ὀκτώ

17 υἱοὶ Βασου τριακόσιοι εἴκοσι τρεῖς

18 υἱοὶ Ιωρα ἑκατὸν δέκα δύο

19 υἱοὶ Ασεμ διακόσιοι εἴκοσι τρεῖς

20 υἱοὶ Γαβερ ἐνενήκοντα πέντε

21 υἱοὶ Βαιθλεεμ ἑκατὸν εἴκοσι τρεῖς

22 υἱοὶ Νετωφα πεντήκοντα ἕξ

23 υἱοὶ Αναθωθ ἑκατὸν εἴκοσι ὀκτώ

24 υἱοὶ Ασμωθ τεσσαράκοντα δύο

25 υἱοὶ Καριαθιαριμ Καφιρα καὶ Βηρωθ ἑπτακόσιοι τεσσαράκοντα τρεῖς

26 υἱοὶ Αραμα καὶ Γαβαα ἑξακόσιοι εἴκοσι εἷς

27 ἄνδρες Μαχμας ἑκατὸν εἴκοσι δύο

28 ἄνδρες Βαιθηλ καὶ Αια τετρακόσιοι εἴκοσι τρεῖς

29 υἱοὶ Ναβου πεντήκοντα δύο

30 υἱοὶ Μαγεβως ἑκατὸν πεντήκοντα ἕξ

31 υἱοὶ Ηλαμ-αρ χίλιοι διακόσιοι πεντήκοντα τέσσαρες

32 υἱοὶ Ηραμ τριακόσιοι εἴκοσι

33 υἱοὶ Λοδ Αρωθ καὶ Ωνω ἑπτακόσιοι εἴκοσι πέντε

34 υἱοὶ Ιεριχω τριακόσιοι τεσσαράκοντα πέντε

35 υἱοὶ Σαναα τρισχίλιοι ἑξακόσιοι τριάκοντα

36 καὶ οἱ ἱερεῖς υἱοὶ Ιεδουα τῷ οἴκῳ Ἰησοῦ ἐννακόσιοι ἑβδομήκοντα τρεῖς

37 υἱοὶ Εμμηρ χίλιοι πεντήκοντα δύο

38 υἱοὶ Φασσουρ χίλιοι διακόσιοι τεσσαράκοντα ἑπτά

39 υἱοὶ Ηρεμ χίλιοι ἑπτά

40 καὶ οἱ Λευῖται υἱοὶ Ἰησοῦ καὶ Καδμιηλ τοῖς υἱοῖς Ωδουια ἑβδομήκοντα
τέσσαρες

41 οἱ ᾄδοντες υἱοὶ Ασαφ ἑκατὸν εἴκοσι ὀκτώ

42 υἱοὶ τῶν πυλωρῶν υἱοὶ Σαλουμ υἱοὶ Ατηρ υἱοὶ Τελμων υἱοὶ Ακουβ υἱοὶ
Ατιτα υἱοὶ Σαβαου οἱ πάντες ἑκατὸν τριάκοντα ἐννέα

43 οἱ ναθιναῖοι υἱοὶ Σουια υἱοὶ Ασουφε υἱοὶ Ταβαωθ

44 υἱοὶ Κηραος υἱοὶ Σωηα υἱοὶ Φαδων

45 υἱοὶ Λαβανω υἱοὶ Αγαβα υἱοὶ Ακαβωθ

46 υἱοὶ Αγαβ υἱοὶ Σαμαλαι υἱοὶ Αναν

47 υἱοὶ Κεδελ υἱοὶ Γαερ υἱοὶ Ρεηα

48 υἱοὶ Ρασων υἱοὶ Νεκωδα υἱοὶ Γαζεμ

49 υἱοὶ Ουσα υἱοὶ Φαση υἱοὶ Βασι

50 υἱοὶ Ασενα υἱοὶ Μαωνιμ υἱοὶ Ναφισων

51 υἱοὶ Βακβουκ υἱοὶ Ακιφα υἱοὶ Αρουρ

52 υἱοὶ Βασαλωθ υἱοὶ Μαουδα υἱοὶ Αρησα

53 υἱοὶ Βαρκους υἱοὶ Σισαρα υἱοὶ Θεμα

54 υἱοὶ Νασουε υἱοὶ Ατουφα

55 υἱοὶ Αβδησελμα υἱοὶ Σατι υἱοὶ Ασεφηραθ υἱοὶ Φαδουρα

56 υἱοὶ Ιεηλα υἱοὶ Δαρκων υἱοὶ Γεδηλ

57 υἱοὶ Σαφατια υἱοὶ Ατιλ υἱοὶ Φαχεραθ-ασεβωιν υἱοὶ Ημι

58 πάντες οἱ ναθινιν καὶ υἱοὶ Αβδησελμα τριακόσιοι ἐνενήκοντα δύο

59 καὶ οὗτοι οἱ ἀναβάντες ἀπὸ Θελμελεθ Θελαρησα Χαρουβ Ηδαν Εμμηρ καὶ
οὐκ ἠδυνάσθησαν τοῦ ἀναγγεῖλαι οἶκον πατριᾶς αὐτῶν καὶ σπέρμα αὐτῶν εἰ
ἐξ Ισραηλ εἰσίν

60 υἱοὶ Δαλαια υἱοὶ Βουα υἱοὶ Τωβια υἱοὶ Νεκωδα ἑξακόσιοι πεντήκοντα δύο

61 καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν υἱῶν τῶν ἱερέων υἱοὶ Χαβια υἱοὶ Ακους υἱοὶ Βερζελλαι ὃς
ἔλαβεν ἀπὸ θυγατέρων Βερζελλαι τοῦ Γαλααδίτου γυναῖκα καὶ ἐκλήθη ἐπὶ τῷ
ὀνόματι αὐτῶν

62 οὗτοι ἐζήτησαν γραφὴν αὐτῶν οἱ μεθωεσιμ καὶ οὐχ εὑρέθησαν καὶ
ἠγχιστεύθησαν ἀπὸ τῆς ἱερατείας

63 καὶ εἶπεν Αθερσαθα αὐτοῖς τοῦ μὴ φαγεῖν ἀπὸ τοῦ ἁγίου τῶν ἁγίων ἕως
ἀναστῇ ἱερεὺς τοῖς φωτίζουσιν καὶ τοῖς τελείοις

64 πᾶσα δὲ ἡ ἐκκλησία ὡς εἷς τέσσαρες μυριάδες δισχίλιοι τριακόσιοι
ἑξήκοντα

65 χωρὶς δούλων αὐτῶν καὶ παιδισκῶν αὐτῶν οὗτοι ἑπτακισχίλιοι τριακόσιοι
τριάκοντα ἑπτά καὶ οὗτοι ᾄδοντες καὶ ᾄδουσαι διακόσιοι

66 ἵπποι αὐτῶν ἑπτακόσιοι τριάκοντα ἕξ ἡμίονοι αὐτῶν διακόσιοι
τεσσαράκοντα πέντε

67 κάμηλοι αὐτῶν τετρακόσιοι τριάκοντα πέντε ὄνοι αὐτῶν ἑξακισχίλιοι
ἑπτακόσιοι εἴκοσι

68 καὶ ἀπὸ ἀρχόντων πατριῶν ἐν τῷ ἐλθεῖν αὐτοὺς εἰς οἶκον κυρίου τὸν ἐν
Ιερουσαλημ ἡκουσιάσαντο εἰς οἶκον τοῦ θεοῦ τοῦ στῆσαι αὐτὸν ἐπὶ τὴν
ἑτοιμασίαν αὐτοῦ

69 ὡς ἡ δύναμις αὐτῶν ἔδωκαν εἰς θησαυρὸν τοῦ ἔργου χρυσίον καθαρόν μναῖ
ἓξ μυριάδες καὶ χίλιαι καὶ ἀργύριον μναῖ πεντακισχίλιαι καὶ κοθωνοι τῶν
ἱερέων ἑκατόν

70 καὶ ἐκάθισαν οἱ ἱερεῖς καὶ οἱ Λευῖται καὶ οἱ ἀπὸ τοῦ λαοῦ καὶ οἱ
ᾄδοντες καὶ οἱ πυλωροὶ καὶ οἱ ναθινιμ ἐν πόλεσιν αὐτῶν καὶ πᾶς Ισραηλ ἐν
πόλεσιν αὐτῶν

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Esdras 3](es2003)
