[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Judith Index](jdt)  
  [Previous](jdt011)  [Next](jdt013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Judith 12

[Apo](../apo/jdt012)

1 Then he commanded to bring her in where his plate was set; and bade
that they should prepare for her of his own meats, and that she should
drink of his own wine.

2 And Judith said, I will not eat thereof, lest there be an offence: but
provision shall be made for me of the things that I have brought.

3 Then Holofernes said unto her, If thy provision should fail, how
should we give thee the like? for there be none with us of thy nation.

4 Then said Judith unto him As thy soul liveth, my lord, thine handmaid
shall not spend those things that I have, before the Lord work by mine
hand the things that he hath determined.

5 Then the servants of Holofernes brought her into the tent, and she
slept till midnight, and she arose when it was toward the morning watch,

6 And sent to Holofernes, saving, Let my lord now command that thine
handmaid may go forth unto prayer.

7 Then Holofernes commanded his guard that they should not stay her:
thus she abode in the camp three days, and went out in the night into
the valley of Bethulia, and washed herself in a fountain of water by the
camp.

8 And when she came out, she besought the Lord God of Israel to direct
her way to the raising up of the children of her people.

9 So she came in clean, and remained in the tent, until she did eat her
meat at evening.

10 And in the fourth day Holofernes made a feast to his own servants
only, and called none of the officers to the banquet.

11 Then said he to Bagoas the eunuch, who had charge over all that he
had, Go now, and persuade this Hebrew woman which is with thee, that she
come unto us, and eat and drink with us.

12 For, lo, it will be a shame for our person, if we shall let such a
woman go, not having had her company; for if we draw her not unto us,
she will laugh us to scorn.

13 Then went Bagoas from the presence of Holofernes, and came to her,
and he said, Let not this fair damsel fear to come to my lord, and to be
honoured in his presence, and drink wine, and be merry with us and be
made this day as one of the daughters of the Assyrians, which serve in
the house of Nabuchodonosor.

14 Then said Judith unto him, Who am I now, that I should gainsay my
lord? surely whatsoever pleaseth him I will do speedily, and it shall be
my joy unto the day of my death.

15 So she arose, and decked herself with her apparel and all her woman's
attire, and her maid went and laid soft skins on the ground for her over
against Holofernes, which she had received of Bagoas far her daily use,
that she might sit and eat upon them.

16 Now when Judith came in and sat down, Holofernes his heart was
ravished with her, and his mind was moved, and he desired greatly her
company; for he waited a time to deceive her, from the day that he had
seen her.

17 Then said Holofernes unto her, Drink now, and be merry with us.

18 So Judith said, I will drink now, my lord, because my life is
magnified in me this day more than all the days since I was born.

19 Then she took and ate and drank before him what her maid had
prepared.

20 And Holofernes took great delight in her, and drank more wine than he
had drunk at any time in one day since he was born.

[Sep](../sep/jdt012)

1 καὶ ἐκέλευσεν εἰσαγαγεῖν αὐτὴν οὗ ἐτίθετο τὰ ἀργυρώματα αὐτοῦ καὶ
συνέταξεν καταστρῶσαι αὐτῇ ἀπὸ τῶν ὀψοποιημάτων αὐτοῦ καὶ τοῦ οἴνου
αὐτοῦ πίνειν

2 καὶ εἶπεν Ιουδιθ οὐ φάγομαι ἐξ αὐτῶν ἵνα μὴ γένηται σκάνδαλον ἀλλ᾽ ἐκ
τῶν ἠκολουθηκότων μοι χορηγηθήσεται

3 καὶ εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτὴν Ολοφέρνης ἐὰν δὲ ἐκλίπῃ τὰ ὄντα μετὰ σοῦ πόθεν
ἐξοίσομέν σοι δοῦναι ὅμοια αὐτοῖς οὐ γάρ ἐστιν μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν ἐκ τοῦ γένους
σου

4 καὶ εἶπεν Ιουδιθ πρὸς αὐτόν ζῇ ἡ ψυχή σου κύριέ μου ὅτι οὐ δαπανήσει ἡ
δούλη σου τὰ ὄντα μετ᾽ ἐμοῦ ἕως ἂν ποιήσῃ κύριος ἐν χειρί μου ἃ
ἐβουλεύσατο

5 καὶ ἠγάγοσαν αὐτὴν οἱ θεράποντες Ολοφέρνου εἰς τὴν σκηνήν καὶ ὕπνωσεν
μέχρι μεσούσης τῆς νυκτός καὶ ἀνέστη πρὸς τὴν ἑωθινὴν φυλακήν

6 καὶ ἀπέστειλεν πρὸς Ολοφέρνην λέγουσα ἐπιταξάτω δὴ ὁ κύριός μου ἐᾶσαι
τὴν δούλην σου ἐπὶ προσευχὴν ἐξελθεῖν

7 καὶ προσέταξεν Ολοφέρνης τοῖς σωματοφύλαξιν μὴ διακωλύειν αὐτήν καὶ
παρέμεινεν ἐν τῇ παρεμβολῇ ἡμέρας τρεῖς καὶ ἐξεπορεύετο κατὰ νύκτα εἰς
τὴν φάραγγα Βαιτυλουα καὶ ἐβαπτίζετο ἐν τῇ παρεμβολῇ ἐπὶ τῆς πηγῆς τοῦ
ὕδατος

8 καὶ ὡς ἀνέβη ἐδέετο τοῦ κυρίου θεοῦ Ισραηλ κατευθῦναι τὴν ὁδὸν αὐτῆς
εἰς ἀνάστημα τῶν υἱῶν τοῦ λαοῦ αὐτοῦ

9 καὶ εἰσπορευομένη καθαρὰ παρέμενεν ἐν τῇ σκηνῇ μέχρι οὗ προσηνέγκατο
τὴν τροφὴν αὐτῆς πρὸς ἑσπέραν

10 καὶ ἐγένετο ἐν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ τῇ τετάρτῃ ἐποίησεν Ολοφέρνης πότον τοῖς
δούλοις αὐτοῦ μόνοις καὶ οὐκ ἐκάλεσεν εἰς τὴν κλῆσιν οὐδένα τῶν πρὸς
ταῖς χρείαις

11 καὶ εἶπεν Βαγώᾳ τῷ εὐνούχῳ ὃς ἦν ἐφεστηκὼς ἐπὶ πάντων τῶν αὐτοῦ
πεῖσον δὴ πορευθεὶς τὴν γυναῖκα τὴν Εβραίαν ἥ ἐστιν παρὰ σοί τοῦ ἐλθεῖν
πρὸς ἡμᾶς καὶ φαγεῖν καὶ πιεῖν μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν

12 ἰδοὺ γὰρ αἰσχρὸν τῷ προσώπῳ ἡμῶν εἰ γυναῖκα τοιαύτην παρήσομεν οὐχ
ὁμιλήσαντες αὐτῇ ὅτι ἐὰν ταύτην μὴ ἐπισπασώμεθα καταγελάσεται ἡμῶν

13 καὶ ἐξῆλθεν Βαγώας ἀπὸ προσώπου Ολοφέρνου καὶ εἰσῆλθεν πρὸς αὐτὴν καὶ
εἶπεν μὴ ὀκνησάτω δὴ ἡ παιδίσκη ἡ καλὴ αὕτη ἐλθοῦσα πρὸς τὸν κύριόν μου
δοξασθῆναι κατὰ πρόσωπον αὐτοῦ καὶ πίεσαι μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν εἰς εὐφροσύνην οἶνον
καὶ γενηθῆναι ἐν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ ταύτῃ ὡς θυγάτηρ μία τῶν υἱῶν Ασσουρ αἳ
παρεστήκασιν ἐν οἴκῳ Ναβουχοδονοσορ

14 καὶ εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτὸν Ιουδιθ καὶ τίς εἰμι ἐγὼ ἀντεροῦσα τῷ κυρίῳ μου
ὅτι πᾶν ὃ ἔσται ἐν τοῖς ὀφθαλμοῖς αὐτοῦ ἀρεστόν σπεύσασα ποιήσω καὶ
ἔσται τοῦτό μοι ἀγαλλίαμα ἕως ἡμέρας θανάτου μου

15 καὶ διαναστᾶσα ἐκοσμήθη τῷ ἱματισμῷ καὶ παντὶ τῷ κόσμῳ τῷ γυναικείῳ
καὶ προσῆλθεν ἡ δούλη αὐτῆς καὶ ἔστρωσεν αὐτῇ κατέναντι Ολοφέρνου χαμαὶ
τὰ κώδια ἃ ἔλαβεν παρὰ Βαγώου εἰς τὴν καθημερινὴν δίαιταν αὐτῆς εἰς τὸ
ἐσθίειν κατακλινομένην ἐπ᾽ αὐτῶν

16 καὶ εἰσελθοῦσα ἀνέπεσεν Ιουδιθ καὶ ἐξέστη ἡ καρδία Ολοφέρνου ἐπ᾽
αὐτήν καὶ ἐσαλεύθη ἡ ψυχὴ αὐτοῦ καὶ ἦν κατεπίθυμος σφόδρα τοῦ
συγγενέσθαι μετ᾽ αὐτῆς καὶ ἐτήρει καιρὸν τοῦ ἀπατῆσαι αὐτὴν ἀφ᾽ ἧς
ἡμέρας εἶδεν αὐτήν

17 καὶ εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτὴν Ολοφέρνης πίε δὴ καὶ γενήθητι μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν εἰς
εὐφροσύνην

18 καὶ εἶπεν Ιουδιθ πίομαι δή κύριε ὅτι ἐμεγαλύνθη τὸ ζῆν μου ἐν ἐμοὶ
σήμερον παρὰ πάσας τὰς ἡμέρας τῆς γενέσεώς μου

19 καὶ λαβοῦσα ἔφαγεν καὶ ἔπιεν κατέναντι αὐτοῦ ἃ ἡτοίμασεν ἡ δούλη
αὐτῆς

20 καὶ ηὐφράνθη Ολοφέρνης ἀπ᾽ αὐτῆς καὶ ἔπιεν οἶνον πολὺν σφόδρα ὅσον
οὐκ ἔπιεν πώποτε ἐν ἡμέρᾳ μιᾷ ἀφ᾽ οὗ ἐγεννήθη

[Vul](../vul/jdt012)

1 Tunc jussit eam introire ubi repositi erant thesauri ejus, et jussit
illic manere eam, et constituit quid daretur illi de convivio suo.

2 Cui respondit Judith, et dixit: Nunc non potero manducare ex his quæ
mihi præcipis tribui, ne veniat super me offensio: ex his autem quæ mihi
detuli, manducabo.

3 Cui Holofernes ait: Si defecerint tibi ista, quæ tecum detulisti, quid
faciemus tibi?

4 Et dixit Judith: Vivit anima tua, domine meus, quoniam non expendet
omnia hæc ancilla tua, donec faciat Deus in manu mea hæc quæ cogitavi.
Et induxerunt illam servi ejus in tabernaculum quod præceperat.

5 Et petiit dum introiret, ut daretur ei copia nocte et ante lucem
egrediendi foras ad orationem, et deprecandi Dominum.

6 Et præcepit cubiculariis suis ut sicut placeret illi, exiret et
introiret ad adorandum Deum suum per triduum:

7 et exibat noctibus in vallem Bethuliæ, et baptizabat se in fonte aquæ.

8 Et ut ascendebat, orabat Dominum Deum Israël ut dirigeret viam ejus ad
liberationem populi sui.

9 Et introiens, munda manebat in tabernaculo usque dum acciperet escam
suam in vespere.

10 Et factum est, in quarto die Holofernes fecit cœnam servis suis, et
dixit ad Vagao eunuchum suum: Vade, et suade Hebræam illam ut sponte
consentiat habitare mecum.

11 Fœdum est enim apud Assyrios, si femina irrideat virum agendo ut
immunis ab eo transeat.  

12 Tunc introivit Vagao ad Judith, et dixit: Non vereatur bona puella
introire ad dominum meum, ut honorificetur ante faciem ejus, ut manducet
cum eo, et bibat vinum in jucunditate.

13 Cui Judith respondit: Quæ ego sum, ut contradicam domino meo?

14 omne quod erit ante oculos ejus bonum et optimum, faciam. Quidquid
autem illi placuerit, hoc mihi erit optimum omnibus diebus vitæ meæ.

15 Et surrexit, et ornavit se vestimento suo, et ingressa stetit ante
faciem ejus.

16 Cor autem Holofernes concussum est: erat enim ardens in
concupiscentia ejus.

17 Et dixit ad eam Holofernes: Bibe nunc, et accumbe in jucunditate,
quoniam invenisti gratiam coram me.

18 Et dixit Judith: Bibam, domine, quoniam magnificata est anima mea
hodie præ omnibus diebus meis.

19 Et accepit, et manducavit et bibit coram ipso ea quæ paraverat illi
ancilla ejus.

20 Et jucundus factus est Holofernes ad eam, bibitque vinum multum
nimis, quantum numquam biberat in vita sua.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judith 13](jdt013)
