[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Judith Index](jdt.md)  
  [Previous](jdt001)  [Next](jdt003.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Judith 2

[Apo](../apo/jdt002.md)

1 And in the eighteenth year, the two and twentieth day of the first
month, there was talk in the house of Nabuchodonosor king of the
Assyrians that he should, as he said, avenge himself on all the earth.

2 So he called unto him all his officers, and all his nobles, and
communicated with them his secret counsel, and concluded the afflicting
of the whole earth out of his own mouth.

3 Then they decreed to destroy all flesh, that did not obey the
commandment of his mouth.

4 And when he had ended his counsel, Nabuchodonosor king of the
Assyrians called Holofernes the chief captain of his army, which was
next unto him, and said unto him.

5 Thus saith the great king, the lord of the whole earth, Behold, thou
shalt go forth from my presence, and take with thee men that trust in
their own strength, of footmen an hundred and twenty thousand; and the
number of horses with their riders twelve thousand.

6 And thou shalt go against all the west country, because they disobeyed
my commandment.

7 And thou shalt declare unto that they prepare for me earth and water:
for I will go forth in my wrath against them and will cover the whole
face of the earth with the feet of mine army, and I will give them for a
spoil unto them:

8 So that their slain shall fill their valleys and brooks and the river
shall be filled with their dead, till it overflow:

9 And I will lead them captives to the utmost parts of all the earth.

10 Thou therefore shalt go forth. and take beforehand for me all their
coasts: and if they will yield themselves unto thee, thou shalt reserve
them for me till the day of their punishment.

11 But concerning them that rebel, let not thine eye spare them; but put
them to the slaughter, and spoil them wheresoever thou goest.

12 For as I live, and by the power of my kingdom, whatsoever I have
spoken, that will I do by mine hand.

13 And take thou heed that thou transgress none of the commandments of
thy lord, but accomplish them fully, as I have commanded thee, and defer
not to do them.

14 Then Holofernes went forth from the presence of his lord, and called
ail the governors and captains, and the officers of the army of Assur;

15 And he mustered the chosen men for the battle, as his lord had
commanded him, unto an hundred and twenty thousand, and twelve thousand
archers on horseback;

16 And he ranged them, as a great army is ordered for the war.

17 And he took camels and asses for their carriages, a very great
number; and sheep and oxen and goats without number for their provision:

18 And plenty of victual for every man of the army, and very much gold
and silver out of the king's house.

19 Then he went forth and all his power to go before king Nabuchodonosor
in the voyage, and to cover all the face of the earth westward with
their chariots, and horsemen, and their chosen footmen.

20 A great number also sundry countries came with them like locusts, and
like the sand of the earth: for the multitude was without number.

21 And they went forth of Nineve three days' journey toward the plain of
Bectileth, and pitched from Bectileth near the mountain which is at the
left hand of the upper Cilicia.

22 Then he took all his army, his footmen, and horsemen and chariots,
and went from thence into the hill country;

23 And destroyed Phud and Lud, and spoiled all the children of Rasses,
and the children of Israel, which were toward the wilderness at the
south of the land of the Chellians.

24 Then he went over Euphrates, and went through Mesopotamia, and
destroyed all the high cities that were upon the river Arbonai, till ye
come to the sea.

25 And he took the borders of Cilicia, and killed all that resisted him,
and came to the borders of Japheth, which were toward the south, over
against Arabia.

26 He compassed also all the children of Madian, and burned up their
tabernacles, and spoiled their sheepcotes.

27 Then he went down into the plain of Damascus in the time of wheat
harvest, and burnt up all their fields, and destroyed their flocks and
herds, also he spoiled their cities, and utterly wasted their countries,
and smote all their young men with the edge of the sword.

28 Therefore the fear and dread of him fell upon all the inhabitants of
the sea coasts, which were in Sidon and Tyrus, and them that dwelt in
Sur and Ocina, and all that dwelt in Jemnaan; and they that dwelt in
Azotus and Ascalon feared him greatly.

[Sep](../sep/jdt002.md)

1 καὶ ἐν τῷ ἔτει τῷ ὀκτωκαιδεκάτῳ δευτέρᾳ καὶ εἰκάδι τοῦ πρώτου μηνὸς
ἐγένετο λόγος ἐν οἴκῳ Ναβουχοδονοσορ βασιλέως Ἀσσυρίων ἐκδικῆσαι πᾶσαν
τὴν γῆν καθὼς ἐλάλησεν

2 καὶ συνεκάλεσεν πάντας τοὺς θεράποντας αὐτοῦ καὶ πάντας τοὺς
μεγιστᾶνας αὐτοῦ καὶ ἔθετο μετ᾽ αὐτῶν τὸ μυστήριον τῆς βουλῆς αὐτοῦ καὶ
συνετέλεσεν πᾶσαν τὴν κακίαν τῆς γῆς ἐκ τοῦ στόματος αὐτοῦ

3 καὶ αὐτοὶ ἔκριναν ὀλεθρεῦσαι πᾶσαν σάρκα οἳ οὐκ ἠκολούθησαν τῷ λόγῳ
τοῦ στόματος αὐτοῦ

4 καὶ ἐγένετο ὡς συνετέλεσεν τὴν βουλὴν αὐτοῦ ἐκάλεσεν Ναβουχοδονοσορ
βασιλεὺς Ἀσσυρίων τὸν Ολοφέρνην ἀρχιστράτηγον τῆς δυνάμεως αὐτοῦ
δεύτερον ὄντα μετ᾽ αὐτὸν καὶ εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτόν

5 τάδε λέγει ὁ βασιλεὺς ὁ μέγας ὁ κύριος πάσης τῆς γῆς ἰδοὺ σὺ ἐξελεύσῃ
ἐκ τοῦ προσώπου μου καὶ λήμψῃ μετὰ σεαυτοῦ ἄνδρας πεποιθότας ἐν ἰσχύι
αὐτῶν πεζῶν εἰς χιλιάδας ἑκατὸν εἴκοσι καὶ πλῆθος ἵππων σὺν ἀναβάταις
χιλιάδας δέκα δύο

6 καὶ ἐξελεύσῃ εἰς συνάντησιν πάσῃ τῇ γῇ ἐπὶ δυσμάς ὅτι ἠπείθησαν τῷ
ῥήματι τοῦ στόματός μου

7 καὶ ἀπαγγελεῖς αὐτοῖς ἑτοιμάζειν γῆν καὶ ὕδωρ ὅτι ἐξελεύσομαι ἐν θυμῷ
μου ἐπ᾽ αὐτοὺς καὶ καλύψω πᾶν τὸ πρόσωπον τῆς γῆς ἐν τοῖς ποσὶν τῆς
δυνάμεώς μου καὶ δώσω αὐτοὺς εἰς διαρπαγὴν αὐτοῖς

8 καὶ οἱ τραυματίαι αὐτῶν πληρώσουσιν τὰς φάραγγας αὐτῶν καὶ πᾶς
χειμάρρους καὶ ποταμὸς ἐπικλύζων τοῖς νεκροῖς αὐτῶν πληρωθήσεται

9 καὶ ἄξω τὴν αἰχμαλωσίαν αὐτῶν ἐπὶ τὰ ἄκρα πάσης τῆς γῆς

10 σὺ δὲ ἐξελθὼν προκαταλήμψῃ μοι πᾶν ὅριον αὐτῶν καὶ ἐκδώσουσίν σοι
ἑαυτούς καὶ διατηρήσεις ἐμοὶ αὐτοὺς εἰς ἡμέραν ἐλεγμοῦ αὐτῶν

11 ἐπὶ δὲ τοὺς ἀπειθοῦντας οὐ φείσεται ὁ ὀφθαλμός σου τοῦ δοῦναι αὐτοὺς
εἰς φόνον καὶ ἁρπαγὴν ἐν πάσῃ τῇ γῇ σου

12 ὅτι ζῶν ἐγὼ καὶ τὸ κράτος τῆς βασιλείας μου λελάληκα καὶ ποιήσω ταῦτα
ἐν χειρί μου

13 καὶ σὺ δὲ οὐ παραβήσῃ ἕν τι τῶν ῥημάτων τοῦ κυρίου σου ἀλλὰ ἐπιτελῶν
ἐπιτελέσεις καθότι προστέταχά σοι καὶ οὐ μακρυνεῖς τοῦ ποιῆσαι αὐτά

14 καὶ ἐξῆλθεν Ολοφέρνης ἀπὸ προσώπου τοῦ κυρίου αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐκάλεσεν
πάντας τοὺς δυνάστας καὶ τοὺς στρατηγοὺς καὶ ἐπιστάτας τῆς δυνάμεως
Ασσουρ

15 καὶ ἠρίθμησεν ἐκλεκτοὺς ἄνδρας εἰς παράταξιν καθότι ἐκέλευσεν αὐτῷ ὁ
κύριος αὐτοῦ εἰς μυριάδας δέκα δύο καὶ ἱππεῖς τοξότας μυρίους δισχιλίους

16 καὶ διέταξεν αὐτοὺς ὃν τρόπον πολέμου πλῆθος συντάσσεται

17 καὶ ἔλαβεν καμήλους καὶ ὄνους καὶ ἡμιόνους εἰς τὴν ἀπαρτίαν αὐτῶν
πλῆθος πολὺ σφόδρα καὶ πρόβατα καὶ βόας καὶ αἶγας εἰς τὴν παρασκευὴν
αὐτῶν ὧν οὐκ ἦν ἀριθμός

18 καὶ ἐπισιτισμὸν παντὶ ἀνδρὶ εἰς πλῆθος καὶ χρυσίον καὶ ἀργύριον ἐξ
οἴκου βασιλέως πολὺ σφόδρα

19 καὶ ἐξῆλθεν αὐτὸς καὶ πᾶσα ἡ δύναμις αὐτοῦ εἰς πορείαν τοῦ προελθεῖν
βασιλέως Ναβουχοδονοσορ καὶ καλύψαι πᾶν τὸ πρόσωπον τῆς γῆς πρὸς δυσμαῖς
ἐν ἅρμασι καὶ ἱππεῦσι καὶ πεζοῖς ἐπιλέκτοις αὐτῶν

20 καὶ πολὺς ὁ ἐπίμικτος ὡς ἀκρὶς συνεξῆλθον αὐτοῖς καὶ ὡς ἡ ἄμμος τῆς
γῆς οὐ γὰρ ἦν ἀριθμὸς ἀπὸ πλήθους αὐτῶν

21 καὶ ἀπῆλθον ἐκ Νινευη ὁδὸν τριῶν ἡμερῶν ἐπὶ πρόσωπον τοῦ πεδίου
Βεκτιλεθ καὶ ἐπεστρατοπέδευσαν ἀπὸ Βεκτιλεθ πλησίον τοῦ ὄρους τοῦ ἐπ᾽
ἀριστερᾷ τῆς ἄνω Κιλικίας

22 καὶ ἔλαβεν πᾶσαν τὴν δύναμιν αὐτοῦ τοὺς πεζοὺς καὶ τοὺς ἱππεῖς καὶ τὰ
ἅρματα αὐτοῦ καὶ ἀπῆλθεν ἐκεῖθεν εἰς τὴν ὀρεινήν

23 καὶ διέκοψεν τὸ Φουδ καὶ Λουδ καὶ ἐπρονόμευσεν υἱοὺς πάντας Ρασσις
καὶ υἱοὺς Ισμαηλ τοὺς κατὰ πρόσωπον τῆς ἐρήμου πρὸς νότον τῆς Χελεων

24 καὶ παρῆλθεν τὸν Εὐφράτην καὶ διῆλθεν τὴν Μεσοποταμίαν καὶ κατέσκαψεν
πάσας τὰς πόλεις τὰς ὑψηλὰς τὰς ἐπὶ τοῦ χειμάρρου Αβρωνα ἕως τοῦ ἐλθεῖν
ἐπὶ θάλασσαν

25 καὶ κατελάβετο τὰ ὅρια τῆς Κιλικίας καὶ κατέκοψε πάντας τοὺς
ἀντιστάντας αὐτῷ καὶ ἦλθεν ἕως ὁρίων Ιαφεθ τὰ πρὸς νότον κατὰ πρόσωπον
τῆς Ἀραβίας

26 καὶ ἐκύκλωσεν πάντας τοὺς υἱοὺς Μαδιαμ καὶ ἐνέπρησεν τὰ σκηνώματα
αὐτῶν καὶ ἐπρονόμευσεν τὰς μάνδρας αὐτῶν

27 καὶ κατέβη εἰς πεδίον Δαμασκοῦ ἐν ἡμέραις θερισμοῦ πυρῶν καὶ
ἐνέπρησεν πάντας τοὺς ἀγροὺς αὐτῶν καὶ τὰ ποίμνια καὶ τὰ βουκόλια ἔδωκεν
εἰς ἀφανισμὸν καὶ τὰς πόλεις αὐτῶν ἐσκύλευσεν καὶ τὰ πεδία αὐτῶν
ἐξελίκμησεν καὶ ἐπάταξεν πάντας τοὺς νεανίσκους αὐτῶν ἐν στόματι
ῥομφαίας

28 καὶ ἐπέπεσεν φόβος καὶ τρόμος αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ τοὺς κατοικοῦντας τὴν
παραλίαν τοὺς ὄντας ἐν Σιδῶνι καὶ ἐν Τύρῳ καὶ τοὺς κατοικοῦντας Σουρ καὶ
Οκινα καὶ πάντας τοὺς κατοικοῦντας Ιεμνααν καὶ οἱ κατοικοῦντες ἐν Ἀζώτῳ
καὶ Ἀσκαλῶνι ἐφοβήθησαν αὐτὸν σφόδρα

[Vul](../vul/jdt002.md)

1 Anno tertiodecimo Nabuchodonosor regis, vigesima et secunda die mensis
primi, factum est verbum in domo Nabuchodonosor regis Assyriorum ut
defenderet se.

2 Vocavitque omnes majores natu, omnesque duces et bellatores suos, et
habuit cum eis mysterium consilii sui:

3 dixitque cogitationem suam in eo esse, ut omnem terram suo subjugaret
imperio.

4 Quod dictum cum placuisset omnibus, vocavit Nabuchodonosor rex
Holofernem principem militiæ suæ,

5 et dixit ei: Egredere adversus omne regnum occidentis, et contra eos
præcipue, qui contempserunt imperium eum.

6 Non parcet oculus tuus ulli regno, omnemque urbem munitam subjugabis
mihi.

7 Tunc Holofernes vocavit duces et magistratus virtutis Assyriorum, et
dinumeravit viros in expeditionem sicut præcepit ei rex, centum viginti
millia peditum pugnatorum, et equitum sagittariorum duodecim millia.

8 Omnemque expeditionem suam fecit præire in multitudine innumerabilium
camelorum, cum his quæ exercitibus sufficerent copiose, boum quoque
armenta, gregesque ovium, quorum non erat numerus.

9 Frumentum ex omni Syria in transitu suo parari constituit.

10 Aurum vero et argentum de domo regis assumpsit multum nimis.

11 Et profectus est ipse, et omnis exercitus cum quadrigis, et
equitibus, et sagittariis: qui cooperuerunt faciem terræ sicut locustæ.

12 Cumque pertransisset fines Assyriorum, venit ad magnos montes Ange,
qui sunt a sinistro Ciliciæ: ascenditque omnia castella eorum, et
obtinuit omnem munitionem.

13 Effregit autem civitatem opinatissimam Melothi, prædavitque omnes
filios Tharsis et filios Ismaël qui erant contra faciem deserti, et ad
austrum terræ Cellon.

14 Et transivit Euphraten, et venit in Mesopotamiam: et fregit omnes
civitates excelsas quæ erant ibi, a torrente Mambre usquequo perveniatur
ad mare:

15 et occupavit terminos ejus, a Cilicia usque ad fines Japheth qui sunt
ad austrum.

16 Abduxitque omnes filios Madian, et prædavit omnem locupletationem
eorum, omnesque resistentes sibi occidit in ore gladii.

17 Et post hæc descendit in campos Damasci in diebus messis, et
succendit omnia sata, omnesque arbores, et vineas fecit incidi:

18 et cecidit timor illius super omnes inhabitantes terram.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judith 3](jdt003.md)
