[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[1 Macabees Index](ma1.md)  
  [Previous](ma1011)  [Next](ma1013.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1 Macabees 12

[Apo](../apo/ma1012.md)

1 Now when Jonathan saw that time served him, he chose certain men, and
sent them to Rome, for to confirm and renew the friendship that they had
with them.

2 He sent letters also to the Lacedemonians, and to other places, for
the same purpose.

3 So they went unto Rome, and entered into the senate, and said,
Jonathan the high priest, and the people of the Jews, sent us unto you,
to the end ye should renew the friendship, which ye had with them, and
league, as in former time.

4 Upon this the Romans gave them letters unto the governors of every
place that they should bring them into the land of Judea peaceably.

5 And this is the copy of the letters which Jonathan wrote to the
Lacedemonians:

6 Jonathan the high priest, and the elders of the nation, and the
priests, and the other of the Jews, unto the Lacedemonians their
brethren send greeting:

7 There were letters sent in times past unto Onias the high priest from
Darius, who reigned then among you, to signify that ye are our brethren,
as the copy here underwritten doth specify.

8 At which time Onias entreated the ambassador that was sent honourably,
and received the letters, wherein declaration was made of the league and
friendship.

9 Therefore we also, albeit we need none of these things, that we have
the holy books of scripture in our hands to comfort us,

10 Have nevertheless attempted to send unto you for the renewing of
brotherhood and friendship, lest we should become strangers unto you
altogether: for there is a long time passed since ye sent unto us.

11 We therefore at all times without ceasing, both in our feasts, and
other convenient days, do remember you in the sacrifices which we offer,
and in our prayers, as reason is, and as it becometh us to think upon
our brethren:

12 And we are right glad of your honour.

13 As for ourselves, we have had great troubles and wars on every side,
forsomuch as the kings that are round about us have fought against us.

14 Howbeit we would not be troublesome unto you, nor to others of our
confederates and friends, in these wars:

15 For we have help from heaven that succoureth us, so as we are
delivered from our enemies, and our enemies are brought under foot.

16 For this cause we chose Numenius the son of Antiochus, and Antipater
he son of Jason, and sent them unto the Romans, to renew the amity that
we had with them, and the former league.

17 We commanded them also to go unto you, and to salute and to deliver
you our letters concerning the renewing of our brotherhood.

18 Wherefore now ye shall do well to give us an answer thereto.

19 And this is the copy of the letters which Oniares sent.

20 Areus king of the Lacedemonians to Onias the high priest, greeting:

21 It is found in writing, that the Lacedemonians and Jews are brethren,
and that they are of the stock of Abraham:

22 Now therefore, since this is come to our knowledge, ye shall do well
to write unto us of your prosperity.

23 We do write back again to you, that your cattle and goods are our's,
and our's are your's We do command therefore our ambassadors to make
report unto you on this wise.

24 Now when Jonathan heard that Demebius' princes were come to fight
against him with a greater host than afore,

25 He removed from Jerusalem, and met them in the land of Amathis: for
he gave them no respite to enter his country.

26 He sent spies also unto their tents, who came again, and told him
that they were appointed to come upon them in the night season.

27 Wherefore so soon as the sun was down, Jonathan commanded his men to
watch, and to be in arms, that all the night long they might be ready to
fight: also he sent forth centinels round about the host.

28 But when the adversaries heard that Jonathan and his men were ready
for battle, they feared, and trembled in their hearts, and they kindled
fires in their camp.

29 Howbeit Jonathan and his company knew it not till the morning: for
they saw the lights burning.

30 Then Jonathan pursued after them, but overtook them not: for they
were gone over the river Eleutherus.

31 Wherefore Jonathan turned to the Arabians, who were called Zabadeans,
and smote them, and took their spoils.

32 And removing thence, he came to Damascus, and so passed through all
the country,

33 Simon also went forth, and passed through the country unto Ascalon,
and the holds there adjoining, from whence he turned aside to Joppa, and
won it.

34 For he had heard that they would deliver the hold unto them that took
Demetrius' part; wherefore he set a garrison there to keep it.

35 After this came Jonathan home again, and calling the elders of the
people together, he consulted with them about building strong holds in
Judea,

36 And making the walls of Jerusalem higher, and raising a great mount
between the tower and the city, for to separate it from the city, that
so it might be alone, that men might neither sell nor buy in it.

37 Upon this they came together to build up the city, forasmuch as part
of the wall toward the brook on the east side was fallen down, and they
repaired that which was called Caphenatha.

38 Simon also set up Adida in Sephela, and made it strong with gates and
bars.

39 Now Tryphon went about to get the kingdom of Asia, and to kill
Antiochus the king, that he might set the crown upon his own head.

40 Howbeit he was afraid that Jonathan would not suffer him, and that he
would fight against him; wherefore he sought a way how to take Jonathan,
that he might kill him. So he removed, and came to Bethsan.

41 Then Jonathan went out to meet him with forty thousand men chosen for
the battle, and came to Bethsan.

42 Now when Tryphon saw Jonathan came with so great a force, he durst
not stretch his hand against him;

43 But received him honourably, and commended him unto all his friends,
and gave him gifts, and commanded his men of war to be as obedient unto
him, as to himself.

44 Unto Jonathan also he said, Why hast thou brought all this people to
so great trouble, seeing there is no war betwixt us?

45 Therefore send them now home again, and choose a few men to wait on
thee, and come thou with me to Ptolemais, for I will give it thee, and
the rest of the strong holds and forces, and all that have any charge:
as for me, I will return and depart: for this is the cause of my coming.

46 So Jonathan believing him did as he bade him, and sent away his host,
who went into the land of Judea.

47 And with himself he retained but three thousand men, of whom he sent
two thousand into Galilee, and one thousand went with him.

48 Now as soon as Jonathan entered into Ptolemais, they of Ptolemais
shut the gates and took him, and all them that came with him they slew
with the sword.

49 Then sent Tryphon an host of footmen and horsemen into Galilee, and
into the great plain, to destroy all Jonathan's company.

50 But when they knew that Jonathan and they that were with him were
taken and slain, they encouraged one another; and went close together,
prepared to fight.

51 They therefore that followed upon them, perceiving that they were
ready to fight for their lives, turned back again.

52 Whereupon they all came into the land of Judea peaceably, and there
they bewailed Jonathan, and them that were with him, and they were sore
afraid; wherefore all Israel made great lamentation.

53 Then all the heathen that were round about then sought to destroy
them: for said they, They have no captain, nor any to help them: now
therefore let us make war upon them, and take away their memorial from
among men.

[Sep](../sep/ma1012.md)

1 καὶ εἶδεν Ιωναθαν ὅτι ὁ καιρὸς αὐτῷ συνεργεῖ καὶ ἐπελέξατο ἄνδρας καὶ
ἀπέστειλεν εἰς Ῥώμην στῆσαι καὶ ἀνανεώσασθαι τὴν πρὸς αὐτοὺς φιλίαν

2 καὶ πρὸς Σπαρτιάτας καὶ τόπους ἑτέρους ἀπέστειλεν ἐπιστολὰς κατὰ τὰ
αὐτά

3 καὶ ἐπορεύθησαν εἰς Ῥώμην καὶ εἰσῆλθον εἰς τὸ βουλευτήριον καὶ εἶπον
Ιωναθαν ὁ ἀρχιερεὺς καὶ τὸ ἔθνος τῶν Ιουδαίων ἀπέστειλεν ἡμᾶς
ἀνανεώσασθαι τὴν φιλίαν ἑαυτοῖς καὶ τὴν συμμαχίαν κατὰ τὸ πρότερον

4 καὶ ἔδωκαν ἐπιστολὰς αὐτοῖς πρὸς αὐτοὺς κατὰ τόπον ὅπως προπέμπωσιν
αὐτοὺς εἰς γῆν Ιουδα μετ᾽ εἰρήνης

5 καὶ τοῦτο τὸ ἀντίγραφον τῶν ἐπιστολῶν ὧν ἔγραψεν Ιωναθαν τοῖς
Σπαρτιάταις

6 Ιωναθαν ἀρχιερεὺς καὶ ἡ γερουσία τοῦ ἔθνους καὶ οἱ ἱερεῖς καὶ ὁ λοιπὸς
δῆμος τῶν Ιουδαίων Σπαρτιάταις τοῖς ἀδελφοῖς χαίρειν

7 ἔτι πρότερον ἀπεστάλησαν ἐπιστολαὶ πρὸς Ονιαν τὸν ἀρχιερέα παρὰ Ἀρείου
τοῦ βασιλεύοντος ἐν ὑμῖν ὅτι ἐστὲ ἀδελφοὶ ἡμῶν ὡς τὸ ἀντίγραφον
ὑπόκειται

8 καὶ ἐπεδέξατο ὁ Ονιας τὸν ἄνδρα τὸν ἀπεσταλμένον ἐνδόξως καὶ ἔλαβεν
τὰς ἐπιστολάς ἐν αἷς διεσαφεῖτο περὶ συμμαχίας καὶ φιλίας

9 ἡμεῖς οὖν ἀπροσδεεῖς τούτων ὄντες παράκλησιν ἔχοντες τὰ βιβλία τὰ ἅγια
τὰ ἐν ταῖς χερσὶν ἡμῶν

10 ἐπειράθημεν ἀποστεῖλαι τὴν πρὸς ὑμᾶς ἀδελφότητα καὶ φιλίαν
ἀνανεώσασθαι πρὸς τὸ μὴ ἐξαλλοτριωθῆναι ὑμῶν πολλοὶ γὰρ καιροὶ διῆλθον
ἀφ᾽ οὗ ἀπεστείλατε πρὸς ἡμᾶς

11 ἡμεῖς οὖν ἐν παντὶ καιρῷ ἀδιαλείπτως ἔν τε ταῖς ἑορταῖς καὶ ταῖς
λοιπαῖς καθηκούσαις ἡμέραις μιμνῃσκόμεθα ὑμῶν ἐφ᾽ ὧν προσφέρομεν θυσιῶν
καὶ ἐν ταῖς προσευχαῖς ὡς δέον ἐστὶν καὶ πρέπον μνημονεύειν ἀδελφῶν

12 εὐφραινόμεθα δὲ ἐπὶ τῇ δόξῃ ὑμῶν

13 ἡμᾶς δὲ ἐκύκλωσαν πολλαὶ θλίψεις καὶ πόλεμοι πολλοί καὶ ἐπολέμησαν
ἡμᾶς οἱ βασιλεῖς οἱ κύκλῳ ἡμῶν

14 οὐκ ἠβουλόμεθα οὖν παρενοχλῆσαι ὑμῖν καὶ τοῖς λοιποῖς συμμάχοις καὶ
φίλοις ἡμῶν ἐν τοῖς πολέμοις τούτοις

15 ἔχομεν γὰρ τὴν ἐξ οὐρανοῦ βοήθειαν βοηθοῦσαν ἡμῖν καὶ ἐρρύσθημεν ἀπὸ
τῶν ἐχθρῶν καὶ ἐταπεινώθησαν οἱ ἐχθροὶ ἡμῶν

16 ἐπελέξαμεν οὖν Νουμήνιον Ἀντιόχου καὶ Ἀντίπατρον Ἰάσονος καὶ
ἀπεστάλκαμεν πρὸς Ῥωμαίους ἀνανεώσασθαι τὴν πρὸς αὐτοὺς φιλίαν καὶ
συμμαχίαν τὴν πρότερον

17 ἐνετειλάμεθα οὖν αὐτοῖς καὶ πρὸς ὑμᾶς πορευθῆναι καὶ ἀσπάσασθαι ὑμᾶς
καὶ ἀποδοῦναι ὑμῖν τὰς παρ᾽ ἡμῶν ἐπιστολὰς περὶ τῆς ἀνανεώσεως καὶ τῆς
ἀδελφότητος ἡμῶν

18 καὶ νῦν καλῶς ποιήσετε ἀντιφωνήσαντες ἡμῖν πρὸς ταῦτα

19 καὶ τοῦτο τὸ ἀντίγραφον τῶν ἐπιστολῶν ὧν ἀπέστειλαν Ονια

20 Ἄρειος βασιλεὺς Σπαρτιατῶν Ονια ἱερεῖ μεγάλῳ χαίρειν

21 εὑρέθη ἐν γραφῇ περί τε τῶν Σπαρτιατῶν καὶ Ιουδαίων ὅτι εἰσὶν ἀδελφοὶ
καὶ ὅτι εἰσὶν ἐκ γένους Αβρααμ

22 καὶ νῦν ἀφ᾽ οὗ ἔγνωμεν ταῦτα καλῶς ποιήσετε γράφοντες ἡμῖν περὶ τῆς
εἰρήνης ὑμῶν

23 καὶ ἡμεῖς δὲ ἀντιγράφομεν ὑμῖν τὰ κτήνη ὑμῶν καὶ ἡ ὕπαρξις ὑμῶν ἡμῖν
ἐστιν καὶ τὰ ἡμῶν ὑμῖν ἐστιν ἐντελλόμεθα οὖν ὅπως ἀπαγγείλωσιν ὑμῖν κατὰ
ταῦτα

24 καὶ ἤκουσεν Ιωναθαν ὅτι ἐπέστρεψαν οἱ ἄρχοντες Δημητρίου μετὰ
δυνάμεως πολλῆς ὑπὲρ τὸ πρότερον τοῦ πολεμῆσαι πρὸς αὐτόν

25 καὶ ἀπῆρεν ἐξ Ιερουσαλημ καὶ ἀπήντησεν αὐτοῖς εἰς τὴν Αμαθῖτιν χώραν
οὐ γὰρ ἔδωκεν αὐτοῖς ἀνοχὴν τοῦ ἐμβατεῦσαι εἰς τὴν χώραν αὐτοῦ

26 καὶ ἀπέστειλεν κατασκόπους εἰς τὴν παρεμβολὴν αὐτῶν καὶ ἐπέστρεψαν
καὶ ἀπήγγειλαν αὐτῷ ὅτι οὕτως τάσσονται ἐπιπεσεῖν ἐπ᾽ αὐτοὺς τὴν νύκτα

27 ὡς δὲ ἔδυ ὁ ἥλιος ἐπέταξεν Ιωναθαν τοῖς παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ γρηγορεῖν καὶ
εἶναι ἐπὶ τοῖς ὅπλοις ἑτοιμάζεσθαι εἰς πόλεμον δι᾽ ὅλης τῆς νυκτὸς καὶ
ἐξέβαλεν προφύλακας κύκλῳ τῆς παρεμβολῆς

28 καὶ ἤκουσαν οἱ ὑπεναντίοι ὅτι ἡτοίμασται Ιωναθαν καὶ οἱ παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ
εἰς πόλεμον καὶ ἐφοβήθησαν καὶ ἔπτηξαν τῇ καρδίᾳ αὐτῶν καὶ ἀνέκαυσαν
πυρὰς ἐν τῇ παρεμβολῇ αὐτῶν

29 Ιωναθαν δὲ καὶ οἱ παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ οὐκ ἔγνωσαν ἕως πρωί ἔβλεπον γὰρ τὰ φῶτα
καιόμενα

30 καὶ κατεδίωξεν Ιωναθαν ὀπίσω αὐτῶν καὶ οὐ κατέλαβεν αὐτούς διέβησαν
γὰρ τὸν Ἐλεύθερον ποταμόν

31 καὶ ἐξέκλινεν Ιωναθαν ἐπὶ τοὺς Ἄραβας τοὺς καλουμένους Ζαβαδαίους καὶ
ἐπάταξεν αὐτοὺς καὶ ἔλαβεν τὰ σκῦλα αὐτῶν

32 καὶ ἀναζεύξας ἦλθεν εἰς Δαμασκὸν καὶ διώδευσεν ἐν πάσῃ τῇ χώρᾳ

33 καὶ Σιμων ἐξῆλθεν καὶ διώδευσεν ἕως Ἀσκαλῶνος καὶ τὰ πλησίον
ὀχυρώματα καὶ ἐξέκλινεν εἰς Ιοππην καὶ προκατελάβετο αὐτήν

34 ἤκουσεν γὰρ ὅτι βούλονται τὸ ὀχύρωμα παραδοῦναι τοῖς παρὰ Δημητρίου
καὶ ἔθετο ἐκεῖ φρουράν ὅπως φυλάσσωσιν αὐτήν

35 καὶ ἐπέστρεψεν Ιωναθαν καὶ ἐξεκκλησίασεν τοὺς πρεσβυτέρους τοῦ λαοῦ
καὶ ἐβουλεύετο μετ᾽ αὐτῶν τοῦ οἰκοδομῆσαι ὀχυρώματα ἐν τῇ Ιουδαίᾳ

36 καὶ προσυψῶσαι τὰ τείχη Ιερουσαλημ καὶ ὑψῶσαι ὕψος μέγα ἀνὰ μέσον τῆς
ἄκρας καὶ τῆς πόλεως εἰς τὸ διαχωρίζειν αὐτὴν τῆς πόλεως ἵνα ᾖ αὕτη κατὰ
μόνας ὅπως μήτε ἀγοράζωσιν μήτε πωλῶσιν

37 καὶ συνήχθησαν τοῦ οἰκοδομεῖν τὴν πόλιν καὶ ἔπεσεν τοῦ τείχους τοῦ
χειμάρρου τοῦ ἐξ ἀπηλιώτου καὶ ἐπεσκεύασεν τὸ καλούμενον Χαφεναθα

38 καὶ Σιμων ᾠκοδόμησεν τὴν Αδιδα ἐν τῇ Σεφηλα καὶ ὠχύρωσεν αὐτὴν καὶ
ἐπέστησεν θύρας καὶ μοχλούς

39 καὶ ἐζήτησεν Τρύφων βασιλεῦσαι τῆς Ἀσίας καὶ περιθέσθαι τὸ διάδημα
καὶ ἐκτεῖναι χεῖρα ἐπ᾽ Ἀντίοχον τὸν βασιλέα

40 καὶ εὐλαβήθη μήποτε οὐκ ἐάσῃ αὐτὸν Ιωναθαν καὶ μήποτε πολεμήσῃ πρὸς
αὐτόν καὶ ἐζήτει συλλαβεῖν αὐτὸν τοῦ ἀπολέσαι καὶ ἀπάρας ἦλθεν εἰς
Βαιθσαν

41 καὶ ἐξῆλθεν Ιωναθαν εἰς ἀπάντησιν αὐτῷ ἐν τεσσαράκοντα χιλιάσιν
ἀνδρῶν ἐπιλελεγμέναις εἰς παράταξιν καὶ ἦλθεν εἰς Βαιθσαν

42 καὶ εἶδεν Τρύφων ὅτι ἦλθεν μετὰ δυνάμεως πολλῆς καὶ ἐκτεῖναι χεῖρας
ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸν εὐλαβήθη

43 καὶ ἐπεδέξατο αὐτὸν ἐνδόξως καὶ συνέστησεν αὐτὸν πᾶσιν τοῖς φίλοις
αὐτοῦ καὶ ἔδωκεν αὐτῷ δόματα καὶ ἐπέταξεν τοῖς φίλοις αὐτοῦ καὶ ταῖς
δυνάμεσιν αὐτοῦ ὑπακούειν αὐτοῦ ὡς αὑτοῦ

44 καὶ εἶπεν τῷ Ιωναθαν ἵνα τί ἐκόπωσας πάντα τὸν λαὸν τοῦτον πολέμου μὴ
ἐνεστηκότος ἡμῖν

45 καὶ νῦν ἀπόστειλον αὐτοὺς εἰς τοὺς οἴκους αὐτῶν ἐπίλεξαι δὲ σεαυτῷ
ἄνδρας ὀλίγους οἵτινες ἔσονται μετὰ σοῦ καὶ δεῦρο μετ᾽ ἐμοῦ εἰς
Πτολεμαίδα καὶ παραδώσω σοι αὐτὴν καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ ὀχυρώματα καὶ τὰς
δυνάμεις τὰς λοιπὰς καὶ πάντας τοὺς ἐπὶ τῶν χρειῶν καὶ ἐπιστρέψας
ἀπελεύσομαι τούτου γὰρ χάριν πάρειμι

46 καὶ ἐμπιστεύσας αὐτῷ ἐποίησεν καθὼς εἶπεν καὶ ἐξαπέστειλεν τὰς
δυνάμεις καὶ ἀπῆλθον εἰς γῆν Ιουδα

47 κατέλιπεν δὲ μεθ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ ἄνδρας τρισχιλίους ὧν δισχιλίους ἀφῆκεν ἐν
τῇ Γαλιλαίᾳ χίλιοι δὲ συνῆλθον αὐτῷ

48 ὡς δὲ εἰσῆλθεν Ιωναθαν εἰς Πτολεμαίδα ἀπέκλεισαν οἱ Πτολεμαεῖς τὰς
πύλας καὶ συνέλαβον αὐτόν καὶ πάντας τοὺς συνεισελθόντας μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ
ἀπέκτειναν ἐν ῥομφαίᾳ

49 καὶ ἀπέστειλεν Τρύφων δυνάμεις καὶ ἵππον εἰς τὴν Γαλιλαίαν καὶ τὸ
πεδίον τὸ μέγα τοῦ ἀπολέσαι πάντας τοὺς παρὰ Ιωναθου

50 καὶ ἐπέγνωσαν ὅτι συνελήμφθη καὶ ἀπόλωλεν καὶ οἱ μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ καὶ
παρεκάλεσαν ἑαυτοὺς καὶ ἐπορεύοντο συνεστραμμένοι ἕτοιμοι εἰς πόλεμον

51 καὶ εἶδον οἱ διώκοντες ὅτι περὶ ψυχῆς αὐτοῖς ἐστιν καὶ ἐπέστρεψαν

52 καὶ ἦλθον πάντες μετ᾽ εἰρήνης εἰς γῆν Ιουδα καὶ ἐπένθησαν τὸν Ιωναθαν
καὶ τοὺς μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐφοβήθησαν σφόδρα καὶ ἐπένθησεν πᾶς Ισραηλ
πένθος μέγα

53 καὶ ἐζήτησαν πάντα τὰ ἔθνη τὰ κύκλῳ αὐτῶν ἐκτρῖψαι αὐτούς εἶπον γάρ
οὐκ ἔχουσιν ἄρχοντα καὶ βοηθοῦντα νῦν οὖν πολεμήσωμεν αὐτοὺς καὶ
ἐξάρωμεν ἐξ ἀνθρώπων τὸ μνημόσυνον αὐτῶν

[Vul](../vul/ma1012.md)

1 Et vidit Jonathas quia tempus eum juvat, et elegit viros, et misit eos
Romam statuere et renovare cum eis amicitiam:

2 et ad Spartiatas, et ad alia loca misit epistolas secundum eamdem
formam:

3 et abierunt Romam, et intraverunt curiam, et dixerunt: Jonathas summus
sacerdos, et gens Judæorum miserunt nos, ut renovaremus amicitiam et
societatem secundum pristinum.

4 Et dederunt illis epistolas ad ipsos per loca, ut deducerent eos in
terram Juda cum pace.

5 Et hoc est exemplum epistolarum, quas scripsit Jonathas Spartiatis:

6 Jonathas summus sacerdos, et seniores gentis, et sacerdotes, et
reliquus populus Judæorum, Spartiatis fratribus salutem.

7 Jampridem missæ erant epistolæ ad Oniam summum sacerdotem ab Ario, qui
regnabat apud vos, quoniam estis fratres nostri, sicut rescriptum
continet, quod subjectum est.

8 Et suscepit Onias virum, qui missus fuerat, cum honore: et accepit
epistolas, in quibus significabatur de societate et amicitia.

9 Nos cum nullo horum indigeremus, habentes solatio sanctos libros, qui
sunt in manibus nostris,

10 maluimus mittere ad vos renovare fraternitatem et amicitiam, ne forte
alieni efficiamur a vobis: multa enim tempora transierunt, ex quo
misistis ad nos.

11 Nos ergo in omni tempore sine intermissione in diebus solemnibus, et
ceteris, quibus oportet, memores sumus vestri in sacrificiis quæ
offerimus, et in observationibus, sicut fas est, et decet meminisse
fratrum.

12 Lætamur itaque de gloria vestra.

13 Nos autem circumdederunt multæ tribulationes, et multa prælia, et
impugnaverunt nos reges qui sunt in circuitu nostro.

14 Noluimus ergo vobis molesti esse, neque ceteris sociis et amicis
nostris in his præliis:

15 habuimus enim de cælo auxilium, et liberati sumus nos, et humiliati
sunt inimici nostri.

16 Elegimus itaque Numenium Antiochi filium, et Antipatrem Jasonis
filium, et misimus ad Romanos renovare cum eis amicitiam et societatem
pristinam.

17 Mandavimus itaque eis ut veniant etiam ad vos, et salutent vos, et
reddant vobis epistolas nostras de innovatione fraternitatis nostræ.

18 Et nunc benefacietis respondentes nobis ad hæc.  

19 Et hoc est rescriptum epistolarum quod miserat Oniæ:

20 Arius rex Spartiatarum Oniæ sacerdoti magno salutem.

21 Inventum est in scriptura de Spartiatis, et Judæis, quoniam sunt
fratres, et quod sunt de genere Abraham.

22 Et nunc ex quo hæc cognovimus, benefacitis scribentes nobis de pace
vestra.

23 Sed et nos rescripsimus vobis: Pecora nostra, et possessiones nostræ,
vestræ sunt: et vestræ, nostræ: mandavimus itaque hæc nuntiari vobis.  

24 Et audivit Jonathas quoniam regressi sunt principes Demetrii cum
exercitu multo supra quam prius, pugnare adversus eum:

25 et exiit ab Jerusalem, et occurrit eis in Amathite regione: non enim
dederat eis spatium ut ingrederentur regionem ejus.

26 Et misit speculatores in castra eorum: et reversi renuntiaverunt quod
constituunt supervenire illis nocte.

27 Cum occidisset autem sol, præcepit Jonathas suis vigilare, et esse in
armis paratos ad pugnam tota nocte: et posuit custodes per circuitum
castrorum.

28 Et audierunt adversarii quod paratus est Jonathas cum suis in bello:
et timuerunt, et formidaverunt in corde suo: et accenderunt focos in
castris suis.

29 Jonathas autem, et qui cum eo erant, non cognoverunt usque mane:
videbant autem luminaria ardentia,

30 et secutus est eos Jonathas, et non comprehendit eos: transierant
enim flumen Eleutherum.

31 Et divertit Jonathas ad Arabas, qui vocantur Zabadæi: et percussit
eos, et accepit spolia eorum.

32 Et junxit, et venit Damascum, et perambulabat omnem regionem illam.

33 Simon autem exiit, et venit usque ad Ascalonem, et ad proxima
præsidia: et declinavit in Joppen, et occupavit eam

34 (audivit enim quod vellent præsidium tradere partibus Demetrii), et
posuit ibi custodes ut custodirent eam.

35 Et reversus est Jonathas, et convocavit seniores populi, et cogitavit
cum eis ædificare præsidia in Judæa,

36 et ædificare muros in Jerusalem, et exaltare altitudinem magnam inter
medium arcis et civitatis, ut separaret eam a civitate, ut esset ipsa
singulariter, et neque emant, neque vendant.

37 Et convenerunt ut ædificarent civitatem: et cecidit murus qui erat
super torrentem ab ortu solis, et reparavit eum, qui vocatur Caphetetha:

38 et Simon ædificavit Adiada in Sephela, et munivit eam, et imposuit
portas et seras.  

39 Et cum cogitasset Tryphon regnare Asiæ, et assumere diadema, et
extendere manum in Antiochum regem:

40 timens ne forte non permitteret eum Jonathas, sed pugnaret adversus
eum, quærebat comprehendere eum, et occidere. Et exsurgens abiit in
Bethsan.

41 Et exivit Jonathas obviam illi cum quadraginta millibus virorum
electorum in prælium, et venit Bethsan.

42 Et vidit Tryphon quia venit Jonathas cum exercitu multo ut extenderet
in eum manus: timuit,

43 et excepit eum cum honore, et commendavit eum omnibus amicis suis, et
dedit ei munera: et præcepit exercitibus suis ut obedirent ei, sicut
sibi.

44 Et dixit Jonathæ: Ut quid vexasti universum populum, cum bellum nobis
non sit?

45 et nunc remitte eos in domos suas: elige autem tibi viros paucos, qui
tecum sint, et veni mecum Ptolemaidam, et tradam eam tibi, et reliqua
præsidia, et exercitum, et universos præpositos negotii: et conversus
abibo: propterea enim veni.

46 Et credidit ei, et fecit sicut dixit: et dimisit exercitum, et
abierunt in terram Juda.

47 Retinuit autem secum tria millia virorum: ex quibus remisit in
Galilæam duo millia: mille autem venerunt cum eo.

48 Ut autem intravit Ptolemaidam Jonathas, clauserunt portas civitatis
Ptolemenses, et comprehenderunt eum: et omnes qui cum eo intraverant,
gladio interfecerunt.

49 Et misit Tryphon exercitum et equites in Galilæam et in campum
magnum, ut perderent omnes socios Jonathæ.

50 At illi cum cognovissent quia comprehensus est Jonathas, et periit,
et omnes qui cum eo erant, hortati sunt semetipsos, et exierunt parati
in prælium.

51 Et videntes hi qui insecuti fuerant, quia pro anima res est illis,
reversi sunt:

52 illi autem venerunt omnes cum pace in terram Juda. Et planxerunt
Jonathan, et eos qui cum ipso fuerant, valde: et luxit Israël luctu
magno.

53 Et quæsierunt omnes gentes quæ erant in circuitu eorum conterere eos:
dixerunt enim:

54 Non habent principem et adjuvantem: nunc ergo expugnemus illos, et
tollamus de hominibus memoriam eorum.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Macabees 13](ma1013.md)
