[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[1 Macabees Index](ma1)  
  [Previous](ma1005)  [Next](ma1007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1 Macabees 6

[Apo](../apo/ma1006)

1 About that time king Antiochus travelling through the high countries
heard say, that Elymais in the country of Persia was a city greatly
renowned for riches, silver, and gold;

2 And that there was in it a very rich temple, wherein were coverings of
gold, and breastplates, and shields, which Alexander, son of Philip, the
Macedonian king, who reigned first among the Grecians, had left there.

3 Wherefore he came and sought to take the city, and to spoil it; but he
was not able, because they of the city, having had warning thereof,

4 Rose up against him in battle: so he fled, and departed thence with
great heaviness, and returned to Babylon.

5 Moreover there came one who brought him tidings into Persia, that the
armies, which went against the land of Judea, were put to flight:

6 And that Lysias, who went forth first with a great power was driven
away of the Jews; and that they were made strong by the armour, and
power, and store of spoils, which they had gotten of the armies, whom
they had destroyed:

7 Also that they had pulled down the abomination, which he had set up
upon the altar in Jerusalem, and that they had compassed about the
sanctuary with high walls, as before, and his city Bethsura.

8 Now when the king heard these words, he was astonished and sore moved:
whereupon he laid him down upon his bed, and fell sick for grief,
because it had not befallen him as he looked for.

9 And there he continued many days: for his grief was ever more and
more, and he made account that he should die.

10 Wherefore he called for all his friends, and said unto them, The
sleep is gone from mine eyes, and my heart faileth for very care.

11 And I thought with myself, Into what tribulation am I come, and how
great a flood of misery is it, wherein now I am! for I was bountiful and
beloved in my power.

12 But now I remember the evils that I did at Jerusalem, and that I took
all the vessels of gold and silver that were therein, and sent to
destroy the inhabitants of Judea without a cause.

13 I perceive therefore that for this cause these troubles are come upon
me, and, behold, I perish through great grief in a strange land.

14 Then called he for Philip, one of his friends, who he made ruler over
all his realm,

15 And gave him the crown, and his robe, and his signet, to the end he
should bring up his son Antiochus, and nourish him up for the kingdom.

16 So king Antiochus died there in the hundred forty and ninth year.

17 Now when Lysias knew that the king was dead, he set up Antiochus his
son, whom he had brought up being young, to reign in his stead, and his
name he called Eupator.

18 About this time they that were in the tower shut up the Israelites
round about the sanctuary, and sought always their hurt, and the
strengthening of the heathen.

19 Wherefore Judas, purposing to destroy them, called all the people
together to besiege them.

20 So they came together, and besieged them in the hundred and fiftieth
year, and he made mounts for shot against them, and other engines.

21 Howbeit certain of them that were besieged got forth, unto whom some
ungodly men of Israel joined themselves:

22 And they went unto the king, and said, How long will it be ere thou
execute judgment, and avenge our brethren?

23 We have been willing to serve thy father, and to do as he would have
us, and to obey his commandments;

24 For which cause they of our nation besiege the tower, and are
alienated from us: moreover as many of us as they could light on they
slew, and spoiled our inheritance.

25 Neither have they stretched out their hand against us only, but also
against their borders.

26 And, behold, this day are they besieging the tower at Jerusalem, to
take it: the sanctuary also and Bethsura have they fortified.

27 Wherefore if thou dost not prevent them quickly, they will do the
greater things than these, neither shalt thou be able to rule them.

28 Now when the king heard this, he was angry, and gathered together all
his friends, and the captains of his army, and those that had charge of
the horse.

29 There came also unto him from other kingdoms, and from isles of the
sea, bands of hired soldiers.

30 So that the number of his army was an hundred thousand footmen, and
twenty thousand horsemen, and two and thirty elephants exercised in
battle.

31 These went through Idumea, and pitched against Bethsura, which they
assaulted many days, making engines of war; but they of Bethsura came
out, and burned them with fire, and fought valiantly.

32 Upon this Judas removed from the tower, and pitched in Bathzacharias,
over against the king's camp.

33 Then the king rising very early marched fiercely with his host toward
Bathzacharias, where his armies made them ready to battle, and sounded
the trumpets.

34 And to the end they might provoke the elephants to fight, they shewed
them the blood of grapes and mulberries.

35 Moreover they divided the beasts among the armies, and for every
elephant they appointed a thousand men, armed with coats of mail, and
with helmets of brass on their heads; and beside this, for every beast
were ordained five hundred horsemen of the best.

36 These were ready at every occasion: wheresoever the beast was, and
whithersoever the beast went, they went also, neither departed they from
him.

37 And upon the beasts were there strong towers of wood, which covered
every one of them, and were girt fast unto them with devices: there were
also upon every one two and thirty strong men, that fought upon them,
beside the Indian that ruled him.

38 As for the remnant of the horsemen, they set them on this side and
that side at the two parts of the host giving them signs what to do, and
being harnessed all over amidst the ranks.

39 Now when the sun shone upon the shields of gold and brass, the
mountains glistered therewith, and shined like lamps of fire.

40 So part of the king's army being spread upon the high mountains, and
part on the valleys below, they marched on safely and in order.

41 Wherefore all that heard the noise of their multitude, and the
marching of the company, and the rattling of the harness, were moved:
for the army was very great and mighty.

42 Then Judas and his host drew near, and entered into battle, and there
were slain of the king's army six hundred men.

43 Eleazar also, surnamed Savaran, perceiving that one of the beasts,
armed with royal harness, was higher than all the rest, and supposing
that the king was upon him,

44 Put himself in jeopardy, to the end he might deliver his people, and
get him a perpetual name:

45 Wherefore he ran upon him courageously through the midst of the
battle, slaying on the right hand and on the left, so that they were
divided from him on both sides.

46 Which done, he crept under the elephant, and thrust him under, and
slew him: whereupon the elephant fell down upon him, and there he died.

47 Howbeit the rest of the Jews seeing the strength of the king, and the
violence of his forces, turned away from them.

48 Then the king's army went up to Jerusalem to meet them, and the king
pitched his tents against Judea, and against mount Sion.

49 But with them that were in Bethsura he made peace: for they came out
of the city, because they had no victuals there to endure the siege, it
being a year of rest to the land.

50 So the king took Bethsura, and set a garrison there to keep it.

51 As for the sanctuary, he besieged it many days: and set there
artillery with engines and instruments to cast fire and stones, and
pieces to cast darts and slings.

52 Whereupon they also made engines against their engines, and held them
battle a long season.

53 Yet at the last, their vessels being without victuals, (for that it
was the seventh year, and they in Judea that were delivered from the
Gentiles, had eaten up the residue of the store;)

54 There were but a few left in the sanctuary, because the famine did so
prevail against them, that they were fain to disperse themselves, every
man to his own place.

55 At that time Lysias heard say, that Philip, whom Antiochus the king,
whiles he lived, had appointed to bring up his son Antiochus, that he
might be king,

56 Was returned out of Persia and Media, and the king's host also that
went with him, and that he sought to take unto him the ruling of the
affairs.

57 Wherefore he went in all haste, and said to the king and the captains
of the host and the company, We decay daily, and our victuals are but
small, and the place we lay siege unto is strong, and the affairs of the
kingdom lie upon us:

58 Now therefore let us be friends with these men, and make peace with
them, and with all their nation;

59 And covenant with them, that they shall live after their laws, as
they did before: for they are therefore displeased, and have done all
these things, because we abolished their laws.

60 So the king and the princes were content: wherefore he sent unto them
to make peace; and they accepted thereof.

61 Also the king and the princes made an oath unto them: whereupon they
went out of the strong hold.

62 Then the king entered into mount Sion; but when he saw the strength
of the place, he broke his oath that he had made, and gave commandment
to pull down the wall round about.

63 Afterward departed he in all haste, and returned unto Antiochia,
where he found Philip to be master of the city: so he fought against
him, and took the city by force.

[Sep](../sep/ma1006)

1 καὶ ὁ βασιλεὺς Ἀντίοχος διεπορεύετο τὰς ἐπάνω χώρας καὶ ἤκουσεν ὅτι
ἐστὶν Ἐλυμαῒς ἐν τῇ Περσίδι πόλις ἔνδοξος πλούτῳ ἀργυρίῳ καὶ χρυσίῳ

2 καὶ τὸ ἱερὸν τὸ ἐν αὐτῇ πλούσιον σφόδρα καὶ ἐκεῖ καλύμματα χρυσᾶ καὶ
θώρακες καὶ ὅπλα ἃ κατέλιπεν ἐκεῖ Ἀλέξανδρος ὁ τοῦ Φιλίππου ὁ βασιλεὺς ὁ
Μακεδών ὃς ἐβασίλευσεν πρῶτος ἐν τοῖς Ἕλλησι

3 καὶ ἦλθεν καὶ ἐζήτει καταλαβέσθαι τὴν πόλιν καὶ προνομεῦσαι αὐτήν καὶ
οὐκ ἠδυνάσθη ὅτι ἐγνώσθη ὁ λόγος τοῖς ἐκ τῆς πόλεως

4 καὶ ἀντέστησαν αὐτῷ εἰς πόλεμον καὶ ἔφυγεν καὶ ἀπῆρεν ἐκεῖθεν μετὰ
λύπης μεγάλης ἀποστρέψαι εἰς Βαβυλῶνα

5 καὶ ἦλθέν τις ἀπαγγέλλων αὐτῷ εἰς τὴν Περσίδα ὅτι τετρόπωνται αἱ
παρεμβολαὶ αἱ πορευθεῖσαι εἰς γῆν Ιουδα

6 καὶ ἐπορεύθη Λυσίας δυνάμει ἰσχυρᾷ ἐν πρώτοις καὶ ἐνετράπη ἀπὸ
προσώπου αὐτῶν καὶ ἐπίσχυσαν ὅπλοις καὶ δυνάμει καὶ σκύλοις πολλοῖς οἷς
ἔλαβον ἀπὸ τῶν παρεμβολῶν ὧν ἐξέκοψαν

7 καὶ καθεῖλον τὸ βδέλυγμα ὃ ᾠκοδόμησεν ἐπὶ τὸ θυσιαστήριον τὸ ἐν
Ιερουσαλημ καὶ τὸ ἁγίασμα καθὼς τὸ πρότερον ἐκύκλωσαν τείχεσιν ὑψηλοῖς
καὶ τὴν Βαιθσουραν πόλιν αὐτοῦ

8 καὶ ἐγένετο ὡς ἤκουσεν ὁ βασιλεὺς τοὺς λόγους τούτους ἐθαμβήθη καὶ
ἐσαλεύθη σφόδρα καὶ ἔπεσεν ἐπὶ τὴν κοίτην καὶ ἐνέπεσεν εἰς ἀρρωστίαν ἀπὸ
τῆς λύπης ὅτι οὐκ ἐγένετο αὐτῷ καθὼς ἐνεθυμεῖτο

9 καὶ ἦν ἐκεῖ ἡμέρας πλείους ὅτι ἀνεκαινίσθη ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸν λύπη μεγάλη καὶ
ἐλογίσατο ὅτι ἀποθνῄσκει

10 καὶ ἐκάλεσεν πάντας τοὺς φίλους αὐτοῦ καὶ εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτούς ἀφίσταται
ὁ ὕπνος ἀπὸ τῶν ὀφθαλμῶν μου καὶ συμπέπτωκα τῇ καρδίᾳ ἀπὸ τῆς μερίμνης

11 καὶ εἶπα τῇ καρδίᾳ ἕως τίνος θλίψεως ἦλθα καὶ κλύδωνος μεγάλου ἐν ᾧ
νῦν εἰμι ὅτι χρηστὸς καὶ ἀγαπώμενος ἤμην ἐν τῇ ἐξουσίᾳ μου

12 νῦν δὲ μιμνῄσκομαι τῶν κακῶν ὧν ἐποίησα ἐν Ιερουσαλημ καὶ ἔλαβον
πάντα τὰ σκεύη τὰ ἀργυρᾶ καὶ τὰ χρυσᾶ τὰ ἐν αὐτῇ καὶ ἐξαπέστειλα ἐξᾶραι
τοὺς κατοικοῦντας Ιουδα διὰ κενῆς

13 ἔγνων ὅτι χάριν τούτων εὗρέν με τὰ κακὰ ταῦτα καὶ ἰδοὺ ἀπόλλυμαι λύπῃ
μεγάλῃ ἐν γῇ ἀλλοτρίᾳ

14 καὶ ἐκάλεσεν Φίλιππον ἕνα τῶν φίλων αὐτοῦ καὶ κατέστησεν αὐτὸν ἐπὶ
πάσης τῆς βασιλείας αὐτοῦ

15 καὶ ἔδωκεν αὐτῷ τὸ διάδημα καὶ τὴν στολὴν αὐτοῦ καὶ τὸν δακτύλιον τοῦ
ἀγαγεῖν Ἀντίοχον τὸν υἱὸν αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐκθρέψαι αὐτὸν τοῦ βασιλεύειν

16 καὶ ἀπέθανεν ἐκεῖ Ἀντίοχος ὁ βασιλεὺς ἔτους ἐνάτου καὶ τεσσαρακοστοῦ
καὶ ἑκατοστοῦ

17 καὶ ἐπέγνω Λυσίας ὅτι τέθνηκεν ὁ βασιλεύς καὶ κατέστησεν βασιλεύειν
Ἀντίοχον τὸν υἱὸν αὐτοῦ ὃν ἐξέθρεψεν νεώτερον καὶ ἐκάλεσεν τὸ ὄνομα
αὐτοῦ Εὐπάτωρ

18 καὶ οἱ ἐκ τῆς ἄκρας ἦσαν συγκλείοντες τὸν Ισραηλ κύκλῳ τῶν ἁγίων καὶ
ζητοῦντες κακὰ δι᾽ ὅλου καὶ στήριγμα τοῖς ἔθνεσιν

19 καὶ ἐλογίσατο Ιουδας ἐξᾶραι αὐτοὺς καὶ ἐξεκκλησίασε πάντα τὸν λαὸν
τοῦ περικαθίσαι ἐπ᾽ αὐτούς

20 καὶ συνήχθησαν ἅμα καὶ περιεκάθισαν ἐπ᾽ αὐτὴν ἔτους πεντηκοστοῦ καὶ
ἑκατοστοῦ καὶ ἐποίησεν βελοστάσεις καὶ μηχανάς

21 καὶ ἐξῆλθον ἐξ αὐτῶν ἐκ τοῦ συγκλεισμοῦ καὶ ἐκολλήθησαν αὐτοῖς τινες
τῶν ἀσεβῶν ἐξ Ισραηλ

22 καὶ ἐπορεύθησαν πρὸς τὸν βασιλέα καὶ εἶπον ἕως πότε οὐ ποιήσῃ κρίσιν
καὶ ἐκδικήσεις τοὺς ἀδελφοὺς ἡμῶν

23 ἡμεῖς εὐδοκοῦμεν δουλεύειν τῷ πατρί σου καὶ πορεύεσθαι τοῖς ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ
λεγομένοις καὶ κατακολουθεῖν τοῖς προστάγμασιν αὐτοῦ

24 καὶ περιεκάθηντο ἐπ᾽ αὐτὴν οἱ υἱοὶ τοῦ λαοῦ ἡμῶν χάριν τούτου καὶ
ἠλλοτριοῦντο ἀφ᾽ ἡμῶν πλὴν ὅσοι εὑρίσκοντο ἐξ ἡμῶν ἐθανατοῦντο καὶ αἱ
κληρονομίαι ἡμῶν διηρπάζοντο

25 καὶ οὐκ ἐφ᾽ ἡμᾶς μόνον ἐξέτειναν χεῖρα ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐπὶ πάντα τὰ ὅρια
αὐτῶν

26 καὶ ἰδοὺ παρεμβεβλήκασι σήμερον ἐπὶ τὴν ἄκραν ἐν Ιερουσαλημ τοῦ
καταλαβέσθαι αὐτήν καὶ τὸ ἁγίασμα καὶ τὴν Βαιθσουραν ὠχύρωσαν

27 καὶ ἐὰν μὴ προκαταλάβῃ αὐτοὺς διὰ τάχους μείζονα τούτων ποιήσουσιν
καὶ οὐ δυνήσῃ τοῦ κατασχεῖν αὐτῶν

28 καὶ ὠργίσθη ὁ βασιλεύς ὅτε ἤκουσεν καὶ συνήγαγεν πάντας τοὺς φίλους
αὐτοῦ ἄρχοντας δυνάμεως αὐτοῦ καὶ τοὺς ἐπὶ τῶν ἡνιῶν

29 καὶ ἀπὸ βασιλειῶν ἑτέρων καὶ ἀπὸ νήσων θαλασσῶν ἦλθον πρὸς αὐτὸν
δυνάμεις μισθωταί

30 καὶ ἦν ὁ ἀριθμὸς τῶν δυνάμεων αὐτοῦ ἑκατὸν χιλιάδες πεζῶν καὶ εἴκοσι
χιλιάδες ἱππέων καὶ ἐλέφαντες δύο καὶ τριάκοντα εἰδότες πόλεμον

31 καὶ ἦλθον διὰ τῆς Ιδουμαίας καὶ παρενέβαλον ἐπὶ Βαιθσουραν καὶ
ἐπολέμησαν ἡμέρας πολλὰς καὶ ἐποίησαν μηχανάς καὶ ἐξῆλθον καὶ ἐνεπύρισαν
αὐτὰς πυρὶ καὶ ἐπολέμησαν ἀνδρωδῶς

32 καὶ ἀπῆρεν Ιουδας ἀπὸ τῆς ἄκρας καὶ παρενέβαλεν εἰς Βαιθζαχαρια
ἀπέναντι τῆς παρεμβολῆς τοῦ βασιλέως

33 καὶ ὤρθρισεν ὁ βασιλεὺς τὸ πρωὶ καὶ ἀπῆρεν τὴν παρεμβολὴν ἐν ὁρμήματι
αὐτῆς κατὰ τὴν ὁδὸν Βαιθζαχαρια καὶ διεσκευάσθησαν αἱ δυνάμεις εἰς τὸν
πόλεμον καὶ ἐσάλπισαν ταῖς σάλπιγξιν

34 καὶ τοῖς ἐλέφασιν ἔδειξαν αἷμα σταφυλῆς καὶ μόρων τοῦ παραστῆσαι
αὐτοὺς εἰς τὸν πόλεμον

35 καὶ διεῖλον τὰ θηρία εἰς τὰς φάλαγγας καὶ παρέστησαν ἑκάστῳ ἐλέφαντι
χιλίους ἄνδρας τεθωρακισμένους ἐν ἁλυσιδωτοῖς καὶ περικεφαλαῖαι χαλκαῖ
ἐπὶ τῶν κεφαλῶν αὐτῶν καὶ πεντακοσία ἵππος διατεταγμένη ἑκάστῳ θηρίῳ
ἐκλελεγμένη

36 οὗτοι πρὸ καιροῦ οὗ ἂν ᾖ τὸ θηρίον ἦσαν καὶ οὗ ἐὰν ἐπορεύετο
ἐπορεύοντο ἅμα οὐκ ἀφίσταντο ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ

37 καὶ πύργοι ξύλινοι ἐπ᾽ αὐτοὺς ὀχυροὶ σκεπαζόμενοι ἐφ᾽ ἑκάστου θηρίου
ἐζωσμένοι ἐπ᾽ αὐτοῦ μηχαναῖς καὶ ἐφ᾽ ἑκάστου ἄνδρες δυνάμεως τέσσαρες οἱ
πολεμοῦντες ἐπ᾽ αὐτοῖς καὶ ὁ Ἰνδὸς αὐτοῦ

38 καὶ τὴν ἐπίλοιπον ἵππον ἔνθεν καὶ ἔνθεν ἔστησεν ἐπὶ τὰ δύο μέρη τῆς
παρεμβολῆς κατασείοντες καὶ καταφρασσόμενοι ἐν ταῖς φάλαγξιν

39 ὡς δὲ ἔστιλβεν ὁ ἥλιος ἐπὶ τὰς χρυσᾶς καὶ χαλκᾶς ἀσπίδας ἔστιλβεν τὰ
ὄρη ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν καὶ κατηύγαζεν ὡς λαμπάδες πυρός

40 καὶ ἐξετάθη μέρος τι τῆς παρεμβολῆς τοῦ βασιλέως ἐπὶ τὰ ὑψηλὰ ὄρη καί
τινες ἐπὶ τὰ ταπεινά καὶ ἤρχοντο ἀσφαλῶς καὶ τεταγμένως

41 καὶ ἐσαλεύοντο πάντες οἱ ἀκούοντες φωνῆς πλήθους αὐτῶν καὶ ὁδοιπορίας
τοῦ πλήθους καὶ συγκρουσμοῦ τῶν ὅπλων ἦν γὰρ ἡ παρεμβολὴ μεγάλη σφόδρα
καὶ ἰσχυρά

42 καὶ ἤγγισεν Ιουδας καὶ ἡ παρεμβολὴ αὐτοῦ εἰς παράταξιν καὶ ἔπεσον ἀπὸ
τῆς παρεμβολῆς τοῦ βασιλέως ἑξακόσιοι ἄνδρες

43 καὶ εἶδεν Ελεαζαρος ὁ Αυαραν ἓν τῶν θηρίων τεθωρακισμένον θώραξιν
βασιλικοῖς καὶ ἦν ὑπεράγον πάντα τὰ θηρία καὶ ᾠήθη ὅτι ἐν αὐτῷ ἐστιν ὁ
βασιλεύς

44 καὶ ἔδωκεν ἑαυτὸν τοῦ σῶσαι τὸν λαὸν αὐτοῦ καὶ περιποιῆσαι ἑαυτῷ
ὄνομα αἰώνιον

45 καὶ ἐπέδραμεν αὐτῷ θράσει εἰς μέσον τῆς φάλαγγος καὶ ἐθανάτου δεξιὰ
καὶ εὐώνυμα καὶ ἐσχίζοντο ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἔνθα καὶ ἔνθα

46 καὶ εἰσέδυ ὑπὸ τὸν ἐλέφαντα καὶ ὑπέθηκεν αὐτῷ καὶ ἀνεῖλεν αὐτόν καὶ
ἔπεσεν ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν ἐπάνω αὐτοῦ καὶ ἀπέθανεν ἐκεῖ

47 καὶ εἶδον τὴν ἰσχὺν τῆς βασιλείας καὶ τὸ ὅρμημα τῶν δυνάμεων καὶ
ἐξέκλιναν ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν

48 οἱ δὲ ἐκ τῆς παρεμβολῆς τοῦ βασιλέως ἀνέβαινον εἰς συνάντησιν αὐτῶν
εἰς Ιερουσαλημ καὶ παρενέβαλεν ὁ βασιλεὺς εἰς τὴν Ιουδαίαν καὶ εἰς τὸ
ὄρος Σιων

49 καὶ ἐποίησεν εἰρήνην μετὰ τῶν ἐκ Βαιθσουρων καὶ ἐξῆλθον ἐκ τῆς πόλεως
ὅτι οὐκ ἦν αὐτοῖς ἐκεῖ διατροφὴ τοῦ συγκεκλεῖσθαι ἐν αὐτῇ ὅτι σάββατον
ἦν τῇ γῇ

50 καὶ κατελάβετο ὁ βασιλεὺς τὴν Βαιθσουραν καὶ ἀπέταξεν ἐκεῖ φρουρὰν
τηρεῖν αὐτήν

51 καὶ παρενέβαλεν ἐπὶ τὸ ἁγίασμα ἡμέρας πολλὰς καὶ ἔστησεν ἐκεῖ
βελοστάσεις καὶ μηχανὰς καὶ πυροβόλα καὶ λιθοβόλα καὶ σκορπίδια εἰς τὸ
βάλλεσθαι βέλη καὶ σφενδόνας

52 καὶ ἐποίησαν καὶ αὐτοὶ μηχανὰς πρὸς τὰς μηχανὰς αὐτῶν καὶ ἐπολέμησαν
ἡμέρας πολλάς

53 βρώματα δὲ οὐκ ἦν ἐν τοῖς ἀγγείοις διὰ τὸ ἕβδομον ἔτος εἶναι καὶ οἱ
ἀνασῳζόμενοι εἰς τὴν Ιουδαίαν ἀπὸ τῶν ἐθνῶν κατέφαγον τὸ ὑπόλειμμα τῆς
παραθέσεως

54 καὶ ὑπελείφθησαν ἐν τοῖς ἁγίοις ἄνδρες ὀλίγοι ὅτι κατεκράτησεν αὐτῶν
ὁ λιμός καὶ ἐσκορπίσθησαν ἕκαστος εἰς τὸν τόπον αὐτοῦ

55 καὶ ἤκουσεν Λυσίας ὅτι Φίλιππος ὃν κατέστησεν ὁ βασιλεὺς Ἀντίοχος ἔτι
ζῶντος αὐτοῦ ἐκθρέψαι Ἀντίοχον τὸν υἱὸν αὐτοῦ εἰς τὸ βασιλεῦσαι αὐτόν

56 ἀπέστρεψεν ἀπὸ τῆς Περσίδος καὶ Μηδίας καὶ αἱ δυνάμεις αἱ πορευθεῖσαι
μετὰ τοῦ βασιλέως μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ καὶ ὅτι ζητεῖ παραλαβεῖν τὰ τῶν πραγμάτων

57 καὶ κατέσπευδεν καὶ ἐπένευσεν τοῦ ἀπελθεῖν καὶ εἶπεν πρὸς τὸν βασιλέα
καὶ τοὺς ἡγεμόνας τῆς δυνάμεως καὶ τοὺς ἄνδρας ἐκλείπομεν καθ᾽ ἡμέραν
καὶ ἡ τροφὴ ἡμῖν ὀλίγη καὶ ὁ τόπος οὗ παρεμβάλλομέν ἐστιν ὀχυρός καὶ
ἐπίκειται ἡμῖν τὰ τῆς βασιλείας

58 νῦν οὖν δῶμεν δεξιὰς τοῖς ἀνθρώποις τούτοις καὶ ποιήσωμεν μετ᾽ αὐτῶν
εἰρήνην καὶ μετὰ παντὸς ἔθνους αὐτῶν

59 καὶ στήσωμεν αὐτοῖς τοῦ πορεύεσθαι τοῖς νομίμοις αὐτῶν ὡς τὸ πρότερον
χάριν γὰρ τῶν νομίμων αὐτῶν ὧν διεσκεδάσαμεν ὠργίσθησαν καὶ ἐποίησαν
ταῦτα πάντα

60 καὶ ἤρεσεν ὁ λόγος ἐναντίον τοῦ βασιλέως καὶ τῶν ἀρχόντων καὶ
ἀπέστειλεν πρὸς αὐτοὺς εἰρηνεῦσαι καὶ ἐπεδέξαντο

61 καὶ ὤμοσεν αὐτοῖς ὁ βασιλεὺς καὶ οἱ ἄρχοντες ἐπὶ τούτοις ἐξῆλθον ἐκ
τοῦ ὀχυρώματος

62 καὶ εἰσῆλθεν ὁ βασιλεὺς εἰς ὄρος Σιων καὶ εἶδεν τὸ ὀχύρωμα τοῦ τόπου
καὶ ἠθέτησεν τὸν ὁρκισμόν ὃν ὤμοσεν καὶ ἐνετείλατο καθελεῖν τὸ τεῖχος
κυκλόθεν

63 καὶ ἀπῆρεν κατὰ σπουδὴν καὶ ἀπέστρεψεν εἰς Ἀντιόχειαν καὶ εὗρεν
Φίλιππον κυριεύοντα τῆς πόλεως καὶ ἐπολέμησεν πρὸς αὐτὸν καὶ κατελάβετο
τὴν πόλιν βίᾳ

[Vul](../vul/ma1006)

1 Et rex Antiochus perambulabat superiores regiones, et audivit esse
civitatem Elymaidem in Perside nobilissimam, et copiosam in argento et
auro,

2 templumque in ea locuples valde, et illic velamina aurea, et loricæ,
et scuta, quæ reliquit Alexander Philippi rex Macedo, qui regnavit
primus in Græcia.

3 Et venit, et quærebat capere civitatem, et deprædari eam: et non
potuit, quoniam innotuit sermo his qui erant in civitate:

4 et insurrexerunt in prælium, et fugit inde, et abiit cum tristitia
magna, et reversus est in Babyloniam.

5 Et venit qui nuntiaret ei in Perside, quia fugata sunt castra quæ
erant in terra Juda:

6 et quia abiit Lysias cum virtute forti in primis, et fugatus est a
facie Judæorum, et invaluerunt armis, et viribus, et spoliis multis, quæ
ceperunt de castris, quæ exciderunt:

7 et quia diruerunt abominationem, quam ædificaverat super altare quod
erat in Jerusalem: et sanctificationem, sicut prius, circumdederunt
muris excelsis, sed et Bethsuram civitatem suam.

8 Et factum est ut audivit rex sermones istos, expavit, et commotus est
valde: et decidit in lectum, et incidit in languorem præ tristitia, quia
non factum est ei sicut cogitabat.

9 Et erat illic per dies multos, quia renovata est in eo tristitia
magna, et arbitratus est se mori.

10 Et vocavit omnes amicos suos, et dixit illis: Recessit somnus ab
oculis meis, et concidi, et corrui corde præ sollicitudine:

11 et dixi in corde meo: In quantam tribulationem deveni, et in quos
fluctus tristitiæ, in qua nunc sum: qui jucundus eram, et dilectus in
potestate mea!

12 Nunc vero reminiscor malorum quæ feci in Jerusalem, unde et abstuli
omnia spolia aurea et argentea quæ erant in ea, et misi auferre
habitantes Judæam sine causa.

13 Cognovi ergo quia propterea invenerunt me mala ista: et ecce pereo
tristitia magna in terra aliena.

14 Et vocavit Philippum, unum de amicis suis, et præposuit eum super
universum regnum suum:

15 et dedit ei diadema, et stolam suam, et annulum, ut adduceret
Antiochum filium suum, et nutriret eum, et regnaret.

16 Et mortuus est illic Antiochus rex anno centesimo quadragesimo nono.

17 Et cognovit Lysias quoniam mortuus est rex, et constituit regnare
Antiochum filium ejus, quem nutrivit adolescentem: et vocavit nomen ejus
Eupator.  

18 Et hi qui erant in arce, concluserant Israël in circuitu sanctorum:
et quærebant eis mala semper, et firmamentum gentium.

19 Et cogitavit Judas disperdere eos: et convocavit universum populum,
ut obsiderent eos.

20 Et convenerunt simul, et obsederunt eos anno centesimo quinquagesimo,
et fecerunt ballistas et machinas.

21 Et exierunt quidam ex eis qui obsidebantur: et adjunxerunt se illis
aliqui impii ex Israël,

22 et abierunt ad regem, et dixerunt: Quousque non facis judicium, et
vindicas fratres nostros?

23 Nos decrevimus servire patri tuo, et ambulare in præceptis ejus, et
obsequi edictis ejus:

24 et filii populi nostri propter hoc alienabant se a nobis, et
quicumque inveniebantur ex nobis, interficiebantur, et hæreditates
nostræ diripiebantur.

25 Et non ad nos tantum extenderunt manum, sed et in omnes fines
nostros:

26 et ecce applicuerunt hodie ad arcem Jerusalem occupare eam, et
munitionem Bethsuram munierunt:

27 et nisi præveneris eos velocius, majora quam hæc facient, et non
poteris obtinere eos.

28 Et iratus est rex, ut hæc audivit: et convocavit omnes amicos suos,
et principes exercitus sui, et eos qui super equites erant:

29 sed et de regnis aliis et de insulis maritimis venerunt ad eum
exercitus conductitii.

30 Et erat numerus exercitus ejus, centum millia peditum, et viginti
millia equitum, et elephanti triginta duo, docti ad prælium.

31 Et venerunt per Idumæam, et applicuerunt ad Bethsuram, et pugnaverunt
dies multos: et fecerunt machinas, et exierunt, et succenderunt eas
igni, et pugnaverunt viriliter.  

32 Et recessit Judas ab arce, et movit castra ad Bethzacharam contra
castra regis.

33 Et surrexit rex ante lucem, et concitavit exercitus in impetum contra
viam Bethzacharam: et comparaverunt se exercitus in prælium, et tubis
cecinerunt:

34 et elephantis ostenderunt sanguinem uvæ et mori, ad acuendos eos in
prælium:

35 et diviserunt bestias per legiones, et astiterunt singulis elephantis
mille viri in loricis concatenatis, et galeæ æreæ in capitibus eorum: et
quingenti equites ordinati unicuique bestiæ electi erant.

36 Hi ante tempus, ubicumque erat bestia, ibi erant: et quocumque ibat,
ibant, et non discedebant ab ea.

37 Sed et turres ligneæ super eos firmæ protegentes super singulas
bestias: et super eas machinæ: et super singulas viri virtutis triginta
duo, qui pugnabant desuper: et Indus magister bestiæ.

38 Et residuum equitatum hinc et inde statuit in duas partes, tubis
exercitum commovere, et perurgere constipatos in legionibus ejus.

39 Et ut refulsit sol in clypeos aureos et æreos, resplenduerunt montes
ab eis, et resplenduerunt sicut lampades ignis.

40 Et distincta est pars exercitus regis per montes excelsos, et alia
per loca humilia: et ibant caute et ordinate.

41 Et commovebantur omnes inhabitantes terram a voce multitudinis, et
incessu turbæ, et collisione armorum: erat enim exercitus magnus valde,
et fortis.

42 Et appropiavit Judas et exercitus ejus in prælium, et ceciderunt de
exercitu regis sexcenti viri.

43 Et vidit Eleazar filius Saura unam de bestiis loricatam loricis
regis: et erat eminens super ceteras bestias, et visum est ei quod in ea
esset rex:

44 et dedit se ut liberaret populum suum, et acquireret sibi nomen
æternum.

45 Et cucurrit ad eam audacter in medio legionis, interficiens a dextris
et a sinistris, et cadebant ab eo huc atque illuc.

46 Et ivit sub pedes elephantis, et supposuit se ei, et occidit eum: et
cecidit in terram super ipsum, et mortuus est illic.

47 Et videntes virtutem regis, et impetum exercitus ejus, diverterunt se
ab eis.  

48 Castra autem regis ascenderunt contra eos in Jerusalem, et
applicuerunt castra regis ad Judæam, et montem Sion.

49 Et fecit pacem cum his qui erant in Bethsura: et exierunt de
civitate, quia non erant eis ibi alimenta conclusis, quia sabbata erant
terræ.

50 Et comprehendit rex Bethsuram: et constituit illic custodiam servare
eam.

51 Et convertit castra ad locum sanctificationis dies multos: et statuit
illic ballistas, et machinas, et ignis jacula, et tormenta ad lapides
jactandos, et spicula, et scorpios ad mittendas sagittas, et fundibula.

52 Fecerunt autem et ipsi machinas adversus machinas eorum, et
pugnaverunt dies multos.

53 Escæ autem non erant in civitate, eo quod septimus annus esset: et
qui remanserant in Judæa de gentibus, consumpserant reliquias eorum, quæ
repositæ fuerant.

54 Et remanserunt in sanctis viri pauci, quoniam obtinuerat eos fames:
et dispersi sunt unusquisque in locum suum.  

55 Et audivit Lysias quod Philippus, quem constituerat rex Antiochus cum
adhuc viveret, ut nutriret Antiochum filium suum, et regnaret,

56 reversus esset a Perside et Media, et exercitus qui abierat cum ipso,
et quia quærebat suscipere regni negotia:

57 festinavit ire, et dicere ad regem, et duces exercitus: Deficimus
quotidie, et esca nobis modica est; et locus, quem obsidemus, est
munitus, et incumbit nobis ordinare de regno.

58 Nunc itaque demus dextras hominibus istis, et faciamus cum illis
pacem, et cum omni gente eorum:

59 et constituamus illis ut ambulent in legitimis suis sicut prius:
propter legitima enim ipsorum, quæ despeximus, irati sunt, et fecerunt
omnia hæc.

60 Et placuit sermo in conspectu regis et principum: et misit ad eos
pacem facere, et receperunt illam.

61 Et juravit illis rex et principes, et exierunt de munitione.

62 Et intravit rex montem Sion, et vidit munitionem loci: et rupit
citius juramentum quod juravit, et mandavit destruere murum in gyro.

63 Et discessit festinanter, et reversus est Antiochiam, et invenit
Philippum dominantem civitati: et pugnavit adversus eum, et occupavit
civitatem.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Macabees 7](ma1007)
