[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[1 Macabees Index](ma1)  
  [Previous](man001)  [Next](ma1002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1 Macabees 1

[Apo](../apo/ma1001)

1 And it happened, after that Alexander son of Philip, the Macedonian,
who came out of the land of Chettiim, had smitten Darius king of the
Persians and Medes, that he reigned in his stead, the first over Greece,

2 And made many wars, and won many strong holds, and slew the kings of
the earth,

3 And went through to the ends of the earth, and took spoils of many
nations, insomuch that the earth was quiet before him; whereupon he was
exalted and his heart was lifted up.

4 And he gathered a mighty strong host and ruled over countries, and
nations, and kings, who became tributaries unto him.

5 And after these things he fell sick, and perceived that he should die.

6 Wherefore he called his servants, such as were honourable, and had
been brought up with him from his youth, and parted his kingdom among
them, while he was yet alive.

7 So Alexander reigned twelves years, and then died.

8 And his servants bare rule every one in his place.

9 And after his death they all put crowns upon themselves; so did their
sons after them many years: and evils were multiplied in the earth.

10 And there came out of them a wicked root Antiochus surnamed
Epiphanes, son of Antiochus the king, who had been an hostage at Rome,
and he reigned in the hundred and thirty and seventh year of the kingdom
of the Greeks.

11 In those days went there out of Israel wicked men, who persuaded
many, saying, Let us go and make a covenant with the heathen that are
round about us: for since we departed from them we have had much sorrow.

12 So this device pleased them well.

13 Then certain of the people were so forward herein, that they went to
the king, who gave them licence to do after the ordinances of the
heathen:

14 Whereupon they built a place of exercise at Jerusalem according to
the customs of the heathen:

15 And made themselves uncircumcised, and forsook the holy covenant, and
joined themselves to the heathen, and were sold to do mischief.

16 Now when the kingdom was established before Antiochus, he thought to
reign over Egypt that he might have the dominion of two realms.

17 Wherefore he entered into Egypt with a great multitude, with
chariots, and elephants, and horsemen, and a great navy,

18 And made war against Ptolemee king of Egypt: but Ptolemee was afraid
of him, and fled; and many were wounded to death.

19 Thus they got the strong cities in the land of Egypt and he took the
spoils thereof.

20 And after that Antiochus had smitten Egypt, he returned again in the
hundred forty and third year, and went up against Israel and Jerusalem
with a great multitude,

21 And entered proudly into the sanctuary, and took away the golden
altar, and the candlestick of light, and all the vessels thereof,

22 And the table of the shewbread, and the pouring vessels, and the
vials. and the censers of gold, and the veil, and the crown, and the
golden ornaments that were before the temple, all which he pulled off.

23 He took also the silver and the gold, and the precious vessels: also
he took the hidden treasures which he found.

24 And when he had taken all away, he went into his own land, having
made a great massacre, and spoken very proudly.

25 Therefore there was a great mourning in Israel, in every place where
they were;

26 So that the princes and elders mourned, the virgins and young men
were made feeble, and the beauty of women was changed.

27 Every bridegroom took up lamentation, and she that sat in the
marriage chamber was in heaviness,

28 The land also was moved for the inhabitants thereof, and all the
house of Jacob was covered with confusion.

29 And after two years fully expired the king sent his chief collector
of tribute unto the cities of Juda, who came unto Jerusalem with a great
multitude,

30 And spake peaceable words unto them, but all was deceit: for when
they had given him credence, he fell suddenly upon the city, and smote
it very sore, and destroyed much people of Israel.

31 And when he had taken the spoils of the city, he set it on fire, and
pulled down the houses and walls thereof on every side.

32 But the women and children took they captive, and possessed the
cattle.

33 Then builded they the city of David with a great and strong wall, and
with mighty towers, and made it a strong hold for them.

34 And they put therein a sinful nation, wicked men, and fortified
themselves therein.

35 They stored it also with armour and victuals, and when they had
gathered together the spoils of Jerusalem, they laid them up there, and
so they became a sore snare:

36 For it was a place to lie in wait against the sanctuary, and an evil
adversary to Israel.

37 Thus they shed innocent blood on every side of the sanctuary, and
defiled it:

38 Insomuch that the inhabitants of Jerusalem fled because of them:
whereupon the city was made an habitation of strangers, and became
strange to those that were born in her; and her own children left her.

39 Her sanctuary was laid waste like a wilderness, her feasts were
turned into mourning, her sabbaths into reproach her honour into
contempt.

40 As had been her glory, so was her dishonour increased, and her
excellency was turned into mourning.

41 Moreover king Antiochus wrote to his whole kingdom, that all should
be one people,

42 And every one should leave his laws: so all the heathen agreed
according to the commandment of the king.

43 Yea, many also of the Israelites consented to his religion, and
sacrificed unto idols, and profaned the sabbath.

44 For the king had sent letters by messengers unto Jerusalem and the
cities of Juda that they should follow the strange laws of the land,

45 And forbid burnt offerings, and sacrifice, and drink offerings, in
the temple; and that they should profane the sabbaths and festival days:

46 And pollute the sanctuary and holy people:

47 Set up altars, and groves, and chapels of idols, and sacrifice
swine's flesh, and unclean beasts:

48 That they should also leave their children uncircumcised, and make
their souls abominable with all manner of uncleanness and profanation:

49 To the end they might forget the law, and change all the ordinances.

50 And whosoever would not do according to the commandment of the king,
he said, he should die.

51 In the selfsame manner wrote he to his whole kingdom, and appointed
overseers over all the people, commanding the cities of Juda to
sacrifice, city by city.

52 Then many of the people were gathered unto them, to wit every one
that forsook the law; and so they committed evils in the land;

53 And drove the Israelites into secret places, even wheresoever they
could flee for succour.

54 Now the fifteenth day of the month Casleu, in the hundred forty and
fifth year, they set up the abomination of desolation upon the altar,
and builded idol altars throughout the cities of Juda on every side;

55 And burnt incense at the doors of their houses, and in the streets.

56 And when they had rent in pieces the books of the law which they
found, they burnt them with fire.

57 And whosoever was found with any the book of the testament, or if any
committed to the law, the king's commandment was, that they should put
him to death.

58 Thus did they by their authority unto the Israelites every month, to
as many as were found in the cities.

59 Now the five and twentieth day of the month they did sacrifice upon
the idol altar, which was upon the altar of God.

60 At which time according to the commandment they put to death certain
women, that had caused their children to be circumcised.

61 And they hanged the infants about their necks, and rifled their
houses, and slew them that had circumcised them.

62 Howbeit many in Israel were fully resolved and confirmed in
themselves not to eat any unclean thing.

63 Wherefore the rather to die, that they might not be defiled with
meats, and that they might not profane the holy covenant: so then they
died.

64 And there was very great wrath upon Israel.

[Sep](../sep/ma1001)

1 καὶ ἐγένετο μετὰ τὸ πατάξαι Ἀλέξανδρον τὸν Φιλίππου Μακεδόνα ὃς
ἐξῆλθεν ἐκ γῆς Χεττιιμ καὶ ἐπάταξεν τὸν Δαρεῖον βασιλέα Περσῶν καὶ Μήδων
καὶ ἐβασίλευσεν ἀντ᾽ αὐτοῦ πρότερον ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα

2 καὶ συνεστήσατο πολέμους πολλοὺς καὶ ἐκράτησεν ὀχυρωμάτων καὶ ἔσφαξεν
βασιλεῖς τῆς γῆς

3 καὶ διῆλθεν ἕως ἄκρων τῆς γῆς καὶ ἔλαβεν σκῦλα πλήθους ἐθνῶν καὶ
ἡσύχασεν ἡ γῆ ἐνώπιον αὐτοῦ καὶ ὑψώθη καὶ ἐπήρθη ἡ καρδία αὐτοῦ

4 καὶ συνῆξεν δύναμιν ἰσχυρὰν σφόδρα καὶ ἦρξεν χωρῶν ἐθνῶν καὶ τυράννων
καὶ ἐγένοντο αὐτῷ εἰς φόρον

5 καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα ἔπεσεν ἐπὶ τὴν κοίτην καὶ ἔγνω ὅτι ἀποθνῄσκει

6 καὶ ἐκάλεσεν τοὺς παῖδας αὐτοῦ τοὺς ἐνδόξους τοὺς συνεκτρόφους αὐτοῦ
ἐκ νεότητος καὶ διεῖλεν αὐτοῖς τὴν βασιλείαν αὐτοῦ ἔτι αὐτοῦ ζῶντος

7 καὶ ἐβασίλευσεν Ἀλέξανδρος ἔτη δώδεκα καὶ ἀπέθανεν

8 καὶ ἐπεκράτησαν οἱ παῖδες αὐτοῦ ἕκαστος ἐν τῷ τόπῳ αὐτοῦ

9 καὶ ἐπέθεντο πάντες διαδήματα μετὰ τὸ ἀποθανεῖν αὐτὸν καὶ οἱ υἱοὶ
αὐτῶν ὀπίσω αὐτῶν ἔτη πολλὰ καὶ ἐπλήθυναν κακὰ ἐν τῇ γῇ

10 καὶ ἐξῆλθεν ἐξ αὐτῶν ῥίζα ἁμαρτωλὸς Ἀντίοχος Ἐπιφανὴς υἱὸς Ἀντιόχου
τοῦ βασιλέως ὃς ἦν ὅμηρα ἐν Ῥώμῃ καὶ ἐβασίλευσεν ἐν ἔτει ἑκατοστῷ καὶ
τριακοστῷ καὶ ἑβδόμῳ βασιλείας Ἑλλήνων

11 ἐν ταῖς ἡμέραις ἐκείναις ἐξῆλθον ἐξ Ισραηλ υἱοὶ παράνομοι καὶ
ἀνέπεισαν πολλοὺς λέγοντες πορευθῶμεν καὶ διαθώμεθα διαθήκην μετὰ τῶν
ἐθνῶν τῶν κύκλῳ ἡμῶν ὅτι ἀφ᾽ ἧς ἐχωρίσθημεν ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν εὗρεν ἡμᾶς κακὰ
πολλά

12 καὶ ἠγαθύνθη ὁ λόγος ἐν ὀφθαλμοῖς αὐτῶν

13 καὶ προεθυμήθησάν τινες ἀπὸ τοῦ λαοῦ καὶ ἐπορεύθησαν πρὸς τὸν βασιλέα
καὶ ἔδωκεν αὐτοῖς ἐξουσίαν ποιῆσαι τὰ δικαιώματα τῶν ἐθνῶν

14 καὶ ᾠκοδόμησαν γυμνάσιον ἐν Ιεροσολύμοις κατὰ τὰ νόμιμα τῶν ἐθνῶν

15 καὶ ἐποίησαν ἑαυτοῖς ἀκροβυστίας καὶ ἀπέστησαν ἀπὸ διαθήκης ἁγίας καὶ
ἐζευγίσθησαν τοῖς ἔθνεσιν καὶ ἐπράθησαν τοῦ ποιῆσαι τὸ πονηρόν

16 καὶ ἡτοιμάσθη ἡ βασιλεία ἐνώπιον Ἀντιόχου καὶ ὑπέλαβεν βασιλεῦσαι γῆς
Αἰγύπτου ὅπως βασιλεύσῃ ἐπὶ τὰς δύο βασιλείας

17 καὶ εἰσῆλθεν εἰς Αἴγυπτον ἐν ὄχλῳ βαρεῖ ἐν ἅρμασιν καὶ ἐλέφασιν καὶ
ἐν ἱππεῦσιν καὶ ἐν στόλῳ μεγάλῳ

18 καὶ συνεστήσατο πόλεμον πρὸς Πτολεμαῖον βασιλέα Αἰγύπτου καὶ ἐνετράπη
Πτολεμαῖος ἀπὸ προσώπου αὐτοῦ καὶ ἔφυγεν καὶ ἔπεσον τραυματίαι πολλοί

19 καὶ κατελάβοντο τὰς πόλεις τὰς ὀχυρὰς ἐν γῇ Αἰγύπτῳ καὶ ἔλαβεν τὰ
σκῦλα γῆς Αἰγύπτου

20 καὶ ἐπέστρεψεν Ἀντίοχος μετὰ τὸ πατάξαι Αἴγυπτον ἐν τῷ ἑκατοστῷ καὶ
τεσσαρακοστῷ καὶ τρίτῳ ἔτει καὶ ἀνέβη ἐπὶ Ισραηλ καὶ ἀνέβη εἰς
Ιεροσόλυμα ἐν ὄχλῳ βαρεῖ

21 καὶ εἰσῆλθεν εἰς τὸ ἁγίασμα ἐν ὑπερηφανίᾳ καὶ ἔλαβεν τὸ θυσιαστήριον
τὸ χρυσοῦν καὶ τὴν λυχνίαν τοῦ φωτὸς καὶ πάντα τὰ σκεύη αὐτῆς

22 καὶ τὴν τράπεζαν τῆς προθέσεως καὶ τὰ σπονδεῖα καὶ τὰς φιάλας καὶ τὰς
θυΐσκας τὰς χρυσᾶς καὶ τὸ καταπέτασμα καὶ τοὺς στεφάνους καὶ τὸν κόσμον
τὸν χρυσοῦν τὸν κατὰ πρόσωπον τοῦ ναοῦ καὶ ἐλέπισεν πάντα

23 καὶ ἔλαβεν τὸ ἀργύριον καὶ τὸ χρυσίον καὶ τὰ σκεύη τὰ ἐπιθυμητὰ καὶ
ἔλαβεν τοὺς θησαυροὺς τοὺς ἀποκρύφους οὓς εὗρεν

24 καὶ λαβὼν πάντα ἀπῆλθεν εἰς τὴν γῆν αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐποίησεν φονοκτονίαν
καὶ ἐλάλησεν ὑπερηφανίαν μεγάλην

25 καὶ ἐγένετο πένθος μέγα ἐπὶ Ισραηλ ἐν παντὶ τόπῳ αὐτῶν

26 καὶ ἐστέναξαν ἄρχοντες καὶ πρεσβύτεροι παρθένοι καὶ νεανίσκοι
ἠσθένησαν καὶ τὸ κάλλος τῶν γυναικῶν ἠλλοιώθη

27 πᾶς νυμφίος ἀνέλαβεν θρῆνον καὶ καθημένη ἐν παστῷ ἐπένθει

28 καὶ ἐσείσθη ἡ γῆ ἐπὶ τοὺς κατοικοῦντας αὐτήν καὶ πᾶς ὁ οἶκος Ιακωβ
ἐνεδύσατο αἰσχύνην

29 μετὰ δύο ἔτη ἡμερῶν ἀπέστειλεν ὁ βασιλεὺς ἄρχοντα φορολογίας εἰς τὰς
πόλεις Ιουδα καὶ ἦλθεν εἰς Ιερουσαλημ ἐν ὄχλῳ βαρεῖ

30 καὶ ἐλάλησεν αὐτοῖς λόγους εἰρηνικοὺς ἐν δόλῳ καὶ ἐνεπίστευσαν αὐτῷ
καὶ ἐπέπεσεν ἐπὶ τὴν πόλιν ἐξάπινα καὶ ἐπάταξεν αὐτὴν πληγὴν μεγάλην καὶ
ἀπώλεσεν λαὸν πολὺν ἐξ Ισραηλ

31 καὶ ἔλαβεν τὰ σκῦλα τῆς πόλεως καὶ ἐνέπρησεν αὐτὴν πυρὶ καὶ καθεῖλεν
τοὺς οἴκους αὐτῆς καὶ τὰ τείχη κύκλῳ

32 καὶ ᾐχμαλώτισαν τὰς γυναῖκας καὶ τὰ τέκνα καὶ τὰ κτήνη ἐκληρονόμησαν

33 καὶ ᾠκοδόμησαν τὴν πόλιν Δαυιδ τείχει μεγάλῳ καὶ ὀχυρῷ πύργοις
ὀχυροῖς καὶ ἐγένετο αὐτοῖς εἰς ἄκραν

34 καὶ ἔθηκαν ἐκεῖ ἔθνος ἁμαρτωλόν ἄνδρας παρανόμους καὶ ἐνίσχυσαν ἐν
αὐτῇ

35 καὶ παρέθεντο ὅπλα καὶ τροφὴν καὶ συναγαγόντες τὰ σκῦλα Ιερουσαλημ
ἀπέθεντο ἐκεῖ καὶ ἐγένοντο εἰς μεγάλην παγίδα

36 καὶ ἐγένετο εἰς ἔνεδρον τῷ ἁγιάσματι καὶ εἰς διάβολον πονηρὸν τῷ
Ισραηλ διὰ παντός

37 καὶ ἐξέχεαν αἷμα ἀθῷον κύκλῳ τοῦ ἁγιάσματος καὶ ἐμόλυναν τὸ ἁγίασμα

38 καὶ ἔφυγον οἱ κάτοικοι Ιερουσαλημ δι᾽ αὐτούς καὶ ἐγένετο κατοικία
ἀλλοτρίων καὶ ἐγένετο ἀλλοτρία τοῖς γενήμασιν αὐτῆς καὶ τὰ τέκνα αὐτῆς
ἐγκατέλιπον αὐτήν

39 τὸ ἁγίασμα αὐτῆς ἠρημώθη ὡς ἔρημος αἱ ἑορταὶ αὐτῆς ἐστράφησαν εἰς
πένθος τὰ σάββατα αὐτῆς εἰς ὀνειδισμόν ἡ τιμὴ αὐτῆς εἰς ἐξουδένωσιν

40 κατὰ τὴν δόξαν αὐτῆς ἐπληθύνθη ἡ ἀτιμία αὐτῆς καὶ τὸ ὕψος αὐτῆς
ἐστράφη εἰς πένθος

41 καὶ ἔγραψεν ὁ βασιλεὺς πάσῃ τῇ βασιλείᾳ αὐτοῦ εἶναι πάντας εἰς λαὸν
ἕνα

42 καὶ ἐγκαταλιπεῖν ἕκαστον τὰ νόμιμα αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐπεδέξαντο πάντα τὰ ἔθνη
κατὰ τὸν λόγον τοῦ βασιλέως

43 καὶ πολλοὶ ἀπὸ Ισραηλ εὐδόκησαν τῇ λατρείᾳ αὐτοῦ καὶ ἔθυσαν τοῖς
εἰδώλοις καὶ ἐβεβήλωσαν τὸ σάββατον

44 καὶ ἀπέστειλεν ὁ βασιλεὺς βιβλία ἐν χειρὶ ἀγγέλων εἰς Ιερουσαλημ καὶ
τὰς πόλεις Ιουδα πορευθῆναι ὀπίσω νομίμων ἀλλοτρίων τῆς γῆς

45 καὶ κωλῦσαι ὁλοκαυτώματα καὶ θυσίαν καὶ σπονδὴν ἐκ τοῦ ἁγιάσματος καὶ
βεβηλῶσαι σάββατα καὶ ἑορτὰς

46 καὶ μιᾶναι ἁγίασμα καὶ ἁγίους

47 οἰκοδομῆσαι βωμοὺς καὶ τεμένη καὶ εἰδώλια καὶ θύειν ὕεια καὶ κτήνη
κοινὰ

48 καὶ ἀφιέναι τοὺς υἱοὺς αὐτῶν ἀπεριτμήτους βδελύξαι τὰς ψυχὰς αὐτῶν ἐν
παντὶ ἀκαθάρτῳ καὶ βεβηλώσει

49 ὥστε ἐπιλαθέσθαι τοῦ νόμου καὶ ἀλλάξαι πάντα τὰ δικαιώματα

50 καὶ ὃς ἂν μὴ ποιήσῃ κατὰ τὸν λόγον τοῦ βασιλέως ἀποθανεῖται

51 κατὰ πάντας τοὺς λόγους τούτους ἔγραψεν πάσῃ τῇ βασιλείᾳ αὐτοῦ καὶ
ἐποίησεν ἐπισκόπους ἐπὶ πάντα τὸν λαὸν καὶ ἐνετείλατο ταῖς πόλεσιν Ιουδα
θυσιάζειν κατὰ πόλιν καὶ πόλιν

52 καὶ συνηθροίσθησαν ἀπὸ τοῦ λαοῦ πολλοὶ πρὸς αὐτούς πᾶς ὁ ἐγκαταλείπων
τὸν νόμον καὶ ἐποίησαν κακὰ ἐν τῇ γῇ

53 καὶ ἔθεντο τὸν Ισραηλ ἐν κρύφοις ἐν παντὶ φυγαδευτηρίῳ αὐτῶν

54 καὶ τῇ πεντεκαιδεκάτῃ ἡμέρᾳ Χασελευ τῷ πέμπτῳ καὶ τεσσαρακοστῷ καὶ
ἑκατοστῷ ἔτει ᾠκοδόμησεν βδέλυγμα ἐρημώσεως ἐπὶ τὸ θυσιαστήριον καὶ ἐν
πόλεσιν Ιουδα κύκλῳ ᾠκοδόμησαν βωμούς

55 καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν θυρῶν τῶν οἰκιῶν καὶ ἐν ταῖς πλατείαις ἐθυμίων

56 καὶ τὰ βιβλία τοῦ νόμου ἃ εὗρον ἐνεπύρισαν ἐν πυρὶ κατασχίσαντες

57 καὶ ὅπου εὑρίσκετο παρά τινι βιβλίον διαθήκης καὶ εἴ τις συνευδόκει
τῷ νόμῳ τὸ σύγκριμα τοῦ βασιλέως ἐθανάτου αὐτόν

58 ἐν ἰσχύι αὐτῶν ἐποίουν τῷ Ισραηλ τοῖς εὑρισκομένοις ἐν παντὶ μηνὶ καὶ
μηνὶ ἐν ταῖς πόλεσιν

59 καὶ τῇ πέμπτῃ καὶ εἰκάδι τοῦ μηνὸς θυσιάζοντες ἐπὶ τὸν βωμόν ὃς ἦν
ἐπὶ τοῦ θυσιαστηρίου

60 καὶ τὰς γυναῖκας τὰς περιτετμηκυίας τὰ τέκνα αὐτῶν ἐθανάτωσαν κατὰ τὸ
πρόσταγμα

61 καὶ ἐκρέμασαν τὰ βρέφη ἐκ τῶν τραχήλων αὐτῶν καὶ τοὺς οἴκους αὐτῶν
καὶ τοὺς περιτετμηκότας αὐτούς

62 καὶ πολλοὶ ἐν Ισραηλ ἐκραταιώθησαν καὶ ὠχυρώθησαν ἐν αὑτοῖς τοῦ μὴ
φαγεῖν κοινὰ

63 καὶ ἐπεδέξαντο ἀποθανεῖν ἵνα μὴ μιανθῶσιν τοῖς βρώμασιν καὶ μὴ
βεβηλώσωσιν διαθήκην ἁγίαν καὶ ἀπέθανον

64 καὶ ἐγένετο ὀργὴ μεγάλη ἐπὶ Ισραηλ σφόδρα

[Vul](../vul/ma1001)

1 Et factum est, postquam percussit Alexander Philippi Macedo, qui
primus regnavit in Græcia, egressus de terra Cethim, Darium regem
Persarum et Medorum:

2 constituit prælia multa, et obtinuit omnium munitiones, et interfecit
reges terræ,

3 et pertransiit usque ad fines terræ: et accepit spolia multitudinis
gentium, et siluit terra in conspectu ejus.

4 Et congregavit virtutem, et exercitum fortem nimis: et exaltatum est,
et elevatum cor ejus:

5 et obtinuit regiones gentium, et tyrannos: et facti sunt illi in
tributum.

6 Et post hæc decidit in lectum, et cognovit quia moreretur.

7 Et vocavit pueros suos nobiles, qui secum erant nutriti a juventute:
et divisit illis regnum suum, cum adhuc viveret.

8 Et regnavit Alexander annis duodecim, et mortuus est.

9 Et obtinuerunt pueri ejus regnum, unusquisque in loco suo:

10 et imposuerunt omnes sibi diademata post mortem ejus, et filii eorum
post eos annis multis, et multiplicata sunt mala in terra.  

11 Et exiit ex eis radix peccatrix, Antiochus illustris, filius Antiochi
regis, qui fuerat Romæ obses: et regnavit in anno centesimo trigesimo
septimo regni Græcorum.

12 In diebus illis, exierunt ex Israël filii iniqui, et suaserunt
multis, dicentes: Eamus, et disponamus testamentum cum gentibus, quæ
circa nos sunt: quia ex quo recessimus ab eis, invenerunt nos multa
mala.

13 Et bonus visus est sermo in oculis eorum.

14 Et destinaverunt aliqui de populo, et abierunt ad regem: et dedit
illis potestatem ut facerent justitiam gentium.

15 Et ædificaverunt gymnasium in Jerosolymis secundum leges nationum:

16 et fecerunt sibi præputia, et recesserunt a testamento sancto, et
juncti sunt nationibus, et venundati sunt ut facerent malum.

17 Et paratum est regnum in conspectu Antiochi, et cœpit regnare in
terra Ægypti ut regnaret super duo regna.

18 Et intravit in Ægyptum in multitudine gravi, in curribus, et
elephantis, et equitibus, et copiosa navium multitudine:

19 et constituit bellum adversus Ptolemæum regem Ægypti, et veritus est
Ptolemæus a facie ejus, et fugit, et ceciderunt vulnerati multi.

20 Et comprehendit civitates munitas in terra Ægypti, et accepit spolia
terræ Ægypti.  

21 Et convertit Antiochus, postquam percussit Ægyptum in centesimo et
quadragesimo tertio anno: et ascendit ad Israël,

22 et ascendit Jerosolymam in multitudine gravi.

23 Et intravit in sanctificationem cum superbia, et accepit altare
aureum, et candelabrum luminis, et universa vasa ejus, et mensam
propositionis, et libatoria, et phialas, et mortariola aurea, et velum,
et coronas, et ornamentum aureum, quod in facie templi erat: et
comminuit omnia.

24 Et accepit argentum, et aurum, et vasa concupiscibilia: et accepit
thesauros occultos, quos invenit: et sublatis omnibus, abiit in terram
suam.

25 Et fecit cædem hominum, et locutus est in superbia magna.

26 Et factus est planctus magnus in Israël, et in omni loco eorum:

27 et ingemuerunt principes et seniores; virgines et juvenes infirmati
sunt: et speciositas mulierum immutata est.

28 Omnis maritus sumpsit lamentum, et quæ sedebant in thoro maritali,
lugebant:

29 et commota est terra super habitantes in ea, et universa domus Jacob
induit confusionem.  

30 Et post duos annos dierum, misit rex principem tributorum in
civitates Juda, et venit Jerusalem cum turba magna.

31 Et locutus est ad eos verba pacifica in dolo: et crediderunt ei.

32 Et irruit super civitatem repente, et percussit eam plaga magna, et
perdidit populum multum ex Israël.

33 Et accepit spolia civitatis: et succendit eam igni, et destruxit
domos ejus, et muros ejus in circuitu:

34 et captivas duxerunt mulieres, et natos et pecora possederunt.

35 Et ædificaverunt civitatem David muro magno et firmo, et turribus
firmis, et facta est illis in arcem:

36 et posuerunt illic gentem peccatricem viros iniquos, et convaluerunt
in ea: et posuerunt arma, et escas, et congregaverunt spolia Jerusalem:

37 et reposuerunt illic: et facti sunt in laqueum magnum.

38 Et factum est hoc ad insidias sanctificationi, et in diabolum malum
in Israël:

39 et effuderunt sanguinem innocentem per circuitum sanctificationis, et
contaminaverunt sanctificationem.

40 Et fugerunt habitatores Jerusalem propter eos, et facta est habitatio
exterorum, et facta est extera semini suo, et nati ejus reliquerunt eam.

41 Sanctificatio ejus desolata est sicut solitudo; dies festi ejus
conversi sunt in luctum, sabbata ejus in opprobrium, honores ejus in
nihilum.

42 Secundum gloriam ejus multiplicata est ignominia ejus, et sublimitas
ejus conversa est in luctum.  

43 Et scripsit rex Antiochus omni regno suo ut esset omnis populus unus:
et relinqueret unusquisque legem suam.

44 Et consenserunt omnes gentes secundum verbum regis Antiochi:

45 et multi ex Israël consenserunt servituti ejus, et sacrificaverunt
idolis, et coinquinaverunt sabbatum.

46 Et misit rex libros per manus nuntiorum in Jerusalem, et in omnes
civitates Juda, ut sequerentur leges gentium terræ,

47 et prohiberent holocausta et sacrificia, et placationes fieri in
templo Dei,

48 et prohiberent celebrari sabbatum, et dies solemnes:

49 et jussit coinquinari sancta, et sanctum populum Israël.

50 Et jussit ædificari aras, et templa, et idola, et immolari carnes
suillas, et pecora communia,

51 et relinquere filios suos incircumcisos, et coinquinari animas eorum
in omnibus immundis, et abominationibus, ita ut obliviscerentur legem,
et immutarent omnes justificationes Dei:

52 et quicumque non fecissent secundum verbum regis Antiochi,
morerentur.

53 Secundum omnia verba hæc scripsit omni regno suo: et præposuit
principes populo, qui hæc fieri cogerent.

54 Et jusserunt civitatibus Juda sacrificare.

55 Et congregati sunt multi de populo ad eos qui dereliquerant legem
Domini, et fecerunt mala super terram:

56 et effugaverunt populum Israël in abditis, et in absconditis
fugitivorum locis.  

57 Die quintadecima mensis Casleu, quinto et quadragesimo et centesimo
anno, ædificavit rex Antiochus abominandum idolum desolationis super
altare Dei, et per universas civitates Juda in circuitu ædificaverunt
aras:

58 et ante januas domorum et in plateis incendebant thura, et
sacrificabant:

59 et libros legis Dei combusserunt igni, scindentes eos:

60 et apud quemcumque inveniebantur libri testamenti Domini, et
quicumque observabat legem Domini, secundum edictum regis trucidabant
eum.

61 In virtute sua faciebant hæc populo Israël, qui inveniebatur in omni
mense et mense in civitatibus.

62 Et quinta et vigesima die mensis sacrificabant super aram, quæ erat
contra altare.

63 Et mulieres, quæ circumcidebant filios suos, trucidabantur secundum
jussum regis Antiochi,

64 et suspendebant pueros a cervicibus per universas domos eorum: et
eos, qui circumciderant illos, trucidabant.

65 Et multi de populo Israël definierunt apud se, ut non manducarent
immunda: et elegerunt magis mori, quam cibis coinquinari immundis:

66 et noluerunt infringere legem Dei sanctam, et trucidati sunt:

67 et facta est ira magna super populum valde.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Macabees 2](ma1002)
