[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[1 Macabees Index](ma1)  
  [Previous](ma1012)  [Next](ma1014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1 Macabees 13

[Apo](../apo/ma1013)

1 Now when Simon heard that Tryphon had gathered together a great host
to invade the land of Judea, and destroy it,

2 And saw that the people was in great trembling and fear, he went up to
Jerusalem, and gathered the people together,

3 And gave them exhortation, saying, Ye yourselves know what great
things I, and my brethren, and my father's house, have done for the laws
and the sanctuary, the battles also and troubles which we have seen.

4 By reason whereof all my brethren are slain for Israel's sake, and I
am left alone.

5 Now therefore be it far from me, that I should spare mine own life in
any time of trouble: for I am no better than my brethren.

6 Doubtless I will avenge my nation, and the sanctuary, and our wives,
and our children: for all the heathen are gathered to destroy us of very
malice.

7 Now as soon as the people heard these words, their spirit revived.

8 And they answered with a loud voice, saying, Thou shalt be our leader
instead of Judas and Jonathan thy brother.

9 Fight thou our battles, and whatsoever, thou commandest us, that will
we do.

10 So then he gathered together all the men of war, and made haste to
finish the walls of Jerusalem, and he fortified it round about.

11 Also he sent Jonathan the son of Absolom, and with him a great power,
to Joppa: who casting out them that were therein remained there in it.

12 So Tryphon removed from Ptolemaus with a great power to invade the
land of Judea, and Jonathan was with him in ward.

13 But Simon pitched his tents at Adida, over against the plain.

14 Now when Tryphon knew that Simon was risen up instead of his brother
Jonathan, and meant to join battle with him, he sent messengers unto
him, saying,

15 Whereas we have Jonathan thy brother in hold, it is for money that he
is owing unto the king's treasure, concerning the business that was
committed unto him.

16 Wherefore now send an hundred talents of silver, and two of his sons
for hostages, that when he is at liberty he may not revolt from us, and
we will let him go.

17 Hereupon Simon, albeit he perceived that they spake deceitfully unto
him yet sent he the money and the children, lest peradventure he should
procure to himself great hatred of the people:

18 Who might have said, Because I sent him not the money and the
children, therefore is Jonathan dead.

19 So he sent them the children and the hundred talents: howbeit Tryphon
dissembled neither would he let Jonathan go.

20 And after this came Tryphon to invade the land, and destroy it, going
round about by the way that leadeth unto Adora: but Simon and his host
marched against him in every place, wheresoever he went.

21 Now they that were in the tower sent messengers unto Tryphon, to the
end that he should hasten his coming unto them by the wilderness, and
send them victuals.

22 Wherefore Tryphon made ready all his horsemen to come that night: but
there fell a very great snow, by reason whereof he came not. So he
departed, and came into the country of Galaad.

23 And when he came near to Bascama he slew Jonathan, who was buried
there.

24 Afterward Tryphon returned and went into his own land.

25 Then sent Simon, and took the bones of Jonathan his brother, and
buried them in Modin, the city of his fathers.

26 And all Israel made great lamentation for him, and bewailed him many
days.

27 Simon also built a monument upon the sepulchre of his father and his
brethren, and raised it aloft to the sight, with hewn stone behind and
before.

28 Moreover he set up seven pyramids, one against another, for his
father, and his mother, and his four brethren.

29 And in these he made cunning devices, about the which he set great
pillars, and upon the pillars he made all their armour for a perpetual
memory, and by the armour ships carved, that they might be seen of all
that sail on the sea.

30 This is the sepulchre which he made at Modin, and it standeth yet
unto this day.

31 Now Tryphon dealt deceitfully with the young king Antiochus, and slew
him.

32 And he reigned in his stead, and crowned himself king of Asia, and
brought a great calamity upon the land.

33 Then Simon built up the strong holds in Judea, and fenced them about
with high towers, and great walls, and gates, and bars, and laid up
victuals therein.

34 Moreover Simon chose men, and sent to king Demetrius, to the end he
should give the land an immunity, because all that Tryphon did was to
spoil.

35 Unto whom king Demetrius answered and wrote after this manner:

36 King Demetrius unto Simon the high priest, and friend of kings, as
also unto the elders and nation of the Jews, sendeth greeting:

37 The golden crown, and the scarlet robe, which ye sent unto us, we
have received: and we are ready to make a stedfast peace with you, yea,
and to write unto our officers, to confirm the immunities which we have
granted.

38 And whatsoever covenants we have made with you shall stand; and the
strong holds, which ye have builded, shall be your own.

39 As for any oversight or fault committed unto this day, we forgive it,
and the crown tax also, which ye owe us: and if there were any other
tribute paid in Jerusalem, it shall no more be paid.

40 And look who are meet among you to be in our court, let then be
enrolled, and let there be peace betwixt us.

41 Thus the yoke of the heathen was taken away from Israel in the
hundred and seventieth year.

42 Then the people of Israel began to write in their instruments and
contracts, In the first year of Simon the high priest, the governor and
leader of the Jews.

43 In those days Simon camped against Gaza and besieged it round about;
he made also an engine of war, and set it by the city, and battered a
certain tower, and took it.

44 And they that were in the engine leaped into the city; whereupon
there was a great uproar in the city:

45 Insomuch as the people of the city rent their clothes, and climbed
upon the walls with their wives and children, and cried with a loud
voice, beseeching Simon to grant them peace.

46 And they said, Deal not with us according to our wickedness, but
according to thy mercy.

47 So Simon was appeased toward them, and fought no more against them,
but put them out of the city, and cleansed the houses wherein the idols
were, and so entered into it with songs and thanksgiving.

48 Yea, he put all uncleanness out of it, and placed such men there as
would keep the law, and made it stronger than it was before, and built
therein a dwellingplace for himself.

49 They also of the tower in Jerusalem were kept so strait, that they
could neither come forth, nor go into the country, nor buy, nor sell:
wherefore they were in great distress for want of victuals, and a great
number of them perished through famine.

50 Then cried they to Simon, beseeching him to be at one with them:
which thing he granted them; and when he had put them out from thence,
he cleansed the tower from pollutions:

51 And entered into it the three and twentieth day of the second month
in the hundred seventy and first year, with thanksgiving, and branches
of palm trees, and with harps, and cymbals, and with viols, and hymns,
and songs: because there was destroyed a great enemy out of Israel.

52 He ordained also that that day should be kept every year with
gladness. Moreover the hill of the temple that was by the tower he made
stronger than it was, and there he dwelt himself with his company.

53 And when Simon saw that John his son was a valiant man, he made him
captain of all the hosts; and he dwelt in Gazera.

[Sep](../sep/ma1013)

1 καὶ ἤκουσεν Σιμων ὅτι συνήγαγεν Τρύφων δύναμιν πολλὴν τοῦ ἐλθεῖν εἰς
γῆν Ιουδα καὶ ἐκτρῖψαι αὐτήν

2 καὶ εἶδεν τὸν λαόν ὅτι ἔντρομός ἐστιν καὶ ἔκφοβος καὶ ἀνέβη εἰς
Ιερουσαλημ καὶ ἤθροισεν τὸν λαὸν

3 καὶ παρεκάλεσεν αὐτοὺς καὶ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς αὐτοὶ οἴδατε ὅσα ἐγὼ καὶ οἱ
ἀδελφοί μου καὶ ὁ οἶκος τοῦ πατρός μου ἐποιήσαμεν περὶ τῶν νόμων καὶ τῶν
ἁγίων καὶ τοὺς πολέμους καὶ τὰς στενοχωρίας ἃς εἴδομεν

4 τούτου χάριν ἀπώλοντο οἱ ἀδελφοί μου πάντες χάριν τοῦ Ισραηλ καὶ
κατελείφθην ἐγὼ μόνος

5 καὶ νῦν μή μοι γένοιτο φείσασθαί μου τῆς ψυχῆς ἐν παντὶ καιρῷ θλίψεως
οὐ γάρ εἰμι κρείσσων τῶν ἀδελφῶν μου

6 πλὴν ἐκδικήσω περὶ τοῦ ἔθνους μου καὶ περὶ τῶν ἁγίων καὶ περὶ τῶν
γυναικῶν καὶ τέκνων ὑμῶν ὅτι συνήχθησαν πάντα τὰ ἔθνη ἐκτρῖψαι ἡμᾶς
ἔχθρας χάριν

7 καὶ ἀνεζωπύρησεν τὸ πνεῦμα τοῦ λαοῦ ἅμα τοῦ ἀκοῦσαι τῶν λόγων τούτων

8 καὶ ἀπεκρίθησαν φωνῇ μεγάλῃ λέγοντες σὺ εἶ ἡμῶν ἡγούμενος ἀντὶ Ιουδου
καὶ Ιωναθου τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ σου

9 πολέμησον τὸν πόλεμον ἡμῶν καὶ πάντα ὅσα ἂν εἴπῃς ἡμῖν ποιήσομεν

10 καὶ συνήγαγεν πάντας τοὺς ἄνδρας τοὺς πολεμιστὰς καὶ ἐτάχυνεν τοῦ
τελέσαι τὰ τείχη Ιερουσαλημ καὶ ὠχύρωσεν αὐτὴν κυκλόθεν

11 καὶ ἀπέστειλεν Ιωναθαν τὸν τοῦ Αψαλωμου καὶ μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ δύναμιν ἱκανὴν
εἰς Ιοππην καὶ ἐξέβαλεν τοὺς ὄντας ἐν αὐτῇ καὶ ἔμεινεν ἐκεῖ ἐν αὐτῇ

12 καὶ ἀπῆρεν Τρύφων ἀπὸ Πτολεμαίδος μετὰ δυνάμεως πολλῆς ἐλθεῖν εἰς γῆν
Ιουδα καὶ Ιωναθαν μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἐν φυλακῇ

13 Σιμων δὲ παρενέβαλεν ἐν Αδιδοις κατὰ πρόσωπον τοῦ πεδίου

14 καὶ ἐπέγνω Τρύφων ὅτι ἀνέστη Σιμων ἀντὶ Ιωναθου τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ αὐτοῦ καὶ
ὅτι συνάπτειν αὐτῷ μέλλει πόλεμον καὶ ἀπέστειλεν πρὸς αὐτὸν πρέσβεις
λέγων

15 περὶ ἀργυρίου οὗ ὤφειλεν Ιωναθαν ὁ ἀδελφός σου εἰς τὸ βασιλικὸν δι᾽
ἃς εἶχεν χρείας συνέχομεν αὐτόν

16 καὶ νῦν ἀπόστειλον ἀργυρίου τάλαντα ἑκατὸν καὶ δύο τῶν υἱῶν αὐτοῦ
ὅμηρα ὅπως μὴ ἀφεθεὶς ἀποστατήσῃ ἀφ᾽ ἡμῶν καὶ ἀφήσομεν αὐτόν

17 καὶ ἔγνω Σιμων ὅτι δόλῳ λαλοῦσιν πρὸς αὐτόν καὶ πέμπει τοῦ λαβεῖν τὸ
ἀργύριον καὶ τὰ παιδάρια μήποτε ἔχθραν ἄρῃ μεγάλην πρὸς τὸν λαὸν

18 λέγοντες ὅτι οὐκ ἀπέστειλα αὐτῷ τὸ ἀργύριον καὶ τὰ παιδάρια ἀπώλετο

19 καὶ ἀπέστειλεν τὰ παιδάρια καὶ τὰ ἑκατὸν τάλαντα καὶ διεψεύσατο καὶ
οὐκ ἀφῆκεν τὸν Ιωναθαν

20 καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα ἦλθεν Τρύφων τοῦ ἐμβατεῦσαι εἰς τὴν χώραν καὶ ἐκτρῖψαι
αὐτήν καὶ ἐκύκλωσαν ὁδὸν τὴν εἰς Αδωρα καὶ Σιμων καὶ ἡ παρεμβολὴ αὐτοῦ
ἀντιπαρῆγεν αὐτῷ εἰς πάντα τόπον οὗ ἂν ἐπορεύετο

21 οἱ δὲ ἐκ τῆς ἄκρας ἀπέστελλον πρὸς Τρύφωνα πρεσβευτὰς κατασπεύδοντας
αὐτὸν τοῦ ἐλθεῖν πρὸς αὐτοὺς διὰ τῆς ἐρήμου καὶ ἀποστεῖλαι αὐτοῖς τροφάς

22 καὶ ἡτοίμασεν Τρύφων πᾶσαν τὴν ἵππον αὐτοῦ ἐλθεῖν καὶ ἐν τῇ νυκτὶ
ἐκείνῃ ἦν χιὼν πολλὴ σφόδρα καὶ οὐκ ἦλθεν διὰ τὴν χιόνα καὶ ἀπῆρεν καὶ
ἦλθεν εἰς τὴν Γαλααδῖτιν

23 ὡς δὲ ἤγγισεν τῆς Βασκαμα ἀπέκτεινεν τὸν Ιωναθαν καὶ ἐτάφη ἐκεῖ

24 καὶ ἐπέστρεψεν Τρύφων καὶ ἀπῆλθεν εἰς τὴν γῆν αὐτοῦ

25 καὶ ἀπέστειλεν Σιμων καὶ ἔλαβεν τὰ ὀστᾶ Ιωναθου τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ αὐτοῦ καὶ
ἔθαψεν αὐτὸν ἐν Μωδεϊν πόλει τῶν πατέρων αὐτοῦ

26 καὶ ἐκόψαντο αὐτὸν πᾶς Ισραηλ κοπετὸν μέγαν καὶ ἐπένθησαν αὐτὸν
ἡμέρας πολλάς

27 καὶ ᾠκοδόμησεν Σιμων ἐπὶ τὸν τάφον τοῦ πατρὸς αὐτοῦ καὶ τῶν ἀδελφῶν
αὐτοῦ καὶ ὕψωσεν αὐτὸν τῇ ὁράσει λίθῳ ξεστῷ ἐκ τῶν ὄπισθεν καὶ ἔμπροσθεν

28 καὶ ἔστησεν ἑπτὰ πυραμίδας μίαν κατέναντι τῆς μιᾶς τῷ πατρὶ καὶ τῇ
μητρὶ καὶ τοῖς τέσσαρσιν ἀδελφοῖς

29 καὶ ταύταις ἐποίησεν μηχανήματα περιθεὶς στύλους μεγάλους καὶ
ἐποίησεν ἐπὶ τοῖς στύλοις πανοπλίας εἰς ὄνομα αἰώνιον καὶ παρὰ ταῖς
πανοπλίαις πλοῖα ἐγγεγλυμμένα εἰς τὸ θεωρεῖσθαι ὑπὸ πάντων τῶν πλεόντων
τὴν θάλασσαν

30 οὗτος ὁ τάφος ὃν ἐποίησεν ἐν Μωδεϊν ἕως τῆς ἡμέρας ταύτης

31 ὁ δὲ Τρύφων ἐπορεύετο δόλῳ μετὰ Ἀντιόχου τοῦ βασιλέως τοῦ νεωτέρου
καὶ ἀπέκτεινεν αὐτὸν

32 καὶ ἐβασίλευσεν ἀντ᾽ αὐτοῦ καὶ περιέθετο τὸ διάδημα τῆς Ἀσίας καὶ
ἐποίησεν πληγὴν μεγάλην ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς

33 καὶ ᾠκοδόμησεν Σιμων τὰ ὀχυρώματα τῆς Ιουδαίας καὶ περιετείχισεν
πύργοις ὑψηλοῖς καὶ τείχεσιν μεγάλοις καὶ πύλαις καὶ μοχλοῖς καὶ ἔθετο
βρώματα ἐν τοῖς ὀχυρώμασιν

34 καὶ ἐπέλεξεν Σιμων ἄνδρας καὶ ἀπέστειλεν πρὸς Δημήτριον τὸν βασιλέα
τοῦ ποιῆσαι ἄφεσιν τῇ χώρᾳ ὅτι πᾶσαι αἱ πράξεις Τρύφωνος ἦσαν ἁρπαγαί

35 καὶ ἀπέστειλεν αὐτῷ Δημήτριος ὁ βασιλεὺς κατὰ τοὺς λόγους τούτους καὶ
ἀπεκρίθη αὐτῷ καὶ ἔγραψεν αὐτῷ ἐπιστολὴν τοιαύτην

36 βασιλεὺς Δημήτριος Σιμωνι ἀρχιερεῖ καὶ φίλῳ βασιλέων καὶ πρεσβυτέροις
καὶ ἔθνει Ιουδαίων χαίρειν

37 τὸν στέφανον τὸν χρυσοῦν καὶ τὴν βαΐνην ἣν ἀπεστείλατε κεκομίσμεθα
καὶ ἕτοιμοί ἐσμεν τοῦ ποιεῖν ὑμῖν εἰρήνην μεγάλην καὶ γράφειν τοῖς ἐπὶ
τῶν χρειῶν τοῦ ἀφιέναι ὑμῖν τὰ ἀφέματα

38 καὶ ὅσα ἐστήσαμεν πρὸς ὑμᾶς ἕστηκεν καὶ τὰ ὀχυρώματα ἃ ᾠκοδομήσατε
ὑπαρχέτω ὑμῖν

39 ἀφίεμεν δὲ ἀγνοήματα καὶ τὰ ἁμαρτήματα ἕως τῆς σήμερον ἡμέρας καὶ τὸν
στέφανον ὃν ὠφείλετε καὶ εἴ τι ἄλλο ἐτελωνεῖτο ἐν Ιερουσαλημ μηκέτι
τελωνείσθω

40 καὶ εἴ τινες ἐπιτήδειοι ὑμῶν γραφῆναι εἰς τοὺς περὶ ἡμᾶς
ἐγγραφέσθωσαν καὶ γινέσθω ἀνὰ μέσον ἡμῶν εἰρήνη

41 ἔτους ἑβδομηκοστοῦ καὶ ἑκατοστοῦ ἤρθη ὁ ζυγὸς τῶν ἐθνῶν ἀπὸ τοῦ
Ισραηλ

42 καὶ ἤρξατο ὁ λαὸς γράφειν ἐν ταῖς συγγραφαῖς καὶ συναλλάγμασιν ἔτους
πρώτου ἐπὶ Σιμωνος ἀρχιερέως μεγάλου καὶ στρατηγοῦ καὶ ἡγουμένου
Ιουδαίων

43 ἐν ταῖς ἡμέραις ἐκείναις παρενέβαλεν ἐπὶ Γαζαρα καὶ ἐκύκλωσεν αὐτὴν
παρεμβολαῖς καὶ ἐποίησεν ἑλεόπολιν καὶ προσήγαγεν τῇ πόλει καὶ ἐπάταξεν
πύργον ἕνα καὶ κατελάβετο

44 καὶ ἐξήλλοντο οἱ ἐν τῇ ἑλεοπόλει εἰς τὴν πόλιν καὶ ἐγένετο κίνημα
μέγα ἐν τῇ πόλει

45 καὶ ἀνέβησαν οἱ ἐν τῇ πόλει σὺν γυναιξὶν καὶ τοῖς τέκνοις ἐπὶ τὸ
τεῖχος διερρηχότες τὰ ἱμάτια αὐτῶν καὶ ἐβόησαν φωνῇ μεγάλῃ ἀξιοῦντες
Σιμωνα δεξιὰς αὐτοῖς δοῦναι

46 καὶ εἶπαν μὴ ἡμῖν χρήσῃ κατὰ τὰς πονηρίας ἡμῶν ἀλλὰ κατὰ τὸ ἔλεός σου

47 καὶ συνελύθη αὐτοῖς Σιμων καὶ οὐκ ἐπολέμησεν αὐτούς καὶ ἐξέβαλεν
αὐτοὺς ἐκ τῆς πόλεως καὶ ἐκαθάρισεν τὰς οἰκίας ἐν αἷς ἦν τὰ εἴδωλα καὶ
οὕτως εἰσῆλθεν εἰς αὐτὴν ὑμνῶν καὶ εὐλογῶν

48 καὶ ἐξέβαλεν ἐξ αὐτῆς πᾶσαν ἀκαθαρσίαν καὶ κατῴκισεν ἐν αὐτῇ ἄνδρας
οἵτινες τὸν νόμον ποιήσωσιν καὶ προσωχύρωσεν αὐτὴν καὶ ᾠκοδόμησεν ἑαυτῷ
ἐν αὐτῇ οἴκησιν

49 οἱ δὲ ἐκ τῆς ἄκρας ἐν Ιερουσαλημ ἐκωλύοντο ἐκπορεύεσθαι καὶ
εἰσπορεύεσθαι εἰς τὴν χώραν ἀγοράζειν καὶ πωλεῖν καὶ ἐπείνασαν σφόδρα
καὶ ἀπώλοντο ἐξ αὐτῶν ἱκανοὶ τῷ λιμῷ

50 καὶ ἐβόησαν πρὸς Σιμωνα δεξιὰς λαβεῖν καὶ ἔδωκεν αὐτοῖς καὶ ἐξέβαλεν
αὐτοὺς ἐκεῖθεν καὶ ἐκαθάρισεν τὴν ἄκραν ἀπὸ τῶν μιασμάτων

51 καὶ εἰσῆλθον εἰς αὐτὴν τῇ τρίτῃ καὶ εἰκάδι τοῦ δευτέρου μηνὸς ἔτους
πρώτου καὶ ἑβδομηκοστοῦ καὶ ἑκατοστοῦ μετὰ αἰνέσεως καὶ βαΐων καὶ ἐν
κινύραις καὶ ἐν κυμβάλοις καὶ ἐν νάβλαις καὶ ἐν ὕμνοις καὶ ἐν ᾠδαῖς ὅτι
συνετρίβη ἐχθρὸς μέγας ἐξ Ισραηλ

52 καὶ ἔστησεν κατ᾽ ἐνιαυτὸν τοῦ ἄγειν τὴν ἡμέραν ταύτην μετὰ εὐφροσύνης
καὶ προσωχύρωσεν τὸ ὄρος τοῦ ἱεροῦ τὸ παρὰ τὴν ἄκραν καὶ ᾤκει ἐκεῖ αὐτὸς
καὶ οἱ παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ

53 καὶ εἶδεν Σιμων τὸν Ιωαννην υἱὸν αὐτοῦ ὅτι ἀνήρ ἐστιν καὶ ἔθετο αὐτὸν
ἡγούμενον τῶν δυνάμεων πασῶν καὶ ᾤκει ἐν Γαζαροις

[Vul](../vul/ma1013)

1 Et audivit Simon quod congregavit Tryphon exercitum copiosum ut
veniret in terram Juda, et attereret eam.

2 Videns quia in tremore populus est, et in timore, ascendit Jerusalem,
et congregavit populum:

3 et adhortans dixit: Vos scitis quanta ego, et fratres mei, et domus
patris mei, fecimus pro legibus et pro sanctis, prælia, et angustias
quales vidimus:

4 horum gratia perierunt fratres mei omnes propter Israël, et relictus
sum ego solus.

5 Et nunc non mihi contingat parcere animæ meæ in omni tempore
tribulationis: non enim melior sum fratribus meis.

6 Vindicabo itaque gentem meam, et sancta, natos quoque nostros, et
uxores: quia congregatæ sunt universæ gentes conterere nos inimicitiæ
gratia.

7 Et accensus est spiritus populi simul ut audivit sermones istos:

8 et responderunt voce magna, dicentes: Tu es dux noster loco Judæ, et
Jonathæ fratris tui:

9 pugna prælium nostrum: et omnia, quæcumque dixeris nobis, faciemus.

10 Et congregans omnes viros bellatores, acceleravit consummare
universos muros Jerusalem, et munivit eam in gyro.

11 Et misit Jonathan filium Absalomi, et cum eo exercitum novum in
Joppen, et ejectis his qui erant in ea, remansit illic ipse.

12 Et movit Tryphon a Ptolemaida cum exercitu multo, ut veniret in
terram Juda, et Jonathas cum eo in custodia.

13 Simon autem applicuit in Addus contra faciem campi.  

14 Et ut cognovit Tryphon quia surrexit Simon loco fratris sui Jonathæ,
et quia commissurus esset cum eo prælium, misit ad eum legatos,

15 dicens: Pro argento, quod debebat frater tuus Jonathas in ratione
regis propter negotia quæ habuit, detinuimus eum.

16 Et nunc mitte argenti talenta centum, et duos filios ejus obsides, ut
non dimissus fugiat a nobis, et remittemus eum.

17 Et cognovit Simon quia cum dolo loqueretur secum: jussit tamen dari
argentum et pueros, ne inimicitiam magnam sumeret ad populum Israël,
dicentem:

18 Quia non misit ei argentum, et pueros, propterea periit.

19 Et misit pueros, et centum talenta: et mentitus est, et non dimisit
Jonathan.  

20 Et post hæc venit Tryphon intra regionem, ut contereret eam: et
gyraverunt per viam quæ ducit Ador: et Simon et castra ejus ambulabant
in omnem locum quocumque ibant.

21 Qui autem in arce erant, miserunt ad Tryphonem legatos, ut festinaret
venire per desertum, et mitteret illis alimonias.

22 Et paravit Tryphon omnem equitatum, ut veniret illa nocte: erat autem
nix multa valde, et non venit in Galaaditim.

23 Et cum appropinquasset Bascaman, occidit Jonathan et filios ejus
illic.

24 Et convertit Tryphon, et abiit in terram suam.

25 Et misit Simon, et accepit ossa Jonathæ fratris sui, et sepelivit ea
in Modin civitate patrum ejus.

26 Et planxerunt eum omnis Israël planctu magno, et luxerunt eum dies
multos.

27 Et ædificavit Simon super sepulchrum patris sui et fratrum suorum
ædificium altum visu, lapide polito retro et ante.

28 Et statuit septem pyramidas, unam contra unam, patri et matri, et
quatuor fratribus:

29 et his circumposuit columnas magnas: et super columnas arma, ad
memoriam æternam: et juxta arma naves sculptas, quæ viderentur ab
omnibus navigantibus mare:

30 hoc est sepulchrum, quod fecit in Modin usque in hunc diem.

31 Tryphon autem cum iter faceret cum Antiocho rege adolescente, dolo
occidit eum:

32 et regnavit loco ejus, et imposuit sibi diadema Asiæ, et fecit plagam
magnam in terra.  

33 Et ædificavit Simon præsidia Judææ, muniens ea turribus excelsis, et
muris magnis, et portis, et seris: et posuit alimenta in munitionibus.

34 Et elegit Simon viros, et misit ad Demetrium regem ut faceret
remissionem regioni: quia actus omnes Tryphonis per direptionem fuerant
gesti.

35 Et Demetrius rex ad verba ista respondit ei, et scripsit epistolam
talem:

36 Rex Demetrius Simoni summo sacerdoti et amico regum, et senioribus,
et genti Judæorum, salutem.

37 Coronam auream, et bahem, quam misistis, suscepimus: et parati sumus
facere vobiscum pacem magnam, et scribere præpositis regis remittere
vobis quæ indulsimus.

38 Quæcumque enim constituimus, vobis constant: munitiones, quas
ædificastis, vobis sint:

39 remittimus quoque ignorantias et peccata usque in hodiernum diem, et
coronam quam debebatis: et si quid aliud erat tributarium in Jerusalem,
jam non sit tributarium.

40 Et si qui ex vobis apti sunt conscribi inter nostros, conscribantur,
et sit inter nos pax.  

41 Anno centesimo septuagesimo, ablatum est jugum gentium ab Israël.

42 Et cœpit populus Israël scribere in tabulis, et gestis publicis, anno
primo sub Simone summo sacerdote, magno duce, et principe Judæorum.

43 In diebus illis applicuit Simon ad Gazam, et circumdedit eam castris,
et fecit machinas, et applicuit ad civitatem, et percussit turrem unam,
et comprehendit eam.

44 Et eruperant qui erant intra machinam in civitatem, et factus est
motus magnus in civitate.

45 Et ascenderunt qui erant in civitate cum uxoribus et filiis supra
murum, scissis tunicis suis, et clamaverunt voce magna, postulantes a
Simone dextras sibi dari,

46 et dixerunt: Non nobis reddas secundum malitias nostras, sed secundum
misericordias tuas.

47 Et flexus Simon, non debellavit eos: ejecit tamen eos de civitate, et
mundavit ædes in quibus fuerant simulacra, et tunc intravit in eam cum
hymnis benedicens Dominum:

48 et ejecta ab ea omni immunditia, collocavit in ea viros qui legem
facerent: et munivit eam, et fecit sibi habitationem.

49 Qui autem erant in arce Jerusalem, prohibebantur egredi et ingredi
regionem, et emere ac vendere: et esurierunt valde, et multi ex eis fame
perierunt,

50 et clamaverunt ad Simonem ut dextras acciperent: et dedit illis: et
ejecit eos inde, et mundavit arcem a contaminationibus:

51 et intraverunt in eam tertia et vigesima die secundi mensis, anno
centesimo septuagesimo primo, cum laude, et ramis palmarum, et cinyris,
et cymbalis, et nablis, et hymnis, et canticis, quia contritus est
inimicus magnus ex Israël.

52 Et constituit ut omnibus annis agerentur dies hi cum lætitia.

53 Et munivit montem templi, qui erat secus arcem, et habitavit ibi
ipse, et qui cum eo erant.

54 Et vidit Simon Joannem filium suum, quod fortis prælii vir esset: et
posuit eum ducem virtutum universarum: et habitavit in Gazaris.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Macabees 14](ma1014)
