[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[1 Macabees Index](ma1)  
  [Previous](ma1009)  [Next](ma1011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1 Macabees 10

[Apo](../apo/ma1010)

1 In the hundred and sixtieth year Alexander, the son of Antiochus
surnamed Epiphanes, went up and took Ptolemais: for the people had
received him, by means whereof he reigned there,

2 Now when king Demetrius heard thereof, he gathered together an
exceeding great host, and went forth against him to fight.

3 Moreover Demetrius sent letters unto Jonathan with loving words, so as
he magnified him.

4 For said he, Let us first make peace with him, before he join with
Alexander against us:

5 Else he will remember all the evils that we have done against him, and
against his brethren and his people.

6 Wherefore he gave him authority to gather together an host, and to
provide weapons, that he might aid him in battle: he commanded also that
the hostages that were in the tower should be delivered him.

7 Then came Jonathan to Jerusalem, and read the letters in the audience
of all the people, and of them that were in the tower:

8 Who were sore afraid, when they heard that the king had given him
authority to gather together an host.

9 Whereupon they of the tower delivered their hostages unto Jonathan,
and he delivered them unto their parents.

10 This done, Jonathan settled himself in Jerusalem, and began to build
and repair the city.

11 And he commanded the workmen to build the walls and the mount Sion
and about with square stones for fortification; and they did so.

12 Then the strangers, that were in the fortresses which Bacchides had
built, fled away;

13 Insomuch as every man left his place, and went into his own country.

14 Only at Bethsura certain of those that had forsaken the law and the
commandments remained still: for it was their place of refuge.

15 Now when king Alexander had heard what promises Demetrius had sent
unto Jonathan: when also it was told him of the battles and noble acts
which he and his brethren had done, and of the pains that they had
endured,

16 He said, Shall we find such another man? now therefore we will make
him our friend and confederate.

17 Upon this he wrote a letter, and sent it unto him, according to these
words, saying,

18 King Alexander to his brother Jonathan sendeth greeting:

19 We have heard of thee, that thou art a man of great power, and meet
to be our friend.

20 Wherefore now this day we ordain thee to be the high priest of thy
nation, and to be called the king's friend; (and therewithal he sent him
a purple robe and a crown of gold:) and require thee to take our part,
and keep friendship with us.

21 So in the seventh month of the hundred and sixtieth year, at the
feast of the tabernacles, Jonathan put on the holy robe, and gathered
together forces, and provided much armour.

22 Whereof when Demetrius heard, he was very sorry, and said,

23 What have we done, that Alexander hath prevented us in making amity
with the Jews to strengthen himself?

24 I also will write unto them words of encouragement, and promise them
dignities and gifts, that I may have their aid.

25 He sent unto them therefore to this effect: King Demetrius unto the
people of the Jews sendeth greeting:

26 Whereas ye have kept covenants with us, and continued in our
friendship, not joining yourselves with our enemies, we have heard
hereof, and are glad.

27 Wherefore now continue ye still to be faithful unto us, and we will
well recompense you for the things ye do in our behalf,

28 And will grant you many immunities, and give you rewards.

29 And now do I free you, and for your sake I release all the Jews, from
tributes, and from the customs of salt, and from crown taxes,

30 And from that which appertaineth unto me to receive for the third
part or the seed, and the half of the fruit of the trees, I release it
from this day forth, so that they shall not be taken of the land of
Judea, nor of the three governments which are added thereunto out of the
country of Samaria and Galilee, from this day forth for evermore.

31 Let Jerusalem also be holy and free, with the borders thereof, both
from tenths and tributes.

32 And as for the tower which is at Jerusalem, I yield up authority over
it, and give the high priest, that he may set in it such men as he shall
choose to keep it.

33 Moreover I freely set at liberty every one of the Jews, that were
carried captives out of the land of Judea into any part of my kingdom,
and I will that all my officers remit the tributes even of their cattle.

34 Furthermore I will that all the feasts, and sabbaths, and new moons,
and solemn days, and the three days before the feast, and the three days
after the feast shall be all of immunity and freedom for all the Jews in
my realm.

35 Also no man shall have authority to meddle with or to molest any of
them in any matter.

36 I will further, that there be enrolled among the king's forces about
thirty thousand men of the Jews, unto whom pay shall be given, as
belongeth to all king's forces.

37 And of them some shall be placed in the king's strong holds, of whom
also some shall be set over the affairs of the kingdom, which are of
trust: and I will that their overseers and governors be of themselves,
and that they live after their own laws, even as the king hath commanded
in the land of Judea.

38 And concerning the three governments that are added to Judea from the
country of Samaria, let them be joined with Judea, that they may be
reckoned to be under one, nor bound to obey other authority than the
high priest's.

39 As for Ptolemais, and the land pertaining thereto, I give it as a
free gift to the sanctuary at Jerusalem for the necessary expences of
the sanctuary.

40 Moreover I give every year fifteen thousand shekels of silver out of
the king's accounts from the places appertaining.

41 And all the overplus, which the officers payed not in as in former
time, from henceforth shall be given toward the works of the temple.

42 And beside this, the five thousand shekels of silver, which they took
from the uses of the temple out of the accounts year by year, even those
things shall be released, because they appertain to the priests that
minister.

43 And whosoever they be that flee unto the temple at Jerusalem, or be
within the liberties hereof, being indebted unto the king, or for any
other matter, let them be at liberty, and all that they have in my
realm.

44 For the building also and repairing of the works of the sanctuary
expences shall be given of the king's accounts.

45 Yea, and for the building of the walls of Jerusalem, and the
fortifying thereof round about, expences shall be given out of the
king's accounts, as also for the building of the walls in Judea.

46 Now when Jonathan and the people heard these words, they gave no
credit unto them, nor received them, because they remembered the great
evil that he had done in Israel; for he had afflicted them very sore.

47 But with Alexander they were well pleased, because he was the first
that entreated of true peace with them, and they were confederate with
him always.

48 Then gathered king Alexander great forces, and camped over against
Demetrius.

49 And after the two kings had joined battle, Demetrius' host fled: but
Alexander followed after him, and prevailed against them.

50 And he continued the battle very sore until the sun went down: and
that day was Demetrius slain.

51 Afterward Alexander sent ambassadors to Ptolemee king of Egypt with a
message to this effect:

52 Forasmuch as I am come again to my realm, and am set in the throne of
my progenitors, and have gotten the dominion, and overthrown Demetrius,
and recovered our country;

53 For after I had joined battle with him, both he and his host was
discomfited by us, so that we sit in the throne of his kingdom:

54 Now therefore let us make a league of amity together, and give me now
thy daughter to wife: and I will be thy son in law, and will give both
thee and her as according to thy dignity.

55 Then Ptolemee the king gave answer, saying, Happy be the day wherein
thou didst return into the land of thy fathers, and satest in the throne
of their kingdom.

56 And now will I do to thee, as thou hast written: meet me therefore at
Ptolemais, that we may see one another; for I will marry my daughter to
thee according to thy desire.

57 So Ptolemee went out of Egypt with his daughter Cleopatra, and they
came unto Ptolemais in the hundred threescore and second year:

58 Where king Alexander meeting him, he gave unto him his daughter
Cleopatra, and celebrated her marriage at Ptolemais with great glory, as
the manner of kings is.

59 Now king Alexander had written unto Jonathan, that he should come and
meet him.

60 Who thereupon went honourably to Ptolemais, where he met the two
kings, and gave them and their friends silver and gold, and many
presents, and found favour in their sight.

61 At that time certain pestilent fellows of Israel, men of a wicked
life, assembled themselves against him, to accuse him: but the king
would not hear them.

62 Yea more than that, the king commanded to take off his garments, and
clothe him in purple: and they did so.

63 And he made him sit by himself, and said into his princes, Go with
him into the midst of the city, and make proclamation, that no man
complain against him of any matter, and that no man trouble him for any
manner of cause.

64 Now when his accusers saw that he was honored according to the
proclamation, and clothed in purple, they fled all away.

65 So the king honoured him, and wrote him among his chief friends, and
made him a duke, and partaker of his dominion.

66 Afterward Jonathan returned to Jerusalem with peace and gladness.

67 Furthermore in the; hundred threescore and fifth year came Demetrius
son of Demetrius out of Crete into the land of his fathers:

68 Whereof when king Alexander heard tell, he was right sorry, and
returned into Antioch.

69 Then Demetrius made Apollonius the governor of Celosyria his general,
who gathered together a great host, and camped in Jamnia, and sent unto
Jonathan the high priest, saying,

70 Thou alone liftest up thyself against us, and I am laughed to scorn
for thy sake, and reproached: and why dost thou vaunt thy power against
us in the mountains?

71 Now therefore, if thou trustest in thine own strength, come down to
us into the plain field, and there let us try the matter together: for
with me is the power of the cities.

72 Ask and learn who I am, and the rest that take our part, and they
shall tell thee that thy foot is not able to to flight in their own
land.

73 Wherefore now thou shalt not be able to abide the horsemen and so
great a power in the plain, where is neither stone nor flint, nor place
to flee unto.

74 So when Jonathan heard these words of Apollonius, he was moved in his
mind, and choosing ten thousand men he went out of Jerusalem, where
Simon his brother met him for to help him.

75 And he pitched his tents against Joppa: but; they of Joppa shut him
out of the city, because Apollonius had a garrison there.

76 Then Jonathan laid siege unto it: whereupon they of the city let him
in for fear: and so Jonathan won Joppa.

77 Whereof when Apollonius heard, he took three thousand horsemen, with
a great host of footmen, and went to Azotus as one that journeyed, and
therewithal drew him forth into the plain. because he had a great number
of horsemen, in whom he put his trust.

78 Then Jonathan followed after him to Azotus, where the armies joined
battle.

79 Now Apollonius had left a thousand horsemen in ambush.

80 And Jonathan knew that there was an ambushment behind him; for they
had compassed in his host, and cast darts at the people, from morning
till evening.

81 But the people stood still, as Jonathan had commanded them: and so
the enemies' horses were tired.

82 Then brought Simon forth his host, and set them against the footmen,
(for the horsemen were spent) who were discomfited by him, and fled.

83 The horsemen also, being scattered in the field, fled to Azotus, and
went into Bethdagon, their idol's temple, for safety.

84 But Jonathan set fire on Azotus, and the cities round about it, and
took their spoils; and the temple of Dagon, with them that were fled
into it, he burned with fire.

85 Thus there were burned and slain with the sword well nigh eight
thousand men.

86 And from thence Jonathan removed his host, and camped against
Ascalon, where the men of the city came forth, and met him with great
pomp.

87 After this returned Jonathan and his host unto Jerusalem, having any
spoils.

88 Now when king ALexander heard these things, he honoured Jonathan yet
more.

89 And sent him a buckle of gold, as the use is to be given to such as
are of the king's blood: he gave him also Accaron with the borders
thereof in possession.

[Sep](../sep/ma1010)

1 καὶ ἐν ἔτει ἑξηκοστῷ καὶ ἑκατοστῷ ἀνέβη Ἀλέξανδρος ὁ τοῦ Ἀντιόχου ὁ
Ἐπιφανὴς καὶ κατελάβετο Πτολεμαίδα καὶ ἐπεδέξαντο αὐτόν καὶ ἐβασίλευσεν
ἐκεῖ

2 καὶ ἤκουσεν Δημήτριος ὁ βασιλεὺς καὶ συνήγαγεν δυνάμεις πολλὰς σφόδρα
καὶ ἐξῆλθεν εἰς συνάντησιν αὐτῷ εἰς πόλεμον

3 καὶ ἀπέστειλεν Δημήτριος πρὸς Ιωναθαν ἐπιστολὰς λόγοις εἰρηνικοῖς ὥστε
μεγαλῦναι αὐτόν

4 εἶπεν γάρ προφθάσωμεν τοῦ εἰρήνην θεῖναι μετ᾽ αὐτῶν πρὶν ἢ θεῖναι
αὐτὸν μετὰ Ἀλεξάνδρου καθ᾽ ἡμῶν

5 μνησθήσεται γὰρ πάντων τῶν κακῶν ὧν συνετελέσαμεν πρὸς αὐτὸν καὶ εἰς
τοὺς ἀδελφοὺς αὐτοῦ καὶ εἰς τὸ ἔθνος

6 καὶ ἔδωκεν αὐτῷ ἐξουσίαν συναγαγεῖν δυνάμεις καὶ κατασκευάζειν ὅπλα
καὶ εἶναι αὐτὸν σύμμαχον αὐτοῦ καὶ τὰ ὅμηρα τὰ ἐν τῇ ἄκρᾳ εἶπεν
παραδοῦναι αὐτῷ

7 καὶ ἦλθεν Ιωναθαν εἰς Ιερουσαλημ καὶ ἀνέγνω τὰς ἐπιστολὰς εἰς τὰ ὦτα
παντὸς τοῦ λαοῦ καὶ τῶν ἐκ τῆς ἄκρας

8 καὶ ἐφοβήθησαν φόβον μέγαν ὅτε ἤκουσαν ὅτι ἔδωκεν αὐτῷ ὁ βασιλεὺς
ἐξουσίαν συναγαγεῖν δύναμιν

9 καὶ παρέδωκαν οἱ ἐκ τῆς ἄκρας Ιωναθαν τὰ ὅμηρα καὶ ἀπέδωκεν αὐτοὺς
τοῖς γονεῦσιν αὐτῶν

10 καὶ ᾤκησεν Ιωναθαν ἐν Ιερουσαλημ καὶ ἤρξατο οἰκοδομεῖν καὶ καινίζειν
τὴν πόλιν

11 καὶ εἶπεν πρὸς τοὺς ποιοῦντας τὰ ἔργα οἰκοδομεῖν τὰ τείχη καὶ τὸ ὄρος
Σιων κυκλόθεν ἐκ λίθων τετραπόδων εἰς ὀχύρωσιν καὶ ἐποίησαν οὕτως

12 καὶ ἔφυγον οἱ ἀλλογενεῖς οἱ ὄντες ἐν τοῖς ὀχυρώμασιν οἷς ᾠκοδόμησεν
Βακχίδης

13 καὶ κατέλιπεν ἕκαστος τὸν τόπον αὐτοῦ καὶ ἀπῆλθεν εἰς τὴν γῆν αὐτοῦ

14 πλὴν ἐν Βαιθσουροις ὑπελείφθησάν τινες τῶν καταλιπόντων τὸν νόμον καὶ
τὰ προστάγματα ἦν γὰρ εἰς φυγαδευτήριον

15 καὶ ἤκουσεν Ἀλέξανδρος ὁ βασιλεὺς τὰς ἐπαγγελίας ὅσας ἀπέστειλεν
Δημήτριος τῷ Ιωναθαν καὶ διηγήσαντο αὐτῷ τοὺς πολέμους καὶ τὰς
ἀνδραγαθίας ἃς ἐποίησεν αὐτὸς καὶ οἱ ἀδελφοὶ αὐτοῦ καὶ τοὺς κόπους οὓς
ἔσχον

16 καὶ εἶπεν μὴ εὑρήσομεν ἄνδρα τοιοῦτον ἕνα καὶ νῦν ποιήσομεν αὐτὸν
φίλον καὶ σύμμαχον ἡμῶν

17 καὶ ἔγραψεν ἐπιστολὰς καὶ ἀπέστειλεν αὐτῷ κατὰ τοὺς λόγους τούτους
λέγων

18 βασιλεὺς Ἀλέξανδρος τῷ ἀδελφῷ Ιωναθαν χαίρειν

19 ἀκηκόαμεν περὶ σοῦ ὅτι ἀνὴρ δυνατὸς ἰσχύι καὶ ἐπιτήδειος εἶ τοῦ εἶναι
ἡμῶν φίλος

20 καὶ νῦν καθεστάκαμέν σε σήμερον ἀρχιερέα τοῦ ἔθνους σου καὶ φίλον
βασιλέως καλεῖσθαί σε καὶ ἀπέστειλεν αὐτῷ πορφύραν καὶ στέφανον χρυσοῦν
καὶ φρονεῖν τὰ ἡμῶν καὶ συντηρεῖν φιλίας πρὸς ἡμᾶς

21 καὶ ἐνεδύσατο Ιωναθαν τὴν ἁγίαν στολὴν τῷ ἑβδόμῳ μηνὶ ἔτους ἑξηκοστοῦ
καὶ ἑκατοστοῦ ἐν ἑορτῇ σκηνοπηγίας καὶ συνήγαγεν δυνάμεις καὶ
κατεσκεύασεν ὅπλα πολλά

22 καὶ ἤκουσεν Δημήτριος τοὺς λόγους τούτους καὶ ἐλυπήθη καὶ εἶπεν

23 τί τοῦτο ἐποιήσαμεν ὅτι προέφθακεν ἡμᾶς Ἀλέξανδρος τοῦ φιλίαν
καταλαβέσθαι τοῖς Ιουδαίοις εἰς στήριγμα

24 γράψω αὐτοῖς κἀγὼ λόγους παρακλήσεως καὶ ὕψους καὶ δομάτων ὅπως ὦσιν
σὺν ἐμοὶ εἰς βοήθειαν

25 καὶ ἀπέστειλεν αὐτοῖς κατὰ τοὺς λόγους τούτους βασιλεὺς Δημήτριος τῷ
ἔθνει τῶν Ιουδαίων χαίρειν

26 ἐπεὶ συνετηρήσατε τὰς πρὸς ἡμᾶς συνθήκας καὶ ἐνεμείνατε τῇ φιλίᾳ ἡμῶν
καὶ οὐ προσεχωρήσατε τοῖς ἐχθροῖς ἡμῶν ἠκούσαμεν καὶ ἐχάρημεν

27 καὶ νῦν ἐμμείνατε ἔτι τοῦ συντηρῆσαι πρὸς ἡμᾶς πίστιν καὶ
ἀνταποδώσομεν ὑμῖν ἀγαθὰ ἀνθ᾽ ὧν ποιεῖτε μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν

28 καὶ ἀφήσομεν ὑμῖν ἀφέματα πολλὰ καὶ δώσομεν ὑμῖν δόματα

29 καὶ νῦν ἀπολύω ὑμᾶς καὶ ἀφίημι πάντας τοὺς Ιουδαίους ἀπὸ τῶν φόρων
καὶ τῆς τιμῆς τοῦ ἁλὸς καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν στεφάνων

30 καὶ ἀντὶ τοῦ τρίτου τῆς σπορᾶς καὶ ἀντὶ τοῦ ἡμίσους τοῦ καρποῦ τοῦ
ξυλίνου τοῦ ἐπιβάλλοντός μοι λαβεῖν ἀφίημι ἀπὸ τῆς σήμερον καὶ ἐπέκεινα
τοῦ λαβεῖν ἀπὸ γῆς Ιουδα καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν τριῶν νομῶν τῶν προστιθεμένων αὐτῇ
ἀπὸ τῆς Σαμαρίτιδος καὶ Γαλιλαίας ἀπὸ τῆς σήμερον ἡμέρας καὶ εἰς τὸν
ἅπαντα χρόνον

31 καὶ Ιερουσαλημ ἔστω ἁγία καὶ ἀφειμένη καὶ τὰ ὅρια αὐτῆς αἱ δεκάται
καὶ τὰ τέλη

32 ἀφίημι καὶ τὴν ἐξουσίαν τῆς ἄκρας τῆς ἐν Ιερουσαλημ καὶ δίδωμι τῷ
ἀρχιερεῖ ὅπως ἂν καταστήσῃ ἐν αὐτῇ ἄνδρας οὓς ἂν αὐτὸς ἐκλέξηται τοῦ
φυλάσσειν αὐτήν

33 καὶ πᾶσαν ψυχὴν Ιουδαίων τὴν αἰχμαλωτισθεῖσαν ἀπὸ γῆς Ιουδα εἰς πᾶσαν
βασιλείαν μου ἀφίημι ἐλευθέραν δωρεάν καὶ πάντες ἀφιέτωσαν τοὺς φόρους
καὶ τῶν κτηνῶν αὐτῶν

34 καὶ πᾶσαι αἱ ἑορταὶ καὶ τὰ σάββατα καὶ νουμηνίαι καὶ ἡμέραι
ἀποδεδειγμέναι καὶ τρεῖς ἡμέραι πρὸ ἑορτῆς καὶ τρεῖς μετὰ ἑορτὴν ἔστωσαν
πᾶσαι ἡμέραι ἀτελείας καὶ ἀφέσεως πᾶσιν τοῖς Ιουδαίοις τοῖς οὖσιν ἐν τῇ
βασιλείᾳ μου

35 καὶ οὐχ ἕξει ἐξουσίαν οὐδεὶς πράσσειν καὶ παρενοχλεῖν τινα αὐτῶν περὶ
παντὸς πράγματος

36 καὶ προγραφήτωσαν τῶν Ιουδαίων εἰς τὰς δυνάμεις τοῦ βασιλέως εἰς
τριάκοντα χιλιάδας ἀνδρῶν καὶ δοθήσεται αὐτοῖς ξένια ὡς καθήκει πάσαις
ταῖς δυνάμεσιν τοῦ βασιλέως

37 καὶ κατασταθήσεται ἐξ αὐτῶν ἐν τοῖς ὀχυρώμασιν τοῦ βασιλέως τοῖς
μεγάλοις καὶ ἐκ τούτων κατασταθήσονται ἐπὶ χρειῶν τῆς βασιλείας τῶν
οὐσῶν εἰς πίστιν καὶ οἱ ἐπ᾽ αὐτῶν καὶ οἱ ἄρχοντες ἔστωσαν ἐξ αὐτῶν καὶ
πορευέσθωσαν τοῖς νόμοις αὐτῶν καθὰ καὶ προσέταξεν ὁ βασιλεὺς ἐν γῇ
Ιουδα

38 καὶ τοὺς τρεῖς νομοὺς τοὺς προστεθέντας τῇ Ιουδαίᾳ ἀπὸ τῆς χώρας
Σαμαρείας προστεθήτω τῇ Ιουδαίᾳ πρὸς τὸ λογισθῆναι τοῦ γενέσθαι ὑφ᾽ ἕνα
τοῦ μὴ ὑπακοῦσαι ἄλλης ἐξουσίας ἀλλ᾽ ἢ τοῦ ἀρχιερέως

39 Πτολεμαίδα καὶ τὴν προσκυροῦσαν αὐτῇ δέδωκα δόμα τοῖς ἁγίοις τοῖς ἐν
Ιερουσαλημ εἰς τὴν καθήκουσαν δαπάνην τοῖς ἁγίοις

40 κἀγὼ δίδωμι κατ᾽ ἐνιαυτὸν δέκα πέντε χιλιάδας σίκλων ἀργυρίου ἀπὸ τῶν
λόγων τοῦ βασιλέως ἀπὸ τῶν τόπων τῶν ἀνηκόντων

41 καὶ πᾶν τὸ πλεονάζον ὃ οὐκ ἀπεδίδοσαν ἀπὸ τῶν χρειῶν ὡς ἐν τοῖς
πρώτοις ἔτεσιν ἀπὸ τοῦ νῦν δώσουσιν εἰς τὰ ἔργα τοῦ οἴκου

42 καὶ ἐπὶ τούτοις πεντακισχιλίους σίκλους ἀργυρίου οὓς ἐλάμβανον ἀπὸ
τῶν χρειῶν τοῦ ἁγίου ἀπὸ τοῦ λόγου κατ᾽ ἐνιαυτόν καὶ ταῦτα ἀφίεται διὰ
τὸ ἀνήκειν αὐτὰ τοῖς ἱερεῦσιν τοῖς λειτουργοῦσιν

43 καὶ ὅσοι ἐὰν φύγωσιν εἰς τὸ ἱερὸν τὸ ἐν Ιεροσολύμοις καὶ ἐν πᾶσιν
τοῖς ὁρίοις αὐτοῦ ὀφείλων βασιλικὰ καὶ πᾶν πρᾶγμα ἀπολελύσθωσαν καὶ
πάντα ὅσα ἐστὶν αὐτοῖς ἐν τῇ βασιλείᾳ μου

44 καὶ τοῦ οἰκοδομηθῆναι καὶ ἐπικαινισθῆναι τὰ ἔργα τῶν ἁγίων καὶ ἡ
δαπάνη δοθήσεται ἐκ τοῦ λόγου τοῦ βασιλέως

45 καὶ τοῦ οἰκοδομηθῆναι τὰ τείχη Ιερουσαλημ καὶ ὀχυρῶσαι κυκλόθεν καὶ ἡ
δαπάνη δοθήσεται ἐκ τοῦ λόγου τοῦ βασιλέως καὶ τοῦ οἰκοδομηθῆναι τὰ
τείχη ἐν τῇ Ιουδαίᾳ

46 ὡς δὲ ἤκουσεν Ιωναθαν καὶ ὁ λαὸς τοὺς λόγους τούτους οὐκ ἐπίστευσαν
αὐτοῖς οὐδὲ ἐπεδέξαντο ὅτι ἐπεμνήσθησαν τῆς κακίας τῆς μεγάλης ἧς
ἐποίησεν ἐν Ισραηλ καὶ ἔθλιψεν αὐτοὺς σφόδρα

47 καὶ εὐδόκησαν ἐν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ ὅτι αὐτὸς ἐγένετο αὐτοῖς ἀρχηγὸς λόγων
εἰρηνικῶν καὶ συνεμάχουν αὐτῷ πάσας τὰς ἡμέρας

48 καὶ συνήγαγεν Ἀλέξανδρος ὁ βασιλεὺς δυνάμεις μεγάλας καὶ παρενέβαλεν
ἐξ ἐναντίας Δημητρίου

49 καὶ συνῆψαν πόλεμον οἱ δύο βασιλεῖς καὶ ἔφυγεν ἡ παρεμβολὴ Δημητρίου
καὶ ἐδίωξεν αὐτὸν ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος καὶ ἴσχυσεν ἐπ᾽ αὐτούς

50 καὶ ἐστερέωσεν τὸν πόλεμον σφόδρα ἕως ἔδυ ὁ ἥλιος καὶ ἔπεσεν ὁ
Δημήτριος ἐν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ ἐκείνῃ

51 καὶ ἀπέστειλεν Ἀλέξανδρος πρὸς Πτολεμαῖον βασιλέα Αἰγύπτου πρέσβεις
κατὰ τοὺς λόγους τούτους λέγων

52 ἐπεὶ ἀνέστρεψα εἰς τὴν βασιλείαν μου καὶ ἐνεκάθισα ἐπὶ θρόνου πατέρων
μου καὶ ἐκράτησα τῆς ἀρχῆς καὶ συνέτριψα τὸν Δημήτριον καὶ ἐπεκράτησα
τῆς χώρας ἡμῶν

53 καὶ συνῆψα πρὸς αὐτὸν μάχην καὶ συνετρίβη αὐτὸς καὶ ἡ παρεμβολὴ αὐτοῦ
ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν καὶ ἐκαθίσαμεν ἐπὶ θρόνου βασιλείας αὐτοῦ

54 καὶ νῦν στήσωμεν πρὸς αὑτοὺς φιλίαν καὶ νῦν δός μοι τὴν θυγατέρα σου
εἰς γυναῖκα καὶ ἐπιγαμβρεύσω σοι καὶ δώσω σοι δόματα καὶ αὐτῇ ἄξιά σου

55 καὶ ἀπεκρίθη Πτολεμαῖος ὁ βασιλεὺς λέγων ἀγαθὴ ἡμέρα ἐν ᾗ ἐπέστρεψας
εἰς γῆν πατέρων σου καὶ ἐκάθισας ἐπὶ θρόνου βασιλείας αὐτῶν

56 καὶ νῦν ποιήσω σοι ἃ ἔγραψας ἀλλὰ ἀπάντησον εἰς Πτολεμαίδα ὅπως
ἴδωμεν ἀλλήλους καὶ ἐπιγαμβρεύσω σοι καθὼς εἴρηκας

57 καὶ ἐξῆλθεν Πτολεμαῖος ἐξ Αἰγύπτου αὐτὸς καὶ Κλεοπάτρα ἡ θυγάτηρ
αὐτοῦ καὶ ἦλθεν εἰς Πτολεμαίδα ἔτους δευτέρου καὶ ἑξηκοστοῦ καὶ
ἑκατοστοῦ

58 καὶ ἀπήντησεν αὐτῷ Ἀλέξανδρος ὁ βασιλεύς καὶ ἐξέδετο αὐτῷ Κλεοπάτραν
τὴν θυγατέρα αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐποίησεν τὸν γάμον αὐτῆς ἐν Πτολεμαίδι καθὼς οἱ
βασιλεῖς ἐν δόξῃ μεγάλῃ

59 καὶ ἔγραψεν Ἀλέξανδρος ὁ βασιλεὺς Ιωναθη ἐλθεῖν εἰς συνάντησιν αὐτῷ

60 καὶ ἐπορεύθη μετὰ δόξης εἰς Πτολεμαίδα καὶ ἀπήντησεν τοῖς δυσὶν
βασιλεῦσι καὶ ἔδωκεν αὐτοῖς ἀργύριον καὶ χρυσίον καὶ τοῖς φίλοις αὐτῶν
καὶ δόματα πολλὰ καὶ εὗρεν χάριν ἐνώπιον αὐτῶν

61 καὶ ἐπισυνήχθησαν ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸν ἄνδρες λοιμοὶ ἐξ Ισραηλ ἄνδρες παράνομοι
ἐντυχεῖν κατ᾽ αὐτοῦ καὶ οὐ προσέσχεν αὐτοῖς ὁ βασιλεύς

62 καὶ προσέταξεν ὁ βασιλεὺς καὶ ἐξέδυσαν Ιωναθαν τὰ ἱμάτια αὐτοῦ καὶ
ἐνέδυσαν αὐτὸν πορφύραν καὶ ἐποίησαν οὕτως

63 καὶ ἐκάθισεν αὐτὸν ὁ βασιλεὺς μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ καὶ εἶπεν τοῖς ἄρχουσιν
αὐτοῦ ἐξέλθατε μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ εἰς μέσον τῆς πόλεως καὶ κηρύξατε τοῦ μηδένα
ἐντυγχάνειν κατ᾽ αὐτοῦ περὶ μηδενὸς πράγματος καὶ μηδεὶς αὐτῷ
παρενοχλείτω περὶ παντὸς λόγου

64 καὶ ἐγένετο ὡς εἶδον οἱ ἐντυγχάνοντες τὴν δόξαν αὐτοῦ καθὼς ἐκήρυξεν
καὶ περιβεβλημένον αὐτὸν πορφύραν καὶ ἔφυγον πάντες

65 καὶ ἐδόξασεν αὐτὸν ὁ βασιλεὺς καὶ ἔγραψεν αὐτὸν τῶν πρώτων φίλων καὶ
ἔθετο αὐτὸν στρατηγὸν καὶ μεριδάρχην

66 καὶ ἐπέστρεψεν Ιωναθαν εἰς Ιερουσαλημ μετ᾽ εἰρήνης καὶ εὐφροσύνης

67 καὶ ἐν ἔτει πέμπτῳ καὶ ἑξηκοστῷ καὶ ἑκατοστῷ ἦλθεν Δημήτριος υἱὸς
Δημητρίου ἐκ Κρήτης εἰς τὴν γῆν τῶν πατέρων αὐτοῦ

68 καὶ ἤκουσεν Ἀλέξανδρος ὁ βασιλεὺς καὶ ἐλυπήθη σφόδρα καὶ ὑπέστρεψεν
εἰς Ἀντιόχειαν

69 καὶ κατέστησεν Δημήτριος Ἀπολλώνιον τὸν ὄντα ἐπὶ Κοίλης Συρίας καὶ
συνήγαγεν δύναμιν μεγάλην καὶ παρενέβαλεν ἐπὶ Ιάμνειαν καὶ ἀπέστειλεν
πρὸς Ιωναθαν τὸν ἀρχιερέα λέγων

70 σὺ μονώτατος ἐπαίρῃ ἐφ᾽ ἡμᾶς ἐγὼ δὲ ἐγενήθην εἰς καταγέλωτα καὶ εἰς
ὀνειδισμὸν διὰ σέ καὶ διὰ τί σὺ ἐξουσιάζῃ ἐφ᾽ ἡμᾶς ἐν τοῖς ὄρεσι

71 νῦν οὖν εἰ πέποιθας ἐπὶ ταῖς δυνάμεσίν σου κατάβηθι πρὸς ἡμᾶς εἰς τὸ
πεδίον καὶ συγκριθῶμεν ἑαυτοῖς ἐκεῖ ὅτι μετ᾽ ἐμοῦ ἐστιν δύναμις τῶν
πόλεων

72 ἐρώτησον καὶ μάθε τίς εἰμι καὶ οἱ λοιποὶ οἱ βοηθοῦντες ἡμῖν καὶ
λέγουσιν οὐκ ἔστιν ὑμῖν στάσις ποδὸς κατὰ πρόσωπον ἡμῶν ὅτι δὶς
ἐτροπώθησαν οἱ πατέρες σου ἐν τῇ γῇ αὐτῶν

73 καὶ νῦν οὐ δυνήσῃ ὑποστῆναι τὴν ἵππον καὶ δύναμιν τοιαύτην ἐν τῷ
πεδίῳ ὅπου οὐκ ἔστιν λίθος οὐδὲ κόχλαξ οὐδὲ τόπος τοῦ φυγεῖν

74 ὡς δὲ ἤκουσεν Ιωναθαν τῶν λόγων Ἀπολλωνίου ἐκινήθη τῇ διανοίᾳ καὶ
ἐπέλεξεν δέκα χιλιάδας ἀνδρῶν καὶ ἐξῆλθεν ἐξ Ιερουσαλημ καὶ συνήντησεν
αὐτῷ Σιμων ὁ ἀδελφὸς αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ βοήθειαν αὐτῷ

75 καὶ παρενέβαλεν ἐπὶ Ιοππην καὶ ἀπέκλεισαν αὐτὴν οἱ ἐκ τῆς πόλεως ὅτι
φρουρὰ Ἀπολλωνίου ἐν Ιοππη καὶ ἐπολέμησαν αὐτήν

76 καὶ φοβηθέντες ἤνοιξαν οἱ ἐκ τῆς πόλεως καὶ ἐκυρίευσεν Ιωναθαν Ιοππης

77 καὶ ἤκουσεν Ἀπολλώνιος καὶ παρενέβαλεν τρισχιλίαν ἵππον καὶ δύναμιν
πολλὴν καὶ ἐπορεύθη εἰς Ἄζωτον ὡς διοδεύων καὶ ἅμα προῆγεν εἰς τὸ πεδίον
διὰ τὸ ἔχειν αὐτὸν πλῆθος ἵππου καὶ πεποιθέναι ἐπ᾽ αὐτῇ

78 καὶ κατεδίωξεν ὀπίσω αὐτοῦ εἰς Ἄζωτον καὶ συνῆψαν αἱ παρεμβολαὶ εἰς
πόλεμον

79 καὶ ἀπέλιπεν Απολλώνιος χιλίαν ἵππον κρυπτῶς κατόπισθεν αὐτῶν

80 καὶ ἔγνω Ιωναθαν ὅτι ἔστιν ἔνεδρον κατόπισθεν αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐκύκλωσαν
αὐτοῦ τὴν παρεμβολὴν καὶ ἐξετίναξαν τὰς σχίζας εἰς τὸν λαὸν ἐκ πρωίθεν
ἕως δείλης

81 ὁ δὲ λαὸς εἱστήκει καθὼς ἐπέταξεν Ιωναθαν καὶ ἐκοπίασαν οἱ ἵπποι
αὐτῶν

82 καὶ εἵλκυσεν Σιμων τὴν δύναμιν αὐτοῦ καὶ συνῆψεν πρὸς τὴν φάλαγγα ἡ
γὰρ ἵππος ἐξελύθη καὶ συνετρίβησαν ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ καὶ ἔφυγον

83 καὶ ἡ ἵππος ἐσκορπίσθη ἐν τῷ πεδίῳ καὶ ἔφυγον εἰς Ἄζωτον καὶ εἰσῆλθον
εἰς Βηθδαγων τὸ εἰδώλιον αὐτῶν τοῦ σωθῆναι

84 καὶ ἐνεπύρισεν Ιωναθαν τὴν Ἄζωτον καὶ τὰς πόλεις τὰς κύκλῳ αὐτῆς καὶ
ἔλαβεν τὰ σκῦλα αὐτῶν καὶ τὸ ἱερὸν Δαγων καὶ τοὺς συμφυγόντας εἰς αὐτὸ
ἐνεπύρισεν πυρί

85 καὶ ἐγένοντο οἱ πεπτωκότες μαχαίρᾳ σὺν τοῖς ἐμπυρισθεῖσιν εἰς ἄνδρας
ὀκτακισχιλίους

86 καὶ ἀπῆρεν ἐκεῖθεν Ιωναθαν καὶ παρενέβαλεν ἐπὶ Ἀσκαλῶνα καὶ ἐξῆλθον
οἱ ἐκ τῆς πόλεως εἰς συνάντησιν αὐτῷ ἐν δόξῃ μεγάλῃ

87 καὶ ἐπέστρεψεν Ιωναθαν εἰς Ιερουσαλημ σὺν τοῖς παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἔχοντες
σκῦλα πολλά

88 καὶ ἐγένετο ὡς ἤκουσεν Ἀλέξανδρος ὁ βασιλεὺς τοὺς λόγους τούτους καὶ
προσέθετο ἔτι δοξάσαι τὸν Ιωναθαν

89 καὶ ἀπέστειλεν αὐτῷ πόρπην χρυσῆν ὡς ἔθος ἐστὶν δίδοσθαι τοῖς
συγγενέσιν τῶν βασιλέων καὶ ἔδωκεν αὐτῷ τὴν Ακκαρων καὶ πάντα τὰ ὅρια
αὐτῆς εἰς κληροδοσίαν

[Vul](../vul/ma1010)

1 Et anno centesimo sexagesimo, ascendit Alexander Antiochi filius, qui
cognominatus est Nobilis, et occupavit Ptolemaidam: et receperunt eum,
et regnavit illic.

2 Et audivit Demetrius rex, et congregavit exercitum copiosum valde, et
exivit obviam illi in prælium.

3 Et misit Demetrius epistolam ad Jonathan verbis pacificis, ut
magnificaret eum.

4 Dixit enim: Anticipemus facere pacem cum eo, priusquam faciat cum
Alexandro adversum nos:

5 recordabitur enim omnium malorum, quæ fecimus in eum, et in fratrem
ejus, et in gentem ejus.

6 Et dedit ei potestatem congregandi exercitum, et fabricare arma, et
esse ipsum socium ejus: et obsides, qui erant in arce, jussit tradi ei.

7 Et venit Jonathas in Jerusalem, et legit epistolas in auditu omnis
populi, et eorum qui in arce erant.

8 Et timuerunt timore magno, quoniam audierunt quod dedit ei rex
potestatem congregandi exercitum.

9 Et traditi sunt Jonathæ obsides, et reddidit eos parentibus suis:

10 et habitavit Jonathas in Jerusalem, et cœpit ædificare et innovare
civitatem.

11 Et dixit facientibus opera ut exstruerent muros, et montem Sion in
circuitu lapidibus quadratis ad munitionem: et ita fecerunt.

12 Et fugerunt alienigenæ, qui erant in munitionibus quas Bacchides
ædificaverat:

13 et reliquit unusquisque locum suum, et abiit in terram suam:

14 tantum in Bethsura remanserunt aliqui ex his qui reliquerant legem et
præcepta Dei: erat enim hæc eis ad refugium.  

15 Et audivit Alexander rex promissa, quæ promisit Demetrius Jonathæ: et
narraverunt ei prælia, et virtutes quas ipse fecit, et fratres ejus, et
labores quos laboraverunt:

16 et ait: Numquid inveniemus aliquem virum talem? et nunc faciemus eum
amicum, et socium nostrum.

17 Et scripsit epistolam, et misit ei secundum hæc verba, dicens:

18 Rex Alexander fratri Jonathæ salutem.

19 Audivimus de te quod vir potens sis viribus, et aptus es ut sis
amicus noster:

20 et nunc constituimus te hodie summum sacerdotem gentis tuæ, et ut
amicus voceris regis (et misit ei purpuram, et coronam auream) et quæ
nostra sunt sentias nobiscum, et conserves amicitias ad nos.

21 Et induit se Jonathas stola sancta septimo mense, anno centesimo
sexagesimo, in die solemni scenopegiæ: et congregavit exercitum, et
fecit arma copiosa.  

22 Et audivit Demetrius verba ista, et contristatus est nimis, et ait:

23 Quid hoc fecimus, quod præoccupavit nos Alexander apprehendere
amicitiam Judæorum ad munimen sui?

24 scribam et ego illis verba deprecatoria, et dignitates, et dona, ut
sint mecum in adjutorium.

25 Et scripsit eis in hæc verba: Rex Demetrius genti Judæorum salutem.

26 Quoniam servastis ad nos pactum, et mansistis in amicitia nostra, et
non accessistis ad inimicos nostros, audivimus, et gavisi sumus.

27 Et nunc perseverate adhuc conservare ad nos fidem, et retribuemus
vobis bona pro his quæ fecistis nobiscum:

28 et remittemus vobis præstationes multas, et dabimus vobis donationes.

29 Et nunc absolvo vos et omnes Judæos a tributis, et pretia salis
indulgeo, et coronas remitto, et tertias seminis:

30 et dimidiam partem fructus ligni, quod est portionis meæ, relinquo
vobis ex hodierno die, et deinceps, ne accipiatur a terra Juda, et a
tribus civitatibus quæ additæ sunt illi ex Samaria et Galilæa; ex
hodierna die et in totum tempus:

31 et Jerusalem sit sancta, et libera cum finibus suis: et decimæ et
tributa ipsius sint.

32 Remitto etiam potestatem arcis, quæ est in Jerusalem: et do eam summo
sacerdoti, ut constituat in ea viros quoscumque ipse elegerit, qui
custodiant eam.

33 Et omnem animam Judæorum, quæ captiva est a terra Juda in omni regno
meo, relinquo liberam gratis, ut omnes a tributis solvantur, etiam
pecorum suorum.

34 Et omnes dies solemnes, et sabbata, et neomeniæ, et dies decreti, et
tres dies ante diem solemnem, et tres dies post diem solemnem, sint
omnes immunitatis et remissionis omnibus Judæis, qui sunt in regno meo:

35 et nemo habebit potestatem agere aliquid, et movere negotia adversus
aliquem illorum in omni causa.

36 Et ascribantur ex Judæis in exercitu regis ad triginta millia
virorum: et dabuntur illis copiæ ut oportet omnibus exercitibus regis,
et ex eis ordinabuntur qui sint in munitionibus regis magni:

37 et ex his constituentur super negotia regni, quæ aguntur ex fide, et
principes sint ex eis, et ambulent in legibus suis, sicut præcepit rex
in terra Juda.

38 Et tres civitates, quæ additæ sunt Judææ ex regione Samariæ, cum
Judæa reputentur: ut sint sub uno, et non obediant alii potestati, nisi
summi sacerdotis.

39 Ptolemaida et confines ejus, quas dedi donum sanctis qui sunt in
Jerusalem, ad necessarios sumptus sanctorum.

40 Et ego do singulis annis quindecim millia siclorum argenti de
rationibus regis, quæ me contingunt:

41 et omne quod reliquum fuerit, quod non reddiderant qui super negotia
erant annis prioribus, ex hoc dabunt in opera domus.

42 Et super hæc quinque millia siclorum argenti, quæ accipiebant de
sanctorum ratione per singulos annos: et hæc ad sacerdotes pertineant,
qui ministerio funguntur.

43 Et quicumque confugerint in templum quod est Jerosolymis, et in
omnibus finibus ejus, obnoxii regi in omni negotio dimittantur, et
universa quæ sunt eis in regno meo, libera habeant.

44 Et ad ædificanda vel restauranda opera sanctorum, sumptus dabuntur de
ratione regis:

45 et ad exstruendos muros Jerusalem, et communiendos in circuitu,
sumptus dabuntur de ratione regis, et ad construendos muros in Judæa.

46 Ut audivit autem Jonathas et populus sermones istos, non crediderunt
eis, nec receperunt eos: quia recordati sunt malitiæ magnæ, quam fecerat
in Israël, et tribulaverat eos valde.

47 Et complacuit eis in Alexandrum, quia ipse fuerat eis princeps
sermonum pacis, et ipsi auxilium ferebant omnibus diebus.  

48 Et congregavit rex Alexander exercitum magnum, et admovit castra
contra Demetrium.

49 Et commiserunt prælium duo reges, et fugit exercitus Demetrii, et
insecutus est eum Alexander, et incubuit super eos.

50 Et invaluit prælium nimis, donec occidit sol: et cecidit Demetrius in
die illa.

51 Et misit Alexander ad Ptolemæum regem Ægypti legatos secundum hæc
verba, dicens:

52 Quoniam regressus sum in regnum meum, et sedi in sede patrum meorum,
et obtinui principatum, et contrivi Demetrium, et possedi regionem
nostram,

53 et commisi pugnam cum eo, et contritus est ipse et castra ejus a
nobis, et sedimus in sede regni ejus:

54 et nunc statuamus ad invicem amicitiam: et da mihi filiam tuam
uxorem, et ego ero gener tuus, et dabo tibi dona, et ipsi, digna te.

55 Et respondit rex Ptolemæus, dicens: Felix dies, in qua reversus es ad
terram patrum tuorum, et sedisti in sede regni eorum.

56 Et nunc faciam tibi quod scripsisti: sed occurre mihi Ptolemaidam, ut
videamus invicem nos, et spondeam tibi sicut dixisti.

57 Et exivit Ptolemæus de Ægypto, ipse et Cleopatra filia ejus, et venit
Ptolemaidam anno centesimo sexagesimo secundo.

58 Et occurrit ei Alexander rex, et dedit ei Cleopatram filiam suam: et
fecit nuntias ejus Ptolemaidæ, sicut reges in magna gloria.

59 Et scripsit rex Alexander Jonathæ, ut veniret obviam sibi.

60 Et abiit cum gloria Ptolemaidam, et occurrit ibi duobus regibus, et
dedit illis argentum multum, et aurum, et dona: et invenit gratiam in
conspectu eorum.

61 Et convenerunt adversus eum viri pestilentes ex Israël, viri iniqui
interpellantes adversus eum: et non intendit ad eos rex.

62 Et jussit spoliari Jonathan vestibus suis, et indui eum purpura: et
ita fecerunt. Et collocavit eum rex sedere secum.

63 Dixitque principibus suis: Exite cum eo in medium civitatis, et
prædicate, ut nemo adversus eum interpellet de ullo negotio, nec
quisquam ei molestus sit de ulla ratione.

64 Et factum est, ut viderunt qui interpellabant gloriam ejus, quæ
prædicabatur, et opertum eum purpura, fugerunt omnes:

65 et magnificavit eum rex, et scripsit eum inter primos amicos, et
posuit eum ducem, et participem principatus.

66 Et reversus est Jonathas in Jerusalem cum pace et lætitia.  

67 In anno centesimo sexagesimo quinto, venit Demetrius filius Demetrii
a Creta in terram patrum suorum.

68 Et audivit Alexander rex, et contristatus est valde, et reversus est
Antiochum.

69 Et constituit Demetrius rex Apollonium ducem, qui præerat Cœlesyriæ:
et congregavit exercitum magnum, et accessit ad Jamniam: et misit ad
Jonathan summum sacerdotem,

70 dicens: Tu solus resistis nobis: ego autem factus sum in derisum, et
in opprobrium, propterea quia tu potestatem adversum nos exerces in
montibus.

71 Nunc ergo si confidis in virtutibus tuis, descende ad nos in campum,
et comparemus illic invicem: quia mecum est virtus bellorum.

72 Interroga, et disce quis sum ego, et ceteri qui auxilio sunt mihi,
qui et dicunt quia non potest stare pes vester ante faciem nostram, quia
bis in fugam conversi sunt patres tui in terra sua:

73 et nunc quomodo poteris sustinere equitatum et exercitum tantum in
campo, ubi non est lapis, neque saxum, neque locus fugiendi?

74 Ut audivit autem Jonathas sermones Apollonii, motus est animo: et
elegit decem millia virorum, et exiit ab Jerusalem, et occurrit ei Simon
frater ejus in adjutorium:

75 et applicuerunt castra in Joppen, et exclusit eum a civitate, quia
custodia Apollonii Joppe erat: et oppugnavit eam.

76 Et exterriti qui erant in civitate, aperuerunt ei, et obtinuit
Jonathas Joppen.

77 Et audivit Apollonius, et admovit tria millia equitum, et exercitum
multum.

78 Et abiit Azotum tamquam iter faciens, et statim exiit in campum, eo
quod haberet multitudinem equitum, et confideret in eis. Et insecutus
est eum Jonathas in Azotum, et commiserunt prælium.

79 Et reliquit Apollonius in castris mille equites post eos occulte.

80 Et cognovit Jonathas quoniam insidiæ sunt post se, et circuierunt
castra ejus, et jecerunt jacula in populum a mane usque ad vesperam.

81 Populus autem stabat, sicut præceperat Jonathas: et laboraverunt equi
eorum.

82 Et ejecit Simon exercitum suum, et commisit contra legionem: equites
enim fatigati erant: et contriti sunt ab eo, et fugerunt.

83 Et qui dispersi sunt per campum, fugerunt in Azotum, et intraverunt
in Bethdagon idolum suum, ut ibi se liberarent.

84 Et succendit Jonathas Azotum, et civitates quæ erant in circuitu
ejus, et accepit spolia eorum, et templum Dagon: et omnes qui fugerunt
in illud, succendit igni.

85 Et fuerunt qui ceciderunt gladio, cum his qui succensi sunt, fere
octo millia virorum.

86 Et movit inde Jonathas castra, et applicuit ea Ascalonem: et exierunt
de civitate obviam illi in magna gloria.

87 Et reversus est Jonathas in Jerusalem cum suis, habentibus spolia
multa.

88 Et factum est, ut audivit Alexander rex sermones istos, addidit adhuc
glorificare Jonathan.

89 Et misit ei fibulam auream, sicut consuetudo est dari cognatis regum.
Et dedit ei Accaron, et omnes fines ejus, in possessionem.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Macabees 11](ma1011)
