[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[1 Macabees Index](ma1)  
  [Previous](ma1003)  [Next](ma1005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1 Macabees 4

[Apo](../apo/ma1004)

1 Then took Gorgias five thousand footmen, and a thousand of the best
horsemen, and removed out of the camp by night;

2 To the end he might rush in upon the camp of the Jews, and smite them
suddenly. And the men of the fortress were his guides.

3 Now when Judas heard thereof he himself removed, and the valiant men
with him, that he might smite the king's army which was at Emmaus,

4 While as yet the forces were dispersed from the camp.

5 In the mean season came Gorgias by night into the camp of Judas: and
when he found no man there, he sought them in the mountains: for said
he, These fellows flee from us

6 But as soon as it was day, Judas shewed himself in the plain with
three thousand men, who nevertheless had neither armour nor swords to
their minds.

7 And they saw the camp of the heathen, that it was strong and well
harnessed, and compassed round about with horsemen; and these were
expert of war.

8 Then said Judas to the men that were with him, Fear ye not their
multitude, neither be ye afraid of their assault.

9 Remember how our fathers were delivered in the Red sea, when Pharaoh
pursued them with an army.

10 Now therefore let us cry unto heaven, if peradventure the Lord will
have mercy upon us, and remember the covenant of our fathers, and
destroy this host before our face this day:

11 That so all the heathen may know that there is one who delivereth and
saveth Israel.

12 Then the strangers lifted up their eyes, and saw them coming over
against them.

13 Wherefore they went out of the camp to battle; but they that were
with Judas sounded their trumpets.

14 So they joined battle, and the heathen being discomfited fled into
the plain.

15 Howbeit all the hindmost of them were slain with the sword: for they
pursued them unto Gazera, and unto the plains of Idumea, and Azotus, and
Jamnia, so that there were slain of them upon a three thousand men.

16 This done, Judas returned again with his host from pursuing them,

17 And said to the people, Be not greedy of the spoil inasmuch as there
is a battle before us,

18 And Gorgias and his host are here by us in the mountain: but stand ye
now against our enemies, and overcome them, and after this ye may boldly
take the spoils.

19 As Judas was yet speaking these words, there appeared a part of them
looking out of the mountain:

20 Who when they perceived that the Jews had put their host to flight
and were burning the tents; for the smoke that was seen declared what
was done:

21 When therefore they perceived these things, they were sore afraid,
and seeing also the host of Judas in the plain ready to fight,

22 They fled every one into the land of strangers.

23 Then Judas returned to spoil the tents, where they got much gold, and
silver, and blue silk, and purple of the sea, and great riches.

24 After this they went home, and sung a song of thanksgiving, and
praised the Lord in heaven: because it is good, because his mercy
endureth forever.

25 Thus Israel had a great deliverance that day.

26 Now all the strangers that had escaped came and told Lysias what had
happened:

27 Who, when he heard thereof, was confounded and discouraged, because
neither such things as he would were done unto Israel, nor such things
as the king commanded him were come to pass.

28 The next year therefore following Lysias gathered together threescore
thousand choice men of foot, and five thousand horsemen, that he might
subdue them.

29 So they came into Idumea, and pitched their tents at Bethsura, and
Judas met them with ten thousand men.

30 And when he saw that mighty army, he prayed and said, Blessed art
thou, O Saviour of Israel, who didst quell the violence of the mighty
man by the hand of thy servant David, and gavest the host of strangers
into the hands of Jonathan the son of Saul, and his armourbearer;

31 Shut up this army in the hand of thy people Israel, and let them be
confounded in their power and horsemen:

32 Make them to be of no courage, and cause the boldness of their
strength to fall away, and let them quake at their destruction:

33 Cast them down with the sword of them that love thee, and let all
those that know thy name praise thee with thanksgiving.

34 So they joined battle; and there were slain of the host of Lysias
about five thousand men, even before them were they slain.

35 Now when Lysias saw his army put to flight, and the manliness of
Judas' soldiers, and how they were ready either to live or die
valiantly, he went into Antiochia, and gathered together a company of
strangers, and having made his army greater than it was, he purposed to
come again into Judea.

36 Then said Judas and his brethren, Behold, our enemies are
discomfited: let us go up to cleanse and dedicate the sanctuary.

37 Upon this all the host assembled themselves together, and went up
into mount Sion.

38 And when they saw the sanctuary desolate, and the altar profaned, and
the gates burned up, and shrubs growing in the courts as in a forest, or
in one of the mountains, yea, and the priests' chambers pulled down;

39 They rent their clothes, and made great lamentation, and cast ashes
upon their heads,

40 And fell down flat to the ground upon their faces, and blew an alarm
with the trumpets, and cried toward heaven.

41 Then Judas appointed certain men to fight against those that were in
the fortress, until he had cleansed the sanctuary.

42 So he chose priests of blameless conversation, such as had pleasure
in the law:

43 Who cleansed the sanctuary, and bare out the defiled stones into an
unclean place.

44 And when as they consulted what to do with the altar of burnt
offerings, which was profaned;

45 They thought it best to pull it down, lest it should be a reproach to
them, because the heathen had defiled it: wherefore they pulled it down,

46 And laid up the stones in the mountain of the temple in a convenient
place, until there should come a prophet to shew what should be done
with them.

47 Then they took whole stones according to the law, and built a new
altar according to the former;

48 And made up the sanctuary, and the things that were within the
temple, and hallowed the courts.

49 They made also new holy vessels, and into the temple they brought the
candlestick, and the altar of burnt offerings, and of incense, and the
table.

50 And upon the altar they burned incense, and the lamps that were upon
the candlestick they lighted, that they might give light in the temple.

51 Furthermore they set the loaves upon the table, and spread out the
veils, and finished all the works which they had begun to make.

52 Now on the five and twentieth day of the ninth month, which is called
the month Casleu, in the hundred forty and eighth year, they rose up
betimes in the morning,

53 And offered sacrifice according to the law upon the new altar of
burnt offerings, which they had made.

54 Look, at what time and what day the heathen had profaned it, even in
that was it dedicated with songs, and citherns, and harps, and cymbals.

55 Then all the people fell upon their faces, worshipping and praising
the God of heaven, who had given them good success.

56 And so they kept the dedication of the altar eight days and offered
burnt offerings with gladness, and sacrificed the sacrifice of
deliverance and praise.

57 They decked also the forefront of the temple with crowns of gold, and
with shields; and the gates and the chambers they renewed, and hanged
doors upon them.

58 Thus was there very great gladness among the people, for that the
reproach of the heathen was put away.

59 Moreover Judas and his brethren with the whole congregation of Israel
ordained, that the days of the dedication of the altar should be kept in
their season from year to year by the space of eight days, from the five
and twentieth day of the month Casleu, with mirth and gladness.

60 At that time also they builded up the mount Sion with high walls and
strong towers round about, lest the Gentiles should come and tread it
down as they had done before.

61 And they set there a garrison to keep it, and fortified Bethsura to
preserve it; that the people might have a defence against Idumea.

[Sep](../sep/ma1004)

1 καὶ παρέλαβεν Γοργίας πεντακισχιλίους ἄνδρας καὶ χιλίαν ἵππον ἐκλεκτήν
καὶ ἀπῆρεν ἡ παρεμβολὴ νυκτὸς

2 ὥστε ἐπιβαλεῖν ἐπὶ τὴν παρεμβολὴν τῶν Ιουδαίων καὶ πατάξαι αὐτοὺς ἄφνω
καὶ υἱοὶ τῆς ἄκρας ἦσαν αὐτῷ ὁδηγοί

3 καὶ ἤκουσεν Ιουδας καὶ ἀπῆρεν αὐτὸς καὶ οἱ δυνατοὶ πατάξαι τὴν δύναμιν
τοῦ βασιλέως τὴν ἐν Αμμαους

4 ἕως ἔτι ἐσκορπισμέναι ἦσαν αἱ δυνάμεις ἀπὸ τῆς παρεμβολῆς

5 καὶ ἦλθεν Γοργίας εἰς τὴν παρεμβολὴν Ιουδου νυκτὸς καὶ οὐδένα εὗρεν
καὶ ἐζήτει αὐτοὺς ἐν τοῖς ὄρεσιν ὅτι εἶπεν φεύγουσιν οὗτοι ἀφ᾽ ἡμῶν

6 καὶ ἅμα ἡμέρᾳ ὤφθη Ιουδας ἐν τῷ πεδίῳ ἐν τρισχιλίοις ἀνδράσιν πλὴν
καλύμματα καὶ μαχαίρας οὐκ εἶχον ὡς ἠβούλοντο

7 καὶ εἶδον παρεμβολὴν ἐθνῶν ἰσχυρὰν καὶ τεθωρακισμένην καὶ ἵππον
κυκλοῦσαν αὐτήν καὶ οὗτοι διδακτοὶ πολέμου

8 καὶ εἶπεν Ιουδας τοῖς ἀνδράσιν τοῖς μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ μὴ φοβεῖσθε τὸ πλῆθος
αὐτῶν καὶ τὸ ὅρμημα αὐτῶν μὴ δειλωθῆτε

9 μνήσθητε ὡς ἐσώθησαν οἱ πατέρες ἡμῶν ἐν θαλάσσῃ ἐρυθρᾷ ὅτε ἐδίωκεν
αὐτοὺς Φαραω ἐν δυνάμει

10 καὶ νῦν βοήσωμεν εἰς οὐρανόν εἰ θελήσει ἡμᾶς καὶ μνησθήσεται διαθήκης
πατέρων καὶ συντρίψει τὴν παρεμβολὴν ταύτην κατὰ πρόσωπον ἡμῶν σήμερον

11 καὶ γνώσονται πάντα τὰ ἔθνη ὅτι ἔστιν ὁ λυτρούμενος καὶ σῴζων τὸν
Ισραηλ

12 καὶ ἦραν οἱ ἀλλόφυλοι τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς αὐτῶν καὶ εἶδον αὐτοὺς
ἐρχομένους ἐξ ἐναντίας

13 καὶ ἐξῆλθον ἐκ τῆς παρεμβολῆς εἰς πόλεμον καὶ ἐσάλπισαν οἱ παρὰ
Ιουδου

14 καὶ συνῆψαν καὶ συνετρίβησαν τὰ ἔθνη καὶ ἔφυγον εἰς τὸ πεδίον

15 οἱ δὲ ἔσχατοι πάντες ἔπεσον ἐν ῥομφαίᾳ καὶ ἐδίωξαν αὐτοὺς ἕως Γαζηρων
καὶ ἕως τῶν πεδίων τῆς Ιδουμαίας καὶ Ἀζώτου καὶ Ιαμνείας καὶ ἔπεσαν ἐξ
αὐτῶν εἰς ἄνδρας τρισχιλίους

16 καὶ ἀπέστρεψεν Ιουδας καὶ ἡ δύναμις ἀπὸ τοῦ διώκειν ὄπισθεν αὐτῶν

17 καὶ εἶπεν πρὸς τὸν λαόν μὴ ἐπιθυμήσητε τῶν σκύλων ὅτι πόλεμος ἐξ
ἐναντίας ἡμῶν

18 καὶ Γοργίας καὶ ἡ δύναμις ἐν τῷ ὄρει ἐγγὺς ἡμῶν ἀλλὰ στῆτε νῦν
ἐναντίον τῶν ἐχθρῶν ἡμῶν καὶ πολεμήσατε αὐτούς καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα λάβετε τὰ
σκῦλα μετὰ παρρησίας

19 ἔτι πληροῦντος Ιουδου ταῦτα μέρος τι ὤφθη ἐκκύπτον ἐκ τοῦ ὄρους

20 καὶ εἶδεν ὅτι τετρόπωνται καὶ ἐμπυρίζουσιν τὴν παρεμβολήν ὁ γὰρ
καπνὸς ὁ θεωρούμενος ἐνεφάνιζεν τὸ γεγονός

21 οἱ δὲ ταῦτα συνιδόντες ἐδειλώθησαν σφόδρα συνιδόντες δὲ καὶ τὴν
Ιουδου παρεμβολὴν ἐν τῷ πεδίῳ ἑτοίμην εἰς παράταξιν

22 ἔφυγον πάντες εἰς γῆν ἀλλοφύλων

23 καὶ Ιουδας ἀνέστρεψεν ἐπὶ τὴν σκυλείαν τῆς παρεμβολῆς καὶ ἔλαβον
χρυσίον πολὺ καὶ ἀργύριον καὶ ὑάκινθον καὶ πορφύραν θαλασσίαν καὶ
πλοῦτον μέγαν

24 καὶ ἐπιστραφέντες ὕμνουν καὶ εὐλόγουν εἰς οὐρανὸν ὅτι καλόν ὅτι εἰς
τὸν αἰῶνα τὸ ἔλεος αὐτοῦ

25 καὶ ἐγενήθη σωτηρία μεγάλη τῷ Ισραηλ ἐν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ ἐκείνῃ

26 ὅσοι δὲ τῶν ἀλλοφύλων διεσώθησαν παραγενηθέντες ἀπήγγειλαν τῷ Λυσίᾳ
πάντα τὰ συμβεβηκότα

27 ὁ δὲ ἀκούσας συνεχύθη καὶ ἠθύμει ὅτι οὐχ οἷα ἤθελεν τοιαῦτα ἐγεγόνει
τῷ Ισραηλ καὶ οὐχ οἷα αὐτῷ ἐνετείλατο ὁ βασιλεύς ἐξέβη

28 καὶ ἐν τῷ ἐρχομένῳ ἐνιαυτῷ συνελόχησεν ἀνδρῶν ἐπιλέκτων ἑξήκοντα
χιλιάδας καὶ πεντακισχιλίαν ἵππον ὥστε ἐκπολεμῆσαι αὐτούς

29 καὶ ἦλθον εἰς τὴν Ιδουμαίαν καὶ παρενέβαλον ἐν Βαιθσουροις καὶ
συνήντησεν αὐτοῖς Ιουδας ἐν δέκα χιλιάσιν ἀνδρῶν

30 καὶ εἶδεν τὴν παρεμβολὴν ἰσχυρὰν καὶ προσηύξατο καὶ εἶπεν εὐλογητὸς
εἶ ὁ σωτὴρ Ισραηλ ὁ συντρίψας τὸ ὅρμημα τοῦ δυνατοῦ ἐν χειρὶ τοῦ δούλου
σου Δαυιδ καὶ παρέδωκας τὴν παρεμβολὴν τῶν ἀλλοφύλων εἰς χεῖρας Ιωναθου
υἱοῦ Σαουλ καὶ τοῦ αἴροντος τὰ σκεύη αὐτοῦ

31 οὕτως σύγκλεισον τὴν παρεμβολὴν ταύτην ἐν χειρὶ λαοῦ σου Ισραηλ καὶ
αἰσχυνθήτωσαν ἐπὶ τῇ δυνάμει καὶ τῇ ἵππῳ αὐτῶν

32 δὸς αὐτοῖς δειλίαν καὶ τῆξον θράσος ἰσχύος αὐτῶν καὶ σαλευθήτωσαν τῇ
συντριβῇ αὐτῶν

33 κατάβαλε αὐτοὺς ῥομφαίᾳ ἀγαπώντων σε καὶ αἰνεσάτωσάν σε πάντες οἱ
εἰδότες τὸ ὄνομά σου ἐν ὕμνοις

34 καὶ συνέβαλλον ἀλλήλοις καὶ ἔπεσον ἐκ τῆς παρεμβολῆς Λυσίου εἰς
πεντακισχιλίους ἄνδρας καὶ ἔπεσον ἐξ ἐναντίας αὐτῶν

35 ἰδὼν δὲ Λυσίας τὴν γενομένην τροπὴν τῆς αὑτοῦ συντάξεως τῆς δὲ Ιουδου
τὸ γεγενημένον θάρσος καὶ ὡς ἕτοιμοί εἰσιν ἢ ζῆν ἢ τεθνηκέναι γενναίως
ἀπῆρεν εἰς Ἀντιόχειαν καὶ ἐξενολόγει πλεοναστὸν πάλιν παραγίνεσθαι εἰς
τὴν Ιουδαίαν

36 εἶπεν δὲ Ιουδας καὶ οἱ ἀδελφοὶ αὐτοῦ ἰδοὺ συνετρίβησαν οἱ ἐχθροὶ ἡμῶν
ἀναβῶμεν καθαρίσαι τὰ ἅγια καὶ ἐγκαινίσαι

37 καὶ συνήχθη ἡ παρεμβολὴ πᾶσα καὶ ἀνέβησαν εἰς ὄρος Σιων

38 καὶ εἶδον τὸ ἁγίασμα ἠρημωμένον καὶ τὸ θυσιαστήριον βεβηλωμένον καὶ
τὰς θύρας κατακεκαυμένας καὶ ἐν ταῖς αὐλαῖς φυτὰ πεφυκότα ὡς ἐν δρυμῷ ἢ
ὡς ἐν ἑνὶ τῶν ὀρέων καὶ τὰ παστοφόρια καθῃρημένα

39 καὶ διέρρηξαν τὰ ἱμάτια αὐτῶν καὶ ἐκόψαντο κοπετὸν μέγαν καὶ ἐπέθεντο
σποδὸν

40 καὶ ἔπεσαν ἐπὶ πρόσωπον ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν καὶ ἐσάλπισαν ταῖς σάλπιγξιν τῶν
σημασιῶν καὶ ἐβόησαν εἰς οὐρανόν

41 τότε ἐπέταξεν Ιουδας ἀνδράσιν πολεμεῖν τοὺς ἐν τῇ ἄκρᾳ ἕως καθαρίσῃ
τὰ ἅγια

42 καὶ ἐπελέξατο ἱερεῖς ἀμώμους θελητὰς νόμου

43 καὶ ἐκαθάρισαν τὰ ἅγια καὶ ἦραν τοὺς λίθους τοῦ μιασμοῦ εἰς τόπον
ἀκάθαρτον

44 καὶ ἐβουλεύσαντο περὶ τοῦ θυσιαστηρίου τῆς ὁλοκαυτώσεως τοῦ
βεβηλωμένου τί αὐτῷ ποιήσωσιν

45 καὶ ἔπεσεν αὐτοῖς βουλὴ ἀγαθὴ καθελεῖν αὐτό μήποτε γένηται αὐτοῖς εἰς
ὄνειδος ὅτι ἐμίαναν τὰ ἔθνη αὐτό καὶ καθεῖλον τὸ θυσιαστήριον

46 καὶ ἀπέθεντο τοὺς λίθους ἐν τῷ ὄρει τοῦ οἴκου ἐν τόπῳ ἐπιτηδείῳ μέχρι
τοῦ παραγενηθῆναι προφήτην τοῦ ἀποκριθῆναι περὶ αὐτῶν

47 καὶ ἔλαβον λίθους ὁλοκλήρους κατὰ τὸν νόμον καὶ ᾠκοδόμησαν
θυσιαστήριον καινὸν κατὰ τὸ πρότερον

48 καὶ ᾠκοδόμησαν τὰ ἅγια καὶ τὰ ἐντὸς τοῦ οἴκου καὶ τὰς αὐλὰς ἡγίασαν

49 καὶ ἐποίησαν σκεύη ἅγια καινὰ καὶ εἰσήνεγκαν τὴν λυχνίαν καὶ τὸ
θυσιαστήριον τῶν θυμιαμάτων καὶ τὴν τράπεζαν εἰς τὸν ναόν

50 καὶ ἐθυμίασαν ἐπὶ τὸ θυσιαστήριον καὶ ἐξῆψαν τοὺς λύχνους τοὺς ἐπὶ
τῆς λυχνίας καὶ ἔφαινον ἐν τῷ ναῷ

51 καὶ ἐπέθηκαν ἐπὶ τὴν τράπεζαν ἄρτους καὶ ἐξεπέτασαν τὰ καταπετάσματα
καὶ ἐτέλεσαν πάντα τὰ ἔργα ἃ ἐποίησαν

52 καὶ ὤρθρισαν τὸ πρωὶ τῇ πέμπτῃ καὶ εἰκάδι τοῦ μηνὸς τοῦ ἐνάτου οὗτος
ὁ μὴν Χασελευ τοῦ ὀγδόου καὶ τεσσαρακοστοῦ καὶ ἑκατοστοῦ ἔτους

53 καὶ ἀνήνεγκαν θυσίαν κατὰ τὸν νόμον ἐπὶ τὸ θυσιαστήριον τῶν
ὁλοκαυτωμάτων τὸ καινόν ὃ ἐποίησαν

54 κατὰ τὸν καιρὸν καὶ κατὰ τὴν ἡμέραν ἐν ᾗ ἐβεβήλωσαν αὐτὸ τὰ ἔθνη ἐν
ἐκείνῃ ἐνεκαινίσθη ἐν ᾠδαῖς καὶ κιθάραις καὶ κινύραις καὶ κυμβάλοις

55 καὶ ἔπεσεν πᾶς ὁ λαὸς ἐπὶ πρόσωπον καὶ προσεκύνησαν καὶ εὐλόγησαν εἰς
οὐρανὸν τὸν εὐοδώσαντα αὐτοῖς

56 καὶ ἐποίησαν τὸν ἐγκαινισμὸν τοῦ θυσιαστηρίου ἡμέρας ὀκτὼ καὶ
προσήνεγκαν ὁλοκαυτώματα μετ᾽ εὐφροσύνης καὶ ἔθυσαν θυσίαν σωτηρίου καὶ
αἰνέσεως

57 καὶ κατεκόσμησαν τὸ κατὰ πρόσωπον τοῦ ναοῦ στεφάνοις χρυσοῖς καὶ
ἀσπιδίσκαις καὶ ἐνεκαίνισαν τὰς πύλας καὶ τὰ παστοφόρια καὶ ἐθύρωσαν
αὐτά

58 καὶ ἐγενήθη εὐφροσύνη μεγάλη ἐν τῷ λαῷ σφόδρα καὶ ἀπεστράφη
ὀνειδισμὸς ἐθνῶν

59 καὶ ἔστησεν Ιουδας καὶ οἱ ἀδελφοὶ αὐτοῦ καὶ πᾶσα ἡ ἐκκλησία Ισραηλ
ἵνα ἄγωνται αἱ ἡμέραι τοῦ ἐγκαινισμοῦ τοῦ θυσιαστηρίου ἐν τοῖς καιροῖς
αὐτῶν ἐνιαυτὸν κατ᾽ ἐνιαυτὸν ἡμέρας ὀκτὼ ἀπὸ τῆς πέμπτης καὶ εἰκάδος τοῦ
μηνὸς Χασελευ μετ᾽ εὐφροσύνης καὶ χαρᾶς

60 καὶ ᾠκοδόμησαν ἐν τῷ καιρῷ ἐκείνῳ τὸ ὄρος Σιων κυκλόθεν τείχη ὑψηλὰ
καὶ πύργους ὀχυρούς μήποτε παραγενηθέντα τὰ ἔθνη καταπατήσωσιν αὐτά ὡς
ἐποίησαν τὸ πρότερον

61 καὶ ἀπέταξεν ἐκεῖ δύναμιν τηρεῖν αὐτὸ καὶ ὠχύρωσεν αὐτὸ τηρεῖν τὴν
Βαιθσουραν τοῦ ἔχειν τὸν λαὸν ὀχύρωμα κατὰ πρόσωπον τῆς Ιδουμαίας

[Vul](../vul/ma1004)

1 Et assumpsit Gorgias quinque millia virorum, et mille equites electos:
et moverunt castra nocte,

2 ut applicarent ad castra Judæorum, et percuterent eos subito: et
filii, qui erant ex arce, erant illis duces.

3 Et audivit Judas, et surrexit ipse et potentes percutere virtutem
exercituum regis, qui erant in Emmaum:

4 adhuc enim dispersus erat exercitus a castris.

5 Et venit Gorgias in castra Judæ noctu, et neminem invenit: et quærebat
eos in montibus, quoniam dixit: Fugiunt hi a nobis.

6 Et cum dies factus esset, apparuit Judas in campo cum tribus millibus
virorum tantum, qui tegumenta et gladios non habebant:

7 et viderunt castra gentium valida, et loricatos et equitatus in
circuitu eorum, et hi docti ad prælium.

8 Et ait Judas viris, qui secum erant: Ne timueritis multitudinem eorum,
et impetum eorum ne formidetis.

9 Mementote qualiter salvi facti sunt patres nostri in mari Rubro, cum
sequeretur eos Pharao cum exercitu multo.

10 Et nunc clamemus in cælum: et miserebitur nostri Dominus, et memor
erit testamenti patrum nostrorum, et conteret exercitum istum ante
faciem nostram hodie:

11 et scient omnes gentes quia est qui redimat et liberet Israël.

12 Et elevaverunt alienigenæ oculos suos, et viderunt eos venientes ex
adverso.

13 Et exierunt de castris in prælium, et tuba cecinerunt hi qui erant
cum Juda.

14 Et congressi sunt: et contritæ sunt gentes, et fugerunt in campum.

15 Novissimi autem omnes ceciderunt in gladio, et persecuti sunt eos
usque Gezeron, et usque in campos Idumææ, et Azoti, et Jamniæ: et
ceciderunt ex illis usque ad tria millia virorum.

16 Et reversus est Judas, et exercitus ejus sequens eum.

17 Dixitque ad populum: Non concupiscatis spolia: quia bellum contra nos
est,

18 et Gorgias et exercitus ejus prope nos in monte: sed state nunc
contra inimicos nostros, et expugnate eos, et sumetis postea spolia
securi.

19 Et adhuc loquente Juda hæc, ecce apparuit pars quædam prospiciens de
monte.

20 Et vidit Gorgias quod in fugam conversi sunt sui, et succenderunt
castra: fumus enim, qui videbatur, declarabat quod factum est.

21 Quibus illi conspectis timuerunt valde, aspicientes simul et Judam,
et exercitum in campo paratum ad prælium.

22 Et fugerunt omnes in campum alienigenarum:

23 et Judas reversus est ad spolia castrorum, et acceperunt aurum
multum, et argentum, et hyacinthinum, et purpuram marinam, et opes
magnas.

24 Et conversi, hymnum canebant, et benedicebant Deum in cælum, quoniam
bonus est, quoniam in sæculum misericordia ejus.

25 Et facta est salus magna in Israël in die illa.

26 Quicumque autem alienigenarum evaserunt, venerunt, et nuntiaverunt
Lysiæ universa quæ acciderant.

27 Quibus ille auditis, consternatus animo deficiebat: quod non qualia
voluit, talia contigerunt in Israël, et qualia mandavit rex.  

28 Et sequenti anno, congregavit Lysias virorum electorum sexaginta
millia, et equitum quinque millia, ut debellaret eos.

29 Et venerunt in Judæam, et castra posuerunt in Bethoron, et occurrit
illis Judas cum decem millibus viris.

30 Et viderunt exercitum fortem, et oravit, et dixit: Benedictus es,
salvator Israël, qui contrivisti impetum potentis in manu servi tui
David, et tradidisti castra alienigenarum in manu Jonathæ filii Saul, et
armigeri ejus.

31 Conclude exercitum istum in manu populi tui Israël, et confundantur
in exercitu suo et equitibus.

32 Da illis formidinem, et tabefac audaciam virtutis eorum, et
commoveantur contritione sua.

33 Dejice illos gladio diligentium te: et collaudent te omnes, qui
noverunt nomen tuum, in hymnis.

34 Et commiserunt prælium: et ceciderunt de exercitu Lysiæ quinque
millia virorum.

35 Videns autem Lysias fugam suorum, et Judæorum audaciam, et quod
parati sunt aut vivere, aut mori fortiter, abiit Antiochiam, et elegit
milites, ut multiplicati rursus venirent in Judæam.  

36 Dixit autem Judas, et fratres ejus: Ecce contriti sunt inimici
nostri: ascendamus nunc mundare sancta, et renovare.

37 Et congregatus est omnis exercitus, et ascenderunt in montem Sion.

38 Et viderunt sanctificationem desertam, et altare profanatum, et
portas exustas, et in atriis virgulta nata sicut in saltu vel in
montibus, et pastophoria diruta.

39 Et sciderunt vestimenta sua, et planxerunt planctu magno, et
imposuerunt cinerem super caput suum,

40 et ceciderunt in faciem super terram, et exclamaverunt tubis
signorum, et clamaverunt in cælum.

41 Tunc ordinavit Judas viros ut pugnarent adversus eos qui erant in
arce, donec emundarent sancta.

42 Et elegit sacerdotes sine macula, voluntatem habentes in lege Dei:

43 et mundaverunt sancta, et tulerunt lapides contaminationis in locum
immundum.

44 Et cogitavit de altari holocaustorum, quod profanatum erat, quid de
eo faceret.

45 Et incidit illis consilium bonum ut destruerent illud: ne forte illis
esset in opprobrium, quia contaminaverunt illud gentes, et demoliti sunt
illud.

46 Et reposuerunt lapides in monte domus in loco apto, quoadusque
veniret propheta, et responderet de eis.

47 Et acceperunt lapides integros secundum legem, et ædificaverunt
altare novum secundum illud quod fuit prius:

48 et ædificaverunt sancta, et quæ intra domum erant intrinsecus: et
ædem, et atria sanctificaverunt.

49 Et fecerunt vasa sancta nova, et intulerunt candelabrum, et altare
incensorum, et mensam, in templum.

50 Et incensum posuerunt super altare, et accenderunt lucernas quæ super
candelabrum erant, et lucebant in templo.

51 Et posuerunt super mensam panes, et appenderunt vela, et
consummaverunt omnia opera quæ fecerant.

52 Et ante matutinum surrexerunt quinta et vigesima die mensis noni (hic
est mensis Casleu) centesimi quadragesimi octavi anni:

53 et obtulerunt sacrificium secundum legem super altare holocaustorum
novum, quod fecerunt.

54 Secundum tempus et secundum diem in qua contaminaverunt illud gentes,
in ipsa renovatum est in canticis, et citharis, et cinyris, et in
cymbalis.

55 Et cecidit omnis populus in faciem, et adoraverunt, et benedixerunt
in cælum eum, qui prosperavit eis.

56 Et fecerunt dedicationem altaris diebus octo, et obtulerunt
holocausta cum lætitia, et sacrificium salutaris et laudis.

57 Et ornaverunt faciem templi coronis aureis et scutulis, et
dedicaverunt portas et pastophoria, et imposuerunt eis januas.

58 Et facta est lætitia in populo magna valde, et aversum est opprobrium
gentium.

59 Et statuit Judas, et fratres ejus, et universa ecclesia Israël, ut
agatur dies dedicationis altaris in temporibus suis ab anno in annum per
dies octo a quinta et vigesima die mensis Casleu, cum lætitia et gaudio.

60 Et ædificaverunt in tempore illo montem Sion, et per circuitum muros
altos et turres firmas, nequando venirent gentes, et conculcarent eum
sicut antea fecerunt.

61 Et collocavit illic exercitum, ut servarent eum, et munivit eum ad
custodiendum Bethsuram, ut haberet populus munitionem contra faciem
Idumææ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Macabees 5](ma1005)
