[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[1 Macabees Index](ma1)  
  [Previous](ma1004)  [Next](ma1006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1 Macabees 5

[Apo](../apo/ma1005)

1 Now when the nations round about heard that the altar was built and
the sanctuary renewed as before, it displeased them very much.

2 Wherefore they thought to destroy the generation of Jacob that was
among them, and thereupon they began to slay and destroy the people.

3 Then Judas fought against the children of Esau in Idumea at
Arabattine, because they besieged Gael: and he gave them a great
overthrow, and abated their courage, and took their spoils.

4 Also he remembered the injury of the children of Bean, who had been a
snare and an offence unto the people, in that they lay in wait for them
in the ways.

5 He shut them up therefore in the towers, and encamped against them,
and destroyed them utterly, and burned the towers of that place with
fire, and all that were therein.

6 Afterward he passed over to the children of Ammon, where he found a
mighty power, and much people, with Timotheus their captain.

7 So he fought many battles with them, till at length they were
discomfited before him; and he smote them.

8 And when he had taken Jazar, with the towns belonging thereto, he
returned into Judea.

9 Then the heathen that were at Galaad assembled themselves together
against the Israelites that were in their quarters, to destroy them; but
they fled to the fortress of Dathema.

10 And sent letters unto Judas and his brethren, The heathen that are
round about us are assembled together against us to destroy us:

11 And they are preparing to come and take the fortress whereunto we are
fled, Timotheus being captain of their host.

12 Come now therefore, and deliver us from their hands, for many of us
are slain:

13 Yea, all our brethren that were in the places of Tobie are put to
death: their wives and their children also they have carried away
captives, and borne away their stuff; and they have destroyed there
about a thousand men.

14 While these letters were yet reading, behold, there came other
messengers from Galilee with their clothes rent, who reported on this
wise,

15 And said, They of Ptolemais, and of Tyrus, and Sidon, and all Galilee
of the Gentiles, are assembled together against us to consume us.

16 Now when Judas and the people heard these words, there assembled a
great congregation together, to consult what they should do for their
brethren, that were in trouble, and assaulted of them.

17 Then said Judas unto Simon his brother, Choose thee out men, and go
and deliver thy brethren that are in Galilee, for I and Jonathan my
brother will go into the country of Galaad.

18 So he left Joseph the son of Zacharias, and Azarias, captains of the
people, with the remnant of the host in Judea to keep it.

19 Unto whom he gave commandment, saying, Take ye the charge of this
people, and see that ye make not war against the heathen until the time
that we come again.

20 Now unto Simon were given three thousand men to go into Galilee, and
unto Judas eight thousand men for the country of Galaad.

21 Then went Simon into Galilee, where he fought many battles with the
heathen, so that the heathen were discomfited by him.

22 And he pursued them unto the gate of Ptolemais; and there were slain
of the heathen about three thousand men, whose spoils he took.

23 And those that were in Galilee, and in Arbattis, with their wives and
their children, and all that they had, took he away with him, and
brought them into Judea with great joy.

24 Judas Maccabeus also and his brother Jonathan went over Jordan, and
travelled three days' journey in the wilderness,

25 Where they met with the Nabathites, who came unto them in a peaceable
manner, and told them every thing that had happened to their brethren in
the land of Galaad:

26 And how that many of them were shut up in Bosora, and Bosor, and
Alema, Casphor, Maked, and Carnaim; all these cities are strong and
great:

27 And that they were shut up in the rest of the cities of the country
of Galaad, and that against to morrow they had appointed to bring their
host against the forts, and to take them, and to destroy them all in one
day.

28 Hereupon Judas and his host turned suddenly by the way of the
wilderness unto Bosora; and when he had won the city, he slew all the
males with the edge of the sword, and took all their spoils, and burned
the city with fire,

29 From whence he removed by night, and went till he came to the
fortress.

30 And betimes in the morning they looked up, and, behold, there was an
innumerable people bearing ladders and other engines of war, to take the
fortress: for they assaulted them.

31 When Judas therefore saw that the battle was begun, and that the cry
of the city went up to heaven, with trumpets, and a great sound,

32 He said unto his host, Fight this day for your brethren.

33 So he went forth behind them in three companies, who sounded their
trumpets, and cried with prayer.

34 Then the host of Timotheus, knowing that it was Maccabeus, fled from
him: wherefore he smote them with a great slaughter; so that there were
killed of them that day about eight thousand men.

35 This done, Judas turned aside to Maspha; and after he had assaulted
it he took and slew all the males therein, and received the spoils
thereof and and burnt it with fire.

36 From thence went he, and took Casphon, Maged, Bosor, and the other
cities of the country of Galaad.

37 After these things gathered Timotheus another host and encamped
against Raphon beyond the brook.

38 So Judas sent men to espy the host, who brought him word, saying, All
the heathen that be round about us are assembled unto them, even a very
great host.

39 He hath also hired the Arabians to help them and they have pitched
their tents beyond the brook, ready to come and fight against thee. Upon
this Judas went to meet them.

40 Then Timotheus said unto the captains of his host, When Judas and his
host come near the brook, if he pass over first unto us, we shall not be
able to withstand him; for he will mightily prevail against us:

41 But if he be afraid, and camp beyond the river, we shall go over unto
him, and prevail against him.

42 Now when Judas came near the brook, he caused the scribes of the
people to remain by the brook: unto whom he gave commandment, saying,
Suffer no man to remain in the camp, but let all come to the battle.

43 So he went first over unto them, and all the people after him: then
all the heathen, being discomfited before him, cast away their weapons,
and fled unto the temple that was at Carnaim.

44 But they took the city, and burned the temple with all that were
therein. Thus was Carnaim subdued, neither could they stand any longer
before Judas.

45 Then Judas gathered together all the Israelites that were in the
country of Galaad, from the least unto the greatest, even their wives,
and their children, and their stuff, a very great host, to the end they
might come into the land of Judea.

46 Now when they came unto Ephron, (this was a great city in the way as
they should go, very well fortified) they could not turn from it, either
on the right hand or the left, but must needs pass through the midst of
it.

47 Then they of the city shut them out, and stopped up the gates with
stones.

48 Whereupon Judas sent unto them in peaceable manner, saying, Let us
pass through your land to go into our own country, and none shall do you
any hurt; we will only pass through on foot: howbeit they would not open
unto him.

49 Wherefore Judas commanded a proclamation to be made throughout the
host, that every man should pitch his tent in the place where he was.

50 So the soldiers pitched, and assaulted the city all that day and all
that night, till at the length the city was delivered into his hands:

51 Who then slew all the males with the edge of the sword, and rased the
city, and took the spoils thereof, and passed through the city over them
that were slain.

52 After this went they over Jordan into the great plain before Bethsan.

53 And Judas gathered together those that came behind, and exhorted the
people all the way through, till they came into the land of Judea.

54 So they went up to mount Sion with joy and gladness, where they
offered burnt offerings, because not one of them were slain until they
had returned in peace.

55 Now what time as Judas and Jonathan were in the land of Galaad, and
Simon his brother in Galilee before Ptolemais,

56 Joseph the son of Zacharias, and Azarias, captains of the garrisons,
heard of the valiant acts and warlike deeds which they had done.

57 Wherefore they said, Let us also get us a name, and go fight against
the heathen that are round about us.

58 So when they had given charge unto the garrison that was with them,
they went toward Jamnia.

59 Then came Gorgias and his men out of the city to fight against them.

60 And so it was, that Joseph and Azaras were put to flight, and pursued
unto the borders of Judea: and there were slain that day of the people
of Israel about two thousand men.

61 Thus was there a great overthrow among the children of Israel,
because they were not obedient unto Judas and his brethren, but thought
to do some valiant act.

62 Moreover these men came not of the seed of those, by whose hand
deliverance was given unto Israel.

63 Howbeit the man Judas and his brethren were greatly renowned in the
sight of all Israel, and of all the heathen, wheresoever their name was
heard of;

64 Insomuch as the the people assembled unto them with joyful
acclamations.

65 Afterward went Judas forth with his brethren, and fought against the
children of Esau in the land toward the south, where he smote Hebron,
and the towns thereof, and pulled down the fortress of it, and burned
the towers thereof round about.

66 From thence he removed to go into the land of the Philistines, and
passed through Samaria.

67 At that time certain priests, desirous to shew their valour, were
slain in battle, for that they went out to fight unadvisedly.

68 So Judas turned to Azotus in the land of the Philistines, and when he
had pulled down their altars, and burned their carved images with fire,
and spoiled their cities, he returned into the land of Judea.

[Sep](../sep/ma1005)

1 καὶ ἐγένετο ὅτε ἤκουσαν τὰ ἔθνη κυκλόθεν ὅτι ᾠκοδομήθη τὸ θυσιαστήριον
καὶ ἐνεκαινίσθη τὸ ἁγίασμα ὡς τὸ πρότερον καὶ ὠργίσθησαν σφόδρα

2 καὶ ἐβουλεύσαντο τοῦ ἆραι τὸ γένος Ιακωβ τοὺς ὄντας ἐν μέσῳ αὐτῶν καὶ
ἤρξαντο τοῦ θανατοῦν ἐν τῷ λαῷ καὶ ἐξαίρειν

3 καὶ ἐπολέμει Ιουδας πρὸς τοὺς υἱοὺς Ησαυ ἐν τῇ Ιδουμαίᾳ τὴν
Ακραβαττήνην ὅτι περιεκάθηντο τὸν Ισραηλ καὶ ἐπάταξεν αὐτοὺς πληγὴν
μεγάλην καὶ συνέστειλεν αὐτοὺς καὶ ἔλαβεν τὰ σκῦλα αὐτῶν

4 καὶ ἐμνήσθη τῆς κακίας υἱῶν Βαιαν οἳ ἦσαν τῷ λαῷ εἰς παγίδα καὶ
σκάνδαλον ἐν τῷ ἐνεδρεύειν αὐτοὺς ἐν ταῖς ὁδοῖς

5 καὶ συνεκλείσθησαν ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ εἰς τοὺς πύργους καὶ παρενέβαλεν ἐπ᾽
αὐτοὺς καὶ ἀνεθεμάτισεν αὐτοὺς καὶ ἐνεπύρισε τοὺς πύργους αὐτῆς ἐν πυρὶ
σὺν πᾶσιν τοῖς ἐνοῦσιν

6 καὶ διεπέρασεν ἐπὶ τοὺς υἱοὺς Αμμων καὶ εὗρεν χεῖρα κραταιὰν καὶ λαὸν
πολὺν καὶ Τιμόθεον ἡγούμενον αὐτῶν

7 καὶ συνῆψεν πρὸς αὐτοὺς πολέμους πολλούς καὶ συνετρίβησαν πρὸ προσώπου
αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐπάταξεν αὐτούς

8 καὶ προκατελάβετο τὴν Ιαζηρ καὶ τὰς θυγατέρας αὐτῆς καὶ ἀνέστρεψεν εἰς
τὴν Ιουδαίαν

9 καὶ ἐπισυνήχθησαν τὰ ἔθνη τὰ ἐν τῇ Γαλααδ ἐπὶ τὸν Ισραηλ τοὺς ὄντας
ἐπὶ τοῖς ὁρίοις αὐτῶν τοῦ ἐξᾶραι αὐτούς καὶ ἔφυγον εἰς Δαθεμα τὸ ὀχύρωμα

10 καὶ ἀπέστειλαν γράμματα πρὸς Ιουδαν καὶ τοὺς ἀδελφοὺς αὐτοῦ λέγοντες
ἐπισυνηγμένα ἐστὶν ἐφ᾽ ἡμᾶς τὰ ἔθνη κύκλῳ ἡμῶν τοῦ ἐξᾶραι ἡμᾶς

11 καὶ ἑτοιμάζονται ἐλθεῖν καὶ προκαταλαβέσθαι τὸ ὀχύρωμα εἰς ὃ
κατεφύγομεν καὶ Τιμόθεος ἡγεῖται τῆς δυνάμεως αὐτῶν

12 νῦν οὖν ἐλθὼν ἐξελοῦ ἡμᾶς ἐκ χειρὸς αὐτῶν ὅτι πέπτωκεν ἐξ ἡμῶν πλῆθος

13 καὶ πάντες οἱ ἀδελφοὶ ἡμῶν οἱ ὄντες ἐν τοῖς Τουβίου τεθανάτωνται καὶ
ᾐχμαλωτίκασιν τὰς γυναῖκας αὐτῶν καὶ τὰ τέκνα καὶ τὴν ἀποσκευὴν καὶ
ἀπώλεσαν ἐκεῖ ὡσεὶ μίαν χιλιαρχίαν ἀνδρῶν

14 ἔτι αἱ ἐπιστολαὶ ἀνεγιγνώσκοντο καὶ ἰδοὺ ἄγγελοι ἕτεροι παρεγένοντο
ἐκ τῆς Γαλιλαίας διερρηχότες τὰ ἱμάτια ἀπαγγέλλοντες κατὰ τὰ ῥήματα
ταῦτα

15 λέγοντες ἐπισυνῆχθαι ἐπ᾽ αὐτοὺς ἐκ Πτολεμαίδος καὶ Τύρου καὶ Σιδῶνος
καὶ πᾶσαν Γαλιλαίαν ἀλλοφύλων τοῦ ἐξαναλῶσαι ἡμᾶς

16 ὡς δὲ ἤκουσεν Ιουδας καὶ ὁ λαὸς τοὺς λόγους τούτους ἐπισυνήχθη
ἐκκλησία μεγάλη βουλεύσασθαι τί ποιήσωσιν τοῖς ἀδελφοῖς αὐτῶν τοῖς οὖσιν
ἐν θλίψει καὶ πολεμουμένοις ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν

17 καὶ εἶπεν Ιουδας Σιμωνι τῷ ἀδελφῷ αὐτοῦ ἐπίλεξον σεαυτῷ ἄνδρας καὶ
πορεύου καὶ ῥῦσαι τοὺς ἀδελφούς σου τοὺς ἐν τῇ Γαλιλαίᾳ ἐγὼ δὲ καὶ
Ιωναθαν ὁ ἀδελφός μου πορευσόμεθα εἰς τὴν Γαλααδῖτιν

18 καὶ κατέλιπεν Ιωσηπον τὸν τοῦ Ζαχαριου καὶ Αζαριαν ἡγούμενον τοῦ λαοῦ
μετὰ τῶν ἐπιλοίπων τῆς δυνάμεως ἐν τῇ Ιουδαίᾳ εἰς τήρησιν

19 καὶ ἐνετείλατο αὐτοῖς λέγων πρόστητε τοῦ λαοῦ τούτου καὶ μὴ συνάψητε
πόλεμον πρὸς τὰ ἔθνη ἕως τοῦ ἐπιστρέψαι ἡμᾶς

20 καὶ ἐμερίσθησαν Σιμωνι ἄνδρες τρισχίλιοι τοῦ πορευθῆναι εἰς τὴν
Γαλιλαίαν Ιουδα δὲ ἄνδρες ὀκτακισχίλιοι εἰς τὴν Γαλααδῖτιν

21 καὶ ἐπορεύθη Σιμων εἰς τὴν Γαλιλαίαν καὶ συνῆψεν πολέμους πολλοὺς
πρὸς τὰ ἔθνη καὶ συνετρίβη τὰ ἔθνη ἀπὸ προσώπου αὐτοῦ

22 καὶ ἐδίωξεν αὐτοὺς ἕως τῆς πύλης Πτολεμαίδος καὶ ἔπεσον ἐκ τῶν ἐθνῶν
εἰς τρισχιλίους ἄνδρας καὶ ἔλαβεν τὰ σκῦλα αὐτῶν

23 καὶ παρέλαβεν τοὺς ἐκ τῆς Γαλιλαίας καὶ ἐν Αρβαττοις σὺν ταῖς
γυναιξὶν καὶ τοῖς τέκνοις καὶ πάντα ὅσα ἦν αὐτοῖς καὶ ἤγαγεν εἰς τὴν
Ιουδαίαν μετ᾽ εὐφροσύνης μεγάλης

24 καὶ Ιουδας ὁ Μακκαβαῖος καὶ Ιωναθαν ὁ ἀδελφὸς αὐτοῦ διέβησαν τὸν
Ιορδάνην καὶ ἐπορεύθησαν ὁδὸν τριῶν ἡμερῶν ἐν τῇ ἐρήμῳ

25 καὶ συνήντησαν τοῖς Ναβαταίοις καὶ ἀπήντησαν αὐτοῖς εἰρηνικῶς καὶ
διηγήσαντο αὐτοῖς πάντα τὰ συμβάντα τοῖς ἀδελφοῖς αὐτῶν ἐν τῇ
Γαλααδίτιδι

26 καὶ ὅτι πολλοὶ ἐξ αὐτῶν συνειλημμένοι εἰσὶν εἰς Βοσορρα καὶ Βοσορ ἐν
Αλεμοις Χασφω Μακεδ καὶ Καρναιν πᾶσαι αἱ πόλεις αὗται ὀχυραὶ καὶ μεγάλαι

27 καὶ ἐν ταῖς λοιπαῖς πόλεσιν τῆς Γαλααδίτιδός εἰσιν συνειλημμένοι εἰς
αὔριον τάσσονται παρεμβαλεῖν ἐπὶ τὰ ὀχυρώματα καὶ καταλαβέσθαι καὶ
ἐξᾶραι πάντας τούτους ἐν ἡμέρᾳ μιᾷ

28 καὶ ἀπέστρεψεν Ιουδας καὶ ἡ παρεμβολὴ αὐτοῦ ὁδὸν εἰς τὴν ἔρημον
Βοσορρα ἄφνω καὶ κατελάβετο τὴν πόλιν καὶ ἀπέκτεινε πᾶν ἀρσενικὸν ἐν
στόματι ῥομφαίας καὶ ἔλαβεν πάντα τὰ σκῦλα αὐτῶν καὶ ἐνέπρησεν αὐτὴν
πυρί

29 καὶ ἀπῆρεν ἐκεῖθεν νυκτός καὶ ἐπορεύοντο ἕως ἐπὶ τὸ ὀχύρωμα

30 καὶ ἐγένετο ἑωθινῇ ἦραν τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς αὐτῶν καὶ ἰδοὺ λαὸς πολύς οὗ
οὐκ ἦν ἀριθμός αἴροντες κλίμακας καὶ μηχανὰς καταλαβέσθαι τὸ ὀχύρωμα καὶ
ἐπολέμουν αὐτούς

31 καὶ εἶδεν Ιουδας ὅτι ἦρκται ὁ πόλεμος καὶ ἡ κραυγὴ τῆς πόλεως ἀνέβη
ἕως οὐρανοῦ σάλπιγξιν καὶ κραυγῇ μεγάλῃ

32 καὶ εἶπεν τοῖς ἀνδράσιν τῆς δυνάμεως πολεμήσατε σήμερον ὑπὲρ τῶν
ἀδελφῶν ἡμῶν

33 καὶ ἐξῆλθεν ἐν τρισὶν ἀρχαῖς ἐξόπισθεν αὐτῶν καὶ ἐσάλπισαν ταῖς
σάλπιγξιν καὶ ἐβόησαν ἐν προσευχῇ

34 καὶ ἐπέγνω ἡ παρεμβολὴ Τιμοθέου ὅτι Μακκαβαῖός ἐστιν καὶ ἔφυγον ἀπὸ
προσώπου αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐπάταξεν αὐτοὺς πληγὴν μεγάλην καὶ ἔπεσον ἐξ αὐτῶν ἐν
ἐκείνῃ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ εἰς ὀκτακισχιλίους ἄνδρας

35 καὶ ἀπέκλινεν εἰς Αλεμα καὶ ἐπολέμησεν αὐτὴν καὶ κατελάβετο αὐτὴν καὶ
ἀπέκτεινεν πᾶν ἀρσενικὸν αὐτῆς καὶ ἔλαβεν τὰ σκῦλα αὐτῆς καὶ ἐνέπρησεν
αὐτὴν ἐν πυρί

36 ἐκεῖθεν ἀπῆρεν καὶ προκατελάβετο τὴν Χασφω Μακεδ καὶ Βοσορ καὶ τὰς
λοιπὰς πόλεις τῆς Γαλααδίτιδος

37 μετὰ δὲ τὰ ῥήματα ταῦτα συνήγαγεν Τιμόθεος παρεμβολὴν ἄλλην καὶ
παρενέβαλεν κατὰ πρόσωπον Ραφων ἐκ πέραν τοῦ χειμάρρου

38 καὶ ἀπέστειλεν Ιουδας κατασκοπεῦσαι τὴν παρεμβολήν καὶ ἀπήγγειλαν
αὐτῷ λέγοντες ἐπισυνηγμένα εἰσὶν πρὸς αὐτὸν πάντα τὰ ἔθνη τὰ κύκλῳ ἡμῶν
δύναμις πολλὴ σφόδρα

39 καὶ Ἄραβας μεμίσθωνται εἰς βοήθειαν αὐτοῖς καὶ παρεμβάλλουσιν πέραν
τοῦ χειμάρρου ἕτοιμοι τοῦ ἐλθεῖν ἐπὶ σὲ εἰς πόλεμον καὶ ἐπορεύθη Ιουδας
εἰς συνάντησιν αὐτῶν

40 καὶ εἶπεν Τιμόθεος τοῖς ἄρχουσιν τῆς δυνάμεως αὐτοῦ ἐν τῷ ἐγγίζειν
Ιουδαν καὶ τὴν παρεμβολὴν αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ τὸν χειμάρρουν τοῦ ὕδατος ἐὰν διαβῇ
πρὸς ἡμᾶς πρότερος οὐ δυνησόμεθα ὑποστῆναι αὐτόν ὅτι δυνάμενος δυνήσεται
πρὸς ἡμᾶς

41 ἐὰν δὲ δειλανθῇ καὶ παρεμβάλῃ πέραν τοῦ ποταμοῦ διαπεράσομεν πρὸς
αὐτὸν καὶ δυνησόμεθα πρὸς αὐτόν

42 ὡς δὲ ἤγγισεν Ιουδας ἐπὶ τὸν χειμάρρουν τοῦ ὕδατος ἔστησεν τοὺς
γραμματεῖς τοῦ λαοῦ ἐπὶ τοῦ χειμάρρου καὶ ἐνετείλατο αὐτοῖς λέγων μὴ
ἀφῆτε πάντα ἄνθρωπον παρεμβαλεῖν ἀλλὰ ἐρχέσθωσαν πάντες εἰς τὸν πόλεμον

43 καὶ διεπέρασεν ἐπ᾽ αὐτοὺς πρότερος καὶ πᾶς ὁ λαὸς ὄπισθεν αὐτοῦ καὶ
συνετρίβησαν πρὸ προσώπου αὐτῶν πάντα τὰ ἔθνη καὶ ἔρριψαν τὰ ὅπλα αὐτῶν
καὶ ἔφυγον εἰς τὸ τέμενος Καρναιν

44 καὶ προκατελάβοντο τὴν πόλιν καὶ τὸ τέμενος ἐνεπύρισαν ἐν πυρὶ σὺν
πᾶσιν τοῖς ἐν αὐτῷ καὶ ἐτροπώθη Καρναιν καὶ οὐκ ἠδύναντο ἔτι ὑποστῆναι
κατὰ πρόσωπον Ιουδου

45 καὶ συνήγαγεν Ιουδας πάντα Ισραηλ τοὺς ἐν τῇ Γαλααδίτιδι ἀπὸ μικροῦ
ἕως μεγάλου καὶ τὰς γυναῖκας αὐτῶν καὶ τὰ τέκνα αὐτῶν καὶ τὴν ἀποσκευήν
παρεμβολὴν μεγάλην σφόδρα ἐλθεῖν εἰς γῆν Ιουδα

46 καὶ ἦλθον ἕως Εφρων καὶ αὕτη πόλις μεγάλη ἐπὶ τῆς ὁδοῦ ὀχυρὰ σφόδρα
οὐκ ἦν ἐκκλῖναι ἀπ᾽ αὐτῆς δεξιὰν ἢ ἀριστεράν ἀλλ᾽ ἢ διὰ μέσου αὐτῆς
πορεύεσθαι

47 καὶ ἀπέκλεισαν αὐτοὺς οἱ ἐκ τῆς πόλεως καὶ ἐνέφραξαν τὰς πύλας λίθοις

48 καὶ ἀπέστειλεν πρὸς αὐτοὺς Ιουδας λόγοις εἰρηνικοῖς λέγων
διελευσόμεθα διὰ τῆς γῆς σου τοῦ ἀπελθεῖν εἰς τὴν γῆν ἡμῶν καὶ οὐδεὶς
κακοποιήσει ὑμᾶς πλὴν τοῖς ποσὶν παρελευσόμεθα καὶ οὐκ ἠβούλοντο ἀνοῖξαι
αὐτῷ

49 καὶ ἐπέταξεν Ιουδας κηρύξαι ἐν τῇ παρεμβολῇ τοῦ παρεμβαλεῖν ἕκαστον
ἐν ᾧ ἐστιν τόπῳ

50 καὶ παρενέβαλον οἱ ἄνδρες τῆς δυνάμεως καὶ ἐπολέμησεν τὴν πόλιν ὅλην
τὴν ἡμέραν ἐκείνην καὶ ὅλην τὴν νύκτα καὶ παρεδόθη ἡ πόλις ἐν χειρὶ
αὐτοῦ

51 καὶ ἀπώλεσεν πᾶν ἀρσενικὸν ἐν στόματι ῥομφαίας καὶ ἐξερρίζωσεν αὐτὴν
καὶ ἔλαβεν τὰ σκῦλα αὐτῆς καὶ διῆλθεν διὰ τῆς πόλεως ἐπάνω τῶν
ἀπεκταμμένων

52 καὶ διέβησαν τὸν Ιορδάνην εἰς τὸ πεδίον τὸ μέγα κατὰ πρόσωπον Βαιθσαν

53 καὶ ἦν Ιουδας ἐπισυνάγων τοὺς ἐσχατίζοντας καὶ παρακαλῶν τὸν λαὸν
κατὰ πᾶσαν τὴν ὁδόν ἕως ἦλθεν εἰς γῆν Ιουδα

54 καὶ ἀνέβησαν εἰς ὄρος Σιων ἐν εὐφροσύνῃ καὶ χαρᾷ καὶ προσήγαγον
ὁλοκαυτώματα ὅτι οὐκ ἔπεσεν ἐξ αὐτῶν οὐθεὶς ἕως τοῦ ἐπιστρέψαι ἐν εἰρήνῃ

55 καὶ ἐν ταῖς ἡμέραις ἐν αἷς ἦν Ιουδας καὶ Ιωναθαν ἐν γῇ Γαλααδ καὶ
Σιμων ὁ ἀδελφὸς αὐτοῦ ἐν τῇ Γαλιλαίᾳ κατὰ πρόσωπον Πτολεμαίδος

56 ἤκουσεν Ιωσηφ ὁ τοῦ Ζαχαριου καὶ Αζαριας ἄρχοντες τῆς δυνάμεως τῶν
ἀνδραγαθιῶν καὶ τοῦ πολέμου οἷα ἐποίησαν

57 καὶ εἶπον ποιήσωμεν καὶ αὐτοὶ ἑαυτοῖς ὄνομα καὶ πορευθῶμεν πολεμῆσαι
πρὸς τὰ ἔθνη τὰ κύκλῳ ἡμῶν

58 καὶ παρήγγειλεν τοῖς ἀπὸ τῆς δυνάμεως τῆς μετ᾽ αὐτῶν καὶ ἐπορεύθησαν
ἐπὶ Ιάμνειαν

59 καὶ ἐξῆλθεν Γοργίας ἐκ τῆς πόλεως καὶ οἱ ἄνδρες αὐτοῦ εἰς συνάντησιν
αὐτοῖς εἰς πόλεμον

60 καὶ ἐτροπώθη Ιωσηπος καὶ Αζαριας καὶ ἐδιώχθησαν ἕως τῶν ὁρίων τῆς
Ιουδαίας καὶ ἔπεσον ἐν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ ἐκείνῃ ἐκ τοῦ λαοῦ Ισραηλ εἰς δισχιλίους
ἄνδρας

61 καὶ ἐγενήθη τροπὴ μεγάλη ἐν τῷ λαῷ ὅτι οὐκ ἤκουσαν Ιουδου καὶ τῶν
ἀδελφῶν αὐτοῦ οἰόμενοι ἀνδραγαθῆσαι

62 αὐτοὶ δὲ οὐκ ἦσαν ἐκ τοῦ σπέρματος τῶν ἀνδρῶν ἐκείνων οἷς ἐδόθη
σωτηρία Ισραηλ διὰ χειρὸς αὐτῶν

63 καὶ ὁ ἀνὴρ Ιουδας καὶ οἱ ἀδελφοὶ αὐτοῦ ἐδοξάσθησαν σφόδρα ἔναντι
παντὸς Ισραηλ καὶ τῶν ἐθνῶν πάντων οὗ ἠκούετο τὸ ὄνομα αὐτῶν

64 καὶ ἐπισυνήγοντο πρὸς αὐτοὺς εὐφημοῦντες

65 καὶ ἐξῆλθεν Ιουδας καὶ οἱ ἀδελφοὶ αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐπολέμουν τοὺς υἱοὺς Ησαυ
ἐν τῇ γῇ τῇ πρὸς νότον καὶ ἐπάταξεν τὴν Χεβρων καὶ τὰς θυγατέρας αὐτῆς
καὶ καθεῖλεν τὰ ὀχυρώματα αὐτῆς καὶ τοὺς πύργους αὐτῆς ἐνεπύρισεν
κυκλόθεν

66 καὶ ἀπῆρεν τοῦ πορευθῆναι εἰς γῆν ἀλλοφύλων καὶ διεπορεύετο τὴν
Μαρισαν

67 ἐν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ ἐκείνῃ ἔπεσον ἱερεῖς ἐν πολέμῳ βουλόμενοι ἀνδραγαθῆσαι ἐν
τῷ αὐτοὺς ἐξελθεῖν εἰς πόλεμον ἀβουλεύτως

68 καὶ ἐξέκλινεν Ιουδας εἰς Ἄζωτον γῆν ἀλλοφύλων καὶ καθεῖλεν τοὺς
βωμοὺς αὐτῶν καὶ τὰ γλυπτὰ τῶν θεῶν αὐτῶν κατέκαυσεν πυρὶ καὶ ἐσκύλευσεν
τὰ σκῦλα τῶν πόλεων καὶ ἐπέστρεψεν εἰς γῆν Ιουδα

[Vul](../vul/ma1005)

1 Et factum est, ut audierunt gentes in circuitu quia ædificatum est
altare et sanctuarium sicut prius, iratæ sunt valde:

2 et cogitabant tollere genus Jacob, qui erant inter eos, et cœperunt
occidere de populo, et persequi.

3 Et debellabat Judas filios Esau in Idumæa, et eos qui erant in
Acrabathane, quia circumsedebant Israëlitas: et percussit eos plaga
magna.

4 Et recordatus est malitiam filiorum Bean, qui erant populo in laqueum
et in scandalum, insidiantes ei in via.

5 Et conclusi sunt ab eo in turribus, et applicuit ad eos, et
anathematizavit eos, et incendit turres eorum igni cum omnibus qui in
eis erant.

6 Et transivit ad filios Ammon, et invenit manum fortem, et populum
copiosum, et Timotheum ducem ipsorum:

7 et commisit cum eis prælia multa, et contriti sunt in conspectu eorum,
et percussit eos:

8 et cepit Gazer civitatem et filias ejus, et reversus est in Judæam.

9 Et congregatæ sunt gentes quæ sunt in Galaad adversus Israëlitas, qui
erant in finibus eorum, ut tollerent eos: et fugerunt in Datheman
munitionem.

10 Et miserunt litteras ad Judam et fratres ejus, dicentes: Congregatæ
sunt adversum nos gentes per circuitum, ut nos auferant,

11 et parant venire, et occupare munitionem, in quam confugimus: et
Timotheus est dux exercitus eorum.

12 Nunc ergo veni, et eripe nos de manibus eorum, quia cecidit multitudo
de nobis.

13 Et omnes fratres nostri, qui erant in locis Tubin, interfecti sunt:
et captivas duxerunt uxores eorum, et natos, et spolia, et peremerunt
illic fere mille viros.

14 Et adhuc epistolæ legebantur, et ecce alii nuntii venerunt de Galilæa
conscissis tunicis, nuntiantes secundum verba hæc:

15 dicentes convenisse adversum se a Ptolemaida, et Tyro, et Sidone: et
repleta est omnis Galilæa alienigenis, ut nos consumant.

16 Ut audivit autem Judas et populus sermones istos, convenit ecclesia
magna cogitare quid facerent fratribus suis, qui in tribulatione erant,
et expugnabantur ab eis.  

17 Dixitque Judas Simoni fratri suo: Elige tibi viros, et vade, et
libera fratres tuos in Galilæa: ego autem et frater meus Jonathas ibimus
in Galaaditim.

18 Et reliquit Josephum filium Zachariæ, et Azariam, duces populi, cum
residuo exercitu in Judæa ad custodiam:

19 et præcepit illis, dicens: Præestote populo huic: et nolite bellum
committere adversum gentes, donec revertamur.

20 Et partiti sunt Simoni viri tria millia, ut iret in Galilæam: Judæ
autem octo millia in Galaaditim.

21 Et abiit Simon in Galilæam, et commisit prælia multa cum gentibus: et
contritæ sunt gentes a facie ejus, et persecutus est eos usque ad portam

22 Ptolemaidis: et ceciderunt de gentibus fere tria millia virorum. Et
accepit spolia eorum,

23 et assumpsit eos qui erant in Galilæa et in Arbatis, cum uxoribus, et
natis, et omnibus quæ erant illis, et adduxit in Judæam cum lætitia
magna.  

24 Et Judas Machabæus, et Jonathas frater ejus, transierunt Jordanem, et
abierunt viam trium dierum per desertum.

25 Et occurrerunt eis Nabuthæi, et susceperunt eos pacifice, et
narraverunt eis omnia quæ acciderant fratribus eorum in Galaaditide,

26 et quia multi ex eis comprehensi sunt in Barasa, et Bosor, et in
Alimis, et in Casphor, et Mageth, et Carnaim: hæ omnes civitates munitæ
et magnæ.

27 Sed et in ceteris civitatibus Galaaditidis tenentur comprehensi, et
in crastinum constituerunt admovere exercitum civitatibus his, et
comprehendere, et tollere eos in una die.

28 Et convertit Judas et exercitus ejus viam in desertum Bosor repente,
et occupavit civitatem: et occidit omnem masculum in ore gladii, et
accepit omnia spolia eorum, et succendit eam igni.

29 Et surrexerunt inde nocte, et ibant usque ad munitionem.

30 Et factum est diluculo, cum elevassent oculos suos, ecce populus
multus, cujus non erat numerus, portantes scalas et machinas ut
comprehenderent munitionem, et expugnarent eos.

31 Et vidit Judas quia cœpit bellum, et clamor belli ascendit ad cælum
sicut tuba, et clamor magnus de civitate:

32 et dixit exercitui suo: Pugnate hodie pro fratribus vestris.

33 Et venit tribus ordinibus post eos, et exclamaverunt tubis, et
clamaverunt in oratione.

34 Et cognoverunt castra Timothei quia Machabæus est, et refugerunt a
facie ejus: et percusserunt eos plaga magna. Et ceciderunt ex eis in die
illa fere octo millia virorum.

35 Et divertit Judas in Maspha, et expugnavit, et cepit eam: et occidit
omnem masculum ejus, et sumpsit spolia ejus, et succendit eam igni.

36 Inde perrexit, et cepit Casbon, et Mageth, et Bosor, et reliquas
civitates Galaaditidis.

37 Post hæc autem verba congregavit Timotheus exercitum alium, et castra
posuit contra Raphon trans torrentem.

38 Et misit Judas speculari exercitum: et renuntiaverunt ei, dicentes:
Quia convenerunt ad eum omnes gentes quæ in circuitu nostro sunt,
exercitus multus nimis:

39 et Arabas conduxerunt in auxilium sibi, et castra posuerunt trans
torrentem, parati ad te venire in prælium. Et abiit Judas obviam illis.

40 Et ait Timotheus principibus exercitus sui: Cum appropinquaverit
Judas, et exercitus ejus, ad torrentem aquæ: si transierit ad nos prior,
non poterimus sustinere eum, quia potens poterit adversum nos;

41 si vero timuerit transire, et posuerit castra extra flumen,
transfretamus ad eos, et poterimus adversus illum.

42 Ut autem appropinquavit Judas ad torrentem aquæ, statuit scribas
populi secus torrentem, et mandavit eis, dicens: Neminem hominem
reliqueritis, sed veniant omnes in prælium.

43 Et transfretavit ad illos prior, et omnis populus post eum, et
contritæ sunt omnes gentes a facie eorum, et projecerunt arma sua, et
fugerunt ad fanum, quod erat in Carnaim.

44 Et occupavit ipsam civitatem, et fanum succendit igni cum omnibus qui
erant in ipso: et oppressa est Carnaim, et non potuit sustinere contra
faciem Judæ.  

45 Et congregavit Judas universos Israëlitas, qui erant in Galaaditide,
a minimo usque ad maximum, et uxores eorum, et natos, et exercitum
magnum valde, ut venirent in terram Juda.

46 Et venerunt usque Ephron: et hæc civitas magna in ingressu posita,
munita valde, et non erat declinare ab ea dextera vel sinistra, sed per
mediam iter erat.

47 Et incluserunt se qui erant in civitate, et obstruxerunt portas
lapidibus: et misit ad eos Judas verbis pacificis,

48 dicens: Transeamus per terram vestram, ut eamus in terram nostram: et
nemo vobis nocebit, tantum pedibus transibimus. Et nolebant eis aperire.

49 Et præcepit Judas prædicare in castris, ut applicarent unusquisque in
quo erat loco:

50 et applicuerunt se viri virtutis, et oppugnavit civitatem illam tota
die et tota nocte, et tradita est civitas in manu ejus:

51 et peremerunt omnem masculum in ore gladii, et eradicavit eam, et
accepit spolia ejus: et transivit per totam civitatem super interfectos.

52 Et transgressi sunt Jordanem in campo magno, contra faciem Bethsan.

53 Et erat Judas congregans extremos, et exhortabatur populum per totam
viam, donec venirent in terram Juda:

54 et ascenderunt in montem Sion cum lætitia, et gaudio, et obtulerunt
holocausta, quod nemo ex eis cecidisset donec reverterentur in pace.  

55 Et in diebus quibus erat Judas et Jonathas in terra Galaad, et Simon
frater ejus in Galilæa contra faciem Ptolemaidis,

56 audivit Josephus Zachariæ filius, et Azarias princeps virtutis, res
bene gestas, et prælia quæ facta sunt,

57 et dixit: Faciamus et ipsi nobis nomen, et eamus pugnare adversus
gentes quæ in circuitu nostro sunt.

58 Et præcepit his qui erant in exercitu suo, et abierunt Jamniam.

59 Et exivit Gorgias de civitate, et viri ejus obviam illis in pugnam.

60 Et fugati sunt Josephus et Azarias usque in fines Judææ: et
ceciderunt illo die de populo Israël ad duo millia viri, et facta est
fuga magna in populo:

61 quia non audierunt Judam, et fratres ejus, existimantes fortiter se
facturos.

62 Ipsi autem non erant de semine virorum illorum, per quos salus facta
est in Israël.

63 Et viri Juda magnificati sunt valde in conspectu omnis Israël, et
gentium omnium ubi audiebatur nomen eorum.

64 Et convenerunt ad eos fausta acclamantes.  

65 Et exivit Judas et fratres ejus, et expugnabant filios Esau in terra
quæ ad austrum est, et percussit Chebron et filias ejus: et muros ejus,
et turres succendit igni in circuitu.

66 Et movit castra ut iret in terram alienigenarum, et perambulabat
Samariam.

67 In die illa ceciderunt sacerdotes in bello, dum volunt fortiter
facere, dum sine consilio exeunt in prælium.

68 Et declinavit Judas in Azotum in terram alienigenarum, et diruit aras
eorum, et sculptilia deorum ipsorum succendit igni: et cepit spolia
civitatum, et reversus est in terram Juda.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Macabees 6](ma1006)
