[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[1 Macabees Index](ma1.md)  
  [Previous](ma1015)  [Next](ma2001.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1 Macabees 16

[Apo](../apo/ma1016.md)

1 Then came up John from Gazera, and told Simon his father what
Cendebeus had done.

2 Wherefore Simon called his two eldest sons, Judas and John, and said
unto them, I, and my brethren, and my father's house, have ever from my
youth unto this day fought against the enemies of Israel; and things
have prospered so well in our hands, that we have delivered Israel
oftentimes.

3 But now I am old, and ye, by God's mercy, are of a sufficient age: be
ye instead of me and my brother, and go and fight for our nation, and
the help from heaven be with you.

4 So he chose out of the country twenty thousand men of war with
horsemen, who went out against Cendebeus, and rested that night at
Modin.

5 And when as they rose in the morning, and went into the plain, behold,
a mighty great host both of footmen and horsemen came against them:
howbeit there was a water brook betwixt them.

6 So he and his people pitched over against them: and when he saw that
the people were afraid to go over the water brook, he went first over
himself, and then the men seeing him passed through after him.

7 That done, he divided his men, and set the horsemen in the midst of
the footmen: for the enemies' horsemen were very many.

8 Then sounded they with the holy trumpets: whereupon Cendebeus and his
host were put to flight, so that many of them were slain, and the
remnant gat them to the strong hold.

9 At that time was Judas John's brother wounded; but John still followed
after them, until he came to Cedron, which Cendebeus had built.

10 So they fled even unto the towers in the fields of Azotus; wherefore
he burned it with fire: so that there were slain of them about two
thousand men. Afterward he returned into the land of Judea in peace.

11 Moreover in the plain of Jericho was Ptolemeus the son of Abubus made
captain, and he had abundance of silver and gold:

12 For he was the high priest's son in law.

13 Wherefore his heart being lifted up, he thought to get the country to
himself, and thereupon consulted deceitfully against Simon and his sons
to destroy them.

14 Now Simon was visiting the cities that were in the country, and
taking care for the good ordering of them; at which time he came down
himself to Jericho with his sons, Mattathias and Judas, in the hundred
threescore and seventeenth year, in the eleventh month, called Sabat:

15 Where the son of Abubus receiving them deceitfully into a little
hold, called Docus, which he had built, made them a great banquet:
howbeit he had hid men there.

16 So when Simon and his sons had drunk largely, Ptolemee and his men
rose up, and took their weapons, and came upon Simon into the banqueting
place, and slew him, and his two sons, and certain of his servants.

17 In which doing he committed a great treachery, and recompensed evil
for good.

18 Then Ptolemee wrote these things, and sent to the king, that he
should send him an host to aid him, and he would deliver him the country
and cities.

19 He sent others also to Gazera to kill John: and unto the tribunes he
sent letters to come unto him, that he might give them silver, and gold,
and rewards.

20 And others he sent to take Jerusalem, and the mountain of the temple.

21 Now one had run afore to Gazera and told John that his father and
brethren were slain, and, quoth he, Ptolemee hath sent to slay thee
also.

22 Hereof when he heard, he was sore astonished: so he laid hands on
them that were come to destroy him, and slew them; for he knew that they
sought to make him away.

23 As concerning the rest of the acts of John, and his wars, and worthy
deeds which he did, and the building of the walls which he made, and his
doings,

24 Behold, these are written in the chronicles of his priesthood, from
the time he was made high priest after his father.

[Sep](../sep/ma1016.md)

1 καὶ ἀνέβη Ιωαννης ἐκ Γαζαρων καὶ ἀπήγγειλεν Σιμωνι τῷ πατρὶ αὐτοῦ ἃ
συνετέλεσεν Κενδεβαῖος

2 καὶ ἐκάλεσεν Σιμων τοὺς δύο υἱοὺς αὐτοῦ τοὺς πρεσβυτέρους Ιουδαν καὶ
Ιωαννην καὶ εἶπεν αὐτοῖς ἐγὼ καὶ οἱ ἀδελφοί μου καὶ ὁ οἶκος τοῦ πατρός
μου ἐπολεμήσαμεν τοὺς πολέμους Ισραηλ ἀπὸ νεότητος ἕως τῆς σήμερον
ἡμέρας καὶ εὐοδώθη ἐν ταῖς χερσὶν ἡμῶν ῥύσασθαι τὸν Ισραηλ πλεονάκις

3 νυνὶ δὲ γεγήρακα καὶ ὑμεῖς δὲ ἐν τῷ ἐλέει ἱκανοί ἐστε ἐν τοῖς ἔτεσιν
γίνεσθε ἀντ᾽ ἐμοῦ καὶ τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ μου καὶ ἐξελθόντες ὑπερμαχεῖτε ὑπὲρ
τοῦ ἔθνους ἡμῶν ἡ δὲ ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ βοήθεια ἔστω μεθ᾽ ὑμῶν

4 καὶ ἐπέλεξεν ἐκ τῆς χώρας εἴκοσι χιλιάδας ἀνδρῶν πολεμιστῶν καὶ ἱππεῖς
καὶ ἐπορεύθησαν ἐπὶ τὸν Κενδεβαῖον καὶ ἐκοιμήθησαν ἐν Μωδεϊν

5 καὶ ἀναστάντες τὸ πρωὶ ἐπορεύθησαν εἰς τὸ πεδίον καὶ ἰδοὺ δύναμις
πολλὴ εἰς συνάντησιν αὐτοῖς πεζικὴ καὶ ἱππεῖς καὶ χειμάρρους ἦν ἀνὰ
μέσον αὐτῶν

6 καὶ παρενέβαλε κατὰ πρόσωπον αὐτῶν αὐτὸς καὶ ὁ λαὸς αὐτοῦ καὶ εἶδεν
τὸν λαὸν δειλούμενον διαπερᾶσαι τὸν χειμάρρουν καὶ διεπέρασεν πρῶτος καὶ
εἶδον αὐτὸν οἱ ἄνδρες καὶ διεπέρασαν κατόπισθεν αὐτοῦ

7 καὶ διεῖλεν τὸν λαὸν καὶ τοὺς ἱππεῖς ἐν μέσῳ τῶν πεζῶν ἦν δὲ ἵππος τῶν
ὑπεναντίων πολλὴ σφόδρα

8 καὶ ἐσάλπισαν ταῖς σάλπιγξιν καὶ ἐτροπώθη Κενδεβαῖος καὶ ἡ παρεμβολὴ
αὐτοῦ καὶ ἔπεσον ἐξ αὐτῶν τραυματίαι πολλοί οἱ δὲ καταλειφθέντες ἔφυγον
εἰς τὸ ὀχύρωμα

9 τότε ἐτραυματίσθη Ιουδας ὁ ἀδελφὸς Ιωαννου Ιωαννης δὲ κατεδίωξεν
αὐτούς ἕως ἦλθεν εἰς Κεδρων ἣν ᾠκοδόμησεν

10 καὶ ἔφυγον εἰς τοὺς πύργους τοὺς ἐν τοῖς ἀγροῖς Ἀζώτου καὶ ἐνεπύρισεν
αὐτὴν ἐν πυρί καὶ ἔπεσον ἐξ αὐτῶν εἰς ἄνδρας δισχιλίους καὶ ἀπέστρεψεν
εἰς τὴν Ιουδαίαν μετὰ εἰρήνης

11 καὶ Πτολεμαῖος ὁ τοῦ Ἀβούβου ἦν καθεσταμένος στρατηγὸς εἰς τὸ πεδίον
Ιεριχω καὶ ἔσχεν ἀργύριον καὶ χρυσίον πολύ

12 ἦν γὰρ γαμβρὸς τοῦ ἀρχιερέως

13 καὶ ὑψώθη ἡ καρδία αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐβουλήθη κατακρατῆσαι τῆς χώρας καὶ
ἐβουλεύετο δόλῳ κατὰ Σιμωνος καὶ τῶν υἱῶν αὐτοῦ ἆραι αὐτούς

14 Σιμων δὲ ἦν ἐφοδεύων τὰς πόλεις τὰς ἐν τῇ χώρᾳ καὶ φροντίζων τῆς
ἐπιμελείας αὐτῶν καὶ κατέβη εἰς Ιεριχω αὐτὸς καὶ Ματταθιας καὶ Ιουδας οἱ
υἱοὶ αὐτοῦ ἔτους ἑβδόμου καὶ ἑβδομηκοστοῦ καὶ ἑκατοστοῦ ἐν μηνὶ ἑνδεκάτῳ
οὗτος ὁ μὴν Σαβατ

15 καὶ ὑπεδέξατο αὐτοὺς ὁ τοῦ Ἀβούβου εἰς τὸ ὀχυρωμάτιον τὸ καλούμενον
Δωκ μετὰ δόλου ὃ ᾠκοδόμησεν καὶ ἐποίησεν αὐτοῖς πότον μέγαν καὶ
ἐνέκρυψεν ἐκεῖ ἄνδρας

16 καὶ ὅτε ἐμεθύσθη Σιμων καὶ οἱ υἱοὶ αὐτοῦ ἐξανέστη Πτολεμαῖος καὶ οἱ
παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ καὶ ἔλαβον τὰ ὅπλα αὐτῶν καὶ ἐπεισῆλθον τῷ Σιμωνι εἰς τὸ
συμπόσιον καὶ ἀπέκτειναν αὐτὸν καὶ τοὺς δύο υἱοὺς αὐτοῦ καί τινας τῶν
παιδαρίων αὐτοῦ

17 καὶ ἐποίησεν ἀθεσίαν μεγάλην καὶ ἀπέδωκεν κακὰ ἀντὶ ἀγαθῶν

18 καὶ ἔγραψεν ταῦτα Πτολεμαῖος καὶ ἀπέστειλεν τῷ βασιλεῖ ὅπως ἀποστείλῃ
αὐτῷ δυνάμεις εἰς βοήθειαν καὶ παραδῷ τὴν χώραν αὐτῶν καὶ τὰς πόλεις

19 καὶ ἀπέστειλεν ἑτέρους εἰς Γαζαρα ἆραι τὸν Ιωαννην καὶ τοῖς
χιλιάρχοις ἀπέστειλεν ἐπιστολὰς παραγενέσθαι πρὸς αὐτόν ὅπως δῷ αὐτοῖς
ἀργύριον καὶ χρυσίον καὶ δόματα

20 καὶ ἑτέρους ἀπέστειλεν καταλαβέσθαι τὴν Ιερουσαλημ καὶ τὸ ὄρος τοῦ
ἱεροῦ

21 καὶ προδραμών τις ἀπήγγειλεν Ιωαννη εἰς Γαζαρα ὅτι ἀπώλετο ὁ πατὴρ
αὐτοῦ καὶ οἱ ἀδελφοὶ αὐτοῦ καὶ ὅτι ἀπέσταλκεν καὶ σὲ ἀποκτεῖναι

22 καὶ ἀκούσας ἐξέστη σφόδρα καὶ συνέλαβεν τοὺς ἄνδρας τοὺς ἐλθόντας
ἀπολέσαι αὐτὸν καὶ ἀπέκτεινεν αὐτούς ἐπέγνω γὰρ ὅτι ἐζήτουν αὐτὸν
ἀπολέσαι

23 καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ τῶν λόγων Ιωαννου καὶ τῶν πολέμων αὐτοῦ καὶ τῶν
ἀνδραγαθιῶν αὐτοῦ ὧν ἠνδραγάθησεν καὶ τῆς οἰκοδομῆς τῶν τειχῶν ὧν
ᾠκοδόμησεν καὶ τῶν πράξεων αὐτοῦ

24 ἰδοὺ ταῦτα γέγραπται ἐπὶ βιβλίῳ ἡμερῶν ἀρχιερωσύνης αὐτοῦ ἀφ᾽ οὗ
ἐγενήθη ἀρχιερεὺς μετὰ τὸν πατέρα αὐτοῦ

[Vul](../vul/ma1016.md)

1 Et ascendit Joannes de Gazaris, et nuntiavit Simoni patri suo quæ
fecit Cendebæus in populo ipsorum.

2 Et vocavit Simon duos filios seniores, Judam et Joannem, et ait illis:
Ego, et fratres mei, et domus patris mei expugnavimus hostes Israël ab
adolescentia usque in hunc diem: et prosperatum est in manibus nostris
liberare Israël aliquoties.

3 Nunc autem senui: sed estote loco meo, et fratres mei, et egressi
pugnate pro gente nostra: auxilium vero de cælo vobiscum sit.

4 Et elegit de regione viginti millia virorum belligeratorum, et
equites: et profecti sunt ad Cendebæum, et dormierunt in Modin.

5 Et surrexerunt mane, et abierunt in campum: et ecce exercitus copiosus
in obviam illis peditum et equitum: et fluvius torrens erat inter medium
ipsorum.

6 Et admovit castra contra faciem eorum ipse et populus ejus, et vidit
populum trepidantem ad transfretandum torrentem: et transfretavit
primus, et viderunt eum viri, et transierunt post eum.

7 Et divisit populum et equites in medio peditum: erat autem equitatus
adversariorum copiosus nimis.

8 Et exclamaverunt sacris tubis, et in fugam conversus est Cendebæus et
castra ejus: et ceciderunt ex eis multi vulnerati: residui autem in
munitionem fugerunt.

9 Tunc vulneratus est Judas frater Joannis: Joannes autem insecutus est
eos, donec venit Cedronem, quam ædificavit:

10 et fugerunt usque ad turres, quæ erant in agris Azoti, et succendit
eas igni. Et ceciderunt ex illis duo millia virorum, et reversus est in
Judæam in pace.  

11 Et Ptolemæus filius Abobi constitutus erat dux in campo Jericho, et
habebat argentum et aurum multum:

12 erat enim gener summi sacerdotis.

13 Et exaltatum est cor ejus, et volebat obtinere regionem, et cogitabat
dolum adversus Simonem et filios ejus, ut tolleret eos.

14 Simon autem, perambulans civitates quæ erant in regione Judææ, et
sollicitudinem gerens earum, descendit in Jericho ipse, et Mathathias
filius ejus, et Judas, anno centesimo septuagesimo septimo, mense
undecimo: hic est mensis Sabath.

15 Et suscepit eos filius Abobi in munitiunculam, quæ vocatur Doch, cum
dolo, quam ædificavit: et fecit eis convivium magnum, et abscondit illic
viros.

16 Et cum inebriatus esset Simon et filii ejus, surrexit Ptolemæus cum
suis, et sumpserunt arma sua, et intraverunt in convivium: et occiderunt
eum, et duos filios ejus, et quosdam pueros ejus:

17 et fecit deceptionem magnam in Israël, et reddidit mala pro bonis.

18 Et scripsit hæc Ptolemæus, et misit regi ut mitteret ei exercitum in
auxilium, et traderet ei regionem, et civitates eorum, et tributa.

19 Et misit alios in Gazaram tollere Joannem: et tribunis misit
epistolas, ut venirent ad se, et daret eis argentum, et aurum, et dona.

20 Et alios misit occupare Jerusalem et montem templi.

21 Et præcurrens quidam, nuntiavit Joanni in Gazara quia periit pater
ejus et fratres ejus, et quia misit te quoque interfici.

22 Ut audivit autem, vehementer expavit: et comprehendit viros, qui
venerant perdere eum, et occidit eos: cognovit enim quia quærebant eum
perdere.  

23 Et cetera sermonum Joannis, et bellorum ejus, et bonarum virtutum,
quibus fortiter gessit, et ædificii murorum, quos exstruxit, et rerum
gestarum ejus:

24 ecce hæc scripta sunt in libro dierum sacerdotii ejus, ex quo factus
est princeps sacerdotum post patrem suum.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Macabees 1](ma2001.md)
