[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[1 Macabees Index](ma1.md)  
  [Previous](ma1001)  [Next](ma1003.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1 Macabees 2

[Apo](../apo/ma1002.md)

1 In those days arose Mattathias the son of John, the son of Simeon, a
priest of the sons of Joarib, from Jerusalem, and dwelt in Modin.

2 And he had five sons, Joannan, called Caddis:

3 Simon; called Thassi:

4 Judas, who was called Maccabeus:

5 Eleazar, called Avaran: and Jonathan, whose surname was Apphus.

6 And when he saw the blasphemies that were committed in Juda and
Jerusalem,

7 He said, Woe is me! wherefore was I born to see this misery of my
people, and of the holy city, and to dwell there, when it was delivered
into the hand of the enemy, and the sanctuary into the hand of
strangers?

8 Her temple is become as a man without glory.

9 Her glorious vessels are carried away into captivity, her infants are
slain in the streets, her young men with the sword of the enemy.

10 What nation hath not had a part in her kingdom and gotten of her
spoils?

11 All her ornaments are taken away; of a free woman she is become a
bondslave.

12 And, behold, our sanctuary, even our beauty and our glory, is laid
waste, and the Gentiles have profaned it.

13 To what end therefore shall we live any longer?

14 Then Mattathias and his sons rent their clothes, and put on
sackcloth, and mourned very sore.

15 In the mean while the king's officers, such as compelled the people
to revolt, came into the city Modin, to make them sacrifice.

16 And when many of Israel came unto them, Mattathias also and his sons
came together.

17 Then answered the king's officers, and said to Mattathias on this
wise, Thou art a ruler, and an honourable and great man in this city,
and strengthened with sons and brethren:

18 Now therefore come thou first, and fulfil the king's commandment,
like as all the heathen have done, yea, and the men of Juda also, and
such as remain at Jerusalem: so shalt thou and thy house be in the
number of the king's friends, and thou and thy children shall be
honoured with silver and gold, and many rewards.

19 Then Mattathias answered and spake with a loud voice, Though all the
nations that are under the king's dominion obey him, and fall away every
one from the religion of their fathers, and give consent to his
commandments:

20 Yet will I and my sons and my brethren walk in the covenant of our
fathers.

21 God forbid that we should forsake the law and the ordinances.

22 We will not hearken to the king's words, to go from our religion,
either on the right hand, or the left.

23 Now when he had left speaking these words, there came one of the Jews
in the sight of all to sacrifice on the altar which was at Modin,
according to the king's commandment.

24 Which thing when Mattathias saw, he was inflamed with zeal, and his
reins trembled, neither could he forbear to shew his anger according to
judgment: wherefore he ran, and slew him upon the altar.

25 Also the king's commissioner, who compelled men to sacrifice, he
killed at that time, and the altar he pulled down.

26 Thus dealt he zealously for the law of God like as Phinees did unto
Zambri the son of Salom.

27 And Mattathias cried throughout the city with a loud voice, saying,
Whosoever is zealous of the law, and maintaineth the covenant, let him
follow me.

28 So he and his sons fled into the mountains, and left all that ever
they had in the city.

29 Then many that sought after justice and judgment went down into the
wilderness, to dwell there:

30 Both they, and their children, and their wives; and their cattle;
because afflictions increased sore upon them.

31 Now when it was told the king's servants, and the host that was at
Jerusalem, in the city of David, that certain men, who had broken the
king's commandment, were gone down into the secret places in the
wilderness,

32 They pursued after them a great number, and having overtaken them,
they camped against them, and made war against them on the sabbath day.

33 And they said unto them, Let that which ye have done hitherto
suffice; come forth, and do according to the commandment of the king,
and ye shall live.

34 But they said, We will not come forth, neither will we do the king's
commandment, to profane the sabbath day.

35 So then they gave them the battle with all speed.

36 Howbeit they answered them not, neither cast they a stone at them,
nor stopped the places where they lay hid;

37 But said, Let us die all in our innocency: heaven and earth will
testify for us, that ye put us to death wrongfully.

38 So they rose up against them in battle on the sabbath, and they slew
them, with their wives and children and their cattle, to the number of a
thousand people.

39 Now when Mattathias and his friends understood hereof, they mourned
for them right sore.

40 And one of them said to another, If we all do as our brethren have
done, and fight not for our lives and laws against the heathen, they
will now quickly root us out of the earth.

41 At that time therefore they decreed, saying, Whosoever shall come to
make battle with us on the sabbath day, we will fight against him;
neither will we die all, as our brethren that were murdered im the
secret places.

42 Then came there unto him a company of Assideans who were mighty men
of Israel, even all such as were voluntarily devoted unto the law.

43 Also all they that fled for persecution joined themselves unto them,
and were a stay unto them.

44 So they joined their forces, and smote sinful men in their anger, and
wicked men in their wrath: but the rest fled to the heathen for succour.

45 Then Mattathias and his friends went round about, and pulled down the
altars:

46 And what children soever they found within the coast of Israel
uncircumcised, those they circumcised valiantly.

47 They pursued also after the proud men, and the work prospered in
their hand.

48 So they recovered the law out of the hand of the Gentiles, and out of
the hand of kings, neither suffered they the sinner to triumph.

49 Now when the time drew near that Mattathias should die, he said unto
his sons, Now hath pride and rebuke gotten strength, and the time of
destruction, and the wrath of indignation:

50 Now therefore, my sons, be ye zealous for the law, and give your
lives for the covenant of your fathers.

51 Call to remembrance what acts our fathers did in their time; so shall
ye receive great honour and an everlasting name.

52 Was not Abraham found faithful in temptation, and it was imputed unto
him for righteousness?

53 Joseph in the time of his distress kept the commandment and was made
lord of Egypt.

54 Phinees our father in being zealous and fervent obtained the covenant
of an everlasting priesthood.

55 Jesus for fulfilling the word was made a judge in Israel.

56 Caleb for bearing witness before the congregation received the
heritage of the land.

57 David for being merciful possessed the throne of an everlasting
kingdom.

58 Elias for being zealous and fervent for the law was taken up into
heaven.

59 Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, by believing were saved out of the
flame.

60 Daniel for his innocency was delivered from the mouth of lions.

61 And thus consider ye throughout all ages, that none that put their
trust in him shall be overcome.

62 Fear not then the words of a sinful man: for his glory shall be dung
and worms.

63 To day he shall be lifted up and to morrow he shall not be found,
because he is returned into his dust, and his thought is come to
nothing.

64 Wherefore, ye my sons, be valiant and shew yourselves men in the
behalf of the law; for by it shall ye obtain glory.

65 And behold, I know that your brother Simon is a man of counsel, give
ear unto him alway: he shall be a father unto you.

66 As for Judas Maccabeus, he hath been mighty and strong, even from his
youth up: let him be your captain, and fight the battle of the people.

67 Take also unto you all those that observe the law, and avenge ye the
wrong of your people.

68 Recompense fully the heathen, and take heed to the commandments of
the law.

69 So he blessed them, and was gathered to his fathers.

70 And he died in the hundred forty and sixth year, and his sons buried
him in the sepulchres of his fathers at Modin, and all Israel made great
lamentation for him.

[Sep](../sep/ma1002.md)

1 ἐν ταῖς ἡμέραις ἐκείναις ἀνέστη Ματταθιας υἱὸς Ιωαννου τοῦ Συμεων
ἱερεὺς τῶν υἱῶν Ιωαριβ ἀπὸ Ιερουσαλημ καὶ ἐκάθισεν ἐν Μωδεϊν

2 καὶ αὐτῷ υἱοὶ πέντε Ιωαννης ὁ ἐπικαλούμενος Γαδδι

3 Σιμων ὁ καλούμενος Θασσι

4 Ιουδας ὁ καλούμενος Μακκαβαῖος

5 Ελεαζαρ ὁ καλούμενος Αυαραν Ιωναθης ὁ καλούμενος Απφους

6 καὶ εἶδεν τὰς βλασφημίας τὰς γινομένας ἐν Ιουδα καὶ ἐν Ιερουσαλημ

7 καὶ εἶπεν οἴμμοι ἵνα τί τοῦτο ἐγεννήθην ἰδεῖν τὸ σύντριμμα τοῦ λαοῦ
μου καὶ τὸ σύντριμμα τῆς ἁγίας πόλεως καὶ καθίσαι ἐκεῖ ἐν τῷ δοθῆναι
αὐτὴν ἐν χειρὶ ἐχθρῶν τὸ ἁγίασμα ἐν χειρὶ ἀλλοτρίων

8 ἐγένετο ὁ ναὸς αὐτῆς ὡς ἀνὴρ ἄδοξος

9 τὰ σκεύη τῆς δόξης αὐτῆς αἰχμάλωτα ἀπήχθη ἀπεκτάνθη τὰ νήπια αὐτῆς ἐν
ταῖς πλατείαις αὐτῆς οἱ νεανίσκοι αὐτῆς ἐν ῥομφαίᾳ ἐχθροῦ

10 ποῖον ἔθνος οὐκ ἐκληρονόμησεν βασίλεια καὶ οὐκ ἐκράτησεν τῶν σκύλων
αὐτῆς

11 πᾶς ὁ κόσμος αὐτῆς ἀφῃρέθη ἀντὶ ἐλευθέρας ἐγένετο εἰς δούλην

12 καὶ ἰδοὺ τὰ ἅγια ἡμῶν καὶ ἡ καλλονὴ ἡμῶν καὶ ἡ δόξα ἡμῶν ἠρημώθη καὶ
ἐβεβήλωσαν αὐτὰ τὰ ἔθνη

13 ἵνα τί ἡμῖν ἔτι ζωή

14 καὶ διέρρηξεν Ματταθιας καὶ οἱ υἱοὶ αὐτοῦ τὰ ἱμάτια αὐτῶν καὶ
περιεβάλοντο σάκκους καὶ ἐπένθησαν σφόδρα

15 καὶ ἦλθον οἱ παρὰ τοῦ βασιλέως οἱ καταναγκάζοντες τὴν ἀποστασίαν εἰς
Μωδεϊν τὴν πόλιν ἵνα θυσιάσωσιν

16 καὶ πολλοὶ ἀπὸ Ισραηλ πρὸς αὐτοὺς προσῆλθον καὶ Ματταθιας καὶ οἱ υἱοὶ
αὐτοῦ συνήχθησαν

17 καὶ ἀπεκρίθησαν οἱ παρὰ τοῦ βασιλέως καὶ εἶπον τῷ Ματταθια λέγοντες
ἄρχων καὶ ἔνδοξος καὶ μέγας εἶ ἐν τῇ πόλει ταύτῃ καὶ ἐστηρισμένος υἱοῖς
καὶ ἀδελφοῖς

18 νῦν πρόσελθε πρῶτος καὶ ποίησον τὸ πρόσταγμα τοῦ βασιλέως ὡς ἐποίησαν
πάντα τὰ ἔθνη καὶ οἱ ἄνδρες Ιουδα καὶ οἱ καταλειφθέντες ἐν Ιερουσαλημ
καὶ ἔσῃ σὺ καὶ οἱ υἱοί σου τῶν φίλων τοῦ βασιλέως καὶ σὺ καὶ οἱ υἱοί σου
δοξασθήσεσθε ἀργυρίῳ καὶ χρυσίῳ καὶ ἀποστολαῖς πολλαῖς

19 καὶ ἀπεκρίθη Ματταθιας καὶ εἶπεν φωνῇ μεγάλῃ εἰ πάντα τὰ ἔθνη τὰ ἐν
οἴκῳ τῆς βασιλείας τοῦ βασιλέως ἀκούουσιν αὐτοῦ ἀποστῆναι ἕκαστος ἀπὸ
λατρείας πατέρων αὐτοῦ καὶ ᾑρετίσαντο ἐν ταῖς ἐντολαῖς αὐτοῦ

20 κἀγὼ καὶ οἱ υἱοί μου καὶ οἱ ἀδελφοί μου πορευσόμεθα ἐν διαθήκῃ
πατέρων ἡμῶν

21 ἵλεως ἡμῖν καταλιπεῖν νόμον καὶ δικαιώματα

22 τῶν λόγων τοῦ βασιλέως οὐκ ἀκουσόμεθα παρελθεῖν τὴν λατρείαν ἡμῶν
δεξιὰν ἢ ἀριστεράν

23 καὶ ὡς ἐπαύσατο λαλῶν τοὺς λόγους τούτους προσῆλθεν ἀνὴρ Ιουδαῖος ἐν
ὀφθαλμοῖς πάντων θυσιάσαι ἐπὶ τοῦ βωμοῦ ἐν Μωδεϊν κατὰ τὸ πρόσταγμα τοῦ
βασιλέως

24 καὶ εἶδεν Ματταθιας καὶ ἐζήλωσεν καὶ ἐτρόμησαν οἱ νεφροὶ αὐτοῦ καὶ
ἀνήνεγκεν θυμὸν κατὰ τὸ κρίμα καὶ δραμὼν ἔσφαξεν αὐτὸν ἐπὶ τὸν βωμόν

25 καὶ τὸν ἄνδρα τοῦ βασιλέως τὸν ἀναγκάζοντα θύειν ἀπέκτεινεν ἐν τῷ
καιρῷ ἐκείνῳ καὶ τὸν βωμὸν καθεῖλεν

26 καὶ ἐζήλωσεν τῷ νόμῳ καθὼς ἐποίησεν Φινεες τῷ Ζαμβρι υἱῷ Σαλωμ

27 καὶ ἀνέκραξεν Ματταθιας ἐν τῇ πόλει φωνῇ μεγάλῃ λέγων πᾶς ὁ ζηλῶν τῷ
νόμῳ καὶ ἱστῶν διαθήκην ἐξελθέτω ὀπίσω μου

28 καὶ ἔφυγεν αὐτὸς καὶ οἱ υἱοὶ αὐτοῦ εἰς τὰ ὄρη καὶ ἐγκατέλιπον ὅσα
εἶχον ἐν τῇ πόλει

29 τότε κατέβησαν πολλοὶ ζητοῦντες δικαιοσύνην καὶ κρίμα εἰς τὴν ἔρημον
καθίσαι ἐκεῖ

30 αὐτοὶ καὶ οἱ υἱοὶ αὐτῶν καὶ αἱ γυναῖκες αὐτῶν καὶ τὰ κτήνη αὐτῶν ὅτι
ἐσκληρύνθη ἐπ᾽ αὐτοὺς τὰ κακά

31 καὶ ἀνηγγέλη τοῖς ἀνδράσιν τοῦ βασιλέως καὶ ταῖς δυνάμεσιν αἳ ἦσαν ἐν
Ιερουσαλημ πόλει Δαυιδ ὅτι κατέβησαν ἄνδρες οἵτινες διεσκέδασαν τὴν
ἐντολὴν τοῦ βασιλέως εἰς τοὺς κρύφους ἐν τῇ ἐρήμῳ

32 καὶ ἔδραμον ὀπίσω αὐτῶν πολλοὶ καὶ κατελάβοντο αὐτοὺς καὶ παρενέβαλον
ἐπ᾽ αὐτοὺς καὶ συνεστήσαντο πρὸς αὐτοὺς πόλεμον ἐν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ τῶν σαββάτων

33 καὶ εἶπον πρὸς αὐτούς ἕως τοῦ νῦν ἐξελθόντες ποιήσατε κατὰ τὸν λόγον
τοῦ βασιλέως καὶ ζήσεσθε

34 καὶ εἶπον οὐκ ἐξελευσόμεθα οὐδὲ ποιήσομεν τὸν λόγον τοῦ βασιλέως
βεβηλῶσαι τὴν ἡμέραν τῶν σαββάτων

35 καὶ ἐτάχυναν ἐπ᾽ αὐτοὺς πόλεμον

36 καὶ οὐκ ἀπεκρίθησαν αὐτοῖς οὐδὲ λίθον ἐνετίναξαν αὐτοῖς οὐδὲ
ἐνέφραξαν τοὺς κρύφους

37 λέγοντες ἀποθάνωμεν πάντες ἐν τῇ ἁπλότητι ἡμῶν μαρτυρεῖ ἐφ᾽ ἡμᾶς ὁ
οὐρανὸς καὶ ἡ γῆ ὅτι ἀκρίτως ἀπόλλυτε ἡμᾶς

38 καὶ ἀνέστησαν ἐπ᾽ αὐτοὺς ἐν πολέμῳ τοῖς σάββασιν καὶ ἀπέθανον αὐτοὶ
καὶ αἱ γυναῖκες αὐτῶν καὶ τὰ τέκνα αὐτῶν καὶ τὰ κτήνη αὐτῶν ἕως χιλίων
ψυχῶν ἀνθρώπων

39 καὶ ἔγνω Ματταθιας καὶ οἱ φίλοι αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐπένθησαν ἐπ᾽ αὐτοὺς σφόδρα

40 καὶ εἶπεν ἀνὴρ τῷ πλησίον αὐτοῦ ἐὰν πάντες ποιήσωμεν ὡς οἱ ἀδελφοὶ
ἡμῶν ἐποίησαν καὶ μὴ πολεμήσωμεν πρὸς τὰ ἔθνη ὑπὲρ τῆς ψυχῆς ἡμῶν καὶ
τῶν δικαιωμάτων ἡμῶν νῦν τάχιον ὀλεθρεύσουσιν ἡμᾶς ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς

41 καὶ ἐβουλεύσαντο τῇ ἡμέρᾳ ἐκείνῃ λέγοντες πᾶς ἄνθρωπος ὃς ἐὰν ἔλθῃ
ἐφ᾽ ἡμᾶς εἰς πόλεμον τῇ ἡμέρᾳ τῶν σαββάτων πολεμήσωμεν κατέναντι αὐτοῦ
καὶ οὐ μὴ ἀποθάνωμεν πάντες καθὼς ἀπέθανον οἱ ἀδελφοὶ ἡμῶν ἐν τοῖς
κρύφοις

42 τότε συνήχθησαν πρὸς αὐτοὺς συναγωγὴ Ασιδαίων ἰσχυροὶ δυνάμει ἀπὸ
Ισραηλ πᾶς ὁ ἑκουσιαζόμενος τῷ νόμῳ

43 καὶ πάντες οἱ φυγαδεύοντες ἀπὸ τῶν κακῶν προσετέθησαν αὐτοῖς καὶ
ἐγένοντο αὐτοῖς εἰς στήριγμα

44 καὶ συνεστήσαντο δύναμιν καὶ ἐπάταξαν ἁμαρτωλοὺς ἐν ὀργῇ αὐτῶν καὶ
ἄνδρας ἀνόμους ἐν θυμῷ αὐτῶν καὶ οἱ λοιποὶ ἔφυγον εἰς τὰ ἔθνη σωθῆναι

45 καὶ ἐκύκλωσεν Ματταθιας καὶ οἱ φίλοι αὐτοῦ καὶ καθεῖλον τοὺς βωμοὺς

46 καὶ περιέτεμον τὰ παιδάρια τὰ ἀπερίτμητα ὅσα εὗρον ἐν ὁρίοις Ισραηλ
ἐν ἰσχύι

47 καὶ ἐδίωξαν τοὺς υἱοὺς τῆς ὑπερηφανίας καὶ κατευοδώθη τὸ ἔργον ἐν
χειρὶ αὐτῶν

48 καὶ ἀντελάβοντο τοῦ νόμου ἐκ χειρὸς τῶν ἐθνῶν καὶ τῶν βασιλέων καὶ
οὐκ ἔδωκαν κέρας τῷ ἁμαρτωλῷ

49 καὶ ἤγγισαν αἱ ἡμέραι Ματταθιου ἀποθανεῖν καὶ εἶπεν τοῖς υἱοῖς αὐτοῦ
νῦν ἐστηρίσθη ὑπερηφανία καὶ ἐλεγμὸς καὶ καιρὸς καταστροφῆς καὶ ὀργὴ
θυμοῦ

50 νῦν τέκνα ζηλώσατε τῷ νόμῳ καὶ δότε τὰς ψυχὰς ὑμῶν ὑπὲρ διαθήκης
πατέρων ἡμῶν

51 καὶ μνήσθητε τὰ ἔργα τῶν πατέρων ἃ ἐποίησαν ἐν ταῖς γενεαῖς αὐτῶν καὶ
δέξασθε δόξαν μεγάλην καὶ ὄνομα αἰώνιον

52 Αβρααμ οὐχὶ ἐν πειρασμῷ εὑρέθη πιστός καὶ ἐλογίσθη αὐτῷ εἰς
δικαιοσύνην

53 Ιωσηφ ἐν καιρῷ στενοχωρίας αὐτοῦ ἐφύλαξεν ἐντολὴν καὶ ἐγένετο κύριος
Αἰγύπτου

54 Φινεες ὁ πατὴρ ἡμῶν ἐν τῷ ζηλῶσαι ζῆλον ἔλαβεν διαθήκην ἱερωσύνης
αἰωνίας

55 Ἰησοῦς ἐν τῷ πληρῶσαι λόγον ἐγένετο κριτὴς ἐν Ισραηλ

56 Χαλεβ ἐν τῷ μαρτύρασθαι ἐν τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ ἔλαβεν γῆς κληρονομίαν

57 Δαυιδ ἐν τῷ ἐλέει αὐτοῦ ἐκληρονόμησεν θρόνον βασιλείας εἰς αἰῶνας

58 Ηλιας ἐν τῷ ζηλῶσαι ζῆλον νόμου ἀνελήμφθη εἰς τὸν οὐρανόν

59 Ανανιας Αζαριας Μισαηλ πιστεύσαντες ἐσώθησαν ἐκ φλογός

60 Δανιηλ ἐν τῇ ἁπλότητι αὐτοῦ ἐρρύσθη ἐκ στόματος λεόντων

61 καὶ οὕτως ἐννοήθητε κατὰ γενεὰν καὶ γενεάν ὅτι πάντες οἱ ἐλπίζοντες
ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸν οὐκ ἀσθενήσουσιν

62 καὶ ἀπὸ λόγων ἀνδρὸς ἁμαρτωλοῦ μὴ φοβηθῆτε ὅτι ἡ δόξα αὐτοῦ εἰς
κόπρια καὶ εἰς σκώληκας

63 σήμερον ἐπαρθήσεται καὶ αὔριον οὐ μὴ εὑρεθῇ ὅτι ἐπέστρεψεν εἰς τὸν
χοῦν αὐτοῦ καὶ ὁ διαλογισμὸς αὐτοῦ ἀπολεῖται

64 τέκνα ἀνδρίζεσθε καὶ ἰσχύσατε ἐν τῷ νόμῳ ὅτι ἐν αὐτῷ δοξασθήσεσθε

65 καὶ ἰδοὺ Συμεων ὁ ἀδελφὸς ὑμῶν οἶδα ὅτι ἀνὴρ βουλῆς ἐστιν αὐτοῦ
ἀκούετε πάσας τὰς ἡμέρας αὐτὸς ἔσται ὑμῶν πατήρ

66 καὶ Ιουδας Μακκαβαῖος ἰσχυρὸς δυνάμει ἐκ νεότητος αὐτοῦ αὐτὸς ἔσται
ὑμῖν ἄρχων στρατιᾶς καὶ πολεμήσει πόλεμον λαῶν

67 καὶ ὑμεῖς προσάξετε πρὸς ὑμᾶς πάντας τοὺς ποιητὰς τοῦ νόμου καὶ
ἐκδικήσατε ἐκδίκησιν τοῦ λαοῦ ὑμῶν

68 ἀνταπόδοτε ἀνταπόδομα τοῖς ἔθνεσιν καὶ προσέχετε εἰς πρόσταγμα τοῦ
νόμου

69 καὶ εὐλόγησεν αὐτούς καὶ προσετέθη πρὸς τοὺς πατέρας αὐτοῦ

70 καὶ ἀπέθανεν ἐν τῷ ἕκτῳ καὶ τεσσαρακοστῷ καὶ ἑκατοστῷ ἔτει καὶ ἐτάφη
ἐν τάφοις πατέρων αὐτοῦ ἐν Μωδεϊν καὶ ἐκόψαντο αὐτὸν πᾶς Ισραηλ κοπετὸν
μέγαν

[Vul](../vul/ma1002.md)

1 In diebus illis surrexit Mathathias filius Joannis filii Simeonis,
sacerdos ex filiis Joarib, ab Jerusalem, et consedit in monte Modin:

2 et habebat filios quinque, Joannem, qui cognominabatur Gaddis:

3 et Simonem, qui cognominabatur Thasi:

4 et Judam, qui vocabatur Machabæus:

5 et Eleazarum, qui cognominabatur Abaron: et Jonathan, qui
cognominabatur Apphus:

6 hi viderunt mala, quæ fiebant in populo Juda, et in Jerusalem.

7 Et dixit Mathathias: Væ mihi! ut quid natus sum videre contritionem
populi mei, et contritionem civitatis sanctæ, et sedere illic, cum datur
in manibus inimicorum?

8 Sancta in manu extraneorum facta sunt: templum ejus sicut homo
ignobilis.

9 Vasa gloriæ ejus captiva abducta sunt: trucidati sunt senes ejus in
plateis, et juvenes ejus ceciderunt in gladio inimicorum.

10 Quæ gens non hæreditavit regnum ejus et non obtinuit spolia ejus?

11 Omnis compositio ejus ablata est. Quæ erat libera, facta est ancilla.

12 Et ecce sancta nostra, et pulchritudo nostra, et claritas nostra
desolata est, et coinquinaverunt ea gentes.

13 Quo ergo nobis adhuc vivere?

14 Et scidit vestimenta sua Mathathias, et filii ejus: et operuerunt se
ciliciis, et planxerunt valde.  

15 Et venerunt illuc qui missi erant a rege Antiocho, ut cogerent eos,
qui confugerant in civitatem Modin, immolare, et accendere thura, et a
lege Dei discedere.

16 Et multi de populo Israël consentientes accesserunt ad eos: sed
Mathathias et filii ejus constanter steterunt.

17 Et respondentes qui missi erant ab Antiocho, dixerunt Mathathiæ:
Princeps, et clarissimus et magnus es in hac civitate, et ornatus filiis
et fratribus:

18 ergo accede prior, et fac jussum regis, sicut fecerunt omnes gentes,
et viri Juda, et qui remanserunt in Jerusalem: et eris tu, et filii tui,
inter amicos regis, et amplificatus auro, et argento, et muneribus
multis.

19 Et respondit Mathathias, et dixit magna voce: Etsi omnes gentes regi
Antiocho obediunt, ut discedat unusquisque a servitute legis patrum
suorum, et consentiat mandatis ejus:

20 ego et filii mei, et fratres mei, obediemus legi patrum nostrorum:

21 propitius sit nobis Deus: non est nobis utile relinquere legem, et
justitias Dei:

22 non audiemus verba regis Antiochi, nec sacrificabimus transgredientes
legis nostræ mandata, ut eamus altera via.

23 Et ut cessavit loqui verba hæc, accessit quidam Judæus in omnium
oculis sacrificare idolis super aram in civitate Modin, secundum jussum
regis:

24 et vidit Mathathias, et doluit, et contremuerunt renes ejus, et
accensus est furor ejus secundum judicium legis, et insiliens trucidavit
eum super aram:

25 sed et virum, quem rex Antiochus miserat, qui cogebat immolare,
occidit in ipso tempore, et aram destruxit:

26 et zelatus est legem, sicut fecit Phinees Zamri filio Salomi.

27 Et exclamavit Mathathias voce magna in civitate, dicens: Omnis qui
zelum habet legis, statuens testamentum, exeat post me.

28 Et fugit ipse, et filii ejus in montes, et reliquerunt quæcumque
habebant in civitate.  

29 Tunc descenderunt multi quærentes judicium, et justitiam, in
desertum:

30 et sederunt ibi ipsi, et filii eorum, et mulieres eorum, et pecora
eorum: quoniam inundaverunt super eos mala.

31 Et renuntiatum est viris regis, et exercitui qui erat in Jerusalem
civitate David, quoniam discessissent viri quidam, qui dissipaverunt
mandatum regis, in loca occulta in deserto, et abiissent post illos
multi.

32 Et statim perrexerunt ad eos, et constituerunt adversus eos prælium
in die sabbatorum,

33 et dixerunt ad eos: Resistitis et nunc adhuc? exite, et facite
secundum verbum regis Antiochi, et vivetis.

34 Et dixerunt: Non exibimus, neque faciemus verbum regis, ut polluamus
diem sabbatorum.

35 Et concitaverunt adversus eos prælium.

36 Et non responderunt eis, nec lapidem miserunt in eos, nec
oppilaverunt loca occulta,

37 dicentes: Moriamur omnes in simplicitate nostra: et testes erunt
super nos cælum et terra, quod injuste perditis nos.

38 Et intulerunt illis bellum sabbatis: et mortui sunt ipsi, et uxores
eorum, et filii eorum, et pecora eorum usque ad mille animas hominum.

39 Et cognovit Mathathias et amici ejus, et luctum habuerunt super eos
valde.

40 Et dixit vir proximo suo: Si omnes fecerimus sicut fratres nostri
fecerunt, et non pugnaverimus adversus gentes pro animabus nostris et
justificationibus nostris, nunc citius disperdent nos a terra.

41 Et cogitaverunt in die illa, dicentes: Omnis homo, quicumque venerit
ad nos in bello die sabbatorum, pugnemus adversus eum: et non moriemur
omnes, sicut mortui sunt fratres nostri in occultis.  

42 Tunc congregata est ad eos synagoga Assidæorum fortis viribus ex
Israël, omnis voluntarius in lege:

43 et omnes, qui fugiebant a malis, additi sunt ad eos, et facti sunt
illis ad firmamentum.

44 Et collegerunt exercitum, et percusserunt peccatores in ira sua, et
viros iniquos in indignatione sua: et ceteri fugerunt ad nationes, ut
evaderent.

45 Et circuivit Mathathias et amici ejus, et destruxerunt aras:

46 et circumciderunt pueros incircumcisos quotquot invenerunt in finibus
Israël: et in fortitudine.

47 Et persecuti sunt filios superbiæ, et prosperatum est opus in manibus
eorum:

48 et obtinuerunt legem de manibus gentium, et de manibus regum, et non
dederant cornu peccatori.  

49 Et appropinquaverunt dies Mathathiæ moriendi, et dixit filiis suis:
Nunc confortata est superbia, et castigatio, et tempus eversionis, et
ira indignationis.

50 Nunc ergo, o filii, æmulatores estote legis, et date animas vestras
pro testamento patrum vestrorum,

51 et mementote operum patrum, quæ fecerunt in generationibus suis: et
accipietis gloriam magnam, et nomen æternum.

52 Abraham nonne in tentatione inventus est fidelis, et reputatum est ei
ad justitiam?

53 Joseph in tempore angustiæ suæ custodivit mandatum, et factus est
dominus Ægypti.

54 Phinees pater noster, zelando zelum Dei, accepit testamentum
sacerdotii æterni.

55 Jesus dum implevit verbum, factus est dux in Israël.

56 Caleb dum testificatur in ecclesia, accepit hæreditatem.

57 David in sua misericordia consecutus est sedem regni in sæcula.

58 Elias, dum zelat zelum legis, receptus est in cælum.

59 Ananias et Azarias et Misaël credentes, liberati sunt de flamma.

60 Daniel in sua simplicitate liberatus est de ore leonum.

61 Et ita cogitate per generationem et generationem: quia omnes qui
sperant in eum, non infirmantur.

62 Et a verbis viri peccatoris ne timueritis, quia gloria ejus stercus
et vermis est:

63 hodie extollitur, et cras non invenietur: quia conversus est in
terram suam, et cogitatio ejus periit.

64 Vos ergo filii, confortamini, et viriliter agite in lege: quia in
ipsa gloriosi eritis.

65 Et ecce Simon frater vester, scio quod vir consilii est: ipsum audite
semper, et ipse erit vobis pater.

66 Et Judas Machabæus, fortis viribus a juventute sua, sit vobis
princeps militiæ, et ipse aget bellum populi.

67 Et adducetis ad vos omnes factores legis: et vindicate vindictam
populi vestri.

68 Retribuite retributionem gentibus, et intendite in præceptum legis.  

69 Et benedixit eos, et appositus est ad patres suos.

70 Et defunctus est anno centesimo et quadragesimo sexto: et sepultus
est a filiis suis in sepulchris patrum suorum in Modin, et planxerunt
eum omnis Israël planctu magno.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Macabees 3](ma1003.md)
