[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[2 Macabees Index](ma2.md)  
  [Previous](ma2003)  [Next](ma2005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 2 Macabees 4

[Apo](../apo/ma2004.md)

1 This Simon now, of whom we spake afore, having been a betrayer of the
money, and of his country, slandered Onias, as if he ha terrified
Heliodorus, and been the worker of these evils.

2 Thus was he bold to call him a traitor, that had deserved well of the
city, and tendered his own nation, and was so zealous of the laws.

3 But when their hatred went so far, that by one of Simon's faction
murders were committed,

4 Onias seeing the danger of this contention, and that Apollonius, as
being the governor of Celosyria and Phenice, did rage, and increase
Simon's malice,

5 He went to the king, not to be an accuser of his countrymen, but
seeking the good of all, both publick and private:

6 For he saw that it was impossible that the state should continue
quiet, and Simon leave his folly, unless the king did look thereunto.

7 But after the death of Seleucus, when Antiochus, called Epiphanes,
took the kingdom, Jason the brother of Onias laboured underhand to be
high priest,

8 Promising unto the king by intercession three hundred and threescore
talents of silver, and of another revenue eighty talents:

9 Beside this, he promised to assign an hundred and fifty more, if he
might have licence to set him up a place for exercise, and for the
training up of youth in the fashions of the heathen, and to write them
of Jerusalem by the name of Antiochians.

10 Which when the king had granted, and he had gotten into his hand the
rule he forthwith brought his own nation to Greekish fashion.

11 And the royal privileges granted of special favour to the Jews by the
means of John the father of Eupolemus, who went ambassador to Rome for
amity and aid, he took away; and putting down the governments which were
according to the law, he brought up new customs against the law:

12 For he built gladly a place of exercise under the tower itself, and
brought the chief young men under his subjection, and made them wear a
hat.

13 Now such was the height of Greek fashions, and increase of heathenish
manners, through the exceeding profaneness of Jason, that ungodly
wretch, and no high priest;

14 That the priests had no courage to serve any more at the altar, but
despising the temple, and neglecting the sacrifices, hastened to be
partakers of the unlawful allowance in the place of exercise, after the
game of Discus called them forth;

15 Not setting by the honours of their fathers, but liking the glory of
the Grecians best of all.

16 By reason whereof sore calamity came upon them: for they had them to
be their enemies and avengers, whose custom they followed so earnestly,
and unto whom they desired to be like in all things.

17 For it is not a light thing to do wickedly against the laws of God:
but the time following shall declare these things.

18 Now when the game that was used every faith year was kept at Tyrus,
the king being present,

19 This ungracious Jason sent special messengers from Jerusalem, who
were Antiochians, to carry three hundred drachms of silver to the
sacrifice of Hercules, which even the bearers thereof thought fit not to
bestow upon the sacrifice, because it was not convenient, but to be
reserved for other charges.

20 This money then, in regard of the sender, was appointed to Hercules'
sacrifice; but because of the bearers thereof, it was employed to the
making of gallies.

21 Now when Apollonius the son of Menestheus was sent into Egypt for the
coronation of king Ptolemeus Philometor, Antiochus, understanding him
not to be well affected to his affairs, provided for his own safety:
whereupon he came to Joppa, and from thence to Jerusalem:

22 Where he was honourably received of Jason, and of the city, and was
brought in with torch alight, and with great shoutings: and so afterward
went with his host unto Phenice.

23 Three years afterward Jason sent Menelaus, the aforesaid Simon's
brother, to bear the money unto the king, and to put him in mind of
certain necessary matters.

24 But he being brought to the presence of the king, when he had
magnified him for the glorious appearance of his power, got the
priesthood to himself, offering more than Jason by three hundred talents
of silver.

25 So he came with the king's mandate, bringing nothing worthy the high
priesthood, but having the fury of a cruel tyrant, and the rage of a
savage beast.

26 Then Jason, who had undermined his own brother, being undermined by
another, was compelled to flee into the country of the Ammonites.

27 So Menelaus got the principality: but as for the money that he had
promised unto the king, he took no good order for it, albeit Sostratis
the ruler of the castle required it:

28 For unto him appertained the gathering of the customs. Wherefore they
were both called before the king.

29 Now Menelaus left his brother Lysimachus in his stead in the
priesthood; and Sostratus left Crates, who was governor of the Cyprians.

30 While those things were in doing, they of Tarsus and Mallos made
insurrection, because they were given to the king's concubine, called
Antiochus.

31 Then came the king in all haste to appease matters, leaving
Andronicus, a man in authority, for his deputy.

32 Now Menelaus, supposing that he had gotten a convenient time, stole
certain vessels of gold out of the temple, and gave some of them to
Andronicus, and some he sold into Tyrus and the cities round about.

33 Which when Onias knew of a surety, he reproved him, and withdrew
himself into a sanctuary at Daphne, that lieth by Antiochia.

34 Wherefore Menelaus, taking Andronicus apart, prayed, him to get Onias
into his hands; who being persuaded thereunto, and coming to Onias in
deceit, gave him his right hand with oaths; and though he were suspected
by him, yet persuaded he him to come forth of the sanctuary: whom
forthwith he shut up without regard of justice.

35 For the which cause not only the Jews, but many also of other
nations, took great indignation, and were much grieved for the unjust
murder of the man.

36 And when the king was come again from the places about Cilicia, the
Jews that were in the city, and certain of the Greeks that abhorred the
fact also, complained because Onias was slain without cause.

37 Therefore Antiochus was heartily sorry, and moved to pity, and wept,
because of the sober and modest behaviour of him that was dead.

38 And being kindled with anger, forthwith he took away Andronicus his
purple, and rent off his clothes, and leading him through the whole city
unto that very place, where he had committed impiety against Onias,
there slew he the cursed murderer. Thus the Lord rewarded him his
punishment, as he had deserved.

39 Now when many sacrileges had been committed in the city by Lysimachus
with the consent of Menelaus, and the fruit thereof was spread abroad,
the multitude gathered themselves together against Lysimachus, many
vessels of gold being already carried away.

40 Whereupon the common people rising, and being filled with rage,
Lysimachus armed about three thousand men, and began first to offer
violence; one Auranus being the leader, a man far gone in years, and no
less in folly.

41 They then seeing the attempt of Lysimachus, some of them caught
stones, some clubs, others taking handfuls of dust, that was next at
hand, cast them all together upon Lysimachus, and those that set upon
them.

42 Thus many of them they wounded, and some they struck to the ground,
and all of them they forced to flee: but as for the churchrobber
himself, him they killed beside the treasury.

43 Of these matters therefore there was an accusation laid against
Menelaus.

44 Now when the king came to Tyrus, three men that were sent from the
senate pleaded the cause before him:

45 But Menelaus, being now convicted, promised Ptolemee the son of
Dorymenes to give him much money, if he would pacify the king toward
him.

46 Whereupon Ptolemee taking the king aside into a certain gallery, as
it were to take the air, brought him to be of another mind:

47 Insomuch that he discharged Menelaus from the accusations, who
notwithstanding was cause of all the mischief: and those poor men, who,
if they had told their cause, yea, before the Scythians, should have
been judged innocent, them he condemned to death.

48 Thus they that followed the matter for the city, and for the people,
and for the holy vessels, did soon suffer unjust punishment.

49 Wherefore even they of Tyrus, moved with hatred of that wicked deed,
caused them to be honourably buried.

50 And so through the covetousness of them that were of power Menelaus
remained still in authority, increasing in malice, and being a great
traitor to the citizens.

[Sep](../sep/ma2004.md)

1 ὁ δὲ προειρημένος Σιμων ὁ τῶν χρημάτων καὶ τῆς πατρίδος ἐνδείκτης
γεγονὼς ἐκακολόγει τὸν Ονιαν ὡς αὐτός τε εἴη τὸν Ἡλιόδωρον ἐπισεσεικὼς
καὶ τῶν κακῶν δημιουργὸς καθεστηκώς

2 καὶ τὸν εὐεργέτην τῆς πόλεως καὶ τὸν κηδεμόνα τῶν ὁμοεθνῶν καὶ ζηλωτὴν
τῶν νόμων ἐπίβουλον τῶν πραγμάτων ἐτόλμα λέγειν

3 τῆς δὲ ἔχθρας ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον προβαινούσης ὥστε καὶ διά τινος τῶν ὑπὸ τοῦ
Σιμωνος δεδοκιμασμένων φόνους συντελεῖσθαι

4 συνορῶν ὁ Ονιας τὸ χαλεπὸν τῆς φιλονεικίας καὶ Ἀπολλώνιον Μενεσθέως
τὸν Κοίλης Συρίας καὶ Φοινίκης στρατηγὸν συναύξοντα τὴν κακίαν τοῦ
Σιμωνος

5 πρὸς τὸν βασιλέα διεκομίσθη οὐ γινόμενος τῶν πολιτῶν κατήγορος τὸ δὲ
σύμφορον κοινῇ καὶ κατ᾽ ἰδίαν παντὶ τῷ πλήθει σκοπῶν

6 ἑώρα γὰρ ἄνευ βασιλικῆς προνοίας ἀδύνατον εἶναι τυχεῖν εἰρήνης ἔτι τὰ
πράγματα καὶ τὸν Σιμωνα παῦλαν οὐ λημψόμενον τῆς ἀνοίας

7 μεταλλάξαντος δὲ τὸν βίον Σελεύκου καὶ παραλαβόντος τὴν βασιλείαν
Ἀντιόχου τοῦ προσαγορευθέντος Ἐπιφανοῦς ὑπενόθευσεν Ἰάσων ὁ ἀδελφὸς
Ονιου τὴν ἀρχιερωσύνην

8 ἐπαγγειλάμενος τῷ βασιλεῖ δι᾽ ἐντεύξεως ἀργυρίου τάλαντα ἑξήκοντα πρὸς
τοῖς τριακοσίοις καὶ προσόδου τινὸς ἄλλης τάλαντα ὀγδοήκοντα

9 πρὸς δὲ τούτοις ὑπισχνεῖτο καὶ ἕτερα διαγράφειν πεντήκοντα πρὸς τοῖς
ἑκατόν ἐὰν ἐπιχωρηθῇ διὰ τῆς ἐξουσίας αὐτοῦ γυμνάσιον καὶ ἐφηβεῖον αὐτῷ
συστήσασθαι καὶ τοὺς ἐν Ιεροσολύμοις Ἀντιοχεῖς ἀναγράψαι

10 ἐπινεύσαντος δὲ τοῦ βασιλέως καὶ τῆς ἀρχῆς κρατήσας εὐθέως πρὸς τὸν
Ἑλληνικὸν χαρακτῆρα τοὺς ὁμοφύλους μετέστησε

11 καὶ τὰ κείμενα τοῖς Ιουδαίοις φιλάνθρωπα βασιλικὰ διὰ Ιωάννου τοῦ
πατρὸς Εὐπολέμου τοῦ ποιησαμένου τὴν πρεσβείαν ὑπὲρ φιλίας καὶ συμμαχίας
πρὸς τοὺς Ῥωμαίους παρώσας καὶ τὰς μὲν νομίμους καταλύων πολιτείας
παρανόμους ἐθισμοὺς ἐκαίνιζεν

12 ἀσμένως γὰρ ὑπ᾽ αὐτὴν τὴν ἀκρόπολιν γυμνάσιον καθίδρυσεν καὶ τοὺς
κρατίστους τῶν ἐφήβων ὑποτάσσων ὑπὸ πέτασον ἤγαγεν

13 ἦν δ᾽ οὕτως ἀκμή τις Ἑλληνισμοῦ καὶ πρόσβασις ἀλλοφυλισμοῦ διὰ τὴν
τοῦ ἀσεβοῦς καὶ οὐκ ἀρχιερέως Ἰάσωνος ὑπερβάλλουσαν ἀναγνείαν

14 ὥστε μηκέτι περὶ τὰς τοῦ θυσιαστηρίου λειτουργίας προθύμους εἶναι
τοὺς ἱερεῖς ἀλλὰ τοῦ μὲν νεὼ καταφρονοῦντες καὶ τῶν θυσιῶν ἀμελοῦντες
ἔσπευδον μετέχειν τῆς ἐν παλαίστρῃ παρανόμου χορηγίας μετὰ τὴν τοῦ
δίσκου πρόσκλησιν

15 καὶ τὰς μὲν πατρῴους τιμὰς ἐν οὐδενὶ τιθέμενοι τὰς δὲ Ἑλληνικὰς δόξας
καλλίστας ἡγούμενοι

16 ὧν καὶ χάριν περιέσχεν αὐτοὺς χαλεπὴ περίστασις καὶ ὧν ἐζήλουν τὰς
ἀγωγὰς καὶ καθ᾽ ἅπαν ἤθελον ἐξομοιοῦσθαι τούτους πολεμίους καὶ τιμωρητὰς
ἔσχον

17 ἀσεβεῖν γὰρ εἰς τοὺς θείους νόμους οὐ ῥᾴδιον ἀλλὰ ταῦτα ὁ ἀκόλουθος
καιρὸς δηλώσει

18 ἀγομένου δὲ πενταετηρικοῦ ἀγῶνος ἐν Τύρῳ καὶ τοῦ βασιλέως παρόντος

19 ἀπέστειλεν Ἰάσων ὁ μιαρὸς θεωροὺς ὡς ἀπὸ Ιεροσολύμων Ἀντιοχεῖς ὄντας
παρακομίζοντας ἀργυρίου δραχμὰς τριακοσίας εἰς τὴν τοῦ Ἡρακλέους θυσίαν
ἃς καὶ ἠξίωσαν οἱ παρακομίσαντες μὴ χρῆσθαι εἰς θυσίαν διὰ τὸ μὴ
καθήκειν εἰς ἑτέραν δὲ καταθέσθαι δαπάνην

20 ἔπεσε μὲν οὖν ταῦτα διὰ μὲν τὸν ἀποστείλαντα εἰς τὴν τοῦ Ἡρακλέους
θυσίαν ἕνεκεν δὲ τῶν παρακομιζόντων εἰς τὰς τῶν τριηρέων κατασκευάς

21 ἀποσταλέντος δὲ εἰς Αἴγυπτον Ἀπολλωνίου τοῦ Μενεσθέως διὰ τὰ
πρωτοκλίσια τοῦ Φιλομήτορος βασιλέως μεταλαβὼν Ἀντίοχος ἀλλότριον αὐτὸν
τῶν αὐτοῦ γεγονέναι πραγμάτων τῆς καθ᾽ αὑτὸν ἀσφαλείας ἐφρόντιζεν ὅθεν
εἰς Ιοππην παραγενόμενος κατήντησεν εἰς Ιεροσόλυμα

22 μεγαλομερῶς δὲ ὑπὸ τοῦ Ἰάσωνος καὶ τῆς πόλεως ἀποδεχθεὶς μετὰ
δᾳδουχίας καὶ βοῶν εἰσεδέχθη εἶθ᾽ οὕτως εἰς τὴν Φοινίκην
κατεστρατοπέδευσεν

23 μετὰ δὲ τριετῆ χρόνον ἀπέστειλεν Ἰάσων Μενέλαον τὸν τοῦ
προσημαινομένου Σιμωνος ἀδελφὸν παρακομίζοντα τὰ χρήματα τῷ βασιλεῖ καὶ
περὶ πραγμάτων ἀναγκαίων ὑπομνηματισμοὺς τελέσοντα

24 ὁ δὲ συσταθεὶς τῷ βασιλεῖ καὶ δοξάσας αὐτὸν τῷ προσώπῳ τῆς ἐξουσίας
εἰς ἑαυτὸν κατήντησεν τὴν ἀρχιερωσύνην ὑπερβαλὼν τὸν Ἰάσωνα τάλαντα
ἀργυρίου τριακόσια

25 λαβὼν δὲ τὰς βασιλικὰς ἐντολὰς παρεγένετο τῆς μὲν ἀρχιερωσύνης οὐδὲν
ἄξιον φέρων θυμοὺς δὲ ὠμοῦ τυράννου καὶ θηρὸς βαρβάρου ὀργὰς ἔχων

26 καὶ ὁ μὲν Ἰάσων ὁ τὸν ἴδιον ἀδελφὸν ὑπονοθεύσας ὑπονοθευθεὶς ὑφ᾽
ἑτέρου φυγὰς εἰς τὴν Αμμανῖτιν χώραν συνήλαστο

27 ὁ δὲ Μενέλαος τῆς μὲν ἀρχῆς ἐκράτει τῶν δὲ ἐπηγγελμένων τῷ βασιλεῖ
χρημάτων οὐδὲν εὐτάκτει

28 ποιουμένου δὲ τὴν ἀπαίτησιν Σωστράτου τοῦ τῆς ἀκροπόλεως ἐπάρχου πρὸς
τοῦτον γὰρ ἦν ἡ τῶν διαφόρων πρᾶξις δι᾽ ἣν αἰτίαν οἱ δύο ὑπὸ τοῦ
βασιλέως προσεκλήθησαν

29 καὶ ὁ μὲν Μενέλαος ἀπέλιπεν τῆς ἀρχιερωσύνης διάδοχον Λυσίμαχον τὸν
ἑαυτοῦ ἀδελφόν Σώστρατος δὲ Κράτητα τὸν ἐπὶ τῶν Κυπρίων

30 τοιούτων δὲ συνεστηκότων συνέβη Ταρσεῖς καὶ Μαλλώτας στασιάζειν διὰ
τὸ Ἀντιοχίδι τῇ παλλακῇ τοῦ βασιλέως ἐν δωρεᾷ δεδόσθαι

31 θᾶττον οὖν ὁ βασιλεὺς ἧκεν καταστεῖλαι τὰ πράγματα καταλιπὼν τὸν
διαδεχόμενον Ἀνδρόνικον τῶν ἐν ἀξιώματι κειμένων

32 νομίσας δὲ ὁ Μενέλαος εἰληφέναι καιρὸν εὐφυῆ χρυσώματά τινα τῶν τοῦ
ἱεροῦ νοσφισάμενος ἐχαρίσατο τῷ Ἀνδρονίκῳ καὶ ἕτερα ἐτύγχανεν πεπρακὼς
εἴς τε Τύρον καὶ τὰς κύκλῳ πόλεις

33 ἃ καὶ σαφῶς ἐπεγνωκὼς ὁ Ονιας ἀπήλεγχεν ἀποκεχωρηκὼς εἰς ἄσυλον τόπον
ἐπὶ Δάφνης τῆς πρὸς Ἀντιόχειαν κειμένης

34 ὅθεν ὁ Μενέλαος λαβὼν ἰδίᾳ τὸν Ἀνδρόνικον παρεκάλει χειρώσασθαι τὸν
Ονιαν ὁ δὲ παραγενόμενος ἐπὶ τὸν Ονιαν καὶ πεισθεὶς ἐπὶ δόλῳ καὶ
δεξιασθεὶς μεθ᾽ ὅρκων δοὺς δεξιάν καίπερ ἐν ὑποψίᾳ κείμενος ἔπεισεν ἐκ
τοῦ ἀσύλου προελθεῖν ὃν καὶ παραχρῆμα παρέκλεισεν οὐκ αἰδεσθεὶς τὸ
δίκαιον

35 δι᾽ ἣν αἰτίαν οὐ μόνον Ιουδαῖοι πολλοὶ δὲ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἐθνῶν
ἐδείναζον καὶ ἐδυσφόρουν ἐπὶ τῷ τοῦ ἀνδρὸς ἀδίκῳ φόνῳ

36 τοῦ δὲ βασιλέως ἐπανελθόντος ἀπὸ τῶν κατὰ Κιλικίαν τόπων ἐνετύγχανον
οἱ κατὰ πόλιν Ιουδαῖοι συμμισοπονηρούντων καὶ τῶν Ἑλλήνων ὑπὲρ τοῦ παρὰ
λόγον τὸν Ονιαν ἀπεκτονῆσθαι

37 ψυχικῶς οὖν ὁ Ἀντίοχος ἐπιλυπηθεὶς καὶ τραπεὶς ἐπὶ ἔλεος καὶ δακρύσας
διὰ τὴν τοῦ μετηλλαχότος σωφροσύνην καὶ πολλὴν εὐταξίαν

38 καὶ πυρωθεὶς τοῖς θυμοῖς παραχρῆμα τὴν τοῦ Ἀνδρονίκου πορφύραν
περιελόμενος καὶ τοὺς χιτῶνας περιρρήξας περιαγαγὼν καθ᾽ ὅλην τὴν πόλιν
ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸν τὸν τόπον οὗπερ τὸν Ονιαν ἠσέβησεν ἐκεῖ τὸν μιαιφόνον
ἀπεκόσμησεν τοῦ κυρίου τὴν ἀξίαν αὐτῷ κόλασιν ἀποδόντος

39 γενομένων δὲ πολλῶν ἱεροσυλημάτων κατὰ τὴν πόλιν ὑπὸ τοῦ Λυσιμάχου
μετὰ τῆς τοῦ Μενελάου γνώμης καὶ διαδοθείσης ἔξω τῆς φήμης ἐπισυνήχθη τὸ
πλῆθος ἐπὶ τὸν Λυσίμαχον χρυσωμάτων ἤδη πολλῶν διενηνεγμένων

40 ἐπεγειρομένων δὲ τῶν ὄχλων καὶ ταῖς ὀργαῖς διεμπιπλαμένων καθοπλίσας
ὁ Λυσίμαχος πρὸς τρισχιλίους κατήρξατο χειρῶν ἀδίκων προηγησαμένου τινὸς
Αυρανου προβεβηκότος τὴν ἡλικίαν οὐδὲν δὲ ἧττον καὶ τὴν ἄνοιαν

41 συνιδόντες δὲ καὶ τὴν ἐπίθεσιν τοῦ Λυσιμάχου συναρπάσαντες οἱ μὲν
πέτρους οἱ δὲ ξύλων πάχη τινὲς δὲ ἐκ τῆς παρακειμένης σποδοῦ δρασσόμενοι
φύρδην ἐνετίνασσον εἰς τοὺς περὶ τὸν Λυσίμαχον

42 δι᾽ ἣν αἰτίαν πολλοὺς μὲν αὐτῶν τραυματίας ἐποίησαν τινὰς δὲ καὶ
κατέβαλον πάντας δὲ εἰς φυγὴν συνήλασαν αὐτὸν δὲ τὸν ἱερόσυλον παρὰ τὸ
γαζοφυλάκιον ἐχειρώσαντο

43 περὶ δὲ τούτων ἐνέστη κρίσις πρὸς τὸν Μενέλαον

44 καταντήσαντος δὲ τοῦ βασιλέως εἰς Τύρον ἐπ᾽ αὐτοῦ τὴν δικαιολογίαν
ἐποιήσαντο οἱ πεμφθέντες τρεῖς ἄνδρες ὑπὸ τῆς γερουσίας

45 ἤδη δὲ λελειμμένος ὁ Μενέλαος ἐπηγγείλατο χρήματα ἱκανὰ τῷ Πτολεμαίῳ
Δορυμένους πρὸς τὸ πεῖσαι τὸν βασιλέα

46 ὅθεν ἀπολαβὼν ὁ Πτολεμαῖος εἴς τι περίστυλον ὡς ἀναψύξοντα τὸν
βασιλέα μετέθηκεν

47 καὶ τὸν μὲν τῆς ὅλης κακίας αἴτιον Μενέλαον ἀπέλυσεν τῶν
κατηγορημένων τοῖς δὲ ταλαιπώροις οἵτινες εἰ καὶ ἐπὶ Σκυθῶν ἔλεγον
ἀπελύθησαν ἀκατάγνωστοι τούτοις θάνατον ἐπέκρινεν

48 ταχέως οὖν τὴν ἄδικον ζημίαν ὑπέσχον οἱ περὶ πόλεως καὶ δήμων καὶ τῶν
ἱερῶν σκευῶν προηγορήσαντες

49 δι᾽ ἣν αἰτίαν καὶ Τύριοι μισοπονηρήσαντες τὰ πρὸς τὴν κηδείαν αὐτῶν
μεγαλοπρεπῶς ἐχορήγησαν

50 ὁ δὲ Μενέλαος διὰ τὰς τῶν κρατούντων πλεονεξίας ἔμενεν ἐπὶ τῇ ἀρχῇ
ἐπιφυόμενος τῇ κακίᾳ μέγας τῶν πολιτῶν ἐπίβουλος καθεστώς

[Vul](../vul/ma2004.md)

1 Simon autem prædictus, pecuniarum et patriæ delator, male loquebatur
de Onia, tamquam ipse Heliodorum instigasset ad hæc, et ipse fuisset
incentor malorum:

2 provisoremque civitatis, ac defensorem gentis suæ, et æmulatorem legis
Dei, audebat insidiatorem regni dicere.

3 Sed cum inimicitiæ in tantum procederent ut etiam per quosdam Simonis
necessarios homicidia fierent,

4 considerans Onias periculum contentionis, et Apollonium insanire,
utpote ducem Cœlesyriæ et Phœnicis, ad augendam malitiam Simonis ad
regem se contulit,

5 non ut civium accusator, sed communem utilitatem apud semetipsum
universæ multitudinis considerans.

6 Videbat enim sine regali providentia impossibile esse pacem rebus
dari, nec Simonem posse cessare a stultitia sua.  

7 Sed post Seleuci vitæ excessum, cum suscepisset regnum Antiochus, qui
Nobilis appellabatur, ambiebat Jason frater Oniæ summum sacerdotium:

8 adito rege, promittens ei argenti talenta trecenta sexaginta, et ex
redditibus aliis talenta octoginta,

9 super hæc promittebat et alia centum quinquaginta, si potestati ejus
concederetur, gymnasium et ephebiam sibi constituere, et eos qui in
Jerosolymis erant, Antiochenos scribere.

10 Quod cum rex annuisset, et obtinuisset principatum, statim ad
gentilem ritum contribules suos transferre cœpit,

11 et amotis his quæ humanitatis causa Judæis a regibus fuerant
constituta per Joannem patrem Eupolemi, qui apud Romanos de amicitia et
societate functus est legatione legitima, civium jura destituens, prava
instituta sanciebat.

12 Etenim ausus est sub ipsa arce gymnasium constituere, et optimos
quosque epheborum in lupanaribus ponere.

13 Erat autem hoc non initium, sed incrementum quoddam, et profectus
gentilis et alienigenæ conversationis, propter impii et non sacerdotis
Jasonis nefarium, et inauditum scelus:

14 ita ut sacerdotes jam non circa altaris officia dediti essent, sed
contempto templo et sacrificiis neglectis, festinarent participes fieri
palæstræ et præbitionis ejus injustæ, et in exercitiis disci.

15 Et patrios quidem honores nihil habentes, græcas glorias optimas
arbitrabantur:

16 quarum gratia periculosa eos contentio habebat, et eorum instituta
æmulabantur, ac per omnia his consimiles esse cupiebant, quos hoste et
peremptores habuerant.

17 In leges enim divinas impie agere impune non cedit: sed hoc tempus
sequens declarabit.

18 Cum autem quinquennalis agon Tyri celebraretur, et rex præsens esset,

19 misit Jason facinorosus ab Jerosolymis viros peccatores, portantes
argenti didrachmas trecentas in sacrificum Herculis: quas postulaverunt
hi qui asportaverant ne in sacrificiis erogarentur, quia non oporteret,
sed in alios sumptus eas deputari.

20 Sed hæ oblatæ sunt quidem ab eo qui miserat in sacrificium Herculis:
propter præsentes autem datæ sunt in fabricam navium triremium.

21 Misso autem in Ægyptum Apollonio Mnesthei filio propter primates
Ptolemæi Philometoris regis, cum cognovisset Antiochus alienum se a
negotiis regni effectum, propriis utilitatibus consulens, profectus inde
venit Joppen, et inde Jerosolymam.

22 Et magnifice ab Jasone et civitate susceptus, cum facularum luminibus
et laudibus ingressus est: et inde in Phœnicen exercitum convertit.  

23 Et post triennii tempus, misit Jason Menelaum supradicti Simonis
fratrem portantem pecunias regi, et de negotiis necessariis responsa
perlaturum.

24 At ille commendatus regi, cum magnificasset faciem potestatis ejus,
in semetipsum retorsit summum sacerdotium, superponens Jasoni talenta
argenti trecenta.

25 Acceptisque a rege mandatis, venit, nihil quidem habens dignum
sacerdotio: animos vero crudelis tyranni, et feræ beluæ iram gerens.

26 Et Jason quidem, qui proprium fratrem captivaverat, ipse deceptus
profugus in Ammanitem expulsus est regionem.

27 Menelaus autem principatum quidem obtinuit: de pecuniis vero regi
promissis, nihil agebat, cum exactionem faceret Sostratus, qui arci erat
præpositus,

28 nam ad hunc exactio vectigalium pertinebant: quam ob causam utrique
ad regem sunt evocati.

29 Et Menelaus amotus est a sacerdotio, succedente Lysimacho fratre suo:
Sostratus autem prælatus est Cypriis.

30 Et cum hæc agerentur, contigit Tharsenses et Mallotas seditionem
movere, eo quod Antiochidi regis concubinæ dono essent dati.

31 Festinanter itaque rex venit sedare illos, relicto suffecto uno ex
comitibus suis Andronico.

32 Ratus autem Menelaus accepisse se tempus opportunum, aurea quædam
vasa e templo furatus donavit Andronico, et alia vendiderat Tyri, et per
vicinas civitates.

33 Quod cum certissime cognovisset Onias, arguebat eum, ipse in loco
tuto se continens Antiochiæ secus Daphnem.  

34 Unde Menelaus accedens ad Andronicum, rogabat ut Oniam interficeret.
Qui cum venisset ad Oniam, et datis dextris cum jurejurando (quamvis
esset ei suspectus) suasisset de asylo procedere, statim eum peremit,
non veritus justitiam.

35 Ob quam causam non solum Judæi, sed aliæ quoque nationes
indignabantur, et moleste ferebant de nece tanti viri injusta.

36 Sed regressum regem de Ciliciæ locis adierunt Judæi apud Antiochiam,
simul et Græci, conquerentes de iniqua nece Oniæ.

37 Contristatus itaque animo Antiochus propter Oniam, et flexus ad
misericordiam, lacrimas fudit, recordatus defuncti sobrietatem et
modestiam:

38 accensisque animis Andronicum purpura exutum, per totam civitatem
jubet circumduci: et in eodem loco in quo in Oniam impietatem
commiserat, sacrilegum vita privari, Domino illi condignam retribuente
pœnam.  

39 Multis autem sacrilegiis in templo a Lysimacho commissis Menelai
consilio, et divulgata fama, congregata est multitudo adversum
Lysimachum multo jam auro exportato.

40 Turbis autem insurgentibus, et animis ira repletis, Lysimachus
armatis fere tribus millibus iniquis manibus uti cœpit, duce quodam
tyranno, ætate pariter et dementia provecto.

41 Sed ut intellexerunt conatum Lysimachi, alii lapides, alii fustes
validos arripuere: quidam vero cinerem in Lysimachum jecere.

42 Et multi quidem vulnerati, quidam autem et prostrati, omnes vero in
fugam conversi sunt: ipsum etiam sacrilegum secus ærarium interfecerunt.

43 De his ergo cœpit judicium adversus Menelaum agitari.

44 Et cum venisset rex Tyrum, ad ipsum negotium detulerunt missi tres
viri a senioribus.

45 Et cum superaretur Menelaus, promisit Ptolemæo multas pecunias dare
ad suadendum regi.

46 Itaque Ptolemæus in quodam atrio positum quasi refrigerandi gratia
regem adiit, et deduxit a sententia:

47 et Menelaum quidem universæ malitiæ reum criminibus absolvit: miseros
autem qui, etiamsi apud Scythas causam dixissent, innocentes
judicarentur, hos morte damnavit.

48 Cito ergo injustam pœnam dederunt, qui pro civitate, et populo, et
sacris vasis causam prosecuti sunt.

49 Quam ob rem Tyrii quoque indignati, erga sepulturam eorum
liberalissimi extiterunt.

50 Menelaus autem, propter eorum qui in potentia erant avaritiam,
permanebat in potestate, crescens in malitia ad insidias civium.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Macabees 5](ma2005.md)
