[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[2 Macabees Index](ma2)  
  [Previous](ma2007)  [Next](ma2009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 2 Macabees 8

[Apo](../apo/ma2008)

1 Then Judas Maccabeus, and they that were with him, went privily into
the towns, and called their kinsfolks together, and took unto them all
such as continued in the Jews' religion, and assembled about six
thousand men.

2 And they called upon the Lord, that he would look upon the people that
was trodden down of all; and also pity the temple profaned of ungodly
men;

3 And that he would have compassion upon the city, sore defaced, and
ready to be made even with the ground; and hear the blood that cried
unto him,

4 And remember the wicked slaughter of harmless infants, and the
blasphemies committed against his name; and that he would shew his
hatred against the wicked.

5 Now when Maccabeus had his company about him, he could not be
withstood by the heathen: for the wrath of the Lord was turned into
mercy.

6 Therefore he came at unawares, and burnt up towns and cities, and got
into his hands the most commodious places, and overcame and put to
flight no small number of his enemies.

7 But specially took he advantage of the night for such privy attempts,
insomuch that the fruit of his holiness was spread every where.

8 So when Philip saw that this man increased by little and little, and
that things prospered with him still more and more, he wrote unto
Ptolemeus, the governor of Celosyria and Phenice, to yield more aid to
the king's affairs.

9 Then forthwith choosing Nicanor the son of Patroclus, one of his
special friends, he sent him with no fewer than twenty thousand of all
nations under him, to root out the whole generation of the Jews; and
with him he joined also Gorgias a captain, who in matters of war had
great experience.

10 So Nicanor undertook to make so much money of the captive Jews, as
should defray the tribute of two thousand talents, which the king was to
pay to the Romans.

11 Wherefore immediately he sent to the cities upon the sea coast,
proclaiming a sale of the captive Jews, and promising that they should
have fourscore and ten bodies for one talent, not expecting the
vengeance that was to follow upon him from the Almighty God.

12 Now when word was brought unto Judas of Nicanor's coming, and he had
imparted unto those that were with him that the army was at hand,

13 They that were fearful, and distrusted the justice of God, fled, and
conveyed themselves away.

14 Others sold all that they had left, and withal besought the Lord to
deliver them, sold by the wicked Nicanor before they met together:

15 And if not for their own sakes, yet for the covenants he had made
with their fathers, and for his holy and glorious name's sake, by which
they were called.

16 So Maccabeus called his men together unto the number of six thousand,
and exhorted them not to be stricken with terror of the enemy, nor to
fear the great multitude of the heathen, who came wrongly against them;
but to fight manfully,

17 And to set before their eyes the injury that they had unjustly done
to the holy place, and the cruel handling of the city, whereof they made
a mockery, and also the taking away of the government of their
forefathers:

18 For they, said he, trust in their weapons and boldness; but our
confidence is in the Almighty who at a beck can cast down both them that
come against us, and also all the world.

19 Moreover, he recounted unto them what helps their forefathers had
found, and how they were delivered, when under Sennacherib an hundred
fourscore and five thousand perished.

20 And he told them of the battle that they had in Babylon with the
Galatians, how they came but eight thousand in all to the business, with
four thousand Macedonians, and that the Macedonians being perplexed, the
eight thousand destroyed an hundred and twenty thousand because of the
help that they had from heaven, and so received a great booty.

21 Thus when he had made them bold with these words, and ready to die
for the law and the country, he divided his army into four parts;

22 And joined with himself his own brethren, leaders of each band, to
wit Simon, and Joseph, and Jonathan, giving each one fifteen hundred
men.

23 Also he appointed Eleazar to read the holy book: and when he had
given them this watchword, The help of God; himself leading the first
band,

24 And by the help of the Almighty they slew above nine thousand of
their enemies, and wounded and maimed the most part of Nicanor's host,
and so put all to flight;

25 And took their money that came to buy them, and pursued them far: but
lacking time they returned:

26 For it was the day before the sabbath, and therefore they would no
longer pursue them.

27 So when they had gathered their armour together, and spoiled their
enemies, they occupied themselves about the sabbath, yielding exceeding
praise and thanks to the Lord, who had preserved them unto that day,
which was the beginning of mercy distilling upon them.

28 And after the sabbath, when they had given part of the spoils to the
maimed, and the widows, and orphans, the residue they divided among
themselves and their servants.

29 When this was done, and they had made a common supplication, they
besought the merciful Lord to be reconciled with his servants for ever.

30 Moreover of those that were with Timotheus and Bacchides, who fought
against them, they slew above twenty thousand, and very easily got high
and strong holds, and divided among themselves many spoils more, and
made the maimed, orphans, widows, yea, and the aged also, equal in
spoils with themselves.

31 And when they had gathered their armour together, they laid them up
all carefully in convenient places, and the remnant of the spoils they
brought to Jerusalem.

32 They slew also Philarches, that wicked person, who was with
Timotheus, and had annoyed the Jews many ways.

33 Furthermore at such time as they kept the feast for the victory in
their country they burnt Callisthenes, that had set fire upon the holy
gates, who had fled into a little house; and so he received a reward
meet for his wickedness.

34 As for that most ungracious Nicanor, who had brought a thousand
merchants to buy the Jews,

35 He was through the help of the Lord brought down by them, of whom he
made least account; and putting off his glorious apparel, and
discharging his company, he came like a fugitive servant through the
midland unto Antioch having very great dishonour, for that his host was
destroyed.

36 Thus he, that took upon him to make good to the Romans their tribute
by means of captives in Jerusalem, told abroad, that the Jews had God to
fight for them, and therefore they could not be hurt, because they
followed the laws that he gave them.

[Sep](../sep/ma2008)

1 Ιουδας δὲ ὁ καὶ Μακκαβαῖος καὶ οἱ σὺν αὐτῷ παρεισπορευόμενοι λεληθότως
εἰς τὰς κώμας προσεκαλοῦντο τοὺς συγγενεῖς καὶ τοὺς μεμενηκότας ἐν τῷ
Ιουδαϊσμῷ προσλαμβανόμενοι συνήγαγον εἰς ἑξακισχιλίους

2 καὶ ἐπεκαλοῦντο τὸν κύριον ἐπιδεῖν τὸν ὑπὸ πάντων καταπατούμενον λαόν
οἰκτῖραι δὲ καὶ τὸν ναὸν τὸν ὑπὸ τῶν ἀσεβῶν ἀνθρώπων βεβηλωθέντα

3 ἐλεῆσαι δὲ καὶ τὴν καταφθειρομένην πόλιν καὶ μέλλουσαν ἰσόπεδον
γίνεσθαι καὶ τῶν καταβοώντων πρὸς αὐτὸν αἱμάτων εἰσακοῦσαι

4 μνησθῆναι δὲ καὶ τῆς τῶν ἀναμαρτήτων νηπίων παρανόμου ἀπωλείας καὶ
περὶ τῶν γενομένων εἰς τὸ ὄνομα αὐτοῦ βλασφημιῶν καὶ μισοπονηρῆσαι

5 γενόμενος δὲ ὁ Μακκαβαῖος ἐν συστέματι ἀνυπόστατος ἤδη τοῖς ἔθνεσιν
ἐγίνετο τῆς ὀργῆς τοῦ κυρίου εἰς ἔλεον τραπείσης

6 πόλεις δὲ καὶ κώμας ἀπροσδοκήτως ἐρχόμενος ἐνεπίμπρα καὶ τοὺς
ἐπικαίρους τόπους ἀπολαμβάνων οὐκ ὀλίγους τῶν πολεμίων τροπούμενος

7 μάλιστα τὰς νύκτας πρὸς τὰς τοιαύτας ἐπιβολὰς συνεργοὺς ἐλάμβανεν καὶ
λαλιὰ τῆς εὐανδρίας αὐτοῦ διηχεῖτο πανταχῆ

8 συνορῶν δὲ ὁ Φίλιππος κατὰ μικρὸν εἰς προκοπὴν ἐρχόμενον τὸν ἄνδρα
πυκνότερον δὲ ἐν ταῖς εὐημερίαις προβαίνοντα πρὸς Πτολεμαῖον τὸν Κοίλης
Συρίας καὶ Φοινίκης στρατηγὸν ἔγραψεν ἐπιβοηθεῖν τοῖς τοῦ βασιλέως
πράγμασιν

9 ὁ δὲ ταχέως προχειρισάμενος Νικάνορα τὸν τοῦ Πατρόκλου τῶν πρώτων
φίλων ἀπέστειλεν ὑποτάξας παμφύλων ἔθνη οὐκ ἐλάττους τῶν δισμυρίων τὸ
σύμπαν τῆς Ιουδαίας ἐξᾶραι γένος συνέστησεν δὲ αὐτῷ καὶ Γοργίαν ἄνδρα
στρατηγὸν καὶ ἐν πολεμικαῖς χρείαις πεῖραν ἔχοντα

10 διεστήσατο δὲ ὁ Νικάνωρ τὸν φόρον τῷ βασιλεῖ τοῖς Ῥωμαίοις ὄντα
ταλάντων δισχιλίων ἐκ τῆς τῶν Ιουδαίων αἰχμαλωσίας ἐκπληρώσειν

11 εὐθέως δὲ εἰς τὰς παραθαλασσίους πόλεις ἀπέστειλεν προκαλούμενος ἐπ᾽
ἀγορασμὸν Ιουδαίων σωμάτων ὑπισχνούμενος ἐνενήκοντα σώματα ταλάντου
παραχωρήσειν οὐ προσδεχόμενος τὴν παρὰ τοῦ παντοκράτορος μέλλουσαν
παρακολουθήσειν ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ δίκην

12 τῷ δὲ Ιουδα προσέπεσεν περὶ τῆς τοῦ Νικάνορος ἐφόδου καὶ μεταδόντος
τοῖς σὺν αὐτῷ τὴν παρουσίαν τοῦ στρατοπέδου

13 οἱ δειλανδροῦντες καὶ ἀπιστοῦντες τὴν τοῦ θεοῦ δίκην διεδίδρασκον
ἑαυτοὺς καὶ ἐξετόπιζον

14 οἱ δὲ τὰ περιλελειμμένα πάντα ἐπώλουν ὁμοῦ δὲ τὸν κύριον ἠξίουν
ῥύσασθαι τοὺς ὑπὸ τοῦ δυσσεβοῦς Νικάνορος πρὶν συντυχεῖν πεπραμένους

15 καὶ εἰ μὴ δι᾽ αὐτούς ἀλλὰ διὰ τὰς πρὸς τοὺς πατέρας αὐτῶν διαθήκας
καὶ ἕνεκα τῆς ἐπ᾽ αὐτοὺς ἐπικλήσεως τοῦ σεμνοῦ καὶ μεγαλοπρεποῦς
ὀνόματος αὐτοῦ

16 συναγαγὼν δὲ ὁ Μακκαβαῖος τοὺς περὶ αὐτὸν ὄντας ἀριθμὸν ἑξακισχιλίους
παρεκάλει μὴ καταπλαγῆναι τοῖς πολεμίοις μηδὲ εὐλαβεῖσθαι τὴν τῶν ἀδίκως
παραγινομένων ἐπ᾽ αὐτοὺς ἐθνῶν πολυπλήθειαν ἀγωνίσασθαι δὲ γενναίως

17 πρὸ ὀφθαλμῶν λαβόντας τὴν ἀνόμως εἰς τὸν ἅγιον τόπον συντετελεσμένην
ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν ὕβριν καὶ τὸν τῆς ἐμπεπαιγμένης πόλεως αἰκισμόν ἔτι δὲ τὴν τῆς
προγονικῆς πολιτείας κατάλυσιν

18 οἱ μὲν γὰρ ὅπλοις πεποίθασιν ἅμα καὶ τόλμαις ἔφησεν ἡμεῖς δὲ ἐπὶ τῷ
παντοκράτορι θεῷ δυναμένῳ καὶ τοὺς ἐρχομένους ἐφ᾽ ἡμᾶς καὶ τὸν ὅλον
κόσμον ἑνὶ νεύματι καταβαλεῖν πεποίθαμεν

19 προσαναλεξάμενος δὲ αὐτοῖς καὶ τὰς ἐπὶ τῶν προγόνων γενομένας
ἀντιλήμψεις καὶ τὴν ἐπὶ Σενναχηριμ ἑκατὸν ὀγδοήκοντα πέντε χιλιάδες ὡς
ἀπώλοντο

20 καὶ τὴν ἐν τῇ Βαβυλωνίᾳ τὴν πρὸς τοὺς Γαλάτας παράταξιν γενομένην ὡς
οἱ πάντες ἐπὶ τὴν χρείαν ἦλθον ὀκτακισχίλιοι σὺν Μακεδόσιν
τετρακισχιλίοις τῶν Μακεδόνων ἀπορουμένων οἱ ὀκτακισχίλιοι τὰς δώδεκα
μυριάδας ἀπώλεσαν διὰ τὴν γινομένην αὐτοῖς ἀπ᾽ οὐρανοῦ βοήθειαν καὶ
ὠφέλειαν πολλὴν ἔλαβον

21 ἐφ᾽ οἷς εὐθαρσεῖς αὐτοὺς παραστήσας καὶ ἑτοίμους ὑπὲρ τῶν νόμων καὶ
τῆς πατρίδος ἀποθνῄσκειν τετραμερές τι τὸ στράτευμα ἐποίησεν

22 τάξας καὶ τοὺς ἀδελφοὺς αὐτοῦ προηγουμένους ἑκατέρας τάξεως Σιμωνα
καὶ Ιωσηπον καὶ Ιωναθην ὑποτάξας ἑκάστῳ χιλίους πρὸς τοῖς πεντακοσίοις

23 ἔτι δὲ καὶ Ελεαζαρον παραναγνοὺς τὴν ἱερὰν βίβλον καὶ δοὺς σύνθημα
θεοῦ βοηθείας τῆς πρώτης σπείρας αὐτὸς προηγούμενος συνέβαλε τῷ Νικάνορι

24 γενομένου δὲ αὐτοῖς τοῦ παντοκράτορος συμμάχου κατέσφαξαν τῶν
πολεμίων ὑπὲρ τοὺς ἐνακισχιλίους τραυματίας δὲ καὶ τοῖς μέλεσιν
ἀναπείρους τὸ πλεῖον μέρος τῆς τοῦ Νικάνορος στρατιᾶς ἐποίησαν πάντας δὲ
φυγεῖν ἠνάγκασαν

25 τὰ δὲ χρήματα τῶν παραγεγονότων ἐπὶ τὸν ἀγορασμὸν αὐτῶν ἔλαβον
συνδιώξαντες δὲ αὐτοὺς ἐφ᾽ ἱκανὸν ἀνέλυσαν ὑπὸ τῆς ὥρας συγκλειόμενοι

26 ἦν γὰρ ἡ πρὸ τοῦ σαββάτου δι᾽ ἣν αἰτίαν οὐκ ἐμακροτόνησαν
κατατρέχοντες αὐτούς

27 ὁπλολογήσαντες δὲ αὐτοὺς καὶ τὰ σκῦλα ἐκδύσαντες τῶν πολεμίων περὶ τὸ
σάββατον ἐγίνοντο περισσῶς εὐλογοῦντες καὶ ἐξομολογούμενοι τῷ κυρίῳ τῷ
διασώσαντι εἰς τὴν ἡμέραν ταύτην ἀρχὴν ἐλέους τάξαντος αὐτοῖς

28 μετὰ δὲ τὸ σάββατον τοῖς ᾐκισμένοις καὶ ταῖς χήραις καὶ ὀρφανοῖς
μερίσαντες ἀπὸ τῶν σκύλων τὰ λοιπὰ αὐτοὶ καὶ τὰ παιδία διεμερίσαντο

29 ταῦτα δὲ διαπραξάμενοι καὶ κοινὴν ἱκετείαν ποιησάμενοι τὸν ἐλεήμονα
κύριον ἠξίουν εἰς τέλος καταλλαγῆναι τοῖς αὑτοῦ δούλοις

30 καὶ τοῖς περὶ Τιμόθεον καὶ Βακχίδην συνερίσαντες ὑπὲρ τοὺς δισμυρίους
αὐτῶν ἀνεῖλον καὶ ὀχυρωμάτων ὑψηλῶν εὖ μάλα ἐγκρατεῖς ἐγένοντο καὶ
λάφυρα πλείονα ἐμερίσαντο ἰσομοίρους αὑτοῖς καὶ τοῖς ᾐκισμένοις καὶ
ὀρφανοῖς καὶ χήραις ἔτι δὲ καὶ πρεσβυτέροις ποιήσαντες

31 ὁπλολογήσαντες δὲ αὑτοὺς ἐπιμελῶς πάντα συνέθηκαν εἰς τοὺς ἐπικαίρους
τόπους τὰ δὲ λοιπὰ τῶν σκύλων ἤνεγκαν εἰς Ιεροσόλυμα

32 τὸν δὲ φυλάρχην τῶν περὶ Τιμόθεον ἀνεῖλον ἀνοσιώτατον ἄνδρα καὶ πολλὰ
τοὺς Ιουδαίους ἐπιλελυπηκότα

33 ἐπινίκια δὲ ἄγοντες ἐν τῇ πατρίδι τοὺς ἐμπρήσαντας τοὺς ἱεροὺς
πυλῶνας καὶ Καλλισθένην ὑφῆψαν εἰς ἓν οἰκίδιον πεφευγότα καὶ τὸν ἄξιον
τῆς δυσσεβείας ἐκομίσατο μισθόν

34 ὁ δὲ τρισαλιτήριος Νικάνωρ ὁ τοὺς χιλίους ἐμπόρους ἐπὶ τὴν πρᾶσιν τῶν
Ιουδαίων ἀγαγὼν

35 ταπεινωθεὶς ὑπὸ τῶν κατ᾽ αὐτὸν νομιζομένων ἐλαχίστων εἶναι τῇ τοῦ
κυρίου βοηθείᾳ τὴν δοξικὴν ἀποθέμενος ἐσθῆτα διὰ τῆς μεσογείου δραπέτου
τρόπον ἔρημον ἑαυτὸν ποιήσας ἧκεν εἰς Ἀντιόχειαν ὑπὲρ ἅπαν εὐημερηκὼς
ἐπὶ τῇ τοῦ στρατοῦ διαφθορᾷ

36 καὶ ὁ τοῖς Ῥωμαίοις ἀναδεξάμενος φόρον ἀπὸ τῆς τῶν ἐν Ιεροσολύμοις
αἰχμαλωσίας κατορθώσασθαι κατήγγελλεν ὑπέρμαχον ἔχειν τοὺς Ιουδαίους καὶ
διὰ τὸν τρόπον τοῦτον ἀτρώτους εἶναι τοὺς Ιουδαίους διὰ τὸ ἀκολουθεῖν
τοῖς ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ προτεταγμένοις νόμοις

[Vul](../vul/ma2008)

1 Judas vero Machabæus, et qui cum illo erant, introibant latenter in
castella: et convocantes cognatos et amicos, et eos qui permanserunt in
Judaismo assumentes, eduxerunt ad se sex millia virorum.

2 Et invocabant Dominum, ut respiceret in populum qui ab omnibus
calcabatur, et misereretur templo quod contaminabatur ab impiis:

3 misereretur etiam exterminio civitatis, quæ esset illico complananda,
et vocem sanguinis ad se clamantis audiret:

4 memoraretur quoque iniquissimas mortes parvulorum innocentum, et
blasphemias nomini suo illatas, et indignaretur super his.

5 At Machabæus, congregata multitudine, intolerabilis gentibus
efficiebatur: ira enim Domini in misericordiam conversa est.

6 Et superveniens castellis et civitatibus improvisus, succendebat eas:
et opportuna loca occupans, non paucas hostium strages dabat:

7 maxime autem noctibus ad hujuscemodi excursus ferebatur, et fama
virtutis ejus ubique diffundebatur.

8 Videns autem Philippus paulatim virum ad profectum venire, ac
frequentius res ei cedere propere, ad Ptolemæum ducem Cœlesyriæ et
Phœnicis scripsit ut auxilium ferret regis negotiis.  

9 At ille velociter misit Nicanorem Patrocli de primoribus amicum, datis
ei de permistis gentibus, armatis non minus viginti millibus, ut
universum Judæorum genus deleret, adjuncto ei Gorgia viro militari, et
in bellicis rebus experientissimo.

10 Constituit autem Nicanor, ut regi tributum, quod Romanis erat dandum,
duo millia talentorum de captivitate Judæorum suppleret:

11 statimque ad maritimas civitates misit, convocans ad coëmptionem
Judaicorum mancipiorum, promittens se nonaginta mancipia talento
distracturum, non respiciens ad vindictam quæ eum ab Omnipotente esset
consecutura.

12 Judas autem ubi comperit, indicavit his qui secum erant Judæis
Nicanoris adventum.

13 Ex quibus quidam formidantes, et non credentes Dei justitiæ, in fugam
vertebantur:

14 alii vero si quid eis supererat vendebant, simulque Dominum
deprecabantur ut eriperet eos ab impio Nicanore, qui eos priusquam
cominus veniret, vendiderat:

15 etsi non propter eos, propter testamentum tamen quod erat ad patres
eorum, et propter invocationem sancti et magnifici nominis ejus super
ipsos.  

16 Convocatis autem Machabæus septem millibus qui cum ipso erant,
rogabat ne hostibus reconciliarentur, neque metuerent inique venientium
adversum se hostium multitudinem: sed fortiter contenderent,

17 ante oculos habentes contumeliam quæ loco sancto ab his injuste esset
illata, itemque et ludibrio habitæ civitatis injuriam, adhuc etiam
veterum instituta convulsa.

18 Nam illi quidem armis confidunt, ait, simul et audacia: nos autem in
omnipotente Domino, qui potest et venientes adversum nos, et universum
mundum, uno nutu delere, confidimus.

19 Admonuit autem eos et de auxiliis Dei, quæ facta sunt erga parentes:
et quod sub Sennacherib centum octoginta quinque millia perierunt:

20 et de prælio quod eis adversus Galatas fuit in Babylonia, ut omnes,
ubi ad rem ventum est, Macedonibus sociis hæsitantibus, ipsi sex millia
soli peremerunt centum viginti millia, propter auxilium illis datum de
cælo, et beneficia pro his plurima consecuti sunt.

21 His verbis constantes effecti sunt, et pro legibus et patria mori
parati.

22 Constituit itaque fratres suos duces utrique ordini, Simonem, et
Josephum, et Jonathan, subjectis unicuique millenis et quingentenis.

23 Ad hoc etiam ab Esdra lecto illis sancto libro, et dato signo
adjutorii Dei, in prima acie ipse dux commisit cum Nicanore.

24 Et facto sibi adjutore Omnipotente, interfecerunt super novem millia
hominum: majorem autem partem exercitus Nicanoris vulneribus debilem
factam fugere compulerunt.

25 Pecuniis vero eorum, qui ad emptionem ipsorum venerant, sublatis,
ipsos usquequaque persecuti sunt:

26 sed reversi sunt hora conclusi, nam erat ante sabbatum: quam ob
causam non perseveraverunt insequentes.

27 Arma autem ipsorum, et spolia congregantes, sabbatum agebant,
benedicentes Dominum, qui liberavit eos in isto die, misericordiæ
initium stillans in eos.

28 Post sabbatum vero debilibus, et orphanis, et viduis diviserunt
spolia: et residua ipsi cum suis habuere.

29 His itaque gestis, et communiter ab omnibus facta obsecratione,
misericordem Dominum postulabant ut in finem servis suis
reconciliaretur.

30 Et ex his qui cum Timotheo et Bacchide erant contra se contendentes,
super viginti millia interfecerunt, et munitiones excelsas obtinuerunt:
et plures prædas diviserunt, æquam portionem debilibus, pupillis, et
viduis, sed et senioribus facientes.

31 Et cum arma eorum diligenter collegissent, omnia composuerunt in
locis opportunis: residua vero spolia Jerosolymam detulerunt:

32 et Philarchen, qui cum Timotheo erat, interfecerunt, virum scelestum,
qui in multis Judæos afflixerat.

33 Et cum epinicia agerent Jerosolymis, eum qui sacras januas
incenderat, id est, Callisthenem, cum in quoddam domicilium refugisset,
incenderunt, digna ei mercede pro impietatibus suis reddita.

34 Facinorosissimus autem Nicanor, qui mille negotiantes ad Judæorum
venditionem adduxerat,

35 humiliatus auxilio Domini ab his quos nullos existimaverat, deposita
veste gloriæ, per mediterranea fugiens, solus venit Antiochiam, summam
infelicitatem de interitu sui exercitus consecutus.

36 Et qui promiserat Romanis se tributum restituere de captivitate
Jerosolymorum, prædicabat nunc protectorem Deum habere Judæos, et ob
ipsum invulnerabiles esse, eo quod sequerentur leges ab ipso
constitutas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Macabees 9](ma2009)
