[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[2 Macabees Index](ma2.md)  
  [Previous](ma2001)  [Next](ma2003.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 2 Macabees 2

[Apo](../apo/ma2002.md)

1 It is also found in the records, that Jeremy the prophet commanded
them that were carried away to take of the fire, as it hath been
signified:

2 And how that the prophet, having given them the law, charged them not
to forget the commandments of the Lord, and that they should not err in
their minds, when they see images of silver and gold, with their
ornaments.

3 And with other such speeches exhorted he them, that the law should not
depart from their hearts.

4 It was also contained in the same writing, that the prophet, being
warned of God, commanded the tabernacle and the ark to go with him, as
he went forth into the mountain, where Moses climbed up, and saw the
heritage of God.

5 And when Jeremy came thither, he found an hollow cave, wherein he laid
the tabernacle, and the ark, and the altar of incense, and so stopped
the door.

6 And some of those that followed him came to mark the way, but they
could not find it.

7 Which when Jeremy perceived, he blamed them, saying, As for that
place, it shall be unknown until the time that God gather his people
again together, and receive them unto mercy.

8 Then shall the Lord shew them these things, and the glory of the Lord
shall appear, and the cloud also, as it was shewed under Moses, and as
when Solomon desired that the place might be honourably sanctified.

9 It was also declared, that he being wise offered the sacrifice of
dedication, and of the finishing of the temple.

10 And as when Moses prayed unto the Lord, the fire came down from
heaven, and consumed the sacrifices: even so prayed Solomon also, and
the fire came down from heaven, and consumed the burnt offerings.

11 And Moses said, Because the sin offering was not to be eaten, it was
consumed.

12 So Solomon kept those eight days.

13 The same things also were reported in the writings and commentaries
of Neemias; and how he founding a library gathered together the acts of
the kings, and the prophets, and of David, and the epistles of the kings
concerning the holy gifts.

14 In like manner also Judas gathered together all those things that
were lost by reason of the war we had, and they remain with us,

15 Wherefore if ye have need thereof, send some to fetch them unto you.

16 Whereas we then are about to celebrate the purification, we have
written unto you, and ye shall do well, if ye keep the same days.

17 We hope also, that the God, that delivered all his people, and gave
them all an heritage, and the kingdom, and the priesthood, and the
sanctuary,

18 As he promised in the law, will shortly have mercy upon us, and
gather us together out of every land under heaven into the holy place:
for he hath delivered us out of great troubles, and hath purified the
place.

19 Now as concerning Judas Maccabeus, and his brethren, and the
purification of the great temple, and the dedication of the altar,

20 And the wars against Antiochus Epiphanes, and Eupator his son,

21 And the manifest signs that came from heaven unto those that behaved
themselves manfully to their honour for Judaism: so that, being but a
few, they overcame the whole country, and chased barbarous multitudes,

22 And recovered again the temple renowned all the world over, and freed
the city, and upheld the laws which were going down, the Lord being
gracious unto them with all favour:

23 All these things, I say, being declared by Jason of Cyrene in five
books, we will assay to abridge in one volume.

24 For considering the infinite number, and the difficulty which they
find that desire to look into the narrations of the story, for the
variety of the matter,

25 We have been careful, that they that will read may have delight, and
that they that are desirous to commit to memory might have ease, and
that all into whose hands it comes might have profit.

26 Therefore to us, that have taken upon us this painful labour of
abridging, it was not easy, but a matter of sweat and watching;

27 Even as it is no ease unto him that prepareth a banquet, and seeketh
the benefit of others: yet for the pleasuring of many we will undertake
gladly this great pains;

28 Leaving to the author the exact handling of every particular, and
labouring to follow the rules of an abridgement.

29 For as the master builder of a new house must care for the whole
building; but he that undertaketh to set it out, and paint it, must seek
out fit things for the adorning thereof: even so I think it is with us.

30 To stand upon every point, and go over things at large, and to be
curious in particulars, belongeth to the first author of the story:

31 But to use brevity, and avoid much labouring of the work, is to be
granted to him that will make an abridgment.

32 Here then will we begin the story: only adding thus much to that
which hath been said, that it is a foolish thing to make a long
prologue, and to be short in the story itself.

[Sep](../sep/ma2002.md)

1 εὑρίσκεται δὲ ἐν ταῖς ἀπογραφαῖς Ιερεμιας ὁ προφήτης ὅτι ἐκέλευσεν τοῦ
πυρὸς λαβεῖν τοὺς μεταγενομένους ὡς σεσήμανται

2 καὶ ὡς ἐνετείλατο τοῖς μεταγενομένοις ὁ προφήτης δοὺς αὐτοῖς τὸν νόμον
ἵνα μὴ ἐπιλάθωνται τῶν προσταγμάτων τοῦ κυρίου καὶ ἵνα μὴ ἀποπλανηθῶσιν
ταῖς διανοίαις βλέποντες ἀγάλματα χρυσᾶ καὶ ἀργυρᾶ καὶ τὸν περὶ αὐτὰ
κόσμον

3 καὶ ἕτερα τοιαῦτα λέγων παρεκάλει μὴ ἀποστῆναι τὸν νόμον ἀπὸ τῆς
καρδίας αὐτῶν

4 ἦν δὲ ἐν τῇ γραφῇ ὡς τὴν σκηνὴν καὶ τὴν κιβωτὸν ἐκέλευσεν ὁ προφήτης
χρηματισμοῦ γενηθέντος αὐτῷ συνακολουθεῖν ὡς δὲ ἐξῆλθεν εἰς τὸ ὄρος οὗ ὁ
Μωυσῆς ἀναβὰς ἐθεάσατο τὴν τοῦ θεοῦ κληρονομίαν

5 καὶ ἐλθὼν ὁ Ιερεμιας εὗρεν οἶκον ἀντρώδη καὶ τὴν σκηνὴν καὶ τὴν
κιβωτὸν καὶ τὸ θυσιαστήριον τοῦ θυμιάματος εἰσήνεγκεν ἐκεῖ καὶ τὴν θύραν
ἐνέφραξεν

6 καὶ προσελθόντες τινὲς τῶν συνακολουθούντων ὥστε ἐπισημάνασθαι τὴν
ὁδὸν καὶ οὐκ ἐδυνήθησαν εὑρεῖν

7 ὡς δὲ ὁ Ιερεμιας ἔγνω μεμψάμενος αὐτοῖς εἶπεν ὅτι καὶ ἄγνωστος ὁ τόπος
ἔσται ἕως ἂν συναγάγῃ ὁ θεὸς ἐπισυναγωγὴν τοῦ λαοῦ καὶ ἵλεως γένηται

8 καὶ τότε ὁ κύριος ἀναδείξει ταῦτα καὶ ὀφθήσεται ἡ δόξα τοῦ κυρίου καὶ
ἡ νεφέλη ὡς ἐπὶ Μωυσῇ ἐδηλοῦτο ὡς καὶ ὁ Σαλωμων ἠξίωσεν ἵνα ὁ τόπος
καθαγιασθῇ μεγάλως

9 διεσαφεῖτο δὲ καὶ ὡς σοφίαν ἔχων ἀνήνεγκεν θυσίαν ἐγκαινισμοῦ καὶ τῆς
τελειώσεως τοῦ ἱεροῦ

10 καθὼς καὶ Μωυσῆς προσηύξατο πρὸς κύριον καὶ κατέβη πῦρ ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ
καὶ τὰ τῆς θυσίας ἐδαπάνησεν οὕτως καὶ Σαλωμων προσηύξατο καὶ καταβὰν τὸ
πῦρ ἀνήλωσεν τὰ ὁλοκαυτώματα

11 καὶ εἶπεν Μωυσῆς διὰ τὸ μὴ βεβρῶσθαι τὸ περὶ τῆς ἁμαρτίας ἀνηλώθη

12 ὡσαύτως καὶ ὁ Σαλωμων τὰς ὀκτὼ ἡμέρας ἤγαγεν

13 ἐξηγοῦντο δὲ καὶ ἐν ταῖς ἀναγραφαῖς καὶ ἐν τοῖς ὑπομνηματισμοῖς τοῖς
κατὰ τὸν Νεεμιαν τὰ αὐτὰ καὶ ὡς καταβαλλόμενος βιβλιοθήκην ἐπισυνήγαγεν
τὰ περὶ τῶν βασιλέων βιβλία καὶ προφητῶν καὶ τὰ τοῦ Δαυιδ καὶ ἐπιστολὰς
βασιλέων περὶ ἀναθεμάτων

14 ὡσαύτως δὲ καὶ Ιουδας τὰ διαπεπτωκότα διὰ τὸν γεγονότα πόλεμον ἡμῖν
ἐπισυνήγαγεν πάντα καὶ ἔστιν παρ᾽ ἡμῖν

15 ὧν οὖν ἐὰν χρείαν ἔχητε τοὺς ἀποκομιοῦντας ὑμῖν ἀποστέλλετε

16 μέλλοντες οὖν ἄγειν τὸν καθαρισμὸν ἐγράψαμεν ὑμῖν καλώς οὖν ποιήσετε
ἄγοντες τὰς ἡμέρας

17 ὁ δὲ θεὸς ὁ σώσας τὸν πάντα λαὸν αὐτοῦ καὶ ἀποδοὺς τὴν κληρονομίαν
πᾶσιν καὶ τὸ βασίλειον καὶ τὸ ἱεράτευμα καὶ τὸν ἁγιασμόν

18 καθὼς ἐπηγγείλατο διὰ τοῦ νόμου ἐλπίζομεν γὰρ ἐπὶ τῷ θεῷ ὅτι ταχέως
ἡμᾶς ἐλεήσει καὶ ἐπισυνάξει ἐκ τῆς ὑπὸ τὸν οὐρανὸν εἰς τὸν ἅγιον τόπον
ἐξείλετο γὰρ ἡμᾶς ἐκ μεγάλων κακῶν καὶ τὸν τόπον ἐκαθάρισεν

19 τὰ δὲ κατὰ τὸν Ιουδαν τὸν Μακκαβαῖον καὶ τοὺς τούτου ἀδελφοὺς καὶ τὸν
τοῦ ἱεροῦ τοῦ μεγίστου καθαρισμὸν καὶ τὸν τοῦ βωμοῦ ἐγκαινισμὸν

20 ἔτι τε τοὺς πρὸς Ἀντίοχον τὸν Ἐπιφανῆ καὶ τὸν τούτου υἱὸν Εὐπάτορα
πολέμους

21 καὶ τὰς ἐξ οὐρανοῦ γενομένας ἐπιφανείας τοῖς ὑπὲρ τοῦ Ιουδαϊσμοῦ
φιλοτίμως ἀνδραγαθήσασιν ὥστε τὴν ὅλην χώραν ὀλίγους ὄντας λεηλατεῖν καὶ
τὰ βάρβαρα πλήθη διώκειν

22 καὶ τὸ περιβόητον καθ᾽ ὅλην τὴν οἰκουμένην ἱερὸν ἀνακομίσασθαι καὶ
τὴν πόλιν ἐλευθερῶσαι καὶ τοὺς μέλλοντας καταλύεσθαι νόμους ἐπανορθῶσαι
τοῦ κυρίου μετὰ πάσης ἐπιεικείας ἵλεω γενομένου αὐτοῖς

23 ὑπὸ Ἰάσωνος τοῦ Κυρηναίου δεδηλωμένα διὰ πέντε βιβλίων πειρασόμεθα
δι᾽ ἑνὸς συντάγματος ἐπιτεμεῖν

24 συνορῶντες γὰρ τὸ χύμα τῶν ἀριθμῶν καὶ τὴν οὖσαν δυσχέρειαν τοῖς
θέλουσιν εἰσκυκλεῖσθαι τοῖς τῆς ἱστορίας διηγήμασιν διὰ τὸ πλῆθος τῆς
ὕλης

25 ἐφροντίσαμεν τοῖς μὲν βουλομένοις ἀναγινώσκειν ψυχαγωγίαν τοῖς δὲ
φιλοφρονοῦσιν εἰς τὸ διὰ μνήμης ἀναλαβεῖν εὐκοπίαν πᾶσιν δὲ τοῖς
ἐντυγχάνουσιν ὠφέλειαν

26 καὶ ἡμῖν μὲν τοῖς τὴν κακοπάθειαν ἐπιδεδεγμένοις τῆς ἐπιτομῆς οὐ
ῥᾴδιον ἱδρῶτος δὲ καὶ ἀγρυπνίας τὸ πρᾶγμα

27 καθάπερ τῷ παρασκευάζοντι συμπόσιον καὶ ζητοῦντι τὴν ἑτέρων
λυσιτέλειαν οὐκ εὐχερές ὅμως διὰ τὴν τῶν πολλῶν εὐχαριστίαν ἡδέως τὴν
κακοπάθειαν ὑποίσομεν

28 τὸ μὲν διακριβοῦν περὶ ἑκάστων τῷ συγγραφεῖ παραχωρήσαντες τὸ δὲ
ἐπιπορεύεσθαι τοῖς ὑπογραμμοῖς τῆς ἐπιτομῆς διαπονοῦντες

29 καθάπερ γὰρ τῆς καινῆς οἰκίας ἀρχιτέκτονι τῆς ὅλης καταβολῆς
φροντιστέον τῷ δὲ ἐγκαίειν καὶ ζωγραφεῖν ἐπιχειροῦντι τὰ ἐπιτήδεια πρὸς
διακόσμησιν ἐξεταστέον οὕτως δοκῶ καὶ ἐπὶ ἡμῶν

30 τὸ μὲν ἐμβατεύειν καὶ περίπατον ποιεῖσθαι λόγων καὶ πολυπραγμονεῖν ἐν
τοῖς κατὰ μέρος τῷ τῆς ἱστορίας ἀρχηγέτῃ καθήκει

31 τὸ δὲ σύντομον τῆς λέξεως μεταδιώκειν καὶ τὸ ἐξεργαστικὸν τῆς
πραγματείας παραιτεῖσθαι τῷ τὴν μετάφρασιν ποιουμένῳ συγχωρητέον

32 ἐντεῦθεν οὖν ἀρξώμεθα τῆς διηγήσεως τοῖς προειρημένοις τοσοῦτον
ἐπιζεύξαντες εὔηθες γὰρ τὸ μὲν πρὸ τῆς ἱστορίας πλεονάζειν τὴν δὲ
ἱστορίαν ἐπιτεμεῖν

[Vul](../vul/ma2002.md)

1 Invenitur autem in descriptionibus Jeremiæ prophetæ, quod jussit eos
ignem accipere qui transmigrabant, ut significatum est, et ut mandavit
transmigratis.

2 Et dedit illis legem, ne obliviscerentur præcepta Domini, et non
exerrarent mentibus, videntes simulacra aurea et argentea, et ornamenta
eorum.

3 Et alia hujusmodi dicens, hortabatur ne legem amoverent a corde suo.

4 Erat autem in ipsa scriptura, quomodo tabernaculum et arcam jussit
propheta divino responso ad se facto comitari secum, usquequo exiit in
montem in quo Moyses ascendit, et vidit Dei hæreditatem.

5 Et veniens ibi Jeremias, invenit locum speluncæ: et tabernaculum, et
arcam, et altare incensi intulit illuc, et ostium obstruxit.

6 Et accesserunt quidam simul, qui sequebantur, ut notarent sibi locum:
et non potuerunt invenire.

7 Ut autem cognovit Jeremias, culpans illos dixit: Quod ignotus erit
locus donec congreget Deus congregationem populi, et propitius fiat:

8 et tunc Dominus ostendet hæc, et apparebit majestas Domini, et nubes
erit, sicut et Moysi manifestabatur, et sicut cum Salomon petiit ut
locus sanctificaretur magno Deo, manifestabat hæc.

9 Magnifice etenim sapientiam tractabat: et ut sapientiam habens,
obtulit sacrificium dedicationis et consummationis templi.

10 Sicut et Moyses orabat ad Dominum, et descendit ignis de cælo et
consumpsit holocaustum, sic et Salomon oravit, et descendit ignis de
cælo et consumpsit holocaustum.

11 Et dixit Moyses: Eo quod non sit comestum quod erat pro peccato,
consumptum est.

12 Similiter et Salomon octo diebus celebravit dedicationem.  

13 Inferebantur autem in descriptionibus et commentariis Nehemiæ hæc
eadem: et ut construens bibliothecam congregavit de regionibus libros et
prophetarum et David, et epistolas regum, et de donariis.

14 Similiter autem et Judas ea quæ deciderant per bellum quod nobis
acciderat, congregavit omnia, et sunt apud nos.

15 Si ergo desideratis hæc, mittite qui perferant vobis.

16 Acturi itaque purificationem scripsimus vobis: bene ergo facietis, si
egeritis hos dies.

17 Deus autem, qui liberavit populum suum, et reddidit hæreditatem
omnibus, et regnum, et sacerdotium, et sanctificationem,

18 sicut promisit in lege, speramus quod cito nostri miserebitur, et
congregavit de sub cælo in locum sanctum.

19 Eripuit enim nos de magnis periculis, et locum purgavit.  

20 De Juda vero Machabæo, et fratribus ejus, et de templi magni
purificatione, et de aræ dedicatione,

21 sed et de præliis quæ pertinent ad Antiochum Nobilem et filium ejus
Eupatorem,

22 et de illuminationibus quæ de cælo factæ sunt ad eos qui pro Judæis
fortiter fecerunt, ita ut universam regionem, cum pauci essent,
vindicarent, et barbaram multitudinem fugarent,

23 et famosissimum in toto orbe templum recuperarent, et civitatem
liberarent, et leges quæ abolitæ erant, restituerentur, Domino cum omni
tranquillitate propitio facto illis.

24 Itemque ab Jasone Cyrenæo quinque libris comprehensa tentavimus nos
uno volumine breviare.

25 Considerantes enim multitudinem librorum, et difficultatem volentibus
aggredi narrationes historiarum propter multitudinem rerum,

26 curavimus volentibus quidem legere, ut esset animi oblectatio:
studiosis vero, ut facilius possint memoriæ commendare: omnibus autem
legentibus utilitas conferatur.

27 Et nobis quidem ipsis, qui hoc opus breviandi causa suscepimus, non
facilem laborem, immo vero negotium plenum vigiliarum et sudoris
assumpsimus.

28 Sicut hi qui præparant convivium, et quærunt aliorum voluntati parere
propter multorum gratiam, libenter laborem sustinemus.

29 Veritatem quidem de singulis auctoribus concedentes, ipsi autem
secundum datam formam brevitati studentes.

30 Sicut enim novæ domus architecto de universa structura curandum est;
ei vero qui pingere curat, quæ apta sunt ad ornatum exquirenda sunt: ita
æstimandum est et in nobis.

31 Etenim intellectum colligere, et ordinare sermonem, et curiosius
partes singulas quasque disquirere, historiæ congruit auctori:

32 brevitatem vero dictionis sectari, et executiones rerum vitare,
brevianti concedendum est.

33 Hinc ergo narrationem incipiemus: de præfatione tantum dixisse
sufficiat. Stultum etenim est ante historiam effluere, in ipsa autem
historia succingi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Macabees 3](ma2003.md)
