[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index.md)   
[Tobias Index](tob.md)  
  [Previous](tob003)  [Next](tob005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Tobias 4

[Apo](../apo/tob004.md)

1 In that day Tobit remembered the money which he had committed to
Gabael in Rages of Media,

2 And said with himself, I have wished for death; wherefore do I not
call for my son Tobias that I may signify to him of the money before I
die?

3 And when he had called him, he said, My son, when I am dead, bury me;
and despise not thy mother, but honour her all the days of thy life, and
do that which shall please her, and grieve her not.

4 Remember, my son, that she saw many dangers for thee, when thou wast
in her womb: and when she is dead, bury her by me in one grave.

5 My son, be mindful of the Lord our God all thy days, and let not thy
will be set to sin, or to transgress his commandments: do uprightly all
thy life long, and follow not the ways of unrighteousness.

6 For if thou deal truly, thy doings shall prosperously succeed to thee,
and to all them that live justly.

7 Give alms of thy substance; and when thou givest alms, let not thine
eye be envious, neither turn thy face from any poor, and the face of God
shall not be turned away from thee.

8 If thou hast abundance give alms accordingly: if thou have but a
little, be not afraid to give according to that little:

9 For thou layest up a good treasure for thyself against the day of
necessity.

10 Because that alms do deliver from death, and suffereth not to come
into darkness.

11 For alms is a good gift unto all that give it in the sight of the
most High.

12 Beware of all whoredom, my son, and chiefly take a wife of the seed
of thy fathers, and take not a strange woman to wife, which is not of
thy father's tribe: for we are the children of the prophets, Noe,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: remember, my son, that our fathers from the
beginning, even that they all married wives of their own kindred, and
were blessed in their children, and their seed shall inherit the land.

13 Now therefore, my son, love thy brethren, and despise not in thy
heart thy brethren, the sons and daughters of thy people, in not taking
a wife of them: for in pride is destruction and much trouble, and in
lewdness is decay and great want: for lewdness is the mother of famine.

14 Let not the wages of any man, which hath wrought for thee, tarry with
thee, but give him it out of hand: for if thou serve God, he will also
repay thee: be circumspect my son, in all things thou doest, and be wise
in all thy conversation.

15 Do that to no man which thou hatest: drink not wine to make thee
drunken: neither let drunkenness go with thee in thy journey.

16 Give of thy bread to the hungry, and of thy garments to them that are
naked; and according to thine abundance give alms: and let not thine eye
be envious, when thou givest alms.

17 Pour out thy bread on the burial of the just, but give nothing to the
wicked.

18 Ask counsel of all that are wise, and despise not any counsel that is
profitable.

19 Bless the Lord thy God alway, and desire of him that thy ways may be
directed, and that all thy paths and counsels may prosper: for every
nation hath not counsel; but the Lord himself giveth all good things,
and he humbleth whom he will, as he will; now therefore, my son,
remember my commandments, neither let them be put out of thy mind.

20 And now I signify this to they that I committed ten talents to Gabael
the son of Gabrias at Rages in Media.

21 And fear not, my son, that we are made poor: for thou hast much
wealth, if thou fear God, and depart from all sin, and do that which is
pleasing in his sight.

[Sep](../sep/toa004.md)

1 ἐν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ ἐκείνῃ ἐμνήσθη Τωβιτ περὶ τοῦ ἀργυρίου οὗ παρέθετο Γαβαηλ
ἐν Ῥάγοις τῆς Μηδίας

2 καὶ εἶπεν ἐν ἑαυτῷ ἐγὼ ᾐτησάμην θάνατον τί οὐ καλῶ Τωβιαν τὸν υἱόν μου
ἵνα αὐτῷ ὑποδείξω πρὶν ἀποθανεῖν με

3 καὶ καλέσας αὐτὸν εἶπεν παιδίον ἐὰν ἀποθάνω θάψον με καὶ μὴ ὑπερίδῃς
τὴν μητέρα σου τίμα αὐτὴν πάσας τὰς ἡμέρας τῆς ζωῆς σου καὶ ποίει τὸ
ἀρεστὸν αὐτῇ καὶ μὴ λυπήσῃς αὐτήν

4 μνήσθητι παιδίον ὅτι πολλοὺς κινδύνους ἑόρακεν ἐπὶ σοὶ ἐν τῇ κοιλίᾳ
ὅταν ἀποθάνῃ θάψον αὐτὴν παρ᾽ ἐμοὶ ἐν ἑνὶ τάφῳ

5 πάσας τὰς ἡμέρας παιδίον κυρίου τοῦ θεοῦ ἡμῶν μνημόνευε καὶ μὴ θελήσῃς
ἁμαρτάνειν καὶ παραβῆναι τὰς ἐντολὰς αὐτοῦ δικαιοσύνην ποίει πάσας τὰς
ἡμέρας τῆς ζωῆς σου καὶ μὴ πορευθῇς ταῖς ὁδοῖς τῆς ἀδικίας

6 διότι ποιοῦντός σου τὴν ἀλήθειαν εὐοδίαι ἔσονται ἐν τοῖς ἔργοις σου

7 καὶ πᾶσι τοῖς ποιοῦσι τὴν δικαιοσύνην ἐκ τῶν ὑπαρχόντων σοι ποίει
ἐλεημοσύνην καὶ μὴ φθονεσάτω σου ὁ ὀφθαλμὸς ἐν τῷ ποιεῖν σε ἐλεημοσύνην
μὴ ἀποστρέψῃς τὸ πρόσωπόν σου ἀπὸ παντὸς πτωχοῦ καὶ ἀπὸ σοῦ οὐ μὴ
ἀποστραφῇ τὸ πρόσωπον τοῦ θεοῦ

8 ὡς σοὶ ὑπάρχει κατὰ τὸ πλῆθος ποίησον ἐξ αὐτῶν ἐλεημοσύνην ἐὰν ὀλίγον
σοι ὑπάρχῃ κατὰ τὸ ὀλίγον μὴ φοβοῦ ποιεῖν ἐλεημοσύνην

9 θέμα γὰρ ἀγαθὸν θησαυρίζεις σεαυτῷ εἰς ἡμέραν ἀνάγκης

10 διότι ἐλεημοσύνη ἐκ θανάτου ῥύεται καὶ οὐκ ἐᾷ εἰσελθεῖν εἰς τὸ σκότος

11 δῶρον γὰρ ἀγαθόν ἐστιν ἐλεημοσύνη πᾶσι τοῖς ποιοῦσιν αὐτὴν ἐνώπιον
τοῦ ὑψίστου

12 πρόσεχε σεαυτῷ παιδίον ἀπὸ πάσης πορνείας καὶ γυναῖκα πρῶτον λαβὲ ἀπὸ
τοῦ σπέρματος τῶν πατέρων σου μὴ λάβῃς γυναῖκα ἀλλοτρίαν ἣ οὐκ ἔστιν ἐκ
τῆς φυλῆς τοῦ πατρός σου διότι υἱοὶ προφητῶν ἐσμεν Νωε Αβρααμ Ισαακ
Ιακωβ οἱ πατέρες ἡμῶν ἀπὸ τοῦ αἰῶνος μνήσθητι παιδίον ὅτι οὗτοι πάντες
ἔλαβον γυναῖκας ἐκ τῶν ἀδελφῶν αὐτῶν καὶ εὐλογήθησαν ἐν τοῖς τέκνοις
αὐτῶν καὶ τὸ σπέρμα αὐτῶν κληρονομήσει γῆν

13 καὶ νῦν παιδίον ἀγάπα τοὺς ἀδελφούς σου καὶ μὴ ὑπερηφανεύου τῇ καρδίᾳ
σου ἀπὸ τῶν ἀδελφῶν σου καὶ τῶν υἱῶν καὶ θυγατέρων τοῦ λαοῦ σου λαβεῖν
σεαυτῷ ἐξ αὐτῶν γυναῖκα διότι ἐν τῇ ὑπερηφανίᾳ ἀπώλεια καὶ ἀκαταστασία
πολλή καὶ ἐν τῇ ἀχρειότητι ἐλάττωσις καὶ ἔνδεια μεγάλη ἡ γὰρ ἀχρειότης
μήτηρ ἐστὶν τοῦ λιμοῦ

14 μισθὸς παντὸς ἀνθρώπου ὃς ἐὰν ἐργάσηται παρὰ σοὶ μὴ αὐλισθήτω ἀλλὰ
ἀπόδος αὐτῷ παραυτίκα καὶ ἐὰν δουλεύσῃς τῷ θεῷ ἀποδοθήσεταί σοι πρόσεχε
σεαυτῷ παιδίον ἐν πᾶσι τοῖς ἔργοις σου καὶ ἴσθι πεπαιδευμένος ἐν πάσῃ
ἀναστροφῇ σου

15 καὶ ὃ μισεῖς μηδενὶ ποιήσῃς οἶνον εἰς μέθην μὴ πίῃς καὶ μὴ πορευθήτω
μετὰ σοῦ μέθη ἐν τῇ ὁδῷ σου

16 ἐκ τοῦ ἄρτου σου δίδου πεινῶντι καὶ ἐκ τῶν ἱματίων σου τοῖς γυμνοῖς
πᾶν ὃ ἐὰν περισσεύσῃ σοι ποίει ἐλεημοσύνην καὶ μὴ φθονεσάτω σου ὁ
ὀφθαλμὸς ἐν τῷ ποιεῖν σε ἐλεημοσύνην

17 ἔκχεον τοὺς ἄρτους σου ἐπὶ τὸν τάφον τῶν δικαίων καὶ μὴ δῷς τοῖς
ἁμαρτωλοῖς

18 συμβουλίαν παρὰ παντὸς φρονίμου ζήτησον καὶ μὴ καταφρονήσῃς ἐπὶ πάσης
συμβουλίας χρησίμης

19 καὶ ἐν παντὶ καιρῷ εὐλόγει κύριον τὸν θεὸν καὶ παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ αἴτησον
ὅπως αἱ ὁδοί σου εὐθεῖαι γένωνται καὶ πᾶσαι αἱ τρίβοι καὶ βουλαὶ
εὐοδωθῶσιν διότι πᾶν ἔθνος οὐκ ἔχει βουλήν ἀλλὰ αὐτὸς ὁ κύριος δίδωσιν
πάντα τὰ ἀγαθὰ καὶ ὃν ἐὰν θέλῃ ταπεινοῖ καθὼς βούλεται καὶ νῦν παιδίον
μνημόνευε τῶν ἐντολῶν μου καὶ μὴ ἐξαλειφθήτωσαν ἐκ τῆς καρδίας σου

20 καὶ νῦν ὑποδεικνύω σοι τὰ δέκα τάλαντα τοῦ ἀργυρίου ἃ παρεθέμην
Γαβαήλῳ τῷ τοῦ Γαβρια ἐν Ῥάγοις τῆς Μηδίας

21 καὶ μὴ φοβοῦ παιδίον ὅτι ἐπτωχεύσαμεν ὑπάρχει σοι πολλά ἐὰν φοβηθῇς
τὸν θεὸν καὶ ἀποστῇς ἀπὸ πάσης ἁμαρτίας καὶ ποιήσῃς τὸ ἀρεστὸν ἐνώπιον
αὐτοῦ

[Sep](../sep/tos004.md)

1 ἐν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ ἐκείνῃ ἐμνήσθη Τωβιθ τοῦ ἀργυρίου ὃ παρέθετο Γαβαήλῳ ἐν
Ῥάγοις τῆς Μηδίας

2 καὶ εἶπεν ἐν τῇ καρδίᾳ αὐτοῦ ἰδοὺ ἐγὼ ᾐτησάμην θάνατον τί οὐχὶ καλῶ
Τωβιαν τὸν υἱόν μου καὶ ὑποδείξω αὐτῷ περὶ τοῦ ἀργυρίου τούτου πρὶν
ἀποθανεῖν με

3 καὶ ἐκάλεσεν Τωβιαν τὸν υἱὸν αὐτοῦ καὶ ἦλθεν πρὸς αὐτόν καὶ εἶπεν αὐτῷ
θάψον με καλῶς καὶ τίμα τὴν μητέρα σου καὶ μὴ ἐγκαταλίπῃς αὐτὴν πάσας
τὰς ἡμέρας τῆς ζωῆς αὐτῆς καὶ ποίει τὸ ἀρεστὸν ἐνώπιον αὐτῆς καὶ μὴ
λυπήσῃς τὸ πνεῦμα αὐτῆς ἐν παντὶ πράγματι

4 μνήσθητι αὐτῆς παιδίον ὅτι κινδύνους πολλοὺς ἑώρακεν ἐπὶ σοὶ ἐν τῇ
κοιλίᾳ αὐτῆς καὶ ὅταν ἀποθάνῃ θάψον αὐτὴν παρ᾽ ἐμοὶ ἐν ἑνὶ τάφῳ

5 καὶ πάσας τὰς ἡμέρας σου παιδίον τοῦ κυρίου μνημόνευε καὶ μὴ θελήσῃς
ἁμαρτεῖν καὶ παραβῆναι τὰς ἐντολὰς αὐτοῦ δικαιοσύνας ποίει πάσας τὰς
ἡμέρας τῆς ζωῆς σου καὶ μὴ πορευθῇς ταῖς ὁδοῖς τῆς ἀδικίας

6 διότι οἱ ποιοῦντες ἀλήθειαν εὐοδωθήσονται ἐν τοῖς ἔργοις αὐτῶν

7 καὶ πᾶσιν τοῖς ποιοῦσιν δικαιοσύνην

19 δώσει κύριος αὐτοῖς βουλὴν ἀγαθήν καὶ ὃν ἂν θέλῃ κύριος ταπεινοῖ ἕως
ᾅδου κατωτάτω καὶ νῦν παιδίον μνημόνευε τὰς ἐντολὰς ταύτας καὶ μὴ
ἐξαλειφθήτωσαν ἐκ τῆς καρδίας σου

20 καὶ νῦν παιδίον ὑποδεικνύω σοι ὅτι δέκα τάλαντα ἀργυρίου παρεθέμην
Γαβαήλῳ τῷ τοῦ Γαβρι ἐν Ῥάγοις τῆς Μηδίας

21 καὶ μὴ φοβοῦ παιδίον ὅτι ἐπτωχεύσαμεν ὑπάρχει σοι πολλὰ ἀγαθά ἐὰν
φοβηθῇς τὸν θεὸν καὶ φύγῃς ἀπὸ πάσης ἁμαρτίας καὶ ποιήσῃς τὰ ἀγαθὰ
ἐνώπιον κυρίου τοῦ θεοῦ σου

[Vul](../vul/tob004.md)

1 Igitur cum Tobias putaret orationem suam exaudiri ut mori potuisset,
vocavit ad se Tobiam filium suum,

2 dixitque ei: Audi, fili mi, verba oris mei, et ea in corde tuo quasi
fundamentum construe.

3 Cum acceperit Deus animam meam, corpus meum sepeli: et honorem habebis
matri tuæ omnibus diebus vitæ ejus:

4 memor enim esse debes, quæ et quanta pericula passa sit propter te in
utero suo.

5 Cum autem et ipsa compleverit tempus vitæ suæ, sepelias eam circa me.

6 Omnibus autem diebus vitæ tuæ in mente habeto Deum: et cave ne
aliquando peccato consentias, et prætermittas præcepta Domini Dei
nostri.

7 Ex substantia tua fac eleemosynam, et noli avertere faciem tuam ab
ullo paupere: ita enim fiet ut nec a te avertatur facies Domini.

8 Quomodo potueris, ita esto misericors.

9 Si multum tibi fuerit, abundanter tribue: si exiguum tibi fuerit,
etiam exiguum libenter impertiri stude.

10 Præmium enim bonum tibi thesaurizas in die necessitatis:

11 quoniam eleemosyna ab omni peccato et a morte liberat, et non
patietur animam ire in tenebras.

12 Fiducia magna erit coram summo Deo, eleemosyna omnibus facientibus
eam.

13 Attende tibi, fili mi, ab omni fornicatione, et præter uxorem tuam
numquam patiaris crimen scire.

14 Superbiam numquam in tuo sensu aut in tuo verbo dominari permittas:
in ipsa enim initium sumpsit omnis perditio.

15 Quicumque tibi aliquid operatus fuerit, statim ei mercedem restitue,
et merces mercenarii tui apud te omnino non remaneat.

16 Quod ab alio oderis fieri tibi, vide ne tu aliquando alteri facias.

17 Panem tuum cum esurientibus et egenis comede, et de vestimentis tuis
nudos tege.

18 Panem tuum et vinum tuum super sepulturam justi constitue, et noli ex
eo manducare et bibere cum peccatoribus.

19 Consilium semper a sapiente perquire.

20 Omni tempore benedic Deum: et pete ab eo ut vias tuas dirigat, et
omnia consilia tua in ipso permaneant.

21 Indico etiam tibi, fili mi, dedisse me decem talenta argenti, dum
adhuc infantulus esses, Gabelo, in Rages civitate Medorum, et
chirographum ejus apud me habeo:

22 et ideo perquire quomodo ad eum pervenias, et recipias ab eo supra
memoratum pondus argenti, et restituas ei chirographum suum.

23 Noli timere, fili mi: pauperem quidem vitam gerimus, sed multa bona
habebimus si timuerimus Deum, et recesserimus ab omni peccato, et
fecerimus bene.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tobias 5](tob005.md)
