[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc08)  [Next](pjc10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# MEDITATION V.

### Jesus goes up to Jerusalem.

IN the morning, while the Apostles were engaged at Jerusalem in
preparing for the Pasch, Jesus, who had remained at Bethania, took an
affecting leave of the holy women, of Lazarus, and of his Blessed
Mother, and gave them some final instructions. I saw our Lord conversing
apart with his Mother, and he told her, among other things, that he had
sent Peter, the apostle of faith, and John, the apostle of love, to
prepare for the Pasch at Jerusalem. He said, in speaking of Magdalen,
whose grief was excessive, that her love was great, but still somewhat
human, and that on this account her sorrow made her beside herself. He
spoke also of the schemes of the traitor

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Judas, and the
Blessed Virgin prayed for him. Judas had again left Bethania to go to
Jerusalem, under pretence of paying some debts that were due. He spent
his whole day in hurrying backwards and forwards from one Pharisee to
another, and making his final agreements with them He was shown the
soldiers who had been engaged to seize the person of our Divine Saviour,
and he so arranged his journeys to and fro as to be able to account for
his absence. I beheld all his wicked schemes and all his thoughts. He
was naturally active and obliging, but these good qualities were choked
by avarice, ambition, and envy, which passions he made no effort to
control. In our Lord's absence he had even performed miracles and healed
the sick.

When our Lord announced to his Blessed Mother what was going to take
place, she besought him, in the most touching terms, to let her die with
him. But he exhorted her to show more calmness in her sorrow than the
other women, told her that he should rise again, and named the very spot
where he should appear to her. She did not weep much, but her grief was
indescribable, and there was something almost awful in her look of deep
recollection. Our Divine Lord returned thanks, as a loving Son, for all
the love she had borne him, and pressed her to his heart. He also told
her that he would make the Last Supper with her, spiritually, and named
the hour at which she would receive his precious Body and Blood. Then
once more he, in touching language, bade farewell to all, and gave them
different instructions.

About twelve o'clock in the day, Jesus and the nine Apostles went from
Bethania up to Jerusalem, followed by seven disciples, who, with the
exception of Nathaniel and Silas, came from Jerusalem and the
neighbourhood. Among these were John, Mark, and the son of the poor
widow who, the Thursday previous, had offered her mite in the Temple,
whilst Jesus was preaching there. Jesus had taken him into his company a
few days before. The holy women set off later.

Jesus and his companions walked around Mount Olivet, about the valley of
Josaphat, and even as far as Mount

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Calvary. During
the whole of this walk, be continued giving them instructions. He told
the Apostles, among other things, that until then he had given them his
bread and his wine, but that this day he was going to give them his Body
and Blood, his whole self-all that he had and all that he was. The
countenance of our Lord bore so touching an expression whilst he was
speaking, that his whole soul seemed to breathe forth from his lips, and
he appeared to be languishing with love and desire for the moment when
he should give himself to man. His disciples did not understand him, but
thought that he was speaking of the Paschal Lamb. No words can give an
adequate idea of the love and resignation which were expressed in these
last discourses of our Lord at Bethania, and on his way to Jerusalem.

The seven disciples who had followed our Lord to Jerusalem did not go
there in his company, but carried the ceremonial habits for the Pasch to
the supper-room, and then returned to the house of Mary, the mother of
Mark. When Peter and John came to the supper-room with the chalice, all
the ceremonial habits were already in the vestibule, whither they had
been brought by his disciples and some companions. They had also hung
the walls with drapery, cleared the higher openings in the sides, and
put up three lamps. Peter and John then went to the Valley of Josaphat,
and summoned our Lord and the twelve Apostles. The disciples and friends
who were also to make their Pasch in the supper-room, came later.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Meditation VI. The Last Pasch](pjc10.md)
