[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc05)  [Next](pjc07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# MEDITATION II.

### The Supper-Room.

ON the southern side of Mount Sion, not far from the ruined Castle of
David, and the market held on the ascent leading to that Castle, there
stood, towards the east, an ancient and solid building, between rows of
thick trees, in the midst of a spacious court surrounded by strong
walls. To the right and left of the entrance, other buildings were

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

to be seen adjoining the wall, particularly to the right, where stood
the dwelling of the major-domo, and close to it the house in which the
Blessed Virgin and the holy women spent most of their time after the
death of Jesus. The supper-room, which was originally larger, had
formerly been inhabited by David's brave captains, who had there learned
the use of arms.

Previous to the building of the Temple, the Ark of the Covenant had been
deposited there for a considerable length of time, and traces of its
presence were still to be found in an underground room. I have also seen
the Prophet Malachy hidden beneath this same roof: he there wrote his
prophecies concerning the Blessed Sacrament and the Sacrifice of the New
Law. Solomon held this house in honour, and performed within its walls
some figurative and symbolical action, which I have forgotten. When a
great part of Jerusalem was destroyed by the Babylonians, this house was
spared. I have seen many other things concerning this same house, but I
only remember what I have now told.

This building was in a very dilapidated state when it became the
property of Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea, who arranged the
principal building in a very suitable manner, and let it as a
supper-room to strangers coming to Jerusalem for the purpose of
celebrating the festival of the Pasch. Thus it was that our Lord had
made use of it the previous year. Moreover, the house and surrounding
buildings served as warehouses for monuments and other stones, and as
workshops for the labourers; for Joseph of Arimathea possessed valuable
quarries in his own country, from which he had large blocks of stone
brought, that his workmen might fashion them, under his own eye, into
tombs, architectural ornaments, and columns, for sale. Nicodemus had a
share in this business, and used to spend many leisure hours himself in
sculpturing. He worked in the room, or in a subterraneous apartment
which was beneath it, excepting at the times of the festivals; and this
occupation having brought him, into connection with Joseph of Arimathea,
they had

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

become friends, and often joined together in various transactions.

This morning, whilst Peter and John were conversing with the man who had
hired the supper-room, I saw Nicodemus in the buildings to the left of
the court, where a great many stones which filled up the passages
leading to the supper-room had been placed. A week before, I had seen
several persons engaged in putting the stones on one side, cleaning the
court, and preparing the supper-room for the celebration of the Pasch;
it even appears to me that there were among them some disciples of our
Lord, perhaps Aram and Themein, the cousins of Joseph of Arimathea.

The supper-room, properly so called, was nearly in the centre of the
court; its length was greater than its width; it was surrounded by a row
of low pillars, and if the spaces between the pillars had been cleared,
would have formed a part of the large inner room, for the whole edifice
was, as it were, transparent; only it was usual, except on special
occasions, for the passages to be closed up. The room was lighted by
apertures at the top of the walls. In front, there was first a
vestibule, into which three doors gave entrance; next, the large inner
room, where several lamps hung from the platform; the walls were
ornamented for the festival, half way up, with beautiful matting or
tapestry, and an aperture had been made in the roof, and covered over
with transparent blue gauze.

The back part of this room was separated from the rest by a curtain,
also of blue transparent gauze. This division of the supper-room into
three parts gave a resemblance to the Temple--thus forming the outer
Court, the Holy, and the Holy of Holies. In the last of these divisions,
on both sides, the dresses and other things necessary for the
celebration of the feast were placed. In the centre there was a species
of altar. A stone bench raised on three steps, and of a rectangular
triangular shape, came out of the wall; it must have constituted the
upper part of the oven used for roasting the Paschal Lamb, for to-day
the steps were quite heated during the repast. I cannot describe in
detail

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

all that there was in this part of the room, but all kinds of
arrangements were being made there for preparing the Paschal Supper.
Above this hearth or altar, there was a species of niche in the wall, in
front of which I saw an image of the Paschal Lamb, with a knife in its
throat, and the blood appearing to flow drop by drop upon the altar; but
I do not remember distinctly how that was done. In a niche in the wall
there were three cupboards of various colours, which turned like our
tabernacles, for opening or closing. A number of vessels used in the
celebration of the Pasch were kept in them; later, the Blessed Sacrament
was placed there.

In the rooms at the sides of the supper-room, there were some couches,
on which thick coverlids rolled up were placed, and which could be used
as beds. There were spacious cellars beneath the whole of this building.
The Ark of the Covenant was formerly deposited under the very spot where
the hearth was afterwards built. Five gutters, under the house, served
to convey the refuse to the slope of the hill, on the -upper part of
which the house was built. I had previously seen Jesus preach and
perform miraculous cures there, and the disciples frequently passed the
night in the side rooms.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Meditation III. Arrangements for eating the Paschal Lamb](pjc07.md)
