[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc11)  [Next](pjc13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# MEDITATION VIII.

### Institution of the Holy Eucharist.

By command of our Lord, the major-domo had again laid out the table,
which he had raised a little; then, having placed it once more in the
middle of the room, he stood one urn filled with wine, and another with
water underneath it. Peter and John went into the part of the room near
the hearth, to get the chalice which they had brought from Seraphia's
house, and which was still wrapped up in its covering. They carried it
between them as if they had been carrying a tabernacle, and placed it on
the table before Jesus. An oval plate stood there, with three fine white
azymous loaves, placed on a piece of linen, by the side of the half loaf
which Jesus had set aside during

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

the Paschal meal, also a jar containing wine and water, and three boxes,
one filled with thick oil, a second with liquid oil, and the third
empty.

In earlier times, it had been the practice for all at table to eat of
the same loaf and drink of the same cup at the end of the meal, thereby
to express their friendship and brotherly love, and to welcome and bid
farewell to each other. I think Scripture must contain something upon
this subject.

On the day of the Last Supper, Jesus raised this custom (which had
hitherto been no more than a symbolical and figurative rite) to the
dignity of the holiest of sacraments. One of the charges brought before
Caiphas, on occasion of the treason of Judas, was, that Jesus had
introduced a novelty into the Paschal ceremonies, but Nicodemus proved
from Scripture that it was an ancient practice.

Jesus was seated between Peter and John, the doors were closed, and
everything was done in the most mysterious and imposing manner. When the
chalice was taken out of its covering, Jesus prayed, and spoke to his
Apostles with the utmost solemnity. I saw him giving them an explanation
of the Supper, and of the entire ceremony, and I was forcibly reminded
of a priest teaching others to say Mass.

He then drew a species of shelf with grooves from the board on which the
jars stood, and taking a piece of white linen with which the chalice was
covered, spread it over the board and shelf. I then saw him lift a round
plate, which he placed on this same shelf, off the top of the chalice.
He next took the azymous loaves from beneath the linen with which they
were covered, and placed them before him on the board; then be took out
of the chalice a smaller vase, and ranged the six little glasses on each
side of it. Then he blessed the bread and also the oil, to the best of
my belief, after which he lifted up the paten with the loaves upon it,
in his two hands, raised his eyes, prayed offered, and replaced the
paten on the table, covering it up again. He then took the chalice, had
some wine

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

poured into it by Peter, and some water, which he first blessed, by
John, adding to it a little more water, which he poured into a small
spoon, and after this he blessed the chalice, raised it up with a
prayer, made the oblation, and replaced it on the table.

John and Peter poured some water on his hands, which he held over the
plate on which the azymous loaves had been placed; then he took a little
of the water which had been poured on his hands, in the spoon that be
had taken out of the lower part of the chalice, and poured it on theirs.
After this, the vase was passed round the table, and all the Apostles
washed their hands in it. I do not remember whether this was the precise
order in which these ceremonies were performed; all I know is, that they
reminded me in a striking manner of the holy sacrifice of the Mass.

Meanwhile, our Divine Lord became more and more tender and loving in his
demeanour; he told his Apostles that he was about to give them all that
he had, namely, his entire self, and he looked as though perfectly
transformed by love. I saw him becoming transparent, until he resembled
a luminous shadow. He broke the bread into several pieces, which he laid
together on the paten, and then took a corner of the first piece and
dropped it into the chalice. At the moment when he was doing this, I
seemed to see the Blessed Virgin receiving the Holy Sacrament in a
spiritual manner, although she was not present in the supper-room. I do
not know how it was done, but I thought I saw her enter without touching
the ground, and come before our Lord to receive the Holy Eucharist;
after which I saw her no more. Jesus had told her in the morning, at
Bethania, that he would keep the Pasch with her spiritually, and he had
named the hour at which she was to betake herself to prayer, in order to
receive it in spirit.

Again he prayed and taught; his words came forth from his lips like fire
and light, and entered into each of the Apostles, with the exception of
Judas. He took the paten with the pieces of bread (I do not know whether
he had placed it on the chalice) and said: '*Take and eat*;

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

*this is my Body which is given for you*.' He stretched forth his right
hand as if to bless, and, whilst he did so, a brilliant light came from
him, his words were luminous, the bread entered the mouths of the
Apostles as a brilliant substance, and light seemed to penetrate and
surround them all, Judas alone remaining dark. Jesus presented the bread
first to Peter, next to John <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6) and then
he made a sign to Judas to approach. Judas was thus the third who
received the Adorable Sacrament, but the words of our Lord appeared to
turn aside from the mouth of the traitor, and come back to their Divine
Author. So perturbed was I in spirit at this sight, that my feelings
cannot be described. Jesus said to him: '*That which thou dost, do
quickly*.' He then administered the Blessed Sacrament to the other
Apostles, who approached two and two.

Jesus raised the chalice by its two handles to a level with his face,
and pronounced the words of consecration. Whilst doing so, he appeared
wholly transfigured, as it were transparent, and as though entirely
passing into what he was going to give his Apostles. He made Peter and
John drink from the chalice which he held in his hand, and then placed
it again on the table. John poured the Divine Blood from the chalice
into the smaller glasses, and Peter presented them to the Apostles, two
of whom drank together out of the same cup. I think, but am not quite
certain, that Judas also partook of the chalice; he did not return to
his place, but immediately left the supper-room, and the other Apostles
thought that Jesus had given him some commission to do. He left without
praying or making any thanksgiving, and hence you may perceive how
sinful it is to neglect returning thanks either after receiving our
daily food, or after partaking of the Life-Giving Bread of Angels.
During the entire meal, I had seen a frightful little figure, with one
foot like a dried bone, remaining close to Judas, but when he had
reached the door,

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I beheld three
devils pressing round him; one entered into his mouth, the second urged
him on, and the third preceded him. It was night, and they seemed to be
lighting him, whilst he hurried onward like a madman.

Our Lord poured a few drops of the Precious Blood remaining in the
chalice into the little vase of which I have already spoken, and then
placed his fingers over the chalice, while Peter and John poured water
and wine upon them. This done, he caused them to drink again from the
chalice, and what remained of its contents was poured into the smaller
glasses, and distributed to the other Apostles. Then Jesus wiped the
chalice, put into it the little vase containing the remainder of the
Divine Blood, and placed over it the paten with the fragments of the
consecrated bread, after which he again put on the cover, wrapped up the
chalice, and stood it in the midst of the six small cups. I saw the
Apostles receive in communion these remains of the Adorable Sacrament,
after the Resurrection.

I do not remember seeing our Lord himself eat and drink of the
consecrated elements, neither did I see Melchisedech, when offering the
bread and wine, taste of them himself. It was made known to me why
priests partake of them, although Jesus did not.

Here Sister Emmerich looked suddenly up, and appeared to be listening.
Some explanation was given her on this subject, but the following words
were all that she could repeat to us: 'If the office of distributing it
had been given to angels, they would not have partaken, but if priests
did not partake, the Blessed Eucharist would be lost-- it is through
their participation that it is preserved.'

There was an indescribable solemnity and order in all the actions of
Jesus during the institution of the Holy Eucharist, and his every
movement was most majestic. I saw the Apostles noting things down in the
little rolls of parchment which they carried on their persons. Several
times during the ceremonies I remarked that they bowed to each other, in
the same way that our priests do.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[87:1](pjc12.htm#fr_6) She was not certain that
the Blessed Sacrament was administered in the order given above, for on
another occasion she had seen John the last to receive.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Meditation IX. Private Instructions and Consecrations](pjc13)
