[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc12)  [Next](pjc14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

# MEDITATION IX.

### Private Instructions and Consecrations.

Jesus gave his Apostles some private instructions; he told them how they
were to preserve the Blessed Sacrament in memory of him, even to the end
of the world; he taught them the necessary forms for making use of and
communicating it, and in what manner they were, by degrees, to teach and
publish this mystery; finally he told them when they were to receive
what remained of the consecrated Elements, when to give some to the
Blessed Virgin, and how to consecrate, themselves, after he should have
sent them the Divine Comforter. He then spoke concerning the priesthood,
the sacred unction, and the preparation of the Chrism and Holy
Oils. <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7) He had there three boxes, two of
which contained a mixture of oil and balm. He taught them how to make
this mixture, what parts of the body were to be anointed with them, and
upon what occasions. I remember, among other things, that he mentioned a
case in which the Holy Eucharist could not be administered; perhaps what
he said had reference to Extreme Unction, for my recollections on this
point are not very clear. He spoke of different kinds of anointing, and
in particular of that of kings, and he said that even wicked kings who
were anointed, derived from it especial powers. He put ointment and oil
in the empty box, and mixed them together, but I cannot say for certain

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

whether it was at this moment, or at the time of the consecration of the
bread, that he blessed the oil.

I then saw Jesus anoint Peter and John, on whose hands he had already
poured the water which had flowed on his own, and two whom he had given
to drink out of the chalice. Then he laid his hands on their shoulders
and heads, while they, on their part, joined their hands and crossed
their thumbs, bowing down profoundly before him--I am not sure whether
they did not even kneel. He anointed the thumb and fore-finger of each
of their hands, and marked a cross on their heads with Chrism. He said
also that this would remain with them unto the end of the world.

James the Less, Andrew, James the Greater, and Bartholomew, were also
consecrated. I saw likewise that on Peter's bosom he crossed a sort of
stole worn round the neck, whilst on the others he simply placed it
crosswise, from the right shoulder to the left side. I do not know
whether this was done at the time of the institution of the Blessed
Sacrament, or only for the anointing.

I understood that Jesus communicated to them by this unction something
essential and supernatural, beyond my power to describe. He told them
that when they should have received the Holy Spirit they were to
consecrate the bread and wine, and anoint the other Apostles. It was
made known to me then that, on the day of Pentecost, Peter and John
imposed their hands upon the other Apostles, and a week later upon
several of the disciples. After the Resurrection, John gave the Adorable
Sacrament for the first time to the Blessed Virgin. This event was
solemnised as a festival among the Apostles. It is a festival no longer
kept in the Church on earth, but I see it celebrated in the Church
triumphant. For the first few days after Pentecost I saw only Peter and
John consecrate the Blessed Eucharist, but after that the others also
consecrated.

Our Lord next proceeded to bless fire in a brass vessel, and care was
taken that it should not go out, but it was kept near the spot where the
Blessed Sacrament had been

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

deposited, in one division of the ancient Paschal hearth, and fire was
always taken from it when needed for spiritual purposes.

All that Jesus did upon this occasion was done in private, and taught
equally in private. The Church has retained all that was essential of
these secret instructions, and, under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost,
developed and adapted them to all her requirements.

Whether Peter and John were both consecrated bishops, or Peter alone as
bishop and John as priest, or to what dignity the other four Apostles
were raised, I cannot pretend to say. But the different ways in which
our Lord arranged the Apostles' stoles appear to indicate different
degrees of consecration.

When these holy ceremonies were concluded, the chalice (near which the
blessed Chrism also stood) was re-covered, and the Adorable Sacrament
carried by Peter and John into the back part of the room, which was
divided off by a curtain, and from thenceforth became the Sanctuary. The
spot where the Blessed Sacrament was deposited was not very far above
the Paschal stove. Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus took care of the
Sanctuary and of the supper-room during the absence of the Apostles.

Jesus again instructed his Apostles for a considerable length of time,
and also prayed several times. He frequently appeared to be conversing
with his Heavenly Father, and to be overflowing with enthusiasm and
love. The Apostles also were full of joy and zeal, and asked him various
questions which he forthwith answered. The scriptures must contain much
of this last discourse and conversation. He told Peter and John
different things to be made known later to the other Apostles, who in
their turn were to communicate them to the disciples and holy women,
according to the capacity of each for such knowledge. He had a private
conversation with John, whom he told that his life would be longer than
the lives of the others. He spoke to him also concerning seven Churches,
some crowns and angels, and instructed him in the meaning of certain
mysterious figures, which signified, to the

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

beat of my belief, different epochs. The other Apostles were slightly
jealous of this confidential communication being made to John.

Jesus spoke also of the traitor. 'Now he is doing this or that,' he
said, and I, in fact, saw Judas doing exactly as he said of him. As
Peter was vehemently protesting that he would always remain faithful,
our Lord said to him: '*Simon, Simon, behold Satan hath desired to have
you that he may sift you as wheat. But I have prayed for thee that thy
faith fail not: and thou being once converted, confirm thy brethren*.'

Again, our Lord said, that whither he was going they could not follow
him, when Peter exclaimed: '*Lord, I am ready to go with thee both into
prison and to death*.' And Jesus replied: '*Amen, amen, I say to thee,
Before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice*.'

Jesus, while making known to his Apostles that trying times were at hand
for them, said: '*When I sent you without purse, or scrip, or shoes, did
you want anything*?' They answered: '*Nothing*.' '*But now*,' he
continued, '*he that hath a purse let him take it, and likewise a scrip,
and he that hath not, let him sell his coat and buy a sword. For I say
to you, that this that is written must yet be fulfilled in me*: AND WITH
THE WICKED WAS HE BECKONED. *For the things concerning me have an end*.'
The Apostles only understood his words in a carnal sense, and Peter
showed him two swords, which were short and thick, like cleavers. Jesus
said: '*It is enough*: let us go hence.' Then they sang the thanksgiving
hymn, put the table on one side, and went into the vestibule.

There, Jesus found his Mother, Mary of Cleophas, and Magdalen, who
earnestly besought him not to go to Mount Olivet, for a report had
spread that his enemies were seeking to lay hands on him. But Jesus
comforted them in few words, and hastened onward--it being then about
nine o'clock. They went down the road by which Peter and John had come
to the supper-room, and directed their steps towards Mount Olivet.

I have always seen the Pasch and the institution of

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

the Blessed Sacrament take place in the order related above. But my
feelings were each time so strongly excited and my emotion so great,
that I could not give much attention to all the details, but now I have
seen them more distinctly. No words can describe how painful and
exhausting is such a sight as that of beholding the hidden recesses of
hearts, the love and constancy of our Saviour, and to know at the same
time all that is going to befall him. How would it be possible to
observe all that is merely external! the heart is overflowing with
admiration, gratitude, and love--the blindness of men seems perfectly
incomprehensible--and the soul is overwhelmed with sorrow at the thought
of the ingratitude of the whole world, and of her own sins 1

The eating of the Paschal Lamb was performed by Jesus rapidly, and in
entire conformity with all the legal ordinances. The Pharisees were in
the habit of adding some minute and superstitious ceremonies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[89:1](pjc13.htm#fr_7) It was not without
surprise that the editor, some years after these things had been related
by Sister Emmerich, read, in the Latin edition of the Roman Catechism
(Mayence, Muller), in reference to the Sacrament of Confirmation, that,
according to the tradition of the holy Pope Fabian, Jesus taught his
Apostles in what manner they were to prepare the Holy Chrism, after the
institution of the Blessed Sacrament. The Pope says expressly, in the
54th paragraph of his Second Epistle to the Bishops of the East: 'Our
predecessors received from the Apostles and delivered to us that our
Saviour Jesus Christ, after having made the Last Supper with his
Apostles and washed their feet, taught them how to prepare the Holy
Chrism.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](pjc14)
