[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc09)  [Next](pjc11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# MEDITATION VI.

### The Last Pasch.

JESUS and his disciples ate the Paschal Lamb in the supper-room. They
divided into three groups. Jesus ate the Paschal Lamb with the twelve
Apostles in the supper-room, properly so called; Nathaniel with twelve
other disciples in one of the lateral rooms, and Eliacim (the son

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

of Cleophas and Mary, the daughter of Heli), who had been a disciple of
John the Baptist, with twelve more, in another side-room

Three lambs were immolated for them in the Temple, but there was a
fourth lamb which was immolated in the supper-room, and was the one
eaten by Jesus with his Apostles. Judas was not aware of this
circumstance, because being engaged in plotting his betrayal of our
Lord, he only returned a few moments before the repast, and after the
immolation of the lamb had taken place. Most touching was the scene of
the immolation of the lamb to be eaten by Jesus and his Apostles; it
took place in the vestibule of the supper-room. The Apostles and
disciples were present, singing the 118th Psalm. Jesus spoke of a new
period then beginning, and said that the sacrifice of Moses and the
figure of the Paschal Lamb were about to receive their accomplishment,
but that on this very account, the lamb was to be immolated in the same
manner as formerly in Egypt, and that they were really about to go forth
from the house of bondage.

The vessels and necessary instruments were prepared, and then the
attendants brought a beautiful little lamb, decorated with a crown,
which was sent to the Blessed Virgin in the room where she had remained
with the other holy women. The lamb was fastened with its back against a
board by a cord around its body, and reminded me of Jesus tied to the
pillar and scourged. The son of Simeon held the lamb's head; Jesus made
a slight incision in its neck with the point of a knife, Which he then
gave to the son of Simeon, that he might complete killing it. Jesus
appeared to inflict the wound with a feeling of repugnance, and he was
quick in his movements, although his countenance was grave, and his
manner such as to inspire respect. The blood flowed into a basin, and
the attendants brought a branch of hyssop, which Jesus dipped in it.
Then he went to the door of the room, stained the side-posts and the
lock with blood, and placed the branch which had been dipped in blood
above the door. He then spoke to the disciples, and told them, among
other things,

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

that the exterminating angel would pass by, that they would adore in
that room without fear or anxiety, when he, the true Paschal Lamb,
should have been immolated--that a new epoch, and a new sacrifice were
about to begin, which would last to the end of the world.

They then went to the other side of the room, near the hearth where the
Ark of the Covenant had formerly stood. Fire had already been lighted
there, and Jesus poured some blood upon the hearth, consecrating it as
an altar; and the remainder of the blood and the fat were thrown on the
fire beneath the altar, after which Jesus, followed by his Apostles,
walked round the supper-room, singing some psalms, and consecrating it
as a new Temple. The doors were all closed during this time. Meanwhile
the son of Simeon had completed the preparation of the lamb. He passed a
stake through its body, fastening the front legs on a cross piece of
wood, and stretching the hind ones along the stake. It bore a strong
resemblance to Jesus on the cross, and was placed in the oven, to be
there roasted with the three other lambs brought from the Temple.

The Paschal Lambs of the Jews were all immolated in the vestibule of the
Temple, but in different parts, according as the persons who were to eat
them were rich, or poor, or Strangers. <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5.md)
The Paschal Lamb belonging to Jesus was not immolated in the Temple, but
everything else was done strictly according to the law. Jesus again
addressed his disciples, saying that the lamb was but a figure, that he
himself would next day be the true Paschal Lamb, together with other
things which I have forgotten.

When Jesus had finished his instructions concerning the Paschal Lamb and
its signification, the time being come, and Judas also returned, the
tables were set out. The disciples put on travelling dresses which were
in the vestibule, different shoes, a white robe resembling a shirt, and
a cloak, which was short in front and longer behind,

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

their sleeves were large and turned back, and they girded up their
clothes around the waist. Each party went to their own table; and two
sets of disciples in the side rooms, and our Lord and his Apostles in
the supper-room. They held staves in their hands, and went two and two
to the table, where they remained standing, each in his own place, with
the stave resting on his arms, and his hands upraised.

The table was narrow, and about half a foot higher than the knees of a
man; in shape it resembled a horseshoe, and opposite Jesus, in the inner
part of the half-circle, there was a space left vacant, that the
attendants might be able to set down the dishes. As far as I can
remember, John, James the Greater, and James the Less sat on the
right-hand of Jesus; after them Bartholomew, and then, round the corner,
Thomas and Judas Iscariot. Peter, Andrew, and Thaddeus sat on the left
of Jesus; next came Simon, and then (round the corner) Matthew and
Philip.

The Paschal Lamb was placed on a dish in the centre of the table. Its
head rested on its front legs, which were fastened to a cross-stick, its
hind legs being stretched out, and the dish was garnished with garlic.
By the side there was a dish with the Paschal roast meat, then came a
plate with green vegetables balanced against each other, and another
plate with small bundles of bitter herbs, which had the appearance of
aromatic herbs. Opposite Jesus there was also one dish with different
herbs, and a second containing a brown-coloured sauce or beverage. The
guests had before them some round loaves instead of plates, and they
used ivory knives.

After the prayer, the major-domo laid the knife for cutting the lamb on
the table before Jesus, who placed a cup of wine before him, and filled
six other cups, each one of which stood between two Apostles. Jesus
blessed the wine and drank, and the Apostles drank two together out of
one cup. Then our Lord proceeded to cut up the lamb; his Apostles
presented their pieces of bread in turn, and each received his share.
They ate it in haste,

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

separating the flesh from the bone, by means of their ivory knives, and
the bones were afterwards burnt. They also ate the garlic and green
herbs in haste, dipping them in the sauce. All this time they remained
standing, only leaning slightly on the backs of their seats. Jesus broke
one of the loaves of unleavened bread, covered up a part of it, and
divided the remainder among his Apostles. Another cup of wine was
brought, but Jesus drank not of it: 'Take this,' he said, 'and divide it
among you, *for I will not drink from henceforth, of the fruit of the
vine, until that day when I shall drink it with you new in the kingdom
of my Father*' (Matt. xxvi. 2 9). When they had drunk the wine, they
sang a hymn; then Jesus prayed or taught, and they again washed their
hands. After this they sat down.

Our Lord cut up another lamb, which was carried to the holy women in one
of the buildings of the court, where they were seated at table. The
Apostles ate some more vegetables and lettuce. The countenance of our
Divine Saviour bore an indescribable expression of serenity and
recollection, greater than I had ever before Seen. He bade the Apostles
forget all their cares. The Blessed Virgin also, as she sat at table
with the other women, looked most placid and calm. When the other women
came up, and took hold of her veil to make her turn round and speak to
them, her every movement expressed the sweetest self-control and
placidity of spirit.

At first Jesus conversed lovingly and calmly with his disciples, but
after a while he became grave and sad: '*Amen, Amen, I say to you, that
one of you is about to betray me*:' he said, '*he that dippeth his hand
with me in the dish*' (Matt. xxvi. 21, 23). Jesus was then distributing
the lettuce, of which there was only one dish, to those Apostles who
were by his side, and be had given Judas, who was nearly opposite to
him, the office of distributing it to the others. When Jesus spoke of a
traitor, an expression which filled all the Apostles with fear, he said:
'*he that dippeth his hand with me in the dish*,' which means: I one of
the twelve who are eating

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

and drinking with me--one of those with whom I am eating bread.' He did
not plainly point out Judas to the others by these words; for to dip the
hand in the same dish was an expression used to signify the most
friendly and intimate intercourse. He was desirous, however, to give a
warning to Judas, who was then really dipping his hand in the dish with
our Saviour, to distribute the lettuce. Jesus continued to speak: '*The
Son of man indeed goeth*,' he said, '*as it is written of him: but woe
to that man by whom the Son of man shall be betrayed: It were better for
him if that man had not been born*.'

The Apostles were very much troubled, and each one of them exclaimed:
'*Lord, is it I*?' for they were all perfectly aware that they did not
entirely understand his words. Peter leaned towards John, behind Jesus,
and made him a sign to ask our Lord who the traitor was to be, for,
having so often been reproved by our Lord, he trembled lest it should be
himself who was referred to. John was seated at the right hand of Jesus,
and as all were leaning on their left arms, using the right to eat, his
head was close to the bosom of Jesus. He leaned then on his breast and
said: '*Lord, who is it*?' I did not see Jesus say to him with his lips:
'*He it is to whom I shall reach bread dipped*.' I do not know whether
he whispered it to him, but John knew it, when Jesus having dipped the
bread, which was covered with lettuce, gave it tenderly to Judas, who
also asked: '*Is it I, Lord*?' Jesus looked at him with love, and
answered him in general terms. Among the Jews, to give 'bread dipped was
a mark of friendship and confidence; Jesus on this occasion gave Judas
the morsel, in order thus to warn him, without making known his guilt to
the others. But the heart of Judas burned with anger, and during the
whole time of the repast, I saw a frightful little figure seated at his
feet, and sometimes ascending to his heart. I did not see John repeat to
Peter what he had learned from Jesus, but he set his fears at rest by a
look.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[78:1](pjc10.htm#fr_5.md) She here again explained
the manner in which the families assembled together, and in what
numbers. But the writer has forgotten her words.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Meditation VII. The Washing of the Feet](pjc11.md)
