[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc20)  [Next](pjc22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

# CHAPTER VII.

### The Tribunal of Caiphas.

To enter Caiphas's tribunal persons had to pass through a large court,
which maybe called the exterior court; from thence they entered into an
inner court, which extended all round the building. The building itself
was of far greater length than breadth, and in the front there was a
kind of open vestibule surrounded on three sides by columns of no great
height. On the fourth side the columns were higher, and behind them was
a room almost as large as the vestibule itself, where the seats of the
members of the Council were placed on a species of round platform
raised, above the level of the floor. That assigned to the High Priest
was elevated above the others; the criminal to be tried stood in the
centre of the half-circle formed by the seats. The witnesses and
accusers stood either by the side or behind the prisoner. There were
three doors at the back of the judges\` seats which led into another
apartment, filled likewise with seats. This room was used for secret
consultation. Entrances placed on the right and left hand sides of this
room opened into the interior court, which was round, like the back of
the building. Those who left the room by the door on the right-hand side
saw on the left-hand side of the court the gate which led to a
subterranean prison excavated under the room. There were many
underground prisons there, and it was in one of these that Peter and
John were confined a whole night, when they had cured the lame man in
the Temple after Pentecost. Both the house and the courts were filled
with torches and lamps, which made them as light as day. There was a
large fire lighted in the middle of the porch, on each side of which
were hollow pipes to serve as chimneys for the smoke, and round this
fire were standing soldiers, menial servants, and witnesses of the
lowest class who had received bribes for giving their false testimony. A
few women were there likewise, whose employment was to pour out a
species of red beverage for the

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

soldiers, and to bake cakes, for which services they received a small
compensation. The majority of the judges were already seated around
Caiphas, the others came in shortly afterwards, and the porch was almost
filled, between true and false witnesses, while many other persons
likewise endeavoured to come in to gratify their curiosity, but were
prevented. Peter and John entered the outer court, in the dress of
travellers, a short time before Jesus was led through, and John
succeeded in penetrating into the inner court, by means of a servant
with whom he was acquainted. The door was instantly closed after him,
therefore Peter, who was a little behind, was shut out. He begged the
maid-servant to open the door for him, but she refused both his
entreaties and those of John, and he must have remained on the outside
had not Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea, who came up at this moment,
taken him with them. The two Apostles then returned the cloaks which
they had borrowed, and stationed themselves in a place from whence they
could see the judges, and hear everything that was going on. Caiphas was
seated in the centre of the raised platform, and seventy of the members
of the Sanhedrim were placed around him, while the public officers, the
Scribes, and the ancients were standing on either side, and the false
witnesses behind them. Soldiers were posted from the base of the
platform to the door of the vestibule through which Jesus was to enter.
The countenance of Caiphas was solemn in the extreme, but the gravity
was accompanied by unmistakable signs of suppressed rage and sinister
intentions. He wore a long mantle of a dull red colour, embroidered in
flowers and trimmed with golden fringe; it was fastened at the shoulders
and on the chest, besides being ornamented in the front with gold
clasps. His head-attire was high, and adorned with hanging ribbons, the
sides were open, and it rather resembled a bishop's mitre. Caiphas had
been waiting with his adherents belonging to the Great Council for some
time, and so impatient was he that he arose several times, went into the
outer court in his magnificent dress, and asked angrily whether Jesus of
Nazareth was come. When

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

he saw the procession drawing near he returned to his seat.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Jesus before Caiphas](pjc22)
