[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc36)  [Next](pjc38) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XXIII.

### Mary, during the Flagellation of our Lord.

I SAW the Blessed Virgin in a continual ecstasy during the time of the
scourging of her Divine Son; she saw and suffered with inexpressible
love and grief all the torments he was enduring. She groaned feebly, and
her eyes were, red with weeping. A large veil covered her person, and
she leant upon Mary of Heli, her eldest sister, <span
id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11) who was

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

old and extremely like their mother, Anne. Mary of Cleophas, the
daughter of Mary of Heli, was there also. The friends of Jesus and Mary
stood around the latter; they wore large veils, appeared overcome with
grief and anxiety, and were weeping as if in the momentary expectation
of death. The dress of Mary was blue; it was long, and partly covered by
a cloak made of white wool, and her veil was of rather a yellow white.
Magdalen was totally beside herself from grief, and her hair was
floating loosely under her veil.

When Jesus fell down at the foot of the pillar, after the flagellation,
I saw Claudia Procles, the wife of Pilate, send some large pieces of
linen to the Mother of God. I know not whether she thought that Jesus
would be set free, and that his Mother would then require linen to dress
his wounds, or whether this compassionate lady was aware of the use
which would be made of her present. At the termination of the scourging,
Mary came to herself for a time, and saw her Divine Son all torn and
mangled, being led away by the archers after the scourging: he wiped his
eyes, which were filled with blood, that he might look at his Mother,
and she stretched out her hands towards him, and continued to look at
the bloody traces of his footsteps. I soon after saw Mary and Magdalen
approach the pillar where Jesus had been scourged; the mob were at a
distance, and they were partly concealed by the other holy women, and by
a few kind-hearted persons who had joined them; they knelt down on the
ground near the pillar, and wiped up the sacred blood with the linen
which Claudia Procles had sent. John was not at that time with the holy
women, who were about twenty in number. The sons

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

of Simeon and of Obed, and Veronica, as also the two nephews of Joseph
of Arimathea--Aram and Themni--were in the Temple, and appeared to be
overwhelmed with grief. It was not more than nine o'clock A.M. when the
scourging terminated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[210:1](pjc37.htm#fr_11) Mary of Heli is often
spoken of in this relation. According to Sister Emmerich, she was the
daughter of St. Joachim and St. Anne, and was born nearly twenty years
before the Blessed Virgin. She was not the child of promise, and is
called Mary of Heli, by which she is distinguished from the other of the
same name, because <span id="page_211">p. 211</span> she was the
daughter of Joachim, or Heliachim. Her husband bore the name of
Cleophas, and her daughter that of Mary of Cleophas. This daughter was,
however, older than her aunt, the Blessed Virgin, and had been married
first to Alpheus, by whom she had three sons, afterwards the Apostles
Simon, James the Less and Thaddeus. She had one son by her second
husband, Sabat and another called Simon, by her third husband, Jonas.
Simon was afterwards Bishop of Jerusalem.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV. Interruption of the Visions of the Passion by the
Appearance of St. Joseph under the form of a Child](pjc38)
