[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc29)  [Next](pjc31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XVI.

### Description of Pilate's Palace and the adjacent Buildings.

THE palace of the Roman Governor, Pilate, was built on the north-west
side of the mountain on which the Temple stood, and to reach it persons
were obliged to ascend a flight of marble steps. It overlooked a large
square surrounded by a colonnade, under which the merchants sat to sell
their various commodities. A parapet, and an entrance at the north,
south, east, and west sides alone broke the uniformity of this part of
the market-place, which was called the forum, and built on higher ground
than the adjacent streets, which sloped down from it. The palace of
Pilate was not quite close, but separated

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

by a large court, the entrance to which at the eastern side was through
a high arch facing a street leading to the door called the 'Probatica,'
on the road to the Mount of Olives. The southern entrance was through
another arch, which leads to Sion, in the neighbourhood of the fortress
of Acre. From the top of the marble steps of Pilate's palace, a person
could see across the court as far as the forum, at the entrance of which
a few columns and stone seats were placed. It was at these seats that
the Jewish priests stopped, in order not to defile themselves by
entering the tribunal of Pilate, a line traced on the pavement of the
court indicating the precise boundary beyond which they could not pass
without incurring defilement. There was a large parapet near the western
entrance, supported by the sides of Pilate's Prætorium, which formed a
species of porch between it and the square. That part of Pilate's palace
which he made use of when acting in the capacity of judge, was called
the Prætorium. A number of columns surrounded the parapet of which we
have just spoken, and in the centre was an uncovered portion, containing
an underground part, where the two thieves condemned to be crucified
with our Lord were confined, and this part was filled with Roman
soldiers. The pillar upon which our Lord was scourged was placed on the
forum itself, not far from this parapet and the colonnade. There were
many other columns in this place; those nearest to the palace were made
use of for the infliction of various corporal punishments, and the
others served as posts to which were fastened the beasts brought for
sale. Upon the forum itself, opposite this building, was a platform
filled with seats made of stone; and from this platform, which was
called Gabbatha, Pilate was accustomed to pronounce sentence on great
criminals. The marble staircase ascended by per sons going to the
governors palace led likewise to an uncovered terrace, and it was from
this terrace that Pilate gave audience to the priests and Pharisees,
when they brought forward their accusations against Jesus. They all
stood before him in the forum, and refused to advance further than the
stone seats before mentioned. A person

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

speaking in a loud tone of voice from the terrace could be easily heard
by those in the forum.

Behind Pilate's palace there were many other terraces, and likewise
gardens, and a country house. The gardens were between the palace of the
governor and the dwelling of his wife, Claudia Procles. A large moat
separated these buildings from the mountain on which the Temple stood,
and on this side might be seen the houses inhabited by those who served
in the Temple. The palace of Herod the elder was placed on the eastern
side of Pilate's palace; and it was in its inner court that numbers of
the Innocents were massacred. At present the appearance of these two
buildings is a little altered, as their entrances are changed. Four of
the principal streets commenced at this part of the town, and ran in a
southerly direction, three leading to the forum and Pilate's palace, and
the fourth to the gate through which persons passed on their way to
Bethsur. The beautiful house which belonged to Lazarus, and likewise
that of Martha, were in a prominent part of this street.

One of these streets was very near to the Temple, and began at the gate
which was called Probatica. The pool of Probatica was close to this gate
on the right-hand side, and in this pool the sheep were washed for the
first time, before being taken to the Temple; while the second and more
solemn washing took place in the pool of Bethsaida, which is near the
south entrance to the Temple. The second of the above-mentioned streets
contained a house belonging to St. Anne, the Mother of the Blessed
Virgin, which she usually inhabited when she came up to Jerusalem with
her family to offer sacrifice in the Temple. I believe it was in this
house that the espousals of St. Joseph and the Blessed Virgin were
celebrated.

The forum, as I have already explained, was built on higher ground than
the neighbouring streets, and the aqueducts which ran through these
streets flowed into the Probatica pool. On Mount Sion, directly opposite
to the old castle of King David, stood a building very similar to the
forum, while to the south-east might be seen the Cenacle, and a little
towards the north the tribunals of

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Annas and Caiphas.
King David's castle was a deserted fortress, filled with courts, empty
rooms, and stables, generally let to travellers. It had long been in
this state of ruin, certainly before the time of our Lord's nativity. I
saw the Magi with their numerous retinue enter it before going into
Jerusalem.

When in meditation I behold the ruins of old castles and temples, see
their neglected and forlorn state, and reflect on the uses to which they
are now put, so different from the intentions of those who raised them,
my mind always reverts to the events of our own days, when so many of
the beautiful edifices erected by our pious and zealous ancestors are
either destroyed, defaced, or used for worldly, if not wicked purposes.
The little church of our convent, in which our Lord deigned to dwell,
notwithstanding our unworthiness, and which was to me a paradise upon
earth, is now without either roof or windows, and all the monuments are
effaced or carried away. Our beloved convent, too, what will be done
with it in a short time I that convent, where I was more happy in my
little cell with my broken chair, than a king could be on his throne,
for from its window I beheld that part of the church which contained the
Blessed Sacrament. In a few years, perhaps, no one will know that it
ever existed,--no one will know that it once contained hundreds of souls
consecrated to God, who spent their days in imploring his mercy upon
sinners. But God will know all, he never forgets,--the past and the
future are equally present to him. He it is who reveals to me events
which took place so long ago, and on the day of judgment, when all must
be accounted for, and every debt paid, even to the farthing, he will
remember both the good and the evil deeds performed in places long since
forgotten. With God there is no exception of persons or places, his eyes
see all, even the Vineyard of Naboth. It is a tradition among us that
our convent was originally founded by two poor nuns, whose worldly
possessions consist ed in a jar of oil and a sack of beans. On the last
day God will reward them for the manner in which they put out this small
talent to interest,

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

and for the large harvest which they reaped and presented to him. It is
often said that poor souls remain in purgatory in punishment for what
appears to us so small a crime as not having made restitution of a few
coppers of which they had unlawful possession. May God therefore have
mercy upon those who have seized the property of the poor, or of the
Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII. Jesus before Pilate](pjc31)
