[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc30)  [Next](pjc32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XVII.

### Jesus before Pilate.

IT was about eight in the morning, according to our method of counting
time, when the procession reached the palace of Pilate. Annas, Caiphas,
and the chiefs of the Sanhedrim stopped at a part between the forum and
the entrance to the Prætorium, where some stone seats were placed for
them. The brutal guards dragged Jesus to the foot of the fight of stairs
which led to the judgment-seat of Pilate. Pilate was reposing in a
comfortable chair, on a terrace which overlooked the forum, and a small
three-legged table stood by his side, on which was placed the insignia
of his office, and a few other things. He was surrounded by officers and
soldiers dressed with the magnificence usual in the Roman army. The Jews
and the priests did not enter the Prætorium, for fear of defiling
themselves, but remained outside.

When Pilate saw the tumultuous procession enter, and perceived how
shamefully the cruel Jews had treated their prisoner, he arose, and
addressed them in a tone as contemptuous as could have been assumed by a
victorious general towards the vanquished chief of some insignificant
village: 'What are you come about so early? Why have you ill-treated
this prisoner so shamefully? Is it not possible to refrain from thus
tearing to pieces and beginning to execute your criminals even before
they are judged? They made no answer, but shouted out to the guards,
'Bring him on--bring him to be judged!' and then, turning

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

to Pilate, they said, 'Listen to our accusations against this
malefactor; for we cannot enter the tribunal lest we defile ourselves!
Scarcely had they finished these words, when a voice was heard to issue
from the midst of the dense multitude; it proceeded from a
venerable-looking old man, of imposing stature, who exclaimed, 'You are
right in not entering the Prætorium, for it has been sanctified by the
blood of Innocents; there is but one Person who has a right to enter,
and who alone can enter, because he alone is pure as the Innocents who
were massacred there.' The person who uttered these words in a loud
voice, and then disappeared among the crowd, was a rich man of the name
of Zadoc, first-cousin to Obed, the husband of Veronica; two of his
children were among the Innocents whom Herod had caused to be butchered
at the birth of our Saviour. Since that dreadful moment he had given up
the world, and, together with his wife, followed the rules of the
Essenians. He had once seen our Saviour at the house of Lazarus, and
there heard him discourse, and the sight of the barbarous manner in
which he was dragged before Pilate recalled to his mind all he himself
had suffered when his babes were so cruelly murdered before his eyes,
and he determined to give this public testimony of his belief in the
innocence of Jesus. The persecutors of our Lord were far too provoked at
the haughty manner which Pilate assumed towards them, and at the humble
position they were obliged to occupy, to take any notice of the words of
a stranger.

The brutal guards dragged our Lord up the marble staircase, and led him
to the end of the terrace, from whence Pilate was conferring with the
Jewish priests. The Roman governor had often heard of Jesus, although he
had never seen him, and now he was perfectly astonished at the calm
dignity of deportment of a man brought before him in so pitiable a
condition. The inhuman behaviour of the priests and ancients both
exasperated him and increased his contempt for them, and he informed
them pretty quickly that he had not the slightest intention of
condemning Jesus without satisfactory proofs of the truth

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

of their accusations. 'What accusation do you bring against this man?'
said he, addressing the priests in the most scornful tone possible. '*If
he were not a malefactor we would not have delivered him up to thee*,'
replied the priests sullenly. '*Take him*,' said Pilate, '*and judge you
him according to your law*.' 'Thou knowest well,' replied they, '*that
it is not lawful for us to condemn any man to death*.' The enemies of
Jesus were furious--they wished to have the trial finished off, and
their victim executed as quickly as possible, that they might be ready
at the festival-day to sacrifice the Paschal lamb, not knowing,
miserable wretches as they were, that he whom they had dragged before
the tribunal of an idolatrous judge (into whose house they would not
enter, for fear of defiling themselves before partaking of the
figurative victim), that he, and he alone, was the true Paschal Lamb, of
which the other was only the shadow.

Pilate, however, at last ordered them to produce their accusations.
These accusations were three in number, and they brought forward ten
witnesses to attest the truth of each. Their great aim was to make
Pilate believe that Jesus was the leader of a conspiracy against the
emperor, in order that he might condemn him to death as a rebel. They
themselves were powerless in such matters, being allowed to judge none
but religious offences. Their first endeavour was to convict him of
seducing the people, exciting them to rebellion, and of being an enemy
to public peace and tranquillity. To prove these charges they brought
forward some false witnesses, and declared likewise that he violated the
Sabbath, and even profaned it by curing the sick upon that day. At this
accusation Pilate interrupted them, and said in a jeering tone, 'It is
very evident you were none of you ill yourselves--had you been so you
would not have complained of being cured on the Sabbath-day.' 'He
seduces the people, and inculcates the most disgusting doctrines. He
even says, that no person can attain eternal life unless they eat his
flesh and drink his blood.' Pilate was quite provoked at the intense
hatred which their words and countenances expressed,

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

and, turning from them with a look of scorn, exclaimed, 'You most
certainly must wish to follow his doctrines and to attain eternal life,
for you are thirsting for both his body and blood.'

The Jews then brought forward the second accusation against Jesus, which
was that he forbad the people to pay tribute to the emperor. These words
roused the indignation of Pilate, as it was his place to see that all
the taxes were properly paid, and he exclaimed in an angry tone, 'That
is a lie! I must know more about it than you.' This obliged the enemies
of our Lord to proceed to the third accusation, which they did in words
such as these: 'Although this man is of obscure birth, he is the chief
of a large party. When at their head, he denounces curses upon
Jerusalem, and relates parables of double meaning concerning a king who
is preparing a wedding feast for his son. The multitude whom he had
gathered together on a mountain endeavoured once to make him their king;
but it was sooner than he intended: his plans were not matured;
therefore he fled and hid himself. Latterly he has come forward much
more: it was but the other day that he entered Jerusalem at the head of
a tumultuous assembly, who by his orders made the people rend the air
with acclamations of "Hosanna to the Son of David! Blessed be the empire
of our Father David, which is now beginning." He obliges his partisans
to pay him regal honours, and tells them that he is the Christ, the
Anointed of the Lord, the Messiah, the king promised to the Jews, and he
wishes to be addressed by these fine titles.' Ten witnesses gave
testimony concerning these things.

The last accusation-that of Jesus causing himself to be called
king--made some impression upon Pilate; he became a little thoughtful,
left the terrace and, casting a scrutinising glance on Jesus, went into
the adjoining apartment, and ordered the guards to bring him alone into
his presence. Pilate was not only superstitious, but likewise extremely
weak-minded and susceptible. He had often, during the course of his
pagan education, heard mention made of sons of his gods who had dwelt
for a

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

time upon earth; he was likewise fully aware that the Jewish prophets
had long foretold that one should appear in the midst of them who should
be the Anointed of the Lord, their Saviour, and Deliverer from slavery;
and that many among the people believed this firmly. He remembered
likewise that kings from the east had come to Herod, the predecessor of
the present monarch of that name, to pay homage to a newly-born king of
the Jews, and that Herod had on this account given orders for the
massacre of the Innocents. He had often heard of the traditions
concerning the Messiah and the king of the Jews, and even examined them
with some curiosity; although of course, being a pagan, without the
slightest belief. Had he believed at all, he would probably have agreed
with the Herodians, and with those Jews who expected a powerful and
victorious king. With such impressions, the idea of the Jews accusing
the poor miserable individual whom they had brought into his presence of
setting himself up as the promised king and Messiah, of course appeared
to him absurd; but as the enemies of Jesus brought forward these charges
in proof of treason against the emperor, he thought it proper to
interrogate him privately concerning them.

'*Art thou the king of the Jews*?' said Pilate, looking at our Lord, and
unable to repress his astonishment at the divine expression of his
countenance.

Jesus made answer, '*Sayest thou this thing of thyself, or have others
told it thee of me*?'

Pilate was offended that Jesus should think it possible for him to
believe such a thing, and answered, '*Am I a Jew? Thy own nation and the
chief priests have delivered thee up to me as deserving of death: what
hast thou done*?'

Jesus answered majestically, '*My kingdom is not of this world. If my
kingdom were of this world, my servants would certainly strive that I
should not be delivered to the Jews; but now my kingdom is not from
hence*.'

Pilate was somewhat moved by these solemn words, and said to him in a
more serious tone, '*Art thou a king, then*?'

Jesus answered, '*Thou sayest that I am a king. For* 

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

*this was I born, and for this I came into the world, that I should give
testimony to the truth. Every one that is of the truth heareth my
voice*.'

Pilate looked at him, and rising from his seat said, The truth! *what is
truth*?'

They then exchanged a few more words, which I do not now remember, and
Pilate returned to the terrace. The answers and deportment of Jesus were
far beyond his comprehension; but he saw plainly that his assumption of
royalty would not clash with that of the emperor, for that it was to no
worldly kingdom that he laid claim; whereas the emperor cared for
nothing beyond this world. He therefore again addressed the chief
priests from the terrace, and said, '*I find no cause in him*.' The
enemies of Jesus became furious, and uttered a thousand different
accusations against our Saviour. But he remained silent, solely occupied
in praying for his base enemies, and replied not when Pilate addressed
him in these words, '*Answerest thou nothing? Behold in how many things
they accuse thee*!' Pilate was filled with astonishment, and said, '*I
see plainly that all they allege is false*.' But his accusers, whose
anger continued to increase, cried out, 'You find no cause in him?' Is
it no crime to incite the people to revolt in all parts of the
kingdom?--to spread his false doctrines, not only here, but in Galilee
likewise?'

The mention of Galilee made Pilate pause: he reflected for a moment, and
then asked, 'Is this man a Galilæan, and a subject of Herod's?' They
made answer, 'He is; his parents lived at Nazareth, and his present
dwelling is in Capharnaum.'

'Since that is the case,' replied Pilate, 'take him before Herod; he is
here for the festival, and can judge him at once, as he is his subject.'
Jesus was immediately led out of the tribunal, and Pilate dispatched an
officer to Herod, to inform him that Jesus of Nazareth, who was his
subject, was about to be brought to him to be judged. Pilate had two
reasons for following this line of conduct; in the first place he was
delighted to escape having to pass sentence himself, as he felt very
uncomfortable about

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

the whole affair; and in the second place he was glad of an opportunity
of pleasing Herod, with whom he had had a disagreement, for he knew him
to be very curious to see Jesus.

The enemies of our Lord were enraged at being thus dismissed by Pilate
in the presence of the whole multitude, and gave vent to their anger by
ill-treating him even more than before. They pinioned him afresh, and
then ceased not overwhelming him with curses and blows as they led him
hurriedly through the crowd, towards the palace of Herod, which was
situated at no great distance from the forum. Some Roman soldiers had
joined the procession.

During the time of the trial Claudia Procles, the wife of Pilate, had
sent him frequent messages to intimate that she wished extremely to
speak to him; and when Jesus was sent to Herod, she placed herself on a
balcony and watched the cruel conduct of his enemies with mingled
feelings of fear, grief, and horror.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII. The Origin of the Way of the Cross](pjc32)
