[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc33)  [Next](pjc35.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XX.

### Jesus before Herod.

THE palace of the Tetrarch Herod was built on the north side of the
forum, in the new town; not very far from that of Pilate. An escort of
Roman soldiers, mostly from that part of the country which is situated
between Switzerland and Italy, had joined the procession. The enemies of
Jesus were perfectly furious at the trouble they were compelled to take
in going backwards and forwards, and therefore vented their rage upon
him. Pilate's messenger had preceded the procession, consequently Herod
was expecting them. He was seated on a pile of cushions, heaped together
so as to form a species of throne, in a spacious hall, and surrounded by
courtiers and warriors. The Chief Priests entered and placed themselves
by his side, leaving Jesus at the entrance. Herod was much elated and
pleased at Pilate's having thus publicly acknowledged his right of
judging the Galilæans, and likewise rejoiced at seeing that Jesus who
had never deigned to appear before him reduced to such a state of
humiliation and degradation. His curiosity had been greatly excited by
the high terms in which John the Baptist had announced the coming of
Jesus, and he had likewise heard much about him from the Herodians, and
through the many spies whom he had sent into different parts: he was
therefore delighted at this opportunity of interrogating him in the
presence of his courtiers and of the Jewish priests, hoping to make a
grand display of his own knowledge and talents. Pilate having sent him
word,

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'that he could
find no cause in the man,' he concluded that these words were intended
as a hint that he (Pilate) wished the accusers to be treated with
contempt and mistrust. He, therefore, addressed them in the most haughty
distant manner possible, and thereby increased their rage and anger
indescribably.

They all began at once to vociferate their accusations, to which Herod
hardly listened, being intent solely on gratifying his curiosity by a
close examination of Jesus, whom he had so often wished to see. But when
he beheld him stripped of all clothing save the remnant of a mantle,
scarcely able to stand, and his countenance totally disfigured from the
blows he had received, and from the mud and missiles which the rabble
had flung at his head, the luxurious and effeminate prince turned away
in disgust, uttered the name of God, and said to the priests in a tone
of mingled pity and contempt, 'Take him hence, and bring him not back
into my presence in such a deplorable state.' The guards took Jesus into
the outer court, and procured some water in a basin, with which they
cleansed his soiled garments and disfigured countenance; but they could
not restrain their brutality even while doing this, and paid no regard
to the wounds with which he was covered.

Herod meantime accosted the priests in much the same Strain as Pilate
had done. 'Your behaviour vastly resembles that of butchers,' he said,
'and you commence your immolations pretty early in the morning.' The
Chief Priests produced their accusations at once. Herod, when Jesus was
again brought into his presence, pretended to feel some compassion, and
offered him a glass of wine to recruit his strength; but Jesus turned
his head away and refused this alleviation.

Herod then began to expatiate with great volubility on all he had heard
concerning our Lord. He asked a thousand questions, and exhorted him to
work a miracle in his presence; but Jesus answered not a word, and stood
before him with his eyes cast down, which conduct both irritated and
disconcerted Herod, although he endeavoured to conceal

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

his anger, and continued his interrogations. He at first expressed
surprise, and made use of persuasive words. 'Is it possible, Jesus of
Nazareth,' he exclaimed, 'that it is thou thyself that appearest before
me as a criminal? I have heard thy actions so much spoken of. Thou art
not perhaps aware that thou didst offend me grievously by setting free
the prisoners whom I had confined at Thirza, but possibly thy intentions
were good. The Roman governor has now sent thee to me to be judged; what
answer canst thou give to all these accusations? Thou art silent? I have
heard much concerning thy wisdom, and the religion thou teachest, let me
hear thee answer and confound thy enemies. Art thou the king of the
Jews? Art thou the Son of God? Who art thou? Thou art said to have
performed wonderful miracles; work one now in my presence. I have the
power to release thee. Is it true that thou hast restored sight to the
blind, raised up Lazarus from the dead, and fed two or three thousand
persons with a few loaves? Why dost thou not answer? I recommend thee to
work a miracle quickly before me; perhaps thou mayest rejoice afterwards
at having complied with my wishes.'

Jesus still kept silence, and Herod continued to question him with even
more volubility.

'Who art thou?' said he. 'From whence hast thou thy power? How is it
that thou dost no longer possess it? Art thou he whose birth was
foretold in such a wonderful manner? Kings from the East came to my
father to see a newly-born king of the Jews: is it true that thou wast
that child? Didst thou escape when so many children were massacred, and
how was thy escape managed? Why hast thou been for so many years
unknown? Answer my questions? Art thou a king? Thy appearance certainly
is not regal. I have been told that thou wast conducted to the Temple in
triumph a short time ago. What was the meaning of such an
exhibition?--speak out at once!--Answer me!'

Herod continued to question Jesus in this rapid manner; but our Lord did
not vouchsafe a reply. I was shown

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (as indeed I
already knew) that Jesus was thus silent because Herod was in a state of
excommunication, both on account of his adulterous marriage with
Herodias, and of his having given orders for the execution of St. John
the Baptist. Annas and Caiphas, seeing how indignant Herod was at the
silence of Jesus, immediately endeavoured to take advantage of his
feelings of wrath, and recommenced their accusations, saying that he had
called Herod himself a fox; that his great aim for many years had been
the overthrow of Herod's family; that he was endeavouring to establish a
new religion, and had celebrated the Pasch on the previous day. Although
Herod was extremely enraged at the conduct of Jesus, he did not lose
sight of the political ends which he wished to forward. He was
determined not to condemn our Lord, both because he experienced a secret
and indefinable sensation of terror in his presence, and because he
still felt remorse at the thought of having put John the Baptist to
death, besides which he detested the High Priests for not having allowed
him to take part in the sacrifices on account of his adulterous
connection with Herodias.

But his principal reason for determining not to condemn Jesus was, that
he wished to make some return to Pilate for his courtesy, and he thought
the best return would be the compliment of showing deference to his
decision and agreeing with him in opinion. But he spoke in the most
contemptuous manner to Jesus, and turning to the guards and servants who
surrounded him, and who were about two hundred in number, said: 'Take
away this fool, and pay him that homage which is his due; he is mad,
rather than guilty of any crime.'

Our Lord was immediately taken into a large court, where every possible
insult and indignity was heaped upon him. This court was between the two
wings of the palace, and Herod stood a spectator on a platform for some
time. Annas and Caiphas wore by his side, endeavouring to persuade him
to condemn our Saviour. But their efforts were fruitless, and Herod
answered in a tone loud enough to be heard by the Roman soldiers: 'No, I
should act quite

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

wrongly if I condemned him.' His meaning was, that it would be wrong to
condemn as guilty one whom Pilate had pronounced innocent, although he
had been so courteous as to defer the final judgment to him.

When the High Priests and the other enemies of Jesus perceived that
Herod was determined not to give in to their wishes, they dispatched
emissaries to that division of the city called Acre, which was chiefly
inhabited by Pharisees, to let them know that they must assemble in the
neighbourhood of Pilate's palace, gather together the rabble, and bribe
them to make a tumult, and demand the condemnation of our Lord. They
likewise sent forth secret agents to alarm the people by threats of the
divine vengeance if they did not insist on the execution of Jesus, whom
they termed a sacrilegious blasphemer. These agents were ordered
likewise to alarm them by intimating that if Jesus were not put to
death, he would go over to the Romans, and assist in the extermination
of the Jewish nation, for that it was to this he referred when he spoke
of his future kingdom They endeavoured to spread a report in other parts
of the city, that Herod had condemned him, but still that it was
necessary for the people likewise to express their wishes, as his
partisans were to be feared; for that if he were released he would join
the Romans, make a disturbance on the festival day, and take the most
inhuman revenge. Some among them circulated contradictory and alarming
reports, in order to excite the people, and cause an insurrection; while
others distributed money among the soldiers to bribe them to ill-treat
Jesus, so as to cause his death, which they were most anxious should be
brought about as quickly as possible, lest Pilate should acquit him.

Whilst the Pharisees wore busying themselves in this manner, our Blessed
Saviour was suffering the greatest outrages from the brutal soldiers to
whom Herod had delivered him, that they might deride him as a fool. They
dragged him into the court, and one of their number having procured a
large white sack which had once been filled with cotton, they made a
hole in its centre with a

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

sword, and then tossed it over the head of Jesus, accompanying each
action with bursts of the most contemptuous laughter. Another soldier
brought the remnant of an old scarlet cloak, and passed it round his
neck, while the rest bent their knee before him--shoved him--abused
him--spat upon him--struck him on the cheek, because he had refused to
answer their king, mocked him by pretending to pay homage--threw mud
upon him--seized him by the waist, pretending to make him dance; then,
having thrown him down, dragged him through a gutter which ran on the
side of the court, thus causing his sacred head to strike against the
column and sides of the wall, and when at last they raised him up, it
was only in order to recommence their insults. The soldiers and servants
of Herod who were assembled in this court amounted to upwards of two
hundred, and all thought to pay court to their monarch by torturing
Jesus in some unheard-of way. Many were bribed by the enemies of our
Lord to strike him on the head with their sticks, and they took
advantage of the confusion and tumult to do so. Jesus looked upon them
with compassion; excess of pain drew from him occasional moans and
groans, but his enemies rejoiced in his sufferings, and mocked his
moans, and not one among the whole assembly showed the slightest degree
of compassion. I saw blood streaming from his head, and three times did
the blows prostrate him, but angels were weeping at his side, and they
anointed his head with heavenly balsam. It was revealed to me that had
it not been for this miraculous assistance he must have died from those
wounds. The Philistines at Gaza, who gave vent to their wrath by
tormenting poor blind Samson, were far less barbarous than these cruel
executioners of our Lord.

The priests were, however, impatient to return to the Temple; therefore,
having made certain that their orders regarding Jesus would be obeyed,
they returned to Herod, and endeavoured to persuade him to condemn our
Lord. But he, being determined to do all in his power to please Pilate,
refused to accede to their wishes, and sent Jesus back again clothed in
the fool's garment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI. Jesus led back from the Court of Herod to that of
Pilate](pjc35.md)
