[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc46)  [Next](pjc48) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

# CHAPTER XXXIII.

### Simon of Cyrene.--Third Fall of Jesus.

THE procession had reached an arch formed in an old wall belonging to
the town, opposite to a square, in which three streets terminated, when
Jesus stumbled against a large stone which was placed in the middle of
the archway, the cross slipped from his shoulder, he fell upon the
Stone, and was totally unable to rise. Many respectable-looking persons
who were on their way to the Temple stopped, and exclaimed
compassionately: 'Look at that poor man, he is certainly dying!' but his
enemies showed no compassion. This fall caused a fresh delay, as our
Lord could not stand up again, and the Pharisees said to the soldiers:
'We shall never got him to the place of execution alive, if you do not
find some one to carry his cross.' At this moment Simon of Cyrene, a
pagan, happened, to pass by, accompanied by his three children. He was a
gardener, just returning home after working in a garden near the eastern
wall of the city, and carrying a bundle of lopped branches. The soldiers
perceiving by his dress that he was a pagan, seized him, and ordered him
to assist Jesus in carrying his cross. He refused at first, but was soon
compelled to obey, although his children, being frightened, cried and
made a great noise, upon which some women quieted and took charge of
them. Simon was much annoyed, and expressed the greatest vexation at
being obliged to walk with a man in so deplorable a condition of dirt
and misery; but Jesus wept, and cast such a mild and heavenly look upon
him that he was touched, and instead of continuing to show reluctance,
helped him to rise, while the executioners fastened one arm of the cross
on his shoulders, and he walked behind our Lord, thus relieving him in a
great measure from its weight; and when all was arranged, the procession
moved forward. Simon was a stout-looking man, apparently about forty
years of age. His children were dressed in tunics made of a variegated
material. the two eldest, named Rufus and

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Alexander,
afterwards joined the disciples; the third was much younger, but a few
years later went to live with St. Stephen. Simon had not carried the
cross after Jesus any length of time before he felt his heart deeply
touched by grace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIV. The Veil of Veronica](pjc48)
