[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc42)  [Next](pjc44.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

# CHAPTER XXIX.

### Jesus condemned to be crucified.

PILATE, who did not desire to know the truth, but was solely anxious to
get out of the difficulty without harm to himself, became more undecided
than ever; his conscience whispered--'Jesus is innocent;' his wife said,
'he is holy;' his superstitious feelings made him fear that Jesus was
the enemy of his gods; and his cowardice filled him with dread lest
Jesus, if he was a god, should wreak his vengeance upon his judge. He
was both irritated and alarmed at the last words of Jesus, and he made
another attempt for his release; but the Jews instantly threatened to
lay an accusation against him before the Emperor. This menace terrified
him, and he determined to accede to their wishes, although firmly
convinced in his own mind of the innocence of Jesus, and perfectly
conscious that by pronouncing sentence of death upon him he should
violate every law of justice, besides breaking the promise he had made
to his wife in the morning. Thus did he sacrifice Jesus to the enmity of
the Jews, and endeavour to stifle remorse by washing his hands before
the people, saying, '*I am innocent of the blood of this just man; look
you to it*.' Vainly dost thou pronounce these words, O Pilate! for his
blood is on thy head likewise; thou canst not wash his blood from thy
soul, as thou dost from thy hands.

Those fearful words, '*His blood be upon us and upon our children*,' had
scarcely ceased to resound, when Pilate commenced his preparations for
passing sentence. He called for the dress which he wore on state
occasions, put a species of diadem, set in precious stones, on his head,
changed his mantle, and caused a staff to be carried before him. He was
surrounded with soldiers, preceded by officers belonging to the
tribunal, and followed by Scribes, who carried rolls of parchments and
books used for inscribing names and dates. One man walked in front, who
carried the trumpet. The procession marched in this order from Pilate's
palace to the forum, where an elevated seat, used

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

on these particular occasions, was placed opposite to the pillar where
Jesus was scourged. This tribunal was called Gabbatha; it was a kind of
round terrace, ascended by means of staircases; on the top was a seat
for Pilate, and behind this seat a bench for those in minor offices,
while a number of soldiers were stationed round the terrace and upon the
staircases. Many of the Pharisees had left the palace and were gone to
the Temple, so that Annas, Caiphas, and twenty-eight priests alone
followed the Roman governor on to the forum, and the two thieves were
taken there at the time that Pilate presented our Saviour to the people,
saying: '*Ecce homo*!'

Our Lord was still clothed in his purple garment, his crown of thorns
upon his head, and his hands manacled, when the archers brought him up
to the tribunal, and placed him between the two malefactors. As soon as
Pilate was seated, he again addressed the enemies of Jesus, in these
words, '*Behold your King*!'

But the cries of '*Crucify him! Crucify him!*' resounded on all sides.

'*Shall I crucify your King*?' said Pilate.

'*We have no King but Cæsar*!' responded the High Priests.

Pilate found it was utterly hopeless to say anything more, and therefore
commenced his preparations for passing sentence. The two thieves had
received their sentence of crucifixion some time before; but the High
Priests had obtained a respite for them, in order that our Lord might
suffer the additional ignominy of being executed with two criminals of
the most infamous description. The crosses of the two thieves were by
their sides; that intended for our Lord was not brought, because he was
not as yet sentenced to death.

The Blessed Virgin, who had retired to some distance after the scourging
of Jesus, again approached to hear the sentence of death pronounced upon
her Son and her God. Jesus stood in the midst of the archers, at the
foot of the a staircase leading up to the tribunal. The trumpet was
sounded to demand silence, and then the cowardly, the

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

base judge, in a tremulous undecided voice, pronounced the sentence of
death on the Just Man. The sight of the cowardice and duplicity of this
despicable being, who was nevertheless puffed up with pride at his
important position, almost overcame me, and the ferocious joy of the
executioners--the triumphant countenances of the High Priests, added to
the deplorable condition to which our loving Saviour was reduced, and
the agonising grief of his beloved Mother--still further increased my
pain. I looked up again, and saw the cruel Jews almost devouring their
victim with their eyes, the soldiers standing coldly by, and multitudes
of horrible demons passing to and fro and mixing in the crowd. I felt
that I ought to have been in the place of Jesus, my beloved Spouse, for
the sentence would not then have been unjust; but I was so overcome with
anguish, and my sufferings were so intense, that I cannot exactly
remember all that I did see. However, I will relate all as nearly as I
can.

After a long preamble, which was composed principally of the most
pompous and exaggerated eulogy of the Emperor Tiberias, Pilate spoke of
the accusations which had been brought against Jesus by the High
Priests. He said that they had condemned him to death for having
disturbed the public peace, and broken their laws by calling himself the
Son of God and King of the Jews; and that the people had unanimously
demanded that their decree should be carried out. Notwithstanding his
oft-repeated conviction of the innocence of Jesus, this mean and
worthless judge was not ashamed of saying that he likewise considered
their decision a just one, and that he should therefore pronounce
sentence--which he did in these words: 'I condemn Jesus of Nazareth, the
King of the Jews, to be crucified;' and he ordered the executioners to
bring the cross. I think I remember likewise that he took a long stick
in his hands, broke it, and threw the fragments at the feet of Jesus.

On hearing these words of Pilate the Mother of Jesus became for a few
moments totally unconscious, for she was now certain that her beloved
Son must die the most ignominious

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

and the most painful of all deaths. John and the holy women carried her
away, to prevent the heartless beings who surrounded them from adding
crime to crime by jeering at her grief; but no sooner did she revive a
little than she begged to be taken again to each spot which had been
sanctified by the sufferings of her Son, in order to bedew them with her
tears; and thus did the Mother of our Lord, in the name of the Church,
take possession of those holy places.

Pilate then wrote down the sentence, and those who stood behind him
copied it out three times. The words which he wrote were quite different
from those he had pronounced; I could see plainly that his mind was
dreadfully agitated--an angel of wrath appeared to guide his hand. The
substance of the written sentence was this: 'I have been compelled, for
fear of an insurrection, to yield to the wishes of the High Priests, the
Sanhedrim, and the people, who tumultuously demanded the death of Jesus
of Nazareth, whom they accused of having disturbed the public peace, and
also of having blasphemed and broken their laws. I have given him up to
them to be crucified, although their accusations appeared to be
groundless. I have done so for fear of their alleging to the Emperor
that I encourage insurrections, and cause dissatisfaction among the Jews
by denying them the rights of justice.'

He then wrote the inscription for the cross, while his clerks copied out
the sentence several times, that these copies might be sent to distant
parts of the country.

The High Priests were extremely dissatisfied at the words of the
sentence, which they said were not true; and they clamorously surrounded
the tribunal to endeavour to persuade him to alter the inscription, and
not to put *King of the Jews*, but *that he said, I am the King of the
Jews*.

Pilate was vexed, and answered impatiently, '*What I have written I have
written*!'

They were likewise anxious that the cross of our Lord should not be
higher than those of the two thieves, but it was necessary for it to be
so, because there would otherwise

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

not have been sufficient place for Pilate's inscription; they therefore
endeavoured to persuade him not to have this obnoxious inscription put
up at all. But Pilate was determined, and their words made no impression
upon him; the cross was therefore obliged to be lengthened by a fresh
bit of wood. Consequently the form of the cross was peculiar--the two
arms stood out like the branches of a tree growing from the stem, and
the shape was very like that of the letter **Y**, with the lower part
lengthened so as to rise between the arms, which had been put on
separately, and were thinner than the body of the cross. A piece of wood
was likewise nailed at the bottom of the cross for the feet to rest
upon.

During the time that Pilate was pronouncing the iniquitous sentence, I
saw his wife, Claudia Procles, send him back the pledge which he had
given her, and in the evening she left his palace and joined the friends
of our Lord, who concealed her in a subterraneous vault in the house of
Lazarus at Jerusalem. Later in the same day, I likewise saw a friend of
our Lord engrave the words, *Judex injustus*, and the name of Claudia
Procles, on a green-looking stone, which was behind the terrace called
Gabbatha--this stone is still to be found in the foundations of a church
or house at Jerusalem, which stands on the spot formerly called
Gabbatha. Claudia Procles became a Christian, followed St. Paul, and
became his particular friend.

No sooner had Pilate pronounced sentence than Jesus was given up into
the hands of the archers, and the clothes which he had taken off in the
court of Caiphas were brought for him to put on again. I think some
charitable persons had washed them, for they looked clean. The ruffians
who surrounded Jesus untied his hands for his dress to be changed, and
roughly dragged off the scarlet mantle with which they had clothed him
in mockery, thereby reopening all his wounds; he put on his own linen
under-garment with trembling hands, and they threw his scapular over his
shoulders. As the crown of thorns was too large and prevented the
seamless robe, which his

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mother had made
for him, from going over his head., they pulled it off violently,
heedless of the pain thus inflicted upon him. His white woollen dress
was next thrown over his shoulders, and then his wide belt and cloak.
After this, they again tied round his waist a ring covered with sharp
iron points, and to it they fastened the cords by which he was led,
doing all with their usual brutal cruelty.

The two thieves were standing, one on the right and the other on the
left of Jesus, with their hands tied and a chain round their necks; they
were covered with black and livid marks, the effects of the scourging of
the previous day. The demeanour of the one who was afterwards converted
was quiet and peaceable, while that of the other, on the contrary, was
rough and insolent, and he joined the archers in abusing and insulting
Jesus, who looked upon his two companions with love and compassion, and
offered up his sufferings for their salvation. The archers gathered
together all the implements necessary for the crucifixions, and prepared
everything for the terrible and painful journey to Calvary.

Annas and Caiphas at last left off disputing with Pilate, and angrily
retired, taking with them the sheets of parchment on which the sentence
was written; they went away in haste, fearing that they should get to
the Temple too late for the Paschal sacrifice. Thus did the High
Priests, unknowingly to themselves, leave the true Paschal Lamb. They
went to a temple made of stone, to immolate and to sacrifice that lamb
which was but a symbol, and they left the true Paschal Lamb, who was
being led to the Altar of the Cross by the cruel executioners; they were
most careful not to contract exterior defilement, while their souls were
completely defiled by anger, hatred, and envy. They had said, '*His
blood be upon us and upon our children*!' And by these words they had
performed the ceremony, and had placed the hand of the sacrificer upon
the head of the Victim. Thus were the two paths formed--the one leading
to the altar belonging to the Jewish law, the other leading to the Altar
of Grace: Pilate, that proud and irresolute pagan,

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

that slave of the world, who trembled in the presence of the true God,
and yet adored his false gods, took a middle path, and returned to his
palace.

The iniquitous sentence was given at about ten in the morning.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXX. The Carriage of the Cross](pjc44.md)
