[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc55)  [Next](pjc57) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XLII.

### First Word of Jesus on the Cross.

As soon as the executioners had crucified the two thieves and divided
the garments of Jesus between them, they gathered up their tools,
addressed a few more insulting words to our Lord, and went away. The
Pharisees, likewise, rode up to Jesus, looked at him scornfully, made
use of some opprobrious expressions, and then left the place. The Roman
soldiers, of whom a hundred had

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

been posted round Calvary, were marched away, and their places filled by
fifty others, the command of whom was given to Abenadar, an Arab by
birth, who afterwards took the name of Ctésiphon in baptism; and the
second in command was Cassius, who, when he became a Christian, was
known by the name of Longinus: Pilate frequently made use of him as a
messenger. Twelve Pharisees, twelve Sadducees, as many Scribes, and a
few Ancients, accompanied by those Jews who had been endeavouring to
persuade Pilate to change the inscription on the Cross of Jesus, then
came up: they were furious, as the Roman governor had given them a
direct refusal. They rode round the platform, and drove away the Blessed
Virgin, whom St. John led to the holy women. When they passed the Cross
of Jesus, they shook their heads disdainfully at him, exclaiming at the
same time, '*Vah! thou that destroyest the temple of God, and in three
days buildest it up again, save thyself, coming down from the Cross. Let
Christ, the King of Israel, come down now from the Cross, that we may
see and believe*.' The soldiers, likewise, made use of deriding
language.

The countenance and whole body of Jesus became even more colourless: he
appeared to be on the point of fainting, and Gesmas (the wicked thief)
exclaimed, 'The demon by whom he is possessed is about to leave him.' A
soldier then took a sponge, filled it with vinegar, put it on a reed,
and presented it to Jesus, who appeared to drink. If thou art the King
of the Jews,' said the soldier, '*save thyself, coming down from the
Cross*.' These things took place during the time that the first band of
soldiers was being relieved by that of Abenadar. Jesus raised his head a
little, and said, '*Father, forgive them, for they know not what they
do*.' And Gesmas cried out, 'If thou art the Christ, save thyself and
us.' Dismas (the good thief) was silent, but he was deeply moved at the
prayer of Jesus for his enemies. When Mary heard the voice of her Son,
unable to restrain herself, she rushed forward, followed by John,
Salome, and Mary of Cleophas, and approached the Cross, which the
kind-hearted centurion

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

did not prevent. The prayers of Jesus obtained for the good thief a most
powerful grace; he suddenly remembered that it was Jesus and Mary who
had cured him of leprosy in his childhood, and he exclaimed in a loud
and clear voice, 'How can you insult him when he prays for you? He has
been silent, and suffered all your outrages with patience; he is truly a
Prophet--he is our King--he is the Son of God.' This unexpected reproof
from the lips of a miserable malefactor who was dying on a cross caused
a tremendous commotion among the spectators; they gathered up stones,
and wished to throw them at him; but the centurion Abenadar would not
allow it.

The Blessed Virgin was much comforted and strengthened by the prayer of
Jesus, and Dismas said to Gesmas, who was still blaspheming Jesus,
'*Neither dost thou fear God, seeing thou art under the same
condemnation. And we indeed justly, for we receive the due reward of our
deeds; but this man hath done no evil*. Remember thou art now at the
point of death, and repent.' He was enlightened and touched: he
confessed his sins to Jesus, and said: 'Lord, if thou condemnest me it
will be with justice.' And Jesus replied, 'Thou shalt experience my
mercy.' Dismas, filled with the most perfect contrition, began instantly
to thank God for the great graces he had received, and to reflect over
the manifold sins of his past life. All these events took place between
twelve and the half-hour shortly after the crucifixion; but such a
surprising change ad taken place in the appearance of nature during that
time as to astonish the beholders and fill their minds with awe and
terror.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIII. Eclipse of the Sun.--Second and third Word of
Jesus on the Cross](pjc57)
