[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc68)  [Next](pjc70.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER LV.

### The Cross and the Wine-press.

As I was meditating upon these words or thoughts of Jesus when hanging
on the Cross: 'I am pressed like wine placed here under the press for
the first time; my blood must continue to flow until water comes, but
wine shall no more be made here an explanation was given me by means of
another vision relating to Calvary.

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

I saw this rocky country at a period anterior to the Deluge; it was then
less wild and less barren than it afterwards became, and was laid out in
vineyards and fields. I saw there the Patriarch Japhet, a majestic
dark-complexioned old man, surrounded by immense flocks and herds and a
numerous posterity: his children as well as himself had dwellings
excavated in the ground, and covered with turf roofs, on which herbs and
flowers were growing. There were vines all around, and a new method of
making wine was being tried on Calvary, in the presence of Japhet. I saw
also the ancient method of preparing wine, but I can give only the
following description of it. At first men were satisfied with only
eating the grapes; then they pressed them with pestles in hollow stones,
and finally in large wooden trenches. Upon this occasion a new
winepress, resembling the holy Cross in shape, had been devised; it
consisted of the hollow trunk of a tree placed upright, with a bag of
grapes suspended over it. Upon this bag there was fastened a pestle,
surmounted by a weight; and on both sides of the trunk were arms joined
to the bag, through openings made for the purpose, and which, when put
in motion by lowering the ends, crushed the grapes. The juice flowed out
of the tree by five openings, and fell into a stone vat, from whence it
flowed through a channel made of bark and coated with resin, into the
species of cistern excavated in the rock where Jesus was confined before
his Crucifixion. At the foot of the wine-press, in the stone vat, there
was a sort of sieve to stop the skins, which were put on one side. When
they had made their wine-press, they filled the bag with grapes, nailed
it to the top of the trunk, placed the pestle, and put in motion the
side arms, in order to make the wine flow. All this very strongly
reminded me of the Crucifixion, on account of the resemblance between
the wine-press and the Cross. They had a long reed, at the end of which
there were points, so that it looked like an enormous thistle, and they
ran this through the channel and trunk of the tree when there was any
obstruction. I was reminded of the lance and sponge. There were also

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

some leathern bottles, and vases made of bark and plastered with resin.
I saw several young men, with nothing but a cloth wrapped round their
loins like Jesus, working at this wine-press. Japhet was very old; he
wore a long beard, and a dress made of the skins of beasts; and he
looked at the new wine-press with evident satisfaction. It was a
festival day, and they sacrificed on a stone altar some animals which
were running loose in the vineyard, young asses, goats, and sheep. It
was not in this place that Abraham came to sacrifice Isaac; perhaps it
was on Mount Moriah. I have forgotten many of the instructions regarding
the wine, vinegar, and skins, and the different ways in which everything
was to be distributed to the right and to the left; and I regret it,
because the veriest trifles in these matters have a profound symbolical
meaning. If it should be the will of God for me to make them known, be
will show them to me again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LVI. Apparitions on Occasion of the Death of
Jesus](pjc70.md)
