[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc61)  [Next](pjc63.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XLVIII.

### The Opening Of the Side of Jesus.--Death of the two Thieves.

WHILST these events were taking place in Jerusalem, silence reigned
around Calvary. The crowd which had been for a time so noisy and
tumultuous was dispersed; all were panic-stricken; in some that panic
had produced sincere repentance, but on others it had had no beneficial
effects. Mary, John, Magdalen, Mary of Cleophas, and Salome had
remained, either standing or sitting before the Cross, closely veiled
and weeping silently. A few soldiers were leaning over the terrace which
enclosed the platform; Cassius rode up and down; the sky was lowering,
and all nature wore a garb of mourning. Six archers soon after made
their appearance, bringing with them ladders, spades, ropes, and large
iron staves for the purpose of breaking the legs of the criminals, in
order to hasten their deaths. When they approached our Lord's Cross, his
friends retired a few paces back, and the Blessed Virgin was seized with
fear lest they should indulge their hatred of Jesus by insulting even
his dead body. Her fears were not quite unfounded, for when they first
placed their ladders against the Cross they declared that he was only
pretending to be dead; in a few moments, however, seeing that he was
cold and stiff, they left him, and removed their ladders to the crosses
on which the two thieves were still hanging alive. They took up their
iron staves and broke the arms of the thieves above and below the elbow;
while another archer at the same moment broke their legs, both above and
below the knee. Gesmas uttered frightful cries, therefore the
executioner finished him off by three heavy blows of a cudgel on his
chest. Dismas gave a deep groan, and expired:

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

be was the first among mortals who had the happiness of rejoining his
Redeemer. The cords were then loosened, the two bodies fell to the
ground, and the executioners dragged them to a deep morass, which was
between Calvary and the walls of the town, and buried them there.

The archers still appeared doubtful whether Jesus was really dead, and
the brutality they had shown in breaking the legs of the thieves made
the holy. women tremble as to what outrage they might next perpetrate on
the body of our Lord. But Cassius, the subaltern officer, a young man of
about five-and-twenty, whose weak squinting eyes and nervous manner had
often excited the derision of his companions, was suddenly illuminated
by grace, and being quite overcome at the sight of the cruel conduct of
the soldiers, and the deep sorrow of the holy women, determined to
relieve their anxiety by proving beyond dispute that Jesus was really
dead. The kindness of his heart prompted him, but unconsciously to
himself he fulfilled a prophecy. He seized his lance and rode quickly up
to the mound on which the Cross was planted, stopped just between the
cross of the good thief and that of our Lord, and taking his lance in
both hands, thrust it so completely into the right side of Jesus that
the point went through the heart, and appeared on the left side. When
Cassius drew his lance out of the wound a quantity of blood and water
rushed from it, and flowed over his face and body. This species of
washing produced effects somewhat similar to the vivifying waters of
Baptism: grace and salvation at once entered his soul. He leaped from
his horse, threw himself upon his knees, struck his breast, and
confessed loudly before all his firm belief in the divinity of Jesus.

The Blessed Virgin and her companions were still standing near, with
their eyes fixed upon the Cross, but when Cassius thrust his lance into
the side of Jesus they were much startled, and rushed with one accord up
to it. Mary looked as if the lance had transfixed her heart instead of
that of her Divine Son, and could scarcely support herself. Cassius
meantime remained kneeling and

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

thanking God, not only for the graces he had received but likewise for
the cure of the complaint in his eyes, which had caused the weakness and
the squint. This cure had been effected at the same moment that the
darkness with which his soul was previously filled was removed. Every
heart was overcome at the sight, of the blood of our Lord, which ran
into a hollow in the rock at the foot of the Cross. Mary, John, the holy
women, and Cassius, gathered up the blood and water in flasks, and wiped
up the remainder with pieces of linen. <span
id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14.md)

Cassius, whose sight was perfectly restored at the same moment that the
eyes of his soul were opened, was deeply moved, and continued his humble
prayer of thanks( giving. The soldiers were struck with astonishment at
the miracle which had taken place, and cast themselves on their knees by
his side, at the same time striking their breasts and confessing Jesus.
The water and blood continued to flow from the large wound in the side
of our Lord; it ran into the hollow in the rock, and the holy women put
it in vases, while Mary and Magdalen mingled their tears. The archers,
who had received a message from Pilate, ordering them not to touch the
body of Jesus, did not return at all.

All these events took place near the Cross, at a little before four
o'clock, during the time that Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus were
gathering together the articles necessary for the burial of Jesus. But
the servants of Joseph having been sent to clean out the tomb, informed
the friends of our Lord that their master intended to take the body of
Jesus and place it in his new sepulchre. John

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

immediately returned to the town with the holy women; in the first
place, that Mary might recruit her strength a little, and in the second,
to purchase a few things which would be required for the burial. The
Blessed Virgin had a small lodging among the buildings near the
Cenaculum. They did not reënter the town through the gate which was the
nearest to Calvary, because it was closed, and guarded by soldiers
placed there by the Pharisees; but they went through that gate which
leads to Bethlehem.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[283:1](pjc62.htm#fr_14.md) Sister Emmerich added:
'Cassius was baptised by the name of Longinus; and was ordained deacon,
and preached the faith. He always kept some of the blood of Christ,--it
dried up, but was found in his coffin in Italy. He was buried in a town
at no great distance from the locality where St. Clare passed her life.
There. is a lake with an island upon it near this town, and the body of
Longinus must have been taken there.' Sister Emmerich appears to
designate Mantua by this description, and there is a tradition preserved
in that town to the same effect. I do not know which St. Clare lived in
the neighbourhood.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIX. A Description of some Parts of ancient
Jerusalem](pjc63.md)
