[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc62)  [Next](pjc64.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XLIX.

### A Description of some Parts of ancient Jerusalem.

THIS chapter will contain some descriptions of places given by Sister
Emmerich on various occasions. They will be followed by a description of
the tomb and garden of Joseph of Arimathea, that so we may have no need
to interrupt the account of the burial of our Lord.

The first gate which stood. on the eastern side of Jerusalem, to the
south of the south-east angle of the Temple, was the one leading to the
suburb of Ophel. The gate of the sheep was to the north of the
north-east angle of the Temple. Between these two gates there was a
third, leading to some streets situated to the east of the Temple, and
inhabited for the most part by stonemasons and other workmen. The houses
in these streets were supported by the foundations of the Temple; and
almost all belonged to Nicodemus, who had caused them to be built, and
who employed nearly all the workmen living there. Nicodemus had not long
before built a beautiful gate as an entrance to these streets, called
the Gate of Moriah. It was but just finished, and through it Jesus had
entered the town on Palm Sunday. Thus he entered by the new gate of
Nicodemus, through which no one had yet passed, and was buried in the
new monument of Joseph of Arimathea, in which no one had yet been laid.
This gate was afterwards walled up, and there was a

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

tradition that the Christians were once again to enter the town through
it. Even in the present day, a walled-up gate, called by the Turks the
Golden Gate, stands on this spot.

The road leading to the west from the gate of the sheep passed almost
exactly between the north-western side of Mount Sion and Calvary. From
this gate to Golgotha the distance was about two miles and a quarter;
and from Pilate's palace to Golgotha about two miles. The fortress
Antonia was situated to the north-west of the mountain of the Temple, on
a detached rock. A person going towards the west, on leaving Pilate's
palace, would have had this fortress to his left. On one of its walls
there was a platform commanding the forum, and from which Pilate was
accustomed to make proclamations to the people: he did this, for
instance, when he promulgated new laws. When our Divine Lord was
carrying his Cross, in the interior of the town, Mount Calvary was
frequently on his right hand. This road, which partly ran in a
south-westerly direction, led to a gate made in an inner wall of the
town, towards Sion. Beyond this wall, to the left, there was a sort of
suburb, containing more gardens than houses; and towards the outer wall
of the city stood some magnificent sepulchres with stone entrances. On
this side was a house belonging to Lazarus, with beautiful gardens,
extending towards that part where the outer western wall of Jerusalem
turned to the south. I believe that a little private door, made in the
city wall, and through which Jesus and his disciples often passed by
permission of Lazarus, led to these gardens. The gate standing at the
north-western angle of the town led to Bethsur, which was situated more
towards the north than Emmaus and Joppa. The western part of Jerusalem
was lower than any other: the land on which it was built first sloped in
the direction of the surrounding wall, and then rose again when close to
it; and on this declivity there stood gardens and vineyards, behind
which wound a wide road, with paths leading to the walls and towers. On
the other side, without the

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

wall, the land descended towards the valley, so that the walls
surrounding the lower part of the town looked as if built on a raised
terrace. There are gardens and vineyards even in the present day on the
outer hill. When. Jesus arrived at the end of the Way of the Cross, he
had on his left hand that part of the town where there were so many
gardens; and it was from thence that Simon of Cyrene was coming when he
met the procession. The gate by which Jesus left the town was not
entirely facing the west, but rather the south-west. The city wall on
the left-hand side, after passing through the gate, ran somewhat in a
southerly direction, then turned towards the west, and then again to the
south, round Mount Sion. On this side there stood a large tower, like a
fortress. The gate by which Jesus left the town was at no great distance
from another gate more towards the south, leading down to the valley,
and where a road, turning to the left in the direction of Bethlehem,
commenced. The road turned to the north towards Mount Calvary shortly
after that gate by which Jesus left Jerusalem when bearing his Cross.
Mount Calvary was very steep on its eastern side, facing the town, and a
gradual descent on the western; and on this side, from which the road to
Emmaus was to be seen, there was a field, in which I saw Luke gather
several plants when he and Cleophas were going to Emmaus, and met Jesus
on the way. Near the walls, to the east and south of Calvary, there were
also gardens, sepulchres, and vineyards. The Cross was buried on the
northeast side, at the foot of Mount Calvary.

The garden of Joseph of Arimathea <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15.md)
was situated near

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

the gate of Bethlehem, at about a seven minutes' walk from Calvary: it
was a very fine garden, with tall trees, banks, and thickets in it,
which gave much shade, and was situated. on a rising ground extending to
the walls of the city. A person coming from the northern side of the
valley, and entering the garden, had on his left hand a slight ascent
extending as far as the city wall; and on his right, at the end of the
garden, a detached rock, where the cave of the sepulchre was situated.
The grotto in which it was made looked to the east; and on the
southwestern and north-western sides of the same rock were two other
smaller sepulchres, which were also new, and with depressed fronts. A
pathway, beginning on the western side of this rock, ran all round it.
The ground in front of the sepulchre was higher than that of the
entrance, and a person wishing to enter the cavern had to descend
several steps. The cave was sufficiently large for four men to be able
to stand close up to the wall on either side without impeding the
movements of the bearers of the body. Opposite the door was a cavity in
the rock, in which the tomb was made; it was about two feet above the
level of the ground, and fastened to the rock by one side only, like an
altar: two persons could stand, one at the head and one at the foot; and
there was a place also for a third in front, even if the door of the
cavity was closed. This door was made of some metal, perhaps of brass,
and had two folding doors. These doors could be closed by a stone being
rolled against them; and the stone used for this purpose was kept
outside the cavern. Immediately after our Lord was placed in the
sepulchre it was rolled in front of the door. It was very large, and
could not be removed without the united efforts of several men. Opposite
the entrance of the cavern there stood a stone bench, and. by mounting
on this a person could climb on to the rock,

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

which was covered with grass, and from whence the city walls, the
highest parts of Mount Sion, and some towers could be seen, as well as
the gate of Bethlehem and the fountain of Gihon. The rock inside was of
a white colour, intersected with red and blue veins.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_15"></span>[286:1](pjc63.htm#fr_15.md) We must here remark
that, in the four years during which Sister Emmerich had her visions,
she described everything that had happened to the holy places from the
earliest times down to our own. More than once she beheld them profaned
and laid waste, but always venerated, either publicly or privately. She
saw many stones and pieces of rock, which had been silent witnesses of
the Passion and Resurrection of our Lord, placed by St. Helena in the
Church of the Holy Sepulchre upon occasion of the foundation of that
sacred building. When Sister Emmerich visited it in spirit she was
accustomed to venerate the spots where the Cross had stood and the holy
Sepulchre been situated. It must be observed, however, <span
id="page_287">p. 287</span> that she used sometimes to see a greater
distance between the actual position of the Tomb and the spot where the
Cross stood than there is between the chapels which bear their names in
the church of Jerusalem.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter L. The Descent from the Cross](pjc64.md)
