[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc64)  [Next](pjc66) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER LI.

### The Embalming of the Body of Jesus.

THE Blessed Virgin seated herself upon a large cloth spread on the
ground, with her right knee, which was slightly raised, and her back
resting against some mantles, rolled together so as to form a species of
cushion. No precaution had been neglected which could in any way
facilitate to her--the Mother of Sorrows--in her deep affliction of
soul, the mournful but most sacred duty which she was about to fulfil in
regard to the body of her beloved Son. The adorable head of Jesus rested
upon Mary's knee, and his body was stretched upon a sheet. The Blessed
Virgin was overwhelmed with sorrow and love. Once more, and for the last
time, did she hold in her arms the body of her most beloved Son, to whom
she had been unable to give any testimony of love during the long hours
of his martyrdom. And she gazed upon his wounds and fondly embraced his
blood-stained cheeks, whilst Magdalen pressed her face upon his feet.

The men withdrew into a little cave, situated on the south-west side of
Calvary, there to prepare the different things needful for the
embalming; but Cassius, with a few other soldiers who had been
converted, remained at a respectful distance. All ill-disposed persons
were gone back to the city, and the soldiers who were present served
merely to form a guard to prevent any interruption in the last honours
which were being rendered to the body of Jesus. Some of these soldiers
even gave assistance when desired. The holy women held the vases,
sponges, linen, unction, and spices, according as required; but when not
thus employed, they remained at a respectful distance, attentively
gazing upon the Blessed Virgin as she proceeded

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

in her mournful task. Magdalen did not leave the body of Jesus; but John
gave continual assistance to the Blessed Virgin, and went to and fro
from the men to the women, lending aid to both parties. The women had
with them some large leathern bottles and a vase filled. with water
standing upon a coal fire. They gave the Blessed Virgin and Magdalen,
according as they required, vases filled with clear water, and sponges,
which they afterwards squeezed in the leathern bottles.

The courage and firmness of Mary remained unshaken even in the midst of
her inexpressible anguish. <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16) It was
absolutely impossible for her to leave the body of her Son in the awful
state to which it had been reduced by his sufferings, and therefore she
began with indefatigable earnestness to wash and purify it from the
traces of the outrages to which it had been exposed. With the utmost
care she drew off the crown of thorns, opening it behind, and then
cutting off one by one the thorns which had sunk deep into the head of
Jesus, in order that she might not widen the wounds. The crown was
placed by the side of the nails, and then Mary drew out the thorns which
had remained in the skin with a species of rounded pincers, <span
id="fr_17"></span>[2](#fn_17) and sorrowfully showed them to her
friends. These

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

thorns were placed with the crown, but still some of them must have been
preserved separately.

The divine face of our Saviour was scarcely recognisable, so disfigured
was it by the wounds with which it was covered. The beard and hair were
matted together with blood. Mary washed the head and face, and passed
damp sponges over the hair to remove the congealed blood. As she
proceeded in her pious office, the extent of the awful cruelty which had
been exercised upon Jesus became more and more apparent, and caused in
her soul emotions of compassion and tenderness which increased as she
passed from one wound to another. She washed the wounds of the head, the
eyes filled with blood, the nostrils, and the ears, with a sponge and a
small piece of linen spread over the fingers of her right hand; and then
she purified, in the same manner, the half-opened mouth, the tongue, the
teeth, and the lips. She divided what remained of our Lord's hair into
three parts, <span id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18) a part falling over
each temple, and the third over the back of

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

his head; and when she had disentangled the front hair and smoothed it,
she passed it behind his ears. When the head was thoroughly cleansed and
purified, the Blessed Virgin covered it with a veil, after having kissed
the sacred cheeks of her dear Son. She then turned her attention to the
neck, shoulders, chest, back, arms, and pierced hands. All the bones of
the breast and the joints were dislocated, and could not be bent. There
was a frightful wound on the shoulder which had borne the weight of the
Cross, and all the upper part of the body was covered with bruises and
deeply marked with the blows of the scourges. On the left breast there
was a small wound where the point of Cassius's lance had come out, and
on the right side was the large wound made by the same lance, and which
had pierced the heart through and through. Mary washed all these wounds,
and Magdalen, on her knees, helped her from time to time; but without
leaving the sacred feet of Jesus, which she bathed with tears and wiped
with her hair.

The head, bosom, and feet of our Lord were' now washed, and the sacred
body, which was covered with brown stains and red marks in those places
where the skin had been torn off, and of a bluish-white colour, like
flesh that has been drained of blood, was resting on the knees of Mary,
who covered the parts which she had washed with a veil, and then
proceeded to embalm all the wounds. The holy women knelt by her side,
and in turn presented to her a box, out of which she took some precious
ointment, and with it filled and covered the wounds. She also anointed
the hair, and then, taking the sacred hands of Jesus in her left hand,
respectfully kissed them, and filled the large wounds made by the nails
with this ointment or sweet spice. She likewise filled the ears,
nostrils, and wound in the side with the same precious mixture.
Meanwhile Magdalen wiped and embalmed our Lord's feet, and then again
washed them with her tears, and often pressed her face upon them.

The water which had been used was not thrown away, but poured into the
leathern bottles in which the sponges

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

had been squeezed. I saw Cassius or some other soldier go several times
to fetch fresh water from the fountain of Gihon, which was at no great
distance off. When the Blessed Virgin had filled all the wounds with
ointment, she wrapped the head up in linen cloths, but she did not as
yet cover the face. She closed the half-open eyes of Jesus, and kept her
hand upon them for some time. She also closed the mouth, and then
embraced the sacred body of her beloved Son, pressing her face fondly
and reverently upon his. Joseph and Nicodemus had been waiting for some
time, when John drew near to the Blessed Virgin, and besought her to
permit the body of her Son to be taken from her, that the embalming
might be completed, because the Sabbath was close at hand. Once more did
Mary embrace the sacred body of Jesus, and utter her farewells in the
most touching language, and then the men lifted it from her arms on the
sheet, and carried it to some distance. The deep sorrow of Mary had been
for the time assuaged by the feelings of love and reverence with which
she had accomplished her sacred task; but now it once more overwhelmed
her, and she fell, her head covered with her veil, into the arms of the
holy women. Magdalen felt almost as though her Beloved were being
forcibly carried away from her, and, hastily ran forward a few steps,
with her arms stretched forth; but then, after a moment, returned to the
Blessed Virgin.

The sacred body was carried to a spot beneath the level of the top of
Golgotha, where the smooth surface of a rock afforded a convenient
platform on which to embalm the body. I first saw a piece of open-worked
linen, looking very much like lace, and which made me think of the large
embroidered curtain hung between the choir and nave during Lent. <span
id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19) It was probably worked in that open stitch
for the water to run through. I also saw another large sheet unfolded.
The body of our Saviour was placed on

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

the open-worked piece of linen, and some of the other men held the other
sheet spread above it. Nicodemus and Joseph then knelt down, and
underneath this covering took off the linen which they had fastened
round the loins of our Saviour, when they took his body down from the
Cross. They then passed sponges under this sheet and washed the lower
parts of the body; after which they lifted it up by the help of pieces
of linen crossed beneath the loins and knees, and washed the back
without turning it over. They continued washing until nothing but clear
water came from the sponges when pressed. Next they poured water of
myrrh over the whole body, and then, handling it with respect, stretched
it out full length, for it was still in the position in which our Divine
Lord had died--the loins and knees bent. They then placed beneath his
hips a sheet which was a yard in width and three in length, laid upon
his lap bundles of sweet-scented herbs, and shook over the whole body a
powder which Nicodemus had brought. Next they wrapped up the lower part
of the body, and fastened the cloth which they had placed underneath
round it strongly. After this they anointed the wounds of the thighs,
placed bundles of herbs between the legs, which were stretched out to
their fall length, and wrapped them up entirely in these sweet spices.

Then John conducted the Blessed Virgin and the other holy women once
more to the side of the body. Mary knelt down by the head of Jesus, and
placed beneath it a piece of very fine linen which had been given her by
Pilate's wife, and which she had worn round her neck under her cloak;
next, assisted by the holy women, she placed from the shoulders to the
cheeks bundles of herbs, spices, and sweet-scented powder, and then
strongly bound this piece of linen round the head and shoulders.
Magdalen poured besides a small bottle of balm into the wound of the
side, and the holy women placed some more herbs into those of the hands
and feet. Then the men put sweet spices around all the remainder of the
body, crossed the sacred stiffened arms on the chest, and bound the
large white sheet round the body as high as the chest, in the

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

game manner as if they had been swaddling a child. Then, having fastened
the end of a large band beneath the armpits, they rolled it round the
head and the whole body. Finally, they placed our Divine Lord on the
large sheet, six yards in length, which Joseph of Arimathea had bought,
and wrapped him in it. He was lying diagonally upon it, and one corner
of the sheet was raised from the feet to the chest, the other drawn over
the head and shoulders, while the remaining two ends were doubled round
the body.

The Blessed Virgin, the holy women, the men-all were kneeling round the
body of Jesus to take their farewell of it, when a most touching miracle
took place before them. The sacred body of Jesus, with all its wounds,
appeared imprinted upon the cloth which covered it, as though he had
been pleased to reward their care and their love, and leave them a
portrait of himself through all the veils with which he was enwrapped.
With tears they embraced the adorable body, and then reverently kissed
the wonderful impression which it had left. Their astonishment increased
when, on lifting up the sheet, they saw that all the bands which
surrounded the body had remained white as before, and that the upper
cloth alone had been marked in this wonderful manner. It was not a mark
made by the bleeding wounds, since the whole body was wrapped up and
covered with sweet spices, but it was a supernatural portrait, bearing
testimony to the divine creative power ever abiding in the body of
Jesus. I have seen many things relative to the subsequent history of
this piece of linen, but I could not describe them coherently. After the
resurrection it remained in the possession of the friends of Jesus, but
fell twice into the hands of the Jews, and later was honoured in several
different places. I have seen it in a city of Asia, in the possession of
some Christians who were not Catholics. I have forgotten the name of the
town, which is situated in a province near the country of the Three
Kings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_16"></span>[294:1](pjc65.htm#fr_16) On Good Friday, March
30th, 1820, as Sister Emmerich was contemplating the descent from the
Cross she suddenly fainted, in the presence of the writer of these
lines, and appeared to be really dead. But after a time she recovered
her senses and gave the following explanation, although still in a state
of great suffering: 'As I was contemplating the body of Jesus lying on
the knees of the Blessed Virgin I said to myself: "How great is her
strength! She has not fainted even once!" My guide reproached me for
this thought--in which there was more astonishment than compassion--and
said to me, "Suffer then what she has suffered!" And at the same moment
a sensation of the sharpest anguish transfixed me like a sword, so that
I believed I must have died from it.' She had to endure this suffering
for a long time, and, in consequence of it, had an illness which reduced
her almost to the brink of the grave.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[294:2](pjc65.htm#fr_17) Sister Emmerich said
that the shape of these pincers reminded her of the scissors with which
Samson's hair was out off. In her visions of the third year of the
public life of Jesus she had seen our Lord keep the Sabbath-day at
Misael--a town belonging <span id="page_295">p. 295</span> to the
Levites, of the tribe of Aser--and as a portion of the Book of Judges
was read in the synagogue, Sister Emmerich beheld upon that occasion the
life of Samson.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[295:1](pjc65.htm#fr_18) Sister Emmerich was
accustomed, when speaking of persons of historical importance, to
explain how they divided their hair. 'Eve,' she said, 'divided her hair
in two parts, but Mary into three.' And she appeared to attach
importance to these words. No opportunity presented itself for her to
give any explanation upon the subject, which probably would have shown
what was done With the hair in sacrifices, funerals, consecrations, or
vows, &c. She once said of Samson: 'His fair hair, which was long and
thick, was gathered up on his head in seven tresses, like a helmet, and
the ends of these tresses were fastened upon his forehead and temples.
His hair was not in itself the source of his strength, but only as the
witness to the vow which he had made to let it grow in God's honour. The
powers which depended upon these seven tresses were the seven gifts of
the Holy Ghost. He must have already broken his vows and lost many
graces, when he allowed this sign of being a Nazarene to be out off. I
did not see Dalila out off all his hair, and I think one look remained
on his forehead. He retained the grace to do penance and of that
repentance by which he recovered strength sufficient to destroy his
enemies. The life of Samson is figurative and prophetic.'

<span id="fn_19"></span>[297:1](pjc65.htm#fr_19) This refers to a custom
of the Diocese of Munster. During Lent there was hung up in the churches
a curtain, embroidered in open work, representing the Five Wounds, the
instruments of the, Passion, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LII. The Body of our Lord placed in the Sepulchre](pjc66)
