[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc60)  [Next](pjc62.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XLVII.

### The Request of Joseph of Arimathea to be allowed to have the Body of Jesus.

SCARCELY had the commotion which the town had been thrown into begun to
subside in a degree, when the Jews belonging to the Council sent to
Pilate to request that the legs of the criminals might be broken, in
order to put an end to their lives before the Sabbath-day dawned. Pilate
immediately dispatched executioners to Calvary to carry out their
wishes.

Joseph of Arimathea then demanded an audience; he had heard of the death
of Jesus, and he and Nicodemus had determined to bury him in a new
sepulchre which he had made at the end of his garden, not far from
Calvary.

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pilate was still
filled with anxiety and solicitude, and was much astonished at seeing a
person holding a high position like Joseph so anxious for leave to give
honourable burial to a criminal whom he had sentenced to be
ignominiously crucified. He sent for the centurion Abenadar, who
returned to Jerusalem after he had conferred with the disciples who were
hidden in the caverns, and asked him whether the King of the Jews was
really dead. Abenadar gave Pilate a full account of the death of our
Lord, of his last words, and of the loud cry he uttered immediately
before death, and of the earthquake which had rent the great chasm in
the rock. The only thing at which Pilate expressed surprise was that the
death of Jesus should have taken place so quickly, as those who were
crucified usually lived much longer; but although be said so little,
every word uttered by Joseph increased his dismay and remorse. He
instantly gave Joseph an order, by which he was authorised to take down
the body of the King of the Jews from the Cross, and to perform the
rites of sepulture at once. Pilate appeared to endeavour, by his
readiness in granting this request, to wish to make up, in a degree, for
his previous cruel and unjust conduct, and he was likewise very glad to
do what he was certain would annoy the priests extremely, as he knew
their wish was to have Jesus buried ignominiously between the two
thieves. He dispatched a messenger to Calvary to see his orders
executed. I believe the messenger was Abenadar, for I saw him assisting
in taking Jesus down from the Cross.

When Joseph of Arimathea left Pilate's palace, he instantly rejoined
Nicodemus, who was waiting for him at the house of a pious woman, which
stood opposite to a large street, and was not far from that alley where
Jesus was so shamefully ill-treated when he first commenced carrying his
Cross. The woman was a vendor of aromatic herbs, and Nicodemus had
purchased many perfumes which were necessary for embalming the body of
Jesus from her. She procured the more precious kinds from other places,
and Joseph went away to procure a fine winding-sheet. His servants then
fetched ladders, hammers, pegs, jars of

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

water, and sponges, from a neighbouring shed, and placed them in a
hand-barrow similar to that on which the disciples of John the Baptist
put his body when they carried it off from the castle of Macherus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLVIII. The Opening Of the Side of Jesus.--Death of the
two Thieves](pjc62.md)
