[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc67)  [Next](pjc69) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

# CHAPTER LIV.

### On the Name of Calvary.

WHILST meditating on the name of Golgotha, Calvary, the *place of
skulls*, borne by the rock upon which Jesus was crucified, I became
deeply absorbed in contemplation, and beheld in spirit all ages from the
time of Adam to that of Christ, and in this vision the origin of the
name was made known to me. I here give all that I remember on this
subject.

I saw Adam, after his expulsion from Paradise, weeping in the grotto
where Jesus sweated blood and water, on Mount Olivet. I saw how Seth was
promised to Eve in the grotto of the manger at Bethlehem, and how she
brought him forth in that same grotto. I also saw Eve living in some
caverns near Hebron, where the Essenian Monastery of Maspha was
afterwards established.

I then beheld the country where Jerusalem was built, as it appeared
after the Deluge, and the land was all unsettled, black, stony, and very
different from what it had been before. At an immense depth below the
rock which constitutes Mount Calvary (which was formed in this spot by
the rolling, of the waters), I saw the tomb of Adam and Eve. The head
and one rib were wanting to one of the skeletons, and the remaining head
was placed within the same skeleton, to which it did not belong. The
bones of Adam and Eve had not all been left in this grave, for Noah had
some of them with him in the ark, and they were transmitted from
generation to generation by the Patriarchs. Noah, and also Abraham, were
in the habit, when offering sacrifice, of always laying some of Adam's
bones upon the altar, to remind the Almighty of his promise. When Jacob
gave Joseph his variegated robe, he at the same time gave him some bones
of Adam, to be kept as relies. Joseph always wore them on his bosom, and
they were placed with his own bones in the first reliquary which the
children of Israel brought out of Egypt

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I have seen many
similar things, bat some I have for. gotten, and the others time fails
me to describe.

As regards the origin of the name of *Calvary*, I here give all I know.
I beheld the mountain which bears this name as it was in the time of the
Prophet Eliseus. It was not the same then as at the time of our Lords
Crucifixion, but was a hill, with many walls and caverns, resembling
tombs, upon it. I saw the Prophet Eliseus descend into these caverns, I
cannot say whether in reality or only in a vision, and I saw him take
out a skull from a stone sepulchre in which bones were resting. Some one
who was by his side--I think an angel--said to him, 'This is the skull
of Adam.' The prophet was desirous to take it away, but his companion
forbade him. I saw upon the skull some few hairs of a fair colour.

I learned also that the prophet having related what had happened to him,
the spot received the name of *Calvary*. Finally, I saw that the Cross
of Jesus was placed vertically over the skull of Adam. I was informed
that this spot was the exact *centre* of the earth; and at the same time
I was shown the numbers and measures proper to every country, but I have
forgotten them, individually as well as in general. Yet I have seen this
centre from above, and as it were from a bird's-eye view. In that way a
person sees far more clearly than on a map all the different countries,
mountains, deserts, seas, rivers, towns, and even the smallest places,
whether distant or near at hand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LV. The Cross and the Wine-press](pjc69)
