[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc72)  [Next](pjc74) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

# CHAPTER LIX

### A detached Account of the Descent into Hell.

WHEN Jesus, after uttering a loud cry, expired, I saw his heavenly soul
under the form of a bright meteor pierce the earth at the foot of the
Cross, accompanied by the angel Gabriel and many other angels. His
Divine nature continued united to his soul as well as to his body, which
still remained hanging upon the Cross, but I cannot explain how this
was, although I saw it plainly in my own mind. The place into which the
soul of Jesus entered was divided into three parts, which appeared to me
like three worlds; and I felt that they were round, and that each
division was separated from the other by a hemisphere.

I beheld a bright and beautiful space opposite to Limbo; it was
enamelled with flowers, delicious breezes wafted through it; and many
souls were placed there before being admitted into Heaven after their
deliverance from Purgatory. Limbo, the place where the souls were
waiting for the Redemption, was divided into different compartments, and
encompassed by a thick foggy atmosphere. Our Lord appeared radiant with
light and surrounded by angels, who conducted him triumphantly between
two of these compartments; the one on the left containing the patriarchs
who lived before the time of Abraham, and that on the right those who
lived between the days of Abraham and St. John Baptist. These souls did
not at first recognise Jesus, but were filled nevertheless with
sensations of joy and hope. There was not a spot in those narrow
confines which did not, as it were, dilate with feelings of happiness.
The passage of Jesus might be compared to the wafting of a breath of
air, to a sudden flash of light, or to a shower of vivifying dew, but it
was swift as a whirlwind. After passing through the two compartments, he
reached a dark spot in which Adam and Eve were standing; he spoke to
them, they prostrated and adored him in a perfect ecstasy of joy, and
they immediately joined the band of angels, and accompanied our

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Lord to the
compartment on the left, which contained the patriarchs who lived before
Abraham. This compartment was a species of Purgatory, and a few evil
spirits were wandering about among the souls and endeavouring to fill
them with anxiety and alarm. The entrance through a species of door was
closed, but the angels rapped, and I thought I heard them say, 'Open
these doors.' When Jesus entered in triumph the demons dispersed, crying
out at the same time, 'What is there between thee and us? What art thou
come to do here? Wilt thou crucify us likewise?' The angels hunted them
away, having first chained them. The poor souls confined in this place
had only a slight presentiment and vague idea of the presence of Jesus;
but the moment he told them that it was he himself, they burst out into
acclamations of joy, and welcomed him with hymn of rapture and delight.
The soul of our Lord then wended its way to the right, towards that part
which really constituted Limbo; and there he met the soul of the good
thief which angels were carrying to Abraham's bosom, as also that of the
bad thief being dragged by demons into Hell. Our Lord addressed a few
words to both, and then entered Abraham's bosom, accompanied by numerous
angels and holy souls, and also by those demons who had been chained and
expelled from the compartment.

This locality appeared to me more elevated than the surrounding parts;
and I can only describe my sensations on entering it, by comparing them
to those of a person coming suddenly into the interior of a church,
after having been for some time in the burial vaults. The demons, who
were strongly chained, were extremely loth to enter, and resisted to the
utmost of their power, but the angels compelled them to go forward. All
the just who had lived before the time of Christ were assembled there;
the patriarchs, Moses, the judges, and the kings on the left-hand side;
and on the right side, the prophets, and the ancestors of our Lord, as
also his near relations, such as Joachim, Anna, Joseph, Zacharias,
Elizabeth, and John. There were no demons in this place, and the only
discomfort

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

that had been felt by those placed there was a longing desire for the
accomplishment of the promise; and when our Lord entered they saluted
him with joyful hymns of gratitude and thanksgiving for its fulfilment,
they prostrated and adored him, and the evil spirits who had been
dragged into Abraham's bosom when our Lord entered were compelled to
confess with shame that they were vanquished. Many of these holy souls
were ordered by our Lord to return to the earth, reënter their own
bodies, and thus render a solemn and impressive testimony to the truth.
It was at this moment that so many dead persons left their tombs in
Jerusalem; I regarded them less in the light of dead persons risen again
than as corpses put in motion by a divine power, and which, after having
fulfilled the mission intrusted to them, were laid aside in the same
manner as the insignia of office are taken off by a clerk when he has
executed the orders of his superiors.

I next saw our Lord, with his triumphant procession, enter into a
species of Purgatory which was filled with those good pagans who, having
had a faint glimmering of the truth, had longed for its fulfilment: this
Purgatory was very deep, and contained a few demons, as also some of the
idols of the pagans. I saw the demons compelled to confess the deception
they had practised with regard to these idols, and the souls of the poor
pagans cast themselves at the feet of Jesus, and adored him with
inexpressible joy: here, likewise, the demons were bound with chains and
dragged away. I saw our Saviour perform many other actions; but I
suffered so intensely at the same time, that I cannot recount them as I
should have wished.

Finally, I beheld him approach to the centre of the great abyss, that is
to say, to Hell itself; and the expression of his countenance was most
severe.

The exterior of Hell was appalling and frightful; it was an immense,
heavy-looking building, and the granite of which it was formed, although
black, was of metallic brightness; and the dark and ponderous doors were
secured with such terrible bolts that no one could behold them

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

without trembling. Deep groans and cries of despair might be plainly
distinguished even while the doors were tightly closed; but, O, who can
describe the dreadful yells and shrieks which burst. upon the ear when
the bolts were unfastened and the doors flung open; and, O, who can
depict the melancholy appearance of the inhabitants of this wretched
place!

The form under which the Heavenly Jerusalem is generally represented in
my visions is that of a beautiful and well-regulated city, and the
different degrees of glory to which the elect are raised are
demonstrated by the magnificence of their palaces., or the wonderful
fruit and flowers with which the gardens are embellished. Hell is shown
to me under the same form, but all within it is, on the contrary, close,
confused, and crowded; every object tends to fill the mind with
sensations of pain and grief; the marks of the wrath and vengeance of
God are visible everywhere; despair, like a vulture, gnaws every heart,
and discord and misery reign around. In the Heavenly Jerusalem all is
peace and eternal harmony, the beginning, fulfilment, and end of
everything being pure and perfect happiness; the city is filled with
splendid buildings, decorated in such a manner as to charm every eye and
enrapture every sense; the inhabitants of this delightful abode are
overflowing with rapture and exultation, the gardens gay with lovely
flowers, and the trees covered with delicious fruits which give eternal
life. In the city of Hell nothing is to be seen but dismal dungeons,
dark caverns, frightful deserts, fetid swamps filled with every
imaginable species of poisonous and disgusting reptile. In Heaven you
behold the happiness and peaceful union of the saints; in Hell,
perpetual scenes of wretched discord, and every species of sin and
corruption, either under the most horrible forms imaginable, or
represented by different kinds of dreadful torments. All in this dreary
abode tends to fill the mind with horror; not a word of comfort is heard
or a consoling idea admitted; the one tremendous thought, that the
justice of an all-powerful God inflicts or, the damned nothing but what
they have fully deserved

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

is the absorbing tremendous conviction which weighs down each heart.
Vice appears in its own grim disgusting colours, being stripped of the
mask under which it is hidden in this world, and the infernal viper is
seen devouring those who have cherished or fostered it here below. In a
word, Hell is the temple of anguish and despair, while the kingdom of
God is the temple of peace and happiness. This is easy to understand
when seen; but it is almost impossible to describe clearly.

The tremendous explosion of oaths, curses, cries of despair, and
frightful exclamations which, like a clap of thunder, burst forth when
the gates of Hell were thrown open by the angels, would be difficult
even to imagine; our Lord spoke first to the soul of Judas, and the
angels then compelled all the demons to acknowledge and adore Jesus.
They would have infinitely preferred the most frightful torments to such
a humiliation; but all were obliged to submit. Many were chained down in
a circle which was placed round other circles. In the centre of Hell I
saw a dark and horrible-looking abyss, and into this Lucifer was cast,
after being first strongly secured with chains; thick clouds of
sulphureous black smoke arose from its fearful depths, and enveloped his
frightful form in the dismal folds, thus effectually concealing him from
every beholder. God himself had decreed this; and I was likewise told,
if I remember right, that he will be unchained for a time fifty or sixty
years before the year of Christ 2000. The dates of many other events
were pointed out to me which I do not now remember; but a certain number
of demons are to be let loose much earlier than Lucifer, in order to
tempt men, and to serve as instruments of the divine vengeance. I should
think that some must be loosened even in the present day, and others
will be set free in a short time.

It would be utterly impossible for me to describe all the things which
were shown to me; their number was so great that I could not reduce them
sufficiently to order to define and render them intelligible. Besides

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

which my sufferings are very great, and when I speak on the subject of
my visions I behold them in my mind's eye portrayed in such vivid
colours, that the sight is almost sufficient to cause a weak mortal like
myself to expire.

I next saw innumerable bands of redeemed souls liberated from Purgatory
and from Limbo, who followed our Lord to a delightful spot situated
above the celestial Jerusalem, in which place I, a very short time ago,
saw the soul of a person who was very dear to me. The soul of the good
thief was likewise taken there, and the promise of our Lord, '*This day
thou shalt be with me in Paradise*,' was fulfilled.

It is not in my power to explain the exact time that each of these
events occurred, nor can I relate one-half of the things which I saw and
heard; for some were incomprehensible even to myself, and others would
be misunderstood if I attempted to relate them. I have seen our Lord in
many different places. Even in the sea he appeared to me to sanctify and
deliver everything in the creation. Evil spirits fled at his approach,
and cast themselves into the dark abyss. I likewise beheld his soul in
different parts of the earth, first inside the tomb of Adam, under
Golgotha; and when he was there the souls of Adam and Eve came up to
him, and he spoke to them for some time. He then visited the tombs of
the prophets, who were buried at an immense depth below the surface; but
he passed through the soil in the twinkling of an eye. Their souls
immediately reëntered their bodies, and he spoke to them, and explained
the most wonderful mysteries. Next I saw him, accompanied by a chosen
band of prophets, among whom I particularly remarked David, visit those
parts of the earth which had been sanctified by his miracles and by his
sufferings. He pointed out to them, with the greatest love and goodness,
the different symbols in the old law expressive of the future; and he
showed them how he himself had fulfilled every prophecy. The sight of
the soul of our Lord, surrounded by these happy souls, and radiant with
light, was inexpressibly grand as he glided

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

triumphantly through the air, sometimes passing, with the velocity of
lightning, over rivers, then penetrating through the hardest rocks to
the very centre of the earth, or moving noiselessly over its surface.

I can remember nothing beyond the facts which I have just related
concerning the descent of Jesus into Limbo, where he went in order to
present to the souls there detained the grace of the Redemption which he
had merited for them by his death and by his sufferings; and I saw all
these things in a very short space of time; in fact, time passed so
quickly that it seemed to me but a moment. Our Lord, however, displayed
before me, at the same time, another picture, in which I beheld the
immense mercies which he bestows in the present day on the poor souls in
Purgatory; for on every anniversary of this great day, when his Church
is celebrating the glorious mystery of his death, he casts a look of
compassion on the souls in Purgatory, and frees some of those who sinned
against him before his crucifixion. I this day saw Jesus deliver many
souls; some I was acquainted with, and others were strangers to me, but
I cannot name any of them.

Our Lord, by descending into Hell, planted (if I may thus express
myself), in the spiritual garden of the Church, a mysterious tree, the
fruits of which--namely, his merits--are destined for the constant
relief of the poor souls in Purgatory. The Church militant must
cultivate the tree, and gather its fruits, in order to present them to
that suffering portion of the Church which can do nothing for itself.
Thus it is with all the merits of Christ; we must labour with him if we
wish to obtain our share of them; we must gain our bread by the sweat of
our brow. Everything which our Lord has done for us in time must produce
fruit for eternity; but we must gather these fruits in time, without
which we cannot possess them in eternity. The Church is the most prudent
and thoughtful of mothers; the ecclesiastical year is an immense and
magnificent garden, in which all those fruits for eternity are gathered
together, that we may make use of them in

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

time. Each year contains sufficient to supply the wants of all; but woe
be to that careless or dishonest gardener who allows any of the fruit
committed to his care to perish; if he fails to turn to a proper account
those graces which would restore health to the sick, strength to the
weak, or furnish food to the hungry! When the Day of Judgment arrives,
the Master of the garden will demand a strict account, not only of every
tree, but also of all the fruit produced in the garden.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LX. The Eve of the Resurrection](pjc74)
