[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc81.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

### Detached Account of Abenadar.

ON the 1st of April 1823, Sister Emmerich said that that day was the
Feast of St. Ctésiphon, the centurion who had assisted at the
Crucifixion, and that she had seen during the night various particulars
concerning his, life. But she had also suffered greatly, which, combined
with exterior distractions, had caused her to forget the greatest part
of what she had seen. She related what follows:

'Abenadar, afterwards called Ctésiphon, was born in a country situated
between Babylon and Egypt in Arabia Felix, to the right of the spot
where Job dwelt during the latter half of his life. A certain number of
square houses, with flat roofs, were built there on a slight ascent.
There were many small trees growing on this spot, and incense and balm
were gathered there. I have been in Abenadar's house, which was large
and spacious, as might be expected of a rich man's house, but it was
also very low. All these houses were built in this manner, perhaps on
account of the wind, because they were much exposed. Abenadar had joined
the garrison of the fortress Antonia, at Jerusalem, as a volunteer. He
had entered the Roman service for the purpose of enjoying more
facilities in his study of the fine arts, for he was a learned man. His
character was firm, his figure short and thick-set, and his complexion
dark.

'Abenadar was early convinced, by the doctrine which he heard Jesus
preach, and by a miracle which he saw him work, that salvation was to be
found among the Jews, and he had submitted to the law of Moses. Although
not yet a disciple of our Lord, he bore him no ill-will, and held his
person in secret veneration. He was naturally grave and composed, and
when he came to Golgotha to relieve guard, he kept order on all sides,
and forced everybody to behave at least with common decency, down to the
moment when truth triumphed over him, and he rendered public testimony
to the Divinity of Jesus. Being a rich man, and a volunteer, he had no
difficulty in resigning his post at once. He assisted at

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

the descent from the Cross and the burial of our Lord, which put him
into familiar connection with the friends of Jesus, and after the day of
Pentecost he was one of the first to receive baptism in the Pool of
Bethsaida, when he took the name of Ctésiphon. He had a brother living
in Arabia, to whom he related the miracles he had beheld, and who was
thus called to the path of salvation, came to Jerusalem, was baptised by
the name of Cæcilius, and was charged, together with Ctésiphon, to
assist the deacons in the newly-formed Christian community.

'Ctésiphon accompanied the Apostle St. James the Greater into Spain, and
also returned with him. After a time, he was again sent into Spain by
the Apostles, and carried there the body of St. James, who had been
martyred at Jerusalem. He was made a bishop, and resided chiefly in a
sort of island or peninsula at no great distance from France, which he
also visited, and where he made some disciples. The name of the place
where he lived was rather like Vergui, and it was afterwards laid waste
by an inundation. I do not remember that Ctésiphon was ever martyred. He
wrote several books containing details concerning the Passion of Christ;
but there have been some books falsely attributed to him, and others,
which were really from his pen, ascribed to different writers. Rome has
since rejected these books, the greatest part of which were apocryphal,
but which nevertheless did contain some few things really from his pen.
One of the guards of our Lord's sepulchre, who would not let himself be
bribed by the Jews, was his fellow countryman and friend. His name was
something like Sulei or Suleii. After being detained some time in
prison, he retired into a cavern of Mount Sinai, where he lived seven
years. God bestowed many special graces upon this man, and he wrote some
very learned books in the style of Denis the Areopagite, Another writer
made use of his works, and in this manner some extracts from them have
come down to us. Everything concerning these facts was made known to me,
as well as the name of the book, but I have forgotten it. This
countryman of Ctésiphon afterwards followed him

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

into Spain. Among the companions of Ctésiphon in that country were his
brother Cæcilius, and some other men, whose names were Intalecius,
Hesicius, and Euphrasius. Another Arab, called Sulima, was converted in
the very early days of the Church, and a fellow countryman of Ctésiphon,
with a name like Sulensis, became a Christian later, in the time of the
deacons.'

THE END.

 
