<span id="top"></span>[Sacred-Texts](../../index.md) 
 [Buddhism](../index)   [SBE 11 Index](index)   [Previous](sbe1314.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

## FOURTH KHANDHAKA.

(THE PAVÂRA*N*Â CEREMONY AT THE END OF THE RAINY SEASON, VASSA).

### <span id="1"></span>1.

   <span id="1:1"></span>1. At that time the blessed Buddha dwelt at
Sâvatthi, in the *G*etavana, the garden of Anâthapi*nd*ika. At that time
a number of Bhikkhus, companions and friends of each other, entered upon
Vassa in a certain district of the Kosala country. Now those Bhikkhus
thought: 'What shall we do in order that we may keep Vassa well, in
unity, and in concord, and without quarrel, and that we may not suffer
from want of food?'

   <span id="1:2"></span>2. Then those Bhikkhus thought: 'If we do not
speak to or converse with each other, if he who comes back first from
the village, from his alms-pilgrimage, prepares seats, gets water for
washing the feet, a foot-stool, and a towel<span
id="page_325_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_325_note_1.md), cleans the slop-basin
and gets it ready, and puts there (water to) drink and food,--

   <span id="1:3"></span>3. 'And if he who comes back last from the
village, from his alms-pilgrimage, eats, if there is any food left (from
the dinner of the other Bhikkhus) and if he desires to do so; and if he
does not desire (to eat), throws it away at a place free from grass, or
pours it away into water in which no living things are; puts away the
water for washing the feet, the foot-stool, and the towel<span
id="page_325_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_325_note_1.md); cleans the slop-basin
and <span id="page_326">p. 326</span> puts it away, puts the water and
the food away, and sweeps the dining-room,--

   <span id="1:4"></span>4. 'And if he, who sees a water-pot, or a bowl
for food, or a vessel for evacuations, empty and void, puts it (into its
proper place), and if he is not able to do so single-handed, calls some
one else and puts it away with their united effort<span
id="page_326_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_326_note_1.md) without uttering a word
on that account,--thus shall we keep Vassa well, in unity, and in
concord, and without quarrel, and not suffer from want of food<span
id="page_326_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_326_note_2.md).'

   <span id="1:5"></span>5-7. And those Bhikkhus did not speak to or
converse with each other. He who came back from the village from his
alms-pilgrimage first, prepared seats (&c., as above, § 4, down to)
without uttering a word on that account.

   <span id="1:8"></span>8. Now it is the custom of the Bhikkhus who
have finished their Vassa residence, to go to see the Blessed One. Thus
those Bhikkhus, when they had finished their Vassa residence and when
the three months (of Vassa) had elapsed, set their places of rest in
order, took their alms-bowls and robes, and went on their way to
Sâvatthi. Wandering from place to place, they came to Sâvatthi, to the
*G*etavana, the garden of Anâthapi*nd*ika, to the Blessed One; having
approached the Blessed One and respectfully saluted him, they sat down
near him.

   <span id="1:9"></span>9. Now it is the custom of the blessed Buddhas
<span id="page_327">p. 327</span> to exchange greeting with incoming
Bhikkhus. And the Blessed One said to those Bhikkhus: 'Do things go well
with you, O Bhikkhus? Do you get enough to support yourselves with? Have
you kept Vassa well, in unity, and in concord, and without quarrel? and
have you not suffered from want of food?'

   'Things go tolerably well with us, Lord; we get enough, Lord,
wherewith to support ourselves; we have kept Vassa well, in unity, in
concord, and without quarrel; and have not suffered from want of food.'

   <span id="1:10"></span>10. The Tathâgatas sometimes ask about what
they know; sometimes they do not ask about what they know. They
understand the right time when to ask, and they understand the right
time when not to ask. The Tathâgatas put questions full of sense, not
void of sense; to what is void of sense the bridge is pulled down for
the Tathâgatas. For two purposes the blessed Buddhas put questions to
the Bhikkhus, when they intend to preach the doctrine. or when they
intend to institute a rule of conduct to their disciples.

   <span id="1:11"></span>11. And the Blessed One said to those
Bhikkhus: 'In what way, O Bhikkhus, have you kept Vassa well, in unity,
and in concord, and without quarrel, and not suffered from want of
food?'

   'We have entered upon Vassa, Lord, a number of Bhikkhus, companions
and friends of each other. in a certain district of the Kosala country.
Now, Lord, we thought: "What shall we do (&c., as in § 1)?" Then we
thought, Lord: "If we do not speak (&c., as in §§ 2-4)." Thus, Lord, we
did not speak to or converse with each other (&c., down to:) without
uttering a word on that account. In that <span id="page_328">p.
328</span> way, Lord, we have kept Vassa well, in unity, and in concord,
and without quarrel; and have not suffered from want of food.'

   <span id="1:12"></span>12. Then the Blessed One thus addressed the
Bhikkhus: 'Indeed, O Bhikkhus, these foolish men who profess to have
kept Vassa well, have kept it badly; indeed, O Bhikkhus, these foolish
men who profess to have kept Vassa well, have kept it like a herd of
cattle; indeed have kept it like a herd of rams; indeed have kept it
like a company of indolent people. How can these foolish persons, O
Bhikkhus, take upon themselves the vow of silence, as the Titthiyas do?

   <span id="1:13"></span>13. 'This will not do, O Bhikkhus, for
converting the unconverted (&c., as in Book III, chapter 14, § 3).' And
when he bad rebuked them and delivered a religious discourse, he thus
addressed the Bhikkhus:

   'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, take upon himself the vow of silence, as the
Titthiyas do. He who does, I commits a dukka*t*a offence.

   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that the Bhikkhus, when they have finished
their Vassa residence, hold Pavâra*n*â with each other<span
id="page_328_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_328_note_1.md) in these three ways: by
what has been seen, or by what has been heard, or by what is suspected.
Hence it will result that you live in accord with each other, that you
atone for the offences (you have committed), and that you keep the rules
of discipline before your eyes.

   <span id="1:14"></span>14. 'And you ought, O Bhikkhus, to hold
Pavâra*n*â in this way:

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

   'Let a learned, competent Bhikkhu proclaim the following ñatti before
the Sa*m*gha: "Let the Sa*m*gha, reverend Sirs, hear me. To-day is the
Pavâra*n*â day. If the Sa*m*gha is ready, let the Sa*m*gha hold
Pavâra*n*â."

   'Then let the senior Bhikkhu adjust his upper robe so as to cover one
shoulder, sit down squatting, raise his joined hands, and say: "I
pronounce my Pavâra*n*â, friends, before the Sa*m*gha, by what has been
seen, or by what has been heard, or by what is suspected<span
id="page_329_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_329_note_1.md); may you speak to me,
Sirs, out of compassion towards me; if I see (an offence), I will atone
for it. And for the second time, &c. And for the third time I pronounce
my Pavâra*n*â (&c., down to) if I see (an offence), I will atone for
it."

   'Then let (each) younger Bhikkhu adjust his upper robe . . . .
(&c.)<span id="page_329_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_329_note_2.md)'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span id="2"></span>2.

   <span id="2:1"></span>1. At. that time the *Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhus,
while the senior Bhikkhus were crouching down and were performing their
Pavâra*n*â, remained on their seats. The moderate Bhikkhus were annoyed,
murmured, and became angry: 'How can the *Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhus remain
on their seats, while the senior <span id="page_330">p. 330</span>
Bhikkhus crouch down, and perform their Pavâra*n*â?'

   Those Bhikkhus told the thing to the Blessed One.

   'Is it true, O Bhikkhus, that the *Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhus, &c.?'

   'It is true, O Lord.'

   Then the blessed Buddha rebuked them: 'How can these foolish men, O
Bhikkhus, remain on their seats (&c., as above)? This will not do, O
Bhikkhus, for converting the unconverted (&c., as in chap. 1, § 13).'

   Having rebuked them and delivered a religious discourse, he thus
addressed the Bhikkhus: 'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, remain on his seat,
while the senior Bhikkhus crouch down, and perform their Pavâra*n*â. He
who does, commits a dukka*t*a. offence. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that
all of you crouch down while Pavâra*n*â is being performed.'

   <span id="2:2"></span>2. At that time a certain Bhikkhu weak from
age, who waited crouching till all had finished their Pavâra*n*â, fell
down fainting.

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that (every Bhikkhu) crouches down the
whole while till he has performed his Pavâra*n*â, and sits down on his
seat when he has performed it.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span id="3"></span>3.

   <span id="3:1"></span>1. Now the Bhikkhus thought: 'How many
Pavâra*n*â (days) are there?'

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'There are the two following Pavâra*n*â (days), <span
id="page_331">p. 331</span> O Bhikkhus: the fourteenth and the fifteenth
(of the half month)<span id="page_331_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_331_note_1.md); these are the two
Pavâra*n*â (days), O Bhikkhus.'

   <span id="3:2"></span>2. Now the Bhikkhus thought: 'How many
Pavâra*n*â services are there?'

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'There are the four followingPavâra*n*â services. O Bhikkhus,
&c.<span id="page_331_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_331_note_2.md)'

   <span id="3:3"></span>3. Then the Blessed One thus addressed the
Bhikkhus: 'Assemble, O Bhikkhus, the Sa*m*gha will hold Pavâra*n*â.'
When he had spoken thus, a certain Bhikkhu said to the Blessed One:
'There is a sick Bhikkhu, Lord, who is not present.'

   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that a sick Bhikkhu shall declare (lit.
give) his Pavâra*n*â. And let him declare it, O Bhikkhus, in this way:
Let that sick Bhikkhu go to some Bhikkhu, adjust his upper robe so as to
cover one shoulder, sit down squatting, raise his joined hands, and say:
"I declare my Pavâra*n*â, take my Pavâra*n*â, perform the Pavâra*n*â for
me." If he expresses this by gesture, or by word, or by gesture and
word, the Pavâra*n*â has been declared. If he does not express this by
gesture, &c., the Pavâra*n*â has not been declared.

   <span id="3:4"></span>4-5. 'If (the sick Bhikkhu) succeeds in doing
so, well and good. If he do es not succeed, let them take that sick
Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, on his bed or his chair to the assembly, &c.<span
id="page_331_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_331_note_3.md)

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus. that on the day of Pavâra*n*â he who
declares his Pavâra*n*â, is to declare also his consent<span
id="page_332_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_332_note_1.md) (to acts to be performed
eventually by the Order), for (both declarations) are required for the
Sa*m*gha (and for the validity of its acts)<span
id="page_332_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_332_note_2.md).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span id="4"></span>4.

   At that time relations of a certain Bhikkhu kept him back on the day
of Pavâra*n*â, &c.<span id="page_332_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_332_note_3.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span id="5"></span>5.

   <span id="5:1"></span>1. At that time five Bhikkhus dwelt in a
certain district (or, in a certain residence of Bhikkhus) on the day of
Pavâra*n*â.

   Now these Bhikkhus thought: 'The Blessed One has prescribed the
holding of Pavâra*n*â by the Sa*m*gha, and we are (only) five
persons<span id="page_332_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_332_note_4.md). Well, how are we to
hold Pavâra*n*â?'

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'I prescribe,O Bhikkhus, that five Bhikkhus should . hold Pavâra*n*â
in a (regular) chapter<span id="page_332_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_332_note_5.md).'

   <span id="5:2"></span>2. At that time four Bhikkhus dwelt in a
certain <span id="page_333">p. 333</span> district on the day of
Pavâra*n*â. Now these Bhikkhus thought: 'The Blessed One has prescribed
that five Bhikkhus shall hold Pavâra*n*â in a (regular) chapter, and we,
are (only) four persons. Well, how are we to hold Pavâra*n*â?'

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that four Bhikkhus should hold Pavâra*n*â
with each other.

   <span id="5:3"></span>3. 'And let them hold Pavâra*n*â, O Bhikkhus,
in this way: Let a learned, competent Bhikkhu proclaim the following
ñatti hefore those Bhikkhus:

   "Hear me, Sirs. To-day is Pavâra*n*â day. If you are ready, Sirs, let
us hold Pavâra*n*â with each other."

   'Then let the senior Bhikkhu adjust his upper rohe, &c., and say to
those Bhikkhus: "I pronounce my Pavâra*n*â, friends, hefore you, by what
has heen seen, or by what has heen heard, or by what is suspected; may
you speak to me, Sirs, out of compassion towards me; if I see (an
offence), I will atone for it. And for the second time, &c.; and for the
third time, &c."

   'Then let each younger Bhikkhu, &c.'

   <span id="5:4"></span>4. At that time three Bhikkhus dwelt in a
certain district on the day of Pavâra*n*â. Now these Bhikkhus thought:
'The Blessed One has prescrihed that five Bhikkhus shail hold Pavâra*n*â
in a (regular) chapter, that four Bhikkhus shall hold Pavâra*n*â with
each other, and we are (only) three persons. Well, how are we to hold
Pavâra*n*â?'

   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that three Bhikkhus should hold Pavâra*n*â
with each other. And let them hold Pavâra*n*â (&c., see §.3).'

   <span id="5:5"></span>5. At that time two Bhiklthus dwelt in a
certain <span id="page_334">p. 334</span> district on the day of
Pavâra*n*â. Now these Bhikkhus thought: 'The Blessed One has prescrihed
that five Bhikkhus, &c., that four Bhikkhus, &c., that three Bhikkhus,
&c., and we are (only) two persons. Well, how are we to hold
Pavâra*n*â?'

   'I prescrihe, O Bhikkhus, that two Bhikkhus should hold Pavâra*n*â
with each other.

   <span id="5:6"></span>6. 'And let them hold Pavâra*n*â, O Bhikkhus,
in this way: Let the senior Bhikkhu adjust his upper rohe, &c., and say
to the junior Bhikkhu: "I pronounce my Pavâra*n*â, friend, &c."

   'Then let the junior Bhikkhu, &c.'

   <span id="5:7"></span>7. At that time there dwelt a single Bhikkhu in
a certain district on the day of Pavâra*n*â. Now this Bhikkhu thought:
'The Blessed One has prescribed that five Bhikkhus, &c., &c., and I am
only one person. Well, how am I to hold Pavâra*n*â?'

   <span id="5:8"></span>8. 'In case there dwell, O Bhikkhus, in a
certain district on the day of Pavâra*n*â, a single Bhikkhu: Let that
Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, sweep the place which the Bhikkhus use to
frequent,--the refectory, or hall, or place at the foot of a tree; let
him (then) provide water and food, prepare seats, put a lamp there, and
sit down. If other Bhikkhus come, let him hold Pavâra*n*â with them; if
they do not come, let him fix his mind upon the thought: "To-day is my
Pavâra*n*â." If he does not fix his mind upon this thought, he commits a
dukka*t*a offence.

   <span id="5:9"></span>9. 'Now, O Bhikkhus, where five Bhikkhus dwell
(together), they must not convey the Pavâra*n*â<span
id="page_334_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_334_note_1.md) of one (to their
assemhly) and hold Pavâra*n*â by <span id="page_335">p. 335</span> four
(as) in a (regular) chapter. If they do, they commit a dukka*t*a
offence.

   'Now, O Bhikkhus, where four Bhikkhus dwell (together), they must not
convey the Pavâra*n*â of one (to their assembly) and hold Pavâra*n*â
with each other by three. If they do, they commit a dukka*t*a offence.

   'Now, O Bhikkhus, where three Bhikkhus (&c., as in the last clause).

   'Now, O Bhikkhus, where two Bhikkhus dwen, one of them must not
convey the Pavâra*n*â of the other one, and fix (only) his thoughts
(upon the Pavâra*n*â). If he does, he commits a dukka*t*a offence.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span id="6"></span>6.

   <span id="6:1"></span>1. At that time a certain Bhikkhu was guilty of
an offence on the day of Pavâra*n*â. Now this Bhikkhu thought: 'The
Blessed One has prescribed: "Pavâra*n*â is not to be held by a Bhikkhu
who is guilty of an offence<span id="page_335_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_335_note_1.md)." Now I am guilty of a
an offence. What am I to do?'

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'In case, O Bhikkhus, a certain Bhikkhu be guilty of an offence on
the day of Pavâra*n*â (&c., as in II, 27. 1, 2, down to:) "When I shall
feel no doubt, then I will atone for that offence." Having spoken thus,
let him hold Pavâra*n*â. But in no case must there any hindrance arise
to holding Pavâra*n*â from such a cause.'

   <span id="6:2"></span>2-3. At that time a certain Bhikkhu remembered
<span id="page_336">p. 336</span> an offence, while Pavâra*n*â was being
held (&c., see II, 27. 4-8).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

End of the first Bhâ*n*avâra.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span id="7"></span><span id="8"></span><span id="9"></span><span id="10"></span><span id="11"></span><span id="12"></span><span id="13"></span>7-13.

   **7**. <span id="7:1"></span>1. At that time there assembled in a
certain residence (or district) on the day of Pavâra*n*â a number of
resident Bhikkhus, five or more. They did not know that there were other
resident Bhikkhus absent. Intending to act according to Dhamma and
Vinaya, thinking themselves to be complete while (really) incomplete,
they held Pavâra*n*â. While they were holding Pavâra*n*â, other resident
Bhikkhus, a greater number (than the first ones), arrived.

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   <span id="7:2"></span>2. 'In case there assemble, O Bhikkhus, in a
certain residence on the day of Pavâra*n*â (&c., as in § 1, down to)
they hold Pavâra*n*â. While they are holding Pavâra*n*â, other resident
Bhikkhus, a greater number, arrive. Let (all) those Bhikkhus, O
Bhikkhus, hold Pavâra*n*â again; they who have held Pavâra*n*â, are free
from guilt

   <span id="7:3"></span>3. 'In case there assemble, &c. While they are
holding Pavâra*n*â, other resident Bhikkhus, exactly the same number (as
the first ones), arrive. Those who have held Pavâra*n*â, have held it
correctly; let the other ones hold Pavâra*n*â; they who have held
Pavâra*n*â, are free from guilt.'

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>.         .         .         .         .         .         .         .<br />
.         .         .         .         .         .         .         .<br />
.         .         .         .         .         .         .         .<span id="page_336_fr_1"></span><a href="#page_336_note_1"><sup><span class="small">1</span></sup></a></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

### <span id="14"></span>14.

   <span id="14:1"></span>1-3. 'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, hold Pavâra*n*â
in a seated assembly (of Bhikkhus) before a Bhikkhunî, (&c,<span
id="page_337_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_337_note_1).md)

   <span id="14:4"></span>4. 'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, hold Pavâra*n*â by
(accepting) the Pavâra*n*â declaration of a pârivâsika<span
id="page_337_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_337_note_2.md), except if the assembly
has not yet risen (at the time when the Pavâra*n*â is declared). And let
no one, O Bhikkhus, hold Pavâra*n*â on another day than the Pavâra*n*â
day, except for the sake of (preserving) concord among the Sa*m*gha<span
id="page_337_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_337_note_3.md).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span id="15"></span>15.

   <span id="15:1"></span>1. At that time a certain residence (of
Bhikkhus) in the Kosala country was menaced on the day of Pavâra*n*â by
savage people. The Bhikkhus were not able to perform Pavâra*n*â with the
threefold formula.

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

   'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to perform Pavâra*n*â with the twofold
formula<span id="page_338_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_338_note_1.md).'

   The danger from savage people became still more urgent. The Bhikkhus
were not able to perform Pavâra*n*â with the twofold formula.

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to perform Pavâra*n*â with the onefold
formula<span id="page_338_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_338_note_1.md).'

   The danger from savage people became still more urgent. The Bhikkhus
were not able to perform Pavâra*n*â with the onefold formula.

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'I allow, O Bhikkhus, that all the Bhikkhus who have kept Vassa
together, perform Pavâra*n*â (by one common declaration).'

   <span id="15:2"></span>2. At that time in a certain district on the
day of Pavâra*n*â the greater part of the night had passed away while
(lay-)people were offering gifts (to the Bhikkhus). Now the Bhikkhus
thought: 'The greater part of the night has passed away while the people
were offering gifts. If the Sa*m*gha performs Pavâra*n*â with the
threefold formula, it will not have finished the Pavâra*n*â when day
breaks. Well, what are we to do?'

   They told this thingto the Blessed One.

   <span id="15:3"></span>3. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, in a certain district
on the day of Pavâra*n*â the greater part of the night has passed away
while people were offering gifts (to the Bhikkhus). Now if those
Bhikkhus think: "The greater part (&c., down to:) when day breaks,"
<span id="page_339">p. 339</span> let a learned, competent Bhikkhu
proclaim the following ñatti before the Sa*m*gha: "Let the Sa*m*gha,
reverend Sirs, hear me. While people were offering gifts, the greater
part of the night has passed away. If the Sa*m*gha performs Pavâra*n*â
with the threefold formula, it will not have finished the Pavâra*n*â
when day breaks. If the Sa*m*gha is ready, let the Sa*m*gha hold
Pavâra*n*â with the twofold formula, or with the onefold formula, or by
common declaration of all the Bhikkhus who have kept Vassa together."

   <span id="15:4"></span>4. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, in a certain district
on the day of Pavâra*n*â the greater part of the night has passed away
while the Bhikkhus were in confusion: the Bhikkhus were reciting the
Dhamma, those versed in the Suttantas were propounding the Suttantas,
those versed in the Vinaya were discussing the Vinaya, the Dhamma
preachers were talking about the Dhamma. Now if those Bhikkhus think:
"The greater part of the night has passed away while the Bhikkhus were
in confusion. If the Sa*m*gha performs Pavâra*n*â with the threefold
formula, it will not have finished the Pavâra*n*â when day breaks," let
a learned, competent Bhikkhu proclaim the following ñatti before the
Sa*m*gha: "Let the Sa*m*gha, &c. The greater part of the night has
passed away while the Bhikkhus were in confusion. If the Sa*m*gha
performs Pavâra*n*â (&c. as in § 3)"'

   <span id="15:5"></span>5. At that time in a certain district in the
Kosala country a great assembly of Bhikkhus had come together on the day
of Pavâra*n*â, and there was but a small place protected from rain, and
a great cloud was in the sky. Now the Bhikkhus thought: 'A great
assembly of Bhikkhus has come together <span id="page_340">p. 340</span>
here, and there is but a small place protected from rain, and a great
cloud is in the sky. If the Sa*m*gha performs Pavâra*n*â with the
threefold formula, it will not have finished the Pavâra*n*â when this
cloud will begin to rain. Well, what are we to do?'

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   <span id="15:6"></span>6. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, in a certain district
a great assembly of Bhikkhus has come together on the day ofPavâra*n*â,
and there is but a small place protected from rain, and a great cloud is
in the sky. Now if those Bhikkhus think . . . . (&c., as in § 3 to the
end).

   <span id="15:7"></span>7. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, in a certain district
on the day of Pavâra*n*â danger arises from kings, danger from robbers,
danger from fire, danger from water, danger from human beings, danger
from non-human beings, danger from beasts of prey, danger from creeping
things, danger of life, danger against chastity. Now if those Bhikkhus
think: "Here is danger for our chastity. If the Sa*m*gha performs
Pavâra*n*â with the threefold formula, it will not have finished the
Pavâra*n*â when this danger for chastity will arise," let a learned,
competent Bhikkhu . . . .' (&c., as in § 3 to the end).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span id="16"></span>16.

   <span id="16:1"></span>1. At that time the *Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhus
held Pavâra*n*â being guilty of an offence.

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, hold Pavâra*n*â who is guilty of an offence.
He who does, commits a <span id="page_341">p. 341</span> dukka*t*a
offence. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you ask a Bhikkhu who holds
Pavâra*n*â being guilty of an offence. for his leave<span
id="page_341_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_341_note_1.md) and reprove him for that
offence.'

   <span id="16:2"></span>2. At that time the *Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhus,
when asked for leave, were not willing to give leave (to Bhikkhus who
were going to reprove them for an offence).

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you inhibit the Pavâra*n*â of a
Bhikkhu who does not give leave. And you ought to inhibit it, O
Bhikkhus, in this way: Let (a Bhikkhu) say on the day of Pavâra*n*â, on
the fourteenth or on the fifteenth day (of the half month), in presence
of that person, before the assembled Sa*m*gha: "Let the Sa*m*gha,
reverend Sirs, hear me. Such and such a person is guilty of an offence;
I inhibit his Pavâra*n*â; Pavâra*n*â must not be held in his presence."
Thus his Pavâra*n*â is inhibited.'

   <span id="16:3"></span>3, At that time the *Kh*abbagiya Bhikkhus, who
thought: 'Otherwise good Bhikkhus might inhibit our Pavâra*n*â,'
themselves inhibited beforehand, without object and reason, the
Pavâra*n*â of pure Bhikkhus who had committed no offence, and they also
inhibited the Pavâra*n*â of Bhikkhus who had already performed their
Pavâra*n*â.

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, inhibit, without object and reason, the
Pavâra*n*â of pure Bhikkhus who have committed no offence. He who does,
commits a dukka*t*a offence. And further, O Bhikkhus, let no <span
id="page_342">p. 342</span> one inhibit the Pavâra*n*â of Bhikkhus who
have already performed their Pavâra*n*â. He who does, commits a
dukka*t*a offence.

   <span id="16:4"></span>4. 'And thus, O Bhikkhus, (you may discern
whether) the Pavâra*n*â is (duly) inhibited or not inhibited.

   'In what cases is the Pavâra*n*â, O Bhikkhus, not inhibited? When
Pavâra*n*â, O Bhikkhus, is pronounced, dedared, and finished with the
threefold formula, and if (a Bhikkhu then) inhibits the Pavâra*n*â (of
another Bhikkhu), the Pavâra*n*â is not inhibited. When Pavâra*n*â, O
Bhikkhus, is pronounced, declared, and finished with the twofold
formula, with the onefold formula, by common declaration of all Bhikkhus
who have kept Vassa together, and if (a Bhikkhu then) inhibits, (&c., as
before). In these cases, O Bhikkhus, the Pavâra*n*â is not inhibited.

   <span id="16:5"></span>5. 'And in what cases, O Bhikkhus, is the
Pavâra*n*â inhibited? When Pavâra*n*â, O Bhikkhus, is pronounced,
declared, but not finished<span id="page_342_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_342_note_1.md) with the threefold
formula, and if (a Bhikkhu then) inhibits the Pavâra*n*â (of another
Bhikkhu), the Pavâra*n*â is inhibited, (&c.<span
id="page_342_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_342_note_2).md). In these cases, O
Bhikkhus, the Pavâra*n*â is inhibited.

   <span id="16:6"></span>6. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, one Bhikkhu, on the
day of Pavâra*n*â, inhibits the Pavâra*n*â of another Bhikkhu: then if
the other Bhikkhus know with regard to that (inhibiting) Bhikkhu: "This
venerable <span id="page_343">p. 343</span> brother is not of a pure
conduct in his deeds, nor in his words, nor as regards his means of
livelihood, he is ignorant, unlearned, unable to give explanation when
he is questioned," (let them say to him): "Nay, friend, let not quarrel
arise, nor strife, nor discord, nor dispute," and having thus put him to
silence, let the Sa*m*gha hold Pavâra*n*â.

   <span id="16:7"></span>7-9. 'In case; O Bhikkhus, &c.<span
id="page_343_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_343_note_1.md)

   <span id="16:10"></span>10. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, one Bhikkhu on the
day of Pavâra*n*â inhibits the Pavâra*n*â of another Bhikkhu: then if
the other Bhikkhus know with regard to that (inhibiting) Bhikkhu: "This
venerable brother is of a pure conduct in his deeds and in his words and
with regard to his means of livelihood, he is clever, learned, and able
to give explanation when he is questioned," let them say to him: "If you
inhibit, friend, the Pavâra*n*â of this Bhikkhu, on what account do you
inhibit it, on account of a moral transgression, or on account of a
transgression against the rules of conduct or on account of heresy?"

   <span id="16:11"></span>11. ' If he replies: "I inhibit it on account
of a moral transgression, I inhibit it on account of a transgression
against the rules of conduct. I inhibit it on account of heresy," let
them say to him: "Well, do you know, Sir, what a moral transgression is,
what a transgression against the rules of conduct is, what heresy is?"
If he replies. "I <span id="page_344">p. 344</span> know, friends, what
a moral transgression is, &c.," let them say to him: "And what is,
friend, a moral transgression, &c.?"

   <span id="16:12"></span>12. 'If he replies: "The four pârâ*g*ika
offences and the thirteen sa*m*ghâdisesa offences are the moral
transgressions; thulla*kk*aya offences, pâ*k*ittiya offences,
pâ*t*idesanîya offences, dukka*t*a offences, and wicked language are the
transgressions against the rules of conduct; false doctrine and . . . .
doctrine<span id="page_344_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_344_note_1.md) are heresy," let them
say to him: "If you inhibit, friend, the Pavâra*n*â of this Bhikkhu, do
you inhibit it on account of what you have seen, or of what you have
heard, or of what you suspect?"

   <span id="16:13"></span>13. 'If he replies: "I inhibit it on account
of what I have seen, or on account of what I have heard, or on account
of what I suspect," let them say to him: "If you inhibit, friend, the
Pavâra*n*â of this Bhikkhu on account of what you have seen, what have
you seen? What is it that you have seen? When have you seen it? Where
have you seen it? Have you seen him committing a pârâ*g*ika offence?
Have you seen him committing a sa*m*ghâdisesa offence? Have you seen him
committing a thulla*kk*a ya offence, a pâ*k*ittiya offence, a
pâ*t*idesanîya offence, a dukka*t*a offence, or making himself guilty of
wicked language? And where were you? And where was this Bhikkhu? And
what did you do? And what did this Bhikkhu do?"

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

   <span id="16:14"></span>14. 'If he then replies: "I do not inhibit,
friends, the Pavâra*n*â of this Bhikkhu on account of what I have seen,
but I inhibit it on account of what I have heard," let them say to him:
"If you inhibit, friend, the Pavâra*n*â of this Bhikkhu on account of
what you have heard, what have you heard? What is it that you have
heard? When have you heard it? Where have you heard it? Have you heard
that he has committed a pârâ*g*ika offence, (&c., down to) or that he
has made himself guilty of wicked language? Have you heard it from a
Bhikkhu? Have you heard it from a Bhikkhunî? Have you heard it from a
sikkhamânâ, from a sâma*n*era, from a sâma*n*erî, from an upâsaka, from
an upâsikâ, from kings, from royal officers, from Titthiyas, from
Titthiya disciples?"

   <span id="16:15"></span>15. 'If he then replies: "I do not inhibit,
friends, the Pavâra*n*â of this Bhikkhu on account of what I have heard,
but I inhibit it on account of what I suspect," let them say to him: "If
you inhibit, friend, the Pavâra*n*â of this Bhikkhu on account of what
you suspect, what do you suspect? What is it that you suspect? When do
you suspect it? Where do you suspect it? Do you suspect that he has
committed a pârâ*g*ika offence, (&c., down to) wicked language? Does
your suspicion come from what you have heard from a Bhikkhu, (&c., down
to) from Titthiya disciples?"

   <span id="16:16"></span>16. 'If he then replies: "I do not inhibit.
friends, the Pavâra*n*â of this Bhikkhu on account of what I suspect; I
do not know the reason why I inhibit the Pavâra*n*â of this Bhikkhu,"
and if that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, who reproves (the other one), being
questioned by intelligent fellow Bhikkhus, is not able <span
id="page_346">p. 346</span> to convince tbeir minds, you are right in
saying that in such case the Bhikkhu who has been reproved is blameless.
But if that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, who reproves (the other one), being
questioned by intelligent fellow Bhikkhus, is able to convince their
minds, you are right in saying that in such case the Bhikkhu who has
been reproved is blamable.

   <span id="16:17"></span>17. 'If that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, who
reproves (another one), admits that be has charged him unfoundedly with
a pârâ*g*ika offence, let the Sa*m*gha enter upon the sa*m*ghâdisesa
proceedings<span id="page_346_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_346_note_1) (against the accuser.md)
and then hold Pavâra*n*â.

   'If that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, who reproves (another one), admits that
he has charged him unfoundedly with a sa*m*ghâdisesa offence, let the
Sa*m*gha treat (the accuser) according to the law<span
id="page_346_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_346_note_2.md) and then hold
Pavâra*n*â.

   'If that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, who reproves (another one), admits that
he has charged him unfoundedly with a thulla*kk*aya offence, or with a
pâ*k*ittiya offence, or with a pâ*t*idesanîya offence, or with a
dukka*t*a offence, or with having used wicked language, let the Sa*m*gha
treat (the accuser) according to the law<span
id="page_346_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_346_note_3.md) and then hold
Pavâra*n*â.

   <span id="16:18"></span>18. 'If that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, who has
been reproved, admits that be has committed a pârâ*g*ika offence, let
the Sa*m*gha expel him and then bold Pavâra*n*â.

   'If that Bhikkhu, &c., admits that be has committed <span
id="page_347">p. 347</span> a sa*m*ghâdisesa offence, let the Sa*m*gha
enter upon the sa*m*ghâdisesa proceedings (against him) and then hold
Pavâra*n*â.

   'If that Bhikkhu, &c., admits that he has committed a thulla*kk*aya
offence, or a pâ*k*ittiya offence, . . . . (&c., down to) . . . . wicked
language, let the Sa*m*gha treat him according to the law and then hold
Pavâra*n*â.

   <span id="16:19"></span>19. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu on the
day of Pavâra*n*â is guilty of a thulla*kk*aya offence. Some Bhikkhus
believe that it is a thulla*kk*aya offence, other Bhikkhus believe that
it is a sa*m*ghâdisesa offence. In that case, O Bhikkhus, let those
Bhikkhus who take it for a thulla*kk*aya offence, take that Bhikkhu, O
Bhikkhus, aside, treat him according to the law, go back to the
Sa*m*gha, and say: "The offence, friends, which this Bhikkhu has
committed, he has atoned for according to the law. If the Sa*m*gha is
ready, let the Sa*m*gha hold Pavâra*n*â.

   <span id="16:20"></span>20. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu on the
day of Pavâra*n*â is guilty of a thulla*kk*aya offence. Some Bhikkhus
believe that it is a thulla*kk*aya offence, other Bhikkhus believe that
it is a pâ*k*ittiya offence. Some Bhikkhus believe that it is a
thulla*kk*aya offence, other Bhikkhus believe that it is a
pâ*t*idesanîya offence; a thulla*kk*aya offence; a dukka*t*a offence; a
thulla*kk*aya offence, an offence by wicked language. In that case (&c.,
as in § 19, down to the end).

   <span id="16:21"></span>21, 22. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu on
the day of Pavâra*n*â is guilty of a pâ*k*ittiya offence, of a
pâ*t*idesanîya offence, or a dukka*t*a offence, of an offence by wicked
language. Some Bhikkhus believe <span id="page_348">p. 348</span> that
it is an offence by wicked language, other Bhikkhus believe that it is a
sa*m*ghâdisesa offence, &c. Some Bhikkhus believe that it is an offence
by wicked language, other Bhikkhus believe that it is a dukka*t*a
offence. In that case, O Bhikkhus, let those Bhikkhus who take it for an
offence by wicked language, take that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, aside (&c.,
see § 19).

   <span id="16:23"></span>23. 'If, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu speaks thus
before the assembly on the day of Pavâra*n*â: "Let the Sa*m*gha,
reverend Sirs, hear me. Here this deed is known (to me), but not the
(guilty) person. If the Sa*m*gha is ready, let the Sa*m*gha hold
Pavâra*n*â excluding this deed," (the Bhikkhus) ought to reply: "The
Blessed One, friend, has prescribed that they who hold Pavâra*n*â, ought
to be pure. If a deed is known, but not the (guilty) person, report it
(to us) now."

   <span id="16:24"></span>24. 'If, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu speaks thus
before the assembly on the day of Pavâra*n*â: "Let the Sa*m*gha,
reverend Sirs, hear me. Here a person is known (to me as guilty), but
not his deed. If the Sa*m*gha is ready, let the Sa*m*gha hold Pavâra*n*â
excluding this person," (the Bhikkhus) ought to reply: "The Blessed One,
friend, has prescribed that they who hold Pavâra*n*â, ought to be
complete. If a person is known to you (as guilty), but not his deed,
report it (to us) now."

   <span id="16:25"></span>25. 'If, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu speaks thus
before the assembly on the day of Pavâra*n*â: "Let the Sa*m*gha,
reverend Sirs, hear me. Here a deed is known (to me) as well as the
(guilty) person. If the Sa*m*gha is ready, let the Sa*m*gha hold
Pavâra*n*â excluding this deed and this person," (the <span
id="page_349">p. 349</span> Bhikkhus) ought to reply: "The Blessed One,
friend, has prescribed that they who hold Pavâra*n*â, ought to be pure
as well as complete. If the deed and the (guilty) person are known to
you, report it (to us) now."

   <span id="16:26"></span>26. 'If, O Bhikkhus, a deed becomes known
before the Pavâra*n*â, and the (guilty) person afterwards (i.e. after
the Pavâra*n*â), it is right to bring it forward (then)<span
id="page_349_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_349_note_1.md).

   'If, O Bhikkhus, the (guilty) person becomes known before the
Pavâra*n*â, and his deed afterwards, it is right to bring it forward
(then).

   'If, O Bhikkhus, the deed as well as the (guilty) person becomes
known before the Pavâra*n*â, and if (a Bhikkhu) raises up that matter
again after the Pavâra*n*â, he makes himsef guilty of a pâ*k*ittiya
offence for raising up (a matter that has been settled)<span
id="page_349_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_349_note_2.md).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span id="17"></span>17.

   <span id="17:1"></span>1. At that time a number of Bhikkhus,
companions and friends of each other, entered upon Vassa in a certain
district of the Kosala country. In their neighbourhood other Bhikkhus,
litigious, contentious, quarrelsome, disputatious persons, who used to
raise questions before the Sa*m*gha, entered upon Vassa with the
intention of inhibiting, on the Pavâra*n*â day, the Pavâra*n*â of those
Bhikkhus when <span id="page_350">p. 350</span> they should have
finished their Vassa residence. Now those Bhikkhus heard: 'In our
neighbourhood other Bhikkhus, &c. Well, what are we to do?'

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   <span id="17:2"></span>2. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a number of Bhikkhus,
companions and friends of each other, enter upon Vassa in a certain
district. In their neighbourhood other Bhikkhus, . . . . (&c., § 1). I
prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that those Bhikkhus hold Uposatha twice or thrice
on the fourteenth day (of the half-month)<span
id="page_350_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_350_note_1.md) in order that they may
be able to hold Pavâra*n*â before those (other) Bhikkhus. If those
litigious, contentious, . . . . (&c., § 1) Bhikkhus approach that
district, let the resident Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, quickly assemble and
hold Pavâra*n*â; having held Pavâra*n*â, let them say to them: "We have
held our Pavâra*n*â, friends; do you do, Sirs, as you think fit."

   <span id="17:3"></span>3. 'If those litigious, . . . . (&c., § 1)
Bhikkhus come to that residence unexpectedly, let the resident Bhikkhus,
O Bhikkhus, prepare seats (for them), get water for the washing of their
feet, foot-stools, and towels<span id="page_350_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_350_note_2.md), then let them go to
meet them, take their bowls and their robes, and offer them (water) to
drink; having thus looked after those Bhikkhus, let them go outside the
boundary and hold Pavâra*n*â; having held Pavâra*n*â, let <span
id="page_351">p. 351</span> them say: "We have held our Pavâra*n*â,
friends, do you do, Sirs, as you think fit."

   <span id="17:4"></span>4. 'If they succeed in tbis way, well and
good; if they do not succeed, let a learned, competent, resident Bhikkhu
proclaim the following ñatti before the resident Bhikkhus: "Let the
resident Bhikkhus hear me, Sirs. If you are ready, Sirs, let us now bold
Uposatha and recite the Pâtimokkha, and let us hold Pavâra*n*â on the
next new-moon day." If, O Bhikkhus, the litigious, . . . . (&c., § 1)
Bhikkhus say to those Bhikkhus: "Well, friends, hold Pavâra*n*â with us
now," let them reply: "You are not masters, friends, of our Pavâra*n*â;
we will not hold Pavâra*n*â now."

   <span id="17:5"></span>5. 'If, O Bhikkhus, those litigious, (&c., §
1) Bhikkhus stay there till that new-moon day, let a learned, competent,
resident Bhikkhu, . . . .<span id="page_351_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_351_note_1.md)

   <span id="17:6"></span>6. 'If, O Bhikkhus, those litigious, . . . .
(&c., § 1) Bhikkhus stay there still till that full-moon day, those
Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, ought to hold Pavâra*n*â all of them, no matter
whether they like it or not, on the next full-moon day, on the day of
the komudî *k*âtumâsinî<span id="page_351_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_351_note_2.md).

   <span id="17:7"></span>7. 'If those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, hold
Pavâra*n*â, and a sick Bhikkhu inhibits the Pavâra*n*â of a healthy
Bhikkhu, let them say (to the inhibiting Bhikkhu): "You are sick, Sir,
and the Blessed One has said that a sick person cannot endure being
questioned. Wait, friend, until you have recovered; <span
id="page_352">p. 352</span> having recovered, you may reprove him, if
you like." If they speak to him thus, and he reproves (that Bhikkhu)
notwithstanding, he makes himself guilty of the pâ*k*ittiya offence of
disregard<span id="page_352_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_352_note_1.md).

   <span id="17:8"></span>8. 'If those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, hold
Pavâra*n*â, and a healthy Bhikkhu inhibits the Pavâra*n*â of a sick
Bhikkhu, let them say (to the inhibiting Bhikkhu): "This Bhikkhu is
sick, friend, and the Blessed One has said that a sick person cannot
endure being questioned. Wait, friend, until this Bhikkhu has recovered;
when he has recovered you may reprove him, if you like." If they speak
to him thus, . . . . (&c., as in § 7).

   <span id="17:9"></span>9. 'If those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, hold
Pavâra*n*â, and a sick Bhikkhu inhibits the Pavâra*n*â of another sick
Bhikkhu, let them say (to the inhibiting Bhikkhu): "You are sick, Sirs,
and the "Blessed One has said that a sick person cannot endure being
questioned. Wait, friend, until you have recovered; when he has
recovered<span id="page_352_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_352_note_2.md) you may reprove him, if
you like." If they speak to him thus, . . . . (&c., as in § 7).

   <span id="17:10"></span>10. 'If those Bhikkhus, O Bhikkhus, hold
Pavâra*n*â, and a healthy Bhikkhu inhibits the Pavâra*n*â of another
healthy Bhikkhu, let the Sa*m*gha question and examine them both and
treat them according to the law, and then hold Pavâra*n*â.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

### <span id="18"></span>18.

   <span id="18:1"></span>1. At that time a number of Bhikkhus,
companions and friends of each other, entered upon Vassa in a certain
district of the Kosala country. These Bhikkhus, living in unity, and
concord, and without quarrel, had found a comfortable place to dwell in.
Now those Bhikkhus thought: 'Living in unity, &c., we have found a
comfortable place to dwell in. If we hold Pavâra*n*â now, (other
Bhikkhus) might come on a journey, having held their Pavâra*n*â, (and
might occupy this place); thus we should lose this place which is
comfortable to dwell in. Well, what are we to do?'

   They told this thing to the Blessed One.

   <span id="18:2"></span>2. 'In case, O Bhikkhus, a number of Bhikkhus,
companions and friends of each other, have entered upon Vassa in a
certain district. These Bhikkhus, . . . . (&c., § 1).

   'If these Bhikkhus think: "Living in unity, . . . . (&c., § 1, down
to:) thus we should lose this place which is comfortable to dwell in," I
allow, O Bhikkhus, these Bhikkhus to agree upon pavâra*n*âsa*m*gaha<span
id="page_353_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_353_note_1.md).

   <span id="18:3"></span>3. 'And you ought, O Bhikkhus, to agree upon
it in this way: Let them all assemble together. When <span
id="page_354">p. 354</span> they have assembled, let a leamed, competent
Bhikkhu proclaim the following ñatti before the Sa*m*gha: "Let the
Sa*m*gha, reverend Sirs, hear me.

   Living in unity, . . . . (&c., § 1, down to:) thus we should lose
this place which is comfortable to dwell in. If the Sa*m*gha is ready,
let the Sa*m*gha agree upon pavâra*n*âsa*m*gaha; let it now hold
Uposatha and recite the Pâtimokkha, and let the Sa*m*gha hold Pavâra*n*â
on the next komudî *k*âtumâsinî day. This is the ñatti."

   <span id="18:4"></span>4. '"Let the Sa*m*gha, &c.<span
id="page_354_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_354_note_1.md)"

   <span id="18:5"></span>5. 'If, O Bhikkhus, after those Bhikkhus have
agreed upon pavâra*n*âsa*m*gaha, a Bhikkhu should say: "I wish, friends,
to go on my travels through the country; I have a business in the
country," let them reply to him: "Good, friend, hold Pavâra*n*â; and
go." If that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, when holding Pavâra*n*â inhibits the
Pavâra*n*â of another Bhikkhu, let (that other Bhikkhu) say to him: "You
are not master of my Pavâra*n*â, friend; I will not hold Pavâra*n*â
now."

   'If, O Bhikkhus, when that Bhikkhu holds Pavâra*n*â, another Bhikkhu
inhibits his Pavâra*n*â, let the Sa*m*gha question and examine them both
and treat them according to the law.

   <span id="18:6"></span>6. 'If that Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, has finished
that business in the country and comes back to that district before the
clay of komudî *k*âtumâsinî, and if a Bhikkhu, O Bhikkhus, when the
Bhikkhus hold Pavâra*n*â, inhibits the Pavâra*n*â of that Bhikkhu (who
has been absent), let him say (to the <span id="page_355">p. 355</span>
inhibiting Bhikkhu): "You are not master of my Pavâra*n*â, friend; I
have held my Pavâra*n*â."

   'If, O Bhikkhus, when the Bhikkhus hold Pavâra*n*â, this Bhikkhu
inhibits the Pavâra*n*â of another Bhikkhu, let the Sa*m*gha question
and examine them both and treat them according to the law, and then hold
Pavâra*n*â.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

End of the Pavâra*n*â-Khandhaka.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_325">p. 325</span>

<span id="page_325_note_1"></span>[1](#page_325_fr_1.md) See the note on I,
6, 11.

<span id="footnotes_page_326">p. 326</span>

<span id="page_326_note_1"></span>[1](#page_326_fr_1.md) We are not quite
sure of the meaning of the compounds hattha-vikâreha and
hattha-vita<u>n</u>ghakena. Buddhaghosa says merely
hatthavila<u>n</u>ghakenâ 'ti hatthukkhepakena.

<span id="page_326_note_2"></span>[2](#page_326_fr_2.md) For this whole
passage, compare *K*ullavagga VIII, 5, 3. The single actions which these
Bhikkhus do, are quite correct, except that they keep silence during the
whole time of Vassa, and especially at the end of it, for which time
Buddha, on this occasion, prescribes the Pavâra*n*â ceremony.

<span id="footnotes_page_328">p. 328</span>

<span id="page_328_note_1"></span>[1](#page_328_fr_1.md) Literally, invite
each other; i.e. every Bhikkhu present invites his companions to tell
him if they believe him guilty of an offence, having seen that offence,
or having heard of it, or suspecting it.

<span id="footnotes_page_329">p. 329</span>

<span id="page_329_note_1"></span>[1](#page_329_fr_1.md) I.e. I invite the
Sa*m*gha to charge me with any offence they think me guilty of, which
they have seen, or heard of, or which they suspect.

<span id="page_329_note_2"></span>[2](#page_329_fr_2.md) As in the
preceding sentence, except that the younger Bhikkhus do not address the
Sa*m*gha,' 'Friends,' but, 'Reverend Sirs.'

<span id="footnotes_page_331">p. 331</span>

<span id="page_331_note_1"></span>[1](#page_331_fr_1.md) Comp. II, 14, 1,
and the note on II, 34, 1.

<span id="page_331_note_2"></span>[2](#page_331_fr_2.md) This passage is
exactly identical with II, 14. 2. 3, replacing 'Uposatha service' by
'Pavâra*n*â service.'

<span id="page_331_note_3"></span>[3](#page_331_fr_3.md) This passage is a
repetition of II, 22, 2-4, the words, 'Hold Uposatha,' 'Declare the
Pârisuddhi,' &c., being replaced respectively by 'Hold Pavâra*n*â,'
'Declare the Pavâra*n*â,' &c.

<span id="footnotes_page_332">p. 332</span>

<span id="page_332_note_1"></span>[1](#page_332_fr_1.md) See II, 23.

<span id="page_332_note_2"></span>[2](#page_332_fr_2.md) Comp. the
finishing clause of II, 23.

<span id="page_332_note_3"></span>[3](#page_332_fr_3.md) This is a
repetition of II, 24, but instead of 'Uposatha' and 'Pârisuddhi' read
'Pavâra*n*â.'

<span id="page_332_note_4"></span>[4](#page_332_fr_4.md) As a general rule
five Bhikkhus were sufficient to form the quorum; but for the
performance of several among the official acts of the Order the presence
of more than five members was required; see IX, 4, 1 seq.

<span id="page_332_note_5"></span>[5](#page_332_fr_5.md) See IX, 4, 1.

<span id="footnotes_page_334">p. 334</span>

<span id="page_334_note_1"></span>[1](#page_334_fr_1.md) See chap. 3, § 3.
Compare II, chap. 22, and chap. 26, § 10.

<span id="footnotes_page_335">p. 335</span>

<span id="page_335_note_1"></span>[1](#page_335_fr_1.md) See chap. 16, § 1.

<span id="footnotes_page_336">p. 336</span>

<span id="page_336_note_1"></span>[1](#page_336_fr_1.md) The following
paragraphs and chapters exactly follow the course indicated by II,
28-35. The alterations to be made are obvious and sufficiently indicated
by §§ 1-3; instead of, 'Let them proclaim their Pârisuddhi ' (II, 28, 4,
&c.), read here, 'Let them pronounce their Pavâra*n*â.'

<span id="footnotes_page_337">p. 337</span>

<span id="page_337_note_1"></span>[1](#page_337_fr_1.md) See II, 36, 1-3.

<span id="page_337_note_2"></span>[2](#page_337_fr_2.md) Comp. II, 36, 4,
with the note.

<span id="page_337_note_3"></span>[3](#page_337_fr_3.md) See, for instance,
the cases in chap. 17. Buddhaghosa's explanation is different; he says:
'Concord among the Sa*m*gha js to be understood of such cases as that of
Kosambî,' It is said in the account of the schism of Kosambî that, if
concord has been re-established, the reconciled parties hold Uposatha
together (X, 5, 14; comp. II, 36, 4); Buddhaghosa apparently extends
this to holding Pavâra*n*â also.

<span id="footnotes_page_338">p. 338</span>

<span id="page_338_note_1"></span>[1](#page_338_fr_1.md) This means
apparently that the Bhikkhus were not obliged to pronounce the formula
of Pavâra*n*â (chap. 1, 14) thrice, but twice or once respectively.

<span id="footnotes_page_341">p. 341</span>

<span id="page_341_note_1"></span>[1](#page_341_fr_1.md) Comp. II, 16, 1.

<span id="footnotes_page_342">p. 342</span>

<span id="page_342_note_1"></span>[1](#page_342_fr_1.md) Correct in the
Pâli text pariyositâya into apariyositâya.

<span id="page_342_note_2"></span>[2](#page_342_fr_2.md) The paragraph is
repeated with the phrases, 'With the twofold formula,' 'with the onefold
formula,' and 'by common declaration of all the Bhikkhus who have kept
Vassa together,' respectively, instead of 'with the threefold formula.'

<span id="footnotes_page_343">p. 343</span>

<span id="page_343_note_1"></span>[1](#page_343_fr_1.md) As in § 6. But
instead of 'Not of a pure conduct in his deeds, nor in his words, nor as
regards his means of livelihood,' read respectively, 'Of a pure conduct
in his deeds, but not in his words, nor as regards his means of
livelihood' (§ 7); 'Of a pure conduct in his deeds and in his words, but
not with regard to his means of livelihood' (§ 8); 'Of a pure conduct in
his deeds and in his words and with regard to his means of livelihood'
(§ 9).

<span id="footnotes_page_344">p. 344</span>

<span id="page_344_note_1"></span>[1](#page_344_fr_1.md) The meaning of
antaggâhikâ di*tth*i (Sanskrit ântargrahikâ d*ri*sh*t*i? ântagrahikâ
d*ri*sh*t*i?) is unknown to us; Buddhaghosa gives no explanation.
Perhaps it may mean doctrine partly false and partly correct (eclectic).

<span id="footnotes_page_346">p. 346</span>

<span id="page_346_note_1"></span>[1](#page_346_fr_1.md) See the 5th
Sa*m*ghâdisesa rule.

<span id="page_346_note_2"></span>[2](#page_346_fr_2.md) See the 76th
Pâ*k*ittiya rule.

<span id="page_346_note_3"></span>[3](#page_346_fr_3.md) According to
Buddhaghosa, the Bhikkhu who brings such an unfounded charge against a
fellow Bhikkhu, is guilty of a dukka*t*a offence.

<span id="footnotes_page_349">p. 349</span>

<span id="page_349_note_1"></span>[1](#page_349_fr_1.md) 'Because it had
not been possible to decide the matter at the Pavâra*n*â '
(Buddhaghosa).

<span id="page_349_note_2"></span>[2](#page_349_fr_2.md) See the 63rd
Pâ*k*ittiya rule.

<span id="footnotes_page_350">p. 350</span>

<span id="page_350_note_1"></span>[1](#page_350_fr_1.md) In this way, when
the inimical Bhikkhus are arriving about the time of Pavâra*n*â, the
resident Bhikkhus count the day which is the thirteenth or fourteenth to
the other Bhikkhus, as the fifteenth, and thus they are enabled to
finish their Pavâra*n*â before they can be prevented.

<span id="page_350_note_2"></span>[2](#page_350_fr_2.md) See I, 6, 11.

<span id="footnotes_page_351">p. 351</span>

<span id="page_351_note_1"></span>[1](#page_351_fr_1.md) As in § 4, down to
the end of the paragraph; instead of, 'On the next new-moon day,' it is
to be read here, 'On the next full-moon day.'

<span id="page_351_note_2"></span>[2](#page_351_fr_2.md) See the note on
III, 14, 11.

<span id="footnotes_page_352">p. 352</span>

<span id="page_352_note_1"></span>[1](#page_352_fr_1.md) See the 54th
Pâ*k*ittiya rule.

<span id="page_352_note_2"></span>[2](#page_352_fr_2.md) Probably we should
read in the Pâli text, 'ârogo âroga*m* âka<u>n</u>khamâno
*k*odessasîti.' Then the translation would be: 'When you have recovered
and he has recovered, &c.'

<span id="footnotes_page_353">p. 353</span>

<span id="page_353_note_1"></span>[1](#page_353_fr_1.md) Literally this
word means, we believe, 'Keeping back one's own Pavâra*n*â,' Buddhaghosa
says: 'When the decree of pavâra*n*âsa*m*gaha has been issued, the
Bhikkhus (who have issued it) ought to live as in the rainy season.
Incoming Bhikkhus are not allowed to take possession of their places of
rest. On the other side, they ought not to interrupt their Vassa
residence.'

<span id="footnotes_page_354">p. 354</span>

<span id="page_354_note_1"></span>[1](#page_354_fr_1.md) Here follows the
usual formula of a ñattidutiya kamma as in Book ll, chap. 6. Comp. the
note on Book I, chap. 28, § 3.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
