<span id="top"></span>[Sacred-Texts](../../index.md) 
 [Buddhism](../index)   [SBE 11 Index](index)   [Previous](sbe1305.md) 
 [Next](sbe1307.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

## ANIYATÂ DHAMMÂ<span id="page_16_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_16_note_1.md).

RULES REGARDING UNDETERMINED MATTERS.

   Here, venerable Sirs, the two Rules regarding undetermined matters
come into recitation.

   

   <span id="1"></span>1. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall take a seat with a
woman, one man with one woman, in secret, on a secluded seat,
suitable<span id="page_16_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_16_note_2) (for sexual intercourse.md);
and if a believing woman, trustworthy of speech, who has seen (them so),
shall lay it to his charge under one or other of three Rules, either
under the Pârâ*g*ika<span id="page_16_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_16_note_3.md), or under the
Sa*m*ghâdisesa<span id="page_16_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_16_note_4.md) or under the
Pâ*k*ittiya<span id="page_16_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_16_note_5.md) Rules:--let then that
Bhikkhu, if he acknowledge that he has so sat, be dealt with (according
to the circumstances reported) for a Pârâ*g*ika, or for a
Sa*m*ghâdisesa, or fora Pâ*k*ittiya; or let that Bhikkhu be dealt with
under that one of those three Rules under which the believing woman,
trustworthy in speech, shall lay it to his charge.

   This rule relates to a matter undetermined.

   

   <span id="2"></span>2. And furthermore, even if the seat be not
secluded, and not convenient (for sexual intercourse), but be convenient
for addressing a woman with wicked words<span
id="page_16_fr_6"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">6</span></sup>](#page_16_note_6.md), then whatsoever Bhikkhu
shall take <span id="page_17">p. 17</span> a seat with a woman, one man
with one woman, in secret, on such a seat, and a believing woman,
trustworthy in speech, who has seen (them so), shall lay it to his
charge under one or other of two Rules, either under the Sa*m*ghâdisesa,
or under the Pâ*k*ittiya Rule--let then that Bhikkhu, if he acknowledge
that he has so sat, be dealt with (according to the circumstances
reported) for a Sa*m*ghâdisesa, or for a Pâ*k*ittiya; or let that
Bhikkhu be dealt with under that one of those two Rules under which the
believing woman, trustworthy in speech, shall lay it to his charge.

   This rule relates to a matter undetermined.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   Venerable Sirs, the two Rules regarding uncertain matters have been
recited.

   In respect of them I ask the venerable ones, 'Are you pure in this
matter?'

   A second time I ask the venerable ones, 'Are you pure in this
matter?'

   A third time I ask the venerable ones, 'Are you pure in this matter
?'

   The venerable ones are pure herein. Therefore do they keep silence.
Thus I understand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   Here endeth the recitation of the Aniyatas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pâtimokkha - Nissaggiyâ Pâ*k*ittiyâ Dhammâ](sbe1307.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_16">p. 16</span>

<span id="page_16_note_1"></span>[1](#page_16_fr_1.md) The whole or the
following portion of the Pâtimokkha, together with the Old Commentary on
it, recurs in the Vibhanga, Book III.

<span id="page_16_note_2"></span>[2](#page_16_fr_2.md) Ala*m*kammaniye, an
expression found only in this passage, The Vibha<u>n</u>ga interprets it
as above (Aniyata I, 2, 1).

<span id="page_16_note_3"></span>[3](#page_16_fr_3.md) The 1st Pârâ*g*ika.

<span id="page_16_note_4"></span>[4](#page_16_fr_4.md) The 2nd
Sa*m*ghâdisesa.

<span id="page_16_note_5"></span>[5](#page_16_fr_5.md) Pâ*k*ittiya 44, 45;
and compare also 7, 27.

<span id="page_16_note_6"></span>[6](#page_16_fr_6.md) Compare the 3rd
Sa*m*ghâdisesa, and probably the 4th is also referred to.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
