<span id="top"></span>[Sacred-Texts](../../index) 
 [Buddhism](../index)   [SBE 11 Index](index)   [Previous](sbe1308) 
 [Next](sbe1310)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

## PÂ*T*IDESANIYÂ DHAMMÂ.

RULES REGARDING MATTERS WHICH OUGHT TO BE CONFESSED.

   Here, venerable Sirs, the four rules regarding matters which ought to
be confessed come into recitation.

   <span id="1"></span>1. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, when a Bhikkhunî not
related to him has entered within the houses<span
id="page_56_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_56_note_1), shall, with his own
hand, accept at her hands food, either hard or soft, and eat or enjoy
it--that is a matter which ought to be confessed by that Bhikkhu,
saying, 'I have fallen, Brethren, into a blameworthy offence,
unbecoming, which ought to be confessed; and I confess it!'

   <span id="2"></span>2. Now Bhikkhus, when they have been invited to
laymen's houses, eat. If the Bhikkhunî stay there giving directions,
saying, 'Here give curry, give rice here!' the Bhikkhunî ought to be
rebuked by those Bhikkhus, saying, 'Stand aside, Sister, as long as the
Bhikkhus are eating!' If it should not occur to a single Bhikkhu to
rebuke the Bhikkhunî, saying, 'Stand aside, Sister, as long as the
Bhikkhus are eating!'--that is a matter that ought to be confessed by
those Bhikkhus, saying, 'We have fallen, Brethren, into a blameworthy
offence, unbecoming, which ought to be confessed; and we confess it!'
<span id="3"></span>3. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall accept, with his <span
id="page_57">p. 57</span> own hand, food, either hard or soft, in such
households as have been (by a formal sammuti) declared to be households,
under discipline<span id="page_57_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_57_note_1), without having been
previously invited, and without being sick, and eat it or enjoy it--that
is a matter that ought to be confessed by that Bhikkhu, saying, 'I have
fallen, Brethren, into a blameworthy offence, unbecoming, which ought to
be confessed; and I confess it!'

   <span id="4"></span>4. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, while he is dwelling in a
place belonging to the class of those forest dwellings which are held to
be insecure and dangerous<span id="page_57_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_57_note_2), shall accept, with his
own hand, at his home, food, either hard or soft, without having
previously given notice (of the danger incurred by people that enter
that forest), unless he is sick, and shall eat it or enjoy it--that is a
matter that ought to be confessed by that Bhikkhu, saying, 'I have
fallen, Brethren, into a blameworthy offence, unbecoming, which ought to
be confessed; and I confess it!'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here end the Pâ*t*idesaniyas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   Venerable Sirs, the four rules regarding matters which require
confession have been recited.

   In respect of them I ask the venerable ones, 'Are you pure in this
matter?'

   A second time I ask the venerable ones, 'Are you pure in this
matter?'

   A third time I ask the venerable ones, 'Are you pure in this matter?'

   The venerable ones are pure herein. Therefore do they keep silence.
Thus I understand.

   Here endeth the recitation or the Pâtidesaniyas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pâtimokkha - Sekhiyâ Dhammâ](sbe1310)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_56">p. 56</span>

<span id="page_56_note_1"></span>[1](#page_56_fr_1) Antaraghara*m*
pavi*tth*â; that is, during her alms-visit to the village. Compare the
3rd Sekhiya; Mahâvagga I, 23, 3; and Kullavagga VIII, 5, 2.

<span id="footnotes_page_57">p. 57</span>

<span id="page_57_note_1"></span>[1](#page_57_fr_1) Sekha-sammatâni
kulâni; which the Vibha<u>n</u>ga explains as a household grown rich in
faith, but poor in goods; where whatever they get is given away to the
Order, though the family may be some days in want of it. Compare what is
said of Anâtha-pi*nd*ika in the Introduction to the 40th *G*âtaka
(*G*âtaka I, 228); though his lot had not reached the very lowest limit.

<span id="page_57_note_2"></span>[2](#page_57_fr_2) Compare the 29th
Nissaggiya.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
