<span id="top"></span>[Sacred-Texts](../../index.md) 
 [Buddhism](../index)   [SBE 11 Index](index)   [Previous](sbe1307.md) 
 [Next](sbe1309.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

## PÂ*K*ITTIYA DHAMMÂ

THE PÂ*K*ITTIYA<span id="page_32_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_32_note_1.md) RULES.

   Now here, venerable Sirs, the ninety-two Pâ*k*ittiya Rules (Rules
regarding matters requiring expiation) come into recitation.

   <span id="1"></span>1. There is Pâ*k*ittiya in a deliberate lie.

   <span id="2"></span>2. There is Pâ*k*ittiya in abusive language.

   <span id="3"></span>3. There is Pâ*k*ittiya in slander of a Bhikkhu.

   <span id="4"></span>4. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall cause one not
received into the higher grade (of the Order<span
id="page_32_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_32_note_2).md) to recite the Dhamma
clause by clause<span id="page_32_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_32_note_3.md)--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="5"></span>5. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall, for more than two or
three nights, lie down (to sleep) in the same place with one not
received into the higher grade (of the Order)--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="6"></span>6. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall lie down (to sleep)
in the same place with a woman--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya<span
id="page_32_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_32_note_4.md).

   <span id="7"></span>7. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall preach the Dhamma, in
more than five or six words, to a woman, <span id="page_33">p. 33</span>
without a man arrived at years of discretion<span
id="page_33_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_33_note_1) (being present.md)--that is
a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="8"></span>8. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall tell one not received
into the higher grade (of the Order) that the (speaker or any other
Bhikkhu) has extraordinary spiritual gifts, even when such, is the
case<span id="page_33_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_33_note_2.md)--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="9"></span>9. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall tell one not received
into the higher grade (of the Order) of a Bhikkhu having faIIen into any
grave offence--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="10"></span>10. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shaII dig the ground or
have it dug<span id="page_33_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_33_note_3.md)--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here ends the first section, the 'Falsehood-section.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   <span id="11"></span>11. There is Pâ*k*ittiya in destroying any
vegetabIe.

   <span id="12"></span>12. Thete is Pâ*k*ittiya in prevarication, or in
worrying (the assembled Bhikkhus; for instance, by refusing to
answer<span id="page_33_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_33_note_4).md).

   <span id="13"></span>13. There is Pâ*k*ittiya in stirring-up ill-wiII
against, in speaking disrespectfuIIy of (any Bhikkhu deputed to any
official duty<span id="page_33_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_33_note_5).md).

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

   <span id="14"></span>14. Whatsoever Bhikkhu who has put out, or got
another to put out to air, a bedstead, or a chair, or a mat, or a
stool<span id="page_34_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_34_note_1.md), the common property of
the Sa*m*gha; and when going away shall not put it back, or have it put
back, but shall depart without saying anything to anybody--that is a
Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="15"></span>15. Whatsoever Bhikkhu has put out, or got
another to put out, a bedstead in a dwelling-place common to a Sa*m*gha;
and when going away shall not put it back, or have it put back, but
shall depart without saying anything to anybody--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="16"></span>16. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, in a dwelling-place
common to a Sa*m*gha, shall lie down where he knows that he is
encroaching on (the space occupied by) a Bhikkhu who arrived before him,
thinking, 'If he become inconvenienced he may go away'--if he does it
for that object, and for no other<span
id="page_34_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_34_note_2.md)--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="17"></span>17. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, being angry or
displeased with another Bhikkhu, shall drive him out, or get him driven
out of a dwelling-place common to a Sa*m*gha--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="18"></span>18. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall hurriedly sit down,
or lie down, in the upper story of a dwelling-place common to a
Sa*m*gha<span id="page_34_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_34_note_3.md), on a bedstead or chair
with removable legs--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

   <span id="19"></span>19. In case a Bhikkhu is having a large
dwelling-place put up, he may have the work rectified, in a place where
straw is scarce, round the doors, and where the bolts are put in, and
the openings for light are set, and till the roof has been twice or
thrice covered in<span id="page_35_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_35_note_1.md). Should he go beyond
that, even in such a place--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="20"></span>20. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall sprinkle water with
living creatures in it, or shall cause such to be sprinkled on grass or
on clay--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here ends the second section, the' Bhûtagâma-section.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   <span id="21"></span>21. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, not thereto deputed,
shall exhort the Bhikkhunî's<span id="page_35_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_35_note_2.md) that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

   <span id="22"></span>22. If a Bhikkhu, even when thereto deputed,
exhort the Bhikkhunî's after the sun has set--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="23"></span>23. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall go to the
dwelling-place of Bhikkhunî's, and there exhort the Bhikkhunî's<span
id="page_36_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_36_note_1), except on the (right.md)
occasion--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   Herein this is the right occasion: (to wit), when a Bhikkhunî is ill.
This is the right occasion in this passage.

   <span id="24"></span>24. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall speak thus: 'The
Bhîkkhus exhort the Bhikkhunî's for the sake of gain<span
id="page_36_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_36_note_2.md)!'--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="25"></span>25. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall give a robe to a
Bhikkhunî who is not related to him, except in exchange--that is a
Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="26"></span>26. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall make up a robe, or
have it made up, for a Bhikkhunî who is not related to him--that is a
Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="27"></span>27. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, by appointment, shall
travel along a high road in company with a Bhikkhunî, even to go as far
as the village, except on the right occasion--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

   Herein this is the right occasion: (to wit), when the road is so
insecure and dangerous that travellers on it have to carry arms. This is
the right occasion in this passage.

   <span id="28"></span>28. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, by appointment, shall go
on board the same boat, whether going up stream or down stream, in
company with a Bhikkhunî, except for the purpose of crossing over to the
other side--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="29"></span>29. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, knowing it to be so,
shall eat food procured by the intervention of a Bhikkhunî, unless the
laity (who give the food) had already undertaken (to give it to
him)<span id="page_37_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_37_note_1.md)--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="30"></span>30. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall take a seat, one
man with one woman, in company with a Bhikkhunî, in a secret place<span
id="page_37_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_37_note_2.md)-that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here ends the third section, the 'Bhikkhunovâda-section.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   <span id="31"></span>31. A Bhikkhu who is not sick may take one meal
at a public rest-house<span id="page_37_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_37_note_3.md). Should he take more than
that--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

   <span id="32"></span>32. There is Pâ*k*ittiya in going in a body to
receive a meal<span id="page_38_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_38_note_1.md), except on the right
occasion. Herein the right occasion is this: (to wit), when there is
sickness, when robes are being given, when robes are being made, when on
a journey (on foot), when on board a boat, when (the influx of Bhikkhus)
is great<span id="page_38_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_38_note_2.md), when a general
invitation is given to Sama*n*as<span
id="page_38_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_38_note_3.md). This is right occasion
in this passage.

   <span id="33"></span>33. There is Pâ*k*ittiya in taking food in
turn<span id="page_38_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_38_note_4.md), except on the right
occasion.

   Herein the right occasion is this: (to wit), when there is sickness,
when robes are being given, when <span id="page_39">p. 39</span> robes
are being made. This is right occasion in this passage.

   <span id="34"></span>34. In case people should offer a Bhikkhu, who
has gone to some house, to take as much as he chose of their sweetmeats
and cakes, that Bhikkhu, should he so wish, may accept two or three
bowls full<span id="page_39_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_39_note_1.md). If he should accept more
than that--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   When he has accepted two or three bowls full<span
id="page_39_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_39_note_1.md), he must take them away,
and divide them up among the Bhikkhus. That is the proper course in this
case.

   <span id="35"></span>35. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, when he has once
finished his meal, though still invited (to continue eating<span
id="page_39_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_39_note_2).md), shall eat or partake
of<span id="page_39_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_39_note_3.md) food that has not been
left over<span id="page_39_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_39_note_4.md), whether hard or
soft<span id="page_39_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_39_note_5.md)--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

   <span id="36"></span>36. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall offer a Bhikkhu who
has finished his meal, though still invited to continue eating, his
choice of food, whether hard or soft, that has not been left over,
saying, 'Come, now, Bhikkhu; take and eat!' deliberately desiring to
stir up longing (in that Bhikkhu); then if that Bhikkhu eats<span
id="page_40_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_40_note_1.md)--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="37"></span>37. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall take or eat any
food, whether hard or soft, at the wrong time<span
id="page_40_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_40_note_2.md)--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="38"></span>38. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall eat food, whether
hard or soft, that has been put by--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="39"></span>39. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, when he is not sick,
shall request, for his own use, and shall partake of delicacies--to wit,
ghee, butter, oil, honey, molasses, fish, flesh, milk, curds<span
id="page_40_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_40_note_3.md)--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="40"></span>40. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall place, as food,
within the door of his mouth, anything not given to him, save only water
and a tooth-cleaner<span id="page_40_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_40_note_4.md)--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here ends the fourth section, the 'Bho*g*ana-section.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   <span id="41"></span>41. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall, with his own <span
id="page_41">p. 41</span> hand, give food, whether hard or soft, to an
A*k*elaka or to a Paribbâ*g*aka or to a Paribbâ*g*ikâ<span
id="page_41_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_41_note_1.md)--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="42"></span>42. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall address a Bhikkhu
thus: 'Come, brother; let us go, for a meal, to the village, or the
town!' and then, whether after he has got an alms for him, or without
having got an alms for him, shall send him away, saying, 'Go away,
brother! Talking with you, or sitting with you, is not pleasant to me.
Talking, or sitting each one by himself, is more pleasant to me!'--if he
does this for this cause, and for no other<span
id="page_41_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_41_note_2.md)--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="43"></span>43. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall force his way into
a house where a meal is going on<span
id="page_41_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_41_note_3.md), and take a seat
there--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

   <span id="44"></span>44. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall take a seat, in
secret, with a woman, in a concealed place<span
id="page_42_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_42_note_1.md)--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="45"></span>45. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall take a seat, in
secret, with a woman, one man with one woman--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="46"></span>46. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, who has been invited (to
a house), and has been (thus already) provided with a meal, shall,
without having previously spoken about it to a Bhikkhu, if there is one
there, go on his (begging) rounds among the families, either before
meal-time or after meal-time<span id="page_42_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_42_note_2.md), except on the right
occasion--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

   Herein the right occasion is this: (to wit), a time of giving of
robes, a time of making of robes. That is right occasion in this
passage.

   <span id="47"></span>47. A Bhikkhu who is not sick may accept a
(standing) invitation with regard to the requisites<span
id="page_43_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_43_note_1.md) for four months. If he
accept it for a period longer than that--unless there be a second
invitation, or a perpetual invitation--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="48"></span>48. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall go to see an army
drawn up in battle-array, except for a cause thereto sufficient--that is
a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="49"></span>49. And if there be any reason for that
Bhikkhu's going to the army, that Bhikkhu may remain there for two or
three nights. If he remain longer than that--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="50"></span>50. And if while remaining there for two or
three nights he should go to the battle-array, or to the numbering of
the forces, or to the drawing up of the forces, or to a review<span
id="page_43_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_43_note_2.md)-that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

End of the fifth section, the 'A*k*elaka-section.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

   <span id="51"></span>51. There is Pâ*k*ittiya in the drinking of
fermented liquors, or strong drinks<span
id="page_44_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_44_note_1.md).

   <span id="52"></span>52. There is Pâ*k*ittiya in poking (another
person) with the finger.

   <span id="53"></span>53. There is Pâ*k*ittiya in sporting in the
water<span id="page_44_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_44_note_2.md).

   <span id="54"></span>54. There is Pâ*k*ittiya in disrespect<span
id="page_44_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_44_note_3.md).

   <span id="55"></span>55. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall frighten a
Bhikkhu<span id="page_44_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_44_note_4.md)--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="56"></span>56. Whatsoever Bhikkhu; who is not sick, shall,
desiring to warm himself<span id="page_44_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_44_note_5.md), kindle a fire, or have a
fire kindled, without cause sufficient thereto--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="57"></span>57. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall bathe at intervals
of less than half a month, except on the proper occasion--that is a
Pâ*k*ittiya.

   Herein this is proper occasion: (to wit), the two and a half months
during which there is hot weather, and during which there is fever;
namely, the last month and a half of the heats, and the first month
<span id="page_45">p. 45</span> of the rains<span
id="page_45_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_45_note_1.md): when sick; when there is
work; when on a journey; when there has been wind and rain. This is
right occasion in this connection.

   <span id="58"></span>58. A Bhikkhu who receives a new robe must
choose one or other mode of disfigurement out of the three modes of
disfigurement; either (making part of it) dark blue, or (marking part of
it with) mud, or (making part of it) black. If a Bhikkhu should make use
of a new robe without choosing one or other mode of disfigurement out of
the three modes pf disfigurement<span
id="page_45_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_45_note_2.md)--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="59"></span>59. Whatsoever Bhikkhu who has made over<span
id="page_45_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_45_note_3.md) his robe to a Bhikkhu, or
to a Bhikkhunî, or to a probationer, or to a Sâma*n*era, or to a
Sâma*n*erî, shall continue to make use of it as a thing not (formally)
given--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

   <span id="60"></span>60. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall hide, or cause
another to hide, a Bhikkhu's bowl, or his robe, or the mat on which he
sits, or his needle-case<span id="page_46_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_46_note_1.md), or his girdle, even
though in fun--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

End of the sixth section, the 'Surâpâna-section.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   <span id="61"></span>61. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall deliberately
deprive any living thing of life--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="62"></span>62. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall, knowingly, drink
water with living things in it--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="63"></span>63. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall stir up for
decision again a matter which he knows to have been settled according to
the Dhamma<span id="page_46_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_46_note_2.md)--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="64"></span>64. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, who knows of it, shall
conceal a serious offence<span id="page_46_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_46_note_3.md) committed by a
Bhikkhu--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="65"></span>65. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall admit a person
under twenty years of age to the higher grade in the Order, knowing him
(or her) to be so--(while) the person is not admitted to the higher
grade, and the other Bhikkhus (who assist) are blameworthy--this is in
him<span id="page_46_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_46_note_4.md) a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="66"></span>66. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall, by appointment,
journey along the same route with a caravan of <span id="page_47">p.
47</span> robbers, knowing it to be such, even as far as the next
village<span id="page_47_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_47_note_1.md)--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="67"></span>67. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall, by appointment,
journey along the same route with a woman<span
id="page_47_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_47_note_2.md), even as far as the next
village--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="68"></span>68. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall speak thus: 'In
this wise do I understand that the Dhamma has been proclaimed by the
Blessed One: that to him who cultivates those Qualities which have been
called "dangerous" by the Blessed One, there is not sufficient danger
(to prevent his acquiring spiritual gifts)<span
id="page_47_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_47_note_3.md);' then that Bhikkhu
should be addressed by the Bhikkhus thus: "Say not so, brother! bear not
false witness against the Blessed One! For neither is it seemly to bring
a false accusation against the Blessed One, nor could the Blessed One
speak so. By many a figure<span id="page_47_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_47_note_4.md), brother, have the
Dangerous Qualities been declared by the Blessed One to be full of
danger<span id="page_47_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_47_note_5.md), and also to be
sufficient to prevent him who cultivates them (from attaining spiritual
gifts)<span id="page_47_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_47_note_3.md).' If that Bhikkhu, when
he has thus been spoken to by the Bhikkhus, should persist as before,
then let that Bhikkhu be (formally) admonished about it by the Bhikkhus
as a body, even to the third time, to the intent that he abandon that
course. <span id="page_48">p. 48</span> If, while being so admonished,
up to the third time, he abandon that course, it is well. If he abandon
it not--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya<span id="page_48_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_48_note_1.md).

   <span id="69"></span>69. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, knowing him to be so,
shall eat in company with, or dwell together with<span
id="page_48_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_48_note_2.md), or sleep in one place
with a Bhikkhu who talks thus (as in 68), and has not been dealt with
according to the law<span id="page_48_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_48_note_3.md), and has not laid aside
his delusion--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="70"></span>70. If a Sâma*n*era<span
id="page_48_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_48_note_4.md) even should say thus: 'In
this wise do I understand that the Dhamma has been proclaimed by the
Blessed One; that to him who cultivates those Qualities which have been
caned "dangerous" by the Blessed One there is not sufficient danger (to
prevent his attaining to spiritual gifts);' then that Sâma*n*era should
be addressed by the Bhikkhus thus: 'Say not so, good Sâma*n*era! Bear
not false witness against the Blessed One. For neither is it seemly to
bring a false accusation against the Blessed One, nor could the Blessed
One speak so. By many a figure, good Sâma*n*era, have the <span
id="page_49">p. 49</span> Dangerous Qualities been declared by the
Blessed One to be full of danger, and also to be sufficient to prevent
him who cultivates them (from attaining to spiritual gifts).' And if
that Sâma*n*era, when so addressed by the Bhikkhus, shall persist in
that course, that Sâma*n*era should be addressed by the Bhikkhus thus:
'From this day forth, good Sâma*n*era, neither can that Blessed One be
referred to<span id="page_49_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_49_note_1.md) by you as your Teacher ,
nor can the privilege, which the other Sâma*n*eras enjoy, of sleeping in
the same place with the Bhikkhus for two or three nights<span
id="page_49_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_49_note_2.md), any longer be yours!
Depart! away with you<span id="page_49_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_49_note_3.md)!'

   Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall encourage<span
id="page_49_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_49_note_4.md), or support<span
id="page_49_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_49_note_5.md), or eat with, or sleep in
the same place with, a Sâma*n*era thus expelled--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

End of the seventh section, the 'Sappâ*n*aka<span
id="page_49_fr_6"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">6</span></sup>](#page_49_note_6.md)-section.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

   <span id="71"></span>71. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, when admonished by the
Bhikkhus in respect of some precept in accordance with the Dhamma, shall
speak thus: 'I cannot submit myself to that precept, brother, until I
shall have enquired touching it of another Bhikkhu, an experienced
master of the Vinaya'--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   A Bhikkhu desirous of training, Bhikkhus<span
id="page_50_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_50_note_1.md), should learn, and
enquire, and settle in his own mind. This is the right rule in this
connection.

   <span id="72"></span>72. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, when the Pâtimokkha is
being recited, shall speak thus: 'What comes of these minor<span
id="page_50_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_50_note_2.md) precepts being here
recited, save only that they tend to misgiving, and worry, and
perplexity!'--there is Pâ*k*ittiya in thus throwing contempt on the
precepts<span id="page_50_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_50_note_3.md).

   <span id="73"></span>73. 'Whatsoever Bhikkhu, when at the half month
the Pâtimokkha is being recited, should say thus: 'Now for the first
time do I notice that this rule, they say, is handed down in the Suttas,
is embraced in the Suttas!'--then, if the other Bhikkhus shall know
concerning that Bhikkhu thus: 'This Bhikkhu has taken his place at the
recitation of the Pâtimokkha once, or twice, not to say oftener<span
id="page_50_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_50_note_4.md)'--that Bhikkhu is not
only not made free on account of his ignorance<span
id="page_50_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_50_note_5.md), but he is to be dealt
with according to the Dhamma for the offence into which he has fallen,
and furthermore he is to be charged with foolishness (in the words),
'This is loss to thee, <span id="page_51">p. 51</span> brother, this is
an evil to thee, in that when the Pâtimokkha is being recited you fail
to take it to your heart, and attend to it with care.' There is
Pâ*k*ittiya in such foolish conduct.

   <span id="74"></span>74. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, being angry or
displeased with another Bhikkhu, shall give a blow--that is a
Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="75"></span>75. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, being angry or
displeased with another Bhikkhu, shall make use of any threatening
gesture<span id="page_51_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_51_note_1.md)--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="76"></span>76. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall harass a Bhikkhu
with a (charge of) Sa*m*ghâdisesa without ground--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="77"></span>77. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall intentionally
suggest difficulties of conscience to a Bhikkhu, with the idea of
causing him uneasiness, even for a moment; if he does it to that end
alone--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="78"></span>78. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall stand by
overhearing when Bhikkhus are quarrelling, or making a disturbance, or
engaged in a dispute, hoping to hear what they shall utter; if he does
it to that end alone--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="79"></span>79. Whatsoever Bhikkhu; when he has declared his
consent to formaI proceedings conducted according to the Dhamma, shall
thereafter grumble (about those proceedings)<span
id="page_51_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_51_note_2.md)--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

   <span id="80"></span>80. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, when the Sa*m*gha is
engaged in conducting a (formal) enquiry, shall rise from his seat, and
go away, without having declared his consent--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="81"></span>81. Whatsoever Bhikkhu, when, in a regularly
constituted Sa*m*gha<span id="page_52_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_52_note_1.md), he has given away a
robe, shall thereafter grumble about it, saying, 'The Bhikkhus
appropriate the property of the Sa*m*gha according to friendship'--that
is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="82"></span>82. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall divert to the use
of any individuaI property dedicated to the Sa*m*gha, knowing it to be
so--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here ends the eighth section, the 'Sahadhammika-section.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   <span id="83"></span>83. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall cross the threshold
of an anointed Khattiya king, when the king has not gone forth, and the
queen has not withdrawn, without first having had himself announced<span
id="page_52_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_52_note_2.md)--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

   <span id="84"></span>84. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall pick up, or cause
another to pick up, except in a grove or in a dwelling-place, a jewel,
or anything deemed a jewel<span id="page_53_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_53_note_1.md)--that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   Should a Bhikkhu have picked up, either in a grove or in a
dwelling-place, a jewel, or anything deemed a jewel, it is to be laid
aside, that he to whom it may belong may take it away. This is the right
course in such a case.

   <span id="85"></span>85. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall, out of hours<span
id="page_53_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_53_note_2.md), enter a vinage, without
having informed a Bhikkhu if one is present<span
id="page_53_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_53_note_3.md), except on account of
business of a special nature<span id="page_53_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_53_note_4.md) thereto sufficient--that
is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="86"></span>86. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall have a needle-case
made of bone, or ivory, or horn, it shall be broken up--and that is a
Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="87"></span>87. When a Bhikkhu is having a new bedstead or
chair made, it should be made with legs eight inches in height,
according to the accepted inch<span id="page_53_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_53_note_5.md), exclusive of the
lowermost piece of the bed frame<span
id="page_53_fr_6"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">6</span></sup>](#page_53_note_6.md). To him who exceeds that
limit there is a Pâ*k*ittiya, <span id="page_54">p. 54</span> and (the
legs of the piece of fumiture) shall be cut down (to the proper size).

   <span id="88"></span>88. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall have a bedstead or
a chair made, stuffed with cotton<span
id="page_54_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_54_note_1.md), the stuffing shall be
torn out--and that is a Pâ*k*ittiya.

   <span id="89"></span>89. When a Bhikkhu is having a rug or mat to sit
upon made, it must be made of the right measure. Herein this is the
measure: in length two spans, according to the accepted span; in breadth
one span; the border one span. To him who exceeds that limit there is a
Pâ*k*ittiya, and (the article) shall be cut down (to the proper size).

   <span id="90"></span>90. When a Bhikkhu is having an itch-cloth<span
id="page_54_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_54_note_2.md) made, it must be made of
the right measure. Herein this is the measure: in length four spans,
according to the accepted span; in width two spans. To him who exceeds
that limit there is a Pâ*k*ittiya, and (the cloth) shall be cut (clown
to the proper size).

   <span id="91"></span>91. When a Bhikkhu is having a garment made for
the rainy season, it must be made of the right measure. Herein this is
the right measure: in length six spans, according to the accepted span;
in breadth two spans and a half. To him who exceeds that limit there is
a Pâ*k*ittiya, and (the garment) shall be cut (down to the proper size).

   <span id="92"></span>92. Whatsoever Bhikkhu shall have a robe made of
the dimensions of a Sugata's robe<span
id="page_54_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_54_note_3.md), or larger-- <span
id="page_55">p. 55</span> that is a Pâ*k*ittiya, and (the robe) shall be
cut down to the proper size.

   Herein this is the measure of the Sugata robe of a Sugata: in length
nine spans, according to the accepted span; in breadth six spans. This
is me measure of the Sugata robe of a Sugata.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

End of the ninth section, the 'Ratana-section.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   Venerable Sirs, the ninety-two rules regarding matters requiring
expiation have been recited.

   In respect of them I ask the venerable ones, 'Are you pure in this
matter?'

   A second time I ask the venerable ones, 'Are you pure in this
matter?'

   A third time I ask the venerable ones, 'Are you pure in tliis
matter?'

   The venerable ones are pure herein. Therefore do they keep silence.
Thus I understand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   Here endeth the recitation of the Pâ*k*ittiyas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pâtimokkha - Pâ*t*idesaniyâ Dhammâ](sbe1309.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_32">p. 32</span>

<span id="page_32_note_1"></span>[1](#page_32_fr_1.md) That is, 'requiring
repentance.' Compare the Sanskrit terms Prâya*sk*ittika and
Prâya*sk*ittîya.

<span id="page_32_note_2"></span>[2](#page_32_fr_2.md) Literally, 'one who
has not received the upasampadâ.'

<span id="page_32_note_3"></span>[3](#page_32_fr_3.md) Anupasampanna*m*
padaso dhamma*m* vâ*k*eyya. This rule is directed against a wrong method
of teaching the Dhamma to a Sâma*n*era. See the extracts from the Old
Commentary, and from the Samanta-Pâsâdikâ, given by Minayeff on p. 84.
Read however in the second line osâpenti for âsâpenti; and then go on
anvakkhara*m* nâma, rûpam ani*kk*an ti vu*kk*amâno ruppan ti opâteti:
anuvya*ñg*ana*m* nâma, rûpam ani*kk*an ti vu*kk*amâno vedanâ ani*kk*â ti
sadda*m* ni*kkh*âreti, &c.

<span id="page_32_note_4"></span>[4](#page_32_fr_4.md) For the text read
mâtugâmena.

<span id="footnotes_page_33">p. 33</span>

<span id="page_33_note_1"></span>[1](#page_33_fr_1.md) Vi*ññ*u. The
Vibha<u>n</u>ga says, 'a man able to understand what is well said, and
what is wrongly said; what is wicked, and what is not wicked.' Compare
the use of vi*ññ*utâ at *G*âtaka I, 231.

<span id="page_33_note_2"></span>[2](#page_33_fr_2.md) To do so when it was
not the case, would be a Pârâ*g*ika. See the 4th Pârâ*g*ika, and our
note there on the meaning of uttarimanussa-dhamma*m*. The 'even' here
means that the truth of the averment makes no excuse for it.

<span id="page_33_note_3"></span>[3](#page_33_fr_3.md) Because doing so
might bring some living thing into danger.

<span id="page_33_note_4"></span>[4](#page_33_fr_4.md) Vihesake; which must
be understood as being done in a formal meeting of the Sa*m*gha during
an official enquiry.

<span id="page_33_note_5"></span>[5](#page_33_fr_5.md) The words in
parentheses are supplied from the explanations in the Vibha<u>n</u>ga.

<span id="footnotes_page_34">p. 34</span>

<span id="page_34_note_1"></span>[1](#page_34_fr_1.md) Ko*kkh*a*m*, the
meaning of which is not quite clear. The Vibha<u>n</u>ga says there are
four kinds, made of bark, of usîra roots, of mun*ñg* grass, and of
bulrushes. It is apparently therefore of wickerwork.

<span id="page_34_note_2"></span>[2](#page_34_fr_2.md) That is, according
to the Vibha<u>n</u>ga, the rule does not apply to an invalid, or to one
suffering from the heat, or the cold; and so on.

<span id="page_34_note_3"></span>[3](#page_34_fr_3.md) Because if he does
so, he might unwittingly upset the furniture, or fall himself, to the
injury of some one who was rightfully on the ground floor.

<span id="footnotes_page_35">p. 35</span>

<span id="page_35_note_1"></span>[1](#page_35_fr_1.md) In the text read
dvitti*kkh*adanassa: *th*ite pi. This rule, directed against too great
luxury in the matter of a perfectly finished dwelling, is somewhat
obscure, owing to our want of information as to the mode in which such
dwellings should be put up. It refers probably to a hut, albeit a large
one, of wattel and daub (ku*dd*a: comp. Rh. D.'s note on the
Mahâparinibbâna Sutta V, 41). The Samanta-Pâsâdikâ divides dvâra-kosa
into dvâra-okâsa, and quotes various estimates from the old Sinhalese
commentaries as to the proper extent of this space (see Minayeff, p.
87).

<span id="page_35_note_2"></span>[2](#page_35_fr_2.md) Ovadeyya; that is,
shall preach to them the eight Garu-dhammâ. On these see the passages
mentioned in the Index appended to the text of the *K*ullavagga; and on
the ovâda see *K*ullavagga X, 9, 2, and fonowing. The mode of procedure
is laid down in the Vibha<u>n</u>ga as follows: 'The Bhikkhu asks the
Bhikkhunî's, "Are you all present, sisters, and do none raise objections
(that is, are you samaggâ)?" If they say, "That is so Sir!" he asks,
"Are the eight Garu-dhammâ being kept up?" If they say, "They are, Sir!"
he is to say, "That, sisters, is the exhortation! " and so deliver it to
them. If they say, "They are not, Sir!" he should go all through them,
saying, "A sister who has been received into the higher grade even one
hundred years, &c. (and so on to the end of the Garu-dhammâ)."

'If he preach any other Dhamma to those who say. "We, Sir, are all
present, and none raise objections!" he is guilty of a Dukka*t*a. If he
preach the eight Garu-dhammâ to those who say, "No, Sir; that is not
so!" (vagg'amh' ayyâ ti. where vagga is vyagra, the opposite of
samagga), he is guilty of a Dukka*t*a. If he preach another Dhamma, when
the eight Garu-dhammâ have not committed to their charge, he is guilty
of a Dukka*t*a.

<span id="footnotes_page_36">p. 36</span>

<span id="page_36_note_1"></span>[1](#page_36_fr_1.md) Compare *K*ullavagga
X, 6, I.

<span id="page_36_note_2"></span>[2](#page_36_fr_2.md) Âmisa-hetu; that is,
in order that the sisters may be induced to supply the preachers with
food, medicine, &c.

<span id="footnotes_page_37">p. 37</span>

<span id="page_37_note_1"></span>[1](#page_37_fr_1.md) The introductory
story in the Vibha<u>n</u>ga is of a Bhikkhu born in Râgagaha, who went
to a relative's house, and a meal was there being prepared for him by
his relatives. A kulupikâ bhikkhuhî then arrives, and says, 'My friends,
give the gentleman a meal!' Then the Bhikkhu was in doubt whether he
ought not to refuse it as being Bhikkhunî-paripâ*k*ita*m*.

<span id="page_37_note_2"></span>[2](#page_37_fr_2.md) Compare the Aniyatâ
Dhammâ.

<span id="page_37_note_3"></span>[3](#page_37_fr_3.md) Eko âvasatha-pi*nd*o
bhu*ñg*itabbo. An âvasatha is one of those 'chaultries,' or public
resting-places, which good Buddhists were wont to put up in the villages
or at cross roads. At some of these a constant supply of rice was
provided for travellers. See the Mahâ-parinibbâna Sutta I, 10; II, 5
(pp. 10, 16); *G*âtaka, No. 31 (' Buddbist Birth Stories,' pp. 280-285);
Mabâ-sudassana Sutta I, 63; Dhammapada Commentary apud Fausböll, 185.
The Samanta-Pâsâdikâ on this rule (Minayeff, p. 88) says that
âvasatha-pindo is a meal in such an âvasatha.

<span id="footnotes_page_38">p. 38</span>

<span id="page_38_note_1"></span>[1](#page_38_fr_1.md) On this rule compare
*K*ullavagga VII, 3, 13. 'In a body' means four or more Bhikkhus going
together to the same house.

<span id="page_38_note_2"></span>[2](#page_38_fr_2.md) Mabâ-samayo. Tbe
Vibha<u>n</u>ga relates how, when vassa was over, the Bhikkhus repaired
in great numbers to visit the Buddha. On such occasions it was difficult
or impossible for them all, if they adhered to the strict rule, to
obtain their meals.

<span id="page_38_note_3"></span>[3](#page_38_fr_3.md)
Sama*n*a-bhatta-samayo. See the Vibha<u>n</u>ga, and the
Samanta-Pâsâdikâ, quoted by Minayeff, pp. 88, 89. ' Sama*n*as,' of
course, includes others besides Buddhists.

<span id="page_38_note_4"></span>[4](#page_38_fr_4.md) Parampara-bho*g*ane;
that is, in picking and choosing with regard to food, or in regard to
different invitations. The Bhikkhus were to eat straight on whatever was
given, and to accept invitations in the order in which they were
received. But a sick Bhikkhu might choose one morsel rather than
another; and Bhikkhus in bealth might accept an invitation to a house
where robes are going to be given, or made, rather than to a house where
only a meal was offered. The last exception was simply to guard against
the stock of robes falling short (Bhikkhu . . . nâdhivâsenti:
*k*ivara*m* paritta*m* uppa*gg*ati, says the Vibha<u>n</u>ga).

<span id="footnotes_page_39">p. 39</span>

<span id="page_39_note_1"></span>[1](#page_39_fr_1.md) In the text read
dvittipattapurâ.

The word for sweetmeats, pûva, includes all those sweetmeats which it
was then (as it is now) the custom to send as presents from one house to
another at weddings, funerals, and such occasions.

'Cakes' (mantha) refers to those rice-cakes, &c., which were usually
prepared as provision for a journey. Compare *G*âtaka I, 80.

'Should offer to take as much as he chose' is the phrase referred to
above in our note on the 11th Nissaggiya. The Vibha<u>n</u>ga says here,
Abhiha*t*u*m* pavâreyyâ 'ti yâvataka*m* i*kkh*asi tâvataka*m*
ga*n*hâhîti.

<span id="page_39_note_2"></span>[2](#page_39_fr_2.md) Pavârito. The
Vibha<u>n</u>ga says, Pavârito nâma âsana*m* pa*ññ*âyati bho*g*ana*m*
pa*ññ*âyati hatthapâse *th*ito abhiharati pa*t*ikkhepo pa*ññ*âyati;
which means, we think, 'A seat for him is there, food is there, (the
host) standing near him still makes invitation, but there takes place a
refusal (of the proferred food).'

<span id="page_39_note_3"></span>[3](#page_39_fr_3.md) Khâdeyya vâ
bhu*ñg*eyya vâ.

<span id="page_39_note_4"></span>[4](#page_39_fr_4.md) The 'not left over'
refers only to the case of a sick Bhikkhu. A Bhikkhu in health, when he
has once finished his meal, ought not to eat what he has left.

<span id="page_39_note_5"></span>[5](#page_39_fr_5.md) Khâdaniya*m* vâ
bho*g*aniya*m* vâ. The former term is used of hard food, such as
biscuits, cakes, meats, fruits, &c.; the latter term of soft foods, such
as boiled rice, curries, &c. The two words for eating correspond to
these two ideas.

<span id="footnotes_page_40">p. 40</span>

<span id="page_40_note_1"></span>[1](#page_40_fr_1.md) Bhuttasmi*m*
pâ*k*ittiya; that is, the offence is completed when the eating has taken
place; but the offer alone is not a Pâ*k*ittiya. So the Vibha<u>n</u>ga.

<span id="page_40_note_2"></span>[2](#page_40_fr_2.md) After sun-turn.

<span id="page_40_note_3"></span>[3](#page_40_fr_3.md) ln the text read
tâni; madhu phâ*n*ita*m*.

<span id="page_40_note_4"></span>[4](#page_40_fr_4.md) Dantapona; doubtless
the same, perhaps an older expression for, the danta ka*tth*a referred
to in *K*ullavagga V, 31. It is a piece of fragrant root (cinnamon,
betel, &c.) about eight inches long.

<span id="footnotes_page_41">p. 41</span>

<span id="page_41_note_1"></span>[1](#page_41_fr_1.md) These are the
various non-Buddhist religious teachers or devotees, most of whom
rejected the Vedas. The Paribbâ*g*akas were mostly, though not always,
wandering logicians, willing to maintain theses against all the world.
Paribbâ*g*ikâ is merely the feminine of the last. A*k*elaka, which
naturally has no feminine, were the naked ascetics.

The sect now called *G*ains are divided into two classes, Svetambaras
and Digambaras, the latter of which eat naked. They are known to be the
successors of the school called Niga*nth*as in the Pâli Pi*t*akas; and
it is not certain whether the Niga*nth*as are included in the
A*k*elakas. It is probable that the Brâhman ascetics, the Vânaprasthas,
were not included under the term Paribbâ*g*akas; but our information on
the exact meaning of these terms is, as yet, very imperfect.

<span id="page_41_note_2"></span>[2](#page_41_fr_2.md) That is merely to
get rid of him, in order to gain any purpose of his own. The
Vibha<u>n</u>ga gives as examples that the Bhikkhu sees some valuable
things, and wants to get them; or sees some woman, and wants to speak to
her.

<span id="page_41_note_3"></span>[3](#page_41_fr_3.md) Sabho*g*ane kule;
the meaning ofwhich is notquite clear. The Old Commentary says, 'A
sabho*g*ana kula is one where there is a husband and a wife; and they
both, husband and wife, are not gone forth from, are not devoid of lust'
(Minayeff, p. 89, under P.; but for anatikkantâ read anikkhantâ). Then
the Samanta-Pâsâdikâ, doubtless to justify this suggested implication,
makes sabhogana*m* equal to saha ubhohi *g*anehi (!); or, in the
alternative, to sabhoga*m*, since 'the wife is the bhoga of a man still
given to passion, and the husband the bhoga of a wife.' The use of
Bho*g*ana in any such sense is extremely forced, and was perhaps only
suggested by the following rules; but it is just possible we should
translate, 'a household still given to pleasure' (compare *K*ullavagga
VIII, 5, 1), or 'fond of good food' (compare Milinda Pañha 76).

On anupakhagga compare the 16th Pâ*k*ittiya.

<span id="footnotes_page_42">p. 42</span>

<span id="page_42_note_1"></span>[1](#page_42_fr_1.md) Compare the 30th
Pâkittiya, and the two Aniyatâ Dhammâ.

<span id="page_42_note_2"></span>[2](#page_42_fr_2.md) The Vibha<u>n</u>ga
has the following stories in regard to these two particulars. A family
devated to Upananda invited him and another Bhikkhu. Before meal-time he
went to attend on other families (purebhatta*m* kulâni payirupâsati).
The people delayed giving his meal to the other Bhikkhu till Upananda
should arrive. He came late; and the other Bhikkhu was thereby
discomforted.

The family devoted to Upananda sent him food for his use; saying it was
to be given to the Sa*m*gha, with special reference to him. He had gone
for an alms to the village. The messengers delivered the food and the
message, and asked where Upananda was. The Bhikkhus told the matter to
the Blessed One. He directed the present to be accepted, and laid by
till Upananda should return. After Upananda returned, he nevertheless
went out again to attend on other families, and the food so sent went
bad.

The Bhikkhu is to tell a resident Bhikkhu before, on account of this
rule, giving up his usual rounds, in order that he may still go if a
sick Bhikkhu wants medicine.

The exceptions are, as above, to prevent the stock of robes falling
short.

<span id="footnotes_page_43">p. 43</span>

<span id="page_43_note_1"></span>[1](#page_43_fr_1.md) These are usually
four--clothing, food, residence, and medicine. This rule refers more
especially to medicine, as appears from the explanation in the
Vibha<u>n</u>ga.

<span id="page_43_note_2"></span>[2](#page_43_fr_2.md) On this rule compare
the third section of the Ma*ggh*ima-Sîla, and the third section of the
Mahâ-Sîla (translated in Rh. D.'s 'Buddhist Suttas from the Pâli,' pp.
[192](../../bud/sbe11/sbe1105.htm#page_192.md), 198 {sic. [p.
196](../../bud/sbe11/sbe1105.htm#page_196) or 197}.md). We follow the
Vibha<u>n</u>ga in the interpretation of the various terms.

<span id="footnotes_page_44">p. 44</span>

<span id="page_44_note_1"></span>[1](#page_44_fr_1.md) The Old Commentary
(quoted by Minareff, p. 90) distinguishes between surâ and meraya by the
former being derived from flour, water, &c., and the latter from
flowers, fruits, &c.

<span id="page_44_note_2"></span>[2](#page_44_fr_2.md) Throwing water over
one another, and chasing one another, were common amusements at the
public and private bathing-places. Our MSS. read throughout hâsa-dhamme.

<span id="page_44_note_3"></span>[3](#page_44_fr_3.md) Anâdarire. That is,
according to the Vibha<u>n</u>ga, paying no heed, when one's attention
is drawn by an upasampanna to the fact that this or that action is
against the rule laid down (pa*ññ*atta*m*). But compare also
*K*ullavagga VIII, 8, 1.

<span id="page_44_note_4"></span>[4](#page_44_fr_4.md) In the text read
bhi*m*sâpeyya.

<span id="page_44_note_5"></span>[5](#page_44_fr_5.md) H. O.'s MS. reads
visibbanâpekho. At Mahâvagga I, 20, 15, visibbesu*m* occurs in the sense
of they warmed themselves.' Trenckner at p. 47 of the Milinda Pa*ñ*ha
reads aggi*m* galetvâ visîvetvâ; and at p. 102, sa*m*sibbitavisibbitattâ
sâkhâna*m*.

<span id="footnotes_page_45">p. 45</span>

<span id="page_45_note_1"></span>[1](#page_45_fr_1.md) The Vibha<u>n</u>ga
refers the first of these periods to the hot weather, and the second to
the fever weather.

<span id="page_45_note_2"></span>[2](#page_45_fr_2.md) In the text insert a
full stop after kâ*l*asâma*m* vâ. The object of this rule, according to
the Vibha<u>n</u>ga, is to enable a Bhikkhu to trace his robe should it
get lost by being mixed up with others. Compare the I5th Nissaggiya.

<span id="page_45_note_3"></span>[3](#page_45_fr_3.md) The Vibha<u>n</u>ga
says, 'There are two ways of appointment (in making over, vikappanâ),
promising in the presence, and promising in the absence (of the person
to whom the appointment is made). Promise in the presence is by the
words, "I make over this robe to you, or to such and such a one (then
present)!" Promising in the absence is by the words, "I give this robe
to you for you to appoint (to some one else)." Then the person spoken to
should say, "Who is your friend, or intimate acquaintance?" "Such a one,
or such a one." Then the other should say, "I give this to them. This is
their property. Wear it, or part with it, or do with it as you like!"'

These last are the formal words used on presenting a robe; and by their
use the property in the robe is transferred. After that the original
owner, in spite of the formal words, may not, according to our rule,
continue to use the robe.

On apa*kk*uddhâraka*m* see Childers, sub voce pa*kk*uddhâro.

<span id="footnotes_page_46">p. 46</span>

<span id="page_46_note_1"></span>[1](#page_46_fr_1.md) In the text read
sû*k*ighara*m*.

<span id="page_46_note_2"></span>[2](#page_46_fr_2.md) Compare the 79th
Pâ*k*ittiya, and *K*ullavagga IV, 14 passim.

<span id="page_46_note_3"></span>[3](#page_46_fr_3.md) That is, a
Pârâ*g*ika, or a Sa*m*ghâdisesa.

<span id="page_46_note_4"></span>[4](#page_46_fr_4.md) The upa*ggh*âya is
guilty of a Pâ*k*ittiya; the â*k*ariya, and the ga*n*a, of a Dukka*t*a,
says the Vibha<u>n</u>ga.

<span id="footnotes_page_47">p. 47</span>

<span id="page_47_note_1"></span>[1](#page_47_fr_1.md) Compare the 27th
Pâ*k*ittiya. A caravan that sets out with intent to steal or rob on the
way is meant.

<span id="page_47_note_2"></span>[2](#page_47_fr_2.md) Compare the 27th and
28th Pâ*k*ittiyas.

<span id="page_47_note_3"></span>[3](#page_47_fr_3.md) These are specified
in detail in Mahâvagga II, 3, 7.

<span id="page_47_note_4"></span>[4](#page_47_fr_4.md) Pariyâya; fulness,
extent, of illustration and explanation. Not merely manner, or method,
of statement. Much of this pariyâya will be found in the various similes
used in the *K*ullavagga loc. cit.

<span id="page_47_note_5"></span>[5](#page_47_fr_5.md) In the text here,
and in the çorresponding clause of No.70, read anekapariyâyena âvuso
antarâyikâ dhammâ antarâyikâ vuttâ. bhagavatâ, as in *K*ullavagga I, 32.

<span id="footnotes_page_48">p. 48</span>

<span id="page_48_note_1"></span>[1](#page_48_fr_1.md) This rule is
directed against the delusion that sin, to a very holy man, loses its
danger and its sinfulness. Compare the 4th Sa*m*ghâdisesa; and, on the
method of procedure here laid down, the 10th to the 13th
Sa*m*ghâdisesas. At *K*ullavagga I, 32 lust is declared to be an
antarâyiko dhammo; and falsehood another at Mahâvagga II, 3, 3. The
Samanta-Pâsâdikâ (quoted by Minayeff, p. 92) gives five divisions of
these 'dangerous qualities.'

<span id="page_48_note_2"></span>[2](#page_48_fr_2.md) This the
Vibha<u>n</u>ga explains as holding Uposatha, or Pavâra*n*â, or a
Sa*m*ghakamma with him.

<span id="page_48_note_3"></span>[3](#page_48_fr_3.md) Ukkhitto anosârito,
says the Vibha<u>n</u>ga. Compare Mahâvagga IX, 4, 10, 11.

<span id="page_48_note_4"></span>[4](#page_48_fr_4.md) Sama*n*uddeso; which
is explained by the Old Commentary as equal to Sâma*n*era. Why, in the
Pâtimokkha, now one and now the other expression should be used, is not
clear. In the later texts Sâma*n*era is the usual form, but
sama*n*uddeso is found also in a few passages.

<span id="footnotes_page_49">p. 49</span>

<span id="page_49_note_1"></span>[1](#page_49_fr_1.md) Apadisitabbo.
Compare the four Mahâpadesâ in the Mahâ-parinibbâna. Sutta IV, 7-11.

<span id="page_49_note_2"></span>[2](#page_49_fr_2.md) Compare the 5th
Pâ*k*ittiya.

<span id="page_49_note_3"></span>[3](#page_49_fr_3.md) In the text read
*k*ara pi re; that is, *k*ara api re, instead of *k*ara pare. On vinassa
compare Mahâvagga I, 61, 1.

<span id="page_49_note_4"></span>[4](#page_49_fr_4.md) Upalâpeyya. Compare
Mahâvagga I, 59, and Mahâ-parinibbâna Sutta I, 5, and the passages
quoted in Rh. D.'s version of the latter passage. The Old Commentary
says, 'Flatters him (talks him over, tassa upalâpeti) by saying, "I will
give you a bowl, or a robe, or hear you repeat, or answer your
questions."'

<span id="page_49_note_5"></span>[5](#page_49_fr_5.md) Upa*tth*âpeyya. The
Old Commentary says, 'by providing him with chunam, or clay, or a
tooth-cleanser, or water to wash his face with.' No doubt upa*tth*âpetî
is used in the sense of showing such personal attentions to another, as
the upa*tth*âkâ did to the Buddha; and such services would very rightly
come under this rule. Yet here, as often, the comment is rather a
scholastic exegesis of the sentence, than a philologically exact
explanation of the word.

<span id="page_49_note_6"></span>[6](#page_49_fr_6.md) This title is taken
from the second, not, as in all the other cases, from the first rule in
the section.

<span id="footnotes_page_50">p. 50</span>

<span id="page_50_note_1"></span>[1](#page_50_fr_1.md) On this strange
allocution see the note to the 10th Nissaggiya.

<span id="page_50_note_2"></span>[2](#page_50_fr_2.md) Khuddânukhuddakehi.
Compare the Mahâ-parinibbâna Sutta VI, 3, and the passages quoted there
in Rh. D.'s note.

<span id="page_50_note_3"></span>[3](#page_50_fr_3.md) In the text read
viva*nn*ake.

<span id="page_50_note_4"></span>[4](#page_50_fr_4.md) In the text read ko
pana vâdo bhiyyo.

<span id="page_50_note_5"></span>[5](#page_50_fr_5.md) In the text read
a*ññ*â*n*akena.

<span id="footnotes_page_51">p. 51</span>

<span id="page_51_note_1"></span>[1](#page_51_fr_1.md) Talasattika*m*
uggireyya. The Old Commentary says, Kâya*m* vâ kâyap*t*ibaddha*m* vâ
antamaso uppalapatta*m* pi u*kk*âreti. Compare âvudhâni uggiritvâ at
*G*âtaka I, 150.

<span id="page_51_note_2"></span>[2](#page_51_fr_2.md) If he should raise
any formal objections so as to re-open the question, that would fall
under the 63rd Pâ*k*ittiya. On 'declaring one's consent' in this and the
following rule, see below, Mahâvagga II, 23. The whole rule, as well as
on No. 63, is repeatedly referred to in *K*ullavagga IV, 14.

<span id="footnotes_page_52">p. 52</span>

<span id="page_52_note_1"></span>[1](#page_52_fr_1.md) Samaggena
sa*m*ghena. See the note to the 21st Pâ*k*ittiya.

<span id="page_52_note_2"></span>[2](#page_52_fr_2.md) Indakhîla, the word
translated 'threshold,' is explained in the Old Commentary by
sayani-ghara, 'sleeping chamber;' but this is rather a didactic gloss on
the rule. Compare the note above on the 43rd Pâ*k*ittiya. The phrase
'when the queen has not gone in' is somewhat doubtful. H. O.'s MS. of
the Vibha<u>n</u>ga reads (as Minayeff does) aniggata-ratanake, instead
of Dickson's anîhata-ratanake. The former is the better reading; nîhata
is impossible, it must be either nihata or nîha*t*a. But ratanaka,
though the queen is one of the seven Ratanas of a king, is not found
elsewhere used absolutely for a queen: the use of râ*g*ake, too,
immediately after ra*ññ*o, instead of ra*ññ*e or râ*g*ini, is curious. A
possible alternative rendering would be 'when the court has not
departed, and the regalia not laid aside:' but we prefer on the whole
the Old Commentator's explanation of râ.gaka and ratanaka.

<span id="footnotes_page_53">p. 53</span>

<span id="page_53_note_1"></span>[1](#page_53_fr_1.md) Ratanasammata*m*;
that is, a thing made of one of those substances ranked with gems, such
as jade, coral, &c.

<span id="page_53_note_2"></span>[2](#page_53_fr_2.md) Vikâle; that is,
says the Old Commentary, from sun-turn in one day till sun-rise in the
next.

<span id="page_53_note_3"></span>[3](#page_53_fr_3.md) Santa*m* bhikkhu*m*.
If one is not present, he may go without. The Old Commentary gives no
such delinition of being present, as Mr. Dickson has supplied.

<span id="page_53_note_4"></span>[4](#page_53_fr_4.md) A*kk*âyika. Compare
the note on the 28th Nissaggiya.

<span id="page_53_note_5"></span>[5](#page_53_fr_5.md)
Sugata<u>n</u>gulena. See the note on the 6th Sa*m*ghâdisesa.

<span id="page_53_note_6"></span>[6](#page_53_fr_6.md) A*t*ani. There is no
explanation of this term, either in the Old Commentary, or in the
Samanta-Pâsâdikâ.

<span id="footnotes_page_54">p. 54</span>

<span id="page_54_note_1"></span>[1](#page_54_fr_1.md) Tûla*m*; which the
Old Commentary expands into three kinds--tûla*m* from a tree, tûla*m*
from a creeper, and tûla*m* from a young fowl.

<span id="page_54_note_2"></span>[2](#page_54_fr_2.md) When a Bhikkhu had a
boil, or running sore, or any such disease, the use of an itch-cloth (so
called from the first in the list of skin complaints there mentioned) is
laid down in Mahâvagga VIII, 17.

<span id="page_54_note_3"></span>[3](#page_54_fr_3.md) On the doubtful
meaning of Sugata, see the note above on the 28th Nissaggiya. There is
no reason whatever to believe that Gotama's robe was larger, in
proportion, than those worn by the other members of his order. He
exchanged robes with Mahâ Kassapa. Of the two sets of robes brought by
Pukkusa, one was given to Ânanda, and one was reserved for the Buddha
himself; and no one can read the account in the Mahâ-parinibbâna Sutta
without feeling that both are supposed to be of the same size.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
