<span id="top"></span>[Sacred-Texts](../../index.md) 
 [Buddhism](../index)   [SBE 11 Index](index)   [Previous](sbe1301.md) 
 [Next](sbe1303.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

## INTRODUCTION   <span class="small">TO THE</span>   VINAYA TEXTS FROM THE PÂLI.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   IN the present MSS. the Vinaya Pi*t*aka is divided into the following
books:

|                       |     |                                                |
|-----------------------|-----|------------------------------------------------|
| 1\. Pârâ*g*ika,       | }   | called collectively the Sutta-vibha<u>n</u>ga. |
| 2\. Pâ*k*ittiya,      |     |                                                |
| 3\. Mahâvagga,        | }   | called collectively the Khandhakas.            |
| 4\. *K*ullavagga,     |     |                                                |
| 5\. Parivâra-pâ*th*a. |     |                                                |

These books constitute that part of the sacred literature of the
Buddhists which contains the regulations for the outward life of the
members of the Buddhist Sa*m*gha--nearly the oldest, and probably the
most influential, of all Fraternities of monks.

   It is impossible to frame any narrower definition of the Vinaya than
this, since the gradual change of circumstances in the Fraternity
resulted in a gradual change also in the Vinaya itself. To give any more
detailed account of what the Vinaya is, it will be necessary to trace
what can be at present ascertained of its history; to show that is, so
far as it is yet possible to do so--the causes which led to the
establishment of the oldest Rules and Ceremonies of the Order, and to
follow step by step the accretions of new literary work around this
older nucleus.

   For this purpose we propose to consider first the Rules of the work
called the Pâtimokkha; for the later texts presuppose its existence. It
is one of the oldest, if not the oldest, of all Buddhist text-books; and
it has been <span id="page_x">p. x</span> inserted in its entirety into
the first part of the Vinaya, the Vibha<u>n</u>ga<span
id="page_x_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_x_note_1.md).

   The Pâtimokkha--the meaning of the name will be discussed later
on--seems to have owed its existence to the ancient Indian custom of
holding sacred two periods in each month, the times of the Full Moon and
of the New Moon.

   The Vedic ceremonies of the Dar*s*apûr*n*amâsa sacrifice, and of the
feast or sacred day (Upavasatha) connected with it, are known to have
been very old, and the custom of celebrating these days would naturally
be handed on from the Brâhmans to the different Sama*n*as, and be
modified and simplified (though, as it seems, sometimes increased in
number) by them, in accordance with their creeds and their views of
religious duty. According to Buddhist tradition<span
id="page_x_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_x_note_2.md)--and we see no sufficient
reason for doubting the correctness of the account--the monks of other,
that is, of non-Buddhistic sects, used to meet together at the middle
and at the close of every half-month, and were accustomed then to
proclaim their new teaching in public. At such times the people would
crowd together; and the different sects found an opportunity of
increasing their numbers and their influence.

   The Buddhists also adopted the custom of these periodical meetings,
but confined themselves to meeting twice in each month<span
id="page_x_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_x_note_3.md). And the peculiarity which
gave to these meetings among the Buddhists their distinguishing
character seems to have been borrowed by them neither from the Brâhmans
nor from other dissenters, but to have been an original invention of the
Buddhists themselves. The Brethren and Sisters made use of these
half-monthly gatherings to confess to the assembled Order the sins and
faults which each of them had committed; and to take upon himself, or
herself, the penanee which the transgressor had thereby incurred. It
would be unnecessary to dwell bere upon the details of these penitential
meetings, as we can <span id="page_xi">p. xi</span> refer the reader to
the second book of the Mahâvagga, where he will find them fully set out.

   It was for use at such penitential gatherings that the text, now
known as the Pâtimokkha, was composed. A list was drawn up--which of
course it would be necessary from time to time to complete, and
rectify--of those offences which ought to be confessed and atoned for;
this list was read out in the half-monthly meetings of the Order; and
the Brethren and Sisters who were present were asked if they were
innocent of each one of the offences therein mentioned.

   The use of such a list must have already begun in very early times.
Tradition even ascribes the first laying down of each clause to the
Buddha himself. This tradition is of course very far from being
conclusive; but neither should we hold it impossible that the
Pâtimokkha, either in its present shape, or at least in its most
essential parts, can reach back to thc Buddha's own time, or to that of
his personal disciples.

   It is no doubt natural, through the influence of the history of early
Christianity, or perhaps of the school of Socrates, to imagine that
early Buddhism was far removed from all fixed and absolute forms, either
of creed or of liturgy; and to represent the intercourse of Gotama and
his disciples as purely and simply an interchange of spiritual
edification, where the spirit was all in all, and the letter was
nothing. But it should be remembered that Gotama continued to live for
many years, almost for two generations, after he had formulated the
essential points of his system, and after he had founded the brotherhood
of his Order. And at that time the stream of scholastic and legal ideas
which emanated from the earlier Brâhmanism was flowing in full force
through the religious circles of India. A rich phraseology of sacred and
ecclesiastical expressions, an armoury of technical terms in philosophy
and in theology (still preserved in the Brâhma*n*as and Upanishads), had
been developed and made ready for the use of the Buddhists, and
*G*ainas, and other reforming schools. And earlier speculation had
raised a whole series of problems, <span id="page_xii">p. xii</span> and
long-continued custom had elaborated a multifarious system of
ecclesiastical observances, which the newly risen sects, orthodox or
heretical, could grapple with, or could adopt. It seems to us that
Gotama's disciples, from the very beginning, were much more than a free
and unformal union of men held together merely through their common
reverence for their Master, and through a common spiritual aim. They
formed rather, and from the first, an organised Brotherhood.

   But if we look upon the Sakyaputtiya Sama*n*as--for that is the name
which the people in the earliest times gave to the community--as from
the first an organised body, it is highly probable that the earliest
formularies, both of their creeds and of their liturgies, arose in a
time, if not during the life of Gotama, yet at most not long after his
decease. Now among the oldest expressions of belief we may with
certainty rank the four sentences known as the Four Noble Truths and the
summary of the so-called Noble Eightfold Path: and the oldest liturgical
formularies preserved to us are, without any doubt, the Pâtimokkha and
the various Kammavâ*k*as. It is true that these liturgical formularies,
being so much more extensive, may possibly have been modified or added
to before they reached the form in which we now possess them; but there
is not the slightest trace of any other liturgies having ever been in
use in the Buddhist fraternity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   It is of course impossible to attempt to draw a line between the part
which Gotama himself may have had in the settlement of the list of
offences contained in the Pâtimokkha, and the part that may have been
taken by his disciples. Nor indeed, considering the limited character of
our knowledge, is that a point of much importance. But it should perhaps
be noticed in this connection that Buddhist tradition does ascribe to
one among Gotama's disciples--to Upâli--an especial connection with the
Vinaya. This tradition reaches back at least as far as the time when the
existing recension of the Pâli Pi*t*akas was made, for we find it both
in the Sutta- and in the Vinaya-Pi*t*akas.

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

   Thus in the *K*ullavagga (VI, 13, 1) we find the passage--'At that
time the Blessed One proclaimed the Vinaya in many a way to the
Bhikkhus, exalted the Vinaya, exalted the learning of the Vinaya,
exalted again and again the venerable Upâli. Then thought the Bhikkhus,
"The Blessed One hath proclaimed the Vinaya in many a way, hath exalted
the Vinaya, hath exalted the learning of the Vinaya, bath exalted again
and again the venerable Upâli. Come now let us learn the Vinaya from the
venerable Upâli." And so many Bhikkhus, old and middle-aged and young,
learnt the Vinaya from the venerable Upâli.'

   And again in a Sutta of the A<u>n</u>guttara Nikâya<span
id="page_xiii_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_xiii_note_1.md), where those Bhikkhus
are enumerated who, in any particular respect, are the first and
foremost in the Brotherhood, Upâli is mentioned as the first among the
custodians of the Vinaya (the Vinaya-dharâ). And further, as is well
known, it is Upâli who, according to the tradition, plays, at the First
Council, the same part of propounder with regard to the Vinaya Texts
which Ânanda does with regard to the Dhamma Texts<span
id="page_xiii_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_xiii_note_2.md). There may well be some
truth in this very ancient tradition that Upâli was specially conversant
with the Rules of the Order; but it would be hazardous on that account
to ascribe to Upâli a share, not only in the banding down of existing
Rules, but in the composition of the Pâtimokkha itself<span
id="page_xiii_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_xiii_note_3.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   As regards the order in which the various offences are arranged in
the Pâtimokkha, the principal division corresponds to the division of
the Order into Brethren and Sisters: there is a Bhikkhu-pâtimokkha and a
Bhikkbunî-pâtimokkha. In each of these two chief divisions the offences
are divided into various classes, beginning with the heaviest--with
those, that is, that result in the exclusion <span id="page_xiv">p.
xiv</span> of the offender from the Order. Inside each class the
sequence of the clauses follows no invariable rule. Sometimes offences
of a related character are placed together in groups<span
id="page_xiv_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_xiv_note_1.md), but sometimes those
which would naturally come together are round scattered in quite
different parts of the same class<span
id="page_xiv_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_xiv_note_2.md). It is perhaps worthy of
notice that there sometimes seems, as in the two cases first mentioned
in the last note, to be an effort to arrange the offences in groups
(vagga) of ten: and in three cases we find regulations formulated with
the utmost brevity (the offences being merely expressed by a locative
case dependent upon pâkittiya*m*) at the commencement of such a vagga.
It seems to us, at least in the present state of our knowledge, quite
impossible to draw any conclusions from such peculiarities as to the
comparative age of any different parts of the Pâtimokkha. The
irregularities in arrangement may very well be due to want of literary
clearness in the compilers of the present Form of Confession, and it
would be hazardous to attempt to trace in it any historical argument.

   The various points in regard to the Pâtimokkha dealt with in the
foregoing paragraphs do not of themselves show that it was at all older
than the rest of the Vinaya Pi*t*aka; and indeed the work, as a separate
work, is not considered among Buddhists to belong to the Pi*t*akas at
all, and is therefore not included in the list of works of which the
Pi*t*akas consist. But every single Rule or Clause in the Pâtimokkha is
in fact round word for word in the Sutta-vibha<u>n</u>ga, the quotations
being so complete that the Pâtimokkha might be entirely put together
again by piecing together extracts from the Vinaya Pi*t*aka. And it is
not possible that the Pâtimokkha originated merely by such a process of
dovetailing; for the quotations in the Vinaya Pi*t*aka, though not
actually called quotations, bear the unmistakable stamp of being taken
from some pre-existing work. The cause which led to the Pâtimokkha, and
the <span id="page_xv">p. xv</span> Upasampadâ-kammavâ*k*a, being
separately preserved at all, is the same as the cause which led to their
exclusion from the lists of the Pi*t*aka texts--the fact, that is, of
their being liturgical compositions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   We turn now to the consideration of the question how a series of
further literary productions were gradually developed out of, or added
to the Pâtimokkha<span id="page_xv_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_xv_note_1.md).

   Whoever reads through the Mahâvagga will at once be struck by one
section of it which differs completely both in contents and in form from
the rest of the work. This is the section in the Second Book, Chapter
III, paragraphs 4-8.

   This passage is preceded by the opening words of the Pâtimokkha; and
in the passage itself those words are separately paraphrased or
explained. But the explanation does not appear to be put into the mouth
of the Buddha; it bears rather, without any historical or conversational
form, the impersonal shape of a simple commentary: and it only differs
from the later commentaries by peculiar solemn diffuseness and
rhetorical tautology.

   If we were to consider the Mahâvagga only, the sudden and unexplained
appearance in this connection, and in this connection only, of an
isolated passage of this kind, would have to remain an insoluble puzzle.
But when we look further into the other parts of the Vinaya Pi*t*aka, an
answer immediately suggests itself. In the portion of that Pi*t*aka
which is better called the Sutta-vibha<u>n</u>ga, but is divided in the
MSS. into two divisions, under the somewhat misleading titles of
Pârâ*g*ika and Pâ*k*ittiya, we find, at regularly recurring intervals,
passages of an exactly similar character, and without any doubt of the
same origin, as the isolated passage in the Mahâvagga.

   The Sutta-vibha<u>n</u>ga is occupied with laying down and explaining
all the Rules which are contained in the Pâtimokkha. Now, immediately
after the text of each of these Rules, there is found a word for word
commentary upon <span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span> them--precisely as a
word for word commentary follows, in the passage above cited in the
Mahâvagga, upon the quoted words of the Introductory Formular of the
Pâtimokkha service. Here then lies the explanation. This Introductory
Formular is the only passage contained in the Pâtimokkha which is not
found also in the Sutta-vibha<u>n</u>ga. And with the explanation of the
curiously isolated passage in the Mahâvagga we have also a new fact of
very great importance. Not only does the Vinaya Pi*t*aka contain, word
for word, the whole of the Pâtimokkha, but it contains also, and again
word for word, the whole of an ancient Commentary on the Pâtimokkha.

   This commentary no longer exists as a separate work, and it would
indeed be strange if it did. It was not required in the simple
liturgical services of Ordination and Confession in use in the Order:
and if any one wished to refer to it, in order to refresh his memory as
to the explanation of any passage in the Pâtimokkha, he had only to
repeat, or to get repeated over to him, the corresponding passage from
the Sutta-vibha<u>n</u>ga. There he would find the Old Commentary (as we
shall hereafter call it) word for word, together with the additional
commentary by which it had been supplemented in later times.

   A question may then possibly occur to the reader whether we can be
really sure that the Old Commentary has been preserved complete, or
whether what we have is a fragment only. We think there can be but
little doubt as to the right answer. The Pâtimokkha, which the Old
Commentary deals with word by word, has been separately preserved to us,
and we know that no one phrase of it remains uncommented upon. And
further it is clear from several passages that the words of the old
commentator were considered so sacred or authoritative that they have
been kept intact even in cases where they are in contradiction to the
later parts of the Vinaya Pi*t*aka<span
id="page_xvi_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_xvi_note_1.md). It should however be
noted that this Old Commentary is philological <span id="page_xvii">p.
xvii</span> and exegetical throughout, containing nothing of a legendary
or quasi-historical nature. It is just possible to suggest that it may
have originally contained not only such an explanation of the meaning of
each Rule, but an account also of the occasion on which the Rule was
laid down. But it is difficult to see why greater sacredness should have
been attached to one part of the work than to another; or to explain how
it was that, if any part was changed, the contradictory passages above
referred to were not also altered. Every probability therefore points to
the conclusion that we have the complete work still before us, and not
fragments of it only.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   It seems to us to have been precisely the absence of any such
historical account in the older Commentary which probably led to the
formation of what was practically the new edition of the Pâtimokkha
which now lies before us in the first part of the Vinaya Pi*t*aka.

   ln the earliest books of the Sutta Pi*t*aka, which contains the
statement of Buddhist belief, we find--just as in the Gospels and in the
Socratic dialogues--that that belief is not stated directly. The books
profess to give, not simply the belief itself, but the belief as the
Buddha uttered it, with an account of the time when, and the place at
which, he uttered it. The Buddha's new method of salvation, his new
doctrine of what salvation was, did not present itself to the
consciousness of the early Buddhist community as an idea, a doctrine,
standing alone, and merely on its own merits. ln their minds it was
indissolubly bound up with the memory of the revered and striking
personality of him who had proclaimed it. So in the Sutta Pi*t*aka the
actor and speaker is almost throughout the Buddha himself:
(occasionally, but very seldom, one of his disciples.)
Introductions--often indeed short and tending in later times to
disappear--give a full account of where, and when, he spoke; what was
the occasion which led to his uttering that particular speech; and to
whom he uttered it. But, throughout, the principal thing is what the
Buddha said.

   It is only natural that this distinguishing mark of the <span
id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span> literature of the Buddhist Dhamma--much
of which was no doubt in existence at avery early date--should have
reacted upon the literature of the Buddhist Vinaya. The members of the
Order were no longer contented to learn, and to understand the meaning
of, the various Rules of the Pâtimokkha. A desire sprang up to have, for
each one of them also, a kind of historical basis; to know the story of
how the Buddha himself came to lay down the Rule to his disciples. And
it was only the Brother who was properly acquainted with all this who
was accounted a real 'Doctor of the Law.'

   So it is said in the *K*ullavagga (IX, 5, 1):--'If a Brother, Upâli,
has not received gladly both the Pâtimokkhas in their full extent, has
not well divided them, well established them, well investigated them,
both sutta by sutta, and in every detail; if when asked, "Where was this
spoken by the Blessed One?" he fail to solve the question: then there
will be some who will say to him, "But then, let the venerable one still
devote himself to learning the Vinaya!" thus will they say<span
id="page_xviii_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_xviii_note_1.md).'

   It is evident from this passage that, at the time when it was
written, such a tradition regarding each Rule was in existence; and that
the knowledge of these traditions was held in high esteem. It is
therefore a reasonable conjecture that steps were taken to amalgamate
these traditions with the Text and the Old Commentary in a complete
work, which should also contain what we may call Notes on the
Rules--that is, decisions on points of Law involved, though not
expressed in so many words, in the Rules; discussions on what cases were
really included and what were not, in particular regulations;
enumeration of exceptions to the Rules; and so on.

   Whether this conjecture be right or not, it is precisely such a work
that we have now before us in that part of the Vinaya Pi*t*aka called
the Sutta-vibha<u>n</u>ga, and divided <span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>
in the present MSS., as above pointed out, into two books called
respectively--after the class of Rules with which they begin--Pârâ*g*ika
and Pâ*k*ittiya. And it is possible throughout, without the possibility
of mistake, to distinguish between the three portions of which the
present work is built up. The historical basis comes first, leading up
to the extract from the Pâtimokkha, which is always placed in the
Buddha's own mouth; then comes the Old commentary, with its verbal
explanations; and then, finally, the Notes giving the exceptions to, and
the extensions of, the Rule in the Pâtimokkha.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   The foregoing paragraphs show the way in which the
Sutta-vibha<u>n</u>ga grew up on the basis of the Pâtimokkha. The
following books--the Khandhakas--give a detailed and connected account
of the admission into the Sa*m*gha; of the ceremony of the Uposatha; of
the annually recurring observances connected with the beginning and the
end of the rainy season; of the principal disciplinary proceedings; and
of miscellaneous details regarding the medicine, food, dwelling-places,
and daily life of the members of the Order (Bhikkhus). As in the
Sutta-vibha<u>n</u>ga, so here also, the outward form is arranged in
such a way that in the case of every regulation a history was given of
the occasion upon which the Buddha was supposed to have made it. These
histories again lead up, in most cases, to a liturgical formulary by
which the regulation was to be carried out.

   While, however, in the case of the Sutta-vibha<u>n</u>ga the liturgy
on which it has been founded has been preserved in a separate shape, the
formularies in the Khandhakas have not as yet, except in some instances,
been found in existence apart from the Khandhakas. The principal
exception is the Upasampadâ-kammavâ*k*a (The Words of the Act of
Ordination), which recurs in its entirety in the First Khandhaka of the
Mahâvagga (I, 76, 3 to I, 78, 5). It is impossible therefore as yet to
trace the history of the gradual formation of the Khandhakas as we think
it already possible to do in the case of the Sutta-vibha<u>n</u>ga.

   In the Khandhakas too, no doubt, the introductory <span
id="page_xx">p. xx</span> histories are the latest part. But while some
of the formularies and regulations to which they lead up may well be
very old, others are probably additions to, or modifications of, those
older ones; and it is difficult to attempt to show, even with regard to
the exceptions above mentioned, which are the older and which are the
later. The misfortune that these forms are not all now separately
extant<span id="page_xx_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_xx_note_1.md) is probably simply due to
the fact that the formularies separately preserved (including the
Pâtimokkha) are the only ones which continued to be used in actual
services among the members of the Order.

   Such being the nature and contents, and such--so far as it can be
traced--being the origin of the Sutta-vibha<u>n</u>ga and of the
Khandhakas respectively, it follows that in all probability they were
composed, or put into their present shape, at about the same period in
the development of early Buddhism--it is even possible that both works
arose in immediate connection.

   The kind of narrative setting with which, in both cases, the older
material has been surrounded is alike in both. Here and there in both
works are included real fragments of ancient legend or tradition--as,
for instance, the account of the events from the attainment of
Buddhahood down to the conversion of Sâriputta and Moggallâna (Mahâvagga
I, 1-24), the story of Devadatta (*K*ullavagga VII), the story of the
conversion and the sin of Sudinna (Vibha<u>n</u>ga, First Pârâ*g*ika).
But the greater number of these narratives are of the most meagre
description, and have altogether the appearance of being mere
inventions.

   There is little doubt that this is what they, in fact, were. Actual
remembrance of the Buddha, and of his time, could have sufficed only in
the rarest instances to give a correct historical basis for the Rules or
Ceremonies, which had to be explained. We find a precisely similar <span
id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span> state of things leading, in the
Introductions to the *G*âtaka Stories, to what were unquestionably
inventions: and it must be acknowledged that the compilers have not
taken the slightest trouble to conceal the evidently unsubstantial
character of most of these summary introductions. But it does not follow
that they were invented at the time when the Sutta-vibha<u>n</u>ga and
the Khandhakas were compiled. They may possibly have formed part of the
traditional explanatory teaching of the schools.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   As to the time when the Sutta-vibha<u>n</u>ga and the Khandhakas were
compiled, we have important evidence in their silence regarding the
well-known Ten Points.

   The long-continued struggle on that question--as important for the
history of Buddhism as the Arian controversy for that of
Christianity--agitated the whole Buddhist world to its very centre; and
the attempted settlement of it, at the Council of Vesâlî, led to a most
serious schism in the Buddhist Church. Now the ten expressions in which
the question was summarised or catalogued<span
id="page_xxi_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_xxi_note_1.md) are (as was pointed out
in the Introduction to the Pâli Text of the Mahâvagga) conspicuous by
their absence from the, Vibha<u>n</u>ga, and from all, except the last,
of the Khandhakas<span id="page_xxi_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_xxi_note_2.md). The first mention of
most of them, and the first use of any one of them as a distinctive
war-cry, is found in those last books, which are evidently an appendix
to the rest of the Khandhakas, and of an entirely different nature from
the earlier ones; for they contain a regular historical account of the
two Councils, that of Râ*g*agaha, and that of Vesâlî<span
id="page_xxi_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_xxi_note_3.md).

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

   But the Ten Points in dispute were all matters of ecclesiastical law,
they all related to observances of the brotherhood, they were in fact
questions as to whether or not the ancient Rules should be relaxed or
not in these ten respects. Is it possible that in a collection of works
like the Vibha<u>n</u>ga and the Khandhakas, which seek to set forth,
down to the minutest detail, and even with hair-splitting diffuseness,
all that has any relation to the daily life of the Brethren, and the
regulations of the Buddhist Order--is it possible that in such a
collection, if, when it was compiled, the struggle on the Ten Points had
already burst into flame, there should be no reference at all, even in
interpolations, to any one of these ten disputes? That the difference of
opinion on the Ten Points remains altogether unnoticed in those parts of
the collection where, in the natural order of things, it would be
obviously referred to, and that it is only mentioned in an appendix
where the Council held on its account is described, shows clearly, in
our opinion, that the Vibha<u>n</u>ga and the Khandhakas (save the two
last) are older than the Council of Vesâlî--and, of course, a fortiori
that the Pâtimokkha and the Kammavâ*k*âs are so too.

   The Council of Vesâlî is said in the XIIth Khandhaka of the
*K*ullavagga to have taken place a hundred years after the Buddha's
death. This is no doubt a round number; and the exact year of the date
of the Buddha's death is open to question. If it be placed, according to
the Ceylon chronicles, at exactly 218 years before Asoka's coronation,
it will fall in or about 483 B.C.

   But the expression '218 years' can in no case be regarded as an
absolutely reliable statement of actual fact, and the date of 483 B.C.
must therefore be taken subject to a marginal allowance of some decades.
And it appears to one of us, for various reasons which he has elsewhere
stated at length, that the balance of probability leads to the
conclusion that the date of the Buddha's Parinibbâna must be <span
id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span> brought down to the period from 420-400
B.C.<span id="page_xxiii_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_xxiii_note_1.md) We do not enter upon
that question here, as the details are intricate, and the result
uncertain; and it is sufficient for our present purpose to be able to
fix the Council of Vesâlî, even after making allowance for all
possibilities, at within thirty years of 350 B.C.

   We would only point out that there is really no ground for discontent
with a result which can be fixed, after all, within a few decades. For
what difference does that make in this case? If we had to deal with
Grecian history, such a result might well be deemed unsatisfactory.
There are differences, both personal and political, between Greece in
480, in 440, and in 400--differences well known to us. But whether we
fix the date of an event in India in 480, or in 440, what does it, at
present, matter? Who would be bold enough to say that the mention of
India in 480 B.C. calls up to his mind a condition of things different
from that suggested by the mention of India in 440 B.C., or even in 400
B.C.? We need not therefore take too much to heart the uncertainty of
this chronological result; though we may regret that our comfort is
drawn from no better source than our want of knowledge.

   The Vibha<u>n</u>ga and the Twenty Khandhakas were at that time
(circa 350 B.C.) already held in such high repute that no one ventured
to alter them; a sanctity of this kind is not acquired without the lapse
of a considerable time: and we think it is not going too far to say,
Firstly, that these books must have been in existence, as we now have
them, within thirty years, earlier or later, of, at least, 360 or 370
B.C.; Secondly, that the Old Commentary they have preserved must be
considerably, perhaps fifty years, older; and Thirdly, that the
Kammavâ*k*âs and the Pâtimokkha must be older still.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   The reader will notice that in the foregoing discussion no mention
has been made of the Fifth Book in the present <span id="page_xxiv">p.
xxiv</span> division of the Vinaya Pi*t*aka--the Parivâra-pâ*th*a. The
reason is that this work, an abstract of the other parts of the Vinaya,
is in fact a very much later compilation, and probably the work of a
Ceylonese Thera. In some stanzas, which are found at the end of the
Parivâra-pâ*th*a, it is stated to have been composed by 'the highly
wise, learned, and skilful Dîpa, after he had inquired here and there
into the methods (literally, the way) followed by former teachers<span
id="page_xxiv_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_xxiv_note_1.md).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   We have every hope that the foregoing argument will commend itself to
our fellow workers as being, in the main, well founded. We now propose
to test it by applying it in explanation of several difficult terms and
phrases found in the Vinaya Pi*t*aka, which seem to have been hitherto
incorrectly interpreted.

   It has been pointed out that, in the Pâtimokkha, the offences are
arranged in certain classes, called, with reference to the heinousness
of the act committed, Pârâ*g*ika, Sa*m*ghâdisesa, Pâ*k*ittiya,
Pâ*t*idesaniya, and Sekhiya. ln other parts of the Vinaya, other
offences are called Thulla*kk*aya and Dukka*t*a. On this nomenclature
the Rev. S. Coles has founded a trenchant attack upon Buddhist morality.
He says:

   'Beside the Pârâjikas there are lesser faults, the nature of which is
determined by various causes, as will subsequently appear. These are
Sa<u>n</u>ghâdisesa, Thullaccaya, and Dukka*t*a faults, and can all be
easily remedied, the two latter especially; as, after a fault of this
kind has been committed, the culprit has only to confess to his
Upajjhâya (ordaining priest) without much delay, and is then exempted
from all evil consequences; but the Sa<u>n</u>ghâdisesa being more
serious (about half a Pârâjikâ), a course of penance has to be submitted
to, and confession without delay made to twenty-five superior Bhikkhus.
The nature <span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span> and extent of these
penances are not defined in the first book of the Vinaya Pi*t*aka, but
in others, to which reference will be made when these books are brought
under consideration. Suffice it to say, that they can possibly have no
deterring effect on crime, but rather form loop-holes through which most
enormous and disgusting misdeeds may be committed, and yet the
perpetrator may remain not only as a Buddhist, but as a Bhikkhu<span
id="page_xxv_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_xxv_note_1.md).'

   Mr. Coles then applies this argument to show that many offences
against morality, being only called Dukka*t*a and not Pârâ*g*ika, must
have been looked upon very leniently, not only by the Buddhists, but by
Gotama himself; and that therefore his system of morality was not of the
lofty kind it has usually been supposed to be, but was, in fact, a mere
cloak and encouragement to wickedness and crime!

   If Mr. Coles had looked at the Pi*t*aka he was discussing from a
historical, instead of from a controversial, point of view, he wouId
scarcely have advanced this argument. The use of the term Dukka*t*a does
not arise from, nor is it evidence of, a weakness in moral feeling; but
merely of a differenece in point of time: It occurs only in what we have
ventured above to call the Notes: that is to say, in the latest portion
of the Pi*t*aka. When the author or authors of the final recension of
the Vinaya had to speak of an offence not actually mentioned, though
impIied, in the text before them, they did not presume to call it by any
of the names applied in the Pâtimokkha itself to the classification of
offences. They no more dared to add to the number of Pârâ*g*ikâs, for
instance, than a clergyman would now venture seriously to propose an
addition to the Ten Commandments. They made use of two technical terms
(both entirely new ones), namely, Thulla*kk*aya and Dukka*t*a
(literally, Serious Transgression and Bad-deed), using the former more
sparingly, and for graver misdemeanours. No argument based on passages
where the word Dukka*t*a occurs can therefore have any force as to the
teaching of Gotama himself; and the Bhikkhus, who did use the <span
id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span> word, were restrained from using the older
term Pârâ*g*ika by a feeling of reverence towards their sacred books--a
feeling surely deserving, not of censure, but of sympathy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   Again, there are certain terms applied to various parts of the Vinaya
itself on which the above historical analysis may throw some light. When
Asoka, in the Edict of Bhabra, addressed to the Buddhist Order, exhorted
them to take as their authority, among other works, the Vinaya-Samukase,
or Abstract of the Vinaya, he may fairly be supposed to have referred to
the Pâtimokkha, which that epithet would very appropriately describe, If
it be asked why he did not then call it the Pâtimokkha, the explanation
may be either that that word is more especially a term for the act to be
performed, than for the liturgy which shows the way to perform it
(though, it was also undoubtedly used as a name of the liturgy), or else
that the work was known under both designations,

   We would just add, in passing, that, in the passage in question, the
reading samukase (samutkarsha), instead of the formerly accepted
samâkase, is quite clear in General Cunningham's lithograph<span
id="page_xxvi_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_xxvi_note_1.md); and the generally
accepted view that the Edict was addressed to a council, and is
therefore an authoritative confirmation of the Ceylon traditions
regarding the Council of Patna, ought to be reconsidered, The Edict
merely says: 'King Devânampiya of Mâgadha salutes the Sa*m*gha' (that
is, the Order, or the Community, of Bhikkhus)<span
id="page_xxvi_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_xxvi_note_2.md). Without desiring to
throw any doubt upon the reality of the Council of Patna, we are driven
to the conclusion that such an expression as 'the Sa*m*gha' could not
have been meant to describe a formal <span id="page_xxvii">p.
xxvii</span> council. Surely, if the Edict had been addressed to such a
council, the fact would have been plainly intimated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   It is just possible that Vinaya-Samukase may refer to the Old
Commentary as well as to the Pâtimokkha; but this is not probable, for
there is no reason to believe that in Asoka's time the Old Commentary
any longer existed apart from its set ting in the Vibha<u>n</u>ga. And
Vinaya-Samukase cannot for the reasons above stated mean, as has been
supposed, the Parivâra-pâ*th*a.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   As regards the meaning of the word Pâtimokkha we have the explanation
of the Old Commentator in that single passage of his work found, as
above pointed out, in the Khandhakas<span
id="page_xxvii_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_xxvii_note_1.md). He there describes it
as 'the origin, the front (mukha), the chief of the good Dhammas;' where
the word Dhammâ means 'qualities,' and where the evident inference is
that the commentator<span id="page_xxvii_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_xxvii_note_2.md) derived Pâtimokkha
from mukha. But, on the other hand, the tradition of the Northern
Buddhists, in whose Sanskrit works the word is replaced by Prâtimoksha,
points to a derivation from the root mu*k*.

   It seems scarcely open to doubt that we must, in accordance with this
last interpretation, connect the word with mu*k*, and not with mukha.
'Pratimukha' means in Sanskrit 'over against, standing close in front.'
How is it possible to derive from that any meaning appropriate as a
title for the liturgy of confession called Pâtimokkha? On the other
hand, the derivation from mu*k* is straightforward and simple.
Prati-mu*k* (âtmanep.) means 'to free oneself, to get rid of;' and it is
precisely through the recitation of this formular, and the answering of
the questions contained in it, that the conscience of the member of the
Brotherhood <span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span> was set free from
the sense or the offence he had incurred<span
id="page_xxviii_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_xxviii_note_1.md). Pâtimokkha or
Prâtimoksha means therefore 'Disburdening, Getting free.' The
lengthening or the first vowel in the Pâli word is not without analogies
which have been already adduced by Childers. It is certain that the word
is older than the present shape of the Formulary now so called; for it
is used several times in the Formulary itself, as well as in many or the
oldest Suttas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   The Old Commentator makes the Pâtimokkha 'the head of the good
Dhammas.' There is a curious passage in the Pâtimokkha where the Dhammas
are said to be included in the Suttas:

   'If a Bhikkhu at the half-monthly recitation of the Pâtimokkha should
say, "Now for the first time do I notice that this Dhamma, as one handed
down in the Suttas, embraced in the Suttas, gets recited every
half-month!" then' &c.<span id="page_xxviii_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_xxviii_note_2.md)

   It is plain here that neither Dhamma nor Sutta is used in the sense
to which we are accustomed from the later books. The Dhammas recited
half-monthly are those contained in the scheme of offences given in the
Pâtimokkha, and the Suttas must therefore mean the separate clauses of
that Formulary.

   The fact is that the use of the word Sutta is by no means confined in
the oldest Pâli to the texts of what was afterwards the Sutta Pi*t*aka,
nor is it exclusively used either in earlier or later times<span
id="page_xxviii_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_xxviii_note_3.md) in opposition to
Vinaya. Thus we find it used again, as we think, of the Rules of the
Pâtimokkha; and in contrast, as in the rule above quoted, to Dhamma, in
*K*ullavagga IV, 14, 22, 23:

   'This Bhikkhu, of such and such a name, is a preacher <span
id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span> of the Dhamma; but the Suttas have not
been handed down to him, nor the Sutta-Vibha<u>n</u>ga.'

   'This Bhikkhu, of such and such a name, is a preacher of the Dhamma,
and the Suttas have been handed down to him, but not the
Sutta-Vibha<u>n</u>ga<span id="page_xxix_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_xxix_note_1.md).'

   So again in the constantly repeated phrase above referred to--

   'If the two Pâtimokkhas are (or are not, as the connection requires)
thoroughly known to a Bhikkhu in their entirety with all their divisions
and explanations, if he have (or have not) thoroughly mastered them
Sutta by Sutta, and Detail by Detail; then' &c.<span
id="page_xxix_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_xxix_note_2.md)

--the word Sutta evidently refers to the clauses of the two Pâtimokkhas;
and we find also in the immediate context the mention of Dhamma or of
Vinaya, or of both.

   It is no doubt true that in one passage of the Mahâ-parinibbâna Sutta
(IV, 8-11 = pp. 39, 40), Sutta is opposed to Vinaya in much the same way
as Sutta Pi*t*aka was afterwards opposed to Vinaya Pi*t*aka; yet the
contrast between these two ideas is usually expressed by the apposition
of Dhamma to Vinaya<span id="page_xxix_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_xxix_note_3.md), and the passage in the
Mahâ-parinibbâna Sutta stands, so far as we yet know, quite alone.
Indeed in the oldest tradition the discourses or conversations now
called Suttas seem not to have been called by that name, but are
referred to as Suttantas.

   So in the Mahâvagga III, 5, 9, 12 mention is made of devout men, or
of devout women, who may have been accustomed to recite some well-known
Suttanta<span id="page_xxix_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_xxix_note_4.md); and in the next
Khandhaka (IV, 15, 4) we find Suttanta, Dhamma, and Vinaya all occurring
in one context:

   'It may happen, Brethren, that in some district on the day of
Pavâra*n*â the night may have become far spent <span id="page_xxx">p.
xxx</span> while the Brethren are in confusion--some reciting the
Dhamma, those versed in the Suttantas intoning some Suttanta together,
the custodians of the Vinaya discussing the Vinaya, and the preachers of
the Dhamma discoursing about the Dhamma.'

   The whole of these expressions recur in *K*ullavagga IV, 4, 4; and
are found again, with others of a similar character, in *K*ullavagga VI,
6, 2. This last passage is in the Introduction to a fable which of
course recurs, as a *G*âtaka, in the *G*âtaka collection, and with an
introduction in almost the same words. We should therefore expect to
find there also the epithet suttantika ('versed in the Suttantas'), if
that expression had remained in use as late as the fifth century A.D.;
but it is omitted, the Suttantikas having been then long since replaced
by those entrusted, not with the whole, but with special portions only,
of the Dhamma literature. The word Suttanta was however still in common
use at the time when the presumably later books now contained in the
Pi*t*akas were composed; for it occurs in the A<u>n</u>guttara
Nikâya<span id="page_xxx_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_xxx_note_1.md), and in a constantly
recurring verse in the Buddhava*m*sa in which it is opposed to
Vinaya<span id="page_xxx_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_xxx_note_2.md), and the word is still
used in the MSS. as the title of the more important Suttas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   In the passage quoted above from the *K*ullavagga IV, 14, 22, 23
there is a term Sutta-vibha<u>n</u>ga used as the name of some part of
the Vinaya literature apparently distinct <span id="page_xxxi">p.
xxxi</span> from the Suttas of the Pâtimokkha. 'The Suttas have been
handed down to him, but not the Suttavibha<u>n</u>ga.'

   The word recurs only in one other passage<span
id="page_xxxi_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_xxxi_note_1.md), and that is in the
appended Khandhakas of the *K*ullavagga, in the account of the Council
of Vesâlî<span id="page_xxxi_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_xxxi_note_2.md). Seven passages are
there quoted from the Pâtimokkha in condemnation of seven out of the Ten
Points raised by the heretics; and in answer to the question, ' Where
was it condemned?' and before the passages are quoted, the place where
the passage was uttered is mentioned, and condemnation is stated to be
'in the Suttavibha<u>n</u>ga.' Thus

   Revata says, 'Is it right, Lord, to drink *g*alogi?'

   Sabbakâmi replies, ' What, Friend, is this *g*alogi?'

   Revata: 'Is it right, Lord, to drink strong drink which not being
fermented, is not yet intoxicating?'

   Sabbakâmi: 'No, my friend, it is not right.'

   Revata: 'Where has it been condemned?'

   Sabbakâmi: 'At Kosambi in the Suttavibha<u>n</u>ga.'

   Revata: 'What does he (who drinks *g*alogi) commit?'

   Sabbakâmî: 'He commits the Pâ*k*ittiya offence of drinking strong
drink and of drinking intoxicating liquors.'

   This is a quotation, of the Pâ*k*ittiya Rule, No. 51; but the words
quoted do not in fact condemn the drinking of toddy, and neither the
Pâtimokkha nor the Old Commentary contains any reference to the place,
Kosambî, where the words are here said to have been uttered.

   It is only in the introduction afterwards appended (in what is now
called the Vibha<u>n</u>ga) to the two older works, that Kosambi is
mentioned; and in the appendix following the Rule 51 in the
Vibha<u>n</u>ga there are no exceptions which would include *g*alogi.
But Kosambî is mentioned in the Introductory History. It is therefore
most probable that the term Sutta-vibha<u>n</u>ga refers to what is now
called the Vibha<u>n</u>ga; or, if not, at least to that body of
traditional teaching (including the Pâtimokkha and the Old Commentary)
out of which the present Vibha<u>n</u>ga was composed.

<span id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span>

   It may be convenient to make some reference here to the question
whether the literature above discussed was handed down by memory only,
or by writing. We are justified in expecting to find, in texts dealing
in such minute detail with the daily life of the members of the Buddhist
Order, some distinct evidence--and it will be equally distinct whether
it consists in actual statement, or in silence--as to writing, and the
use of written books. And this expectation is not disappointed.

   In the first place, there are several passages which confirm in an
indisputable manner the existence of the art of writing at the time when
the Vinaya texts were put into their present shape.

   'A certain man, who had committed a theft, ran away, and got ordained
among the Bhikkhus. Now he was written up in the king's palace with an
injunction that he should be slain wheresoever he should be found<span
id="page_xxxii_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_xxxii_note_1.md).'--

   'But there occurred to the parents of Upâli this consideration: "If
Upâli should learn writing<span id="page_xxxii_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_xxxii_note_2.md), Upâli might thus
after our decease live at ease, and not be troubled."'

   And in the Vibha<u>n</u>ga we find an interesting explanation of the
Third Pârâ*g*ika Rule, which lays down that whosoever wilfully kills a
man, or brings about his death, must be expelled from the Order.

   In the Notes on this Rule the Sutta-vibha<u>n</u>ga discusses the
case of some one causing the death of another by persuading him that
suicide is glorious, or that it results in salvation. And in this
connection the possibility is considered of these representations being
made to the proposed victim, not by word of mouth, and not by a
messenger, but by writing.

   'He engraves a writing to this effect: "Who so dies, he acquires
wealth, or acquires fame, or goes to heaven." By that writing he is
guilty of a Dukka*t*a offence. The other sees the writing, and,
determining to die, is filled <span id="page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span>
with painful feelings. (The writer is) guilty of a Thulla*kk*aya
offence. He does die. (The writer is) guilty of a Pârâ*g*ika
offence<span id="page_xxxiii_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_xxxiii_note_1.md).'

   And again, with respect to the injunction addressed to the Sisters of
the Order not to devote themselves to worldly wisdom
(tira*kkh*âna-vi*gg*â), the Vibha<u>n</u>ga makes an exception in favour
of learning to write<span id="page_xxxiii_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_xxxiii_note_2.md).

   It is evident therefore that writing was in vogue in the time when
the Notes on the Rules were put into their present form, that it was
made use of for the publication of official announcements, and for the
drawing up of written communications in private life; and that while the
knowledge of the art was a possible source of livelihood, it was not
confined to 'clerks,' but was acquired by ordinary persons, and even by
women.

   But it is a long step from the use of writing for such public or
private notifications to the adoption of it for the purpose of recording
an extensive and sacred literature: and our texts show--and show, as it
seems to us, in an equally indisputable manner--that for this latter
purpose writing, however well known, had not yet come into use.

   Had the sacred texts been written down and read, books, manuscripts,
and the whole activity therewith connected, must have necessarily played
a very important part in the daily life of the members of the Buddhist
Order. Now the texts of the Vinaya place clearly enough before our eyes
the whole of the 'personal property,' so to speak, of the Buddhist
Ârâmas and Vihâras. Every movable thing, down to the smallest and least
important domestic utensils, is in some way or other referred to, and
its use pointed out; while the use of other articles, not usually found
in the Vihâras, is mentioned, and condemned. But nowhere do we find the
least trace of any reference to manuscripts; <span id="page_xxxiv">p.
xxxiv</span> much less of inks, or pens, or styles, or leaves, or other
writing materials.

   And we do find, on the contrary, passages which show the difficulties
which arose every time that the memorial tradition by word of mouth of
any of the sacred texts was interrupted, or threatened to be
interrupted.

   So, for instance, we find the case discussed of no one Bhikkhu, among
all the Brethren dwelling in some particular place, knowing the
Pâtimokkha. There was no other way out of the difficulty, save that of
one of the Bhikkhus being sent out to some neighbouring fraternity, with
the commission there to learn the Pâtimokkha by heart, either in its
full extent (that is, as we take it, all the rules being learnt in full)
or at least in abstract<span id="page_xxxiv_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_xxxiv_note_1.md).

   And again, in a passage already quoted, we hear of the case of an
Upâsaka, who knows some important Suttanta, and is afraid that the
knowledge of it will fade away. So he sends to a fraternity of Bhikkhus,
and invites the Brethren to come over to him; and in that case an
exception is made to the Rule forbidding the Brethren to travel in the
rainy season, provided only that they do not stay away from home longer
than seven days<span id="page_xxxiv_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_xxxiv_note_2.md).

   We may quote in this connection a passage of the same tendency from
the A<u>n</u>guttara Nikâya, in which, among the circumstances hurtful
to the security and the propagation of the Buddhist faith, the
possibility is mentioned of the well-instructed Bhikkhus neglecting to
take pains to hand on to others the Suttantas which they know. Then,
when they have passed away, 'the root of that Suttanta is cut off, and
it finds no place of refuge<span id="page_xxxiv_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_xxxiv_note_3.md).'

   It is very plain from these last passages that the Buddhist community
in its earliest days did not think of the <span id="page_xxxv">p.
xxxv</span> possibility of using writing as a means of guarding against
such painful accidents. Can this have arisen from any belief that
writing the books would have been an irreverent treatment of them? We
cannot think that among such a community as that of the Buddhists--who
were so advanced in their views that they deliberately adopted the
language of the people, and even took no thought, within the ranks of
their community, of caste--any such consideration would have prevailed.
It seems much more probable that, at the date referred to, the art of
writing had not been taken advantage of for the purposes of any kind of
literature; but that its use was wholly confined to recording short
messages or notes, or private letters, or advertisements of a public
character--a result which may well have been due to the want of any
practical material on which to engrave the letters that were
nevertheless evidently known<span id="page_xxxv_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_xxxv_note_1.md).

   On the texts above quoted, and the inferences which may fairly be
drawn from them, we would base two remarks. Firstly, that there can be
no reasonable ground for doubting the correctness of the ancient
tradition preserved in the well-known verse of the Ceylon Chroniclers,
when, speaking of the time of Va*tt*a Gâma*n*i, who began to reign 88
B.C., they say,

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>'The text of the Three Pi<em>t</em>akas, and the Commentary too thereon,<br />
The wise Bhikkhus of former time had handed down by word of mouth:<br />
The then Bhikkhus, perceiving how all beings do decay,<br />
Meeting together, wrote them in books, that the Dhamma might last long<span id="page_xxxv_fr_2"></span><a href="#page_xxxv_note_2"><sup><span class="small">2</span></sup></a>.'</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

But, secondly, though we must therefore believe that the <span
id="page_xxxvi">p. xxxvi</span> Vinaya, before it was reduced to
writing, was handed down for about three hundred years solely by memory,
and that it lived only in the minds of the Vinayadharâ, the Bhikkhus
'who were versed in the Vinaya,' we do not think it is at all necessary,
or even possible, to impugn the substantial accuracy of the texts handed
down in a manner that seems, to moderns, so unsafe. The Text, as it lies
before us, stands so well against all proofs, whether we compare its
different parts one with another, or with the little that is yet known
of its northem counterparts<span id="page_xxxvi_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_xxxvi_note_1.md), that we are justified
in regarding these Pâli books as in fact the authentic mirror of the old
Mâgadhî text as fixed in the central schools of the most ancient
Buddhist Church. That text, in the dialect of Magadha, may have been
lost to us, once for all; and we can scarcely hope, unless some isolated
sentences may hereafter be found preserved here and there in
Inscriptions, that this loss will ever be, even partially, made good.
But we may well be thankful that the faithful zeal and industry of these
old monks has preserved for us a translation, in a dialect so nearly
allied to the original, and in so perfect and trustworthy a state as the
Pâli version of the Vinaya still undoubtedly presents.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   We trust that the choice we have made from the literature of the
Vinaya Pi*t*aka for insertion in this Collection of Translations from
the Sacred Books of the East will be considered to need little
justification. As the oldest and in many respects most important
material of the Vinaya literature we have included a version of the
Pâtimokkha; though confining ourselves to the Bhikkhu-Pâtimokkha, <span
id="page_xxxvii">p. xxxvii</span> as our predecessors, Mr. Dickson and
Professor Minayeff, have done before us. We could not consider, even
after their labours, that a new translation of this difficult text would
be superfluous. And of the younger literature we have confined ourselves
to the Khandhakas, both because these books, in their variety, and in
the fulness of their contents, are better calculated to afford a correct
view of the conditions, and the life, of that oldest and most
influential of the many monkish orders, the Buddhist Sa*m*gha; and also
because the Sutta-vibha<u>n</u>ga is little more than an expansion of
the Pâtimokkha, which we have already, for the reasons just stated,
determined to include<span id="page_xxxvii_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_xxxvii_note_1.md).

<table data-align="right">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>T. W. RHYS DAVIDS.      <br />
H. OLDENBERG.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 

   <span class="small">November, 1880.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   ADDITIONAL NOTE ON MAHÂVAGGA III, 2, 2 (vassupanâyikâ).

   As entering upon Vassa is called vassa*m* upaga*kkh*ati or vassa*m*
upeti, we believe that upanâyikâ, the final member of the compound
vassupanâyikâ (entrance upon Vassa), must not be derived from upa-nî,
but from upa-i (upan-i). Comp. *S*atapatha-Brâhma*n*a II, 3, 2, 2:
ahar-ahar vai Na*d*o Naishidho Yama*m* râ*g*âna*m* dakshi*n*ata
upanayati (Sâya*n*a: upaga*kkh*ati). The preposition upan contained in
upan-ayati will be treated ofby Professor JOH. SCHMIDT . in the 26th
volume of Kuhn's Zeitschrift.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pâtimokkha - Nidâna](sbe1303.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_x">p. x</span>

<span id="page_x_note_1"></span>[1](#page_x_fr_1.md) The opening sentence
only is found in the Mahâvagga. See below, [p. xv](#page_xv.md).

<span id="page_x_note_2"></span>[2](#page_x_fr_2.md) Mahâvagga II, 1. 1.

<span id="page_x_note_3"></span>[3](#page_x_fr_3.md) Ibid. II, 4. 2.

<span id="footnotes_page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

<span id="page_xiii_note_1"></span>[1](#page_xiii_fr_1.md) Phayre MS., vol.
i. fol. kau.

<span id="page_xiii_note_2"></span>[2](#page_xiii_fr_2.md) *K*ullavagga
XII.

<span id="page_xiii_note_3"></span>[3](#page_xiii_fr_3.md) In the Ceylon
Chroniclers (Dîpava*m*sa, Bhâ*n*avâras 4 and 5) Upâli even becomes the
first in a series of Vinayapâmokkhâ, or 'Chiefs of the Vinaya;' but no
such office is known to the older tradition; and had it existed it would
certainly have been mentioned in connection with the dispute about the
so-called Ten Points of the Vinaya at the Conncil of Vesâlî.

<span id="footnotes_page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

<span id="page_xiv_note_1"></span>[1](#page_xiv_fr_1.md) For instance,
regulations as to the conduct of Brethren towards Sisters came together
in Pâ*k*ittiya 21-30; those about meal-times in Pâ*k*ittiya 31-40; about
conduct in relation to armies in Pâ*k*ittiya 48-50.

<span id="page_xiv_note_2"></span>[2](#page_xiv_fr_2.md) For instance,
Pâ*k*ittiya 5, 6, and 43-5; and again, Pâ*k*ittiya 20 and 62, &c.

<span id="footnotes_page_xv">p. xv</span>

<span id="page_xv_note_1"></span>[1](#page_xv_fr_1.md) With the following
paragraphs should be compared H. Oldenberg in the Introduction to his
edition of the Pâli text of the Vinaya, vol. i. pp. xvi and following.

<span id="footnotes_page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

<span id="page_xvi_note_1"></span>[1](#page_xvi_fr_1.md) See, for instance,
the comparison made by Oldenberg in the Introduction to his edition of
the text, vol. i. p. xviii. The Old Commentary follows of course the
passage there referred to in the Pâtimokkha.

<span id="footnotes_page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

<span id="page_xviii_note_1"></span>[1](#page_xviii_fr_1.md) No *k*e Upâli
bhikkhuno ubhayâni Pâtimokkhâni vitthârena svâgatmi honti suvibhattâni
suppavattîni suvini*kkh*itâni suttato anuvya*ñg*anaso, idam pan' âvuso
kattha vutta*m* Bhagavatâ 'ti iti pu*tth*o na sampâyati, tassa bhavanti
vattâro: I<u>n</u>gha tâva âyasmâ Vinaya*m* pariyâpu*n*assû 'ti: iti
'ssa bhavanti vattâro.

<span id="footnotes_page_xx">p. xx</span>

<span id="page_xx_note_1"></span>[1](#page_xx_fr_1.md) Mr. Dickson has
given us an excellent text of the Upasampadâ-kammavâ*k*â; and it were
much to be wished that the rest of them should also be published. Mr.
Clough has given a translation of six others in 'Miscellaneous
Translations from Oriental Languages,' London, 1834; and the Liverpool
Free Library has MSS. of others.

<span id="footnotes_page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

<span id="page_xxi_note_1"></span>[1](#page_xxi_fr_1.md)
Si<u>n</u>gilo*n*a, dva<u>n</u>gula, &c. (*K*ullavagga XII, 1, 10).

<span id="page_xxi_note_2"></span>[2](#page_xxi_fr_2.md) That is, as
war-cries; *g*âtarûpara*g*ata occurs in the sense of the precious
metals.

<span id="page_xxi_note_3"></span>[3](#page_xxi_fr_3.md) In the present
division of the Khandhakas into two parts, called the Larger and Smaller
Divisions (Mahâ- and *K*ulla-vagga), there are ten Khandhakas in the
first Division, and ten, apart from this appendix, in the second
Division. Without the appended two last Khandhakas the so-called smaller
Division is really considerably smaller than the larger Division; and
there is therefore a good reason for the name which was given to it.
With the two last Khandhakas the difference in length of the two
Divisions as a whole is not sufficiently striking to account
satisfactorily for the choice of their names; and the smaller Division
actually contains two more Khandhakas than the larger. We lay no stress
upon these facts, but it confirms the general argument to find little
points of this kind tending in the same direction.

<span id="footnotes_page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

<span id="page_xxiii_note_1"></span>[1](#page_xxiii_fr_1.md) See the
dissertation on this subject in Rhys Davids's 'Ancient Coins and
Measures of Ceylon;' and, more shortly, the close of the Introduction to
his 'Buddhist Suttas from the Pâli.'

<span id="footnotes_page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

<span id="page_xxiv_note_1"></span>[1](#page_xxiv_fr_1.md)

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Pubbâ<em>k</em>ariyamagga<em>ñ</em> <em>k</em>a pu<em>kk</em>itvâ <em>k</em>a tahim tahi<em>m</em><br />
Dîpo nâma mahâpa<em>ññ</em>o sutadharo vi<em>k</em>akkha<em>n</em>o<br />
Ima<em>m</em> vitthârasa<em>m</em>khepa<em>m</em> sa<em>ggh</em>âmaggena ma<em>ggh</em>ime<br />
Kintayitvâ likhâpesi sissakâna<em>m</em> sukhâvaha<em>m</em>.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="footnotes_page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

<span id="page_xxv_note_1"></span>[1](#page_xxv_fr_1.md) Journal of the
Ceylon Asiatic Society, 1867-1870. p. 115.

<span id="footnotes_page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

<span id="page_xxvi_note_1"></span>[1](#page_xxvi_fr_1.md) 'Corpus
Inscriptionum Indicarum,' pl. xv.

<span id="page_xxvi_note_2"></span>[2](#page_xxvi_fr_2.md) Burnouf
translated 'à l'assemblée du Magadha,' and Wilson, 'to the venerable
assembly of Mâgadha' (see 'Corpus,' &c., p. 131); but the reading is
clearly Mâgadhe in the 'Corpus,' while the older facsimile in the
Journal of the Bengal Asiatic Society (ix. 618) had the impossible form
Mâgdhe*m*. Even if we could read Mâgadha*m* sa*m*gha*m* (an expression
for which we know no parallel), the above remarks would still hold good.
Compare further, Professor Kem in the 'Jaartelling der Zuidelijke
Buddhisten,' pp. 30-35.

<span id="footnotes_page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

<span id="page_xxvii_note_1"></span>[1](#page_xxvii_fr_1.md) Pâtimokkhan ti
âdi*m* eta*m* mukha*m* eta*m* pamukha*m* eta*m* kusalâna*m* dhammâna*m*,
tena vu*kk*ati pâtimokkhan ti. Mahâvagga II, 3, 4.

<span id="page_xxvii_note_2"></span>[2](#page_xxvii_fr_2.md) We use the
phrase 'Old Commentator' for convenience only. The commentary was, no
doubt, handed down by tradition in the Buddhist schools; and there is no
reason to believe that it was the work of any one mind.

<span id="footnotes_page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

<span id="page_xxviii_note_1"></span>[1](#page_xxviii_fr_1.md) Compare
Mahâvagga II, 3, 3.

<span id="page_xxviii_note_2"></span>[2](#page_xxviii_fr_2.md) Yo pana
bhikkhu anvaddhamâsa*m* Pâtimokkhe uddissamâne eva*m* vadeyya; idân' eva
kho aham *g*ânâmi, ayam pi kira dhammo suttâgato suttapariyâpanno
anvaddhamâsa*m* uddesa*m* âga*kkh*attti, ta*ñ* *k*e . . . (the 73rd
Pâ*k*ittiya, quoted in *K*ullavagga III, 34, 2).

<span id="page_xxviii_note_3"></span>[3](#page_xxviii_fr_3.md) Though more
especially concerned here with the earlier use of the word Sutta, it may
be well to remind our readers of the name Suttadharâ applied in the
Suma<u>n</u>gala Vilâsinî to secular lawyers (see Alwis, 'Introd.' &c.,
p. 100).

<span id="footnotes_page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

<span id="page_xxix_note_1"></span>[1](#page_xxix_fr_1.md) Sutta*m* tassa
âgata*m* na Suttavibha<u>n</u>ga*m*. On the latter term see below.

<span id="page_xxix_note_2"></span>[2](#page_xxix_fr_2.md) Ubhayâni nu kho
Pâtimokkhâni vitthârena svâgatâni suvibhattâni suppavattîni
suvini*kkh*itâni suttato anuvya*ñg*anaso (Mahâvagga I, 36, 14; I, 37, 4;
*K*ullavagga IV, 4, 19; IX, 5, 1). Anuvya*ñg*ana may perhaps refer here
to the Old Commentary.

<span id="page_xxix_note_3"></span>[3](#page_xxix_fr_3.md) Compare H.
Oldenberg's Introduction to his edition of the Mahâvagga, pp. 7 and
following.

<span id="page_xxix_note_4"></span>[4](#page_xxix_fr_4.md) Abhi*ññ*âta*m*
vâ Suttanta*m* bha*n*ati.

<span id="footnotes_page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

<span id="page_xxx_note_1"></span>[1](#page_xxx_fr_1.md) The
A<u>n</u>guttara Nikâya, Pa*ñk*aka Nipâta (Phayre MS. vol. ii. fol.
gâ*h*): Ye te Suttantâ Tathâgatassa bhâvitâ gambhîrâ gambhîratthâ
lokuttarâ su*ññ*atapa*t*isa*m*yuttâ tesu bha*ññ*amânesu na sussissanti
no sota*m* odahissanti na a*ññ*â*k*itta*m* upa*tth*âpessanti na *k*a te
dhamme uggahetabba*m* pariyâpu*n*itabba*m* ma*ññ*issanti; ye pana te
suttantâ kathitâ kâveyyâ *k*ittakkharâ *k*ittabya*ñg*anâ bahirakâ
sâvakabhâsitâ tesu bha*ññ*amânesu sussissanti sota*m* odahissanti; &c.

Ibid. fol. na*h*: Ye te bhikkhû bahussutâ âgatâgamâ dhammadharâ
vinayadharâ mâtikâdharâ te na sakka*kk*a*m* suttanta*m* para*m*
vâ*k*enti, tesam a*kk*ayena *kh*innamûlako suttanto hoti
apa*t*isara*n*o.

On the form compare the Sanskrit d*ri*sh*t*ânta, v*ri*ttânta, and
siddhânta.

<span id="page_xxx_note_2"></span>[2](#page_xxx_fr_2.md)

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Suttanta<em>m</em> Vinaya<em>ñ</em> <em>k</em>âpi nava<u>n</u>ga<em>m</em> Satthusâsana<em>m</em><br />
Sabba<em>m</em> pariyâpu<em>n</em>itvâna sobhayi <em>G</em>inasâsana<em>m</em>.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

The phrase is used of various Buddhas in verses 317, 348, 594, 627, and
786 of the Buddhava*m*sa. This reference we owe to Dr. Morris.

<span id="footnotes_page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span>

<span id="page_xxxi_note_1"></span>[1](#page_xxxi_fr_1.md) That is, of the
Vinaya Pi*t*aka. We are not certain that it may not be found in the
Sutta Pi*t*aka.

<span id="page_xxxi_note_2"></span>[2](#page_xxxi_fr_2.md) *K*ullavagga
XII, 2, 8.

<span id="footnotes_page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span>

<span id="page_xxxii_note_1"></span>[1](#page_xxxii_fr_1.md) A*ññ*ataro
purisa *k*orika*m* katvâ palâyitvâ bhikkhûsu pabba*g*ito hoti. So *k*a
ra*ññ*o antepure likhito hoti yattha passitabbo tattha hantabbo 'ti
(Mahâvagga I, 43).

<span id="page_xxxii_note_2"></span>[2](#page_xxxii_fr_2.md) Sa*k*e *k*ho
Upâli lekha*m* sikkheyya (Mahâvagga I, 49, 1).

<span id="footnotes_page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span>

<span id="page_xxxiii_note_1"></span>[1](#page_xxxiii_fr_1.md) Lekha*m*
*kh*indati yo eva*m* marati sa dhana*m* vâ labhati yasa*m* vâ labhati
sagga*m* vâ ga*kkh*atîti. Akkharakkharâya âpatti dukka*t*assa. Lekha*m*
passitvâ marissâmîti dukkha*m* vedana*m* uppâdeti. Âpatti
thulla*kk*ayassa. Marati. Âpatti pârâ*g*ikassa.

<span id="page_xxxiii_note_2"></span>[2](#page_xxxiii_fr_2.md) Anâpatti
lekha*m* pariyâpu*n*âti (Bhikkhunî-Pâtimokkha. Pâ*k*ittiya 49).

<span id="footnotes_page_xxxiv">p. xxxiv</span>

<span id="page_xxxiv_note_1"></span>[1](#page_xxxiv_fr_1.md) Mahâvagga II,
17, 5. 6. On this meaning of vitthârena and sa*m*khittena see also
Mahâvagga ll, 15, 1. 2.

<span id="page_xxxiv_note_2"></span>[2](#page_xxxiv_fr_2.md) Mahâvagga III,
5, 9.

<span id="page_xxxiv_note_3"></span>[3](#page_xxxiv_fr_3.md)
*K*atukka-Nipâta (Phayre MS. vol. i. fol. *n*â); and repeated in the
Pa*ñk*aka-Nipâta (ibid. vol. ii. fol. <u>n</u>â*h*): Ye te bhikkhû
bahussutâ âgatâgamâ dhammadharâ vinayadharâ mâtikidharâ te na
sakka*kk*a*m* suttanta*m* para*m* vâ*k*enti tesa*m* a*kk*ayena
*kh*innamûllako suttanto hoti apa*t*isarano.

<span id="footnotes_page_xxxv">p. xxxv</span>

<span id="page_xxxv_note_1"></span>[1](#page_xxxv_fr_1.md) Compare Burnell,
'Elements of South Indian Palaeography,' p. 10.

<span id="page_xxxv_note_2"></span>[2](#page_xxxv_fr_2.md) Dîpava*m*sa XX,
20, 21; Mahâva*m*sa, p. 207. As the stanza is common to both works it is
taken in all probability, word for word, from the Old Commentary in
Si*m*halese, the Sîhala*tth*akathâ, preserved in the Mahâvihâra in
Anurâdhapura. See H. Oldenberg's Introduction to his edition of the
Dîpava*m*sa.

<span id="footnotes_page_xxxvi">p. xxxvi</span>

<span id="page_xxxvi_note_1"></span>[1](#page_xxxvi_fr_1.md) How little
this is, is apparent from the fact that Burnouf, who had studied all
those that were then accessible, did not even find the words pârâ*g*ika
and sa*m*ghâdisesa (Introduction, &c., p. 301). To the Tibetan texts
Csoma Körösi has devoted a few pages ('Analysis of the Dulva' in Asiatic
Researches, vol. xx. pp. 45 and foll.) Of the Chinese we have only the
brief notices of M. Rémusat (Foe Koue Ki, pp. 104 and foll.) and of Mr.
Beal (in H. Oldenberg's Introduction to the Vinaya, vol. i. pp. xliv,
xlv). The last scholar also mentions several Vinaya works, of the
contents of which however nothing further is known, in his Catalogue of
Chinese Buddhist Works now in the India Office Library (pp. 67-71).

<span id="footnotes_page_xxxvii">p. xxxvii</span>

<span id="page_xxxvii_note_1"></span>[1](#page_xxxvii_fr_1.md) For the
Upasampadâ-kammavâ*k*a see the passages recurring in the Khandhakas as
pointed out above. p. xix.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
