[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb12) [Next](bb14)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

# CHAPTER XIII<span id="page_15_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_15_note_3).

OF THE FORMATION OF ADAM.

   O<span class="small">N</span> the Friday, after the making of all
created things, God said, 'Come, let us make man in our image and in our
likeness<span id="page_15_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_15_note_4).' The Jews have
interpreted the expression 'Come, let us make,' as referring to the
angels; though God (adored be His glory!) needs not help from His
creatures: but the expositors of the Church indicate the Persons of the
adorable Trinity. Some say that when God said 'Come, let us make man in
our image and in our likeness,' the angels by the eye of the Spirit saw
the right hand (of God) spread out over the whole world, and there were
in it parts of all the creatures both spiritual and corporeal. And God
took from an these parts<span id="page_15_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_15_note_5), and fashioned Adam with
His holy hands, and breathed into him the breath of life, <span
id="page_16">p. 16</span> and man became a living soul<span
id="page_16_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_16_note_1). Others say that God took
earth from the four quarters of the world<span
id="page_16_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_16_note_2), and formed Adam outside
paradise; <span id="page_17">p. 17</span> while others say that God
fashioned him in the middle of the earth, on the spot where our Lord was
crucified, and that there also was <span id="page_18">p. 18</span>
Adam's skull laid. After God had formed Adam outside Paradise, He
brought him in as a king, and made him king over all the creatures, and
commanded him to give a name to each of them. God did not gather
together unto Adam all cattle, nor (all) that swim in the sea, nor (all)
the birds of the air, that he might give them names<span
id="page_18_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_18_note_1); but he received dominion
and power over them to make use of them as he pleased, and to give them
names, as a master to his slaves. And when God had brought him into
Paradise, He commanded him to till it and to guard it. Why did God say
'to till it and to guard it'?--for Paradise needed no guarding, and was
adorned with fruit of all kinds, and there was none to injure it--unless
it were to exhort him to keep His commandments, and to till it that he
might not become a lover of idleness. Because Adam had not seen his own
formation, and was not acquainted with the power of his Maker, it was
necessary that, when Eve was taken from him in his own likeness, he
should perceive his Maker, and should acknowledge that He who made Eve
also made him, and that they two were bound to be obedient to Him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb14)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_15"></span>p. 15

<span id="page_15_note_3"></span>[3](#page_15_fr_3) Chap. xiv in the
Oxford MS.

<span id="page_15_note_4"></span>[4](#page_15_fr_4) [Gen. i.
26](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#1:26).

<span id="page_15_note_5"></span>[5](#page_15_fr_5) Among other things,
Jewish tradition says that the first Adam had two faces; that he was
formed in two parts, on the one side male, and on the other female; that
in height he reached from earth to heaven (Chagîgâh, p. 12, col. 1); and
that he could stretch from one end of the world to the other (*Sêpher
<u>H</u>asîdîm*, No. 500).

<span id="footnotes_page_16"></span>p. 16

<span id="page_16_note_1"></span>[1](#page_16_fr_1) [Gen. ii.
7](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#2:7).

<span id="page_16_note_2"></span>[2](#page_16_fr_2) See Bezold, *Die
Schatzhöhle*, pp. 3 and 4; and Brit. Mus. Add. 25,875, [fol. 4 *b*, col.
1](../bct/bct04.htm#fol_4b1), line 23 to fol. 5 *b*, col. 1, line 14:
'The creation of Adam was on this wise. On the sixth day, which is
Friday, at the first hour, <span id="footnotes_page_17"></span>p. 17
when silence reigned over all the ranks of the (heavenly) hosts, God
said, "Come, let us make man in our image after our likeness"--hereby
making known concerning the glorious Persons (of the Trinity). When the
angels heard these words they were in fear and trembling, saying one to
another, "We shall see a great miracle to-day, the likeness of God our
Maker." And they saw the right hand of God stretched out and extended
over the whole world; and all created things were collected in the palm
of His right hand. And they saw that He took a grain of dust from all
the earth, a drop of water from the whole nature of water, a breath of
wind from all the atmosphere above, and a little warmth from all the
nature of fire. And the angels saw when these four feeble elements--that
is, cold and heat and dryness and moisture--were laid in the palm of His
right hand, and God formed Adam. For what reason did God make Adam out
of these four elements, unless it were that through them everything in
the world should be subject unto him? He took a grain of dust, that all
natures which are of dust might be subject unto Adam; and a drop of
water, that all those in the seas and rivers might be his; and a breath
of air, that all kinds of birds of the air might be given unto him; and
the heat of fire, that all the fiery beings and (heavenly) hosts might
come to his aid. And God formed man with His holy hands, in His image
and likeness. When the angels saw his glorious appearance, they trembled
at the beauty of his appearance; for they saw the form of his face
blazing with glorious beauty like the sphere of the sun, and the light
of his eyes was like the sun, and the form of his body like the light of
crystal. And when he stretched himself, and stood in the centre of the
earth, he set his two feet on the spot where the cross of our Redeemer
was placed: for Adam was created in Jerusalem, and there it was that he
put on royal apparel, and the crown of glory was set upon his head; and
there was he made king and priest and prophet, there did God set him
upon the throne of His glory; and there He made him master over all
creatures. And all beasts and cattle and fowl were gathered together,
and they passed before Adam and he gave them names; and they bowed their
heads to him, and all natures did homage to him and were subject unto
him. And the angels and (heavenly) hosts heard the voice of God saying
to him, "Adam, behold I have made thee king and priest and prophet and
lord and chief and governor of all things made and created; to thee
shall they be subject, and thine shall they be: and I have given thee
power over everything that I have created." And when the angels heard
these words, they all blessed and worshipped him.'

<span id="footnotes_page_18"></span>p. 18

<span id="page_18_note_1"></span>[1](#page_18_fr_1) So also Bar Hebraeus
in the *Au<u>s</u>ar Râzê* or Horreum Mysteriorum, Brit. Mus. Add.
21,580, fol. 32 *a*, col. 1.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
