[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb22) [Next](bb24)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

# CHAPTER XXIII<span id="page_38_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_38_note_4).

OF THE SUCCESSION OF GENERATIONS FROM THE FLOOD UNTIL NOW<span
id="page_38_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_38_note_5).

   S<span class="small">HEM</span> was a hundred years old, and begat
Arphaxar two years after the flood; the sum of his years was six
hundred. Arphaxar was a <span id="page_39">p. 39</span> hundred and
thirty-five years old, and begat <u>K</u>ainan. <u>K</u>ainan was a
hundred and thirty-nine years old, and begat Shâlâ<u>h</u>: the sum of
his years was four hundred and thirty-eight. Shâlâ<u>h</u> was a hundred
and thirty years old<span id="page_39_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_39_note_1), and begat Eber; the sum
of his years was four hundred and thirty-three. Eber was a hundred and
thirty-four years old, and begat Peleg; the sum of his years was four
hundred and sixty-four. Peleg was a hundred and thirty years old, and
begat Reu; the sum of his years was a hundred and thirty-nine. In the
days of Reu the languages were divided into seventy and two; up to this
time there was only one language<span
id="page_39_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_39_note_3), which was the parent of
them all, namely, Aramean, that is Syriac. Reu was a hundred and
thirty-two years old, and begat Serug; the sum of his years was a
hundred and thirty-nine<span id="page_39_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_39_note_4). Serug was a hundred and
thirty years old, and begat Nahor; the sum of his years was a hundred
and thirty years<span id="page_39_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_39_note_5). In the days of Serug men
worshipped idols and graven images. Nahor was seventy and nine years
old<span id="page_39_fr_6"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">6</span></sup>](#page_39_note_6), and begat Terah; the sum
of his years was one hundred and forty-eight. In the days of Nahor magic
began in the world<span id="page_39_fr_7"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">7</span></sup>](#page_39_note_7). <span id="page_40">p.
40</span> And God opened the storehouse of the winds and whirlwinds<span
id="page_40_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_40_note_1), and they uprooted the
idols and graven images, and they collected them together and buried
them under the earth, and they reared over them these mounds that are in
the world. This was called 'the Wind Flood.' <span id="page_41">p.
41</span> Terah was seventy years old, and begat Abraham; the sum of his
years was one hundred and five years<span
id="page_41_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_41_note_1). So it is two thousand
two hundred and forty-two years from Adam to the flood; and one thousand
and eighty-one years from the flood to the birth of Abraham; and from
Adam to Abraham it is three thousand three hundred and thirteen
years<span id="page_41_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_41_note_2). And know, my brother
readers, that there is a great difference between the computation of
Ptolemy<span id="page_41_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_41_note_3) and that of the Hebrews
and the Samaritans; for the Jews take away one hundred years from the
beginning of the years of each (patriarch), and they add them to the end
of the years of each of them, that they may disturb the reckoning and
lead men astray and falsify the coming of Christ, and may say, 'The
Messiah is to come at the end of the world, and in the last times;' and
behold, according to their account, He came in the fourth millenium, for
so it comes out by their reckoning.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb24)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_38"></span>p. 38

<span id="page_38_note_4"></span>[4](#page_38_fr_4) In the Oxford MS.
chap. xxvi.

<span id="page_38_note_5"></span>[5](#page_38_fr_5) [Genesis, chap.
xi](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#11:1). The numbers of the years of the
Patriarchs agree neither with the Hebrew nor the LXX.

<span id="footnotes_page_39"></span>p. 39

<span id="page_39_note_1"></span>[1](#page_39_fr_1) In the Oxford MS.
138 years.

<span id="page_39_note_3"></span>[3](#page_39_fr_3) 'From Adam until
that time they all spoke this language, that is to say Syriac, which is
Aramean; for this language is the king of all languages. The early
writers have erred, in that they say that Hebrew was the primitive
language; and here have they mingled ignorant error with their writings.
For all the tongues that are in the world are taken from Syriac, and all
the languages in books are mixed with it.' Bezold, *Die Schatzhöhle*, p.
21; Brit. Mus. Add. 25,875, [fol. 22 *a*, col.
1](../bct/bct06.htm#fol_22a1).

<span id="page_39_note_4"></span>[4](#page_39_fr_4) [Gen. xi.
20](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#11:20), 21, two hundred and thirty-nine.

<span id="page_39_note_5"></span>[5](#page_39_fr_5) [Gen. xi.
22](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#11:22), 23, two hundred and thirty.

<span id="page_39_note_6"></span>[6](#page_39_fr_6) [Gen. xi.
24](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#11:24), twenty-nine.

<span id="page_39_note_7"></span>[7](#page_39_fr_7) According to the
'Cave of Treasures,' the origin of magic was this: 'In the days of
Terah, in his ninetieth year, magic appeared on the earth in the city of
<span id="footnotes_page_40"></span>p. 40 Ur, which Horon the son of
Eber had built. Now there was in it a certain man who was very rich, and
he died about that time. His son made for him an image of gold, and set
it up on his grave; and he put a youth to watch it. Then Satan went and
dwelt in that image, and he used to speak to the young man in the form
of his father. But thieves went in and stole everything which the young
man possessed; and he went to his father's grave weeping. And Satan
spake with him, saying, "Weep not before me, but go, bring thy little
son, and sacrifice him to me as a sacrifice; and everything which thou
hast lost shall be restored to thee immediately." So he straightway did
as Satan commanded him; and he slew his son, and bathed in his blood.
Then Satan went forth from the image immediately, and entered into the
young man, and taught him magic, incantation, divinations, chaldeeism,
destinies, haps, and fates. And behold, from that time men began to
sacrifice their children to demons and to worship idols, for the demons
went in and dwelt in all the images. In the one hundredth year of Nahor,
when God saw that men sacrificed their children to devils, and bowed
down to idols, He opened the storehouses of the wind.' Bezold, *Die
Schatzhöle*, p. 32; Brit. Mus. Add. 25,875 [fol. 23 *b*, col.
1](../bct/bct07.htm#fol_23b1), line 19 to fol. 24 *a*, col. 1 line 2.

<span id="page_40_note_1"></span>[1](#page_40_fr_1) Schoenfelder,
*custodiam spirituum et superorum!*

<span id="footnotes_page_41"></span>p. 41

<span id="page_41_note_1"></span>[1](#page_41_fr_1) In the Oxford MS.
205 years.

<span id="page_41_note_2"></span>[2](#page_41_fr_2) Read 3323 years. In
the Oxford MS. 3330 years.

<span id="page_41_note_3"></span>[3](#page_41_fr_3) I.e. the Septuagint.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
