[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb23) [Next](bb25)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

# CHAPTER XXIV<span id="page_41_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_41_note_4).

OF THE BUILDING OF THE TOWER AND THE DIVISION OF TONGUES<span
id="page_41_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_41_note_5).

   W<span class="small">HEN</span> Reu was born in the days of Peleg,
the sons of Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japhet, together with Arphaxar and
their children, were gathered together in Shinar. And they took counsel
together, saying, 'Come, let us build for ourselves a high tower, the
top of which shall be in the heavens, lest a flood come again upon us,
and destroy us from off the face of the earth.' And they began to make
bricks and to build, until (the tower) was reared a great height from
the ground. Then they determined to build seventy-two other towers
around it, and to set up a chief over each tower to govern those who
were under his authority. God saw the weariness of their oppression and
the hardness of their toil, and in His mercy had compassion upon them;
for the higher they went, the more severe became their labour, and their
pain went on increasing, by reason of the violence of the winds and
storms and the heat of the <span id="page_42">p. 42</span> luminaries
and the necessity of carrying up everything they needed. And God said,
'Come, let us go down and divide the tongues there.' The expression
'Come, let us,' resembles 'Come, let us make man in our image and in our
likeness,' and refers to the persons of the adorable Trinity. While they
were tormenting themselves with that vain labour, their language was
suddenly confounded so as to become seventy-two languages, and they
understood not each other's speech, and were scattered throughout the
whole world, and built cities, every man with his fellow who spoke the
same language. From Adam to the building of the tower, there was only
one language, and that was Syriac. Some have said that it was Hebrew;
but the Hebrews were not called by this name until after Abraham had
crossed the river Euphrates and dwelt in <u>H</u>arrân; and from his
crossing they were called Hebrews. It was grievous to Peleg that the
tongues were confounded (or, that God had confounded the tongues of
mankind) in his days, and he died; and his sons Serug and Nahor buried
him in the town of Pâlgîn, which he built after his name.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb25)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_41"></span>p. 41

<span id="page_41_note_4"></span>[4](#page_41_fr_4) In the Oxford MS.
chap. xxvii.

<span id="page_41_note_5"></span>[5](#page_41_fr_5) [Gen.
xi.](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#11:1)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
