[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb24) [Next](bb26)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

# CHAPTER XXV<span id="page_42_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_42_note_1).

OF ABRAHAM<span id="page_42_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_42_note_2).

   T<span class="small">ERAH</span> the father of Abraham took two
wives; the one called Yônâ, by whom he begat Abraham; the other called
Shelmath, by whom he begat Sarah. Mâr Theodore says that Sarah was the
daughter of Abraham's uncle, and puts the uncle in the place of the
father. When Abraham was seventy-five years old, God commanded him to
cross the river Euphrates and to dwell in <u>H</u>arrân. And he took
Sarah his wife and Lot his nephew, and crossed the river Euphrates and
dwelt in <u>H</u>arrân. In his eighty-sixth year his son Ishmael was
born to him of Hagar the Egyptian woman, the handmaid of Sarah, whom
Pharaoh the king gave to her when he restored her to Abraham; and God
was revealed to him under the oak of Mamre. Abraham was a hundred years
old when Isaac, the son of promise, was born to him; and on the eighth
day he circumcised himself, his son, and every one born in his house.
When God commanded Abraham to offer up Isaac <span id="page_43">p.
43</span> upon the altar, He sent him for sacrifice to the special place
where, according to the tradition of those worthy of belief, our Lord
was crucified. After the death of Sarah, Abraham took to wife Kentôrah
(Keturah), the daughter of Ya<u>kt</u>ân, the king of the Turks. When
Isaac was forty years old, Eliezer the Damascene, the servant of
Abraham, went down to the town of Arâch (Erech), and betrothed Raphkâ
(Rebecca), the daughter of Bethuel the Aramean, to Isaac his lord's son.
And Abraham died at the age of one hundred and seventy-five years, and
was laid by the side of Sarah his wife in the 'double cave<span
id="page_43_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_43_note_1),' which he bought from
Ephron the Hittite; When Isaac was sixty years old, there were born unto
him twin sons, Jacob and Esau: At that time Arbêl was built; some say
that the king who built it was called Arbôl. In Isaac's sixty-sixth year
Jericho was built. Esau begat Reuel; Reuel begat Zerah; Zerah begat
Jobab, that is Job.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb26)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_42"></span>p. 42

<span id="page_42_note_1"></span>[1](#page_42_fr_1) In the Oxford MS.
chap. xxviii.

<span id="page_42_note_2"></span>[2](#page_42_fr_2) [Gen.
xii](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#12:1) and following.

<span id="footnotes_page_43"></span>p. 43

<span id="page_43_note_1"></span>[1](#page_43_fr_1) Ibn Ezra explains it
by 'a cave within a cave.'

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
