[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb35) [Next](bb37)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

# CHAPTER XXXVI<span id="page_79_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_79_note_3).

OF THE BIRTH OF OUR LORD IN THE FLESH.

   O<span class="small">NE</span> year before the annunciation of our
Lord, the emperor of the Romans sent to the land of Palestine
Cyrinus<span id="page_79_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_79_note_4) the governor, to write
<span id="page_80">p. 80</span> down every one for the poll-tax, for the
Jews were subject to the empire of the Romans; and every man was written
down in his city. And Joseph the carpenter also went up that he might be
written down in his city; and by reason of his exceeding great
watchfulness for the blessed (Mary), he took her with him upon an ass.
When they had gone about three miles, Joseph looked at her and saw that
her hand was laid upon her belly, and that her face was contracted with
pain; and he thought that she was troubled by the beast, and asked her
about her trouble and pain. She said to him, 'Hasten and prepare a place
for me to alight, for the pains of childbirth have taken hold upon me.'
When he had lifted her down from the animal, he went to fetch a midwife,
and found a Hebrew woman whose name was Salome<span
id="page_80_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_80_note_1). The heretics say that
she was called <u>H</u>adyôk, but they err from the truth. When Joseph
came to the cave, he found it full of brilliant light, and the child
wrapped in swaddling clothes and rags, and laid in a crib. And there
were shepherds there keeping watch over their flocks, and behold the
angel of God came to them, and the glory of the Lord shone upon them;
and they feared with an exceeding great fear. The angel said to them,
'Fear not, for behold, I announce to you a great joy which shall be to
all the world; for there is born to you this day a Redeemer, who is the
Lord Jesus, in the city of David: and this shall be <span
id="page_81">p. 81</span> the sign unto you; ye shall find the babe
wrapped in swaddling clothes, and laid in a crib.' And suddenly with the
angel there appeared many hosts of heaven, praising God and saying,
'Glory to God in the heights, and on earth peace and tranquillity and
good hope to men.' And the shepherds went and entered the cave, and they
saw as the angel had said to them. The names of the shepherds were
these: Asher, Zebulon, Justus, Nicodemus, Joseph, Barshabba, and Jose;
seven in number.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb37)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_79"></span>p. 79

<span id="page_79_note_3"></span>[3](#page_79_fr_3) Chap. xl in the
Oxford MS.

<span id="page_79_note_4"></span>[4](#page_79_fr_4) [Luke ii.
1](../../bib/kjv/luk.htm#2:1)-2. The name is written in the MSS. of 'the
Bee' Κυρι̑νος {Greek: *Kurinos*} = Quirinus.

<span id="footnotes_page_80"></span>p. 80

<span id="page_80_note_1"></span>[1](#page_80_fr_1) The extract from the
History of the Virgin runs as follows: 'When they drew near to
Bethlehem, Mary said to Joseph, "The day of giving birth has come, and
the birth-pains will not allow me to reach the city; let us enter this
cave, for my womb . . . . . ." When she had gone into the cave, Joseph
ran to call a woman to be with her. And lo, while he was running, there
met him an old Samaritan woman, who was travelling from Jerusalem to go
to Bethlehem. Joseph said to her, "Come, O blessed matron, and go into
this cave, where there is a woman giving birth to a child." When the old
woman came, Joseph was mixing for her . . . . . ., and they had nothing
in the cave. When they went in they saw,' etc. Some words seem to have
been omitted in the MS. in the third line. See Cowper, *Apoc. Gospels*,
p. 51; the notes in Thilo, *Codex Apoc.*, p. 377; and Wright, *Contrib.
to the Apoc. Lit. of the New Test.*, pp. 2 and 3. In the Gospel of
Pseudo-Matthew *two* midwives are mentioned, Zelomi and Salome;
Tischendorf, *Evangelia Apoc.*, p. 75.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
