[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb41) [Next](bb43)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

# CHAPTER XLII<span id="page_91_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_91_note_4).

OF OUR LORD'S FAST; OF THE STRIFE WHICH HE WAGED WITH THE DEVIL<span
id="page_91_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_91_note_5); AND OF THE MIGHTY DEEDS
THAT HE WROUGHT.

   T<span class="small">WO</span> days after His baptism, He chose eight
of the twelve disciples; and on the third day He changed the water into
wine in the city of Cana. After He went forth from the wilderness, He
completed the number of the twelve, according to the number of the
tribes of the children of Israel and according to the number of the
months. After the twelve disciples, He chose seventy and two, according
to the number of the seventy-two elders. When He went out to the desert
after He had changed the water into wine, He fasted forty days and forty
nights. <span id="page_92">p. 92</span> Some say that our Lord and the
devil were waging war with one another for forty days; others say that
the three contests took place in one day. After He had conquered the
devil by the power of His Godhead, and had given us power to conquer
him, He began to teach the nations. He wrought miracles, healed the
sick, cleansed the lepers, cast out devils, opened the eyes of the
blind, made the lame walk, made cripples stand, gave hearing to the
deaf, and speech of tongue to the dumb. He satisfied five thousand with
five loaves, and there remained twelve basketfuls; and with seven loaves
and two fishes He satisfied four thousand (men), besides women and
children, and there remained seven basketfuls. And some writers say that
our Lord satisfied forty thousand men and women and children with five
loaves. He walked upon the water and the sea as upon dry land. He
rebuked the sea when it was disturbed, and it ceased from its
disturbance. He raised up four dead; the daughter of Jairus, the widow's
son, the servant of the centurion, and His friend Lazarus after (he had
been dead) four days. He subjected Himself to the ancient law of Moses,
that it might not be thought He was opposed to the divine commandments;
and when the time came for Him to suffer, and to draw nigh to death that
He might make us live by His death, and to slay sin in His flesh, and to
fulfil the prophecies concerning Him, first of all He kept the Passover
of the law; He dissolved the old covenant, and then He laid the
foundation for the new law by His own Passover.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb43)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_91"></span>p. 91

<span id="page_91_note_4"></span>[4](#page_91_fr_4) In the Oxford MS.
chap. xlvi.

<span id="page_91_note_5"></span>[5](#page_91_fr_5) [Matt. chap.
iv](../../bib/kjv/mat.htm#4:1).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
