[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb46) [Next](bb48)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

# CHAPTER XLVII<span id="page_102_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_102_note_3).

OF THE DESCENT OF THE HOLY SPIRIT UPON THE APOSTLES IN THE UPPER
CHAMBER.

   T<span class="small">EN</span> days after our Lord's Ascension, when
the holy apostles were assembled in the upper chamber waiting for the
promise of our Lord, of a sudden, at the third hour of the holy Sunday
of Pentecost, a mighty sound was heard, so that all men were terrified
and marvelled at the mightiness of the sound; and the chamber was filled
with an ineffably strong light. And there appeared over the head of each
one of them (something) in the form of tongues of fire, and there
breathed forth from thence a sweet odour which surpassed all aromas in
this world. The eyes of their hearts were opened, and they began
interpreting new things and uttering wonderful things in the languages
of all nations. When the Jews saw them, they thought within themselves
that they had been drinking new wine and were drunk, and that their
minds were depraved. On that day they participated in the mystery of the
body and blood of our Lord, and sanctified the leavened bread of the
sign of the cross (the eucharistic wafers) and the oil of baptism.

   Some men have a tradition that when our Lord broke His body for <span
id="page_103">p. 103</span> His disciples in the upper chamber, John the
son of Zebedee hid a part of his portion until our Lord rose from the
dead. And when our Lord appeared to His disciples and to Thomas with
them, He said to Thomas, 'Hither with thy finger and lay it on My side,
and be not unbelieving, but believing.' Thomas put his finger near to
our Lord's side, and it rested upon the mark of the spear, and the
disciples saw the blood from the marks of the spear and nails. And John
took that piece of consecrated bread, and wiped up that blood with it;
and the Easterns, Mâr Addai and Mâr Mârî, took that piece, and with it
they sanctified this unleavened bread which has been handed down among
us<span id="page_103_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_103_note_1). The other disciples did
not take any of it, because they said, 'We will consecrate for ourselves
whenever we wish.' As for the oil or baptism, some say that it was part
of the oil with which they anointed the kings; others say that it was
part of the unguent wherewith they embalmed our Lord; and many agree
with this (statement). Others again say that when John took that piece
of consecrated bread of the Passover in his hand, it burst into flame
and burnt in the palm of his hand, and the palm of his hand sweated, and
he took that sweat and hid it for the sign of the cross of baptism. This
account we have heard by ear from the mouth of a recluse and visitor
(περιοδευτής {Greek: *periodeuths*}), and we have not received it from
Scripture. The word Pentecost is interpreted 'the completion of fifty
days.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb48)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_102"></span>p. 102

<span id="page_102_note_3"></span>[3](#page_102_fr_3) In the Oxford MS.
chap. lii, fol. 181 *a*.

<span id="footnotes_page_103"></span>p. 103

<span id="page_103_note_1"></span>[1](#page_103_fr_1) See Assemânî,
*Bibl. Orient.*, t. iii, pt. i, pp. 239, 241, 358, and 608.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
