[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb49) [Next](bb51)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

# CHAPTER L<span id="page_115_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_115_note_1).

OF SOME MINOR MATTERS.

   T<span class="small">HESE</span> are they who were married among the
apostles: Peter, the chief of the apostles; Philip the Evangelist; Paul;
Nathaniel, who is Bartholomew; Labbaeus, who is Thaddaeus, who is Judah
the son of Jacob; Simon the Cananite, who is Zelotes, who is Judah the
son of Simon.

   The child whom our Lord called and set (in the midst), and said,
'Except ye be converted, and become as children, ye shall not enter into
the kingdom of heaven<span id="page_115_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_115_note_2),' was Ignatius, who
became patriarch of Antioch. He saw in a vision the angels ministering
in two bands, and he ordained that (men) should minister in the church
in like manner<span id="page_115_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_115_note_3). After some time this
order was broken through; and when Diodorus went with his father on an
embassy to the land of Persia, and saw that they ministered in two
bands, he came to Antioch his country, and re-established the custom of
their ministering in two bands<span
id="page_115_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_115_note_4).

   The children whom they brought near to our Lord, that He might lay
His hand upon them and pray, were Timothy and Titus, and they were
deemed worthy of the office of bishop.

   The names of the Maries who are mentioned in the Gospels. Mary the
Virgin, the mother of our Lord; Mary the wife of Joseph; Mary the mother
of Cleopas and Joseph; Mary the wife of Peter, the mother of Mark the
Evangelist; and Mary the sister of Lazarus. Some say that Mary the
sinner is Mary of Magdala; but others do not agree <span
id="page_116">p. 116</span> with this, and say that she was other than
the Magdalene. Those who say that she was the Magdalene tell us that she
built herself a tower with the wages of fornication; and those who say
that she was other than the Magdalene, say that Mary Magdalene was
called after the name of her town Magdala, and that she was a pure and
holy woman.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb51)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_115"></span>p. 115

<span id="page_115_note_1"></span>[1](#page_115_fr_1) The Oxford MS.
omits the following three chapters.

<span id="page_115_note_2"></span>[2](#page_115_fr_2) [Matt. xviii.
2](../../bib/kjv/mat.htm#18:2). See Nicephorus, *Hist*., bk. ii, chap.
iii.

<span id="page_115_note_3"></span>[3](#page_115_fr_3) Socrates, *Eccles.
Hist.*, chap. viii.

<span id="page_115_note_4"></span>[4](#page_115_fr_4) Assemânî thinks
that this embassy is a mistake on the part of Solomon, arising from his
having misunderstood a pasage in Theodoret, *Hist. Eccles.*, lib. 2,
cap. xxiv. See *Bibl. Orient.*, t. iii, pt. i, p. 321.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
