[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb56) [Next](bb58)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

# CHAPTER LVII<span id="page_133_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_133_note_1).

OF THE QUICKENING AND THE GENERAL RESURRECTION, THE CONSUMMATION OF THE
MATERIAL WORLD AND THE BEGINNING OF THE NEW WORLD.

   A<span class="small">FTER</span> Elijah comes and conquers the son of
destruction, and encourages the believers, for a space and a time which
is known to God alone, there will appear the living sign of our Lord's
Cross, honoured and borne aloft in the hands of the Archangel Gabriel.
Its light will overpower the light of the sun, to the reproach and
putting to shame of the infidels and the crucifying Jews. As soon as the
life-giving Cross appears before our Lord, as the Doctor saith, 'His
victory comes before Him,' etc., then a powerful light will fill the
whole vaulted space between the heavens and the earth, the radiance and
light whereof will be above all (other) lights; and suddenly will the
mighty sound of the first trumpet of the Archangel be heard, concerning
which our Lord said, 'At midnight there will be a cry, "Behold the
Bridegroom cometh, go ye forth to meet Him<span
id="page_133_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_133_note_2)."' At this trumpet the
sun shall become dark, the moon shall not display its light, the stars
shall drop from the heavens like leaves, and the powers of the heavens
shall be moved. The earth shall totter and tremble, the mountains and
hills shall melt, the sea shall be disturbed and shall cause terrible
sounds to be heard. The rivers shall submerge the earth, the trees shall
be uprooted, buildings shall fall, towns and villages shall be
overturned, and high walls and strong towers shall be thrown down. The
wild beasts and cattle and fowl and fish shall come to an end and
perish; and everything shall be destroyed, except a few human beings who
<span id="page_134">p. 134</span> shall remain alive, and whom the
resurrection shall overtake, of whom Paul has said, 'We who are left
shall not overtake them that sleep<span
id="page_134_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_134_note_1),' meaning to say that
those who are found alive at the time of the resurrection will not sleep
the sleep of death; as the apostle says again, 'Behold I tell you a
mystery; we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed<span
id="page_134_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_134_note_2).' As touching the
heavens, some say that they will be rent, and that the waters which are
above the firmament will descend, for it is not possible for the
substance of water to pass through the substance of the firmament.
Others say that as water passes through a tree or a piece of pottery,
and sweat through the skin, so also will men enter into heaven and not
be prevented, and (in like manner too) will the waters descend from
above. Others say that the firmament will be rolled up like the curtain
of a tent.

   The second trumpet is that at the sound of which the firmament will
be opened, and our Lord will appear from heaven in splendour and great
glory. He will come down with the glory of His divinity as far as
two-thirds of the distance between the firmament and the earth, whither
Paul ascended in the spirit of revelation<span
id="page_134_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_134_note_3). He will then make an
end of the son of perdition, and destroy him body and soul, and He will
hurl Satan and the devils into Gehenna.

   The third trumpet is the last, at which the dead will rise, and the
living be changed, as the blessed Paul says, 'Swiftly, as in the
twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet when it sounds; and the dead
shall rise without corruption, and we shall be changed<span
id="page_134_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_134_note_4).' So swiftly and
speedily will the resurrection of all men be wrought, according to the
spiritual nature of the new world. For the swiftness of the resurrection
will surpass the swiftness of understanding, and the spiritual hosts
alone see and know in what manner it will take place, every man being
suddenly found standing in his spirituality. Some men therefore have a
tradition that the resurrection of the righteous and the just and the
believers will precede that of other men, who are remote from the true
faith; but according to the opinion of the truthful and of people
generally, the resurrection of the <span id="page_135">p. 135</span>
whole human race will take place quicker than lightning and than the
twinkling of an eye; from the generation of Adam to the latest
generation they shall rise at the last trumpet. And though, according to
the opinion of the Expositor<span id="page_135_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_135_note_1), many sounds will be
heard on that night, each one of which is a sign of what will happen,
yet, according to the consent of the greater part of the expositors and
of Scripture, three distinct trumpets will sound by which the whole work
of the resurrection will be completed and finished. Michael the
expositor and exegete, however, says otherwise in the book of
Questions<span id="page_135_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_135_note_2), speaking as follows:
'The world will not pass away and be dissolved before the vivification
of the dead, but the coming of our Lord will be seen first of all, who
will come with the spiritual hosts; and immediately our Lord's power
will compel the earth to give up the parts of the bodies of men who have
been slain and have become dust and ashes within it; and there will be a
making ready and preparation of the souls to receive their bodies all
together. If, before the vivification of the dead, the world and all
that is therein were to pass away, from whence pray would the dead rise?
Those who say that the world will pass away before the vivification of
the dead are fools and simpletons; for Christ will not make the world
pass away before the vivification of the dead, but He will first of all
raise the dead, and men will see with their eyes the passing away of the
world, the uprooting of the elements, and the destruction of the heavens
and the earth and the sun and the moon and the stars; and from here
sorrow will begin to reign in the mind of the wicked, and endless joy in
the mind of the righteous.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb58)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_133"></span>p. 133

<span id="page_133_note_1"></span>[1](#page_133_fr_1) In the Oxford MS.
chap. lviii, fol. 202 *b*.

<span id="page_133_note_2"></span>[2](#page_133_fr_2) [Matt. xxv.
6](../../bib/kjv/mat.htm#25:6).

<span id="footnotes_page_134"></span>p. 134

<span id="page_134_note_1"></span>[1](#page_134_fr_1) Solomon is quoting
[1 Thes. iv. 15](../../bib/kjv/th1.htm#4:15) (P<u>e</u>shî<u>t</u>tâ).

<span id="page_134_note_2"></span>[2](#page_134_fr_2) [1 Cor. xv.
51](../../bib/kjv/co1.htm#15:51).

<span id="page_134_note_3"></span>[3](#page_134_fr_3) [2 Cor. xii.
2](../../bib/kjv/co2.htm#12:2).

<span id="page_134_note_4"></span>[4](#page_134_fr_4) [1 Cor. xv.
52](../../bib/kjv/co1.htm#15:52).

<span id="footnotes_page_135"></span>p. 135

<span id="page_135_note_1"></span>[1](#page_135_fr_1) Probably Theodore
of Mopsuestia.

<span id="page_135_note_2"></span>[2](#page_135_fr_2) See Assemânî,
*Bibl. Orient.*; t. iii, pt. i, p. 147; Hoffmann, *Opusc. Nest.*, p.
xxi.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
