[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb58) [Next](bb60)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

# CHAPTER LIX<span id="page_137_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_137_note_1).

OF THE HAPPINESS OF THE RIGHTEOUS AND THE TORMENT OF SINNERS, AND IN
WHAT STATE THEY ARE THERE.

   I<span class="small">T</span> is right for us to know and explain how
those suffer, who suffer in Gehenna. If they do suffer, how can we say
that they are impassible? and if they do not suffer, then there is no
torture for sinners; and if there be no torture for sinners in
proportion to their sins, neither can there be happiness for the
righteous as a reward for their labours. The suffering wherewith the
Fathers say that sinners will suffer in Gehenna is not one that will
pain the limbs, such as the blows of sticks, the mutilation of the
flesh, and the breaking of the bones, but one that will afflict the
soul, such as grief for the transgression of what is right, repentance
for shameful deeds, and banishment from one to whom he is bound in love
and for whom his affection is strong. For in the resurrection we shall
not be without perception, like the sun which perceives not his
splendour, nor the moon her brilliancy, nor the pearl its beauty; but by
the power of reason we shall feel perfectly the delight of our happiness
or the keen pain of our torture. So then by that which enables the
righteous to perceive the pleasure of their happiness, by that selfsame
thing will the wicked also perceive the suffering of their torment;
(that is) by the power capable of receiving pleasure, which is the
intelligence. Hence it is right for us to be certain that intelligence
will not be taken <span id="page_138">p. 138</span> away from us, but it
will receive the utmost purification and refinement. The glorious and
good things of the world which is to come are not to be compared with
those of this world; for if all the glorious and good things and
delights of this world were given to us in the world which is to come,
we should look upon them as hateful and abominable, and they would not
be able to give us pleasure or to gladden us; and our nature by the
blessedness of its immortality would be exalted above all their glory
and desirability. And if all the torments and afflictions and troubles
of this world were brought near to us in the world which is to come, the
pain of them would make no impression upon our immortal and immutable
nature. Hence the pleasure of that world is something beyond all
comparison more glorious and excellent and exalted than those of this
world; and the torment of yonder is likewise something beyond all
comparison more severe and more bitter than any that is here.

   It is also right for us to explain the quality of the light of the
righteous. The light of the righteous is not of a natural origin like
this elemental light (of ours), but some of the light of our Lord--whose
splendour surpasses ten thousand suns--is diffused and shed upon them.
Each saint shines in proportion to his purity, and holiness and
refinement and sincerity, as the blessed Paul has said, 'One star
surpasseth another in glory, so also is the resurrection of the
dead<span id="page_138_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_138_note_1).' And although all the
saints will be happy in one kingdom, yet he who is near to the King or
the Bridegroom will be separated from him whose place is at the end of
the guest-chamber, even though his place be in the same chamber. So also
with the sinners in Gehenna; their sentence will not be alike, for in
proportion to the sin of each will be his torment. And as the light of
the sun is not to be compared with the light of the moon, nor is the
light of the moon like that of the stars, so also will the happiness of
the righteous be, although the name and honour of righteousness be laid
upon and spread over all of them. And as the light of our Lord's
humanity will pass over all our limbs without distinction, and take the
place of dress and ornament for us, so also with all our members shall
we perceive the suffering and torment of Gehenna. The festal garments
which our Lord has prepared for His saints, the children <span
id="page_139">p. 139</span> of light, are impassibility; and the filthy
garments which hinder us from entering into the spiritual bridal-chamber
are the passions. In the new world there will be no distinctive names
for ranks and conditions of human beings; and as every name and surname
attributed to God and the angels had its origin from this world, and
names for human beings were assigned and distributed by the government
of this world, in the world of spiritual and intellectual natures there
will be neither names nor surnames among them, nor male nor female, nor
slave nor free, nor child nor old man, nor Ethiopian nor Roman (Greek);
but they will all rise in the one perfect form of a man thirty-three
years of age, as our Lord rose from the dead. In the world to come there
will be no companies or bands but two; the one of the angels and the
righteous, who will mingle and form one Church, and the other of the
devils and sinners in Gehenna.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb60)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_137"></span>p. 137

<span id="page_137_note_1"></span>[1](#page_137_fr_1) In the Oxford MS.
chap. lx, fol. 205 *b*.

<span id="footnotes_page_138"></span>p. 138

<span id="page_138_note_1"></span>[1](#page_138_fr_1) [1 Cor. xv.
41](../../bib/kjv/co1.htm#15:41), 43.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
