[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Petronius](../index)  [Index (Latin)](../satyrlat/index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sat00)  [Next](sat02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# INTRODUCTION

Tacitus writes (Annals, XVI. Chapters 17 and 18-20, A.D. 66): "Within a
few days, indeed, there perished in one and the same batch, Annaeus
Mela, Cerialis Anicius, Rufius Crispinus and Petronius. . . . With
regard to Caius Petronius, his character and life merit a somewhat more
particular attention. He passed his days in sleep, and his nights in
business, or in joy and revelry. Indolence was at once his passion and
his road to fame. What others did by vigor and industry, he accomplished
by his love of pleasure and luxurious ease. Unlike the men who profess
to understand social enjoyment, and ruin their fortunes, he led a life
of expense, without profusion; an epicure, yet not a prodigal; addicted
to his appetites, but with taste and judgment; a refined and elegant
voluptuary. Gay and airy in his conversation, he charmed by a certain
graceful negligence, the more engaging as it flowed from the natural
frankness of his disposition. With all this delicacy and careless ease,
he showed, when he was Governor of Bithynia, and afterwards in the year
of his Consulship, that vigor of mind and softness of manners may well
unite in the same person. With his love of sensuality he possessed
talents for business. From his public station he returned to his usual
gratifications, fond of vice, or of pleasures that bordered upon it. His
gayety recommended him to the notice of the Prince. Being in favor at
Court, and cherished as the companion of Nero in all his select parties,
he was allowed to be the arbiter of taste and elegance. Without the
sanction of Petronius nothing was exquisite, nothing rare or delicious.

"Hence the jealousy of Tigellinus, who dreaded a rival in the good
graces of the Emperor almost his equal; in the science of luxury his
superior. Tigellinus determined to work his downfall; and accordingly
addressed himself to the cruelty of the Prince,--that master passion, to
which all other affections and every motive were sure to give way. He
charged Petronius with having lived in close intimacy with Scaevinus,
the conspirator; and to give color to that assertion, he bribed a slave
to turn informer against his master. The rest of the domestics were
loaded with irons. Nor was Petronius suffered to make his defense.

"Nero at that time happened to be on one of his excursions into
Campania. Petronius had followed him as far as Cumae, but was not
allowed to proceed further than that place. He scorned to linger in
doubt and fear, and yet was not in a hurry to leave a world which he
loved. He opened his veins, and closed them again, at intervals losing a
small quantity of blood, then binding up the orifice, as his own
inclination prompted. He conversed during the whole time with his usual
gayety, never changing his habitual manner, nor talking sentences to
show his contempt of death. He listened to his friends, who endeavored
to entertain him, not with grave discourses on the immortality of the
soul or the moral wisdom of philosophers, but with strains of poetry and
verses of a gay and natural turn. He distributed presents to some of his
servants, and ordered others to be chastised. He walked out for his
amusement, and even lay down to sleep. In this last scene of his life he
acted with such calm tranquillity, that his death, though an act of
necessity, seemed no more than the decline of nature. In his will he
scorned to follow the example of others, who like himself died under the
tyrant's stroke; he neither flattered the Emperor nor Tigellinus nor any
of the creatures of the Court. But having written, under the fictitious
names of profligate men and women, a narrative of Nero's debauchery and
his new modes of vice, he had the spirit to send to the Emperor that
satirical romance, sealed with his own seal,--which he took care to
break, that after his death it might not be used for the destruction of
any person whatever.

"Nero saw with surprise his clandestine passions and the secrets of his
midnight revels laid open to the world. To whom the discovery was to be
imputed still remained a doubt. Amidst his conjectures, Silia, who by
her marriage with a Senator had risen into notice, occurred to his
memory. This woman had often acted as procuress for the libidinous
pleasures of the Prince, and lived besides in close intimacy with
Petronius. Nero concluded that she had betrayed him, and for that
offense ordered her into banishment, making her a sacrifice to his
private resentment."

Two questions arise out of this famous passage: 1. Is Petronius
(Arbiter), author of the Satyricon, the same person as the Caius
Petronius here described, and spoken of by the Historian as "elegantiae
arbiter" at the Court of Nero? 2. Is the existing Satyricon the
"satirical romance" composed by the Emperor's victim during his dying
hours and sent under seal to the tyrant?

Both points have been long and vigorously debated, but may now be taken
as fairly well settled by general consent,--the answer to the first
query being Yes! To the second, No!

The Introductory Notice to Petronius, in the noble "Collection des
Auteurs Latins," edited by M. Nisard, sums up the controversy thus: "Is
Petronius, here mentioned by Tacitus, the Author of the Satyricon, and
are we to regard this work as being the testamentary document addressed
to Nero of which the Historian speaks?" These two questions so long and
eagerly disputed, may be looked upon as decided by this time. The
Consular, the favorite of Nero, the "arbiter of taste and elegance" at
the Imperial Court, is generally acknowledged to be our Petronius
Arbiter; whose book, diversified as it is with "strains of poetry and
verses of a gay and natural turn," with its tone of good company and its
easy-going Epicurean morality, is so much in keeping with the cheerful,
uncomplaining death of the pleasure-loving courtier who understood his
master's little peculiarities, and had, like Trimalchio, adopted for his
motto, "Vivamus, dum licet esse,"--"Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow
we die." At any rate in our own opinion, this first point is finally and
definitely decided.

"Can this satire (The Satyricon) be the testament of irony and hate
which the victim sent to his executioner? To this further question we
answer No!--and our personal conviction on the point is shared by the
most weighty authorities. We will limit ourselves here to one or two
observations. According to Tacitus, Petronius had already caused his
veins to be opened, when he started to recapitulate the series of Nero's
debaucheries in this deposition. The document therefore must necessarily
have been brief; whereas the work we possess, too extensive as it stands
to have been composed by a dying man, was originally of much greater
length, for it seems proved by the titles affixed to the Manuscripts
that nearly nine-tenths of the whole is lost. Besides, Petronius had
expressly limited his statement to an account of Nero's secret
debaucheries, with no further disguise beyond the use of fictitious
names,--'under the names of profligate men and women.' Lastly the
extremely varied character of the Work is diametrically opposed to a
view, making it out to have been a personal libel, a piece of abuse that
only stops short of giving the actual name of the individual pilloried."

What is known of Petronius himself, the man Petronius?--Granting an
affirmative answer may be given to question 1, something; but even then
not much.

His name was Caius Petronius; he was a Roman Eques or Knight, born at
Massilia (Marseilles). Even these initial points are not quite firmly
established; Pliny and Plutarch speak of Titus Petronius, and the facts
of his being an Eques and his birth at Marseilles rest on conjectural
evidence. He was successively Proconsul of Bithynia, and Consul, in both
which high offices he showed integrity, energy and ability.

He was in high favor at the Court of Nero, where he devoted his
undoubted talents and genial wit to the amusement of the Prince, the
systematic cultivation of an elegant and luxurious idleness and the
elaboration of a refined profligacy. He won the title among his fellow
courtiers of "arbiter elegantiae," a nickname that with time appears to
have grown into a sort of surname, posterity knowing him universally as
Petronius Arbiter.

Eventually he incurred the jealousy and enmity of Nero's all-powerful
Minister, Tigellinus, who contrived his ruin. Informed against for
conspiracy, or at any rate association with conspirators, he voluntarily
opened his veins. Displaying much fortitude and a fine indifference, he
died calmly and composedly, spending his last hours in merry
conversation with his friends, the recitation of light-hearted verses
and the composition of a candid and circumstantial account of the
Emperor's debaucheries, which he sent under seal to his Master as his
dying bequest.

Pliny (1) and Plutarch (2) add further touch, that previous to his death
he broke to pieces a Murrhine vase of priceless value, which was amongst
his possessions, to prevent its falling into the tyrant's hands.

As to his great work, the so-called Satyricon, its characteristics and
place in literature, we cannot do better than quote from what Professor
Ramsey says of it in the "Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography": "A
very singular production, consisting of a prose narrative interspersed
with numerous pieces of poetry, and thus resembling in form the
Varronian Satire, has come down to us in a sadly mutilated state. In the
oldest MSS. and the earliest editions it bears the title Petronii
Arbitri Saturicon, and as it now exists, is composed of a series of
fragments, the continuity of the piece being frequently interrupted by
blanks, and the whole forming but a very small portion of the original,
which, when entire, contained at least sixteen books, and probably many
more. It is a sort of comic romance, in which the adventures of a
certain Encolpius and his companions in the south of Italy, chiefly in
Naples or its environs, are made a vehicle for exposing the false taste
which prevailed upon all matters connected with literature and the fine
arts, and for holding up to ridicule and detestation the folly, luxury
and dishonesty of all classes of the community in the age and country in
which the scene is laid. A great variety of characters connected for the
most part with the lower ranks of life are brought upon the stage, and
support their parts with the greatest liveliness and dramatic propriety,
while every page overflows with ironical wit and broad humor.
Unfortunately the vices of the personages introduced are depicted with
such minute fidelity that we are perpetually disgusted by the coarseness
and obscenity of the descriptions. Indeed, if we can believe that such a
book was ever widely circulated and generally admired, that fact alone
would afford the most convincing proof of the pollution of the epoch to
which it belongs. . . .

"The longest and most important section is generally known as the Supper
of Trimalchio, presenting us with a detailed and very amusing account of
a fantastic banquet, such as the most luxurious and extravagant
gourmands of the empire were wont to exhibit on their tables. Next in
interest is the well-known tale of the Ephesian Matron, which here
appears for the first time among the popular fictions of the Western
world, although current from a very early period in the remote regions
of the East. . . . The longest of the effusions in verse is a
descriptive poem on the Civil Wars, extending to 295 hexameter lines,
affording a good example of that declamatory tone of which the Pharsalia
is the type. We have also 65 iambic trimeters, depicting the capture of
Troy (Troiae Halosis), and besides these several shorter morsels are
interspersed replete with grace and beauty."

Teuffel in his masterly "History of Roman Literature" is brief, but to
the point, in what he says of the Satyricon: "To Nero's time belongs
also the character-novel of Petronius Arbiter, no doubt the same
Petronius whom Nero (A.D. 66) compelled to kill himself. Originally a
large work in at least 20 books, with accounts of various adventures
supposed to have taken place during a journey, it now consists of a heap
of fragments, the most considerable of which is the Cena Trimalchionis,
being the description of a feast given by a rich and uneducated upstart.
Though steeped in obscenity, this novel is not only highly important for
the history of manners and language, especially the plebeian speech, but
it is also a work of art in its way, full of spirit, fine insight into
human nature, wit of a high order and genial humor. In its form it is a
satira Menippea, in which the metrical pieces interspersed contain
chiefly parodies of certain fashions of taste."

"The narrator and hero of the romance," Nisard writes in his Preliminary
Notice to "Petronius," "is a sort of Guzman d'Alfarache, a young
profligate, over head and ears in debt, without either fortune, or
family, and reduced, with all his brilliant qualitites, to live from
hand to mouth by dint of a series of more or less hazardous expedients.
The pictures he draws with such a bold and lifelike touch change and
shift without plan or purpose, following each other with the same abrupt
inconsequence we observe in real life; and we are strongly tempted to
conclude Petronius has largely depicted in them the actual phases of his
own, that of a self-made adventurer, appropriating as his own with
extraordinary success the tone of persiflage and the ironical outlook on
existence of a man of high birth and station. With equal ease he sounds
the most contradictory notes. Verse and prose, precepts of rhetoric and
of ethics, scenes of profligate indulgence, comic descriptions of a
feast where luxury is carried to ludicrous extremes, anecdotes told in
the happiest manner, notably the world-famous tale of the Ephesian
Matron, epic poetry even, love letters and love talk breathing a
refined, almost chivalric, spirit,--such is the strange fabric of this
drama, at once passionate, derisive, fanfaronading, tragic and
burlesque, where the grand style and the most graceful narrative tread
on the heels of provincial patois and popular saws. . . .

"Petronius' book belongs essentially to the class of Satirae Menippeae,
of which Varro had given the first example in the works he composed in
imitation of the Greek Menippus, and of which Seneca's Apocolocyntosis
is another capital instance."

All critics agree upon the excellence of the Satyricon as a work of art,
though many take exception to the grossness of the subject matter.
Indeed there can be no two opinions as to the brilliancy and refinement
of our Author's style generally; while the vivid picturesqueness of the
narrative on the one hand, and the perfect adaptation of the language to
the rank and idiosyncrasy of the interlocutors on the other, are
particularly noteworthy. "The very criticisms which have been launched
against Petronius are mingled with admiring panegyric which a due regard
for truth has forced from his assailants; and in the mouth of an enemy,
praise counts for much more than blame. Even the barbarisms and
vulgarities of expressions that at times seem to disfigure his style,
are in the eyes of Menage the perfection of art and appropriateness; he
puts them only in the mouths of servants and debuachees devoid of any
touch of refinement. Note on the other hand with what elegance he makes
his well-born characters speak. Petronius assigns to each one of his
actors the language most suited to him. This is a merit precious in
direct ratio to its rarity; the shadows with which a skillful painter
darkens his canvas, only serve to bring out in more startling relief the
beauties of the picture. Justus Lipsius epigrammatically styles him
auctor purissimae impuritatis." (Heguin de Guerle.)

The first thing to strike us is the brilliancy and liveliness of the
book--fragmentary as is the condition in which it has come down to
us--as a Novel of Adventure. The reader is hurried on, his interest
forever on the stretch, from episode to episode of the exciting, and
more often than not scandalous, adventures of the disreputable band of
light-hearted gentlemen of the road, whose leader is that most audacious
and irresponsible of amiable scamps, Encolpius, the narrator of the
moving tale. With the exception of the six chapters devoted to
describing the glories and absurdities of Trimalchio's Feast, which form
a long episode apart, and a most entertaining one, the action never
pauses. From lecture-room to house of ill fame, from country mansion to
country tavern, from the market for stolen goods in a city slum to the
Chapel of Priapus, from a harlot's palace to a rich parvenu's table,
from Picture Gallery to the public baths, from ship and shipwreck to a
luxurious life of imposture in a wealthy provincial town, we are hurried
along in breathless haste. The pace is tremendous, but the road bristles
with hairbreadth escapes and stirring incidents, and is never for one
instant dull or tame. Probably the nearest parallel in other literatures
is the so-called picaresque romances of Spain, of which Don Pablo de
Segovia; Lazarillo de Tormes; and, if we regard it of Spanish origin,
the incomparable Gil Blas de Santillana, may be taken as typical
examples.

A mere Novel of Adventure then? Not so! The Satyricon is this; but it is
a great deal besides. It abounds in clear-sighted and instructive
apercus on education, literature and art, and contemporary deficiencies
in these domains; its prose is interspersed with many brilliant
fragments of verse, mostly parodies and burlesques, some ludicrous, some
beautiful. Over and above its merits as a tale, it is a copious literary
miscellany, over-flowing with wit and wisdom, drollery and sarcasm.

Last but not least, this work of fine, if irregular, genius contains
probably the most lifelike and discriminating character painting in the
realm of everyday life to be found in all the range of ancient
literature. To appreciate this, it is only necessary to name three or
four of the principal dramatis personae:--

Encolpius, the gay, unprincipled profligate, but never altogether
worthless, narrator of the story;

Ascyltos, his comrade and rival, as immoral and good for nothing as the
other, but without his redeeming touch of gentlemanliness and "honor
among thieves";

Giton, the minion, changeable and capricious, with his pretty face and
wheedling ways;

Tryphaena, the beautiful wanton, who "travels the world for her
pleasures";

Lichas, the overbearing and vindictive merchant and Sea-captain;
Quartilla, the lascivious and unscrupulous votary of Priapus; Circe, the
lovely "femme incomprise" of Croton; and finally, the never to be
forgotten Eumolpus, the mad poet, the disreputable and starving pedant,
at once "childlike and bland" with an ineffable naivete of simple
conceit, and frankly given up to the pursuit of the most abominable
immoralities, now bolting from the shower of stones his ineradicable
propensity for reciting his own poetry has provoked, now composing
immortal verse, calm amid the horrors of storm and wreck and utterly
oblivious of impending death.

Another point, the admirably clever adaptation of the language to the
social position and character of the persons speaking, merits a word or
two more. While both the general narrative, and the conversation of the
educated dramatis personae, Eumolpus for instance, are marked by a high
degree of correctness of diction and elegance of phrase, the talk of
such characters as Trimalchio and his freedmen friends, Habinnas and the
rest, and other uneducated or half-educated persons, is full not merely
of vulgarisms and popular words, but of positive blunders and downright
bad grammar. These mistakes of course are intentional, and it is only
another proof of the lack of humor and want of common sense that often
marked the industrious and meritorious scholars, particularly German
scholars, of the old school, that some commentators have actually gone
out of their way to correct these errors in the text of Petronius. There
are hundreds of them; two or three examples must suffice here. Libra
rubricata says Trimalchio (Ch. VII.--xlvi), meaning libros rubricatos,
"lawbooks," and vetuo "I forbid," while his guests indulge in such
glaring solecisms as malus fatus, exhortavit, naufragarunt. The whole of
Chapter VII., where Trimalchio's guests converse freely with one another
in the temporary absence of their host, and afterwards Trimalchio
harangues the company on various subjects, is full of these diverting
"bulls."

From the philologist's point of view the book is particularly valuable
as containing almost our only specimens of the Roman popular, country
speech,--the lingua Romana rusticana, so all important as the link
between literary Latin and the Romance languages of modern Europe. Two
or three examples again must suffice: minutus populus, exactly the
modern French "le menu peuple," urceatim plovebat, "it rained in
bucketfuls," non est miscix, "he's no shirker," bono filo est, "he has
good stuff in him." It is also a storehouse of popular saws and sayings,
sometimes of a fine, vigorous outspokenness, not to say coarseness of
expression, such as: caldum meiire et frigidum potare, "to piss hot and
drink cold"; sudor per bifurcam volabat, "the sweat was pouring down
between my legs"; lassus tanquam caballus in clivo, "as tired as a
carthorse at a hill."

"In addition to the corruptions in the text," says Professor Ramsay,
"which are so numerous and hopeless as to render whole sentences
unintelligible, there are doubtless a multitude of strange words and of
phrases not elsewhere to be found; but this circumstance need excite no
surprise when we remember the various topics which fall under
discussion, and the singular personages grouped together on the scene.
The most remarkable and startling peculiarities may be considered as the
phraseology appropriate to the characters by whom they are uttered, the
language of ordinary conversation, the familiar slang in everyday use
among the hybrid population of Campania, closely resembling in all
probability the dialect of the Atellan farces. On the other hand,
wherever the author may be supposed to be speaking in his own person, we
are deeply impressed by the extreme felicity of the style, which, far
from bearing marks of decrepitude or decay, is redolent of spirit,
elasticity, and vigorous freshness."

As to the text, the following remarks by Professor Ramsay, give a
complete statement which it is impossible to improve upon. "Many
attempts," he writes, "have been made to account for the strangely
mutilated condition in which the piece has been transmitted to modern
times. It has been suggested by some that the blanks were caused by the
scruples of pious transcribers, who omitted those parts which were most
licentious; while others have not hesitated to declare their conviction
that the worst passages were studiously selected. Without meaning to
advocate this last hypothesis--and we can scarcely believe that Burmann
was in earnest when he propounded it--it is clear that the first
explanation is altogether unsatisfactory, for it appears to be
impossible that what was passed over could have been more offensive than
much of what was retained. According to another theory, what we now
possess must be regarded as striking and favorite extracts, copied out
into the common-place book of some scholar in the Middle Ages; a
supposition applicable to the Supper of Trimalchio and the longer
poetical essays, but which fails for the numerous short and abrupt
fragments breaking off in the middle of a sentence. The most simple
solution of the difficulty seems to be the true one. The existing MS.
proceeded, in all likelihood, from two or three archetypes, which may
have been so much damaged by neglect that large portions were rendered
illegible, while whole leaves and sections may have been torn out or
otherwise destroyed.

"The Editio Princeps of the fragments of Petronius was printed at
Venice, by Bernardinus de Vitalibus, 1499; and the second at Leipzig, by
Jacobus Thanner, in 1500; but these editions, and those which followed
for upwards of a hundred and fifty years, exhibited much less than we
now possess. For, about the middle of the seventeenth century, an
individual who assumed the designation of Martinus Statilius, although
his real name was Petrus Petitus, found a MS. at Traun in Dalmatia,
containing nearly entire the Supper of Trimalchio, which was wanting in
all former copies. This was published separately at Padua, in a very
incorrect state, in 1664, without the knowledge of the discoverer, again
by Petitus himself at Paris, in the same year, and immediately gave rise
to a fierce controversy, in which the most learned men of that day took
a share, one party receiving it without suspicion as a genuine relic of
antiquity, while their opponents, with great vehemence, contended that
it was spurious. The strife was not quelled until the year 1669, when
the MS. was dispatched from the Library of the proprietor, Nicolaus
Cippius, at Traun, to Rome, where, having been narrowly scrutinized by
the most competent judges, it was finally pronounced to be at least
three hundred years old, and, since no forgery of such a nature could
have been executed at that epoch, the skeptics were compelled
reluctantly to admit that their doubts were ill founded. The title of
the Codex, commonly known as the Codex Traguriensis, was Petronii
Arbitri Satyri Fragmenta ex libro quinto decimo et sexto decimo, and
then follow the words 'Num alio genere furiarum,' etc.

"Stimulated, it would appear, by the interest excited during the
progress of this discussion, and by the favor with which the new
acquisition was now universally regarded by scholars, a certain Francis
Nodot published at Rotterdam, in 1693, what professed to be the
Satyricon of Petronius complete, taken, it was said, from a MS. found at
Belgrade, when that city was captured in 1688, a MS. which Nodot
declared had been presented to him by a Frenchman high in the Imperial
service. The fate of this volume was soon decided. The imposture was so
palpable that few could be found to advocate the pretensions put forth
on its behalf, and it was soon given up by all. It is sometimes,
however, printed along with the genuine text, but in a different type,
so as to prevent the possibility of mistake. Besides this, a pretended
fragment, said to have been obtained from the monastery of St. Gall, was
printed in 1800, with notes and a French translation by Lallemand, but
it seems to have deceived nobody."

In the present version the portions of the narrative derived from this
alleged Belgrade MS. are not specially distinguished from the genuine
text; this is done advisedly, in order not to interrupt the continuity
of the story. This does not of course for a moment imply that these
interpolations are regarded as other than spurious, but as they are both
amusing reading in themselves as well as admirable imitations of our
Author's style, and supply obvious lacunae in the plot, making the whole
book more interesting and coherent, they have been retained as an
integral part of the work.

We append three or four extracts bearing upon Petronius and the
Satyricon, and interesting either on account of the source from which
they come, the quaintness of their expression, or the weight of their
authority.

From the "Age of Petronius," by Charles Beck, 1856: "Among the small
number of Latin writers of prose fiction, Petronius, the author of the
Satyricon, occupies a prominent place. . . . As to this book, the
quality of its language and style and the nature of its contents
constitute it one of the most interesting and important relics of Roman
lierature, antiquities and history.

"The work, at least the portion which has come down to us, contains the
adventures of a dissipated, unprincipled, but clever, cultivated and
well-informed young man, Encolpius, the hero himself being the narrator.
The book opens with a discussion on the defects of the existing system
of education, in which the shortcomings of both teachers and parents are
pointed out. Next follows a scene in the Forum, in which the hero and
his companion, Ascyltos, are concerned, and which exhibits some of the
abuses connected with judicial proceedings. After a brief and passing
mention of the vices and hypocrisy of the priests, the highly
interesting portion containing an account of the banquet of Trimalchio
follows. This is succeeded by the account of the acquaintance which the
hero, disappointed and dispirited by the faithless conduct of his
companion, forms with a philosopher, Eumolpus, who besides discussing
some subjects relating to art, especially painting, and to literature,
gives an account of his infamous proceedings in corrupting the son of a
family in whose house he had been hospitably received. The hero accepts
the invitation of the philosopher to accompany him on an excursion to
Tarentum. The account of the voyage, of the discovery made by Encolpius
that he is on board a vessel owned by a person whose vengeance he had
just ground to apprehend, of his fruitless attempt to escape detection,
of the reconciliation of the hostile parties, and of the destruction of
the vessel and the greater portion of the passengers by shipwreck, is
full of interest. The hero and his immediate companions, being the only
persons that escaped death, make their way to Croton, where Eumolpus, by
representing himself as the owner of valuable and extensive possessions
in Africa, works so upon the avarice and cupidity of the inhabitants,
who are described as a set of legacy-hunters by profession, that he
meets with the most hospitable reception. An intrigue of the hero with a
beautiful lady of the city occupies a large part of this section of the
story. The book closes with an account of the measures which Eumolpus
takes for the purpose of avoiding the detection of his fraud, by working
anew upon the avarice of his hosts. The close is abrupt as the beginning
had been; the book is incomplete in both parts; the end, as well as the
beginning, is wanting.

"That the author of this work was a man of genius is unquestionable. The
narrative of the events of the story is simple,--exciting, without
exhausting, the interest of the reader, the description of customs,
chiefly those of the middle classes of society, is invaluable to the
antiquarian, and the importance of the work in this respect can scarcely
be overrated; the personages introduced into the story are drawn with
such a clearness of perception of their characteristics, and such an
accuracy of portraiture, extending to the very peculiarities of the
language used by each, that they appear to live and breathe and move
before our eyes."

From John Dunlop's History of Fiction: "The most celebrated fable of
ancient Rome is the work of Petronius Arbiter, perhaps the most
remarkable fiction which has dishonored the literature of any nation. It
is the only fable of that period now extant, but is a strong proof of
the monstrous corruption of the times in which such a production could
be tolerated, though no doubt writings of bad moral tendency might be
circulated before the invention of printing, without arguing the
depravity they would have evinced, if presented to the world subsequent
to that period.

"The work of Petronius is in the form of a satire, and, according to
some commentators, is directed against the vices of the court of Nero,
who is thought to be delineated under the names of Trimalchio and
Agamemnon,--an opinion which has been justly ridiculed by Voltaire. The
satire is written in a manner which was first introduced by Varro;
verses are intermixed with prose, and jests with serious remark. It has
much the air of a romance, both in the incidents and their disposition;
but the story is too well known, and too scandalous, to be particularly
detailed.

"The scene is laid in Magna Graecia; Encolpius is the chief character in
the work, and the narrator of events;--he commences by a lamentation on
the decline of eloquence, and while listening to the reply of Agamemnon,
a professor of oratory, he loses his companion, Ascyltos. Wandering
through the town in search of him, he is finally conducted by an old
woman to a retirement where the incidents that occur are analogous to
the scene. The subsequent adventures,--the feast of Trimalchio,--the
defection and return of Giton,--the amour of Eumolpus in Bithynia,--the
voyage in the vessel of Lichas,--the passion and disappointment of
Circe,--all these follow each other without much art of arrangement, an
apparent defect which may arise from the mutilated form in which the
satire has descended to us.

"The style of Petronius has been much applauded for its elegance,--it
certainly possesses considerable naivete and grace, and is by much too
fine a veil for so deformed a body."

From Addison's Preface to his Translation of Petronius: "'Petronius,'
says that judicious critic, Mons. St. Evremond, 'is to be admired
throughout, for the purity of his style and the delicacy of his
sentiments; but that which more surprises me, is his great easiness in
giving us ingenuously all sorts of Characters. Terence is perhaps the
only author of Antiquity that enters best into the nature of persons.
But still this fault I find in him, that he has too little variety; his
whole talent being confined in making servants and old men, a covetous
father and a debauched son, a slave and an intriguer, to speak properly,
according to their several characters. So far, and no farther, the
capacity of Terence reaches. You must not expect from him either
gallantry or passion, either thoughts or the discourse of a gentleman.
Petronius, who had a universal wit, hits upon the genius of all
professions, and adapts himself, as he pleases, to a thousand different
natures. If he introduces a Declaimer, he assumes his air and his style
so well, that one could say he had used to declaim all his life. Nothing
expresses more naturally the constant disorders of a debauched life than
these everlasting quarrels of Encolpius and Ascyltos about Giton.

"Is not Quartilla an admirable portrait of a prostitute woman? Does not
the marriage of young Giton and innocent Pannychis give us the image of
a complete wantonness?

"All that a sot ridiculously magnificent in banquets, a vain affecter of
niceness, and an impertinent, are able to do, you have at the Feast of
Trimalchio.

"Eumolpus shows us Nero's extravagant folly for the Theater, and his
vanity in reciting his own poems; and you may observe, as you run over
so many noble verses, of which he makes an ill use, that an excellent
poet may be a very ill man. . . . The infirmity he has of making verses
out of season, even at death's door; his fluentness in repeating his
compositions in all places and at all times, answers his most ridiculous
setting out, where he characteristically tells him, "I am a Poet, and I
hope, of no ordinary genius.' . . .

"There is nothing so natural as the character of Chrysis, and none of
our confidantes come near her. Not to mention her first conversation
with Polyaenus,--what she tells him of her mistress, upon the affront
she received, has an inimitable simplicity. But nobody, besides
Petronius, could have described Circe, so beautiful, so voluptuous, and
so polite. Enothea, the Priestess of Priapus, ravishes me with the
miracles she promises, with her enchantments, her sacrifices, her sorrow
for the death of the consecrated goose, and the manner in which she is
pacified when Polyaenus makes her a present, with which she might
purchase a goose and gods too, if she thought fit.

"Philumena, that complaisant lady, is no less entertaining, who after
she had cullied several men out of their estates, in the flower of her
beauty, now being old and by consequence unfit for pleasures, endeavored
to keep up this noble trade by the means of her children, whom she took
every opportunity to introduce with a thousand fine discourses to old
men, who had no heirs of their own.

"In a word, there is no part of Nature, no profession, which Petronius
doth not admirably paint. He is a Poet, an Orator, a Philosopher, and
much more besides, at his pleasure."

Lastly Teufel, writing of the Satyricon in Pauly's Encyclopedia, says:
"The whole plan of the work is that of a novel; two freedmen, Encolpius
and Ascyltos, are enamored of a boy Giton, and the adventures which have
their origin in this circumstance, and which they encounter severally,
the acquaintances which they make (for instance of Trimalchio and
Eumolpus), form the contents at least of that portion of the book which
has come down to us. But the book contains in this dress of a narrative,
descriptions of manners, partly of single places (for example of
Croton), partly of certain classes (for example of Trimalchio, a rich
upstart, who apes the manners of a refined man of the world, but exposes
himself most ridiculously, of Encolpius, a good-natured, cowardly and
licentious Greek, of Eumolpus, a vain and tasteless poet, and at the
same time a thoroughly demoralized preacher of virtue), all drawn with
masterly truthfulness even to the minutest detail. The tone is humorous
throughout; the dramatis personae act and speak, even in the most
offensive circumstances, with an openness, unconcern and
self-satisfaction, as if they had the most undoubted right to be and
think as they do; at the same time, a vein of gentle irony pervades the
whole, which indicates the author's moral independence and higher
standpoint, as well as his sincere gratification at the amusing and
filthy scenes which he describes; he accompanies his heroes at every
step with a smile on his lips and a low laugh. The work belongs
therefore, by its contents as well as its tone, to the department of
satire, resembling in tone Horace, in form the Minippean satire.

"For not only does the language occasionally pass over from prose to
verse (limping iambs and trochees), but entire poems of greater extent
are interwoven (Troiae Halosis and Bellum Civile), which are usually put
in the mouth of Eumolpus, and which always have a satirical object,
sometimes a double one, as in the case with the Bellum Civile, which
ridicules Lucan, as well as his opponents personified by Eumolpus, the
writer with genuine humor placing himself above both, and dealing
against both his blows with impartial justice. The language is always
suited to the character of the persons speaking, elegant in Encolpius,
bombastic in Trimalchio. The language put in the mouth of the last is
for us an invaluable specimen of the lingua Romana rustica, as it
obtained in that part of Italy where the scene is laid,--in Campania,
and especially Naples. In conformity with the originally Greek character
of this region, the language of Trimalchio and his companions is full of
Greek words and Grecisms of the boldest kind (such as coupling the
neuter plural with the verb in the singular). Characteristic of the
local dialect are the many archaisms, compounds not known in the written
language, the frequent solecisms, the many proverbial and extravagant
expressions, the numerous oaths and curses."

A brilliant passage from Emile Thomas' remarkable study of Petronius and
contemporary Roman society, entitled, "Petrone: L'Envers de la Societe
Romaine" (Paris, 1902), may fitly sum up the situation. "This romance,"
he writes, "such delightful and at the same time such difficult reading,
a work at once exquisite and repulsive, gives us by virtue of its
defects no less than of its merits a fairly adequate representation of
the under-side of Roman civilization. Would it not be a gain, and a
great one, for the systematic history of morals and literature at Rome
to restore this work to its proper place? and is not this place pretty
well identical, barring of course the difference of field and form, with
that reserved in Greek Art for the vases, statuettes and pottery of
Tanagra, and of the periods before and after Tanagra; in one word,
whatever allows us to comprehend, or at least get a glimpse of, the
Ancient world under the aspects of its everyday life? Everybody knows
how successful has been the revolution, and how fruitful in results,
which has been brought about under our own eyes in these departments of
Greek History and Archeology.

"Well! here (in Petronius) we have among the authors of Rome a veritable
genre painter, of a sort to take the place for us, at any rate in part,
of the graceful vase-paintings of Antiquity, as well as of the
grotesques of Greek art.

"From yet another aspect, not a few points of resemblance may be
detected between Petronius and the lighter literary productions, novels,
tales, burlesque narratives, vers de societe, and even journals, of the
last two Centuries. Our Author is refined, not to say blase, but none
the less inquisitive, full both of sagacity and passion, always exact,
and above and beyond all else, a supreme master of style. Laying aside
all false delicacy, let us hear what he has to tell us of the daily
routine, of the outward aspect, and even of the hidden secrets, of Roman
existence. Nowhere else has human life been lived on an ampler scale; no
other people, no other society, has ever displayed so much variety, so
many contrasts, such heights of grandeur and such depths of
degradation."

ALFRED R. ALLINSON.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter One](sat02.md)
