[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index)  [EHH
Index](../ehh)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gate04)  [Next](gate06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

# THE THIRD HOUR.

This great god afterwards taketh up his position in the Fields of the
PERU-gods (i.e., the Fighters), and

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

this great god paddleth his way over the STREAM OF OSIRIS (NET-ASAR) in
sailing up this Field, which is three hundred and nine ATRU long, and
one hundred and twenty ATRU wide. This great god uttereth words to those
who are in the following of Osiris to this City, and he allotteth unto
them estates which are situated in this Field.

BAIU-SHETAIU (i.e., Hidden Souls) is the name of the gods who are in
this Field, and whosoever knoweth their names upon earth shall be able
to approach to the place where Osiris is, and there shall be given unto
him water for his Field.

NET-NEB-UA-KHEPER-AUATU is the name of this Field. Whosoever shall know
these hidden similitudes of the Hidden Souls in the correct forms
wherein they are depicted in Ament of the Tuat--now the beginning of
such representations should be from Amentet--\[these figures I say\]
shall act as magical protectors to that man upon earth, \[and\] in
Neter-khert, regularly and unfailingly.

Whosoever knoweth these, when he is making his journey past them shall
escape from their roarings, and he shall not fall down into their
furnaces (or, pits).

Whosoever knoweth this, when 'he is keeping ward over \[his\] seat (or,
place), his bread-cake shall be with Ra; and whosoever knoweth this,
being soul \[and\] spirit, shall have the mastery over his legs, and
shall never enter into the place of destruction, but he shall

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

come forth with his attributes (or, forms), and shall snuff the air for
his hour.

THENTENT-BAIU is the name of the hour of the night which guideth this
great god through this Field.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fourth Hour](gate06)
