[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index)  [EHH
Index](../ehh)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gate03)  [Next](gate05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

# THE SECOND HOUR.

This great god afterwards taketh up his position in UR-NEST, which is
three hundred and nine ATRU in length, and one hundred and twenty ATRU
in width.

The name of the gods who are in this Field is, BAIU-TUATI. Whosoever
knoweth their names shall have his existence with them, and unto him
shall this great god allot fields in the place wherein they are in the
FIELD OF URNES. He shall stand up with the Gods who Stand Up (AHAU), he
shall travel on in the following

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

of this great god, he shall enter into the earth, he shall force a way
through the Tuat, he shall cleave a passage through the tresses of the
gods with flowing hair (HENKSU), he shall travel on by the EATER OF THE
ASS (AM-AA) after the emptying of the lands, he shall eat bread-cakes in
the Boat of the Earth, and there shall be given unto him the fore-part
of TATUBA.

Whosoever shall have made in writing (or, in drawing) similitudes of the
BAIU-TUATI (i.e., the Souls of the Tuat) in the forms in which they are
in Ament of the Tuat-now the beginning of such representations should be
from Amentet,--and whosoever shall make offerings unto them upon earth
in their names, \[these things I say\] shall act as magical protectors
to that person upon earth, regularly and unfailingly.

And whosoever shall know the words which the gods of the Tuat speak to
this god, and the words which are said by him to them when he is
approaching the gods of the Tuat, \[these words I say\] shall act as
magical protectors to him that knoweth them upon earth, regularly and
unfailingly.

SHESAT-MAKET-NEB-S is the name of the hour of the night which guideth
this great god through this Field.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Third Hour](gate05)
