[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cov05)  [Next](cov07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002K8Q2IE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Candle of Vision*, by AE (George William Russell), \[1918\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

# MEDITATION

THERE is no personal virtue in me other than this that I followed a path
all may travel but on which few do journey. It is a path within
ourselves where the feet first falter in shadow and darkness but which
is later made gay by heavenly light. As one who has travelled a little
on that way and who has had some far-off vision of the Many-Coloured
Land, if I tell what I know, and how I came to see most clearly, I may
give hope to those who would fain believe in that world the seers spake
of, but who cannot understand the language written by those who had seen
that beauty of old, or who may have thought the ancient scriptures but a
record of extravagant desires. None need special gifts or genius. Gifts!
There are no gifts. For all that is ours we have paid the price. There
is nothing we aspire to for which we cannot barter some spiritual
merchandise of our own. Genius!

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> There is no
stinting of this by the Keeper of the Treasure House. It is not bestowed
but is won. Yon man of heavy soul might if he willed play on the lyre of
Apollo, that drunkard be god-intoxicated. Powers are not bestowed by
caprice on any. The formulae the chemist illustrates, making exposition
before his students, are not more certainly verifiable than the formulae
of that alchemy by which what is gross in us may be transmuted into
ethereal fires. Our religions make promises to be fulfilled beyond the
grave because they have no knowledge now to be put to the test, but the
ancients spake of a divine vision to be attained while we are yet in the
body. The religion which does not cry out: "I am to-day verifiable as
that water wets or that fire burns. Test me that ye can become as gods."
Mistrust it. Its messengers are prophets of the darkness. As we sink
deeper into the Iron Age we are met by the mighty devils of state and
empire lurking in the abyss, claiming the soul for their own, moulding
it to their image, to be verily their own creature and not heaven's. We
need a power in ourselves that can confront these mighty powers. Though
I am blind I have had moments of sight. Though I have sinned I have been
on

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

the path. Though I am feeble I have seen the way to power. I sought out
ways to make more securely my own those magical lights that dawned and
faded within me. I wished to evoke them at will and be master of my
vision, and I was taught to do this which is as old as human life. Day
after day, at times where none might interfere, and where none through
love or other cause were allowed to interfere, I set myself to attain
mastery over the will. I would choose some mental object. an abstraction
of form. and strive to hold my mind fixed on it in unwavering
concentration, so that not for a moment, not for an instant, would the
concentration slacken. It is an exercise this, a training for higher
adventures of the soul. It is no light labour. The ploughman's, cleaving
the furrows, is easier by far. Five minutes of this effort will at first
leave us trembling as at the close of a laborious day. It is then we
realise how little of life has been our own, and how much a response to
sensation. a drifting on the tide of desire. The rumour of revolt, the
spirit would escape its thraldom, runs through the body. Empires do not
send legions so swiftly to frustrate revolt as all that is mortal in us

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

hurries along nerve, artery, and every highway of the body to beset the
soul. The beautiful face of one we love. more alluring than life, glows
before us to enchant us from our task. Old sins, enmities, vanities and
desires beleaguer and beseech us. If we do not heed them then they
change, they seem to be with us, they open up vistas of all we and they
will do, when this new power we strive for is attained. If we are
tempted down that vista we find with shame after an hour of vain musing
that we were lured away, had deserted our task and forgotten that stern
fixity of the will we set out to achieve. Let us persevere in our daily
ritual and the turmoil increases; our whole being becomes vitalised, the
bad as well as the good. The heat of this fervent concentration acts
like fire under a pot, and everything in our being boils up madly. We
learn our own hitherto unknown character. We did not know we could feel
such fierce desires, never imagined such passionate enmities as now
awaken. We have created in ourselves a centre of power and grow real to
ourselves. It is dangerous, too, for we have flung ourselves into the
eternal conflict between spirit and matter, and find ourselves where the
battle is

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

hottest, where the foemen are locked in a death struggle. We are in
grips with mightier powers than we had before conceived of What man is
there who thinks he has self-control? He stands in the shallow waters,
nor has gone into the great deep, nor been tossed at the mercy of the
waves. Let him rouse the arcane powers in himself, and he will feel like
one who has let loose the avalanche. None would live through that
turmoil if the will were the only power in ourselves we could invoke,
for the will is neither good nor bad but is power only, and it vitalises
good or bad indifferently. If that were all our labour would bring us,
not closer to divine being, but only to a dilation of the personality.
But the ancients who taught us to gain this intensity taught it but as
preliminary to a meditation which would not waver and would be full of
power. The meditation they urged on us has been explained as "the
inexpressible yearning of the inner man to go out into the infinite."
But that Infinite we would enter is living. It is the ultimate being of
us. Meditation is a fiery brooding on that majestical Self. We imagine
ourselves into Its vastness. We conceive ourselves as mirroring Its
infinitudes,

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

as moving in all things, as living in all beings, in earth, water, air,
fire, æther. We try to know as It knows, to live as It lives, to be
compassionate as It is compassionate. We equal ourselves to It that we
may understand It and become It. We do not kneel to It as slaves, but as
Children of the King we lift ourselves up to that Glory, and affirm to
ourselves that we are what we imagine. "What a man thinks, that he is:
that is the old secret," said the wise. We have imagined ourselves into
this pitiful dream of life. By imagination and will we re-enter true
being, becoming that we conceive of. On that path of fiery brooding I
entered. At first all was stupor. I felt as one who steps out of day
into the colourless night of a cavern, and that was because I had
suddenly reversed the habitual motions of life. We live normally seeing
through the eyes, hearing through the ears, stirred by the senses, moved
by bodily powers, and receiving only such spiritual knowledge as may
pass through a momentary purity of our being. On the mystic path we
create our own light, and at first we struggle blind and baffled, seeing
nothing, hearing nothing, unable to think, unable to imagine. We seem
deserted by dream, vision or inspiration,

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

and our meditation barren altogether. But let us persist through weeks
or months, and sooner or later that stupor disappears. Our faculties
readjust themselves, and do the work we will them to do. Never did they
do their work so well. The dark caverns of the brain begin to grow
luminous. We are creating our own light. By heat of will and aspiration
we are transmuting what is gross in the subtle æthers through which the
mind works. As the dark bar of metal begins to glow, at first redly, and
then at white heat, or as ice melts and is alternately fluid, vapour,
gas, and at last a radiant energy, so do these æthers become purified
and alchemically changed into luminous essences, and they make a new
vesture for the soul, and link us to mid-world or heavenward where they
too have their true home. How quick the mind is now! How vivid is the
imagination! We are lifted above the tumult of the body. The heat of the
blood disappears below us. We draw nigher to ourselves. The heart longs
for the hour of meditation and hurries to it; and, when it comes, we
rise within ourselves as a diver too long under seas rises to breathe
the air, to see the light. We have

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

invoked the God and we are answered according to old promise. As our
aspiration so is our inspiration. We imagine It as Love and what a love
enfolds us. We conceive of It as Might and we take power from that
Majesty. We dream of It as Beauty and the Magician of the Beautiful
appears everywhere at Its miraculous art, and the multitudinous lovely
creatures of Its thought are busy moulding nature and life in their
image, and all are hurrying, hurrying to the Golden World. This vision
brings its own proof to the spirit, but words cannot declare or explain
it. We must go back to lower levels and turn to that which has form from
that which is bodiless.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Many-Coloured Land](cov07)
