[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cov04)  [Next](cov06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002K8Q2IE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Candle of Vision*, by AE (George William Russell), \[1918\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

# THE SLAVE OF THE LAMP

BECAUSE I was a creature of many imaginings and of rapid alternations of
mood out of all that there came to me assurance of a truth, of all
truths most inspiring to one in despair in the Iron Age and lost amid
the undergrowths of being. I became aware of a swift echo or response to
my own moods in circumstance which had seemed hitherto immutable in its
indifference. I found every intense imagination, every new adventure of
the intellect endowed with magnetic power to attract to it its own kin.
Will and desire were as the enchanter's wand of fable, and they drew to
themselves their own affinities. Around a pure atom of crystal all the
atoms of the element in solution gather, and in like manner one person
after another emerged out of the mass, betraying their close affinity to
my moods as they were engendered. I met these people seemingly by
accident along is

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

country roads, or I entered into conversation with strangers and found
they were intimates of the spirit. I could prophesy from the uprising of
new moods in myself that I, without search, would soon meet people of a
certain character, and so I met them. Even inanimate things were under
the sway of these affinities. They yielded up to me what they had
specially for my eyes. I have glanced in passing at a book left open by
some one in a library, and the words first seen thrilled me, for they
confirmed a knowledge lately attained in vision. At another time a book
taken down idly from a shelf opened at a sentence quoted from a
Upanishad, scriptures then to me unknown, and this sent my heart flying
eastwards because it was the answer to a spiritual problem I had been
brooding over an hour before. It was hardly a week after my first
awakening that I began to meet those who were to be my lifelong comrades
on the quest, and who were, like myself, in a boyhood troubled by the
spirit. I had just attempted to write in verse when I met a boy whose
voice was soon to be the most beautiful voice in Irish literature. I
sought none of these out because I had heard of them and surmised a
kinship. The concurrence of our

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

personalities seemed mysterious and controlled by some law of spiritual
gravitation, like that which in the chemistry of nature makes one
molecule fly to another. I remember the exultation with which I realised
about life that, as Heraclitus has said, it was in a flux. and that in
all its flowings there was meaning and law; that I could not lose what
was my own; I need not seek, for what was my own would come to me; if
any passed it was because they were no longer mine. One buried in a
dungeon for many years could not have hailed sunshine, the
sweet-smelling earth, and the long hidden infinitude of the skies more
joyously than I the melting of that which had seemed immutable. It is
those who live and grow swiftly, and who continually compare what is
without with what is within, who have this certainty. Those who do not
change see no change and recognise no law. He who has followed even in
secrecy many lights of the spirit can see one by one the answering
torches gleam. When I was made certain about this I accepted what befell
with resignation. I knew that all I met was part of myself and that what
I could not comprehend was related by affinity to some yet unrealised
forces in my being. We have within us the Lamp of

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

the World; and Nature, the genie, is Slave of the Lamp, and must fashion
life about us as we fashion it within ourselves. What we are alone has
power. We may give up the outward personal struggle and ambition, and if
we leave all to the Law all that is rightly ours will be paid. Man
becomes truly the Superman when he has this proud consciousness. No
matter where he may be, in what seeming obscurity, he is still the King,
still master of his fate, and circumstance reels about him or is still
as he, in the solitude of his spirit, is mighty or is humble. We are
indeed most miserable when we dream we have no power over circumstance,
and I account it the highest wisdom to know this of the living universe
that there is no destiny in it other than that we make for ourselves.
How the spirit is kindled, how it feels its power, when, outwardly
quiet, it can see the coming and going of life, as it dilates within
itself or is still! Then do we move in miracle and wonder. Then does the
universe appear to us as it did to the Indian sage who said that to him
who was perfect in meditation all rivers were sacred as the Ganges and
all speech was holy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Meditation](cov06)
