[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cov09)  [Next](cov11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002K8Q2IE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Candle of Vision*, by AE (George William Russell), \[1918\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

# THE MEMORY OF EARTH

WE experience the romance and delight of voyaging upon uncharted seas
when the imagination is released from the foolish notion that the images
seen in reverie and dream are merely the images of memory refashioned;
and in tracking to their originals the forms seen in vision we discover
for them a varied ancestry, as that some come from the minds of others,
and of some we cannot surmise another origin than that they are portions
of the memory of Earth which is accessible to us. We soon grow to think
our memory but a portion of that eternal memory and that we in our lives
are gathering an innumerable experience for a mightier being than our
own. The more vividly we see with the inner eye the more swiftly do we
come to this conviction. Those who see vaguely are satisfied with vague
explanations which those who see vividly at once reject as inadequate.

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> How are we to
explain what has happened to many, and oftentimes to myself, that when
we sit amid ancient ruins or in old houses they renew their life for us?
I waited for a friend inside a ruined chapel and while there a phantasm
of its ancient uses came vividly before me. In front of the altar I saw
a little crowd kneeling, most prominent a woman in a red robe, all pious
and emotionally intent. A man stood behind these leaning by the wall as
if too proud to kneel. An old man in ecclesiastical robes, abbot or
bishop, stood, a crozier in one hand, while the other was uplifted in
blessing or in emphasis of his words. Behind the cleric a boy carried a
vessel, and the lad's face was vain with self-importance. I saw all this
suddenly as if I was contemporary and was elder in the world by many
centuries. I could surmise the emotional abandon of the red-robed lady,
the proud indifference of the man who stood with his head but slightly
bent, the vanity of the young boy as servitor in the ceremony, just as
in a church to-day we feel the varied mood of those present. Anything
may cause such pictures to rise in vivid illumination before us, a
sentence in a book, a word, or contact with some object. I have brooded

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

over the grassy mounds which are all that remain of the duns in which
our Gaelic ancestors lived, and they builded themselves up again for me
so that I looked on what seemed an earlier civilisation, saw the people,
noted their dresses, the colours of natural wool. saffron or blue, how
rough like our own homespuns they were; even such details were visible
as that the men cut meat at table with knives and passed it to the lips
with their fingers. This is not, I am convinced, what people call
imagination, an interior creation in response to a natural curiosity
about past ages. It is an act of vision. a perception of images already
existing breathed on some ethereal medium which in no way differs from
the medium which holds for us our memories; and the reperception of an
image in memory which is personal to us in no way differs as a psychical
act from the perception of images in the memory of Earth. The same power
of seeing is turned upon things of the same character and substance. It
is not only rocks and ruins which infect us with such visions. A word in
a book when one is sensitive may do this also. I sought in a classical
dictionary for information about some myth. What else on the

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

page my eye caught I could not say, but something there made two
thousand years to vanish. I was looking at the garden of a house in some
ancient city. From the house into the garden fluttered two girls, one in
purple and the other in a green robe, and they, in a dance of
excitement, ran to the garden wall and looked beyond it to the right.
There a street rose high to a hill where there was a pillared building.
I could see through blinding sunlight a crowd swaying down the street
drawing nigh the house, and the two girls were as excited as girls might
be to-day if king or queen were entering their city. This instant
uprising of images following a glance at a page cannot be explained as
the refashioning of the pictures of memory. The time which elapsed after
the page was closed and the apparition in the brain was a quarter of a
minute or less. One can only surmise that pictures so vividly coloured,
so full of motion and sparkle as are moving pictures in the theatres
were not an instantaneous creation by some magical artist within us, but
were evoked out of a vaster memory than the personal, that the Grecian
names my eye had caught had the power of symbols which evoke their
affinities, and the picture

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

of the excited girls and the shining procession was in some fashion, I
know not how, connected with what I had read. We cannot pass by the
uprising of these images with some vague phrase about suggestion or
imagination and shirk further inquiry. If with the physical eye
twenty-five years ago a man had seen a winged aeroplane amid the clouds
it had roused him to a tumult of speculation and inquiry. But if the
same picture had been seen in the mind it would speedily have been
buried as mere fancy. There would have been no speculation, though what
appears within us might well be deemed more important than what appears
without us. Every tint, tone, shape, light or shade in an interior image
must have intelligible cause as the wires, planes, engines and
propellers of the aeroplane have. We must infer, when the image is clear
and precise, an original of which this is the reflection. Whence or when
were the originals of the pictures we see in dream or reverie? There
must be originals; and, if we are forced to dismiss as unthinkable any
process by which the pictures of our personal memory could unconsciously
be reshaped into new pictures which appear in themselves authentic
copies

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

of originals, which move, have light, colour, form, shade such as nature
would bestow, then we are led to believe that memory is an attribute of
all living creatures and of Earth also, the greatest living creature we
know, and that she carries with her, and it is accessible to us, all her
long history, cities far gone behind time, empires which are dust, or
are buried with sunken continents beneath the waters. The beauty for
which men perished is still shining; Helen is there in her Troy, and
Deirdre wears the beauty which blasted the Red Branch. No ancient lore
has perished. Earth retains for herself and her children what her
children might in passion have destroyed, and it is still in the realm
of the Ever Living to be seen by the mystic adventurer. We argue that
this memory must be universal, for there is nowhere we go where Earth
does not breathe fragments from her ancient story to the meditative
spirit. These memories gild the desert air where once the proud and
golden races had been and had passed away, and they haunt the rocks and
mountains where the Druids evoked their skiey and subterrene deities.
The laws by which this history is made accessible to us seem to be the
same as

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

those which make our own learning swift to our service. When we begin
thought or discussion on some subject we soon find ourselves thronged
with memories ready for use. Everything in us related by affinity to the
central thought seems to be mobilised; and in meditation those alien
pictures we see, not the pictures of memory, but strange scenes, cities,
beings and happenings, are, if we study them. all found to be in some
relation to our mood. If our will is powerful enough and if by
concentration and aspiration we have made the gloom in the brain to
glow, we can evoke out of the memory of earth images of whatsoever we
desire. These earth memories come to us in various ways. When we are
passive, and the ethereal medium which is the keeper of such images, not
broken up by thought, is like clear glass or calm water, then there is
often a glowing of colour and form upon it, and there is what may be a
reflection from some earth memory connected with the place we move in or
it may be we have direct vision of that memory. Meditation again evokes
images and pictures which are akin to its subject and our mood and serve
in illustration of it. Once, when I was considering the play of arcane
forces in the

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

body, a book appeared before me, a coloured symbol on each page. I saw
the book was magical, for while I looked on one of these the symbol
vanished from the page, and the outline of a human body appeared, and
then there came an interior revelation of that, and there was a shining
of forces and a flashing of fires, rose, gold, azure and silver along
the spinal column, and these flowed up into the brain where they struck
upon a little ball that was like white sunfire for brilliancy, and they
flashed out of that again in a pulsation as of wings on each side of the
head; and then the page darkened, and the changing series closed with
the Caduceus of Mercury and contained only a symbol once more.

Such pictures come without conscious effort of will, but are clearly
evoked by it. Lastly, but more rarely with me, because the electric
intensity of will required was hard to attain, I was able at times to
evoke deliberately out of the memory of nature pictures of persons or
things long past in time, but of which I desired knowledge. I regret
now, while I was young and my energies yet uncoiled, that I did not
practise this art of evocation more in regard to matters where knowledge
might be regarded

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

as of spiritual value; but I was like a child who discovers a whole set
of fresh toys, and plays with one after the other, and I was interested
in all that came to me, and was too often content to be the servant of
my vision and not its master. It was an excitement of spirit for one
born in a little country town in Ireland to find the circle of being
widened so that life seemed to dilate into a paradise of beautiful
memories, and to reach to past ages and to mix with the eternal
consciousness of Earth, and when we come on what is new we pause to
contemplate it, and do not hurry to the end of our journey. The
instances of earth memories given here are trivial in themselves, and
they are chosen, not because they are in any way wonderful, but rather
because they are like things many people see, and so they may more
readily follow my argument. The fact that Earth holds such memories is
itself important, for once we discover this imperishable tablet, we are
led to speculate whether in the future a training in seership might not
lead to a revolution in human knowledge. It is a world where we may
easily get lost, and spend hours in futile vision with no more gain than
if one looked for long hours at the

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

dust. For those to whom in their spiritual evolution these apparitions
arise I would say: try to become the master of your vision, and seek for
and evoke the greatest of earth memories, not those things which only
satisfy curiosity, but those which uplift and inspire, and give us a
vision of our own greatness; and the noblest of all Earth's memories is
the august ritual of the ancient mysteries, where the mortal, amid
scenes of unimaginable grandeur, was disrobed of his mortality and made
of the company of the gods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Imagination](cov11)
