[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](om00)  [Next](om02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

# AUTHOR'S PREFACE

IN the following pages we shall seek to present an outline of the
mythology of the Oceanic peoples. Although certain aspects of the mythic
system of this area, as well as the myths of separate portions of it,
have been treated by others, the present writer does not know of any
recent endeavour to gather all available materials from the whole
region, or to discuss the relationship of the mythologies of the various
portions of Oceania to one another, and to the adjacent lands. The
attempt has been made to go over all the myths of worth which have been
published; but it is not impossible that valuable and important material
has been overlooked. Some omissions, however, have been due to
circumstances beyond control. A number of volumes containing material,
probably of considerable value, were not to be found in the libraries of
the United States, and disturbances consequent upon the European War
have made it impossible to secure them; while other gaps are due to the
author's insufficient knowledge of Malay languages, which prevented the
use of some collections of tales, published without translations.

The selection of the legends to be presented has offered considerable
difficulty, this being especially marked in the class of what may be
denominated, for convenience, miscellaneous tales. No two persons would
probably make the same choice, but. it is believed that those which are
here given serve as a fair sample of the various types and include those
which are of widest interest and distribution. In the majority of cases
the tales have been retold in our own words. For strictly scientific
purposes exact reproductions of the originals would, of course, be
required; but the general purpose of this series,

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

and the limitations of space, have made this method impossible.
References have in every case, however, been given; so that those who
wish to consult the fuller or original forms of the tales can do so
easily. These references, and all notes, have been put into an Appendix
at the end of the volume, thus leaving the pages unencumbered for those
who wish only to get a general idea of the subject. The Bibliography
has, with few exceptions, been restricted to the titles of original
publications; reprints and popular and semi-popular articles and volumes
have been omitted. Every care has been taken to make the large number of
references correct, though it is too much to hope that errors have not
crept in.

In the brief discussions at the end of each section, and again at the
end of the volume, we have sought to draw conclusions in regard to the
probable origin of some of the myths and to point out the evidences of
transmission and historical contact which they show. Merely to present
the tales without offering any suggestions as to how they had come to be
what they are and where they are, seemed to fail of attaining the full
purpose of this series. No one is more conscious than the author that
the hypotheses offered will not meet with universal acceptance; that
they rest, in many cases, upon uncertain foundations; and that,
plausible as they may look today, they may be fundamentally modified by
new material and further study. Should this essay only serve to
stimulate interest in this field, and lead to greater activity in
gathering new material while yet there is time, he will be quite
content.

ROLAND B. DIXON.

HARVARD UNIVERSITY, June 1, 1916.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](om02)
