[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](om14)  [Next](om16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

# PART III

### INDONESIA

THE mythology of the Indonesian area presents problems which are in many
respects similar to those in Polynesia and Melanesia, though more
complex in that a larger number of factors are concerned. In Polynesia
the ethnic composition of the population was relatively simple, for it
seems to have consisted, as already stated, of a blend of several waves
of immigrants from Indonesia, who had, presumably in transit, mixed to a
varying extent with the peoples of Melanesia. The relative proportions
of Indonesian and Melanesian elements in the mythology have been found
to vary in different groups of islands, and indications of several
strata of Indonesian myths have also seemed to be indicated. In
Indonesia itself, on the other hand, a larger number of distinct racial
types; are present, for we have here the Negrito, Indonesian, and Malay,
as well as not inconsiderable elements from Semitic (Arabian) and Hindu
sources. The latter peoples have brought with them the influence of the
more highly developed cultures of southern Asia, while the Arabs and
later Malays have everywhere introduced factors of Islamic origin.
Mythological elements imported from these latter sources lie outside the
scope of the present volume, so that, with some exceptions, we shall
here consider only those tales which are primarily local and presumably
aboriginal in origin, although it will be apparent that the task of
separating the native from the introduced mythology is often difficult.

At the outset we may practically eliminate the Negrito from our
consideration, inasmuch as there is, as yet, no accessible

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

material derived from these people, who seem once to have formed the
underlying stratum of the whole area. Today the Negrito survives only in
the Philippines and the Malay Peninsula, and although it is probable
that myth material may yet be obtained from them, none has thus far been
published. In view of this serious gap in our knowledge, which, it is to
be hoped, may soon be filled, we are restricted to the myths of the
Indonesian and Malay population. Rather than attempt to separate them at
the outset, it will be more advantageous to consider the material as a
whole, discovering any subdivisions into distinct types which we may.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. Myths of Origins and the Deluge](om16)
