[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](om23)  [Next](om25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

# PART V

### AUSTRALIA

THE continent of Australia is not only by all odds the largest land-mass
of the Oceanic area, but also presents in its physical characters the
sharpest contrast to the remainder of the region. Continental in size,
only a small section of its great extent possesses a tropical
environment, the whole of its interior and most of its western portion
being a vast and almost waterless desert. Instead of the conditions of
life being easy and the food-supply abundant, as in the tropical
islands, over great parts of its area the food-quest absorbed a large
proportion of the energies of the inhabitants. In the desert the summer
heat is terrible, while on the elevated plateaux and in the mountains of
the south-east the winters are snowy, and the cold is often intense. The
sad and almost shadeless forests of eucalyptus, acacia, and she-oak are
in sharp contrast to the dense growths of the tropics, and the peculiar
animal life, characterized by the abundance of marsupials and great
struthious birds, sets it apart from most of the rest of the Pacific
world. Moreover, Australia is to a large degree isolated from the
remainder of the whole area in that only at the northern extremity of
Queensland does it closely approach any of the surrounding lands,
although its north-western coasts are not very remote, as Oceanic
distances go, from eastern Indonesia.

The native peoples of Australia were in great measure as distinctive as
its physical features, climate, flora, and fauna. Ranked in their
culture among the lowest peoples of the world--wholly ignorant of
agriculture, pottery, and domestic animals (except the dog), and over
large portions of the area

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

without any knowledge or means of navigation--they possessed at the same
time an extraordinarily complex social organization and an elaborate
religious ceremonial. Although presenting a notable degree of uniformity
throughout the continent, close study and comparison of the various
tribes, particularly in regard to the languages spoken, has quite
recently revealed <span id="fr_730"></span>[1](om40.htm#fn_730) to us
certain broad distinctions, which, although requiring more evidence
before they can be accepted as entirely proved, suffice, to divide the
aborigines into two contrasted groups (or three, if Tasmania is
included). The first of these, which may be called the northern group,
occupied that portion of the continent lying north of the twentieth
parallel of south latitude, together with a large wedge-shaped area
extending southward into the interior for nearly ten degrees farther.
Throughout this area, comprising roughly one-third of the whole
continent, the languages spoken fall into a large number of small,
independent, unrelated stocks comparable to those of the Papuan tribes
of New Guinea. Certain cultural and physical differences also seem to
mark this northern group in contrast with the second, which occupied the
whole of the remainder of the continent. The languages in this area,
although separable into a number of groups, show such a degree of
similarity that they must be regarded as related in some sense, although
the precise extent is not yet clear. The Tasmanians would seem to have
constituted a third group, although the fact that they have been extinct
for many years renders our information in regard to them so fragmentary
that definiteness on this point is almost impossible.

These three groups have been taken as evidence of three successive
strata of people. Of these the Tasmanians represent the oldest and most
primitive, and that which presumably once spread over the whole
Australian continent. The second group is explained as due to a great
wave of immigration from the north which swept over and absorbed, or in
places exterminated, the Tasmanoid type. Latest in point of time is the

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

northern group, which, coming from the same general direction, dominated
the whole north and drove a wedge deep into the central portion of the
continent. That the racial history of Australia has, however, not been
quite as simple as this has become more and more clear with increasing
information; but reference to other factors and possibilities may best
be postponed to the final discussion of Australian mythology.

Material on the mythology of the Australian natives is comparatively
meagre. The rapid extinction of a large portion of the population before
any adequate observations had been made, and the large areas, especially
in the West, still remaining unexplored, leave us little more than
fragments available for the continent itself; while for Tasmania we have
almost literally nothing. Enough material, however, is at hand to
present an outline of the main features of Australian mythology, and to
indicate at least some of its relationships.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. Myths of Origins and the Deluge](om25)
