[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fwe06)  [Next](fwe08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Festivals of Western Europe*, by Dorothy Gladys Spicer, \[1958\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 5 FESTIVALS OF ITALY

CAPO D'ANNO (New Year's Day) January 1

    New Year's Day is celebrated with services in the churches, parties,
visits, and all kinds of festivities. Children receive strenna, or money
gifts, from their parents, while friends and relatives send each other
flowers and bunches of mistletoe. Since early times Italians have
attributed to mistletoe such miraculous properties as healing sickness,
curing sterility in women and animals, and quenching fire. Today a piece
of mistletoe is hung over the door to "bring luck" to all the household.

LA VIGILIA DELL' EPIFANIA (Epiphany Eve) January 5

    Children receive gifts at Epiphany, in memory of the presents the
Wise Men offered the Christ Child; but, unlike the tradition in Spain
and some other countries, it is not the Magi who bring the gifts, but la
Befana, the little old fairy witch woman. The name befana is probably a
popular corruption of Epifania, or Epiphany, the feast that commemorates
the visit of the Three Kings to Bethlehem's manger.

    According to the legend current in Italy, Sicily and Sardinia, the
Befana was sweeping her house when the Kings cqme by with offerings for
Bambino Gesu. When the old woman was invited to accompany them, she
tartly replied that she was too busy with her work. Later, however, when
her sweeping was done, she took her broom and started out toward
Bethlehem. She lost her way and could not find the Bambino, for whom she
still searches.

    Each year la Befana goes through Italy. Boys and girls write letters
to her, asking for the presents they want, just as American children
write to Santa Claus. The spry old witch slides down chimneys on her
broom and always stuffs good children's stockings or shoes with pretty
toys, but leaves pebbles, charcoal, or bags of ashes for those who are
naughty.

    In Rome preparations for Epifania start early in December with the
famous toy fair in the Piazzo Navona. Fascinating toys dangle invitingly
from the hundreds of gaily decorated stalls that are erected about the
fountains. There are all sorts of holiday sweets, gay balloons and
charming little painted figures for the Christmas presepi, or mangers.

    The Piazza is thronged with children, young laughing mothers, bent
old men and withered grandmothers who move from booth to
booth--gossiping, bargaining, exchanging greetings and buying toys for
the Befana to leave on Epiphany Eve.

    The fair continues until January 5, when everyone buys at least one
tin horn or trumpet, or perhaps a brightly-painted little clay figure
that disguises a shrill whistle. The crowd surges back and forth through
the Piazza, laughing, jostling, whistling and blowing, until all Rome
seems mad and the air shrieks with deafening sound. To add to the
general pandemonium processions of youths march about, blowing on large
cardboard trumpets.

    Epiphany Eve customs vary from place to place. In Adriatic coast
towns and villages bands of men and boys go about from house to house,
singing traditional Epiphany songs, and receiving small gifts in return.
At Varenna, on Lake Como, men dressed like the Three Kings and their
retinue go through the countryside with torches, bestowing gifts on the
needy. In some other parts of the country people build bonfires. Dancing
about the fires, they predict good or bad weather for the coming months,
according to the direction from which the smoke blows.

EPIFANIA (Epiphany), in Niscemi, Caltanissetta province, Sicily January
6

    "Clothing the Child Jesus" is the name of an old Epiphany custom
which is observed at Niscemi. A poor parish child is borne naked to the
church, where he is dressed to represent the Infant Jesus. After special
religious services, a procession of priests and worshipers, carrying all
kinds of gifts, take the child home to the joyous accompaniment of
native bagpipes.

CARNEVALE (Carnival) January 17 to Ash Wednesday

    Carnevale always begins on January 17 and continues until Ash
Wednesday. The ceremonies of the last three days of the carnival are the
gayest, especially those of Martedi Grasso, or Shrove Tuesday.
Throughout Italy the occasion is celebrated with colorful pageants,
masquerades, dancing, music and all kinds of merrymaking.

    Every Italian town and village has its own special celebrations. In
some places a Parade of the Months is a carnival event. Allegorical
figures representing the twelve months, pay homage to the "King," who is
attended by four harlequins. The Months sing traditional verses to the
King and later, as the procession moves about from place to place, the
harlequins are crowned as members of the King's retinue.

    Martedi Grasso, in Venice, is celebrated by the appearance of King
Carnival who is greeted with traditional ceremony. As always, King
Carnival is represented as a fat man, for eating and drinking are
characteristic of pre-Lenten revelry. His straw body is filled with
firecrackers and explosives and his reign, although merry, is brief,
since his body is burned at midnight in the Piazza San Marco.

SANT' AGATA (Saint Agatha), in Catania, Sicily February 3, 4, 5

    Saint Agatha, the rich and beatiful young Sicilian virgin whom a
Roman prefect put to death in 251 because she refused to yield to him,
is one of Sicily's most beloved martyrs. She is patroness of nursing
mothers and women suffering from diseases of the breast, because her own
breasts were amputated during the tortures she endured. In all her
trials she remained steadfast in the faith, and Saint Peter himself is
said to have ministered to her wounds.

    Every Italian loves the Palermo-born Saint Agatha, but she is shown
special reverence at Catania, where her relics are preserved in a
silver-sculptured casket. Her festa begins on February 3, and ends on
February 5, anniversary of her death. On each of the three successive
days, a silver bust of the saint wearing a jewel-studded crown is
carried in procession from the Cathedral to the city's various churches.

    The unique feature of the procession is the display of the ceri, or
immense wooden replicas of candlesticks, which are painted, gilded, and
carved with episodes from the saint's harrowing martyrdom. Tumultuous
shouts of "Evviva Sant' Agata!" ring out every time the ceri bearers
halt along the line of march. The streets through which the procession
passes are gay with paper pennants and streamers, flowers, and colorful
festa hangings attached to balconies and windows.

    Strings of many-colored electric lights enliven the scene at night.
People buy all kinds of sweets and holiday foods from temptingly arrayed
street stalls. Later they throng to the piazza to see the wonderful
firework displays without which no saint's day celebration is complete.

SAN GIUSEPPE (Saint Joseph) March 19

    The anniversary of San Giuseppe, husband of the Virgin and patron of
carpenters and cartmakers, and also of unwed mothers and orphans, is
characterized in many places by feasting, merrymaking, most of all, by
sharing with the needy. For was not St. Joseph himself a humble
carpenter of Nazareth, a pious and generous protector, "a just man," in
the words of the Bible?

    The day of San Giuseppe is celebrated differently in different
places but nowhere more picturesquely, perhaps, than in Sicily.
Villagers often prepare a feast table, the tavola di San Giuseppe, at
which those portraying the Holy Family are guests of honor. The Family
consists of an aged carpenter, representing Joseph, a poor local girl
who is the Madonna, and an orphan boy, the Bambino Gesu. Other guests
include orphans, widows, and beggars.

    Everyone in the village contributes a share to the banchetto, or
banquet, according to his means--food, money, candles or flowers. The
women prepare all kinds of regional dishes, which vary from place to
place. In some localities, for example, there is hearty Minestrone, made
with dried beans and vegetables. Neapolitans serve zeppole, or cream
fritters. The Sienese have frittelle di San Giuseppe, Saint Joseph's
fritters, which are sold from stalls outside the church that is
dedicated to the saint. In Bologna there is ravioli di San Giuseppe, a
delicious fried sweet, made with short crust instead of the usual
ravioli dough, and filled with jam or almond paste.

    In many places little cream puffs called Sfingi di San Giuseppe, are
a favorite dessert. The puff shells, flavored with grated lemon and
orange rinds, are filled with ricotta, Italian pot cheese, which is
combined with chocolate and other tempting ingredients.

    The feast is preceded by solemn morning mass. Then the priest and
villagers lead the Holy Family in procession to the outdoor banchetto,
where the food is blessed. Cheers of "Viva la tavola di San Giuseppe,"
go up, as the viands, which are first blessed by the Bambino, are
distributed.

    A procession follows the banquet. The Holy Family, mounted on mules,
is hailed by the villagers and given gifts of food and money as they
ride through the streets. The celebration continues with singing,
merrymaking, and rejoicing as the inhabitants dance about bonfires in
honor of their beloved San Giuseppe.

MEZZA QUARESIMA (Mid-Lent) The fourth Sunday in Lent

    At Mezza Quaresima, or Mid-Lent, feste, parties, dances and all
kinds of gay street celebrations provide a single day's respite from the
severity and monotony of Lenten gloom.

    Just as Carnevale is represented as a fat man, so Quaresima, or
Lent, is a lean, witch-like old hag. In Venice young people dance
hilariously about her rag-stuffed effigy, because Lent is half gone. In
parts of the Abruzzi, Quaresima appears as a tow figure pierced with
seven feathers. The effigy is suspended from a rope stretched from side
to side of the street. On each Saturday in Lent villagers pluck out one
feather with great rejoicing, since each represents one of the seven
weeks of Lent.

     Children often receive toys in the guise of a lean old woman with
seven legs. At Mezza Quaresima boys and girls cut their figures in two,
throwing half away and keeping half until the end of Lent.

DOMENICA DELLE PALME (Palm Sunday) The Sunday preceding Easter

    Palm Sunday ceremonies, like all Holy Week observances, vary widely
from one place to another. Usually the piazzas in front of small village
churches and great cathedrals are filled with worshipers in gay spring
clothes, and picturesque vendors of olive branches and palms. The olive
branches are gilded or silvered while palms, cleverly plaited into
crosses with charming decorative detail, often are adorned with roses,
lilies, or other flowers.

    After olive branches and palms are blessed at morning mass, an
impressive service follows in commemoration of opening the gates of
Jerusalem, when Jesus went into the city as "King of Israel."

    For this ceremony the priests leave the church in procession and
knock at a closed door--the "gate" of Jerusalem. The portals are flung
open in welcome and the clergy make the symbolic triumphal entry amid
waving palms and joyous music.

GIOVEDI SANTO (Holy Thursday) The Thursday preceding Easter

    In some places in Sicily Giovedi Santo is observed with night
processions of local guild members, who carry platforms with lifesized
figures, representing various episodes in the Passion of Christ. Each
guild is preceded by a band and followed by a group of men who stop now
and then to explain in local dialect the story of the Last Supper, the
Agony in the Garden, the Scourging, or whatever the scene depicts.

    Both in Italy and in Italian communities of the United States, many
churches reenact the ceremony of foot washing at the altar. Twelve poor
men of the parish are chosen to represent the twelve Disciples. The
priest performs the symbolic act of bathing the disciples' feet.
Following the ceremony each of the men receives a loaf of bread and a
gift of money.

    On Holy Thursday the Easter Sepulcher, or "Sepulcher of Christ" is
prepared for the Good Friday services. In some churches the sepulcher,
which is a recess in the north wall of the chancel, is covered with
flowers in symbol of the tomb of Jesus. At Saint Peter's, in Rome, the
Host is ceremoniously placed on the altar of a side chapel, which on the
following day represents the sepulcher.

VENERDI SANTO (Holy Friday) The Friday preceding Easter

    In towns and villages throughout Italy dramatic processions go
through the streets on Good Friday night with realistic figures of Jesus
displayed on platforms. Sometimes the platforms, surrounded by flowers
and candles, are borne on the shoulders of hooded and robed penitents.
Sometimes young boys hold aloft large candles on long spiked poles, and
men carry the cross, spear, crown of thorns and other Passion symbols.
Lugubrious music, figures of angels displaying stained graveclothes and
the sorrowing Virgin with clasped hands and agonized face, all add
realism and pathos to these folk processions.

    A deeply moving ceremony is held at Rapallo, near Genoa. A bier with
the figure of the dead Jesus, the crown of thorns and nails of the
cross, is carried from church to church through the town's dark winding
streets. The only illumination comes from hundreds of tapers, burning in
windows along the line of march. For hours the procession moves along
its sorrowful route, accompanied by mourning men and women, uttering
laments and singing penitential chants. After stopping at the Cathedral
for the final mass, townsfolk carry their dead Christ to the nearby
Baptistry and place the bier on the floor. Large white candles burning
at the four corners of the bier cast flickering shadows across the
figure of the inert blood-stained body. The melting wax sputters and
falls in little pools on the floor. Devout worshipers come and go,
kneeling before the image and praying.

SABATO SANTO (Holy Saturday), in Florence, province of Tuscany The
Saturday preceding Easter

    The Mass of Glory ending at noon on Holy Saturday announces the
beginning of the Resurrection festa. The church bells which, in memory
of Jesus' sufferings, have not rung since Holy Thursday, now peal out
joyously. The churches, shrouded in gloom throughout the week, suddenly
come to life. The black draperies drop from the altars, revealing
figures of the risen Lord. Tapers are lighted. Joy and gladness succeed
darkness and sorrow.

    Customs vary from place to place. Florentines observe the ceremony
of the Scoppio del Carro, the Explosion of the Car, which probably is
one of the country's most picturesque Holy Saturday observances.

    The ancient Florentine family of de'Pazzi inaugurated the Scoppio
del Carro by contributing a splendid exposive-filled car to the
religious procession which carried a flaming torch from the altar of the
church to another. The torch was lighted from a spark made by rubbing a
flint against a fragment of stone, reputedly a piece of the Holy
Sepulcher, which was brought to Florence during the Crusades.

    Thousands assemble every year in the Piazza del Duomo before the
Cathedral of Santa Maria del Fiore, to watch the spectacular explosion.

    The modern Carro, an immense, colorfully-decorated wooden car with
fireworks attached, is drawn into the piazza by white oxen and placed
before the cathedral doors. A wire runs from the high altar inside the
cathedral to the Car in the piazza. A dove-shaped rocket, ignited at the
altar as mass terminates with the singing of the Gloria, shoots out
along the wire through the open doors and sets fire to the explosives.
The Carro bursts with tremendous noise and splendor.

    Tuscan farmers watch the ceremony with fascination and dread. They
believe that if the dove rocket performs adequately, harvests will
prosper in the coming year; if anything goes wrong, however, crops will
be bad and the season poor.

LA PASQUA (Easter)

    Easter is a joyous day. After morning mass people generally eat,
drink, visit and rejoice in the passing of Lenten gloom and the glory of
the risen Christ.

    Food plays an important part in the day's festivities and
traditional specialties are as numerous as the country's towns and
villages. Agnellino, roasted baby lamb, is universally popular for the
Easter dinner, especially when served with carciofi arrostiti, roasted
artichokes, with pepper, salt, and slivers of garlic discreetly hidden
between the leaves. Brodetto Pasquale, a delicious Easter broth,
delicately herb-flavored, often starts off the feast, while holiday
breads, pastries, and small cakes abound in every region. One seasonal
treat that children in many places enjoy is a rich bread shaped like a
crown and studded with colored Easter egg candies.

SAN NICOLA (Saint Nicholas), in Bari, province of Apulia May 7, 8

    Italians celebrate the festa of San Nicola, prototype of the modern
Santa Claus, on May 7 and 8, anniversary of the trqnsfer of the saint's
relics to Bari, rather than on December 6, his calendar day. La Befana,
not San Nicola, is the children's gift bearer, but the good saint is
deeply loved and revered as protector of virgins, orphans, schoolboys,
seamen, pawnbrokers, pirates, robbers, and many others.

    In the eleventh century sailors brought the saint's relics to Bari
from Myra, Asia Minor, where he died as Archbishop in 326. Today his
bones rest in the crypt of the Romanesque Church of San Nicola, which
was begun in 1087 in the saint's honor. Thousands of pilgrims come from
far and near to worship at the tomb of the wonderworking saint and to
ask his help for the sick, for children, for those at sea, for all who
sin.

    Legends abound concerning the saint who gives protection to hardened
sinners no less than to the young and innocent. One of the best known
stories tells how the saint learned of the plight of three girls,
daughters of an impoverished noble, who had no dowries. To save them
from becoming prostitues, San Nicola, who had inherited a fortune,
secretly went at night to the nobleman's house and tossed through the
window a bag of gold as a dowry for the eldest daughter. The next night
he repeated the act in behalf of the second daughter. On his third
visit, however, the nobleman, who was awaiting the appearance of the
unseen benefactor, caught at the saint's robe and tried to thank him.
San Nicola made the grateful father promise never to reveal his
identity, and slipped away.

    This story explains how San Nicola came to be regarded as the
protector of young girls of marriagable age, as well as the patron of
pawnbrokers, who adopted three gold balls as their symbol.

    San Nicola is not an Italian saint. He was born in Asia Minor and
there he died; but when infidels threatened desecration of his tomb at
Myra, brave Barese mariners risked their lives, in answer to a vision,
to carry his body by sea to their city. This is why, each year, sailors
of Bari take San Nicola's image to the water in solemn procession. The
saint's statue, robed in gorgeous gold and red vestments, with jewelled
miter and archbishop's staff, is surrounded by flowers and carried
aloft, accompanied by chanting and bands, high-ranking churchmen,
seamen, and pilgrims with lighted candles.

    At the wharf the statue is placed on a vessel decorated with flowers
and banners and taken out to sea. Hundreds of small craft, crowded with
pilgrims and fishermen follow the image, to pay their respects and seek
the saint's blessing. At night the image is returned to its place of
honor on the silver-embossed altar of San Nicola's crypt, and the great
festa ends with spectacular displays of fireworks.

FESTA DEL GRILLO (Cricket Festival), in Florence, province of Tuscany
The fortieth day after Easter

    In most European countries Ascension Day, the fortieth after Easter,
is the early spring holiday when families go to the country to picnic
and spend the day out of doors. Many Florentines do not go to the
country, but spend the day out-of-doors enjoying the spring in their own
unique fashion. Parents pack generous lunch baskets, gather up the
children, and flock to Cascine Park to celebrate with them the Festa del
Grillo, or Festival of the Cricket, for the chirping cricket is a symbol
of spring.

    Hundreds of brightly-painted wicker or wire cages imprisoning
hundreds of crickets caught in the Park, dangle from vendors' stalls.
Each child must have his caged grillo, for tradition says it brings good
luck if it still sings, when carried home.

    In the past children hunted their own grilli on this day, but now
the insects are sold in cages. Food stalls with sweets, ices, and soft
drinks; balloon stalls with hundreds of red, blue, orange, and green
balloons, hundreds of youngsters scurrying hither and yon with little
painted cages--all make this festa one of the happiest and gayest spring
events for everyone--except the grilli!

CORPUS DOMINI (Corpus Christi) The Thursday following Trinity Sunday

    Corpus Christi, the festival honoring the institution of the
Eucharist, is celebrated with splendor throughout the country. Each town
and hamlet observes the day in its own fashion, but everywhere flowers,
music, church banners, and colorful processions give beauty and
picturesqueness to the event.

    The fragrant mosaic flower carpets of Genzano, on Lake Nemi, are
among the most beautiful of all Corpus Christi decorations. For blocks
the brilliant flower petal tapestries mark the route over which priests
in embroidered vestments carry the Blessed Sacrament. Often the petals
are made in geometrical patterns, armorial designs, the Angel of Peace,
or other elaborate motifs.

    At Brindisi the outstanding feature of the procession is a
richly-caparisoned white horse which the Archbishop rides at the head of
the procession.

    In Perugia the Corpus Christi procession, which starts from the
Gothic Cathedral, is elegant and splendid, with rich banners, lighted
candles and flowers. Balconies and windows are draped with brilliant
hangings, and bystanders toss flowers in the path of the Sacrament as it
is reverently carried through the streets.

CORSO DEL PALIO (Race for the Palio), in Siena, province of Siena July 2

    The Corso del Palio, Race for the Palio, is the name of the
spectacular horse race which the Sienese hold twice a year in the
Virgin's honor. The first race, on July 2, is for the armless Madonna di
Provenzano; the second, on August 16 (the day following Assumption)
honors the Madonna del Voto, protectress of Siena. The Palio, one of
Italy's most colorful events, originated in the thirteenth century and
has retained its medieval character throughout the years.

    The treacherous race track is the narrow cobbled road surrounding
the shell-shaped Piazza del Campo, a magnificent natural amphitheatre
which is dominated on one side by the beautiful Gothic Palazzo Pubblico.

    Siena is divided into seventeen contrade, or wards, each of which
goes by the name of the symbol painted on its silk banner. Nobody seems
to know the origin of these contrade symbols, which include such
colorful names as Unicorn, She-Wolf, Snail, Dragon, and Tortoise.

    Ten of the contrade are contestants in the race, and they are
selected by lot from the total number, since the race course is too
narrow to accomodate all seventeen. A barbero, or race horse is assigned
by lot to each contrada, which chooses its own jockey. The prize--one of
glory, not of money--is a magnificent black and gold fringed banner.
This standard is awarded to the winning contrada and is kept at its
headquarters as a proud symbol of prowess in winning the race for the
Virgin.

    On the morning of the race the Palio is blessed in church, and
before the event riders and their barberos, decorated with the colors of
their ward, are blessed at the altars of the churches in the respective
contrade.

    Before the race a gorgeous medieval procession parades around the
race course. First come the mace bearers, then the contrade with their
officials, pages, horsemen, drummers and trumpeters, all dressed in
colorful costumes of the Middle Ages. Among the most picturesque figures
in the procession are the standard bearers who toss and twirl the heavy
silk contrada banners with a grace and skill possible only after
generations of practicing the ancient art of flag throwing.

    The stately procession moves about the Piazza del Campo amid the
wild cheers and deafening plaudits of the crowd. Last of all, a pair of
white oxen with gold and black trappings, draw the cart with the Palio,
the trophy for the winning contrada.

    Just before the race begins each jockey is given his nerbo, a
stinging ox-sinew whip which Palio rules permit him to use in trying to
unseat his opponent or to incapacitate his opponent's horse if, by so
doing, he can press his own mount on to victory.

    The winning jockey is raised on the shoulders of the crowd. His
horse is showered with caresses. After a brief prayer of thanksgiving at
the race course, both rider and horse return to the church in the
contrada to offer further expressions of gratitude for victory.

    Revelry, music and merrymaking, a victory banquet and toasts to the
winning jockey and horse continue far into the night as the victorious
contrada celebrates the glorious race in honor of the Virgin.

IL GIORNO DEI MORTI (The Day of the Dead) November 2

    Throughout Italy people decorate the graves of the dead with flowers
and candles on Il Giorno dei Morti. At five o'clock in the morning
solemn masses are announced by the church bells tolling as for the
passing of the dead.

    In spite of the day's somber beginning Il Giorno dei Morti is not
entirely a period of gloom; for like all other Italian feste, it has its
own traditional foods and picturesque customs. Fave dei Morti, beans of
the dead, is the name given to delectable little bean shaped cakes, made
of ground almonds and sugar, combined with egg, butter, flour, and
flavoring. These small cakes are white, or are tinted pink or chocolate.
In the vicinity of Rome young people often announce engagements on the
Day of the Dead. The man sends the engagement ring to his fiancee in the
conventional little white box, but this is traditionally packed in an
oval container filled with fave dei morti.

    In Sicily where the ancient cult of the dead is possibly strongest,
children look forward to November 2 with great anticipation. If they are
"good," mind their elders, and pray for the departed during the year,
the morti, or souls of the family dead will return on this night with
presents of sweets and toys.

    Gaudily colored, tinsel-trimmed, candy dolls are among the
children's most coveted gifts in the Palermo area. Large and small
figures of historical characters, dancing girls, fair ladies, and plumed
knights are some of the many candy doll favorites which make Il Glorno
dei Morti a real festa to boys and girls.

SAN MARTINO (Saint Martin) November 11

    From Venice in the north to Sicily in the south, it Is traditional
to taste the new wine on the day of San Martino. According to legend San
Martino shared his cloak with a poor drunkard who stumbled and fell.
Consequently his festa is celebrated freely by all lovers of wine.

    Customs vary from village to village, but in many places people
sample the new wine on this day, feast and carry San Martino's statue in
colorful procession through all the town's byways and alleys.

SANTA LUCIA (Saint Lucy), in Syracuse, Sicily December 13

    Tradition says that Santa Lucia, patroness of Syracuse, was born
about 283, of noble family. She had her eyes removed because their
beauty had attracted a heathen nobleman. Her rejection of her suitor led
first, to her torture, and eventually to her death by the sword.

    Santa Lucia, one of Italy's most beloved saints, is patroness of all
who suffer from diseases of the eye. Her image in the Duomo, at
Syracuse, represents the young Christian martyr holding her eyes in a
vessel. Throughout Italy and Sicily her festa of December 13 (she has
another on May first) is celebrated with bonfires, torchlight
processions, and illuminations. This "feast of lights" is appropriate,
since people say that Lucia became blind on the shortest day of the
year.

    In Syracuse the day of Lucia's martyrdom is observed with a
magnificent procession in which her bier is carried through the streets
by torchlight. The festa of May 1 commemorates the miracle of food which
came to Syracuse during a great famine, when the desperate inhabitants
went to the Duomo to implore Santa Lucia's help. While the people were
praying, a ship laden with life-giving wheat entered the harbor and
saved the city from starvation. This is why Italians always eat
cuccidata, cooked wheat, on both of Santa Lucia's festival days.

LA VIGILIA (Christmas Eve) December 24

    Christmas in Italy is a religious festival which begins with a
Novena of devotional preparation and a twenty-four hour fast, from
sunset of December 23 to sunset of December 24. In most homes the first
day of the Novena is observed by making ready the presepio, or miniature
Bethlehem manger, which represents the essence of Christmas to most
Italians. On each morning throughout the Novena many families oather
before the presepio to light the candles and offer prayers. The
preseplo, with its charming clay or wooden figures of the Holy Family,
the angels, shepherds, and kings, are said to have originated over seven
hundred years ago with Saint Francis of Assisi.

    In many families the Bethlehem mangers are precious heirlooms,
handed down and added to, from one generation to the next. For weeks
before Christmas small manger figures are on sale in every market and
village fair. The settings usually are fashioned in the homes from
cardboard, moss, and bits of twig, or from more professional properties.
Sometimes backgrounds are very elaborate, showing the sacred grotto, the
tavern, shepherds' huts, and shining pools, all set in a charming
Italian landscape. The figures of the Magi journey across the
countryside with their camels and precious gifts. Angels, suspended from
invisible wires, seem to sing joyous hallelulahs and ragged shepherds
kneel before the tiny pink-cheeked Babe, with their offerings of
flowers, fruits, and new-born lambs.

    In parts of Calabria and the Abruzzi zampognari, or itinerant
bagpipers come down from the mountains and go about from house to house
playing pastoral hymns before the Bambino Gesu of the little homemade
mangers at village shrines. The musicians receive gifts of food or money
at the various homes.

    Christinas Eve is strictly a family gathering. When the candles are
lighted before the presepi, the children "surprise" their elders by
reciting little verses learned weeks in advance. At last the cenone, or
festa supper is served. This is a meatless meal with many regional
variations. Capitoni, a variety of large eel, is vastly popular among
the well-to-do. Fish of all kinds and fowl are also typical seasonal
foods, while cardoni, or artichokes cooked with eggs, often accompany
eel dishes. Of course, there are all kinds of fancy holiday breads,
including panettone, the famous currant loaf, and such sweets as
cannoli, a cheese-filled pastry, torrone, or nougat, and many other
delicacies.

    The Yule log, rather than the Christmas tree, is important to
Italian boys and girls. Sometimes they tap it with little sticks, asking
for the gifts they want. In certain places the children assemble about
the log and are blindfolded. Starting with the youngest, each one
recites a little verse to the Bambino Gesu. When their bandages are
removed, the children see before them little presents the Bambino has
left. Few presents are given on Christmas Eve, and then only simple
things for small children and old people. Epifania, as already seen, is
the time for gift giving.

    Family parties continue until almost midnight when everyone attends
church services and worships before life-sized figures of the Holy
Family. In some rustic areas peasants lay modest gifts of nuts, flowers,
and vegetables at the Christ Child's feet; in other places processions
for the Bambino are accompanied by shepherds from the hills who play on
bagpipes and flutes.

    Christmas Day is generally a sacred holiday, celebrated with
religious services in the churches and quiet family gatherings in the
homes.

SANTO STEFANO (Saint Stephen), in Baiano, province of Avellino December
26

    People of Baiano celebrate the festival of Santo Stefano, the first
Christian martyr, whom the Bible describes as "full of faith and the
Holy Spirit," by chopping down a fine strong chestnut tree, called the
maio, and setting it up in the church piazza. Woodcutters and young men
hew down the tree, which they load on a specially constructed bullock
cart and take to the piazza.

    Amid music, rejoicing, and the blessing of the priests, the men set
the martyr's tree in a deep hole and surround it with wood supplied by
the townsfolk. Then, to the dramatic firing of rifles, the maio finally
is ignited. After the fire has died down the ashes are sold for
charitable purposes.

    Boiled or roasted chestnuts are eaten on this day in honor of the
martyr saint.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6. Festivals of Luxembourg](fwe08.md)
