[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fwe05)  [Next](fwe07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Festivals of Western Europe*, by Dorothy Gladys Spicer, \[1958\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 4 FESTIVALS OF GERMANY

NEUJAHR (New Year's Day) January I

    The first day of the year must be lived as you would live during the
next twelve months, according to German folk tradition; for New Year's
Day is the time of new beginnings. The housewife takes care that her
home is in order. Everyone puts on at least one new garment. People try
not to spend money, but jingle coins in their pockets "for luck." No
unpleasant tasks are undertaken. Of course, both doctor and chemist are
avoided. Everybody settles down to having a good time with family,
friends, and neighbors.

    At the beginning of the year people universally exchange greeting
cards, but the giving of gifts is confined largely to money remembrances
for the postman, janitor, cleaning woman and others who have served the
family faithfully during the year.

DREIKONIGSFEST (Festival of the Three Kings) January 6

    The Festival of the Three Kings marks the end of the Yuletide
season. On this day the Christmas tree is lighted for the last time.

    Boys and men dressed as the Three Kings wander about towns and
villages of the Kinzig River area and elsewhere, singing old folk songs
of the Wise Men and begging for alms. The Kings wear gold paper crowns
and carry large cardboard stars. One of their favorite songs says that:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

The Three Holy Kings  
Carrying their star  
Like to eat and drink;  
But they don't like to pay  
For the goodies they get!

</div>

    In many parts of the country, particularly in western and southern
Germany, salt and chalk are consecrated in church on this day. The salt
is given the animals to lick, while the Three Kings' traditional
initials, C.M.B., for Caspar (also, Gaspar, Kaspar), Melchior, Balthasar
(or Balthazar) are chalked above house and stable doors. This is thought
to keep evil from entering and harming man or beast. In the Bavarian
Forest peasants write above the lintel the legend, "Caspar, Melchior and
Balthasar, protect us this day from all danger of fire and flood."

    Epiphany parties are frequent, with the traditional cake as a
special feature of the celebration. A bean, or sometimes a coin, is
hidden in the cake. Whoever finds the symbol in his portion becomes king
of the feast.

    In Upper Bavaria peasants wearing horrible-looking wooden masks go
about cracking long whips and symbolically driving out Frau Perchta
(also known as Berchta, or Bertha), nature goddess of ancient Germanic
mythology and custodian of the dead. According to folk belief the
mysterious witch wanders about and harms mortals on the Twelve Days
between Christmas and Epiphany. On Perchiennacht, or Epiphany, Perchta
and her cohorts, symbolizing powers of both good and evil, are thought
to fructify the fields and to frighten naughty children.

    The Perchta masks which are handed down from one generation to
another, are terrifying in their fantastic ugliness. Some have
protruding fangs for teeth, bulging eyes, sinister wrinkles and hairy
faces. Those who wear the masks dress in slovenly kerchiefs and dirty
aprons, and march through the streets with brooms, chains, and hatchets,
fully looking the part of the relentless furies they are intended to
represent.

FASTNACHT (Shrove Tuesday) The Tuesday preceding Ash Wednesday

    Fastnacht, as Shrove Tuesday is called, is celebrated throughout
Germany with masquerades, carnival processions and ceremonials that vary
in character according to locality and folk custom. In the Rhine
district where many of the carnivals originate in religious rites, there
is strict adherence to the sacred pattern. In Mainz, on the other hand,
companies of guards pitch camp along city thoroughfares--especially in
the cathedral area--and form a bodyguard to Prince Carnival. In Cologne,
Prince Carnival presides over a Fool's Court. He is surrounded by
councilors wearing high peaked hats and the badge of the Order of Fools.
The Sparks, as Prince Carnival's bodyguard is called, wear the uniforms
of old Cologne's City Guards and carry wooden muskets over their
shoulders.

    In Munich Shrovetide observances are marked by much of the pageantry
and splendor of the Middle Ages. Actors dressed in court costumes of
former days perform ancient guild dances, while historical floats and
ceremonies portray much of the picturesqueness of Munich's past.

    Eastern Saxony boasts some of the most charming carnival
celebrations of all Germany. In this region a symbolic battle is fought
between representatives of Winter and Spring. Winter always is
vanquished and Spring welcomed with laughter, merrymaking, and song. In
some localities this kind of carnival celebration occurs somewhat later
than Fastnacht. The character of the spring drama varies from district
to district. In Eisenach, for example, where the battle of the seasons
has been observed since 1286, "Summer is won" by burning Winter in
effigy after his defeat by Dame Sun.

    People of Baden-Warttemberg call Fastnacht "Fastnet" in local
dialect. For over five hundred years Rottweit on the Neckar has
celebrated a Fastnet parade with all kinds of traditional figures such
as three huge cocks, known respectively as Guller, Federhannes, or
Feathery John, and Biss, or Bite. Another feature of the parade are
groups of Fools, wearing costumes decorated with ball-shaped bells, who
dance about and recite verses of "fools' wisdom" to the crowd.

KOPENFAHRT (Kope Procession), in Luneburg, State of Lower Saxony Shrove
Tuesday

    The Kope Festival, observed at Carnival time by Luneburg's salt
miners, dates back to the Middle Ages. According to a chronicle of 1471,
an early duke of Luneburg granted journeymen salters--the sons of master
salters--the privilege of holding the annual celebration which has been
observed for almost five hundred years.

    The Kope, a stone-filled wooden barrel, originally was dragged
through the town's narrow byways by strong horses which were mounted by
Salzjunker, or young journeymen salters. Horses and riders were followed
by festively-garbed local officials such as aldermen, councilors, and
scribes. Then came a long line of salt mine laborers, townsfolk, and
trumpeters. Through the centuries the Kopenfahrt, or Kope procession,
has become a folk, rather than a historical, event. Today, as in the
beginning, the trumpeters still blast loudly on their instruments in an
attempt to unnerve the spirited horses. Great skill is therefore
required on the riders' part in order to guide the animals safely
through the streets and bring them to the mouth of the salt mine. There
the Kope is ceremoniously dumped on a huge pile of wood and set on fire.

    Following the bonfire the procession returns to the market place and
with solemn rites enacts the ceremony of initiation of the Salzjunker
into the Guild of Master Salters. For a thousand years Luneburg, famed
for its salt-mining industry--the source of the town's prosperity--has
paid high tribute to this important Guild. Following initiation
ceremonies there is a great banquet.

    According to some authorities the Kopenfahrt originated in pagan,
rather than medieval times. Consequently the flames of the great bonfire
are thought to symbolize the Sun God's triumph over forces of darkness,
while the rolling of the Kope through the streets represents the
relentless passage of time. Quite aside from such speculation, the
ancient festival was revived in 1950 following a period of interruption,
and once more the event is a characteristic feature of the old salt
town's annual carnival merrymaking.

BRAUTELN (Wooing a Bride), in Sigmaringen, State of Baden-Wurttemberg
Shrove Tuesday

    Brauteln is the name Sigmaringen gives to a Carnival custom which
started in 1648, at the close of the Thirty Years' War. In that year
bachelors who dared to become engaged were honored with a peculiar
ceremony. According to local tradition Sigmaringen's young men were
hesitant about assuming the responsibilities of marriage and family
life, due to widespread hunger and pestilence following in the wake of
the war. Accordingly, the town's population diminished so rapidly that
the Schultheiss, or Mayor, decided to take drastic steps.

    Finally the Schultheiss conceived a unique plan: He would honor the
first young man who was courageous enough to become engaged with the
Brauteln, or "Wooing a Bride" ceremony. This meant that the bachelor
would be carried at the head of a brilliant procession about the pump in
the market square. No pains would be spared to make the event a
memorable affair. The man would be accorded so much prominence that
other bachelors would be encouraged to take wives.

    The mayor's plan must have worked since the ceremony still
continues. Annually on Shrove Tuesday every man is brautelt who has
married within the last twelve months, has moved to town for the first
time, or celebrated his twenty-fifth or fiftieth wedding anniversary.

    The yearly two-day carnival ceremony is impressive. Heralds dressed
in three-cornered hats, black breeches, and white shirts and stockings,
go about the town with the Sigmaringen standard. Accompanied by drummers
and pipers, the heralds stop at the house of each eligible bachelor on
their list and invite him to be brautelt, by dancing before the door.
Woe to the man who refuses to participate in the ceremony, for he must
pay a ransom!

    To the accompaniment of a lively tune the heralds briskly carry
eligible candidates about the town pump, while their victims treat the
jubilant spectators with apples, pretzels, and sausages.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

And thus it always will be  
As long as laughing and kissing go on;  
As long as the Danube flows;  
As long as the girl gets her man,

</div>

according to one old brautel song.

    Yet another Sigmaringen song has come down through the centuries.
The words, which doubtless were applicable in 1648 when husbands were
scarce, are hardly appropriate for the modern young woman. The song is
jolly, however, and therefore worth repeating:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Let's live long and be merry.  
Semmering girls set caps for the lads.  
But all, alas, is useless!  
Not a single girl gets a sweetheart!

</div>

PALMSONNTAG (Palm Sunday) The Sunday before Easter

    In most parts of Germany Easter festivities start on Palm Sunday.
Customs vary widely from place to place, but everywhere they symbolize
resurgence of life and joy in the budding spring.

    In the Black Forest, for example, people decorate tall poles with
pussy-willows, heart or cross motifs, and long multicolored ribbon
streamers. These gay Eastertide emblems are set up before village houses
and later carried in procession to church, where they are consecrated by
the priest.

    In Bavaria on the other hand, the poles are transformed into
glittering trees, with branches cut from twelve different kinds of wood.
The branches are bent and fastened to the poles in semicircular shape,
then gaudily decorated with colored glass beads. Villagers carry the
trees in joyous procession to the church. After the blessing the
peasants set up the trees in the farm fields to ensure fertility to
crops, protection from hail and drought, and preservation from all other
disasters.

    Most unusual of all Palm Sunday customs, perhaps, is the Palm Esel,
or wooden Palm Donkey, symbolic of the animal upon which Jesus entered
Jerusalem two thousand years ago. The Palm Donkey, survival of a rare
folk custom, is reverently carried to the village church. Devout
parishioners believe that by touching the wooden image they, too, may
share the same mystic blessing which people doubtless thought emanated
from the humble ass when it carried the King of Israel.

GRUNDONNERSTAG (Green Thursday) (Holy, or Maundy Thursday) The Thursday
preceding Easter

    Anyone refusing to eat green salad on Grundonnerstag, or Green
Thursday, is in danger of "becoming a donkey," according to old Saxon
tradition. To be on the safe side children eat an entire green vegetable
dinner on this day. Often the meal is supplemented by a special dish
prepared from cottage cheese.

    Many interesting egg superstitions are associated with the Thursday
preceding Easter. One saying is that an Antlassei, or Holy Thursday egg,
stays fresh for the entire year. Another claim is that such an egg, when
ploughed into the first furrow, ensures a plentiful harvest. It is also
believed that an Antlassei is just the thing to prevent ruptures. And to
keep one on hand in the house will safeguard the premises from lightning
during the next twelve months.

KARSAMSTAG (Holy Saturday), in South Germany, Hesse, and the Rhineland;
KARSONNABEND, in Berlin and North Germany The Saturday preceding Easter

    On Holy Saturday housewives dressed in their most elaborate peasant
costumes carry the Easter foods to church for consecration by the parish
priest. It is customary for each woman to line a large basket with snowy
linen and decorate it with gay ribbon streamers. She then fills the
basket with a variety of Easter foods--the long braided loaf of holiday
bread, the colored eggs, a portion of bacon or ham and, most important
of all, butter molded into the form of a lamb--the Lamb of God--with a
ribbon tied around the neck and a banner on a long stick inserted into
the flank.

    After the food has been blessed housewives take their baskets home
and start preparing the feast day dinner.

OSTERN (Easter)

    Eastertide customs, many of which originated in early Germanic pagan
rites, are largely concerned with eggs, fire, and water.

    Eggs, the ancient heathen fertility symbol and the early Christian
emblem of the Resurrection, inspire all kinds of games and customs for
both children and adults. Modern children generally accept the idea that
the Easter Hare brings their holiday eggs and hides them in many
out-of-the-way nooks and corners. In the past the stork, the fox and the
cuckoo, rather than the Hare, were credited with dispensing eggs.

    In many places, especially in Swabian villages, pretty little
"rabbit gardens" are made ready for the Hare. In the Deister mountains
near Hannover, he finds carefully prepared nests of moss awaiting his
visit. Of course, the Hare prefers to hide his eggs in gardens and
out-of-door nooks; but in stormy weather he manages, somehow, to find
curious indoor places for boys and girls to search for his offerings.
The Hare brings not only dyed hens' eggs of purple, green, and yellow;
sometimes there are toothsome chocolate eggs with wonderful little
pictures inside, which may be viewed through openings in one end.
Sometimes the Easter visitor even leaves elaborate little pink or blue
satin eggs, containing exciting presents of sweets, perfume or tiny lace
trimmed handkerchiefs.

    Eggs are not only presented to friends but are important in all the
Easter games. Friends give each other beautifully hand-painted eggs
which are made according to distinctive traditional designs. The
exquisite patterns are passed down from one generation to another in
certain towns and villages. Often a special legend or verse accompanies
the decoration. In many places, on the other hand, it is customary for
village girls to present their suitors with red eggs. Should the girls
fail to have their gifts ready, however, the boys spank them with canes!

    Eggs play an important role in the Easter sports. In northwestern
Germany, for example, peasants have formal contests to see who can
devour the greatest number of eggs. Egg duels, known as Eier-Spacken, or
Eier-Doppen always are immensely popular. Contestants face each other,
holding hard boiled eggs by the round ends. Each stabs his adversary's
egg with the pointed end. The player who succeeds in cracking the
greatest number of his opponent's eggs wins, and receives all the
damaged eggs as prize.

    Eierlesen, or egg gathering, and Eierschieben, or egg rolling, are
two of the season's most popular sports. The egg gathering contests,
particularly, require great agility and skill. Eggs are placed at
intervals along a racing track. Running down the track at a starting
signal, the boys try to see who can gather tip the most eggs in the
allotted time. The game is even more exciting when, as in the Black
Forest and some other areas, contestants ride down the line on horseback
or bicycles.

    In Germany as in the United States, egg rolling contests are
confined chiefly to children. This sport usually comes on Faster Monday.
Boys and girls play their game on a hillside. The child whose egg rolls
the greatest distance wins. In some villages the girls play Caningeln, a
game in which an egg is rolled through a ring. This feat requires great
agility and skill.

    By far the most ancient and dramatic of all German Easter customs
are the bonfires and fiery wheels which are common to sections of the
Harz, the Rhineland, Oldenburg and Westphalia.

    The fires, built on mountain tops and ridges, are survivals of pagan
sacrificial rites, while the flaming wheels, symbolic of the sun, are
reminiscent of early Germanic fire worship. In some neighborhoods young
people go about singing traditional rhymes and asking for contributions
of fuel or money for the Easter fires. Generally these fires take the
form of huge piles of tar-soaked barrel staves, tree limbs and roots.

    In the vicinity of Luegde, a Westphalian village, the usual bonfire
consists of huge seven-foot oak wheels with straw-packed spokes. Each
family in the village contributes straw to the gigantic wheels which
weigh approximately eight hundred pounds. The wheels, poised at the top
of a hill, are set afire. Thousands of spectators gathered about Easter
bonfires on adjoining hills watch and cheer as the tremendous wheels
start on their course down the hillside into the valley below. Each time
a wheel reaches the bottom of the hill ablaze, a shout of Joy rises from
the breathless villagers who regard this as portending special blessing
to the land and a rich harvest to the farmer.

    Water no less than fire is important in Easter rites, especially
among young girls of the Harz, Thuringia, and many other regions. The
girls, rising at dawn stealthily go out to the river bank and dip up
"Easter water." If they do not utter a single word and then bathe in the
water, they will be rewarded with beauty throughout the year. For those
who cannot go to the river bank there is, of course, the Easter morning
dew which, when used for bathing the face, is sure to make it look fresh
and charming.

    Spring flowers and grasses are important in Easter ceremonies,
especially in the Black Forest. There blossoms and leaves are fashioned
into symbolic crosses and hearts and taken to church for blessing. The
Easter sunrise is considered important, too; for if the sun dances and
you can see it, you will be blessed with good luck throughout the year.

    Easter brings special Joys to shop and factory workers who don
knapsacks and go out into the country; and to young and old of towns and
villages, who put on new spring finery and join the ranks of Sunday
afternoon participants in the traditional Easter parades.

GEORGIRITT (Saint George's Parade), in Traunstein, Upper Bavaria April
23

    Saint George, the great soldier saint of the Middle Ages who
reputedly was martyred on April 23 about the year 300, is honored
annually at Traunstein and some other Bavarian villages by the
Georgiritt, or Saint George's Parade. For George, who represented the
flower of knighthood, became protector of horses and their riders. On
his day the parish priest blesses both beasts and men and sprinkles them
with holy water.

    According to Jacobus de Voragine, thirteenth-century author of The
Golden Legend, Saint George arrived at Lybia's pagan city of Sylene just
as a dragon which demanded human tribute was terrifying the entire
countryside. Saint George, finding Sylene's citizens in deepest
mourning, soon discovered that it was the turn of the King's daughter to
be sacrificed to the demon's appetite. Dressed in wedding garments of
purest white, the young girl calmly sat down by a stagnant pool outside
the city. Fortunately the story had a happy ending. Saint George came
upon the Princess and awaited the monster's arrival at her side. At last
the charging dragon appeared. Saint George stuck his sword down the
fiery throat. The Princess then tethered the beast to her girdle and
triumphantly led him into Sylene. There the saint promptly slew the
dragon--once Sylene's fifteen thousand citizens had agreed to be
baptized into the Christian faith.

    Throughout the centuries the story of Saint George has symbolized
the victory of good over evil. Many claim that the legend, which finds
its counterpart in the Siegfried cycle and other mythological stories,
represents renewal of life in early spring and the conquest of Summer
over Winter.

    Today the ancient victory of the saint on horseback is commemorated
when Traunstein farmers mount their gaily garlanded horses and ride them
across the fields and three times around the parish church. After
receiving the priest's blessing on the horses, as well as other farm
animals, and on crops and gardens, the procession, accompanied by drums
and trumpets, turns toward the village. The festival finally ends with
ritualistic sword dances which, like the Saint George legend, have come
down from medieval to modern times.

HIMMELFAHRTSTAG or HIMMELFAHRT (Ascension Day) The fortieth day after
Easter

    Many picturesque local customs mark the celebration of Ascension Day
which is the holiday when everyone tries to get into the country for
picnics and outdoor festivities. In the villages of Fienstedt, Godewitz,
Salzmunde, Zornitz, Gorsleben, and Krimpe, in the Mansfeld district of
the State of Saxony-Anhalt, the drinking of "Ascension beer" is
traditional to the day.

    According to thirteenth-century documents of these hamlets,
villagers are commanded to drink beer on this day in memory of the
Countess Elizabeth; for it was she, in olden times, who relieved the
inhabitants of the payment of tithes.

    Himmelfahrtstag (which always falls on a Thursday) is the accepted
time for men to get together with other men on excursions to the
country. According to one informant, this custom started in Berlin. In
the nineteenth century the male merrymakers hired a horse-drawn Kremser,
or charabanc, to take them out of town. Later, buses, trucks, motor
launches, and little steamers--all decorated with festive streamers,
garlands, and pennants--were chartered for the men's day of freedom.
Often clubs hike part of the way to some point of scenic interest.

    Hearty refreshments of food, beer, and wine are features of the
excursions; and even if hubands return home at night a little the worse
for wear, wives are not expected to complain.

PFINGSTEN (Pentecost or Whitsun) The fiftieth day after Easter

    Pentecost, even more than Ascension Day, is a great spring holiday
which everyone tries to spend in the country. In both urban and rural
communities houses and doorways are decorated with birch branches in
honor of spring. Characteristic Pfingsten ceremonies and customs take
place in many different parts of the country.

    Near Schramberg in the Black Forest, for example, shepherds assemble
on the Fohrenbuhl Hill to do a brisk business in buying and selling
cowbells. Bells of varying sizes and tones are tried out, both singly
and together, for every shepherd wants to acquire a harmonious set of
bells.

    Once the day's business is transacted, the shepherds choose partners
and dance the Hanzmeltanz, a traditional country dance which is
performed around a sheep. The dancers hand a staff back and forth
between them. Suddenly a bell rings. The shepherd who happens to be
holding the staff at the moment receives the sheep as prize.

    In parts of the Harz Mountains, noted for the breeding of song
birds, members of the local Finkenklubs, or Finch Clubs, enter their
birds in singing contests. The winning bird's cage is decorated with
flowers. Later in the day the villagers assemble to sing the old folk
songs of the district.

    A Pentecost Bride and Bridegroom are features of the celebration at
Kotzting, in Franconia, which is noted for the colorful procession of
some two hundred horsemen, who perform the annual Pfingstritt, or
Pentecostal Ride. The horsemen, led by the priests carrying church
banners and crosses, make a pilgrimage to the Steinbuhl church in the
Zeller valley.

    Deldesheim in the Rhenish Palatinate, is famed for its annual
auction of a buck goat at Pentecost. This custom dates back to the early
fifteenth century. According to tradition Kaiser Rupprecht commanded, in
1404, that the city of Lambrecht should each year provide a buck as
tribute for use of the Deidesheim forest and pasture lands. The ancient
custom has been observed for over five hundred years.

DER MEISTERTRUNK (The Master Draught), in Rothenburg-ob-der-Tauber,
State of Bavaria Whitsuntide

    Each Whitsuntide the ancient city of Rothenburg honors the memory of
Georg Nusch, the man who, in 1631, took one of the most famous drinks in
history and so saved the town's councilmen from death and her
inhabitants from humiliation. The celebration takes the form of a
historical pageant in which over a thousand of Rothenburg's citizens
reenact, in colorful period costume, the drama of the siege of their
city in the Thirty Years' War.

    According to legend General Tilly's victorious army stood within
Rothenburg's walls and declared that all members of the town council
were to be hanged. Moved at last by the entreaties of the councilmen's
wives and daughters, the enemy general finally changed the sentence and
declared that only four councilmen, chosen by lot, would be put to
death.

    The whole history of Rothenburg might have been changed had not the
Pokal, the huge state beaker, which was filled to the brim with the
town's best wine, been brought in at this moment. The drinking vessel,
which held three quarts, was quaffed again and again by Tilly and his
aides, who passed it from hand to hand around the table. Some of the
liquid still remained, even after repeated draughts.

    Then Tilly suddenly had an idea: If there was a Rothenburg man, he
declared, who could drink the contents of the goblet at a single
draught, and who would be willing to do so, knowing that the wine was
poisoned, that man could save the council members from hanging!

    A deep hush fell over the room. Finally the silence was broken by
Georg Nusch, an ex-burgomaster, who volunteered to accept the challenge.

    The story goes that Georg Nusch, in the presence of the amazed
General Tilly and his companions as well as his fellow Rothenburgers,
drained the three-quart Pokal and then fainted. According to recently
discovered documents, the wine was not really poisoned; but the brave
Nusch, willing to sacrifice his life for the councilmen, believed that
it was.

    It was the ex-burgomaster's heroic exploit which saved four men from
hanging and Rothenburg from occupation. The historic event, which now
has become almost a folk legend, is reenacted each Whitsuntide, and once
or twice during the summer, in the ancient town of Rothenburg.

FRONLEICHNAMS-FEST (Corpus Christi Day) The Thursday following Trinity
Sunday

    Corpus Christi Day is celebrated throughout Catholic Germany with
picturesque processions through streets that are charmingly decorated
with flowers and garlands of green. Crucifixes and pictures of Christ
are prominently displayed from window ledges and the steps of cottages
and village fountains. In many places people display bright hangings and
spread carpets before their houses in honor of the Sacrament and the
large crucifix that are carried through the parish. One of the most
beautiful features of the processions is the group of children, dressed
in white with flower chaplets on their heads and nosegays of fragrant
blossoms in their hands. Girls and women in magnificent regional costume
add further distinction to the joyous event.

    Probably the most dramatic of all Corpus Christi processions are
those of Lakes Staffelsee and Chiemsee, in Upper Bavaria, which take
place on the water, rather than in the streets.

    Boats adorned with flowers and garlands and carrying church banners
and holy symbols, glide across the lakes and are reflected in the
crystal clear waters. Devout worshippers following in other boats chant
liturgies which fill the still air with music and echo solemnly across
the lakes.

SOMMERSONNENWENDE (Summer Solstice) June 23

    Bands of young people march singing to hills and open places to
build enormous bonfires in honor of the summer solstice. First comes a
picnic supper, which is eaten in the early summer twilight. Then the
Johannisfeuer, or Saint John's fire, is lighted. Boys and girls dance
and sing old folk ballads about the huge bonfire. The more hardy lads
leap through the flames, while young lovers join hands and try to jump
over the fire together. If they succeed, they never will be parted,
according to current folk belief.

LINDENFEST (Linden Tree Festival), in Geisenheim, region of the
Rhineland Three day festival, second weekend in July

    Geisenheim boasts a six-hundred-year-old linden tree which is the
center of the annual celebration for sampling new wine. Geisenheim is
the oldest town in Rheingau County which, for over a thousand years, has
been renowned for flourishing vineyards and precious wines.

During three days of festivities the ancient linden is illumined and
folk dances in costume are held beneath its spreading branches. The town
fairly bursts with laughter and merrymaking, since visitors from all
over the world come to taste Geisenheim's wine and participate in her
annual orgy of feasting, visiting the vineyards and making pilgrimages
to Marienthal, a picturesque Franciscan shrine, which is hidden in a
nearby wooded valley.

High above the sounds of festivity and merrymaking the chimes of the old
Rheingau Cathedral chime out melodiously:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

What bells are those, that ring so slow,  
So mellow, musical, and low?  
They are the bells of Geisenheim,  
That with their melancholy chime  
Ring out the curfew of the sun.  
    --LONGFELLOW. Christus. Part Two. VI

</div>

SCHAFERLAUF (Shepherds' Race), in Markgroningen, region of Swabia Saint
Bartholomew-tide, about August 23, 24, 25

    Markgroningen and other Swabian towns honor Saint Bartholomew,
patron of herdsmen, with a three-day festival which includes a barefoot
Shepherd's Race.

    The celebration begins with a church service, which is followed by a
colorful procession through the town, a welcome to guests and a program
of sports and contests. Chief among the latter is the race which
barefoot shepherds and shepherdesses run in pairs across the stubble
fields.

    The victors are honored by a shepherds' dance, a water carriers'
race and other events. These features are followed by a historical play
known as Faithful Bartel. Period costumes, processions, pageants and
general merrymaking all are features of the celebration.

    Later in the day toasts are drunk to the winners in the season's
first new wine, and both shepherds and shepherdesses are entertained by
a sumptuous rural feast.

PFERDEWEIHE (Blessing of Horses), in St. Margen, region of the Black
Forest Day of the Nativity of the Virgin, September 8

    On the Day of the Nativity of the Virgin, Black Forest farmers and
their wives bring their horses to St. Margen to receive the priest's
benediction. St. Margen, long known as the center of a famous horse
breeding area, is especially noted for the sturdy horses which work the
neighboring farms.

    The horses, which are brought to town from outlying hamlets, are
festively decked with well-polished traditional brasses. Nosegays adorn
the harnesses while ribbon streamers, interwoven in manes and tails,
flutter gaily as the horses trot. Both men and women, dressed in
picturesque costumes of the Black Forest valley, add brilliant splashes
of color to the handsome procession of horses.

ALMABTRIEB (Return from Mountain Pasture), in the German Alps Some time
in September

    The day that the flower-decked cattle are driven down from the
mountains to winter in their valley homes is the occasion for
merrymaking and rejoicing throughout the German Alps. All summer long
the animals, under the watchful eye of rosy-cheeked Sennerinnen, or
herd-girls, have roamed at large and grazed in lush mountain pastures.

    Now the cattle are sleek and fat. There is a frosty nip in the
September air. It is high time to take the animals back to winter
shelter. The entire village turns out to celebrate the homecoming and to
welcome both girls and beasts; for as the animals prosper, so thrives
the farm. The village band is on hand to greet the picturesque
procession. There are, also, the priest, the school master, the farmer
and his wife and, of course, the herd girl's sweetheart, family, and
friends. Last, but by no means least, there is a host of village
children dressed in gay regional costumes.

    The air throbs with suppressed excitement, for long before the slow
moving animals swing into sight, the rhythmic clanging of deep-toned
bells echoes melodiously from the distant mountain passes.

    Almabtrieb is indeed a gala event. The adornment of the cattle, like
the costume of the herd-girl, differs considerably from place to place,
but always is picturesque. In the Berchtesgaden area, for example,
around the beautiful Alpine lake known as Konigssee, the herd leader
wears a distinctive traditional headdress which is a most elaborate
creation. It resembles a two-tiered crown, which the herd-girl's clever
fingers fashion from thinly-shaved colored wood. The shavings are woven
into stars, bows, or other intricate designs and fastened to the lower
tier, while the upper is surmounted by a small, gaily decorated fir,
which looks like a miniature Christmis tree.

    Skillfully, the Sennerrinnen drive the cattle down from their
Watzmann Mountain summer quarters, making sure to guide them safely
along rocky paths and treacherous ledges. The final stage of the journey
comes whe--i their charges reach K6nigssee at the foot of the mountain,
and broad-bottomed flower-decked boats ferry them across the lake. A
triumphant shout rises from the impatient reception committee waiting on
the opposite shore.

    Once the cattle are safely driven to winter shelter the real
festivities begin. Each farm couple prepares a sumptuous welcome home
supper, which is followed by music, dancing, and singing lasting far
into the crisp autumn night.

TURA MICHELE MARKT (Tura Michele Fair) in Augsburg, state of Bavaria
September 29

    On September 29, Saint Michael's Day, the city of Augsburg holds an
annual autumn fair to which hundreds of peasants from far and near come
for trade and pleasure. Chief among the day's attractions is the hourly
appearance of figures representing the Archangel and the Devil. The
figures are built in the foundation of Perlach Turm, or Tower, called
Tura in local dialect. This slender structure, which rises to a height
of two-hundred-and-twenty-five-feet and stands next to the Peter's
Kirche, north of the Rathaus, originally was a watch tower. In 1615 the
watch tower was heightened and converted into a belfry.

    Almost a hundred years earlier the group depicting the saint and the
devil had been installed in the tower's understructure. Annually on his
feast day the archangel's armor-clad figure, holding a pointed spear,
appeared whenever the tower bell struck, and stabbed at the devil
writhing at his feet.

    During World War II the historic figures--the delight of generations
of fair-goers--were destroyed. Since then a new group has been made and
installed. Today, as for over four centuries, spectators continue to
gather about the Tura and to watch breathlessly the symbolic drama of
Michael, head of the Church Triumphant, dealing death blows to the
dragon which brings evil and destruction to the world of men.

MUNCHENER OKTOBERFEST (Munich October Festival), in Munich, state of
Bavaria Usually the third Sunday in September; when there are five
Sundays in the month, from the fourth Sunday in September to the first
Sunday in October

    In Munich the Oktoberfest celebrates the annual season of drinking
huge quantities of new Munchener beer, feasting on Steckerl-fisch, or
stick-fried fish, tasty sausages of all sizes and shapes, plump chickens
and whole oxen, spit-roasted over pan fires.

    The Oktoberfest, with its drinking, feasting, and general
jollification, is the anniversary of the marriage of King Ludwig I and
his bride, Theresa, on October 17, 1810. The Theresienwiese, or Theresa
Meadow, where festivities are held, was named in honor of Ludwig's
queen. Today hundreds of Bavarian peasants crowd into this huge area to
carry on the tradition of merrymaking on a royal scale.

    The festival opens as the burgomaster taps the first keg of beer.
The beer which is drawn from barrels, is served by buxom Frauleins in
native costume and drunk from enormous steins.

    Powerful brewery horses decorated with gleaming brasses and colored
ribbon streamers, clatter noisily through the narrow streets, dragging
heavily-loaded beer trucks. Festivity is in the air. Everywhere one sees
bright costumes and hears folk singing and the tireless rhythm of
dancing feet.

    Munich's Oktoberfest, which annually is attended by millions of
visitors from Germany and foreign countries, is noted for all kinds of
amusements besides eating and drinking, although food consumption is an
important part of the annual celebration. Merchandise is bought and sold
from cleverly-decorated booths which feature household articles,
clothing, foodstuffs, and sweets. Burly farmers enjoy an agricultural
show, while carnival features such as merry-gorounds, side shows, and
sports events, furnish entertainment for the general public. In addition
to historical pageants and a magnificent parade which shows costumes
from all parts of the country, there is the traditional Schafflertanz,
or Coopers' Dance. The dance is a five-hundred-year-old custom. It is
performed every seven years during carnival season in Munich, a city in
which beer coopers have always been much respected. Twenty-five coopers,
in colorful costume and the leather aprons of their trade, execute the
steps of the dance, slowly swingin  
hoops of fir branches and beating time with their tools on barrels. The
dance was last performed at the Oktoberfest in 1956.

GRENZUMGANG (Boundary Walk), in Springe Deister, Lower Saxony 1961, and
every ten years thereafter

    Springe Deister observes its Boundary Walk once every decade. The
celebration was revived in 1951, following a twenty-three-year lapse.

    Boundary Walk festivals, held in many German towns, differ from
place to place according to local tradition. The custom dates back to
the Middle Ages when surveying in the modern sense was unknown. In those
days land-owners and churchmen, accompanied by stalwart armed men,
periodically reviewed the boundaries to see that marking stones were in
place and hunting or fishing rights observed. In later times woodsmen
and soldiers walked town and village boundaries and, when all was in
order, ended the ceremony with a huge feast.

    In Springe Deister Boundary Walk celebrations start with morning
reveille and a Fire Department band concert. The burgomaster then reads
a proclamation concerning the day's activities.

    Generally the local band leads off a group of marchers who carry the
town's treasure chest at their head. At the first boundary a delegation
from an adjoining town meets Springe's citizens. An appropriate ceremony
is held, drinks are exchanged. The group then continues to the next
boundary point, and the next. Each time the marchers are joined by more
neighbors, each time they indulge in further cheer. By the time final
rounds are completed the marchers are hilarious. Their ranks have so
greatly increased, moreover, that the group divides and proceeds in
different columns to various points, where festivities are continued.

SCHUTZENFESTE (Marksmen's Festivals), all over Germany At various times
during the year

    Throughout Germany, from small cities to large ones, the
Schutzenfest, or Marksmen's Festival, is one of the most important
annual events. These festivals originated five or six hundred years ago
with the decline of the knights' feudal power. Archery contests by
citizen marksmen superseded medieval tournaments of the knights.
Marksmen, rather than knights, became responsible for the protection of
towns and villages against enemy attack.

    At regular intervals contests were held to keep these guardians of
the peace in top form. People gathered from far and near to witness
their feats of skill. Gradually, the marksmen's contests became gala
events, lasting for several days. Throughout the centuries popular
elements were introduced, such as processions in costume, folk dance
exhibitions, special foods and various amusements. In this way the
marksmen's festivals finally developed into folk festivals in which
everyone participated. Today they are observed with an enthusiasm which
is rivaled only by the holiday spirit prevalent at Christmas, the New
Year, and Carnival.

    Each town and hamlet celebrates its Schutzenfest at its own time and
in its own way. In Biberach, for example, the festival occurs on the
first Monday and Tuesday of July. For centuries the town has featured a
procession of children dressed in period costume who are accompanied by
local bands and colorfully attired heralds. In places like Dusseldorf
and Neuss, on the other hand, the event occurs in late August, while
Hannover celebrates on the first Sunday in July. Some forty or fifty
marksmen's societies participate in these events. The man who scores
highest in the contests is crowned Schutzenkonig, or King of the
Marksmen, and is escorted through the streets to the accompaniment of
blaring trumpets and beating drums. Colorful banners, stretched across
the streets, flutter in the breeze. Spectators shout themselves hoarse
as the King proceeds triumphantly to his coronation and receives homage
from his thousands of admiring subjects.

LEONHARDIRITT (Saint Leonard's Ride), in Bad Tolz, State of Bavaria
November 6

    November 6 is the namesday of Saint Leonard, the sixth-century
hermit-abbott, who was reared by his godfather, the pious Saint Remy,
Archbishop of Rheims. Saint Leonard is patron of prisoners and farm
animals, especially horses and cattle. This saint, who won many tourneys
before giving himself to God, is especially revered in Bavaria and
Austria, where numerous chapels are dedicated to his name. These small
shrines, which usually are situated in mountain places outside the
villages, are covered with votive offerings consisting of horseshoes,
pliers, palls, and other objects associated with horses and cattle
raising. Iron chains, also, are often present, for Saint Leonard
reputedly had power to break chains and set all prisoners free.

    Saint Leonard is honored throughout Bavaria but nowhere, perhaps,
more picturesquely than at Bad Tolz, where peasants in native costume
celebrate his namesday by riding to church in Truhenwagen, chest wagons,
which are gaily painted with incidents from the saint's life. Religious
ceremonies are held in a chapel on top of Kalvarien, Calvary Mountain,
which overlooks the river Isar. The small edifice was built in 1772, on
a spot once occupied by a huge old tree.

    From homesteads and farms high up in the mountain festival
wagons--possibly sixty in all--come drawn by spirited horses wearing
gleaming brass-studded harnesses. The animals proudly toss manes and
flip their long tails, which are decorated with flowers, ribbons, and
sprays of green. An outrider, carrying a colorful banner, accompanies
each conveyance. Great white horses draw a wagon in which members of the
clergy and the Tolz councilmen ride in state.

    The procession, led by a handsome horseback rider and accompanied by
the local rifleman's band, assembles at the foot of Calvary Mountain and
makes its way up the steep ascent to the Chapel. There the worshipers
walk three times about the sanctuary and, following open air Mass,
receive the priest's blessing on both horses and wagons.

    Later the procession returns to town where the group disbands to the
accompaniment of lively music. The "Riders of Saint Leonard," as the
mounted escort is called, then participate in a whip cracking
contest--an ancient and honored sport in this part of Bavaria.

    In many hamlets cattle, rather than horses, participate in the Saint
Leonard's Ride, for they, also, fall under the saint's special
protection. Hundreds of miniature iron votive churches are consecrated
and then purchased by faithful worshipers, in the hope that Saint
Leonard's intercession will preserve the animals from sickness and
disease throughout the year.

MARTINSFEST (Saint Martin's Festival) Saint Martin's Eve, November 10,
Saint Martin's Day, November 11

    Martinsfest is a festival of significance to both Catholic and
Protestant Germany. The occasion honors Saint Martin, Jovial
fourth-century friend of children and patron of the poor, and also
Martin Luther, leader of the Reformation in Germany, born November 10,
1483. German Catholic communities along the Rhine and elsewhere, but
especially in Dusseldorf, pay annual tribute to Saint Martin; while
Protestant groups, notably in Thuringia, long have celebrated Martin
Luther's birthday in picturesque fashion. In prewar Erfurt, where Martin
Luther attended the university, it was customary for thousands of
children, carrying lighted lanterns, to form in procession and march up
to the Plaza before the Cathedral and the Severi Church. There the young
people with their lanterns traditionally formed the "Luther rose," or
the escutcheon of Martin Luther.

    In many Black Forest areas Saint Martin's Day is celebrated by a
village fair. Along the Upper Rhine, however, where Frankish
missionaries first introduced the Christian faith and venerated Saint
Martin as their patron, the Eve is characterized by children's lantern
processions and the Day by feasting on roast goose. Rural inhabitants of
Black Forest and Lake Constance districts usually plan their feast to
coincide with the slaughter of the family pig. Friends and neighbors,
the school master and the preacher are invited to dinner and village
youngsters come around from door to door. They chant traditional ditties
and demand "a sausage so long you can wind it three times around the
oven, across the room and out to the singing boys!"

    Legends abound to explain the eating of goose on this day. One is
that the saint died after eating a whole goose at a single meal. Many
claim that the custom of eating goose originated in pagan times when,
according to German mythology, the bird was sacrificed to Wotan, father
of the gods. Others say that Martinmass feasting began with Thanksgiving
ceremonies for Freya, goddess of plenty.

    Saint Martin in Germany, as elsewhere in Europe, is regarded as
patron of the harvest and friend of the poor. On his anniversary people
invite others to share their bounty, to make merry, feast on autumn
foods and drink the new red wines. Saint Martin himself set the pattern
for sharing when, as a dashing young soldier at the gates of Amiens, he
divided his cloak with a beggar.

    Saint Martin's Day is for family, friends, and the needy, but Saint
Martin's Eve is for children.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Let's be happy, let's be gay,  
Let's be children all today,

</div>

is the ancient song which resounds through Dusseldorf's streets at
nightfall, as hundreds of jubilant boys and girls scurry hither and yon,
swinging fantastic lanterns from long poles and gathering for their
famous procession. An adult, representing Saint Martin, heads the long
line. Then come the children, bobbing homemade lanterns of every
conceivable size and shape. Some of the simpler goblin lanterns are made
from hollowed-out pumpkins or beets, illumined by lighted candles. There
are also wooden lanterns with elaborately colored windows, strange
animals, and cunningly fashioned windmills. Among the more ambitious
creations are lanterns representing Lambertus Church with its leaning
tower.

    Through the streets the children advance, singing, holding their
lanterns, which rise and fall like the waves of the sea. Against the
background of the city's ancient gabled facades; through the cobbled
streets of the Altstadt or old town, on into the broad avenues of the
town's newer parts the procession steadily moves, the children's lighted
lanterns casting fantastic shadows against the dark walls of silent
buildings.

    From every quarter the Saint Martin's Eve theme song,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Let's be happy, let's be gay,  
Let's be children all today,

</div>

rises like a mighty chant from the throats of hundreds of clear-voiced
boys and girls. The words are caught up by thousands of spectators and
repeated in the cracked voices of aged men and women on the sidelines
who, on this one night in the year, relive their lost youth.

HAMBURGER DOM (Dom Fair) in Hamburg November until Christmas

    Hamburg's ancient Dom probably is one of the most unique Christmas
fairs not only in Germany, but in the world. The fair gets its name from
the fact that, in olden days, it was held in the open square before the
Dom, or cathedral. Today the fair occupies the Helligengelstfeld, or
Holy Ghost Field, in the center of town.

    There are booths filled with all kinds of exciting toys, sugared
gingerbreads, and myriads of useless knicknacks which attract the eye
and lure the last pfennig from pockets of holiday shoppers.

    The Dom opens in November and continues until shortly before
Christmas.

ADVENT (Advent) The four weeks preceding Christmas

    Advent customs vary from place to place, but everywhere in Germany
the four weeks before Christmas are looked upon as a preparation period
for the greatest festival of the Christian year.

    In towns an villages of northern Germany every household has a "Star
of Seven," a seven-branch candlestick. On Christmas Eve the candles are
lighted. At midnight each family carries its glowing pointed "star"
across meadows, through dark crooked lanes, along snowy streets to
service in the village church. There, amid a blaze of lighted stars,
parishioners reverently kneel and welcome the Christkind to their hearts
and homes.

    Many families make Advent wreaths of fir which are decorated with
gold or silver ribbons or just scarlet woolen threads. Sometimes the
wreaths hang from the ceiling beams; sometimes they adorn the tables. On
each of the four Saturdays or Sundays in Advent a candle is lighted-one
on the first day, two on the second, three on the third, and so on.
Members of the family or groups of friends customarily sit about the
lighted wreath, singing seasonal carols and preparing handmade Christmas
gifts.

CHRISTKINDLSMARKT or CHRISTKINDLESMARKT (Kriss Kringle's Fair), in
Nuremberg, State of Bavaria Early December until Christmas

    Nuremberg's Christkindlsmarkt, one of the most traditional of
Germany's many holiday fairs, starts about December 4 in the old town's
marketplace and continues until Christmas. The fair is so ancient that
nobody remembers just when it began. In 1697 the historian Wagenseil,
himself a native Nuremberger, described the event much as it is
celebrated today. Many think that the fair originated in the Middle Ages
and that it was associated with Twelfth Day ceremonials.

    The mayor of the town opens the event with a speech. Then, to the
accompaniment of Christmas music, a child dressed like Nuremberg's "gold
angel" makes a dramatic appearance and welcomes visitors in verse.

    The gold angel is reminiscent of an ancient event. In medieval times
people who came to the fair saw in church a replica of the Christ Child
in the manger. In those days it was customary to give the Christ Child
away to the children in the form of a doll. After the Reformation, the
original significance of the custom was lost and the Christ Child doll
gradually became a Christmas angel. Today the angel is dressed in
gold-colored robes of eighteenth-century style.

    As Christmas approaches native toy-makers make thousands of
reproductions of Nuremberg's golden angel. An angel graces every home
and hovers as guardian over fair-time festivities. Quite aside from
golden angels, however, the fair is distinguished by its rows and rows
of colorful booths, each filled with such holiday delights as glittering
Christmas tree decorations, clever toys such as only the fingers of
Nuremberg craftsmen can fashion, marvelous Lebkuchen and pungent
gingerbreads to make a child's nostrils tingle and mouth water. Then
there are cunningly wrought figures of the baby Jesus in his crib,
surrounded by Mary, Joseph, and adoring shepherds. There are small
painted sheep, cows, asses, chickens and dogs--all so life-like and
enticing that parents scarcely can drag their offspring past the
tempting wares.

    Even more attractive to youthful imagination, perhaps, are the
numberless booths filled with such specialties as savory-smelling
roasted sausages or delicately grilled herrings. There are sweets, of
course, all kinds of traditional candies, hard spicy peppernuts, and
little pink-frosted cookies, adorned with delightful sugar scrolls or,
possibly, a brightly colored picture or bit of shiny mirror.

    Yes, the Nuremberg Christkindlsmarkt is full of wonderful sights,
sounds and smells. It symbolizes for grown-ups unforgettably beautiful
childhood memories; for small boys and girls it is little short of
paradise.

SANKT NIKOLAUS-ABEND and SANKT NIKOLAUS-TAG (Saint Nicholast Eve and
Saint Nicholas Day) December 5, 6

    The Yuletide season opens officially on December 5, Saint Nicholas
Eve, or on the morning of December 6, when the good saint appears in
person in many towns and villages and calls on the children. Saint
Nicholas (or, in some places, his assistant, Knecht Rupprecht, or
Christkindle or Kriss Kringle) usually is regarded as a pre-Christmas
messenger who examines the youngsters' behavior. He promises gifts of
toys and sweets if the children are good. If they are bad, however, he
flourishes bundles of birch rods and threatens punishment unless naughty
ways are mended. Sometimes he reminds children of their waywardness by
presenting little bundles of twigs, either real or of candy.

    In some places children place a shoe or a large stocking beside the
bed or outside the door. Saint Nicholas then leaves a small gift or a
bundle of rods, to remind the little ones of their behavior--good or
bad.

    On Saint Nicholas Eve, in the Rhineland and in northern Germany, the
holiday Spekulatius makes its first appearance. Spekulatius is
traditional hard gingerbread which is made in molds to represent Saint
Nicholas, little men, or animals. Sometimes, also, it comes in thin,
yard-long loaves.

HEILIGABEND (Christmas Eve) December 24

    Christmas is the gayest holiday of the German calendar and the
Weihnachtsbaum, or Christmas tree, with its lighted candles, gilded
nuts, multicolored paper garlands, shining red apples and dancing,
raisin-eyed gingerbread men, is the symbol of the German Yuletide. The
real holiday begins with Christmas Eve church services, which are
followed by home festivities and family gatherings.

    In most parts of Germany the trimming of the Christmas tree is done
on the twenty-fourth, although in some places people do it whenever
convenient on the days preceding. Usually the rite is performed in
greatest secrecy by the heads of the household, who are the only persons
having access to the room in which the tree is kept. Presents for each
member of the household, including the domestics, and bunte Teller,
plates filled with apples, nuts, Pfefferkuchen, marzipan and other
goodies, as well as presents, are grouped under and about the tree.

    At last the white candles on the Christmas tree are lighted and all
other lights extinguished. A bell rings and the children are allowed to
enter the room and look at the tree in all its glory. After singing
Christmas carols, which usually include such old time favorites as O
Tannenbaum and Stille Nacht, the moment for the Bescherung, or
distribution of presents arrives. The children are told that their gifts
have been left under the tree by the Weinachtsmann (the Christmas Man,
Santa Claus or his helper, Knecht Rupprecht), or by Christkind, the
Christ Child.

    The rest of the evening is spent in opening gifts, singing and
merrymaking.

SCHAFER-WALZER (Shepherds' Waltz), in Assinghausen, region of Westphalia
December 24

    For over a hundred years the gay rhythms of the "Shepherds' Waltz"
have characterized the Christmas Eve service of Assinghausen's little
church. At midnight the bells ring out joyously and devout villagers
from throughout the parish hasten through heavily drifted snows to the
tiny church, where candles blaze and the pungent smell of melted wax
mingles with the spicy scent of pine.

    Worshipers bend their heads reverently as the priest offers the
Christmas prayer and reads the Gospel story of the manger birth.
Suddenly, the merry strains of the Shepherds' Waltz flow through the
sanctuary and scores of heavily shod feet begin to beat time to the gay
dance music which issues from the organ loft.

    The birth of the Son of God is welcomed in Assinghausen with secular
music, as a result of a century-old tradition. According to church
records Herr F. W. Grimme, local poet and church organist, was playing a
hymn on Christmas Eve, when word came that he had just become father of
a seventh child. On the anniversary of this night two thousand years
ago, reasoned Herr Grimme, shepherds had brought glad tidings of Jesus'
birth. Quickly the organist broke off the stately hymn he was playing
and started improvising a joyous waltz such as he imagined the shepherds
might have played on their pipes, in honor of the arrival of Bethlehem's
Child.

WEIHNACHTEN (Christmas) December 25 and 26

    Both December 25 and 26 are public holidays. In many homes Christmas
Day, Der Erste Feiertag, is strictly a family day which is spent quietly
in enjoyment of the Christmas tree, the new books, and appropriate
seasonal music. Der Zweite Feiertag, Second Christmas, often is spent in
more worldly fashion as a time for visiting friends, attending dances,
and indulging in all kinds of merrymaking.

    Of course, food is important in all the holiday festivities. Roast
goose and Christstollen, long loaves of bread bursting with nuts,
raisins, citron and dried fruits, Lebkuchen, Pfefferkuchen, marzipan,
and scores of other tempting dainties are important among the holiday
foods. Berliners eat carp at Christmas. Whoever finds roe with his fish
is happy, for the superstition is that he will find money in the coming
year.

    There are many old folk superstitions regarding the "Twelve Nights"
between Christmas and Epiphany. Peasants often forecast weather for the
twelve months by the "onion calendar." They cut an onion into twelve
slices and sprinkle each portion with salt. The wetness or dryness of
the coming months is predicted according to the degree of moisture found
on each of the twelve slices.

ALLERKINDERTAG (Holy Innocents' Day) December 28

    Boys and girls of Thuringia celebrate the anniversary of King
Herod's slaughter of Bethlehem's children with a custom sometimes called
"whipping with fresh greens." Armed wilh switches and green branches the
children go out into the streets and spank passers-by with their rods,
demanding at the same time small money gifts.

    The custom doubtless originated in pagan times when whipping was
regarded as an early spring purification rite intended to drive out
demons and disperse powers of darkness.

SILVESTERABEND (New Year's Eve) December 31

    This is a merry night throughout Germany. Traditional foods, ancient
customs, old fashioned games and beloved folk songs all play an
important role in colorful celebrations that take place in various
areas.

    People in different localities think it "lucky" to eat certain foods
on this last night of the old year. For example, there is the
traditional carp, which is served not only in the homes but in
fashionable metropolitan restaurants. In northern Germany many people,
especially those of the older generation, not only eat the fish but slip
a few of the shining scales into their purses as a New Year's charm to
ensure plenty of money in the next twelve months! Then there is the
traditional Silvesterabend punch, a fine hot potent toddy made of
cinnamon-and-sugar-flavored red wine, which is served with Pfannkuchen,
or doughnuts.

    Just as carp is thought by some to bring good luck, so Baden folk
insist that their special dried pea soup is auspicious for all
partakers.

    Along the lower Rhine there are many delightful New Year's Eve foods
including Noujoer, or "little New Year" yeast cookies, baked in spiral
wreath forms or in pretzel or circle shapes. In Bergisch-Land and
Wuppertal the favorite pastry is Ballbauschen, a toothsome fried cake
stuffed with raisins and currants.

    Regardless of locality, however, or the special fare enjoyed on
Silvesterabend, everybody agrees that to secure a well-stocked larder
for the coming year one must leave on one's plate a bit of every kind of
food--at least, until after the clock strikes midnight!

    According to ancient Germanic folk belief prowling demons, devils
and other spirits of darkness must be routed on the last night of the
year by mummery and noise. For the most part the superstition has been
forgotten, but shooting parties still are popular at Berchtesgaden, in
the Bavarian Alps, and elsewhere, and Buttenmandl, or Little Butten Men,
still run through streets of towns and villages. The Buttenmandl are
peasants dressed in straw clothing who wear deerskin animal masks. They
hold clanging bells and drag clanking chains in an effort to drive out
evil spirits! Members of the shooting societies, on the other hand, do
their part in routing demons by scaling the Berchtesgaden heights and
shooting in unison five hundred or more old mortars.

    In Schiltach on the Kinzig a four-hundred-year-old ceremony annually
is reenacted with the midnight ringing of the church bells. Old and
young, carrying lighted lanterns, assemble in the town square and pledge
to protect their town under all circumstances. After a hymn of
thanksgiving the lantern bearers visit the parsonage, where the pastor
greets them and gives his blessing.

    The procession then returns to the square where the Burgomaster of
Schittach delivers a New Year message in which he reviews events of the
past year and extends best wishes for the one to come. The official
greeting is accepted and congratulations returned by one of the town's
leading citizens.

    The last night of the year is regarded as a propitious occasion for
looking into the future. "Lead pouring" parties are popular among young
people who drop a little melted lead into a bowl of cold water and read
fortunes for the coming year from the shapes the metal assumes. Thus a
ship may mean a voyage to distant shores, a pig, food and plenty on the
farm, a ring, a wedding, and so on.

    In lower Rhine areas card games are the most popular pastime of the
season. Everyone plays until midnight; but as soon as church bells begin
to peal and sirens to blow, everyone throws down the cards and shouts
the ancient greeting, "Prosit Neujahr!"

    In some places bands of children go from house to house singing
carols. Sometimes the songs are addressed especially to godfathers and
godmothers. The children are welcomed by householders who give them
presents of nuts, apples, Pfefferkuchen and coins.

    In certain communities the night watchman still goes about at
midnight on New Year's Eve and recites this traditional verse:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

In the name of the Lord  
The Old Year goes out the door.  
This is my wish for each of you:  
Peace forever, and Praise to God, our Lord.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5. Festivals of Italy](fwe07.md)
