[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fwe10)  [Next](fwe12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Festivals of Western Europe*, by Dorothy Gladys Spicer, \[1958\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 9 FESTIVALS OF PORTUGAL

ANO NOVO (New Year's Day) January 1

    The New Year starts with special services in the churches. Friends
and relatives visit from house to house, greeting one another with "Boas
Festas" and exchanging good wishes and congratulations. In northern
Portugal children go about the neighborhood singing old songs called
janeiras which are thought to bring luck in the coming year. In return
for their greetings the boys and girls receive gifts of food and coins.
In some places the village band goes through the streets playing
stirring airs. Whenever the musicians happen to pass the house of one of
their members they stop and play a special selection.

    Peasants of the Minho have the saying that a person will act during
the twelve months as he behaves on the first day of the year. For this
reason youngsters look well to their manners and older people conduct
their affairs with care. If anyone pays a debt on Ano Novo, for example,
he is likely to be paying throughout the year. On this day it is well to
have a coin in the pocket, something new on one's back, and extra food
in the larder.

DIA DE REIS (Day of the Kings) January 6

    All over the country peasants perform Epiphany plays in honor of the
Magi. Bands of carolers go about, singing greetings and begging gifts,
for they, like the Three Holy Kings, are weary and come from afar.

    In some places family groups visit one another from house to house.
The guests stand at the door and beg admittance, so they can sing to the
Christ Child. After receiving a hearty welcome and singing special
carols in honor of the Infant Jesus, the guests are entertained with
wines and sweets.

    Gifts are exchanged on Dia de Reis and special entertainment is
provided for children. Mothers give them a party and a ringshaped cake
called bolo-rei. Baked inside the cake are all sorts of little amulets
and fortune-telling trinkets, as well as a single dried broad bean. The
child finding the bean in his portion is crowned king of the party and
promises to "make the cake" for his playmates the following year.

    When adults hold Dia de Reis parties, in some regions, the person
finding the bean is expected to pay for next year's cake.

SAO VICENTE (Saint Vicente) January 22

    Saint Vicente, murdered by Saracens of Algarve in 1173, is Lisbon's
patron saint. Tradition says two ravens miraculously guided a boat,
carrying the saint's coffin, up the river Tagus to the harbor of Lisbon.
The inhabitants were so grateful to both winged pilots and magic bark
for returning their saint that they depicted the event in Lisbon's coat
of arms.

    Saint Vicente's Day is celebrated in weather omens and folk
traditions, no less than in processions and prayers. Farmers feel that a
good way to predict harvests in the coming season is to light a resin
torch, carry it to a high hill and then note what happens: if the flame
is extinguished in the wind, crops will be abundant and an extra helper
needed; if, on the contrary, the torch burns in spite of the wind, the
season will be bad and a farm hand must go.

NOSSA SENHORA DE FATIMA (Our Lady of Fatima), in Fatima, province of
Estremadura May 13 and October 13

    The Sanctuary of Fatima, at Cova da Iria, in a brief time has become
one of the world's greatest pilgrimage centers. Thousands of
pilgrims--often more than a hundred thousand at one time throng this
Portuguese Lourdes on the thirteenth of May and October, to pray, seek
spiritual grace, or miraculous cure at Our Lady of Fatima's shrine.

    Until May 13, 1917, Fatima consisted of a handful of peasant huts,
and the Cova da Iria, now dominated by the modern basilica and the vast
open space before it, was nothing but a grassy slope. Here three young
shepherds, Lucia de Jesus and Jacinta and Francisco Mato tended their
sheep. On that fateful thirteenth of May, the sky suddenly darkened
above the children at noon. Thinking a storm threatened, the three
shepherds prepared to drive the animals back to their village of
Almoster.

    As the children started to leave, a beautiful lady clothed in white
appeared to them from the branches of a holm-oak. She told the
frightened children to return to the same spot on the thirteenth of each
month, until October, and to "say the Rosary every day to obtain peace
for the world and the end of the war."

    Word about the monthly appearances of Our Lady of the Rosary spread.
She visited the children for the last time on October 13, in the
presence of an estimated seventy thousand persons who gathered on the
grassy slope to witness the miraculous apparition. The message of the
Virgin was always the same: a warning of need for sacrifice, prayer, and
consecration, and a promise of the conversion of Russia and peace to the
world, when "a sufficient number of people" do what Our Lady asks.

    Today Lucia, the only one of the three children to survive, is
Sister Maria Dolores of the Carmelite Convent of Coimbra. The image of
Our Lady of the Rosary has circled the globe and visited seventeen or
more countries in a mission to bring the message of peace to all
peoples. The Chapel of Apparition stands on the reputed site of the
little shepherds' vision. A new place of pilgrimage has arisen in
central Portugal's remote and barren moors.

    Pilgrims travel long distances--on foot, by donkey, in
automobiles--to bring their sick to Fatima. May 13 and October 13 are
the great pilgrimage days, since they mark the first and last
apparitions of Our Lady, but many minor pilgrimages are made on the
thirteenth of the intervening months and also at other time families
crouch about small fires built on the bare earth and cool simple meals.
Then, huddling in the vast arena before the church the pilgrims await
the moment when the small image of Our Lady is carried out of the
basilica in procession. In the warm glow of thousands of lighted candles
the Virgin makes her rounds. Mass is performed and the sick and crippled
receive the Sacrament.

    When Nossa Senhora de Fatima is returned next day to her place in
the basilica, the pilgrims wave their handkerchiefs in sad farewell.

CARNAVAL (Carnival) The Sunday, Monday and Tuesday preceding Ash
Wednesday

    The last three days before Ash Wednesday culminate the pre-Lenten
festivities, which begin several weeks earlier. Throughout the country
masked balls, parties, confetti battles and dances are held at this
season.

    Even as recently as a little over a century ago the Lisbon carnival
was characterized as a time of license, with obscene jokes, coarse
horseplay, and battles with eggs, oranges, flour and water
predominating. Today public festivities in Lisbon are restricted for the
most part, to processions of gay flower-decked cars, music, an parades
of revelers in fancy costume.

    In rural areas Carnival continues to be celebrated with much of its
old time gaiety and abandon. Battles of flowers, mummers and musicians,
the burial in effigy of King Carnival, old folk plays and dramas are
features of the festivities.

DOMINGO DE RAMOS (Palm Sunday) The Sunday preceding Easter

    In northern Portugal people take to church ramos, or branches bent
into half loops and decorated with spring flowers. The priest blesses
the ramos, which later are carried in procession. These hoops are
carefully preserved in homes and burned during storms, as a protection
against thunder and lightning.

SEMANA SANTA (Holy Week) The week preceding Easter

    During Holy Week, sometimes throughout Lent, there are exhibits in
the churches and processions through the streets of scenes from the
Passion of Jesus.

    The church of Senhor dos Passos, Our Lord of the Way of the Cross,
in the city of Guimardes, shows a different Passion tableau each day of
Holy Week "to remind people of the sufferings of Our Lord."

    Two of the most famous Passion processions are in the city of
Covilha on the slope of the Serra de Estrela, and in the town of Vila do
Conde. In many places these processions are attended by bands of
anjinhos, children dressed as little angels, with crowns on their heads
and fluffy eiderdown wings attached to their shoulders. The figures of
Jesus, which have lashes, real hair, and crystal tears, are sumptuously
clad in robes of purple velvet. The clergy's vestments and all
processional properties are violet in color, and frequently the
worshipers lined up to watch the procession, toss violets to their
suffering Lord.

PASCOA (Easter)

    Many churches are decorated with white flowers. Old and young, rich
and poor attend the Easter Masses which are characterized by magnificent
Resurrection music. After the services families eat a holiday meal and
visit among friends and neighbors.

    Folar is a popular Easter cake in many places. This is made of sweet
dough baked in a round flat shape and decorated on top with hard-boiled
eggs. People exchange presents of little colored paper cornucopias
filled with sugar covered almonds.

QUINTA-FEIRA DA ESPIGA (Ear of Wheat Thursday or Ascension Day) The
fortieth day after Easter

    On this day peasants make bouquets of olive branches and wheat
sheaves, poppies and daisies. The olive and wheat symbolize wishes for
abundant harvest; the poppy stands for peace, the daisy for money. A bit
of wheat is kept in the house as a sign of prosperity throughout the
coating year. People often gather medicinal plants and herbs on this
day, preparing them later for home remedies or magic spells.

PENTECOSTES (Pentecost, Whitsun) The fiftieth day after Easter

    The anniversary of the descent of the Holy Ghost on the Disciples is
celebrated with special church services. In some towns of the Azores,
local Holy Ghost societies issue free food tickets to the poor. Long
elaborately decorated tables, laden with all kinds of bread, meat, and
other tempting foods, are set up in the main streets. Food and drink are
distributed to the community poor while bands play and villagers who
have contributed to the feast act as hosts and hostesses to their less
fortunate neighbors.

    The distribution of food usually continues until Corpus Christi,
eleven days after Pentecost.

DIA DE CORPO DE DEUS (Corpus Christi), in Ponta Delgada, on the island
of San Miguel, the Azores The Thursday following Trinity Sunday

    Since medieval days Corpus Christi, the feast that honors the
Eucharist, has been one of the most sumptuous of all religious
observances both on the Portuguese mainland and in the Azores.

    In the city of Ponta Delgada, on San Miguel, on Corpus Christi
Sunday the inhabitants make a magnificent flower petal carpet--almost
three quarters of a mile in length--over which the procession passes.
High-ranking clergy wearing gorgeous vestments and walking under an
embroidered canopy, are accompanied by acolytes who swing censers and
hold tall white candles. Hundreds of red-robed priests follow, then a
charming group of first communicants--little boys in dark suits and
scarlet capes and little girls in white frocks and filmy veils.

    The climax of the ceremony comes when the bishop, in vestments woven
with gold and silver thread, slowly raises the silver monstrance and
exposes the Blessed Sacrament, symbol of the Body of Christ. Worshipers
sink to their knees. As if to enhance the solemnity of the moment, the
setting sun often drenches the bowed heads of the vast throng with warm
glowing light. A spectacular backdrop of purple, rose, and gold suddenly
unfurls in the sky as the chanting of priests and the devout responses
of the people fill the evening with somber melody.

SANTO ANTONIO (Saint Anthony) June 13

    One of the country's most popular saints is Saint Anthony of Padua,
who was born in 1195 in the Alfama, Lisbon's oldest and most crowded
quarter, where the small church of Santo Antonio da Se now stands. When
the church was destroyed by the earthquake of 1755, even the boys and
girls of the Alfama began collecting pennies for its reconstruction. The
children set up little street altars which they decorated with white
paper lace cut-outs, flowers, tapers, and gaudy pictures of their saint.
The youngsters begged "a tittle penny for Santo Antonio" from all who
passed. The "little pennies" and the children's example must have
prompted many substantial gifts, because the present building, completed
in 1812, was paid for by these alms.

    The custom of begging for Santo Antonio still continues in the
twentieth century. Throughout the month of June in Lisbon, children
prepare altars in the saint's honor. Boxes and tables are covered with
white paper "altar cloths" and decorated with candles, images and
pictures depicting the life and works of the saint. "Little pennies" are
still demanded, but nowadays for a children's feast.

    Antonio is the matchmaker saint. On the Eve of his day young girls
try various methods of finding out whom they will wed. One favorite way
is for a girl to fill her mouth with water and hold it until she hears a
boy's name mentioned. The name she hears is sure to be that of her
future husband!

    Young people write letters asking Antonio to furnish sweethearts.
These epistles are dropped into a box in Santo Antonio da Se. When love
affairs prosper and suitable mates are found, the box receives thank
offerings from the grateful lovers.

    A charming custom of the day is for young men to present a pot of
basil to the girls they hope to wed. A frilled and fluted tinsel-trimmed
paper carnation of various colors blooms in each pot. Within the petals
is a verse or message which indicates the young man's passion. Often the
flower is accompanied by a painted toy, a pretty fan, or some other
trifle calculated to appeal to a maiden's fancy.

VESPERA DE SAO JOAO (Saint John's Eve) June 23

    On the night dedicated to Sao Joao Baptista many traditional rites
connected with fire, water, and love are observed. In some places boys
and girls strip a pine tree, decorate it with flowers and greens, and
ceremoniously carry it into the village. There the facho, as the tree is
called, is set up in the center of a great bonfire of brush and pine
logs. When the fire is lighted young people dance about it, singing
ancient songs dedicated to Sao Joao. Hand in hand the couples leap over
the flames.

    Mothers often hold children over the embers, as the saint's fires
are thought to possess curative virtue. Cattle and flocks are driven
through the ashes so the animals will prosper throughout the coming
year. Even the dead embers are gathered and carefully preserved, for
they are thought to be efficacious against storm and evil influences.

    People say that Saint John's Eve water possesses great heating
power. Before dawn both cattle and children are bathed in rivers or dew,
to ensure health and strength. Young girls and women like to wash their
faces in spring water or early dew, so they will be lovely throughout
the year. Often peasants deck the springs with garlands, and water from
seven different springs either is drunk, or carried home in
flower-wreathed jugs.

    On Saint John's Eve, night of love, young people exercise powers of
divination. Three beans slipped under the pillow at night, cakes in
which a grain of maize is hidden, fig leaves passed through the Sao Joao
fires and touched with midnight dew--all these are good devices for
learning whom one will wed. In Oporto, lovers exchange gifts in the
marketplace at dawn. Boys give their sweethearts little pots of
marjoram, girls present the boys with a large leek, which must be kept
"for luck." In other places a boy sometimes bestows a purple thistle,
which the girl promptly burns in the bonfire. She then plants the
blackened stem in the ground. If a flower appears by morning, the true
love has been found.

    Portuguese peasants, who like to feel their saints can enjoy their
own festas, have many charming folk songs in which the saints are
tenderly addressed. Sao Joao, being a favorite saint, is showered with
loving attention on his day.

    These verses, known at Braga, Amares, and Povoa do Lanhoso, are
typical of many delightful Saint John's Day songs:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

If Saint John knew  
When his day occurred  
He would come down from heaven to earth  
With pleasure and joy.

O, my Saint John the Baptist,  
Of what do you wish your chapels made?  
Of carnations and of more roses,  
With little yellow carnations.

</div>

DANCA DO REI DAVID (Dance of King David), in Braga, province of Minho
June 24

    Portugal celebrates Saint John's Day widely with parades, pageants,
bull-fights, fireworks and other popular amusements. Vila do Conde,
Viseu, Pvora, Vila Nova de Famalicao and many other places have special
observances, while the day is popular among gypsies of the Alentejo for
weddings and colorful festivities. One of the most interesting folk
ceremonies is at Braga, where the Danca do Rei David, Dance of King
David, is performed in the streets.

    The role of King David is hereditary in a certain family living near
Braga, and the dance itself possibly originated in medieval times or
earlier. The King, wearing a tall crown and voluminous cape and
strumming a guitar, is accompanied by ten shepherds (or courtiers,
according to some) in brilliant velvet coats and turban-wound fezzes.
The shepherds play ancient tunes on a variety of musical instruments,
including fiddles, flutes, and triangles. During the course of their
parade through town the group frequently halts to perform a curious
ritualistic dance, first King David alone, then the King accompanied by
his followers.

SAO PEDRO (Saint Peter) June 29

    Sao Pedro, patron of fishermen, like Santo Antonio and Sao Joao, is
a favorite June saint whose day is celebrated widely in both towns and
villages. Sintra (Estremadura), Montijo (Estremadura) and Alcanena
(Ribatejo) all have traditional festivities which include fairs,
fireworks, singing and dancing. In Lisbon there are torchlight parades
in the saint's honor and, as in most popular festas, young people dance
in the streets at night and refresh themselves from sidewalk stalls with
huge platefuls of rice and succulent sardines, grilled with tomatoes and
green peppers.

    Since Sao Pedro, like Antonio and Joao, looks upon lovers with an
indulgent eye, his night is considered favorable for all sorts of
divination games. One favorite way for young girls to find out whom they
will marry is to knock at nine different doors without uttering a word.
If absolute silence is maintained throughout the ceremony, the first man
seen from the window in the morning will be the girl's lover.

    In some places children erect little shrines to Sao Pedro on the
doorsteps. The altars are charmingly decorated with flowers, holy
pictures, and lighted tapers. Whenever the children see someone coming
they run out and beg coppers "for the poor saint."

FESTA DA RAINHA SANTA ISABEL (Festival of the Holy Queen Isabel), in
Coimbra, province of Beira Litoral First fortnight in July, in even
years

    Rainha Santa Isabel, Holy Queen Isabel, is Patroness of Coimbra,
Portugal's first capital and ancient university center. Every two years
Coimbra observes the festival of her pious Queen with a week of
elaborate religious processions, fireworks, speeches, concerts and
popular amusements. So devoted is Coimbra to the Rainha Santa that her
image is incorporated in the city's coat of arms. Isabel, whom people
claim "saved the city from pestilence and calamity," was beatified by
Pope Leo X in 1516 and canonized by Urban VIII in 1625.

    Isabel of Portugal, who was born in 1271, was daughter of Pedro III
of Aragon and wife of Dom Diniz, Portugal's poet king. Of all her good
works the Rainha Santa is probably best loved for the legendary "miracle
of roses." Dom Diniz, who was unsympathetic to his wife's frequent
errands of mercy for the poor and afflicted, once demanded to know what
she carried in the upheld folds of her robe. "Roses," said Isabel, who
was hiding bread for the hungry. She opened her robe and lo! her alms
had been transformed into roses.

    Historically, Queen Isabel exercised a strong influence for peace in
the tumultaous times in which she lived and prevented Portugal from
becoming embroiled in civil war. When her husband died in 1325, she
retired to the convent of Santa Clara which she had founded, and joined
the Third Order of Saint Francis. Throughout the country the Rainha
Santa was famed for her miracles, many of the blind and paralyzed
claiming she had cured their ills.

    The ruined convent of Santa Clara stands on the banks of the
Mondego, where it is partly buried in the sands. People still point to
the door where the miracle of roses occurred. The saint's reputedly
incorruptable body once rested in the old church, but was removed in the
seventeenth century to the Convento de Santa Clara a Nova, the "new"
Convent of Santa Clara, built high on the Monte da Esperanca, the Hill
of Hope.

    The Rainha Santa procession starts at nine in the evening from this
convent. The image of the Holy Queen is solemnly carried beneath the
gaily-painted wooden arches that span the streets between tall poles.
The poles are alternately decorated with gildel crowns and baskets of
red and white roses, illumined from within. Garlands of flowers and
plaster replicas of Queen Isabel with her robe full of roses, add
further color to the line of march. The spectacular procession
accompanied by music and fireworks advances slowly down the steep
winding hill, goes across the Ponte de Santa Clara and to the Igreja da
Graca. There religious ceremonies are held and the image remains until
the last night of the festa, when it is returned to its place on the
altar of the convent church.

FESTA DOS TABULEIROS (Festival of the Tabuleiros), in Tomar, province of
Ribatejo About the second week in July, every third year in odd years
(1959, 1961, 1963, and so on)

    For over six hundred years the city of Tomar has celebrated the
Festa dos Tabuleiros in token of thanksgiving for harvest foods and of
the city's charity for the poor and afflicted. Every third year the
festa is celebrated for four days, toward mid-July, both in the homes
and on the streets. For four days there are bands, dances, concerts,
processions, fireworks, bullfights and feasting. For four days Tomar's
population is doubled or tripled, for rich and poor alike pour into the
town from far and near.

    The outstanding feature of the celebration is a magnificent
procession of six hundred girls selected from Tomar and surrounding
communities. The girls wear huge headdresses constructed with small
loaves of bread and adorned with flowers. "Once the flowers were real,"
people told me. Now they are made of colored paper--a wise provision,
surely, for a four-day festa.

    The tabuleiro, as the traditional headdress is called, weighs about
thirty-three pounds and "must be as tall as the girl who carries it."
The foundation is a round basket, such as the Portuguese use for serving
bread. From the basket (which is covered with an embroidered linen
cloth) rises a framework of bamboo sticks and wires. The bamboo pierces
thirty small bread loaves, arranged in five rows, six to a row. The
intervening wires are covered with rainbow-colored flowers. A Maltese
cross or a white dove makes a finial to the massive structure. The dove
(of cotton battincy with red tinsel eyes and an olive branch in its
tinsel beak) "symbolizes peace and the Holy Ghost," while the cross
stands for the ancient Order of Christ, which once flourished in Tomar.

    The city has lived for centuries with the cross as her symbol. The
twelfth-century Templars' monastery castle is silhouetted against the
sky on the hill west of the town. It was in Tomar that the "new" Order
of Christ took firm root in 1356, following the suppression of the
Templars whose Grand Master, in 1160, built the forbidding castle above
the Nabao. The square Maltese Cross of the Order of Christ is therefore
repeated endlessly both in the town's sculptured monuments and in all
festa decorations.

    The Festa dos Tabuleiros though intermingled with secular
entertainment, is primarily religious in character. The event is so old
that nobody in Tomar can tell when or how it started. Everyone agrees,
however, that the procession which honors the Holy Ghost, represents an
annual thank offering; that the bread, wine, and flesh--three symbolic
elements featured in the procession--which are blessed by the priest and
distributed to the poor, are gifts of plenty from the rich to their
needy neighbors. The Portuguese word peca, "a word impossible to
translate," according to one informant, "but meaning the giving of these
three foods to the poor, has come down through the centuries and is
known only to Tomar."

    As with all ceremonials that have been observed for hundreds of
years, there are many conflicting theories concerning the origin of the
Festa dos Tabuleiros. One favorite supposition is that it has come down
from early Roman times and the processions honoring Ceres, goddess of
the harvest. Another explanation links the giving of bread to the poor
with the legend of Queen Isabel I, who was known as the Rainha Santa.
Yet a third legend associates the custom with the name of Donna Maria
Fogaca, a rich and pious woman, who lived long ago when Tomar and the
surrounding countryside were ravaged by locusts. All the grain was
destroyed. The poor, deprived of daily bread, died by hundreds. Donna
Maria ordered that a great loaf be made from her own stock of grain.
Distributing the food to the starving people, she urged them to make an
annual procession and to beseech God always to provide them with
sufficient bread.

    Since I arrived in Tomar in advance of the festa, I had ample
opportunity to observe the elaborate preparations going on in every
quarter of town. For weeks beforehand housewives had indulged in orgies
of cleaning and polishing. Confectioners turned out tons of the regional
estrelas, fatias, queijinhos, and other doces, or sweets, for which
Tomar is justly famous, while local hostelries frenziedly set up extra
beds and stocked extra foods for the expected influx of guests.

    One of the most delightful folk aspects of the whole affair was the
original and often very artistic way in which various little communities
worked out decorative plans for their own neighborhoods. There was Rua
do Camardo, the Street of Shrimp, for example, one of Tomar's more
humble quarters, which won both first and second prizes as the most
beautiful street in town.

    Rua do Camardo is long and slightly twisting. The modest whitewashed
cottages with gaily painted half doors, crowd close to the cobbled lane.
On the eve of the festa every man, woman, cat, dog, and chicken was
busily running hither and yon. I was invited to look into a dark cellar
which overflowed with beautiful paper flower decorations. People were
stringing electric lights against house walls. Fresh greens were being
woven into long garlands adorned with pink, blue, yellow, and red
artificial flowers. Festoons were hung from house to house across the
narrow alley. One old man was busy making what I took for a shrine in a
jog of the wall. He beckoned me to come closer. Unwarily, I leaned over,
to be suddenly drenched by a tiny hidden fountain!

    The Rua do Camardo was gay with paper flower festoons over doors and
windows. At either end of the street inverted paper umbrellas, with
panels of red, yellow, blue and white swung merrily, with tissue covered
"pails," lighted from within, dangling from each point. Smaller
umbrellas, also illumined, lined the street close to the houses.

    But while Rua do Camardo artists were busy with decorations, her
poets were busy writing little hand-printed rhymes which they tacked up
against the walls and framed with flowers. One verse read:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

This street so humble  
Where we are very happy  
Is the most beautiful of all streets,  
This street of Camardo.

</div>

    Another verse, not only flower framed but decorated with green
leaves and two pink-eyed doves, emphasized the peace theme, so often
evident in Portuguese thinking:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

O, thou who passeth by singing,  
Indifferent and unheeding,  
Pause here a moment  
And pray God for peace.

</div>

    Yet another verse expressed much the same idea:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

To see a white dove flying  
Fills my breast with rapture  
And reminds me of the Holy Spirit.

</div>

    Decorations in the Rua do Camaras grew increasinely elaborate as the
festa progressed, so it was fun to visit the quarter each night and see
what new ideas had developed during the day. One night hundreds of fairy
lamps made from lighted wicks floating in tiny terra cotta saucers,
shone like glow worms along the cobbled street, close to the houses. For
centuries primitive lamps such as these have been used by humble folk in
this ancient land. By the end of the festa, flower pots adorned the tops
of walls, flowers bloomed from trees and many other colorful touches
appeared in the narrow street.

    Tomar's ancient ghetto, like the Street of the Shrimp, also was
bursting with festa spirit. I paused to chat with an old man who was
attaching sprays of green, adorned with bright red artifical cherries,
to a morning-glory vine which sprawled voluptuously across the front of
his tiny cottage. The vine, I noted, not only bore its own great purple
flowers, but a profusion of red, green, and silver tinsel blossoms.
Everywhere people took childlike joy in producing colorful effects.
Throughout the town a great deal of artistry and skill went into the
decorations, which cost little but displayed community planning and
effort.

    Serpa Pinto, Tomar's business street, was as gay as the town's more
humble quarters. There were paper lanterns and roses, fluttering banners
and balcony decorations. The motifs of the Cross of Christ and the Holy
Dove were repeated many times. Shops vied with each other in displaying
original verses, figures of girls carrying the tabuleiros, and all kinds
of Tomar sweets, together with regular merchandise. Some shopkeepers
showed a real flair for modern advertising. One accessory store, for
example, exhibited women's scarves, handbags, gloves, and dress
materials, along with comforting hints such as these:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Don't walk along sadly  
Because nobody loves you  
You can be so pretty  
You won't have to stay single!

</div>

    And again:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Miracles are not necessary  
If you want to get married;  
With so many pretty things  
You will soon become a bride!

</div>

    Against this background of gaiety and color the Festa dos Tabuleiros
officially opened with processions of bands and soldiers. By day,
firecrackers, set off at intervals, announced the approach of bagpipers
and drummers. All night loudspeakers blared forth song hits and
jazz--Portuguese, French and American--while the amusement park was the
scene of a products' fair, family picnics, and unbelievably noisy
merry-go-rounds. By midnight the noise reached a deafening crescendo
when fireworks were shot off from the Templars' castle on the hill. One
night there was a great naval battle in the air. Another time the mighty
eight-hundred-year-old fortress seemed smoldering in flames. Of course,
nobody slept until he fell down from sheer fatigue.

    Sunday, the high day of the festa, dawned bright and hot. Everybody
seemed too exhausted by the fireworks, bullfights, and parades of the
first two days to get the celebration under way on time. The bagpipers,
who kept circulating in streets and taverns, began to look decidedly
worse for wear. Housewives were out early, nevertheless, to seek festa
bargains. I saw many hurrying home before noon with huge bouquets for
the table and chickens or rabbits for the pot. Solemn High Mass at Sao
Joao Baptista's was late, and the old Gothic church, hung with feast day
scarlet, overflowed with peasants, kneeling in Sunday best. Dinners were
late all over town, but once eaten, everybody hastened to the church
square to witness the great Tabuleiros procession. The grandstand was
erected before the beautiful eighteenth-century palace, now the Town
Hall, directly opposite Sao Joao Baptista's door. Spectators lined the
streets all about the square, which was cleared except for cameramen.

    After a long wait the repeated firing of rockets announced the
approaching procession. Two firecracker men slowly advanced, passing
before the grandstand. They wore white shirts and trousers, broad red
ashes and green and red knitted caps. One man held a bundle of rockets.
His partner preceded him, lighting one rocket at a time and sending it
aloft with a terrific din that immediately dislodged all the gray doves
in the church belfry. Out they flew, a silver phalanx against the deep
blue sky; then they settled back in their hidden ledges, only to fly out
again with the next explosion.

    Following the firecracker men came the bagpipers, resplendent in red
satin shirts, their waists twined with red and black paper garlands.
Tomar's briskly stepping band came next, then the city standard bearer
with a red satin banner embroidered with a gold dove. Close behind were
three men, each bearing a silver crown displayed on a scarlet cushion.

    At last the tabuletros approached--the procession of six hundred
girls carrying on their heads beautiful crowns with the bread to be
blessed. From a distance they looked like moving columns of brilliant
flowers--green, blue, cerise, purple, orange, pink. Each girl wore the
traditional simple white cotton dress, high-necked, longsleeved, of
ankle length. The close fitting blouses had little lace-edged peplums,
and the full ruffled skirts were also trimmed with lace. Ribbons about
four inches wide, of pink, blue, red, or other colors were passed over
one shoulder, about the waist and tied in a bow with long streamers at
the opposite side.

    Straight and strong the double line of girls approached, each with a
ribboned sogra, or padded ring on her head, to support the tabuleiro of
bread and flowers. Modern caryatids, these stately girls bore their
heavy burdens with the grace of young goddesses. Each girl had an
escort--a young man in dark trousers, red sash, and white shirt who
strode beside her on the outside of the line.

    The girls with the tabuleiros marched past the grandstand, on into
the square. Their escorts lifted the headdresses to the ground. Line
after line filed by, each group of girls preceded by the parish
standard-bearer, each with the special flower or fruit selected by the
parish. Tiger lilies, poppies, roses, tulips, lemons, and cherries all
were represented in the headdresses. Many girls made the flowers
themselves, I was told. Sometimes a well-to-do citizen donated a
headdress to be carried by a girl in the community. Each village or
hamlet developed its own decorative theme in an individual way. One
parish wrapped the small loaves in cellophane tying the ends with
scarlet bows.

    One of the prettiest tabuleiros was made with geraniums, shaded from
salmon pink to deep maroon. The flowers were charmingly emphasized by
green leaves. As in all headdresses, rows of bread alternated with
flowers. The pretty girl bearing the geraniums was small, with long gold
earrings and maroon sash.

    At last, all six hundred girls and their escorts had filed into the
square where they stood motionless, their symbolic crowns beside them. A
solemn hush fell over the crowd. The time of benediction had come. Even
the doves seemed to settle back into the shadows of the old belfry, the
circling swallows to cease their screaming. The priest appeared, robed
in gold and white, and accompanied by two altar boys in scarlet and
white. Slowly the priest passed down one long line of the motionless
girls and up another, blessing the loaves as he went.

    This gift of bread for the poor is symbolic, rather than actual, I
was told. Each family receiving a Festa dos Tabuleiros loaf cherishes it
throughout the year against sickness and disaster. A bit of the blessed
loaf, when swallowed by man or beast in time of crisis, is thought to
possess healing power. Many peasants keep in the holy place not only
current festa loaves, but those acquired in previous years.

    The benediction service completed, the church bells rang joyously.
Almost simultaneously the escorts lifted the tabuleiros, replacing them
on the heads of the erect young girls who began marching out of the
square and into the street. Then came one of the most picturesque
features of the procession: Three two-wheeled ox carts, each drawn by a
yoke of golden brown animals with flower decked horns, passed by the
starid and followed the marching girls. The first two carts, decorated
with wheat and poppies, (in symbol of the gift of bread), each carried a
little girl with long corkscrew curls and swansdown angel wings. The
third cart, representing the gift of wine, contained a decorated wine
cask under a bower of grapes and leaves. Then came three pair of oxen
with decorated horns. These beasts--the gift of prosperous
citizens--were destined for slaughter. Tomorrow their flesh would be
distributed to the needy. The blessed bread, the wine, the flesh--these
three elements comprised Tomar's Peca--her traditio  
al festa offering to old people in the workhouse on the hill, to the
poor for miles about.

    The distribution of peca started next day from the Misericordia
Church, where the loaves had been locked up throughout the night. By ten
o'clock the procession was slowly forming close to the church, before
the interested eyes of small boys, a few old peddlars, and a handful of
spectators. The continuous celebration of the previous three days and
nights seemed to rob this last ritual of much enthusiasm on the part of
Tomar's citizens.

    The peca procession, like that of the tabuleiros, was preceded by
firecracker men, bagpipers, and drummers. One of yesterday's
wheat-and-poppy-decorated ox carts was piled high with the blessed
bread, the other with newspaper wrapped packets of meat. As on the
previous day, the little angels presided over the carts. Stocky men in
white suits and red sashes strode beside them, guiding the animals and
assisting in the distribution of pecas. Following the bread and meat
carts came the one with the wine cask.

    All day the little procession passed up and down through Tomar's
twisted streets. All day food was given to ragged and poor, old and
infirm, and all day the traditional rite was accompanied by the playing
of bands, shooting of rockets and the fanfare of bagpipes and drums.

    But the festa was not over. Once more magnificent fireworks exploded
most of the night, loudspeakers roared, merry-go-rounds blared. Streets
and roads were filled with peasants returning home with baskets and
bedding, for the morrow would find them toiling at their nets and in the
fields.

    The next day Tomar gradually huddled back into her accustomed quiet
beneath the shadow of the Templars' castle on the hill. Secular though
the great celebration is in many respects, the Dove of Peace hovers over
the standard of the ancient town and the Cross of Christ is hewn in her
twelfth-century ramparts. Peace for Portugal and bread for the
poor--this is the real significance of the Festa dos Tabuleiros.

FESTA DO COLETE ENCARNADO (Red Waistcoat Festival), in Vila Franca de
Xira, province of Ribatejo Some time in July

    The Festa do Colete Encarnado derives its name from the red
waistcoats of the campinos, or bull herders of the Ribatejo. These men
still wear their traditional eighteenth-century costumes, consisting of
bright red sleeveless waistcoats, blue breeches, stocking caps, white
woolen hose and red sashes. The campinos carry slender eight- to
ten-foot staves with sharp arrow-pointed metal tips. These staves are
used in the province of Ribatejo to herd and control the bulls.

    The campinos parade on horseback through the streets of Vila Franca
de Xira amid the wild acclaim of onlookers; for these hardy men breed
and care for the black bulls for which the district is famous.

    The high point of the festa comes when the bulls are let loose in
the streets and start on their way to the ring. Chased by the campinos
and goaded on by the yells, taunts, and teasing of the foolhardy, the
enraged animals often charge at their tormentors who seek to exhibit
their prowess as amateur matadors. Hundreds of spectators cheer and
shout as they view the dangerous sport from the safety of balconies,
windows, and barriers.

    Bullfights, fireworks, folk dancing and great regional suppers,
featuring whole roast oxen and native red wine, characterize this
picturesque event in honor of the red waistcoat wearers.

FESTAS GUALTERIANAS (Festivals of Saint Walter), in Gulmaries, province
of Minho First Sunday in August, for four days

    Guimaraes, Portugal's twelfth-century capital and birthplace of Dom
Afonso Henriques, the country's first king, is indeed "the cradle of the
nation." Each year this ancient town, proud in palaces and tradition,
rich in treasure of silver, wood and stone, but poor in livelihood to
many of its humble citizens, is the setting of the Festas Gualterianas,
the festival honoring Sao Gualter (Walter), patron of the town. For four
days and nights people from all over the Minho pour into Guimardes.
There are magnificent processions, dazzling fireworks, animal fairs,
picturesque displays of food and merchandise--all to the deafening
accompaniment of brass bands, and of loudspeakers playing the jazz hits
of the nations.

    "The noise starts a month before the festa and continues for a month
after it is over," a nun complained.

    "Who was Sao Guatter?" I inquired, curious to know about the saint
who inspired the noise, the fireworks, the showy adornment of the square
with huge yellow, pink and blue parasols, surmounted by stars and
electric lights; the white-pillared streets, festooned with green and
white garlands that were caught up with great shimmering,
green-and-white dragonflies. "Oh, he was a Franciscan saint,
contemporaneous with Santo Antonio and Sao Francisco," said my
informant, who added, "His story is 'made up', not real."

    Before the festa commenced I made Sao Gualter's acquaintance at
Senhor dos Passos, Our Lord of the Way of the Cross, the blue-and
white-tiled church which overlooks the public garden from a high
terrace. In the nave stood a platform with the image of a slender young
Franciscan monk, a book in his hand, a halo on his head. Blue hydrangeas
and tall white tapers surrounded the image, which soon would be carried
in triumphal procession through the town, in celebration of the medieval
saint's fiftieth anniversary as patron of Gulmardes. Barefoot peasant
women in gaily striped skirts, toil worn men in festa black and little
girls in fluttering white Communion veils quietly slipped into the
church, prostrated themselves before the image, and left a few coppers
for the saint.

    The balconies and windows of Senhor dos Passos, now more a museum
than a church, were hung in festa scarlet. Other draperies, of blue and
white, were for Portugal's first flag--a white cross on blue background.
Many processional properties were on exhibition--the scarlet and gold
embroidered canopy beneath which the archbishop would walk; sumptuous
gold and red vestments for high-ranking clergy; the silver mace; the
handsome white satin standard of Saint Guatter, with the name worked in
gold threads. One of the most interesting exhibits was a handwoven
natural colored linen standard, embroidered in blue with the city's coat
of arms and in gold with a representation of Nossa Senhora da Oliveira,
Our Lady of the Olive Tree, patroness of a tenth-century Gulmaraes
abbey. This beautiful symbolic banner was made as an anniversary gift
from the city of Gulmardes to Portuguese countrymen in Goa.

    The Procissao Gualteriana of Sunday night was a magnificent
spectacle. The image of the saint, accompanied by the Archbishop of
Braga and distinguished churchmen of both Portugal and Spain, priests,
divinity students, bands and standard bearers, was carried from the
church of Senhor dos Passos through the picturesquely decorated streets.
Thousands of spectators watched the solemn procession, then spent the
rest of the night enjoying fireworks, folk dances in regional costume
and, most of all perhaps, the shooting galleries, side shows and
merry-go-rounds in the public garden that is dominated by the church of
Senhor dos Passos. The sanctuary's doors, windows, and rococo facade
were now outlined by strings of red, green, yellow, and blue electric
bulbs. Even the figures of the four huge granite saints near the portal
were wreathed in blazing lights.

    Pandemonium seemed let loose as the night wore on. A singer dressed
half in scarlet, half in white, with bulbous red nose and raucous voice,
kept popping in and out of one side show. Another exhibited an animated
creche. Joseph and Mary lifted their arms, while donkeys, cows, and
sheep moved heads up and down as the Infant Jesus jerkily raised tiny
hands and feet.

    Vendors of green and purple grapes, ices, household wares, and foods
thronged the streets. Even at two in the morning many peddlars sat by
their stalls hopefully awaiting customers. Others wrapped their children
in blankets and bunked them up against the sides of buildings.
Occasionally a weary woman dropped her head on her arms for a snatch of
sleep. Barefoot peasant women, gracefully balancing classic looking
terra cotta jugs on their heads, strode through the streets selling
draughts of water. Some vendors sold bottles of soft drinks cooled by an
oblong block of ice in a pail, while specialists in hot foods squatted
over little charcoal braziers close to the curb.

    The most fascinating of all merchandise, however, were the tiny pink
and black flower-painted cocks, the miniature jugs, the whistles, and
pretty hand-woven baskets, spread out in endless array. Each small item
was a perfect example of peasant handicraft, the flowering of centuries
of poetic imagination, of dwelling close to the soil in the beauty of
field and flower.

    Then there were the festa breads and fancy cakes. There were great
round fragrant loaves designed for family picnicking and little dough
dogs and birds to please the children. There were oval sugar-coated
cakes and round ones with holes in the middle, strung on pink, blue, or
red cords. Vareirinhas, large sugar-coated buns, were sold in pairs for
three- and-a-half escudos (about ten cents), while cellophane bagfuls of
alfacinhas, cakes that looked like fat peppermints, were even dearer.

    As the days passed the festa increased progressively in noise and
tempo. The Marcha Gualteriana, a midnight procession of twelve
allegorical floats, exhibited to the stirring music of the saint's
march, culminated official festivities in a triumph of color, music, and
fantasy.

    Possibly the most interesting peasant event of the festa came on the
final day when the prize-winning animals from various outlying districts
were selected and led through the streets by pretty girls in regional
dress. Young men and women in costume followed, singing their village
songs with great gaiety and flair.

    The prize-winning oxen were magnificent golden brown beasts, with
enormous lyre-shaped horns adorned with bright paper streamers. The
animals' wide, brass-studded collars were hung with flowers. Led through
the streets by a comely girl in black pleated skirt and apron, the
stately oxen symbolized the Minho, where the rhythm of life changes
little through the centuries and festa and song lighten the task of
tilling the earth and gathering the harvest.

DIA DE NOSSA SENHORA DA ASSUMPCAO (Assumption Day) August 15

    In the churches special services are held to crown Our Lady, Queen
of the Angels, in commemoration of her ascent to heaven.

    Religious processions accompanied by bands, bagpipes, and drums, go
through the streets of many towns and villages. At the small coastal
village of Povoa de Varzim in the Minho, the benediction of the fishing
boats is one of the festival's main events.

NOSSA SENHORA DA NAZARE (Our Lady of Nazare), in Nazare, province of
Estremadura September 8-18

    High on the steep cliff overlooking the sea, Nazare has a little
chapel dedicated to Our Lady, the object of ten days of pilgrimage and
of both religious and secular ceremonies for fisherfolk from miles
about.

    Local legend says that one Dom Fuas Roupinho built a chapel on this
promontory in gratitude to Our Lady of Nazare for miraculously saving
his life. According to the story Dom Fuas went doe hunting on September
8, 1182. Through the heavy fog which enveloped the scene like a curtain,
the huntsman saw the deer he was following vanish into nothingness. His
horse, in hot pursuit, suddenly stopped and pawed the air, for he was on
the edge of a cliff that dropped three hundred feet to the sea. Both man
and horse would have quickly followed the animal, except for the
huntsman's vision of Our Lady of Nazare, whose image had been found by
shepherds in a nearby grotto. Dom Fuas prayed for the Virgin's help. As
he did so, the horse, poised on the brink of death, drew back into
safety. The grateful petitioner had a chapel built for the image. Soon
the shrine became the object of veneration to fishermen from throughout
the district.

    Today it would be hard to find along the coast a cottage without a
holy picture of the miraculous rescue of Dom Fuas. The chapel of Our
Lady, reconstructed in the seventeenth century, is said to occupy the
spot where the vision occurred.

    Beginning with September 8, anniversary of the miracle, religious
processions, bullfights, dancing, feasting and a fair commemorate Nossa
Senhora da Nazare, whose help is sought against all perils of the sea.

DIA DE FINADOS (Day of the Dead) November 2

    Masses are said for the repose of the souls of all the deceased.
Processions of the faithful go to the cemeteries and visit the graves of
the dead. In olden times food offerings for the departed probably were
eaten at the graves. Today, however, magusto, or open air feasts of wine
and chestnuts, are prepared for the living.

    On November 1 bands of children go about singing for "bread for
God," and are rewarded with food and drink. Sometimes the singers
receive bolas de festa, special Day of the Dead sugar cakes, flavored
with cinnamon and herbs.

SAO MARTINHO (Saint Martin) November 11

    The Feast of Sao Martinho, which is popularly associated with
frequent draughts of red Portuguese wine, chestnuts roasted over glowing
embers, and the annual slaughter of the family pig, is widely
celebrated. At Golega, in Ribatejo, the traditional Saint Martin's Fair
features a famous horse show, with exhibitions of some of the country's
finest thoroughbreds. Penafiel, in Tras-os-Montes, also has a Martin's
Fair, while towns and villages throughout the country bold parades and
revels to honor this saint whose festival has a strongly pagan flavor.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Children born on Saint Martin's Day  
Will be born both happy and gay,"

</div>

is a current saying which would seem to justify special celebration on
the part of all Portugal's many Martinhos.

DIA DO NATAL or DIA DA FAMILIA (Christmas, or Day of the Family)
December 25

    Christmas to the Portuguese is primarily a family festival,
characterized by reunions of as many relatives as can be gathered
together. In many parts of the country, the cepo do Natal, or Christmas
log (traditionally of oak), is burned on the hearth while the family
feasts and drinks late into the day. The charred remains of the log are
gathered up and carefully preserved. They are burned, later on, to keep
the house from harm, when endangered by thunder or sudden storm.

    In some primitive districts people share the consoada, or Christmas
repast, with the spirits of the dead, who are thought to return to their
former homes at this season. Sometimes crumbs from the feast are
sprinkled over the hearth, or food is left on the table so the hungry
ghosts may have a part in the family's cheer.

    The night before Christmas groups of carolers go through the streets
singing hymns about Jesus and his birth in Bethlehem's humble manger.

VESPERA DE ANO NOVO (New Year's Eve) December 31

    Throughout the country the devout attend religious services in the
churches. At mldnight the bells ring and people hasten to the village
squares to speed the Old Year and welcome the New with fireworks,
blaring trumpets, and beating drums. In certain localities everyone goes
to the rooftops at midnight, to recite appropriate improvised verses and
"blow away" the dying year through megaphones. An almost universally
observed custom is to pick and eat twelve grapes from a bunch of grapes,
just as the bells strike twelve. This act is said to ensure twelve happy
months in the coming year.

    In some places little groups of masked children go about from house
to house singing janeiras, or ancient New Year songs. The janeireiros,
or singers, address their words to the owners of the house, praising
them when generous, and insulting them when stingy with their
traditional presents of wine, apples, sausages or nuts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 10. Festivals of Spain](fwe12)
