[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fwe09)  [Next](fwe11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Festivals of Western Europe*, by Dorothy Gladys Spicer, \[1958\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 8 FESTIVALS OF NORWAY

NYTTARSDAG (New Year's Day) January I

    After attending morning church services many people spend the rest
of the day quietly at home, or in afternoon visiting among relatives and
friends.

    A typical New Year's dinner starts with a table of cold appetizers,
known as koldt bord, which includes such Norwegian delicacies as silde
salat, herring salad, smoked salmon, and many other kinds of fish, as
well as a great variety of meats, relishes and cheeses. The koldt bord
is followed by the main course of roast pork or goose, accompanied by
potatoes and other vegetables, and numerous fancy cakes and sweets for
dessert. Strong holiday beer and hearty good wishes are passed from host
to guest as each bids the other luck and cheer during the coming year.

    Once New Year's Day passed without special celebration outside the
homes. Gradually, however, the day grew increasingly festive when it
became customary, on New Year's Eve, to give a full month's pay to
servants who had hired themselves out for a year's service. With pockets
full of money, lavish spending and celebration on the first day of the
year became widespread among this group.

    The second day of the New Year is generally characterized by family
parties, dinners and dances. Many organizations hold their annual
festivities at this time.

TRETTENDE DAG JUL (Twelfth Day) January 6

    Trettende Dag Jul, sometimes called Hellig Tre Kongers Dag, the
Three Holy Kings' Day, is the traditional anniversary of the Magi's
visit to the Christ Child's manger. In many homes the three-pronged Yule
candle still is lighted at night in honor of the Three Kings. Some years
ago young students commemorated the festival by carrying a paper star
lantern about the streets and singing ancient carols concerning the Wise
Men.

    One of the oldest songs of the season comes from the province of
Telemark. The twelfth-century heroic ballad known as the Draumkvedet
(Vision of Heaven and Hell), describes the dream of Olav Aastesoti, who
felt asleep on Christmas Eve and did not waken until Epiphany, when
people were going to church. During the twelve days of his sleep Olav
had dramatic visions of souls in purgatory.

TYVENDEDAGEN (Twentieth Day, after Christmas) January 13

    "Saint Knut drives Christmas away," is an old folk saying which
explains why, in many country areas it was customary on this day to hold
the traditional "Christmas race." People piled into their sleighs and
sledges and drove madly across ice-bound lakes and frosty roads to the
accompaniment of joyous shouts and merrily jingling bells; for,
according to ancient superstition trolls, led by the troll woman
herself, Kari-Tretten, or Karl the Thirteenth, raced over the frozen
countryside on the night of January 13.

    On Tyvendedagen, which marks the official end of Yuletide and is the
last day the greeting "Glaedelig Jul," "Merry Christmas," is used,
Christmas trees are dismantled and decorations carefully packed away
until the following year. Generally the tree is chopped up and burned in
the fireplace. The last Christmas parties are held, the final
festivities attended on this day.

FASTELAVN (Shrovetide) The Sunday preceding Ash Wednesday

    The Sunday' before Lent is a holiday which boys and girls await with
great impatience. Following old tradition the children rise at daybreak,
arm themselves with fastelavnsris, or decorated birch branches, and go
about the house trying to switch all the "lazy" people they can catch
lying abed. This curious custom of switching with branches doubtless
originated in an ancient pagan rite of bringing into the village the
fruitfulness of spring.

    The fastelavnsris are made with great artistry. Sometimes the
children tie the switches together and decorate them with sparkling
tinsel and paper streamers of red, orange, yellow, or green. Sometimes
they tie a small doll with stiff, outstanding skirts to the topmost
branch, and sometimes they ornament the twigs with bright colored paper
roses or other flowers.

    The youngsters enter into the switching game with great zest, since
custom decrees they shall receive a delicious hot cross bun for every
victim they spank. Grown-ups, of course, feign sleep as the children
slip into their rooms and start beating the bedclothes. Sometimes
parents and grandparents seem to waken slowly, but even so, the coveted
bun is always produced, and the boys and girls troop off happily,
counting their spoils and seeking further conquests.

LANGFREDAG (Long Friday) The Friday preceding Easter 9

    Langfredag, a "long day to the suffering Christ," is celebrated in
all churches with religious services in memory of the Passion of Jesus.

PASKE (Easter)

    Although Easter is a church holiday which many celebrate with
religious observances, excursions to mountain resorts are increasingly
popular among large groups of people. From Holy Thursday through Easter
Monday towns and cities are deserted and every small mountain hotel and
inn is packed to overflowing with those who come for skiing,
tobogganing, skating and other winter sports. Ice carnivals, sports
competitions, dances and concerts are popular features of the holiday
festivities while many mountain centers hold special out-of-door Easter
services.

    In the homes Easter is always a festive event for the children.
Weeks in advance the boys and girls start hoarding eggshells. They
either bore holes in the shell ends and blow out the contents, or else
carefully cut the shells in half. Often the empty shells are filled with
small candies and then pasted together with strips of paper. The
children ornament the fragile containers with gay paper cutouts or
colorful painted designs.

    Easter morning is egg hunting time. Dyed and decorated eggs are
hidden in flower pots, doll beds and all sorts of odd places. The boys
and girls, bursting with excitement, hide the offerings they themselves
have prepared for other members of the family and shout with delight as
they find the eggs concealed for them.

PINSE (Pentecost or Whitsun) The fiftieth day after Easter

    Services are held in all churches. Pinse is the great spring holiday
when everybody tries to get to the country. Everyone, that is, except
members of the country glee clubs who like to hold conventions in the
cities. Members of city glee clubs, on the other hand, customarily make
trips to the country. Singing contests are held from village to village
and town to town.

JONSOK (Saint John's Eve) June 23

    Jonsok, Saint John's Eve, is celebrated in Norway, as in all
Scandinavian countries, with bonfires, dancing, singing and other
festivities. "As high as you jump over the Sankthansbil, or Saint John's
bonfires, so high will the grain grow in the coming year," is an old
folk saying which refers to the time-honored custom of dancing all night
about the midsummer fires and then vaulting over the dying embers.

    Built on every height and along beaches and on the shores of small
islands, the fires, made from logs and tar-soaked barrels, burn long and
fiercely and are seen for many miles. Young people dressed in colorful
regional costume dance about the blazing piles to the merry tunes of
valley fiddlers. As one fiddler "plays himself out" another takes over,
so no break in music occurs the long night through.

    Often the dancers, singing old folk songs of their valleys, go out
on the water in flower-decked boats and watch the bonfires; often, also,
young lovers wander hand and hand through the birch groves:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

They sit among the birches  
In the beautiful Midsummer;  
And before the sun goes down  
They swear faithfulness to each other,

</div>

according to a Setesdal folk song.

    Jonsok is as important to children as to their older brothers and
sisters. In many regions a little village girl is chosen midsummer
queen. Crowned either with flowers or with a traditional bridal crown,
she is led through the community by a gay procession of boys and girls.
The village fiddler, playing a native wedding march, precedes the
children who wear flowers and are dressed in native costume.

    The traditional aspect of the midsummer festival is preserved in all
its beauty in the open air museum in Malhaugen, in the city of
Lillehammer, and at the Norwegian Folk Museum at Bygdoy, near Oslo.

OLSOK (Saint Olaf's Day) July 29

    The anniversary of the death of Olaf Haraldson, who fell at the
Battle of Stiklestad, near Trondheim, in 1030, is celebrated throughout
Norway. Olaf, a pagan prince, set forth from his native shores a Viking
and returned a Christian. He ruled Ncrway as king from 1015 to 1028,
converted his people to the Christian faith, consolidated the kingdom,
and finally became his country's patron saint.

    Annual vesper services in honor of Saint Olaf are held at Trondheim
Cathedral, white special observances take place in Maihaugen in the city
of Lillehammer, and at the Trondheim Folk Museum. During recent years,
an open air pageant representing the Battle of Stiktestad and King
Olaf's death, has been given at Stiklestad on this anniversary.

MIKKELSMESSE (Michaelmas) September 29

    About this time of year herd girls drive the cows and goats back
from the saeters, or mountain farms, to the valley homesteads. The
return of both girls and animals is the occasion for great
rejoicing--for dancing, singing and feasting.

    Almost all farms of any importance have saeters. These summer camps,
operated by the women, are important in rural economy. Cattle and other
animals are put out to lush mountain pasturage, and the girls--generally
the eldest daughters of the family--milk, tend the beasts and make the
butter, goat's cheese and other dairy products for sale or for use on
the farms throughout the winter.

    When the girls return home in the autumn with fat, flower-decked
animals and full butter tubs, the joy of the valley folk knows no
bounds.

FLYTTEDAG or FAREDAG (Moving Day) October 14

    In Bergen and other large towns servants in search of employment go
about from place to place on this day, looking for new positions.
Peasant girls and men from all parts of Norway come to town. Dressed In
the colorful costumes of their respective valleys, they often ride in
little carts or wagons, which are piled high with gaily-painted hope
chests or bundles bulging with clothing and other worldly possessions.

    Market places and streets are thronged with city folk and ants who
meet to buy and sell animals, chickens, eggs, goat's milk and cheeses,
as well as hand weavings, carvings, and other types of handiwork.

    City-dwellers hold interviews and select help for the year from
among the scores of rosy-cheeked country servants who crowd into the
towns, hoping to find city employment.

    April 14, as well as October 14, is a popular Flyttedag.

JULAFTEN (Christmas Eve) December 24

    Christmas preparations start weeks in advance. The family pig and
calf are slaughtered in November and the meat made into all sorts of
delicacies, such as the pork and veal sausages which, when sliced,
reveal various decorative patterns of stars, spirals or geometric
designs. Then there is the pickled tongue which holds place of honor in
the center of the table and has the legend God Jul, Merry Christmas,
written on it in red. There are also the hams, the cutlets and the
pickled pigs' feet--all important to two weeks of Yuletide hospitality.

    The lutefisk, or Christmas cod, is slowly dried to give it strong
flavor. Then the fish is soaked in a lye solution until it swells to a
trembling jellylike mass. Among the seasonal baked delicacies are fancy
gingerbreads and animal cookies for the Christmas tree, as well as many
kinds of delicious coffee breads and small cakes to accompany steaming
coffee or holiday pufch. In many places it is traditional to have
fourteen different kinds of small cakes--one kind for each of the
fourteen days of Christmas entertaining. In addition to the cooking, the
semi-annual family washing is done, brasses and coppers are polished,
curtains hung, and enough wood chopped to last for two weeks of holiday
fires.

    To Norwegian country people Jul is the season of peace on earth and
good will to all of God's creatures. Nobody thinks of hunting or harming
wild animals or birds during the Christmas season. A sheaf of wheat,
attached to a pole and placed in the yard or on top of houses or
outbuildings, furnishes plentiful cheer for birds. Generally the poles
are made from spruce trees, with little tufts of branches left at the
top, so that while eating the birds can have both firm foothold and
protection against snow and winter winds.

    Horses and cows have extra feedings of the best oats and barley on
Julaften. In olden days the animals received their holiday rations with
the traditional greeting, "It is Christmas Eve, good friend. Eat well."

    There is a story from the valley of the river Driva about the
careless farm girl who neglected to feed one of the cows on Christmas
Eve and so brought dire misfortune upon herself. The girl, thinking she
had given extra food to all the cattle, sat down on the gate. Suddenly
she heard a voice from the barn:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

I wish, I wish that she were blind  
Who sits upon the gate.

</div>

    The story states that the voice came from the cow the girl had
forgotten to feed; and that, from then on, she was blind.

    Christmas eve starts officially at four in the afternoon with the
ringing of the village church bells. By then everything is in readiness
for the holiday. Stores and shops are closed and the "Christmas peace"
descends over every Norwegian town and hamlet. In homes the entire
family, including the father, mother, children, guests and servants,
gathers round to partake of the traditional molje, or rich broth in
which the Christmas meats are cooked. Molje is served hot with fladbrod,
the paper-thin Norwegian bread, which each one dips into the soup. In
rural areas where country people still wear their regional costumes for
this ancient Christmas Eve ceremony, the scene about the soup kettle is
especially pictutesque. In cities, of course, formal clothes are
customarily worn on this occasion.

    For supper the usual hot and cold appetizers are served in stag-
gering array. Then the lutefisk appears which, after its lye bath, has
been boiled and is served with drawn butter and boiled potatoes. Then
there are ribbensstek, pork ribs, accompanied by boiled potatoes and
sauerkraut. Cakes and sweets and risengrynsgrot, or rice porridge, end
the meal. The porridge is made with a single almond in it, and whoever
finds it will either "have luck" throughout the coming year, or will be
first to wed!

    After supper the closed doors, which have been hiding the Christmas
tree from the children, are thrown open and the glittering tree is
revealed in all its breathless beauty. The tree is lighted with white
tapers and decorated with all kinds of tempting cooky animals, gilded
nuts, eggshell toys, red apples and gingerbread figures. The father of
the family usually reads the Christmas story from the Bible. Old and
young join hands and walk about the tree, singing well-loved Christmas
carols.

    Often the Julenisse, the gnome who wears a red pointed cap and has a
long flowing beard, brings the children's Christmas presents.
Traditionally, the little man dwells in attic or barn and is guardian of
the family's welfare. It is wise to please the Julenisse because he is
apt to mix up the milk tins, tangle the horse's manes, and even make the
cows sick, if he doesn't like your household. Consequently, every family
tries to keep things orderly and pleasant, without harsh words or
needless bickering. The children are careful to do their share, too, and
every Christmas Eve they remember the little man with a bowl of
risengrynsgrot--which surely is appreciated, because by morning it
always is gone.

JULEDAG (Christmas Day) December 25

    Everybody attends Christmas morning church services. Generally the
rest of the day is spent quietly at home. In the afternoon boys and
girls try out new skis, skates, or sleds, but few parties are held until
Second Christmas Day.

    Throughout the Yuletide season breakfast is a gay and tremendous
meal. Long tables, decorated in the holiday spirit, groan under
sometimes as many as thirty or forty different kinds of delicious hot
and cold dishes. Aquavit and other strong drinks accompany the food and
make the holiday breakfasts really festive occasions.

ANNEN JULEDAG (Second Christmas Day) December 26

    The Second Christmas Day is a time for parties and visiting.
Factories, places of business, and civic organizations have parties for
their employees on this day. Many children's parties are given in
mid-afternoon while adult gatherings often start in the evening and
continue throughout the night. In rural districts Christmas hospitality
is at its height. In some places people adhere strictly to the old
tradition that passers-by, regardless of age or social status, must stop
in at every farm along the way and partake of food and drink.

    In olden times the day after Christmas, known as Saint Stephen's
Day, was devoted to the mad sport of horse racing over the icy roads.
There is an old rhyme which says that:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Saint Stephen was a stable boy,  
He watered his five foals.

</div>

NYTTARSAFTEN (New Year's Eve) December 31

    In some places young people often dress in masks and fancy costumes
on New Year's Eve and go visiting in groups of ten, fifteen or more. The
visitors stop at every house for dancing and refreshments and finally
wind up with breakfast at the house of some friend or neighbor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 9. Festivals of Portugal](fwe11)
