[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abs10)  [Next](abs12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1931882584/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG0W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Abominable Snowmen*, by Ivan T. Sanderson, \[1961\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

7\. Late North Americans

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*All possible knowledge has, of course, been right under our noses since
the beginning, but we have to dig for it. Often we miss things;
sometimes we deliberately ignore them.*

</div>

You can take the title of this chapter any way you like. Late is a
useful word: it has two completely opposite meanings that imply novelty
or extinction. There is also a connotation of tardiness about a
late-comer. This serves my purpose well.

When Betty Allen started browsing around among her Amerindian friends
she brought to light two sets of surprising facts. The first was simply
that said friends, one and all, had always known about the *Toké-Mussis*
and *Oh-Mahs*, completely accepted them as being quite real, and
regarded them as in no wise bizarre. They had, however, and quite
rightly, long since decided that they were not a suitable topic for
conversation with white men since it seemed to annoy them, while their
even mentioning their beliefs about the matter only augmented the
general contempt in which all their other ideas were already held. There
were those among the Amerinds, even of the older generation who just
brushed the business aside or referred to it as folklore. Surprisingly,
though, there proved to be not a few among the younger generation who
met the white man's skepticism with a deep-rooted scorn of their own,
and who affirmed that there was absolutely no doubt that these manlike
creatures still exist; and not in too few numbers either, not only all
over this territory but over other wide areas. I had the privilege of
talking to some of these young people myself and was much impressed—I
might almost say startled—not only by their sincerity but also by the
matter-of-fact

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

way in which they discussed it, *and* their reasons for not previously
discussing it with any outsiders. Though I have the permission of some
of these new friends to mention their names, I will refrain from doing
so, because they would undoubtedly be subjected to ridicule and an
unmerciful ribbing, even in their own community.

I will not report in full what they told me, nor all that Betty Allen
learned because it is highly repetitious, is little different from all
the other accounts I have given of observations of the creatures, and
does not really add any new details. One and all of that category of
account of which I speak were firsthand (I have some two dozen on file),
alleged encounters with the creatures in and about this block of montane
forest which I call the Klamath. The interesting thing is that these
reports go back to the 1930's but become increasingly more frequent up
till 1958. Since then they have formed a positive flood. My
interpretation of this is that, while the age of the tellers naturally
showed up statistically, another factor is much more important. This
factor is that it is only comparatively recently that roads have been
started into these large areas of national forest. The jeep caused the
first move in this activity, being one better than a mule in this
country, but needing at least a clear path of a certain width that might
loosely be called a road. Next, the government decided to open up these
national forests to timber-cruising, it having been demonstrated that
one of the best ways to conserve timberlands is to cut out the oversized
and overage trees which retard new growth. The road-building program for
the first time took large numbers of people into areas not previously
penetrated, or into which people found it hard to go even to hunt. These
are the retreats of the *Oh-Mah*.

The other thing that Betty Allen brought to light was the much more
surprising fact that this was not by any means only an Amerindian
folk-tale. She began to hear the names of white men and others who, it
was said, had also met or seen these creatures. She went after these
persons too, and found out in due course that it was so, and that they,
in turn, had not been saying anything for fear of ridicule. I withhold
their

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

names too, as I do not have the permission of any to publish them and I
would no more wish to embarrass them than I would my Amerindian friends.
Most of these had also been employed on road construction, but there
were others, including two doctors of medicine returning from a mass
emergency late one night along Route 299 going east from Willow Creek,
who said they had nearly run into one, although they had slowed down,
thinking it to be somebody signaling for a lift. They said that it was
at least 7 feet tall when it stood up, had straight legs but very long
arms, and was clothed in thick lightish brown fur; and who better than
(even tired) medical men ought to know? Some of these local stories went
back 30 years.

Then, there was the extremely unsavory (to me) interjection of the
business of "little people." It is a particularly odd one in this
neighborhood for several reasons. First, the Amerinds will not, as far
as I have been able to determine, come right out and either assert or
deny their existence. Unlike the giants, of which they speak quite
factually, they seem to regard these pigmies with a high degree of
superstition, and their folk-tales are rife with stories of such little
people playing with their children on riverbanks; but, while being
visible to youngsters, being invisible to adults. This is a very
widespread myth that crops up all over the world about fairies, pixies,
and suchlike little folk. However, some white people of higher
education, and resident on the outskirts of fully opened-up and settled
areas, have told the same story, and perfectly straight, but have also,
in several cases, implied that they had assumed, or had definite grounds
for supposing that these little hairy ones were the young of the
*Oh-Mahs!*

Simultaneously, this dearth of direct claims that these midgets have
been *seen* is in marked contrast to reports that their little
foot-tracks have actually been found both in snow and mud much more
often than those of the giants. I have seen sketches of these drawn to
scale, but so far no photographs or plaster casts. Many times they are
said to crowd around pools or depressions in snow and to trail into and
out of the undergrowth in all directions. They are very funny little
imprints,

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

averaging only about 4 inches long and do, for the life of me, look very
like those of tiny men but with very pointed heels.

I frankly don't like this: I don't like it one bit: and it also upsets
me. All of us almost automatically become annoyed with anything new, and
especially when it appears to conflict with our logic and the orderly
tenure of our lives. Perhaps you will say that if I can accept the
possibility of the presence of giants I ought to be able to take little
people in my stride. So I should, but I am afraid that I am a very
pragmatic person, and there is something unsubstantial about these
little footprints. Perhaps it is that I have not seen them in the fresh
state myself? In fact, I find myself performing all the mental gyrations
of the most advanced skeptics and debunkers in this case, and I know
full well that I am doing my damnedest to explain them away.

The first thing one thinks of—just like the zoologists confronted with
the Himalayan *yetis*—is any kind of local animal that might produce
these tracks and, by Jove, there certainly is one. This is the large
western porcupine. This animal has an astonishingly human-looking hind
foot when seen from below, apart from large claws. It has a somewhat
pointed heel. But there is the problem of its claws; and then there is
another objection. The porcupine can waddle along on its hind feet quite
well but, like the ground-sloths of old, it has a thick, stubby tail
that is directed downward and which forms a tripod with the hind legs
when the animal is standing up. However, it can be raised somewhat and
could possibly be carried off the ground. At the same time, the claws on
the back feet of really large porcupines are actually raised well off
the ground so that the swollen pads under the feet can sink into soft
substances quite a way before the claws leave imprints. Yet these tracks
clearly show 5 toes—not sharply incised claw marks—all of about the same
size and arranged almost straight across the front of the feet. In an
endeavor to overcome this fact, an ingenious naturalist friend of mine
has suggested that the claws of animals sometimes acquire globular
encrustations of ice in winter when they are tramping about in wet snow
and when a frost is coming on, and that these might produce

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

the impression of toes. But what then of the tracks in mud, all over,
and by thousands? As I say, I don't like this business; but, I also
don't like leaving it up in the air; yet, I have nothing to add to it as
of now. Until and unless I can go and find some of the tracks in mud
myself, and carry out my own particular kind of investigation thereupon,
I shall refrain from further comment. Then there has been another most
peculiar business in this area. It transpired that nearby, certain
persons who are free, white, family folk, live in rather expensive
houses sometimes of the split-level ranch type, on blacktop roads around
which school buses parade daily to take their offspring to be educated.
In many cases they own houses which stand in several acres of land
backed up against solid forest that has not been touched except for
logging of large timber a century ago. They had something most
unpleasant to report. These people live not more than 30 miles from a
large and bustling modern city. They stated, in confidence and off the
record, to certain locals for whose veracity I will vouch, that they had
for long experienced a problem. This was simply that their kids—i.e.
under 7-year-olds—had been found to be playing in the back fields up by
the borders of the forest with certain fairly small hairy ones, who,
when alarmed by the approach of human adults, allegedly took to the
trees.

Said human kids, on reaching the age of reason, turned out not to want
to talk about this abomination, while their parents most definitely did
not and do not want it talked about. Nonetheless, they have talked a
bit, and I pass it on to you for what it is worth. This is the kind of
thing that gets people really riled: it also seems to me to slop over
into the realm of "Little People" that only kids can see. Let us just
suppose for a moment that *Oh-Mah* mothers permit their kids to play
with ours (up to about the age of 7) but tell them to cut out the moment
one of our adults appears over the fence! Naturally it would be only the
kids who see the little hairy ones. There is no better playmate for a
child than a 2-year-old chimpanzee.

There are other items connected with ABSMery generally in this area and
to the north of it, which I also do not like but which should be
presented and also without comment. This

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

comes from, of all places, Albany in Oregon, which is in the Willamette
Valley at the foot of Mt. Jefferson, and concerns a certain Lake Conser.
A brief notice of this was published in *Fate* Magazine's issue for
January, 1961 and read:

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

**Albany, Ore.**—The monster of Conser Lake is still on the loose. The
creature reportedly stands on two webbed \[italics mine\]  <span
id="fr_13"></span>[\*](#fn_13) feet, is 7 to 3 feet high \[tall\], and
with its shaggy white hair somewhat resembles a gorilla. It has kept
pace with a truck going 35 m.p.h. Never harmed anyone though.

</div>

This is a nasty one, but let me give you some further details. These
were contained in a letter to a friend of mine, dated October 27, 1960.

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

Creatures (several) last report, being sighted on farmer's farm. An
attempt is being made to contact farmer whom to date wants his name and
address held secret. Have made 5 investigation trips and have for
evidence a finger print lifted off a house window including a plaster
cast of a foot print (right). Have personal taped accounts of this
creature plus many interviews, this includes photographs. He is all of
7' tall, 400 lbs.,, can move at tremendous speeds, jump tremendous
distances. No news items concerning this being have been printed in the
Portland Papers. He displays extreme cunning, walks and runs erect,
appears frustrated, acts as if would like to communicate. He makes
extremely high pitched sounds. His hair or fur has a slight glow in the
dark and is 3 to 4 inches long. He walks with feet 19 inches long that
make a sqeeshy sound. Has been seen in daylight and at night and seen to
disappear once into the lake. Will send you complete report as soon as I
can.

Creature first sighted several miles north of Albany, Oregon in a dense
land area approximately 3 sq. miles. Open land extends all around this
area & dotted with farms. Have any ideas how he got there?

Sorry for the delay for there has been new developments. A farmer who
wishes to remain anonymous has sighted several on his farm. He is
attempting to make friends with them. One is brown and one is white. At
times they imitate his voice when he talks to them. Mr. farmer is an
animal trainer and at the last report steady progress is being made. Hal
Starr was contacted by this farmer and has promised that the location
and that his name not be revealed. I would like to investigate further
but am handicapped. They are up to 7' height covered with long hair
which

</div>

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

hangs over their faces. They walk erect and with all fours. They have
taken a shine to the horses but the horses were frightened of them. Lots
of foot prints around and are cloven.

Two weeks ago a sheriff of Salem told me that he heard on the radio KBZY
that a person had called in saying that he had seen a creature near Hwy.
99. I talked to the announcer in Salem and verified this event. I am
busy writing you a complete report. Hope this will suffice for a while.

</div>

I am afraid this did not "hold me" even for a little while because it is
altogether one of the most shocking reports that has yet come into my
hands. I have been pursuing the matter diligently with, however, no
result whatsoever.

This remark about going into water on the part of an ABSM is fairly
common and causes me to think furiously on two counts. First, it is
really a very bizarre thing for anybody who is making a good story out
of a series of lies, to think up. Into a cave, or even into a swamp,
yes: but into water, per se, just as if it were an aquatic or at least
semi-aquatic creature, is very weird. At the same time, one just has to
take into account the perfectly astonishing theory put forward by
Professor, Sir Alistair Hardy of Oxford early in 1960 and which, utterly
bizarre as it at first sounds, has been most seriously considered by
scientists and fully accepted as at least possible by many.

This suggests that one branch of the general Anthropoid stock—and,
although Sir Alistair calls them "apes," I think we should surely name
them Hominids, or at least as already being on the *Man* branch of that
stock rather than on the Pongid or ape branch—about a million years ago
took to semi-aquatic life and especially along seacoasts. But let this
bold savant state his case in his own words: <span
id="fr_14"></span>[\*](#fn_14)

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

"Many apes were driven to hunt in the sea by fierce competition for food
in the forests. At first they waded and groped in the water, but
gradually learned how to swim. Over a period of several hundred thousand
years, the species lost its hair as it carried on its marine life. The
only hair left was on the very top of the head to help protect the
creature from the sun.

"The sea ape learned to stand upright because water helped support

</div>

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

the body. It developed longer legs than its land-based brother ape for
swimming. Its hands became sensitively shaped to allow it to feel along
the sea bed for shellfish and open crabs. It learned to use tools by
picking up stones to crack open sea urchins. It would be only a step for
man to discover that flints chipped into sharper and more useful tools,
knives, and arrows. Then, armed with such equipment and his erect
posture, he was all set for the chase. He could now reconquer the
continents, running and hunting the animals of the plains. I estimate
that apes were driven into shallow sea waters a million years ago. They
emerged as men about 500,000 years ago."

He said he had discussed his theory with many other scientists and they
had been unable to find a flaw in it. (A.P.)

</div>

If in the sea, why not also, or even previously in rivers, lakes, and
ponds, more especially as swamps and marshes were much more prevalent in
the past than they are now, particularly in the pluvial periods
following the ice-advances and retreats of the past million years. Then
again, there is another most convincing aspect of this idea, as follows.
If at the beginning of the Pleistocene there were a variety of primitive
anthropoids of the Hominid branch scattered about the earth, and if all
of these were hairy, but did not all become extinct, as we have until
now supposed, we have some ready-made characters for our ABSMs.

Let us suppose that several of these started going into water after
food, and that one (or perhaps several) types did very well at it; lost
their body hair; learned to crack stones and all the rest; and then came
back to conquer the land as Men, just as Professor Hardy suggests. This
still need not presuppose that *all* of them did so. Some of the types
that started the practice may never have gotten farther than ducking
into inland lakes and, while they did not keep at it fervently enough to
lose their body hair, they did develop very long toes with an almost
complete web between them. Do not forget that *we* still have two
half-webbed toes ourselves—our third and fourth— and please don't fail
to flip over to Appendix B and take a look at the California "Bigfeet,"
in which the second "ball" appears to be an enlarged basal big-toe
joint. All the toes of this type must then, be *very* long and be
webbed, because the mud or

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

snow does not squish up between them but forms (and always forms) a tall
angular ridge running at right angles to the direction of travel, just
where it would be bunched up if the foot were webbed. We might therefore
legitimately conceive of the *Sasquatch—Oh-Mah* type of ABSMs at least
being relics of early hominids with semi-aquatic habits. This would
explain any failure to have tools!

However, to interject at this point, I recently received a report from a
neighboring area which would seem to indicate something of the same
nature. This came to me from a young man in our Air Force whose wife is
part Amerind. He lived until recently on the Makah Indian Reservation at
Neah Bay, Washington. This young man got in touch with me through a
magazine publisher, stating that he had some information that might
interest me. I wrote him, and in reply received some very charming and
highly informative letters, the contents of which I see no reason to
question. Among these he wrote:

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

In my letter to you I mentioned the 18 ½ inch foot prints that were
found out on the beach. I know these weren't made by any man going
around with a foot cut out of a piece of wood. This beach is about 8
miles in the back woods and is a very hard spot to get to.

On another occasion last summer one of the fishermen out here was going
to bed and heard a lot of splashing going on in a swamp in his back
yard. From what he told me, he got a flashlight and went out there to
take a look around and seen this huge creature tearing back into the
woods after the light hit him. Up to this date there has been nothing
more seen of it. Altho many people are waiting for it to come back. The
day this person told me of what happened I took a gun and went into the
swamp to look around. I actually found huge hunks of hair that must have
been pulled loose when he ran back into the woods that night.

I have hunted and killed quite a few bears around here but that hair
that I found that day was definitely not hair from a bear. For one
thing, there was a couple of hairs that I measured to be close to 14
inches long and these hunks had a very strong odor unlike any bear that
I have killed.

There is also one other occasion that makes me think that the Abominable
Snowman is up around this neck of the woods. This happened to me some
time before I read your articles in the *True* Magazine. One

</div>

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

evening I went up this unused logging road to hunt bear. I was some 13
miles up this road and there is not one person living for about 20 miles
around. On this occasion I happened to be alone. Well anyway I was
sitting on a stump and was sitting there for about an hour when I heard
this high pitched scream like a baby but this went on for almost an hour
and the more I listened to it the more I decided that it wasn't a
mountain lion. Then after a while it stopped and I never heard it again
and I left without looking around. Then after I read your article I
thought it might have been a Snowman up there. I went up there quite a
few times after that but never heard or seen anything.

</div>

Once again, I have received nothing more from this source! It has always
been my firm belief, as a reporter, that children don't lie. By this, I
mean that, while real kids (say, under seven) live in a world of their
own, peopled by many things that are not of our world but which are
still most real to them, and while young persons from seven to the age
of puberty delight in pulling the legs of their elders with tall tales,
all young persons are much more basically honest than grownups. More,
important, I do not believe that a young person can carry a lie forced
upon him or her by an elder for any length of time; and, especially,
under sympathetic questioning. I am therefore always interested in what
young people have to say, provided that they know that I am sincerely
interested, have an open mind, and am not critical of their age. Young
people are also extremely keen observers, perhaps because they take a
more nearly worm's-eye view of life and because their senses are more
acute. Thus, when somebody tells me something that happened to them when
they were young, I like to listen. This then from a young person about
an incident when she was still younger:

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

Dear Mr. Sanderson:

I have just finished reading your story concerning the abominable
\[sic\] man of Northern California. Before I write any further I would
like to say that what I am about to say is positively true and I have
never told anyone this story before for fear that they would think that
I was half cracked and out of my mind.

I have seen this man-monster and can give you a detailed description of
him. He is far from being pretty and I still wake up nights dreaming of
him.

</div>

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

When: About 9 years ago, at about 10 o'clock in the morning. Where: Near
the Eel River above Eureka, California. At the edge of a meadow near the
river's edge. Under what circumstances: My family and I were fishing on
the Eel River. We had been camped in the vicinity for about 2 weeks and
had had poor luck when it came to fishing. I used to go for a short walk
before breakfast because there was a very pretty meadow about a mile or
two from our camp and I used to love to see the mist rise off the grass.
I was only about 10 years old at the time and the world of nature was
something which both fascinated and enthralled me. I entered the meadow
and proceeded to cross it in order to reach a small knoll at the other
side. When I approached the foot of the knoll I heard a sound. It was
the sound of someone walking and I thought perhaps my little brother had
followed me and was going to jump out and try to scare me. I hollered,
"All right, stinker, I know you're there." Needless to say it was not my
brother that appeared. Instead it was a creature that I will never
forget as long as I live. He stepped out of the bushes and I froze like
a statue. He or "it" was about 71 to 8 feet tall. He was covered with
brown stuff that looked more like a soft down than fur. He had small
eyes set close together and had a red look about them. His nose was very
large and flat against his face. He had a large mouth with the strangest
looking fangs that I have ever seen.… His form was that of a human and
he had hands and feet of enormous size, but very human looking. However,
there was one thing that I have not mentioned, the strangest and most
frightening thing of all. He had on clothes! Yes, that's right. They
were tattered and torn and barely covered him but they were still there.
He made a horrible growling sound that I don't think could be imitated
by any living thing. Believe me I turned and ran as fast as I could. I
reached camp winded and stayed scared all while we were there.

I have often thought that perhaps it was a mutation of some kind. I
think this thing is highly dangerous and something should definitely be
done about it.

I would be willing to testify to anything I have stated in this letter.
I am not a crackpot and am completely sound of mind and body. I just
thought you might be interested to know what your man-monster really
looks like. Believe me if you saw him he would scare the wits out of
you. I know!

Yours truly,

(signed) (Miss) B. C. <span id="fr_15"></span>[\*](#fn_15)

</div>

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

It is not perhaps quite proper to interject the following comments at
this point but, I contend, a reporter has the right to indulge some
speculation upon matters that he has investigated firsthand. This may be
an infringement upon editorial rights but can be fobbed off as
background information. It seems to me that there is something to this
whole bit in California, Oregon, and Washington, and that it is pretty
fatuous to try and put it all down to any of the standard explanations
such as the hoax, the publicity stunt, the Indian folk-tale, mass
hypnotization, mass cases of mistaken identity (of known animals), or
other suggestions of that nature. We are all pretty odd, but we are not
all liars or crackpots. Further, I do not feel it to be either right or
justified to dub all Washingtonians, Oregonians, and North Californians
as either; just because they say something we don't like, or which does
not fit into our orderly pattern of what is or is not supposed to be. At
the same time, I don't give a hang what any "expert" actually says.
There are enormous areas in those three states about which nobody—not
even the majority of their inhabitants—knows anything. I really cannot
see why some new things should not turn up in those states.

If you could read all the reports that I have; and, much more; if you
could listen to my recordings or have been with me when I interviewed
and got to know the good people who had the guts to tell these stories,
I think everyone interested would be not just amazed but somewhat
shamed. It is so easy to sit back in one's own home, surrounded by all
the normal, known things of modern life, and say "Phui"; but, get out in
the woods and get hungry. A person will begin to see a lot of things he
never saw before, and would never have seen if he had not got lost and
run out of food. Thus, when a teen-ager writes to me from the
delightfully named Happy Camp at the edge of the Klamath area and says:
"Reading your story of America's abominable snowman, I find very
interesting. But I think they've only found the baby. Here, in Happy
Camp, our cars are turned over and rolled into the river, 6-foot trees
uprooted, slides in the mountains, and when it snows 10 feet deep,
1-inch power lines are snapped in two. The daddy must

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

cause this." I do not yell for Paul Bunyan and go into gales of
laughter. Maybe there *was* no flood that shifted the cars, and the
trees *were* 6 feet tall, not thick.

If things as bizarre can happen, or be alleged to happen, right in our
own back yard, we should be doubly careful of criticizing things that
are reported to happen beyond our borders. And when these form a logical
concomitant to happenings in our own bailiwick, we ought to listen most
carefully. Of course, there is the damnable, added frustration in
dealing with foreign matters inherent in their very foreignness—one
can't often go and look into them firsthand, and if one does, one has
language and other difficulties. Moreover, if we doubt our own citizens,
how much more so may we not those of other countries? This is all a pity
but nonetheless the way things are. From now on, therefore, I won't
expect anyone to believe what I report at all. We go first over the
border south to our sister republic of Mexico.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[140:\*](abs11.htm#fr_13) For the significance
of the use of the word webbed here, see analysis of the imprints of the
*Oh-Mahs* in Appendix B.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[141:\*](abs11.htm#fr_14) Quoted from a story in
the New York Herald Tribune, of March 7, 1960, from a March 6, verbatim,
A.P. report on a conference of "Marine Scientists" at Brighton, England.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[145:\*](abs11.htm#fr_15) Name and address on
file, but for release in special circumstances only.—Author.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 8. On the Tracks of …](abs12)
