[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abs11)  [Next](abs13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1931882584/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG0W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Abominable Snowmen*, by Ivan T. Sanderson, \[1961\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

8\. On the Tracks of …

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*All peoples have always thought all other peoples to be both stupid and
at a lower state of culture. This is both stupid and uncultured.*

</div>

The title of this chapter is an acknowledgment of a good friend and
fellow zoologist. He, Dr. Bernard Heuvelmans, Consultant to the Musée
Royal D'Histoire Naturelle de Belgique, but resident in Paris, is the
author of the only book that covers the ABSM problem world-wide. It
covers also many other items of a crypto-zoological nature, and is
entitled in its English version, *On the* *Track of Unknown
Animals*. <span id="fr_16"></span>[\*](#fn_16) I shall be leaning very
heavily upon this work from now on, with its author's more than generous
permission. Bernard and I have been on these tracks separately for many
years now but, as we have constantly exchanged information and
discoveries, a considerable amount of what we have to say has similar
origins. However, there is much that both of us have unearthed \[either
firsthand or by burrowing assiduously through published material\], that
the other has missed. Frankly, neither of us knows any longer, in many
cases, exactly just which items came from which in the first place; and,
as constant acknowledgments in the text would be irksome, Bernard has
given me permission just to barge ahead and gobble up anything that may
seem to me to be pertinent. However, while we were both once
professional zoologists, we specialized in different aspects of the
science. I started out as and always really remained a field ecologist
but have specialized in the major distribution of animals in accordance

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

with that of vegetational types, and therefore approach most, if not
all, matters from that angle. Thus, there may be times when I disagree
with my good friend Bernard and, since I have never then failed to say
so to him, I shall also be mentioning the fact in this text as I go
along, if occasion arises. It was on a framework of phytogeography that
I tackled ABSMery in North America. From now on, and especially in the
tropics, it becomes the main theme of my story.

At this point I have to revert to type and refer to [Map
VI](#img_map06). I also have to ask the reader to plunge once again into
botanical geography. In addition to being all of the other unpleasant
things that we have accused them of, people are very chauvinistic and,
from a national point of view, frankly bucolic. This shows up in various
ways, like wars and tariffs, but most noticeably on maps. It is almost
impossible to buy a map of any country, *in* that country, that shows
anything starting immediately beyond the borders of that country. Thus,
not only road maps but even our school atlases have a habit of going
along splendidly to the Rio Grande and to some arbitrary, somewhat
jiggly, and quite nonexistent line from a point about El Paso, Texas,
west and just north of the upper end of the Bay of Baja California and
thence to the Pacific coast a few miles south of San Diego, California.
Beyond that, southward, there is a great white blank. While the United
Staters of North America are outstandingly obtuse in this respect, we
cannot really exonerate the other United Staters of this same
continent—the United States of Mexico—from indulgence in the same
idiocy. Their maps customarily run *up* to that same ridiculous line;
above which a ghostly "Pais de los Gringos" may be seen—in strong
light. <span id="fr_17"></span>[\*](#fn_17)

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

<span id="img_map05"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![MAP V.
GUATEMALA](tn/map05.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/map05.jpg)  
MAP V. GUATEMALA  
</span>

**MAP V. GUATEMALA**

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

The position of the Republic of Guatemala and the over-all area of this
map is shown by the square in the box, which, in turn, encompasses what
is popularly called Central America. Guatemala is divided into two very
distinct parts—the northern, called the Peten, which is a lowland,
heavily forested plateau; and the southern which is mountainous and
where there are large numbers of volcanoes, both active and idle. To the
west, these mountains are contiguous with the eastern rim of the Chiapas
in Mexico. The southern coastal plain is arid. In the northeast corner
of the country, which reaches the Bight of Honduras in the Caribbean,
there is a limited sealevel triangle containing the so-called "Lake
Isabel"—actually the Laguna de Izabal. This is really an arm of the sea
and is connected to it by a river-like channel. The area from which
ABSMs have been reported centers around the peak named Sanché in the
Sierra de Chuacus.

</div>

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

The American Geographical Society of New York has published some most
excellent maps that show the whole of North America and especially the
overlap between our country and Mexico. These are very revealing in that
one learns from them—as one does if one actually travels through that
strip of territory—that practically everything goes on just the same
right across the border. The Tularosa Basin just flows on south into the
great Bolson (basin) of Mapimi; the Rockies pass on through the
Sacramento and Guadalupe Mountains, via the Chisos, straight into the
Sierra Madre Oriental; and the endless semi-parallel ranges that bestrew
southern Arizona go right on to become the Sierra Madre Occidental,
while the mountains of southern California march on stolidly to become
those of Baja California. Nothing much else changes either: even a
parrot (a Conure) and the jaguar get on to the north side, and millions
of tourists on to the south. The only things that change abruptly are
the brands of beer and the length of the women's skirts—there is a
strong European influence even just over the border. \[Money is
interchangeable for a time but the gasoline does, I must admit, seem to
be of quite a different substance on the two sides of this otherwise
arbitrary border.\]

The really funny thing is that practically nobody knows anything

 

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

about the first great belt just south of our border. There are four
major roads and three major railroads to get south and that is all; and
all of them roar across a variably unpleasant and dreary desert for a
long way before they come to anything important. Mexico lies on its
side, so that what we call its west coast is really its south coast. It
consists of a central core of enormous volcanic mountains from which two
great tines of mountain ranges extend toward the United States, like a
pair of giant scissors. Behind, or to the southeast of the core, there
is a narrow neck of lowlands, the Tehuantepec Isthmus, and then what is
really quite another country named Chiapas that stands up like a large
fiat salad bowl on a footstool, or actually more like a flamingo's nest.

To the northeast of this is still another Mexican country called
Yucatan, which is a low plateau formed of limestone marl, riddled with
caves, and separated from Chiapas by a great swath of swamps more or
less at sea level and clothed in an awful, low, tangled, spiny growth
called *akalché*. Yucatan, which includes the state of that name, as
well as the Territory of Quintana Roo, and the states of Campeche, and
Tabasco, is the land of the Mayas. Behind Chiapas, on the south side,
lies Guatemala; an arbitrary hunk of volcanos and aggressive mountains
that really forms part of a much larger mountain block that extends to
the great lakes district of Nicaragua.

The Sierra Madre Oriental, along with her many associated ranges, are
still not much known, though they are—and have been for countless
centuries—well inhabited. Among them are some valleys filled with a
truly tropical type of vegetation. The Sierra Madre Occidental, on the
other hand, is almost entirely unknown. There are people living in it
but they don't have anything to do with anybody and, least of all and if
possible, with Mexicans, whom their inhabitants call "guachés" \[which
is a slang expression for a very old bus more or less held together with
bits of string\]. Among these people are the Yaquis who played a great
part in modern Mexican history; who still write in hieroglyphs; and who
were

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

alleged to have been scalping on the main Pacific Highway in the early
days of World War II. They are very splendid people—everything an
Amerind should be, both in fact and in fancy. This southern (i.e. to us,
western) block of mountains runs for 800 miles southeast till it hits
the comparative lowland break of Guadalajara. It is crossed by only one
road, from Durango to Mazatlan; it has a canyon in it that has been
estimated to be two hundred times the size of the Grand Canyon when all
its measurements are taken into consideration, though you may console
yourself about this, because nobody has ever explored it. I have seen
one end of it and very impressive it is. Most of its bottom is choked
with forest and there are said to be "people" in there—at least my Yaqui
Indian friends told me so. These are said never to come out, to be very
big, and to be *hairy* all over!

The rest of Mexico down to the northern escarpment of Chiapas is
charming and much more civilized than any of us northerners realize or
like to think. They had universities down there 200 years before our
country was founded, and some of their modern ones are carrying on
studies that are so far ahead of anything being prosecuted in ours that
it makes us look a little silly. \[That may be why we don't hear about
them.\] The best work that I have seen on vegetational distribution, not
excluding Soviet Russia, have been done at, and published recently by,
the University of San Luis Potosi. The indigenes—for we can hardly call
them natives—of this main, central area are too busy even to turn up any
folklore about ABSMs, but they have dug up some awfully funny-looking
statuettes. But, this is another subject that I cannot get involved in
here.

Now, while the plateau of Chiapas is rather an unpleasant, dusty,
cactus-strewn place, and looks not unlike one of our lesser deserts (due
to its altitude), it is ringed by well forested mountains with gorges
that are filled with real "jungle." Also, it flows back into the uplands
of the main Central American block; and it is really part of that block.
Were it nearer sea level, it would be properly tropical, and it is in
any case only

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

just "North" American. The true dividing line between the two continents
of *Erica* and *Columbia* (see [Map XV](abs22.htm#img_map15)) is a very
complicated line that meanders about all over the place on its way from
the Pacific to the Caribbean. Plants and animals respect this line
mightily. In fact, you are hard put to it to catch one of the party in
the first part in the territory of the second part; and vice versa.
Possibly certain ABSMs show the same respect for Nature here, too.

There is nothing like the wealth of material on the subject of ABSMs in
the tropics, and notably in South America, that there is in North
America, in the Himalayas, and in central Eurasia. What is more, what
there is, looks extremely spotty and lacks any pattern unless it be
mapped: and *mapped* on phytogeographical grounds at that. When this is
done, however, it begins to make a great deal of sense. Despite an
enormous volume of literature on the geography and the distribution of
plants and animals in South America, there are still many widely held
misconceptions about the constitution and history of that continent—held
by profound students of the matter as well as by the general (and not
technically interested) public. The general impression of the continent
is that it is a vast tropical jungle all over but, while a lot of it is
covered with closed-canopy forests—whether you should call them jungles
or not is a matter of much controversy in any case—the major part of it
is not; and, a large portion down at the bottom has a temperate climate
tailing off to a sub-polar one. Then, there is the great Andean upland
and mountain ridge that occupies its whole western side. Least
understood of all, however, is the area which is occupied by Brazil.

Looking at [Map VI](#img_map06), you will perceive that, in addition to
the two mountain blocks in Central America, and the three arbitrary
divisions of the Andean ridge, there are three other upland massifs on
this continent. These are the Guianese, the Matto Grosso, and the
enormous Caãtinga. The last is the most puzzling to foreigners, because
one's impression of Brazil has been gained from the periphery of this
grim sloping plateau, and this periphery is almost everywhere a lush
lowland belt of forests and other massed vegetation. The

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

appalling aridity of this still so-called "Terra Incognita" which
reaches its climax in the northeastern bulge of the continent, is not
generally known. If you want to get a clear picture of it, you should
read a book entitled *Tukani* by Helmut Sick, a scientist who
accompanied the first official expedition to cut right across this
terrible territory to the Amazon Basin. In this, you will very soon see
the complete difference between these uplands, their vegetation, climate
and fauna, and that of the equatorial forests of the Amazon. The two are
abruptly different worlds and, as one approaches the latter from the
former, one comes up against an actual *wall* formed by tall evergreen
vegetation.

If one raises the subject of animal life in South America, everybody
invariably yells "Green Hell," and thinks of the Amazon Basin. It is a
funny thing, but there is nothing hellish about any jungle and rather
especially about that of the Amazon. It is, like all equatorial forests,
never too hot or too cold, singularly free of noxious insects,
completely free from disease \[provided you keep away from human beings
and don't carry any pestilence in with you when you enter\], is well
supplied with food that is easy to obtain, has plenty of good water, and
is not too badly infested with indigenous people who resent one's
presence. There are poisonous snakes and jaguars but you really have to
look for them, and they are absolutely harmless as long as you look
where you are going and don't molest them. \[I once persuaded a jaguar
to leave the ridgepole of our bush-house in which my wife was sleeping,
one night, simply by saying "Boo" at it.\] Then there is this Amazon
bit.

It so happens that the basin of this name, which contains the greatest
river, and river system, in the world, was, until not long ago
geologically speaking, an arm of the South Atlantic—a great inland sea.
Further, there is evidence that long since it became land it may have
been completely flooded again for briefer periods off and on, and some
Brazilian scientists claim that they have evidence that the last time
this happened was only about the year 1200 b.c. It is indeed today a
sort of enormous botanical cum zoological

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

garden but, actually, its flora and fauna in no way compares in
diversity with that of all the surrounding areas combined. In fact, it
has manifestly been repopulated quite recently by several streams of
animals and plants *from* those areas, which must have remained above
sea level either as great islands or massive peninsulas attached to the
rest of the continent. Moreover, there were jungles and other wet
forests on those blocks as well as the vegetation and appropriate
wildlife of their drier uplands. Many of those areas are also extremely
ancient; meaning, that they have remained above sea level for a
particularly long time. The most isolated and perhaps the oldest is the
Guiana Massif, but seniority may be claimed for the Colombian Massif.
This was certainly there before the Andes were pushed up. The Andes
themselves are really comparatively recent, and they might be *very*
new. This is not of our story but it is germane to it, in that the age
of the montane forests of the Andes has a very important bearing on the
recently past history of ABSMs and their possible distribution there.

The point I am trying to make here is that if I were asked to go find an
ABSM, or any other as yet uncaught kind of animal, in South America, the
last place that I would go would be the Amazon Basin itself. I would
tackle the Guianese Massif first, next the Colombian Massif, and then
move on to the uplands surrounding the Matto Grosso. After that I would
do what I could about the Caãtinga, and then Patagonia, and then the
Andes, but would leave the Amazon till last. As a matter of fact, I
would do a thorough job on the northern Central American Block before
even going to South America at all, and this is just what I now propose
to do.

The limits of this last block are very clear on [Map VI](#img_map06),
and are confined between the Isthmus of Tehuantepec on the west and the
gutter filled by the great lakes of Nicaragua on the east. The smaller
southern block, running from the latter line to the valley of the Atrato
River, that cuts the Panamanian isthmus off from the Colombian Massif,
will not concern us. There are some exceedingly strange small animals in
that block, and there is some odd folklore but I have nothing

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

concrete upon our subject from it. The main or western block is
enormously mountainous, and constitutes one of the major areas of
volcanicity in the world. The number of volcanos you can count from a
point above Guatemala City is variously estimated and often grossly
exaggerated but it is none the less quite remarkable. The southern edge
of this block drops abruptly to a narrow, cactus-covered, dry, coastal
plain; but the northern face steps down through ever-decreasing banks of
mountains and hills to a wide forest-covered coastal fringe. Its real
border is the valley of the River Usumacinta in Campeche, but north of
this there are some ancient low hills in the Peten, and these mount up
to the east into what is probably the most remarkable little mountain
massif in the whole of Central America. This is called the Maya
Mountains and lies in southern British Honduras.

I have been carrying on a very long-distance correspondence with an
American lady for long resident in what is really the outer periphery of
the Mexican state of Chiapas. She was introduced to me by a man in the
publishing field with the very highest reputation and whom I most
greatly respect. Were it not for this, I simply could not bring myself
to record the following, even in a purely reportorial way. As of going
to press I have not received a reply to my written request—and letters
have to be paddled up a river to her, taking several days—to enter this
information over her name.

However, I heard from her that a form of ABSM is not *quite* but *very*
well-known in the forests nearby where she lives. \[This, incidentally,
is a continuation of those montane forests about which my friend Cal
Brown writes (see below).\] This she tells me is known locally by
various names such as *Salvaje*, *Cax-vinic*, or simply *fantasma
humano*. She then goes on, deadpan, to write: "I have seen this creature
on various occasions and heard it frequently—the last time was about a
year ago however. Some of the things I know about \[it\] coincide with
your information \[from other areas\] but I can't reconcile the cry
described with mine. I don't think I have ever heard anything so
disturbing—not frightening but more dreadful and haunting, and full of
threat I couldn't imagine.

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I suspect that
from this cry alone men living in this jungle could assume it to be a
\`fantasma humano. " As a friend of mine remarked on reading this, "And
I suppose she rides one of the mastodons that the locals use for
plowing."

This almost casual letter is somehow quite shocking to me, though
knowing what I do of this matter in other much more settled areas, and
in view of the fact that it is hard by Cal Brown's pinpointed area for
something very similar-sounding, there is really no need to be upset.

As I remarked in a previous passage, Chiapas of Mexico is shaped like a
salad bowl held on high. Its eastern rim abuts on to the mountains of
Guatemala and these tumble down into the Peten in a tremendous jumble of
tall, tight peaks and ridges with deep narrow valleys and gorges in
between. The whole is choked with wet tropical forest, is unmapped,
unexplored, and just plain not known. I have a group of young associates
under the leadership of this Kenneth (Cal) Brown, who have for some
years been working in this area collecting scientific specimens for
botanical, zoological, and petrological studies, and I once lived for
several years in that area myself, flew over almost all of it repeatedly
during the war and have walked all about it. Comparing notes (after 20
years of this) Cal and I have come to the conclusion that this is one of
the oddest areas on earth, made the more strange, almost eerie in fact,
by the presence of many ancient Mayan ruins therein, which one stumbles
across everywhere. There is something uncanny about these gigantic
artificial hills, with their endless, writhing carvings, courts,
passages, mighty flat-roofed halls, now filled only with the chitterings
of bats; utterly abandoned in vast uninhabited jungles that just breathe
silently in the noonday tropical sun. There are many strange things in
these jungles and some of these pertain to our quest.

Cal Brown has pinpointed for me a valley to which his party once
attained and where some of those odd incidents occurred that so often
crop up when actually exploring. You can't really put your finger on
them, and often one misses even recording them. It may be plants freshly
broken in a way that is just not right; or very strange calls; or a
certain

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

reluctance by any native people around to go any farther or even to talk
much. So powerful was this atmosphere at this place that one of Cal's
partners—Wendell Skousen, a geologist, and one of the most pragmatic men
I have ever met—corralled the locals almost by force and demanded to
know what was going on. Then it came out. The locals explained:

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

There live in the mountain forests very big, wild men, completely
clothed in short, thick, brown, hairy fur, with no necks, small eyes,
long arms and huge hands. They leave footprints twice the length of a
man's.

The area in question was in Baja Verapaz, around the town of Cubulco.
Cubulco is the last vestige of civilization, the road ends there, and
for all intents and purposes so does everything. The range of mountains
in question is the Sierra de Chuacus, whose greatest peak is Mt. (Cerro)
Sanché, 8500 feet elevation. Depending on which direction you're coming
from, there are between 5 and 7 ridges from the floor of the Cubulco
Valley \[Rio Cubulco, which eventually joins the Rio Negro to the north
roughly 20 kilometers\] to C. Sanché. Further than this, I would not
want to speculate as to range of this alleged creature. I have coloured
in a patch on the enclosed map which depicts the approximate range
according to what the natives told me, which means it would range into
the departmento of El Quiche. (See [Map V.](#img_map05))

Cubulco itself, at about 4200 feet, is really "tierra templada," and the
area in question ranges up to "tierra fria." The vegetation is open pine
and oak forests on the slopes, and many high plateau areas are covered
with grass, as is the Cubulco environ. Along the margins of the
highlands where rainfall is greatest, the oak and pine forest merges
with the rain forest. Temperature ranges from 30°F to 90°F, and while I
have no good figures on rainfall, it is considerably less than, say,
Coban.

Now, as to "what the natives said." They referred to a large, hairy
creature, which sometimes walked on two legs, and apparently ran on all
fours. I considered bear first of all, and queried them regarding size,
shape, appearance, etc. The answer was that it looked like a bear, but
it wasn't from the description they gave—no conspicuous ears, no
"snout"—it was somewhat taller than a man, and considerably broader,
covered with darkish hair, and the locals live in mortal dread of
disturbing it. Occasionally, one or two of the natives who got drunk or
particularly boastful would go half way up the ridge and make a big show
of "hunting" it, but no one has ever killed one that I learned. Several
persons reported they were chased by it down the mountain, although with
the fear they have of whatever it is, they probably just caught a
glimpse of

</div>

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

it and ran all the way down the mountain at top speed. No one seemed
very anxious to guide us to the spot, or spots, but one of the braver
souls agreed to do so finally. Unfortunately, we never got to it, for
which you will curse, no doubt. I have no way of determining from their
descriptions whether it was a bear or a *Sisemite* or something else,
but it would seem reasonable that something is back there. You will be
somewhat interested in the fact that the natives reported to me that
this thing "calls" every so often, and they hear it from time to time
when they are travelling about the ridges.

</div>

One cannot lay any store by "calls," for the tiny Douroucouli, or
Night-Monkey of South America (*Aötes*), can almost blast you out of bed
when it really gets going, and the Howler Monkey (*Alouatta*), can
individually make a series of noises that sound just like a dozen
jaguars fighting in a thunderstorm. My point here is that I know Cal
Brown and Wendell Skousen and the others very well indeed and have done
so for many years. They are the hardest-boiled collection of skeptics I
have ever met; yet, they were more than just impressed—they were
astonished.

What they have told me, moreover, acquires a certain added interest when
one reads in *The Museum Journal* (Vol. VI, No. 3, September, 1915),
published quarterly by the University Museum of the University of
Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, the following excerpts on what are therein
described as Guatemaltecan mythology \[sic\]:

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

There is a monster that lives in the forest. He is taller than the
tallest man and in appearance he is between a man and a monkey. His body
is so well protected by a mass of matted hair that a bullet cannot harm
him. His tracks have been seen on the mountains, but it is impossible to
follow his trail because he can reverse his feet and thus baffle the
most successful hunter. His great ambition, which he has never been able
to achieve, is to make fire. When the hunters have left their camp fires
he comes and sits by the embers until they are cold, when he greedily
devours the charcoal and ashes. Occasionally the hunters see in the
forest little piles of twigs which have been brought together by El
Sisemite \[also called Sisimici\] in an unsuccessful effort to make fire
in imitation of men. His strength is so great that he can break down the
biggest trees in the forest. If a woman sees a Sisemite, her life is
infinitely prolonged, but a

</div>

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

man never lives more than a month after he has looked into the eyes of
the monster. If a Sisemite captures a man he rends the body and crushes
the bones between his teeth in great enjoyment of the flesh and blood.
If he captures a woman, she is carried to his cave, where she is kept a
prisoner.

Besides his wish to make fire the Sisemite has another ambition. He
sometimes steals children in the belief that from these he may acquire
the gift of human speech. When a person is captured by a Sisemite the
fact becomes known to his near relations and friends, who at the moment
are seized with a fit of shivering. Numerous tales are told of people
who have been captured by the Sisemite. The following incident is
related by a woman who had it from her grandmother:

A young couple, recently married, went to live in a hut in the woods on
the edge of their milpa  <span id="fr_18"></span>[\*](#fn_18) in order
that they might harvest the maize. On the road Rosalia stepped on a
thorn and next morning her foot was so sore that she was unable to help
Felipe with the harvesting, so he went out alone, leaving one of their
two dogs with her. He had not been working long when the dreaded
feeling, which he recognized as Sisemite shivers, took hold of him and
he hastily returned to the hut to find his wife gone and the dog in a
great fright. He immediately set out for the village, but met on the
road the girl's parents, who exclaimed, "You have let the Sisemite steal
our child, our feelings have told us so." He answered, "It is as you
say."

The case was taken up by the authorities and investigated. The boy was
cross-examined, but always answered, "The Sisemite took her, no more
than that I know." He was, in spite of the girl's parents' protests,
suspected of having murdered his young wife, and was thrown into jail,
where he remained many years.

At last a party of hunters reported having seen on Mount Kacharul a
curious being with hairy body and flowing locks that fled at the sight
of them. A party was organized which went out with the object of trying
to capture this creature at any cost. Some days later this party
returned with what seemed to be a wild woman, of whom the leader
reported as follows. "On Mount Kacharul we hid in the bushes. For 2 days
we saw nothing, but on the third day about noon this creature came to
the brook to drink and we captured her, though she struggled violently.
As we were crossing the brook with her, a Sisemite appeared on the
hillside, waving his arms and yelling. On his back was a child or monkey
child which he took in his hands and held aloft as if to show it to the
woman, who renewed her struggle to be free. The Sisemite came far down
the

</div>

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

hill almost to the brook; he dropped the child and tore off great
branches from big trees which he threw at us."

The young man was brought from his cell into the presence of this wild
creature and asked if he recognized her. He replied, "My wife was young
and beautiful; the woman I see is old and ugly." The woman never spoke a
word and from that time on made no sound. She refused to eat and a few
days after her capture she died.

Felipe lived to be an old man, and the grandmother of the woman who told
this story remembered him as the man whose wife had been carried away by
the Sisemite.

</div>

This account would have been relegated to "Myth, Legend, and Folklore,"
had not an almost identical story, in the form of a complaint on a
police-blotter, turned up in Coban, in the same region in the early
1940's. This was made by one Miguel Huzul and was to the effect that his
son-in-law was delinquent in having permitted his daughter to be seized
by a creature of the mountains to which he gave a name that was
apparently too much for the recording officer and which he therefore put
down as "a sort of gorilla or man" as far as it could be deciphered and
transliterated. I had a copy of this document once, with a tracing of
this passage, made for me by a Puerto Rican American who was baffled by
the local Spanish and did not know any Mayan. Unfortunately my original
went up under a wartime bomb, but we are searching for the records from
which it came. All I can add is from memory, but this is pretty vivid in
this case as you can imagine, for it was "in my district" at the time, I
then being engaged in collecting in the area. It related, in substance,
that the *Sisemite* had entered the young man's house and in the
presence of other witnesses gathered up his young wife and carried her
off while he, the husband, just sat there shivering. No action was taken
because the father was disbelieved, while it was rather nicely pointed
out that if all that is said about the *Sisemite* is true, the young man
could not be accused of cowardice and/or delinquency. I presume there is
no precise law covering the matter!

Even then, I would still relegate both stories to Chapter 17, were it
not for my own personal observations, very close by

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

in British Honduras. While there, my wife and I penetrated some distance
into these Maya Mountains, not an easy task in the absence of any paths
or people, their almost straight up and down topography, and the virtual
nonexistence of people willing to carry things in all surrounding areas.
While camped up there, the Senior Forestry Officer of the colony—one,
Mr. Neil Stevenson—visited us, and we took a day's exploratory and
collecting trip up to the top of the next ridge into the magnificent
montane palm forest which is sufficiently "open" to be able to permit a
view. On the ridge beyond that, then and still now totally unexplored
and never even yet attained, there were rectangular areas of forest of
distinctly different color, showing that they had once been cleared for
cultivation. Later, we saw smoke rising from those forests, and Mr.
Stevenson heard cocks crowing therein in the clear mountain air at dawn.
When the Shell Oil Company later made a detailed survey of that whole
mountain block by aerial, stereoscopic, photography, they brought to
light further evidence that there were people living there. Yet, this
mountain block stands up like an island in a sea of lowlands which have
been crisscrossed for generations by mahogany workers and chicle
collectors. Not one single human being has ever been known to come out
of it.

Who are these people? Some Mayas left over since precolonial days;
*pre*-Mayan people; or whom? Whoever they may be, they must be getting a
strange education, for their home lies under one of the main commercial
airline routes \[from Florida, New Orleans, and Merida, Yucatan, to
Guatemala City\], while we ourselves once sat up on the lower slopes and
watched the *Queen Mary* glide majestically by below, down the Gulf of
Honduras on her way to Puerto Barrios, on a cruise! This is only a
couple of hours flight from Miami, and yet there are apparently *people*
living there who have never contacted other people since the time of
Columbus.

Now, I am not suggesting that these tree-clearing, chicken-raising
chaps, whoever they may be, are ABSMs; but, what I am suggesting, is
that if such people can continue to live in magnificent isolation for
450 years, in a tiny country such

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

as this, not more than 50 miles from a number of settled communities
\[in all directions, as a crow is alleged to fly\], there could
perfectly well be all sorts of other types living nearby too. And this
is just what the people who live around the area affirm.

These people are of two major types—Amerinds, and sundry settlers of
mixed Amerindian stock in Punta Gorda on the south, and related kinds of
people to the north, plus what are called the *Caribs*, along the coast.
These latter are not in any way the Amerindian Caribs who gave their
name to the Caribbean, but are a group of West Africans of Sudanese
Negro stock, who obtained their freedom on the Lesser Antilles in early
days, and then sailed their own ships to the mainland coast. They are
very strange people with their own language, customs, and religion;
great boating people; fearless, and rather fearful. They don't trust
anybody and they don't seem to like anybody, and whatever they say they
should not be trusted—not because they are untrustworthy at all but
because they have learned long ago never again to trust any white.

Both these peoples—the regular British Hondurans or Belizians, and the
Coast Caribs—assert that there dwell in the  tall, wet forests of the
southern half of their country certain  small semi-human creatures which
they call *Dwendis*, a form  of *Duende*, Spanish for goblin. To the
very well-educated  Belizians, these are regarded more as we regard
fairies than  as real entities—unless they have lived or worked in the
southern forested area. Then they, like the Caribs, take quite an- 
other view of the matter. I lived in that country off and on  for years
while we traveled Central America and the West  Indies, and I talked to
innumerable people there about them.  Dozens told me of having seen
them, and these were mostly  men of substance who had worked for
responsible organizations like the Forestry Department and who had, in
several  cases, been schooled or trained either in Europe or the United 
States. One, a junior forestry officer born locally, described in  great
detail two of these little creatures that he had suddenly  noticed
quietly watching him on several occasions at the edge

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

of the forestry reserve near the foot of the Maya Mountains when he was
"cruising" and marking young mahogany trees. His description of them
coincided with that of all the others who were serious.

These little folk were described as being between three foot six and
four foot six, well proportioned but with very heavy shoulders and
rather long arms; clothed in thick, tight, close, brown hair looking
like that of a short-coated dog; having very flat yellowish faces but
head-hair no longer than the body hair except down the back of the neck
and midback. Everybody said that these *Dwendis* have very pronounced
calves but that the most outstanding thing of all about them is that
they almost always held either a piece of dried palm leaf or something
looking like a large Mexican-type hat over their heads. This at first
sounds like the silliest thing, but when one has heard it from highly
educated men as well as from simple peasants, and of half a dozen
nationalities and in three languages, and all over an area as great as
that from the Peten to Nicaragua, one begins to wonder. Then, one day, I
came across a lone chimpanzee in West Africa in an open patch of forest
and on the ground; and, *by* *jingo*, it was solemnly holding a large
section of dead palm frond over its head, just like an umbrella and
looking exactly like a large Mexican straw hat!

*Dwendis* are said to appear suddenly in the forest both by day and
night and to watch you from a discreet distance. They are silent but
seem to be very curious. I heard of no case of their ever making any
threatening move, but I was time and time again told of them chasing,
sometimes catching, and carrying off dogs. They are said to leave very
deep little footprints, *that have* *pointed heels*.

One does not really know quite what to make of all this. If you go to
Belize—and a more delightful spot there can hardly be on earth for a
vacation or just to live—and ask around about these things you will be
met with gay smiles and probably a healthy quote from some classic such
as *The Water Babies* but if you persist you will quite soon find some
man who has timber-cruised, or been in the bush farming, and he

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

will surely come out with some details about these mysterious little
imps of the forests.

Perspective is a hard thing to evaluate on ancient carvings since
captives bearing gifts to an important potentate may be made very small,
compared to the monarch. Nevertheless, there are many Mayan bas-reliefs
that show pairs of tiny little men with big hats but no clothes,
standing among trees and amid the vast legs of demi-gods, priests, and
warriors. They are also much smaller than the peasants bearing gifts to
the temples!

As we have gotten on to the Pigmies again we might as well follow them.
I have a letter from a well-known animal dealer of Guayaquil,
Ecuador—Herr Claus U. Oheim—who knows his zoology, and who has a very
long and intimate experience of the forests of his country and those of
Colombia on the Pacific slopes of the Andes. In this he says:

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

The so-called Shiru, I have heard of from the Indians and a few white
hunters on both sides of the Andes, but decidedly more so on the eastern
slopes, where vast mountainous areas are still quite unexplored, and
rarely if ever visited. All reports describe the Shiru as a small \[4-5
feet\] creature, decidedly hominid, but fully covered with short, dark
brown fur. All agreed that the Shiru was very shy, with the exception of
one Indian, who claimed having been charged after having missed with his
one and only shot from a muzzle loading shotgun, a weapon still used by
the majority of Indians, along with the blowgun. These reports were
rather sober and objective, and in no way tinged with the colorful
imagination, into which Latin-Americans are prone to lapse.

</div>

This business of the "eastern slopes" is going to get us into
unwarranted difficulties unless we once again resort to a map. I think
the best way to contemplate South America is as if it were made up of a
number of large islands comprising those blocks of territory today
enclosed within the 500-meter contours. This gives us a picture like
that shown on p. 168 (see [Map VI](#img_map06)) on which both the
200-meter and 500-meter \[1500-foot\] contours are shown, and from which
it may be seen that the uplands consist of the continuous line of the
Andes; the Guiana Massif; and the Brazilian Uplands (composed of those
surrounding the Matto Grosso, and the great Caãtinga).

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

The 200-meter contour shows how these would be connected if there was
any slight lowering of the land or an uprise of the sea. The Caãtinga
would still be joined to the Matto Grosso, and then both by a narrow
land-bridge to the Andean chain. The Guiana Massif, which is the most
isolated, would in turn be joined to the Colombian Massif by a lowland
bridge.

The "spine" of the Andes runs just about down the middle of that
colossal range. The important fact to grasp is that this forms a
complete break between the forests of the Amazon and the eastern part of
the continent on the one side, and the small patch to the west, on the
Pacific slopes on the other. This latter small area, has a noticeably
different fauna and flora from that of the east and the Amazon. It is
terminated to the south on the Pacific coast by the southern deserts.
ABSMs in South America are reported from both sides of the Colombian
Massif, from the Guiana Massif, and from the Matto Grosso. \[The
Patagonian affair is, I believe, something quite else.\] I have some
extremely funny reports from the Pacific side of the Colombian block
but, while the strangest things have recently been found there  <span
id="fr_19"></span>[\*](#fn_19) and monstrous foot-tracks have been
reported in the same area, there has not been any suggestion that any of
the latter were humanoid. Colombian scientists have taken the matter of
what they call "an ape" fairly seriously but all the talk has
concentrated on the forests of the eastern slopes. It was once thought
that Pigmies, or ABSMs of the little *Orang Pendek* type had cropped up
again in the Motilone territory in that area but, as Heuvelmans points
out, a perfectly good Amerindian tribal grouping named the Marakshitos,
averaging only about 5 feet in stature (like the central Mayas,
incidentally), have been fully studied by the Marquis de Wavrin, while
surrounding peoples admit that

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

<span id="img_map06"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![MAP VI. CENTRAL
AND SOUTH AMERICA](tn/map06.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/map06.jpg)  
MAP VI. CENTRAL AND SOUTH AMERICA  
</span>

**MAP VI. CENTRAL AND SOUTH AMERICA**

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

This continent is most notable for its lack of associated islands. It is
today composed of three subcontinents joined by extensive lowlands. The
former are: first, the Andean chain of mountains and their contained
Alto Pianos; the ancient Guiana Massif; and, the eastern uplands. The
last is divided into two parts—the mountains around the Matto Grosso
swamps and the vast arid Caātingas. Between these three major upland
blocks there are three enormous drainage basins—those of the Orinoco,
Amazon, and La Plata. All these are multiple river systems with
innumerable tributaries that meander through extensive forested
lowlands. Surrounding the upland massifs and bordering these river
basins are intermediate plateaus. These are mostly clothed in savannahs.
In the southern tip of the continent, south of the La Plata, these
intermediate lowlands are covered with the tall grass Pampas and farther
south with scrub. In the extreme northwest there is a block of
equatorial forest on the Pacific side of the Andes cut off abruptly to
the south by the excessively arid western coastal fringe. ABSMs have
been reported from this Colombian area; from the Guiana Massif; from the
mountains around the Matto Grosso; and from a few points in the central
Andean highlands. "Bigfeet" have long been rumored from the Patagonian
region, but the matter is there muddled with the Ground-Sloth business.

</div>

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

these are the "creatures" that they call *Guayazis* and which they
regard as bestial. In the Colombian block, a man-sized kind has been
rumored. This has been very greatly muddled and muddied by a most
preposterous business about a photograph of a Spider-Monkey (*Ateles
sp*.) for which the most extravagant claims have been made, and for
which a number of serious-minded and otherwise highly critical people
seem to have fallen.

As this matter has played such a prominent and, in my opinion, harmful
and misleading part in ABSMery, I would like to try and dispose of it
once and for all—or, at least, once again; for this has really been done
several times already.

First, this picture produced by one Dr. François de Loys is obviously
that of a Spider-Monkey which is a very distinct type of South American
primate that may be seen in any zoo. It displays all the characteristics
of that genus—narrow shoulders and pinched chest; comparative lengths of
upper and lower

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

arms and legs; the hands and feet in detail; and the enlarged clitoris
of a female. In fact, it is a pretty clear picture of one of these
animals—dead. However, of much more importance is the box on which it is
perched. Anybody who has ever been outside a tourist hotel in the
tropics will have run into the fuel problem. Since the discovery of
petroleum oils, they—including gasoline and kerosene—have been shipped
all over the world in pairs of 5-gallon cans, or rather light tins,
fitted into cheap wooden cases, measuring exactly 20½ inches long, by
10½ inches from front to back, and 15½ inches high. The better grade
boxes are bound with metal tape around the two ends. The case shown in
de Loys picture is such an object, and stenciled lettering may be seen
on it under the monkey's right leg. Such lettering is also standard and
is usually stamped over two of the four 4-inch bits of board of which
the sides are invariably constructed. Thus the animal, with its head
poked up to an unnatural degree by a stick, measures about 27 inches
\[it measuring 10x:6x as against the box\]. This is a fair-sized
Spider-Monkey but not even a large one.

The original photograph is not just a case of mistaken identity; it is
an outright hoax, and an obnoxious one at that, being a deliberate
deception. I would have thought that anybody might have suspected this,
even without seeing the picture, from the originator's story. According
to this, he was threatened by this creature and its mate on the ground
when in company of one of his assistants; shot it; photographed it;
counted its teeth; and then—despite the fact that he was a man of
scientific training, and considered his specimen so odd (though out of
his field), as to warrant all this trouble—solemnly gave the head to his
cook to boil, and permitted that worthy to employ the cranium as a salt
container, which "dried up and was lost bit by bit." But worse than even
this is a lot of mumbo-jumbo about having other photographs that were
lost in a river during a flood. This is the kind of nonsense that has
done more harm to the cause of any serious search for ABSMs, and other
creatures as yet unknown, than anything I can name, and it is to be most
utterly deplored.

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

Quite apart from anything, the picture alone, if analyzed, displays the
creature shown, to be a maximum of 48 inches from crown to heel. This is
indeed large for a female *Ateles* but is really substandard for large
females of the northern *A. beelzebub* group. Then again, gigantism is
not uncommon among all the South American *Cebidae*. Finally, I may add,
de Loys' photograph shows an animal that I would say had started to
decompose and was well on the way to being "blown," a condition common
in the tropics in daytime in a few hours, in which not just the body
cavities but the whole body becomes puffy and bloated. Even if this
should be a very large specimen of an as yet unknown *species* of
Spider-Monkey (and even if, by some accident or deformity it happened
not to have had a tail, which I very much doubt), there is no
justification whatsoever for giving it a technical name on the strength
of a single photograph, and especially one so grandiose, so misleading,
and unscientific as *Ameranthropoides loysi* (Montandon) which means,
literally "Mr. Loys' Ape-like American."

The harm done by this obnoxious effort has been widespread. Above all it
has put the whole of ABSMery, in this area, into eclipse. No
serious-minded person, zoologist or otherwise, seeing this ridiculous
picture and having heard the equally ridiculous claims made by some for
it, can be expected either to lend any credence to or even listen to the
accounts of others who state that they have met unknown creatures of a
Hominid form in this country. Yet, there have been some vague accounts
thereabouts.

The earliest is that of the Baron Alexander von Humboldt, being a
careful record of the local Amerindians' descriptions of a creature they
called the *Vasitri* which, they said, constructed primitive huts, was
carnivorous, and would eat men but carried off women for breeding
purposes. There is nothing outrageous about this, for many ABSMs have
now been reported to be carnivorous (at least at times), and their
carrying off of women for reproduction is almost standard. \[Something,
incidentally, that all Africans that I have met who know and live among
gorillas and chimps absolutely deny that those

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

apes ever do.\] Several other early writers are said to have mentioned
the same creatures in this area.

Bernard Heuvelmans discusses an alleged encounter with an ABSM in this
area by a Mr. Roger Courteville but shows that we cannot place any
reliance upon it. The raconteur's description does include some odd
items that are not otherwise to be noted in accounts from South America
but which concur with, of all people, Mr. Ostman's description from
*British* Columbia. These are: a tuft of thick hair running across the
forehead; a powerful neck towering from a V-shaped torso; and long
body-hair. However, the rest of the description, and particularly the
"darting" blue-gray eyes, leave one in the gravest doubts. The only
other definite information I have ever seen from this whole area is
derived fourth hand from the Motilone Indians who are said to state that
there is an "apelike" terrestrial creature in the Sierra de Perijaâ, the
scene of de Loys' exploit, and which is quite common. Thus, apart from
the little *Shiru* and the possibility that von Humboldt left us a
record of something real, there is actually *no evidence* whatsoever for
any ABSM in this whole area. Apart from one locality—the somewhat
mysterious Guiana Massif, there is not, as a matter of fact much if any
ABSMery in the whole of South America.

There is, however, the strange matter of "giant footprints"  in
Patagonia but I do not know of any proper investigation  of these,
either firsthand in the field or even bibliographic,  ever having been
made. From what I have been able to un-  earth it would seem that the
imprints mostly refer to those  of ground-sloths and in some cases those
of the Giant Ground-  Sloth (*Megatherium*) itself, which are altogether
bizarre, since  it walked on the outsides of its enormous feet. There
has been  a terrific rumpus about ground-sloths in the Argentine that 
has been going on for decades. A dried skin of one, found  hanging over
a fence on an estancia in 1898, led certain per-  sons to prosecute a
hunt for the animal, believing it still to  be alive. This led to a cave
in which strange stone corrals  were found deeply piled within with the
dung of these huge  beasts, while other evidence seemed clearly to
indicate that

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

they had been penned therein by men. After considerable excitement
promoted by the notion that some of the smaller forms at least might
still be found alive, and after the discovery of early records by the
Spanish colonizers to the effect that the local natives caught huge
shaggy animals in pits and killed them by building fires on top of the
hapless beasts \[because their skins were so thick and filled with
little bones that they could not be pierced with their primitive
stone-headed weapons\], the whole thing died down.

However, mixed up in all this uproar there were reports of giant
footprints of a very humanoid form being seen all over Patagonia. There
was a period during which there was much speculation upon the
possibility of a giant race of Amerinds living in that region but this
later became a somewhat debilitated notion—to wit, that some large
indigenous Patagonians had large feet. It is true that some now almost
extinct southern Amerinds were among the tallest races of men ever on
record, and they seem to have been large all over.

Today, most of Patagonia is sheep country. It was cleared of its
indigenous human population over wide areas by the simple and ingenious
procedure of poisoning all the available wells and other available water
supplies. It is now a vacation land for the more rugged "sportsmen" and
it must be admitted that the best trout fishing in the world is there
available. However, there still are some enormous areas of a kind of
desiccated tangle of large bushes that somehow manage to grow in endless
blankets upon utterly dry ground for mile after mile. In these it is
quite possible that some smaller types of ground-sloth, such as that
called by the aborigines the *Ellengassen*, might still exist; but of
ABSMs there is no trace —reports of giant humanoid footprints
notwithstanding.

Almost the same may be said of the Caãtinga. Herr Sick, the author of
the book mentioned above, makes some casual remarks about unknown
animals possibly still remaining to be found in that desolation; but he
also makes some very dubious remarks, such as that "desiccated *Hyaena*
droppings may be found" there. Not even the ebullient Argentine
Professor Ameghino suggested the presence of *that* group of animals

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

in South America; so one must take all these statements with more than
just the average grain of salt. But, when we come to the Matto Grosso,
matters are rather different.

Here we hit something much more persistent and much more concrete. Not
only are there endless accounts of giant human-type footprints and
tracks, usually given as being some 20 inches in length, but there is
the matter of the mass slaughter of cattle for months on end from time
to time, by the extraordinary device of ripping their tongues out. These
inexplicable excesses are reported to be accompanied by roarings so
terrible that even the locals—who are profoundly Amerindian, be it
noted—become very nearly hysterical. The perpetrators of these dastardly
acts are, the locals assert, to be called *Mapinguarys*, and to them the
locals attribute all manner of appalling qualities. In fact, we have
here for the first time on our trip to contend with some real
imaginative and traditional frills and furbelows. There is obviously a
gross clash here between the perfectly prosaic Brazilian *estancieros*,
with their modern herdbooks and statistics, on the one hand, and a local
population of truly "superstitious natives" on the other. This clash has
not been resolved to anybody's satisfaction, least of all the herd
owners who are periodically rendered clean out of pocket by some
hundreds of head of good cattle. The "natives" seem, every time that
this has happened, to have adopted a sort of "We told you so" attitude.
This is not very helpful, but the Brazilian Government apparently has
had no better ideas.

The only known animal that can kill cattle in that part of South America
is the jaguar, but these large cats don't, and cannot, go around tearing
the tongues out of steers. They jump on their backs and break their
necks by pulling their noses around with a forepaw—when they attack
cattle at all. Try pulling the tongue out of, say, a dead rabbit
sometime. You will find that despite one's enormous size compared to the
rabbit, plus inborn finger dexterity, you will have one heck of a hard
time. Pulling tongues out of oxen calls for both extraordinary hand
dexterity and positively phenomenal strength. What on earth may have
such strength? The locals

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

say "*Mapinguary*," and point to giant humanoid foot-tracks on sandbars.
Cattle owners just fume and say "rubbish." This is obviously not getting
the latter anywhere since this sort of thing seems to crop up every few
years.

Nobody seems ever to have seen this ox-tongue-puller but there is one
story that Bernard Heuvelmans has dredged up from what can only be
described as unimpeachable sources. With his permission I reproduce this
in its entirety from his book, *On* *the Track of Unknown Animals*. This
account was given to Dr. Heuvelmans by a correspondent, Senhora Anna
Isabel de Sa Leitao Texeira, who obtained it from Dom Paulo Saldanha
Sobrino, a much respected Brazilian writer with a very wide knowledge of
his country. His informant was in turn the principal in the account; one
known simply as Inocêncio. Heuvelmans writes:

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

In 1930 he went on an expedition of 10 men led by one Santanna. They
went up the Uatumã towards the sources of the Urubú. When their boat
came to an impassable waterfall they cut out across the jungle to reach
the Urubú watershed. After 2 days they reached a stream which the leader
decided to follow. Inocêncio was in the party going upstream, but after
2 hours' march he was led astray by a troop of black monkeys which he
followed in the hopes of shooting one. When he realized that it would
take him some time to reach the stream again, it was already too late.
He shouted and fired his gun, but there was no reply except the chatter
of monkeys and squawks of angry birds. So he began to walk almost
blindly, feeling he must do something in such a critical situation until
night fell, when he climbed into a large tree and settled himself in a
fork between the branches. As it grew dark the night was filled with
jungle noises, and Inocêncio rested happily enough until suddenly there
was a cry which at first he thought was a man calling, but he realized
at once that no one would look for him in the middle of the night. Then
he heard the cry nearer at hand and more clearly. It was a wild and
dismal sound. Inocêncio, very frightened, settled himself more firmly
into the tree and loaded his gun. Then the cry rang out a third time and
now that it was so close it sounded horrible, deafening and inhuman.

Some 40 yards away was a small clearing where a *samaumeira* had fallen
and its branches had brought down other smaller trees. This was where
the last cry had come from. Immediately afterwards there was a loud
noise of footsteps, as if a large animal was coming towards me at

</div>

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

top speed. When it reached the fallen tree it gave a grunt and stopped.…
Finally a silhouette the size of a man of middle height appeared in the
clearing.

The night was clear. There was no moon, but the starry sky gave a pale
light which somehow filtered through the tangled vegetation. In this
half-light Inocêncio saw a thick-set black figure "which stood upright
like a man."

It remained where it stood, looking perhaps suspiciously at the place
where I was. Then it roared again as before. I could wait no longer and
fired without even troubling to take proper aim. There was a savage roar
and then a noise of crashing bushes. I was alarmed to see the animal
rush growling towards me and I fired a second bullet. The terrifying
creature was hit and gave an incredibly swift leap and hid near the old
samaumeira. From behind this barricade it gave threatening growls so
fiercely that the tree to which I was clinging seemed to shake. I had
previously been on jaguar-hunts and taken an active part in them, and I
know how savage this cat is when it is run down and at bay. But the
roars of the animal that attacked me that night were more terrible and
deafening than a jaguar's.

I loaded my gun again and fearing another attack, fired in the direction
of the roaring. The black shape roared again more loudly, but retreated
and disappeared into the depths of the forest. From time to time I could
still hear its growl of pain until at last it ceased. Dawn was just
breaking.

Not until the sun was well up did Inocêncio dare to come from his perch.
In the clearing he found blood, broken boughs of bushes and smashed
shrubs. Everywhere there was a sour penetrating smell. Naturally he did
not dare to follow the trail of blood for fear of meeting a creature
which would be even more dangerous now that it was wounded. Taking a
bearing on the sun, he at last reached a stream and rejoined his
companions, who fired shots so that he should know where they were.

I maintain I have seen the *mapinguary* \[Inocêncio said to Paulo
Saldanha\]. It is not armoured as people would have you believe. They
say that to wound it fatally you must hit the one vulnerable spot: the
middle of the belly. I can't say where it was wounded by my bullet, but
I know it was hit, for there was blood everywhere.

</div>

I have heard many stories like this but, like Bernard Heuvelmans, I feel
there is something sincere about this one. No; not just sincere; but
factual. I have lived through some much lesser experiences myself in the
tropical rain-forests that I

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

could never have reported so pragmatically; and there are junctures in
the telling of this one that are so frightfully "right." If the teller
had wanted even to exaggerate he could so very easily have done so but
he did not. And yet, of course, it is ridiculous. But is it? There are
still those tongue-twisters to be accounted for, and their little
efforts are on the books. Do we therefore have a rather rough race of
the otherwise bland and retiring *Sasquatch—Oh-Mah* type ABSM tucked
away here in the soggy wilderness of the Matto Grosso who somehow got
cut off, sometime, by a mass flooding of the continent that they had
strayed into? If puny little Amerindian Man came over the Bering Straits
and got right down to Tierra del Fuego, millennia ago, there is no
conceivable reason why some more lowly type of Hominid may not also have
done so. Perhaps he got there before "the flood" as it were.

The Matto Grosso uplands seem to have been above water for quite a long
time but, according to their flora and fauna today, which is not
particularly odd, they do not seem to have been so privileged as another
area. This is the great Guianese Massif. Here, if anywhere, is the place
where really ancient relics should have been able to linger; and there
are some real lulus that have done so there. It is notable that the
representatives of almost all the great groups of mammals, birds,
reptiles, amphibians, and especially of fishes and insects, found in
South America turn up there in strange and sometimes fabulous guises.
There are great numbers of living fossils in this area; creatures like
the Hoatzin or "Stinking Pheasant," a bird that, when young, has a
clawed finger on its wing, like an Archaeopteryx. This block of ancient
mountains seems, indeed, to have been a refuge from flooding throughout
geological ages—a sort of last retreat for wave after wave of creatures
throughout time, driven out of their previous habitats by shifts or
submergences of the earth's crust. This is where we would most expect to
come across ABSMs if there are any, or have ever been any, on this
continent. And it is indeed from there that the most reports, and the
most definite ones, have come.

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

In the Guianas—Venezuelan, British, Dutch (Surinam), French, and
Brazilian—the name for these creatures is everywhere something like
*Deedee* or *Didi*, with sundry prefixes and suffixes like "*Dru-di-di*"
or "*Didi-aguiri*," most of which mean something simple, such as "nasty"
or "of the water." The whole concept is, however, as far as I was able
to find out, very muddled in the native mind. This is probably because
most of the current "natives" are not indigenous or in any way native to
the country. It is only when you go among the now rapidly disappearing
Amerinds—Caribs, Arawaks, and such—that you get any clear picture of
this creature. Conversation with these folk is almost impossible as
their languages are not known and are extremely difficult to apprehend.
Also, they are naturally very cagey.

I first stumbled across this business when on my constant quest for
animals which entailed endless patience in asking anybody and everybody
about all the kinds of animals they had ever heard of. It was with the
Primates—or monkey kingdom—that I kept getting information about more
and ever more kinds that I had not yet seen. This started in British
Guiana and went on in Surinam \[then Dutch Guiana\]. It seemed that
there was no end to the kinds available and, to my great surprise, the
locals were as good as their tales, for more and still more kinds were
brought to us—or we were taken to them. I saw monkeys alive—and in
captivity—in that country to which I could not and still cannot give
even a familial name. And from quite early on we kept being told about
these *Didis*. They lived way back in the hills, and they were pretty
smart "Kwasi," which is the generalized name for all Primates in that
area. Also, they had no tails, lived on the ground, had thumbs like men,
and built crude bush-houses of palm leaves. They usually ran away but if
a large party of men should penetrate into those completely uninhabited
mountains they would come, a lot together, and throw sticks and mud at
your canoe. So went the stories.

I never saw a *Didi* but then we never got really far into the
uninhabited territory but I did come across some extremely

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

large human footprints in the mud of a tiny side creek off a main river
right up by the first cataract and 40 miles above the last known
village. I put them down to visiting Jukas upriver to hunt, or to a band
of roving Amerinds —for there were still some in the district though
nobody had seen them for over a decade—but I was mystified. I did not
connect them with the *Didis*; but I have since often wondered. It is so
easy to find plausible explanations of odd facts. Besides, some other
dashed rum things happened at that camp.

The story of the *Didis* goes back to the first days of European
exploration of the Guianas. Sir Walter Raleigh's chroniclers mentioned
them; the early Spaniards said that the natives spoke of them; and in
1769 Edward Bancroft  <span id="fr_20"></span>[\*](#fn_20) wrote of
them, saying that the Indians said they were about 5 feet tall, erect,
and clothed in black hair. Once again also, the redoubtable Bernard
Heuvelmans has brought to light some specific statements on these
elusive creatures. These he gives us as follows:

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

In 1868, a century after Dr. Bancroft, Charles Barrington Brown, who was
then Government Surveyor in British Guiana, heard new rumours on the
Upper Mazaruni on the Venezuelan frontier that a sort of hairy men lived
there. Oddly enough, it was after hearing the "plaintive moan or howl"
which Cieza de Leon also alleged these ape-men made.

The first night after leaving Peaimah we heard a long, and most
melancholy whistle, proceeding from the direction of the depths of the
forest, at which some of the men exclaimed, in an awed tone of voice,
"The Didi." Two or three times the whistle was repeated, sounding like
that made by a human being, beginning in a high key and dying slowly and
gradually away in a low one.…

The "Didi" is said by the Indians to be a short, thick set, and powerful
wild man, whose body is covered with hair, and who lives in the forest.
A belief in the existence of this fabulous creature is universal over
the whole of British, Venezuelan and Brazilian Guiana. On the Demerara
river, some years after this, I met a half-breed woodcutter, who related
an

</div>

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

encounter that he had with two Didi—a male and a female—in which he
successfully resisted their attacks with his axe. In the fray, he
stated, he was a good deal scratched.

In 1931 Professor Nello Beccari, an Italian anthropologist, Dr. Renzo
Giglioli and Ugo Ignesti, made an expedition to British Guiana, where
one of their secondary objects was to attack the problem of Loys' ape.
For in this area the fauna, flora, climate and indeed the whole
ecological pattern—what is now called the "biotope"—are the same as in
the Sierra de Perijaâ;  <span id="fr_21"></span>[\*](#fn_21) and Beccari
had read in Elisée Reclus's geographical encyclopedia that according to
Indian legend the forests in British Guiana were haunted by fabulous
hairy men called *di-di*, which all the Indians fear, although they have
never seen them. But it was not until he was just about to return to
Italy that he heard any definite information about where this beast
lived.

On his return from several months in the interior, he met the British
Resident Magistrate, Mr. Haines, who was then living on the Rupununi.
Haines told him that he had come upon a couple of *di-di* many years
before when he was prospecting for gold. In 1910 he was going through
the forest along the Konawaruk, a tributary which joins the Essequibo
just above its junction with the Potaro, when he suddenly came upon two
strange creatures, which stood up on their hind-feet when they saw him.
They had human features but were entirely covered with reddish brown
fur. Haines was unarmed and did not know what he could do if the
encounter took a turn for the worse, but the two creatures retreated
slowly and disappeared into the forest without once taking their eyes
off him. When he had recovered from his surprise he realized that they
were unknown apes and recalled the legend of the *di-di* which he had
been told by the Indians with whom he had lived for many years.

When Miegam, the guide of the Italian expedition, heard this story he
remembered that he had had a similar adventure in 1918. He was going up
the Berbice with three men, Orella, Gibbs and an American whose name he
had forgotten. A little beyond Mambaca they saw on a sandy beach on the
river-bank two creatures which from a distance they took for men, and
hailed them to ask if the fishing was good. The unknown

</div>

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

creatures did not reply but merely slunk away into the forest. The four
men were puzzled and landed on the beach, where they were staggered to
find that the footprints were apes’, not men's. Miegam could not say
whether the creatures had a tail, but it could hardly have been
conspicuous, or he would not have mistaken them for men. He did,
however, say that two other settlers called Melville and Klawstky had
similar adventures in other places.

Professor Beccari obtained further information about the di-di from an
old negro at Mackenzie, famed for his wisdom, learning and experience.
Everyone on the banks of the Demerara called him "Oncle Brun"—presumably
he had come from French Guiana or the French West Indies—but the few
Indians that survived in the neighborhood respected him so much they
named him "The Governor." "Oncle Brun" had been told by the Indians that
the di-di lived in pairs and that it was extremely dangerous to kill one
of them, for the other would inevitably revenge its mate by coming at
night and strangling its murderer in his hammock. Beccari did not trust
the more fanciful part of this story, but felt that it must have a
kernel of truth. Lays, like Haines and Miegam, had also met a pair, and
so had Barrington Brown's woodcutter. Most South American monkeys live
in largish troops, and this habit alone suggests that this is a very
peculiar species.

</div>

The most significant single fact about these reports from Guiana is that
never once has any local person—nor any person reporting what a local
person says—so much as indicated that these creatures are just
"monkeys." In all cases they have specified that they are tailless,
erect, and have human attributes, even to building huts and *throwing*
things. This is an altogether different matter to de Loys' asinine
"ape." We are, in fact, once again confronted with the strange fact that
great numbers of people of all manner of tribes, nationalities, and even
races, insist that ABSMs are wild men, as opposed to manlike animals.
This is the one theme that runs consistently through all ABSMery.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_16"></span>[148:\*](abs12.htm#fr_16) Published in England
by Rupert Hart-Davis, 1958; published in the United States by Hill &
Wang, 1959.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[149:\*](abs12.htm#fr_17) Sometimes things get
much worse, as when Guatemala published a map of her country which
included the whole of British Honduras, because they "claim" it; and
then the Mexicans countered with a map of their southern states from the
Isthmus of Tehuantepec that showed the northern half of that hapless
little independent colony as being a part of their Territory of Quintana
Roo. Happily, the Republica de Honduras, being between governments, only
issued a pamphlet which claimed all the cays and islands off British
Honduras. (There are five United States in all America—ours, Mexico,
Venezuela, Brazil, and the Argentine.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[161:\*](abs12.htm#fr_18) Cornfield.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[167:\*](abs12.htm#fr_19) I have for some years
been interested in the reported existence of giant Earthworms in this
area, based upon some correspondence and some extraordinary bas-reliefs
on ancient pottery from that country. In 1956 and again in 1957, Mrs.
William (Marté) Latham made trips to the Pacific slopes of the Andes and
obtained numbers of these-5 feet long when contracted, and over 2 inches
in diameter. Preserved materials of them is lodged with the Smithsonian
Institution but the animals do not as yet even have a generic name.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[179:\*](abs12.htm#fr_20) Called himself Jacobus
Van Zandt, spied on Benjamin Franklin in Paris, and almost kept France
from joining our War of Independence. He was a well-known botanist and
naturalist, as well as a doctor!

<span id="fn_21"></span>[180:\*](abs12.htm#fr_21) This statement is not
strictly true. There are most marked botanical and zoological
differences between these two areas, while their forests are completely
separated by a wide belt of orchard-bush and open savannahs which form a
barrier just as complete as if a sea. The Guiana Massif, moreover, is
the more isolated in technical parlance, and has been so much longer and
more often in the past. Sub-hominids and sub-men would be just about the
only animals that could cross the open country but even modern forest
peoples prefer not to do so.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 9. Africa—the “Darkest”](abs13)
