[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abs22)  [Next](abs24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1931882584/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG0W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Abominable Snowmen*, by Ivan T. Sanderson, \[1961\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_421">p. 421</span>

**19. Sundry Objectionable Facts**

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Most of us dislike having to change our opinions. So, while facts are
facts, objectionable ones are often deliberately misinterpreted.*

</div>

It will by now be obvious to anyone that facts such as those already
given, even if scattered piecemeal through thousands of outlets and
dozens of countries during more than a hundred years, could not fail to
evoke some response. Nor have they. Starting in 1920, they have produced
violent reactions.

Though the story as a whole gained immediate popularity, the reaction
came primarily from the ranks of science, and notably from zoologists.
It was highly skeptical; and, in many cases quite violent. Besides being
dull, most professional skeptics are insufferably conceited, and in this
affair have never even bothered to collect the facts or examine them
properly. As is their wont they made positive statements, and before we
go any further, we must examine these because they form a thick overlay
of inaccuracy, illogicality, and illusion which, if not exposed and
analyzed, will distort any firm conclusions you may wish to draw from
the actual facts.

The pronouncements of most of the scientific skeptics and "experts" are
not caused exclusively by boneheadedness on the part of those who make
them; some are deliberately misleading and designed to promote further
skepticism, without any regard for truth. In the case of ABSMs, a whole
gamut of factors conveniently \[for them\] combine to promote skepticism
in any case, and many of these are very fundamental. Some are downright
objectionable, but they cannot simply be brushed aside on this account.
They exist, and they lie at the very core of the whole matter. Some of
these factors may at

<span id="page_422">p. 422</span>

first appear to have little bearing on ABSMery but, assembled, they
constitute a massive barrier to progress in the search and to any proper
appreciation of its import by those who aren't in the know. I will put
it this way.

Almost every time you open a newspaper you will find without much effort
some crazy item that sounds not only odd but often illogical.
Occasionally this is a lead story, but more often it is a filler. You
read it and pass on; sometimes you go back and read it again and with an
increasing sense of annoyance. Yet, we are for the most part pretty
immune to such items, and have developed a habit of regarding them as
just examples of irresponsible reporting. They amuse; and, if one does
not take them too seriously, they are predominantly harmless. However,
in some instances they are particularly aggravating because of their
very persistence. These are the old chestnuts that, indeed, usually crop
up in what is called "The Silly Season."

Among such are the matters of large unknown animals in lakes or the sea,
commonly called "sea serpents" in the past, but now somewhat more
properly sea monsters; children brought up by wolves; things called
poltergeists that allegedly throw plates about; and the perennial UFOs
or more popularly "Flying Saucers." Some years ago the magazine *Science
Service* ran an article giving advice to science writers, in which was
included a long list of "don'ts" and of subjects to avoid. This included
the above items and a lot of other items that we all know; some truly
silly and others just annoying. The editor of this article warned
against dealing with these subjects on the grounds that they had all
been *finally* and *utterly* discredited by "science."

This now famous list was compiled by Edwin E. Slosson, Director of
*Science Service* and published on July 1, 1950. It states categorically
that, among other items which are phony, and therefore taboo for all
professional science writers, there are: "Seeds that grow after more
than 300 years; especially that old chestnut about wheat in mummy
cases." Wheat found in canopic jars \[and placed therein in 1200 b.c.\]
has now been germinated on several occasions, but found, perhaps

<span id="page_423">p. 423</span>

rather disappointingly, to be nothing else than the lowest possible
grade wheat, still grown by the fellahin in the Nile Valley. Further to
this, seeds of the Flowering Lotus dug from a swamp near Pekin in North
China, were germinated in the hothouse of Kew Gardens in London, and
bloomed. This species of plant is not found today growing nearer Pekin
than north Assam—a distance of 1500 miles away. The swamp from which
these seeds were taken was originally believed to be some 500 years old.
However, radio-carbon dating of other material taken from it, done in
Japan, indicates that its lower layers, at least, are 24,000 years old.
The seeds were in these layers and could be up to 40,000 years old! In
this list of "don'ts" appears our poor, original ABSM.

Included also are some matters that either lie, or appear at present to
lie, outside our logic. However, there are many, like ABSMs, that are
quite logical and substantial, so that they ought to be open to physical
examination and thus, ultimately, be obtainable. These, too, are
nonetheless of a wide variety of likelihood in point of fact; by which I
mean, some sound frankly very unlikely in the light of what we *do*
know, while others seem perfectly feasible, if not probable, for the
same reason. Unfortunately, science does not any longer make this
distinction, but prefers to lump them all together, as in this article,
and write them all off as *impossible*. This is not only silly, because,
as time has shown it may prove to be wrong; it is *unscientific*.

Science is defined in the dictionaries as the pursuit of the unknown;
yet science today is coming more and more to insist that it not be
bothered with this, and it has reached a point where anything that is
*not* already known is frowned upon. At the same time, there is a
distinct tendency for science, per se, to become synonymous with
technology, while the title *scientist* is becoming a class distinction
founded on the occupation of the employer of the individual concerned.
Thus, anybody who is not employed in or by very certain specific
categories of organizations, whatever be his or her education, training,
experience, and even published works, is referred to, and often
scathingly so, as "an amateur."

<span id="page_424">p. 424</span>

Building radio sets or milking cows is not science; it is technology and
technologists are manipulators. They are trained to do certain things
and are conditioned to tackle only one thing at a time, preferring to be
given a straight yes-or-no problem and be left to worry it out. If you
suggest that they try to find but one correct answer out of many \[or an
infinity\] of possibilities, their invariable answer is "If I had to
investigate every crackpot theory that comes along, I'd never get any
work done." Most regrettably, scientists today are tending to agree with
the technologists in that they just don't want to be bothered with
anything new that requires any novel effort or new thinking. There is
also an extension of this attitude which denies even the possible
existence of anything to which an answer has not already been given.
Thus, all "unpleasantnesses," especially if brought up by the press or
suggested by an "amateur" are often not just ignored but held up to
ridicule as examples of dangerous practices.

One does not like to take "science" to task in this or any other way;
and it is regrettable to have to treat it as if it were a sort of cult,
but the state of affairs has become so irrational by the deliberate
design of scientists themselves that this cannot be avoided. True
scientists there are aplenty, but most of them appear to be so cowed by
the system and its self-appointed hierarchy—which, I also regret to have
to point out, is founded on a purely economic basis today—that they very
seldom dare to speak out or give either their own or any truly
scientific opinions. Then again, a not inconsiderable percentage of
persons called or calling themselves scientists prove, on proper
investigation, not to have any formal scientific training at all. Most
regrettable of all, I have to state flatly that the percentage is vastly
higher in this respect in the United States than in any other country.
If anybody wishes to question this statement, let them go through any
standard reference work in their public library, that will list the
formal academic recognitions of each individual. From this, it will be
discovered that a rather small percentage of those in directorial or
other responsible positions in such institutions—such as museums and
zoos—have any such \[save

<span id="page_425">p. 425</span>

for "honorary degrees," which are not academic recognition\]. At the
same time, it will be found that there is no record of any practical
scientific experience on their part either.

The result is that everybody other than this hierarchy is either
overawed or beaten into submission by it, and is, as often as not, held
up to ridicule to boot. The press meanwhile, trained to a high degree of
skepticism for very good reasons, dares not make a decision on its own;
runs to what it thinks is, or what it has been told is, *Science* for
answers; and it publicizes these pronouncements quite unthinkingly. As a
result, the public is increasingly less well informed on many vital
matters and a most dangerous situation is being created generally—a
situation that may very well lose us our position in the modern world.

The obvious and invariable question asked by the layman at this stage,
is *what* scientists or "experts"? This is a difficult if not impossible
question to answer but not for fear of giving offense. The most that can
be said is that they were mostly if not all, professional \[allegedly\]
zoologists, and most of them British for the simple reason that ABSMery
was until quite recently a purely British affair. Then again, the press
very seldom named those "experts" whom they quoted; again for the simple
reason that said experts either refused permission for them to do so or
were acting as spokesmen for corporate institutions or official
organizations and were not therefore *permitted* to do so. Most of the
criticism of these pronouncements \[which were themselves all highly
critical\] was directed at the British Museum (Natural History), as
being the official mouthpiece of zoology in Britain; but, although that
institution always "officially" denied the possibility of there being
ABSMs, this did not perhaps reflect the real opinions of all its
professional staff. Then there is another aspect to this.

Actually, almost no professionally trained or professionally employed
scientists have published on the subject—even critically. This may not
be so much evidence of caution as an indication that they wholly and
almost universally considered the matter so impossible as not to be
worthy of mention in

<span id="page_426">p. 426</span>

print. Apart from Elwes' brief notice in the Proceedings of the
Zoological Society of London, I don't really know of any mention in
British journals. The Hollanders in the Indies did so publish; and, of
course, the Russians, Mongolians, and Chinese have issued quite a body
of material. There have been others in some countries who have made
passing references in their books; works that may be regarded as
textbooks; but these are almost, one and all, mere references to the
existence of the "problem."

Despite the above, and apart from those scientists whose assistance I
acknowledged at the beginning of this book, there have always been
some—and this number is increasing every year—who have taken an unbiased
view of the matter and who have not denied it in toto. At the same time,
not even these people would say so to the press, so that the latter
fraternity has always had to fall back on the accepted but misleading
term "experts say …" The greatest trouble arising from this situation
has been that any "Tom, Dick, or Harry," trained or working scientist or
not, has been able to say almost anything he likes, off the record; even
speaking for an institution, provided what he said was in accord with
the agreed or expressed policy of that institution. Thus, it is the
over-all attitude of the sciences \[and notably zoology\] that is to
blame and at fault. Science may criticize, but if it positively denies
anything, it should at least state a case *and* give valid
\[scientific\] reasons for this. This it has not done; and, worse, it
has never really reviewed or investigated the facts, the alleged facts,
or even the reports.

As an example, witness the real shock sustained by the lay public on the
announcement of the Sputnik I launching. This was only the beginning;
Lunik I, only a reminder; the Coelacanth fish, a mere hint. Much worse
is to come; and we may expect it from all angles and at an increasing
tempo. Another example, exactly comparable to the Coelacanth, but of
much greater human potentiality, is that of ABSMs. This is, moreover, a
rather special case.

A landing by a UFO, piloted by some super-intelligent entity from some
other celestial body, would seriously jolt our

<span id="page_427">p. 427</span>

whole world; but to get one of our own ancestors, thought to have been
extinct for thousands of years, for study, would have almost as profound
effects. If, moreover, that creature turned out to be so intermediate in
character and characteristics between man and beast as to be ineligible
for either class, it would have even profounder effects—at least at
first —than the arrival from space of thinking creatures of an entirely
different origin and culture, because it would touch what is perhaps the
rawest spot in our consciousness. This is our religious belief.

Let us not forget that not so many years ago a thinking man was
persecuted and physically attacked for having so much as taught the
Theory of Evolution and by inference our kinship with the apes, other
primates, and lower animals. Man, more than one Holy Writ states
categorically, is made in the image of God, whereas "the animals" are
not. What therefore are you going to do with a living creature that not
even a scientist can say is either one or the other, specifically and
definitely? Quite apart from the legal, ethical, and social problems
involved—such as whether he \[or it\] has a vote and other citizens'
rights, whether shooting it is murder or hunting, and whether you lock
it up in a cage or invite it in for afternoon tea—you have to face the
much more basic question as to whether it is in the image of God or not;
and, if it is, *what* image of *what* god, and what the latter's
qualities may be. Further, if it stands half—or anyway between us and
the other mammals, are we to believe Holy Writ or Charles Darwin? <span
id="fr_55"></span>[\*](#fn_52)

The matter of ABSMs, while utterly intriguing is, also perhaps more than
any other enigma, open to another very human sentiment; namely, that an
unsolved mystery is much preferable to a solved one. As I have threaded
my sometimes weary way through the maze of facts about this business for
over a quarter of a century, I have often wondered, and sometimes with a
real jolt, whether some of its greatest protagonists *really* want the
matter solved or one of the creatures caught. It seems that people will
go just so far, but the

<span id="page_428">p. 428</span>

moment they see any real possibility of a solution, they find some
subconscious excuse to draw back.

All these factors combine to create a very widespread and united front
for the skeptics in this business. But they are not the only ones. There
is still pure ignorance; and by this I do not mean of the scientific
variety, but of a perfectly legitimate nature. In order to avoid giving
offense, I should stress that just because most of us can't build a
television set, it is no indication that we are uneducated. It is
nevertheless an example of "ignorance" on our part. Nobody expects
anybody to know everything, and nobody *can* know everything, but this
puts upon all of us a limit as to what we are qualified to talk about.
What is more, even specialists can hardly any longer be expected to know
the whole of their own field. In addition, there is a very great deal
more to be learned about everything than is at present known, and this
applies to our earth as much as to anything else. In fact, we really
know astonishingly little about the latter (see Chapter 18) . Finally,
there is, today, still another bugbear; namely, the compartmentalization
of knowledge.

To put it crudely, very few specialists in one field know even the
rudiments of any other, although, among "experts," there is a sad
tendency to act as if they do. The rift is not just between, say, the
physical and the biological sciences. My own speciality happens to
bridge botany and zoology, and I am constantly and consistently unable
to discuss it with either zoologists or botanists, simply because a
zoologist who takes any botanical matters under consideration is an
extreme rarity, while the average botanist finds no use for animals
except as a minor ecological factor. The amount of plain "ignorance"
even among the most learned is quite terrifying, though the truly
learned are always the first to admit this. We have no quarrel with the
learned nor with the true scientist: our clash is with these so-called
"experts."

This is itself a thoroughly loose term, and the whole concept of
"expertism" is based on false premises. You can be a specialist in
several things, but you cannot really be an expert in anything; and when
someone says he is—or he is said

<span id="page_429">p. 429</span>

to be, in some matter, and particularly a matter the person concerned
denies exists—it is manifest that something is very wrong. The press is
principally to blame for the widespread use of this cliché and it is a
very dangerous procedure to which the public should be alerted. The very
word should be suspect and, if used at all, should be fully qualified.
Thus, if somebody says he is an "expert" in the matter of ABSMs he is a
liar; if others say that he is an expert on anything, it is incumbent
upon them to state just why they say so; and this entails stating in
just what fields he may have been trained and have specialized. In the
ABSM case, such specialists as mountaineers and hunters do not qualify
to pronounce upon the matter, apart from making straightforward factual
reports which is everybody's \[and anybody's\] prerogative. Further,
even if a zoologist has specialized in the known animal life of, say,
the eastern Himalayas, it does not qualify him to make statements about
the extinct sub-hominid Pithecanthropines of the other parts of the
Orient; though, as a zoologist, he ought to display sounder judgment on
such matters than, for instance, a botanist.

We come then to still another hurdle. This is a very odd one indeed. In
some respects it seems illogical but it is nonetheless a fact, as the
press, above all others, can attest. Explanation of it is often
attempted on psychological grounds or by a general appeal to the
fallibility of human nature. Personally, I have always felt that this is
avoiding the main issue and is nothing more than an intellectual "out."
I refer to the extraordinary manner in which strange, odd, and
especially inexplicable happenings gang up, both in time and space. To
try and explain what I am talking about let me attempt a purely
hypothetical case.

Let us suppose that some county newspaper reports the incidence of
innumerable apparently spontaneous fires breaking out in some isolated
farmhouse. If the reports persist, some larger newspaper may send a
reporter. Arriving in the area, he may stumble upon some grotesque local
political situation. Then, something like a murder may take place,
involving still another story of, say, alleged witchcraft. Then the
funsters

<span id="page_430">p. 430</span>

get in the act and pull some incredible stunt that starts the local
constabulary off on a wild-goose chase. But, if the outsider persists,
he will, it seems, almost invariably turn up something else again, quite
unrelated to any of the previous shenanigans, and probably quite unknown
to or even suspected by the local inhabitants. Ask any reporter. For the
life of me I cannot name one single news-story that I have ever been on
that, starting with an oddity, did not bring to light half a dozen other
enigmas and a similar quota of hoaxes, accidents, and other red
herrings.

When we come, therefore, to examine our principal matter on hand, and
its reception by public, press, technology, and science, we must bear in
mind that it offers an extraordinary range of possibilities for
intelligent skepticism, and that there is much legitimate reason for
plain, honest people to be skeptical. However, the scientific skeptics
have gone too far and too fast, so that in the end they have become
frankly asinine and brought into existence a powerful counterforce. This
is a solid skepticism of the scientific skeptics themselves, now so
widespread and potent that anybody criticizing any aspect of the
business immediately becomes suspect himself. This is a healthy but also
a dangerous development.

As I tried to make clear in my brief introductory history of ABSMery, it
was the coining of the phrase "*abominable snowman*" that first brought
this matter out of the seclusion of what was till then regarded as
native folklore and made it front-page news. There had been hundreds of
thousands, if not millions, of strange and bizarre tales told before
that time by travelers of every ilk ever since prehistoric days but few
had ever made "news"; while news dissemination itself had previously
been slow, ponderous, and was in no way as effective then as it is
today. The scientific world had really never been called upon to face a
public outcry of these dimensions and urgency, while they had always
before had not only the press, but the public on their side in coping
with unwanted and awkward items. Never before 1920 had the public
clamored so insistently for an explanation of what was still then only a
"newspaper story"; and never before had

<span id="page_431">p. 431</span>

the originator of the story held a position quite like that of Colonel
Howard-Bury who, to boot, was on a mission of deadly seriousness to his
country. The attack on Mt. Everest and its conquest was a prestige
matter to the British; it had official blessing; and, it was of enormous
popular appeal. Persons in charge of it simply could not be ignored.

The result was that those zoologists to whom the press applied for
guidance and an answer to the new riddle responded more or less out of
habit and to form. They were frankly unaware of the potential of this
business and seemed to have thought that it could be brushed aside like
the other objectionable matters that were brought to it from time to
time. They simply denied it. This is to say that, without any
consideration at all, they glibly announced that it was a lie.

This was a staggering thing to do and one that could only have been
possible in a hierarchical realm, conditioned to issue categoric
pronouncements that would not, or were deemed should not, be questioned.
But they had forgotten several new factors already in existence, such as
the Everest business and the new-found power of the press. They also
seem not to have realized the growth of real skepticism among the
public. Even the press was a bit staggered by these denouncements of a
popular hero.

Accused, in turn, of being liars themselves, those who had pontificated
immediately either retracted or elaborated their previous statements,
they came up with two alternatives. Either, they said, the whole thing
was a case of mistaken identity by somebody, however worthy in other
fields, but who was not a trained zoologist and who therefore could not
be expected to know what he saw or interpret correctly anything of a
zoological nature; or, they said, it was a hoax. There was not very much
anybody could do about the first suggestion because it cannot be denied;
while there was much evidence that untrained personnel did in fact often
make mistakes in identifying things in other specialized fields. It was
not till later that it was pointed out that an experienced mountaineer
is more likely to interpret correctly what he sees in mountains—where
seeing is notoriously unreliable—than a

<span id="page_432">p. 432</span>

zoologist who has never been on a mountain; just as a sea captain is
more likely to know what he sees in the sea than any landlubber.
\[Moreover, it was then observed, that the seaman had better be able to
do so, or ocean travel should be abandoned until he did, for the safety
of ships depends wholly upon their captains' ability in this respect:
and, if they are going to start mistaking bits of seaweed, floating
logs, or deflated Navy blimps for sea monsters, they are not going to be
able to pick up marker buoys, or even to make port.\] There are lots of
people and categories of people, much better qualified to identify
animals in the field than zoologists, and especially that breed of the
latter who made these particular pronouncements, most all of whom had
spent their lives in museums! The suggestion of a hoax presented quite
other possibilities.

The idea that this whole thing might be of such a nature is naturally
both intriguing and satisfying to the average person, because it
explains something unpleasant and "explains away" many things that are
highly objectionable. The only aggravating feature to it is that the
confounded things themselves persist in cropping up again and again and
from ever wider sources when, one would have supposed, the whole matter
had been settled once and for all. The trouble is that very few have
examined the premises of the hoax theory carefully. Let us analyze this
idea.

First, if the whole thing is a hoax, it must be the oldest one in
history because exactly the same things have been reported by Western
Europeans since at least the mid-15th century (see Chapter 14). Second,
they, or it, must be the product or products of a thoroughly
international organization, because they have appeared on five
continents throughout the ages. Third, the organizers must have had a
positively enormous amount of money at their disposal at all times,
because all the concrete evidence has turned up not only in the most
out-of-the-way places, but almost precisely where the toughest explorers
on the one hand and the most expensive oil companies on the other have
either not previously been, or where they have found it almost
impossible to go. Fourth, their organization

<span id="page_433">p. 433</span>

must surpass in security techniques anything ever devised by any other
organization, private or public, because not one iota of suspicion, let
alone evidence of, their existence has ever turned up or even been
claimed. Fifth, their operatives must, throughout the centuries, have
been chosen and trained with a skill that is really quite unbelievable,
for they have managed to get into the most impossible places and have
done things there, persistently and without ever being seen even by the
locals, with such devilish cleverness as defies our imagination. How,
for instance, did they manage to lay out a set of bipedal foot-tracks in
fresh snow just before Messrs. Howard-Bury, Shipton, *et alii*, together
with the best local Sherpa mountaineers happened, by mistake, to turn
aside up a certain pass, and to select a stretch of territory so rugged
and difficult that even the Sherpas gasped in admiration at their
mountaineering skill. This is all odd enough, but I have a further
parenthetical question.

Why?

To manufacture a lot of fossils to fool a professorial pedant is one
thing, but to pull a hoax, world-wide, for centuries, to fool nobody in
particular is not only senseless and illogical, it is just plain
fantasy. The hoax theory is, in fact, so stupid that it hardly warrants
mention, and when it is presented, as by Messrs. Peissel and Thioller
(see *Argosy*) as being a deliberate conspiracy to promote "tourist"
trade on the part of a scattered bunch of Buddhist monks in Nepal, it
becomes far more laughable than the real story itself.

When the public insisted that the thing was not a lie, and the simplest
logic showed that it was not a hoax, the zoologists resorted to what was
to them "Holy Writ," and they trundled out their biggest intellectual
guns to try and prove it. Since the tracks existed, as they now had to
admit, they stated that the whole thing was perfectly normal, and in no
way odd, being no more than cases of mistaken identity. They then
proceeded solemnly to recount the list of animals known to exist in and
around the upper Himalaya and \[to be on the safe side\] chose a goodly
selection of them as being the makers of the tracks. These included the
Giant Panda \[which

<span id="page_434">p. 434</span>

is not found within a thousand miles\], outsized Gray Wolves, certain
larger species of Langur Monkeys, the Snub-nosed Monkey
(*Rhinopithecus*), the Snow Leopard, and even some "large bird" \[type
unspecified\] but, above all, a creature they called the Isabelline
Bear. This is a very mysterious creature itself, as was explained in
Chapter 2.

Much of the world "bought" the bear theory and there is an endless
literature on the subject, most of it absolutely not worth reading,
since none of the writers seem ever to have taken an impression of any
bear's tracks nor even have bothered to look in any of half a hundred
books \[some published up to 50 years ago\] that give drawings,
measurements, and even excellent photographs of such things. ABSM tracks
are not bear tracks. Nor are they those of any of the other animals
listed above and suggested by the skeptics. I need not go further into
this irksome business; and you may refer for further information to
Appendix B. Since I am not among those who affirm that the average
intelligence of the citizen of this country is that of a 12-year-old,
and since I have the profoundest respect for the intelligence and more
so the perspicacity of 12-year-olds in any case, wherever they were
born; and, furthermore, since I believe that any child of much less age
can tell the track of an eagle or a monkey from that of a man, I refuse
to further insult anyone's intelligence. But, believe it or not, this is
just exactly what the skeptics did. It is one of the most deplorable
bits of chicanery that I know of ever perpetrated on the public in the
name of science.

After Eric Shipton published his photographs of ABSM tracks in 1951,
none other than the British Museum (Natural History) mounted a large
exhibit in the main hall of their building in London, and advertised the
fact that they had done so. This exhibit showed pictures and casts of
Mr. Ship-ton's discovery alongside casts and photographs of bear tracks
and those made by Langur Monkeys and then had the brazen effrontery to
state that these proved that the ABSM tracks were those of bears—"or
monkeys," as they neatly put it! This was outright deception, and not
just a foolish prank or due to a lack of knowledge. The whole exhibit
was designed specifically

<span id="page_435">p. 435</span>

to debunk Mr. Shipton's findings and the whole ABSM business, but, so
completely out of touch with reality were those who perpetrated this
hoax that they apparently really thought that their word was enough to
fool the public. One can hardly credit such stupidity, let alone the
duplicity of anybody who would place the casts of a bear, a man, a
langur, and an ABSM \[especially Shipton's enormous and most unusual
find\] alongside each other, and then try and tell the public that these
*proved* that the last was a bear—let alone "either a bear *or* a
monkey." What in the name of anything do such people think—or don't
they? Personally, I cannot believe that it was just stupidity and simple
lack of education. The British Museum is administered as a part of the
British Civil Service and for all that may be said of that organization,
it is certainly not stupid. Mistakes it may make, but to attempt a
*hoax* of this nature—and that is exactly what it was—is not in their
book. The Empire would have collapsed long before that time if it had
been; and, besides, the British public is as sane as any other.

This most disgraceful of all hoaxes backfired. It was virtually the end
of the skeptics, for even the press overcame its inverted scruples, and
howled. It marked a turning point in the history of ABSMery, just as
important as Colonel Howard-Bury's telegram in 1920 and the decision of
the Soviet Government to investigate the matter in 1958. In fact, this
really ended the regime of the skeptics and opened the field to
intelligent appraisal by honest men. From then on, people demanded the
facts and were no longer interested in the mouthings of "experts" or the
tricks of officialdom. So, I now turn to a final appraisal of those
facts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_52"></span>[427:\*](abs23.htm#fr_55) See Vercors' splendid
book, *You Shall Know Them*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 20. Certain Abominable Conclusions](abs24)
