[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Taoism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](tgl004) [Next](tgl006)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

### THE TWO WORLDS

<span class="small">THE WORLD OF SPIRIT AND THE WORLD OF SENSE</span>

*Theme suggested by the material given in the 7th Essay of Huai Nan
Tzû.*

   The Taoist philosophy maintains three fundamental essences, as
outlined in the 7th chapter. These are *ching* \#\#\#, the ethereal
part, as opposed to the gross in human beings. This is spoken of by some
as *instinct: ch‛i* \#\#\# élan vital, transformed into material
substance. The word is the same as the word for air and is that which is
looked upon as substance; and finally *shen* \#\#\# the
*animal-spirits*, the *mind* and so on: by some it is thought of as
*conscience*. These three are, or should be, under the command of the
*will*. Volition is the vanguard. The combination of these three,
results in the issue of *beings*. The organization of the different
classes is due to the different quantities of the essences in the
combination. That which has only partaken of *ch‛i* becomes mineral. A
combination of *ching* and *ch‛i* forms the lower form of organic
matter, such as plants and animals. But those objects that are possessed
of the three elements, *ching*, *ch‛i* and *shen*, go to form the
highest form of beings,—beings with mind and soul. Within such beings
the due harmony of the *ching* and *shen* constitute what may be called
"the spirit."

   This highest form of beings has the power of will to choose its own
path in life: but, for their own welfare, they should adopt the will of
the Tao as their fundamental director.

   The processes of creation proceed on very natural lines. The
combination of the three factors, as mentioned previously, proceeds
continuously and gives birth to the Cosmos,—Heaven, Earth and Man. Since
these are creations proceeding through the instrumentality of the *Tao*,
<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span> their full life can only be
maintained by entire harmony and identity with this Cosmic Spirit. But,
being endowed with a power of will in himself, man is inclined to
neglect this, by the seduction of the senses and through ignorance, thus
making an artificial life for himself where the senses and the flesh
predominate, to the neglect of the spirit and culminating in the final
ruin of life. But Heaven and Earth still maintain their original contact
and implicitly follow the movement of the *Tao*, in all their motions.
"As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be," in regard to
these. But man, being endowed with power of will, does not follow the
impulse of the *Tao*, but goes on, following his own desires, and
conducts his administrative, executive, educational and ceremonial
systems, wholly regardless of the direction of the *Tao*, and has thus
lost reality and created an artificial state of life. So the natural
harmony is lost, to a great extent. In turn, this artificiality has
altered (swerved) the course of Heaven and Earth.

   The human body is constituted as a microcosmos: it is a miniature
form of the universe. The four limbs and the whole body have a
resemblance to the larger universe. The part affects the whole; and so,
if the part has lost its full power of interaction and coöperation, the
larger whole is affected. Heaven and Earth have a way of wholesomeness,
in order to follow the volition of the Tao. This consists in the economy
of the use of all or any of its powers, care of its talents and love and
regard for its soul. So that, if we do not follow them, but do
everything in artificial ways,—following our own wills, the harmony of
nature will be spoiled, as well as our own economies of life.

   Losing this wholesomeness of life will create great disadvantages,
inducing the four corruptions of the body, which will invitably entail
death. If the microcosmos suffers, the macrocosmos cannot escape
infection. There is a close connection between the Universe and Man.
There is intimate connection between Man and all things. There is an
equality and an essential unity. This is the <span id="page_xxiii">p.
xxiii</span> ontology of life. Since human beings neglect or are
ignorant of this wholeness, and are disobedient to the will of Tao,
painful consequences follow, such as the pangs of birth, sickness, old
age and death. Men, being ignorant of the true course of evolution and
laws of nature, think of life as pleasure, and death as bane, or regard
strength as the *summum bonum*, and decay and the ills of life as evil
and unfortunate,—all which implies that a great mistake has been made
about the natural system, and, in consequence, many unnatural things are
brought about.

   Accordingly, the first thing to do is to guard the mind; for the mind
is the throne of the spirit: it is the tablet of the soul and the spot
where the 'jades' (precious things) of life are presented. It is the
shrine of life. If there is no tablet, presentations will have no value,
and nothing can be done in averting evils. So all real men safe-guard
the mind. They never let it drift, and so they accomplish great things,
and great results are achieved. The attitude is one of stillness or a
perfect equilibrium of forces, i.e., not disturbed by passion. They are,
however, full of activity. They understand that the changes occurring in
the body are only the natural processes of evolution; they feel assured
that the spirit can never die; and accordingly, look on it as a matter
of supreme importance to safe-guard the spirit through the mind, or
safe-guard the heart,—the soil whence the spirit comes. This is most
important! Evolving from the *chen jen* \#\#\#, true man, there grows,
naturally, the *chih jen* \#\#\# superman,—the highest class of beings
in nature.

   It may be permitted us to think that the word *mind* used in the
foregoing passage is much similar to the word *reason* as used by Plato.
Here, then, we have a very interesting analogy between two ancient
writers, living not very distant in time from one another, but very
distant in space. One in Greece, the other in China. And it will well
repay us to compare the two worlds which both discussed. One the world
of sense, the other the world <span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span> of
spirit. We have already seen the Taoist conceptions of the two worlds;
let us now hear the Platonic view. I will quote from Martineau's "Types
of Ethical Theory."

   "According to Plato, the leading distinction between its immortal
part and its mortal is expressed by the words Reason and Sense. The
adhesive entanglements of sense and passion grow around the soul, and
cover her with an earthly mass so dense and wild, that her primitive
divine nature is unperceived: but if you only notice the insight that
she can show into the true and good, and the converse she aspires to
with the godlike and immortal, you may imagine what she would appear if,
lifted out of the gulf in which her life is plunged, and with the
unsightly accretions all struck off. The immortal part of the soul is
simple and uncompounded: but the other is composed of a nobler and a
less noble part, of which the higher,—impulse or energy of Will,
mediates between the extremes of Intellect and Sense: and the
lower,—*appetite*, or the selfish desire of *having* rather than of
*being*, is in complete opposition to reason, and through the force of
the intervening impulse to be in rightful subordination to it. This
leads to the conception of character.

   What is the highest good? Are we entangled in the delusions and
fascinations of the senses? We must clear ourselves from them, learn to
converse with ideas, subjugate the body, and welcome death as an
emancipation from the last hindrance of our wisdom. Are we sharers in
that divine Reason which informs and organises the universe? We must
recognise and welcome it everywhere, and follow it out as it ramifies
through the world of sense, and touches pleasure itself with the ray of
beauty. There is nothing inconsistent in this double view, which regards
the material system now as the opaque veil to hide, now as the
transparent medium to reveal, the inner thought which is the divine
essence of all: and seek, at one time, into the intellectual glory, by
escape from detaining appearances: at another, to descend with that
glory as it streams into the <span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span> remotest
recesses of the phenomenal world." Pp. 65-7.

   And then we are led on from this to consider the matter from the
view-point of the two worlds,—the visible and the invisible. As is clear
to those who have read these essays, the matter is ever present to these
ancient Taoists—possibly in a very vague way and not to be compared with
the clearness and the ardour of the Christian mystic. Possibly no modern
life brings out this more manifestly than the life of the late Cardinal
Newman. "In words of strange and wrapt solemnity he gave simply and
unfalteringly his tidings of that "other world", to him so real, that
"other world", half-hidden yet mysteriously present, veiled by the world
of sense, yet laying from time to time, and unawares, upon the heart
some intimation, some mystic hint, that it was close at hand." And a
further quotation from the same source will remind us that the
description given of him bears much resemblance to that given, in
ancient time, of the ancient "perfect man" of the Taoists.

   "One who knew him speaks of his "intense stillness", when in repose.
This stillness was but the outward expression of his inward quietude,
the quietude of one rapt in contemplation of a vision. Mathew Arnold
speaks of him as a "spiritual apparition." "There's Newman", the
students used to say, as they met him, "with head thrust forward and
gaze fixed as though at some vision seen only by himself, with swift,
noiseless steps he glided by". From the seclusion of the study, from
abstinence and prayer, from habitual dwelling in the Unseen, he seemed
to come forth, that one day of the week (Sunday), to speak to others of
the things he had seen and known." J. L. May's "Cardinal Newman". Pp.
30, 33.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tgl006)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
