[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Taoism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](tgl006) [Next](tgl008)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span>

### TAO

   Mankind has always been concerned about the "Power manifesting itself
in the universe." It could not be otherwise. The world is full of wonder
and the signs of power. The starry heavens above and the pullulating
earth below have ever urged on the mind of man to seek the cause and
origin of the forces behind phenomena.

   There are as many opinions as there are minds. And the record of the
many interpretations of this Power is both long and various. The study
of the impressions made on men, by it, falls generally within the sphere
of religion. For it concerns a subject which it is not easy to examine
by experiment. There can only be philosophical deductions and religious
impressions. The experience is as wide as the human race, and exists
without regard to the states of civilization or the standards of
culture. Savages and cultured people both have experience of the Power,
though expressed in different ways, and having divers social effects.
The guise under which the Power is conceived starts a wide study in
human experience.

   Our chief concern is with how the Chinese have thought of this Power
manifesting itself in the universe. A comparison with other races can
only be very brief. Is it thought of as personal and approachable, as
good or malign? Some looked on it as being outside and as external to
the world. But Aristotle did not think so. He did not conceive of it as
being outside and as an external providence, designing earthly structure
and events: rather the design is internal and arises from the type and
function of the thing. In his view "Divine providence coincides
completely with the operations of natural causes. Yet there is a God."
(W. Durrant). In his book, "Progress in Religion," Dr. T. R. Glover
discusses what is the Great Original, as expressed by the Greeks; and he
seems to think it was expressed by Air. The Taoists, too, think of air,
but they deny it was <span id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span> the ordinary
air we breathe, but quite something of another quality. Would it be
ether they were thinking of? And it is not easy to conclude how the
Taoist view compares with that of Aristotle. On the whole they differ.
The Tao is conceived of as something self-existent and being independent
of the visible world. It belongs to the invisible world and the visible
comes from it.

   The ancients judged of the world without mechanical aids. What they
would have concluded had they had at their command all the modern
mechanism for surveying the universe, passes our imagination! But, as
the Taoist saw it, he judged that the invisible was greater than the
visible: that spirit, from every point of view, was more excellent than
matter. Lao Tan felt that behind all,—not only the visible world, but
also behind the invisible world, there is a Supreme Power to which he
gave the conventional name of Tao, or, as it may be translated the
Cosmic Spirit. But this is only a conventional term: we cannot
comprehend it and therefore it is impossible to give it an adequate
name. Its quality, its power and its magnitude is so vast and deep that
no human language,—language belonging to the material universe alone—can
describe it. And, of course, were any term comprehensive enough to
connote it, in all its mysterious greatness, it would, at once, lose its
chief characteristic of the Infinite. Once a thing is defined, it
becomes limited. So the conventional name of Great Tao is only an
indicative name,—indicative of immensity and quality and the way. But
whilst no name can adequately define it, yet it is possible for the mind
to have a good conception of it, through description of its works and by
analogues of what it is like. It is the Source of all and the Eternal
Sustainer of all creation. It gives out energy, but without the least
exhaustion of its own powers and resources.

   These comparisons and descriptions of the Tao are so fully and
frequently made, that it is unnecessary to say more. In the 1st essay,
in particular, a wealth of illustration is given to show its nature and
quality. Throughout the work <span id="page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span>
there are significant suggestions made that in it, alone, will be found
the secret of life and strength adequate to bring all human affairs to a
successful issue. The State and the individual can find the perfect life
in it. The "Perfect Man" will make the perfect state; and the Perfect
Man is so because of a full alliance with the Tao.

   A description of this "Perfect man" may occasion some difficulty. He
is described as being ashen grey in the face and so unconcerned with
life and business, as though he did not care for any of these things. He
looks incompetent. It is easy to understand the intention. It is a
concrete way of depicting a man who is wholly under the domination of
the Tao. It is a way of saying that the chief things in life are the
things of the Tao. It is the greatest thing. "He who looks into the
mirror of the Great Purity sees with great clearness. He who
perambulates in the regions of the Tao has lucidity equal with sun and
moon. Where the Tao was, there was truth and uprightness. Those who had
the Tao, had perfect liberty. "We see all things in God," said
Malebranche.

   There was no ritual in the service of the Tao. It does not seek the
outward manifestation of rites, but guards unity in the heart so that
the possessor may reach communion with High Heaven and with all the
world below. In this the Taoist is far superior to the Confucianist. The
latter is involved in endless etiquettes from which the Taoist is free.
This is a fundamental difference which pervades the two systems. This
arises from the difference in origins. The Taoist maintains a spiritual
origin which has far reaching results in life and conduct. The
Confucianist conceives a physical origin to all things. He begins with
heaven and ends with earth. Even his name for the Supreme Being smells
of the physical, the "Ruler Above, Shang Ti." His moralities have,
therefore, not the naturalness of the Taoist's. Hence the controversies.
The Taoist is left without a rag of man-made ceremonies. His is all
spiritually natural. He has not even that of the noble <span
id="page_xxxiv">p. xxxiv</span> Roman boy pictured by Virgil, whose
purple-edged toga suggested not only the weakness of boyhood and its
need of protection by a holy garment, but kept daily before the eyes and
mind of its wearer that duty to family, state and gods which was the
foundation of all that was best in the Roman character.

   I am not quite certain whether there was any communion in worship and
prayer. But this should be guardedly said. For there are indications
that there are responses to those who pursue and press forward on it.
There are statements about such meditations in which all outside things
are forgotten,—some Yoga practice. There are indications that there was
the practice of abstraction from outward things, that the unseen world
became the chief thing, similar to what the Sadhu Sundar Singh says of
his communion with the spiritual.

   The Tao being one with naturalness (\#\#\#) is not composed of any
fixed principles. "It is not a fixed compound, nor has it any definite
limitations. Hence the use of scientific formulae to describe it is not
possible. It may not be stated in any logical terms" or explained by
syllogistic forms. Its form and applications are interminable and are
self-acting and self-determining. It may, further, be said that the
inherent nature of the Tao is *purity, tranquility, rest* and *unity*.
Whenever it is present in human affairs, it is never divorced from these
four inherent qualities. These words are leading words in the
philosophy: *purity, tranquility, rest* and *unity*. Their purport is
easily understood, and it means that the spiritual must predominate in
all things. The senses are to be instruments in its service. But the
mistake men make is that they make the senses supreme and allow them to
get the mastery. The result is that the whole of life is put into a
state of anarchy. Purity, tranquility, rest and unity are lost, and the
whole of nature is disturbed, in consequence. The Tao, being what it is,
has four qualities of purpose, viz., *forethought, accomplishment,
deliberation* and *action without force*. There is no forcing the Tao.
Whoever tries <span id="page_xxxv">p. xxxv</span> to use the Tao in a
compulsive way, bending and twisting it to suit his own ideas, can only
lead to sham and hypocrisy.

   A peaceful world can only come through the adoption of the Tao.
Anarchy is the fruit of disobedience to it. But when the world adopts
and embodies the principles of the Tao, and coöperates with naturalness,
through the Tao, it follows that creation will receive its wealth of
gifts.

   The assimilation of the Tao has its foundation in *meekness,
tenderness, poverty of spirit* and *quietness*. These are expressed
sometimes by one word, *emptiness*. An aggressive spirit will be brought
low, pride leads to a fall, violence will end in defeat, all which come
from misunderstanding the real use of the Tao.

   The problem of self-culture is not overlooked. The most esteemed
method is the reduction of desire and the suppression of the senses.
This will give the power to govern the mind. When the heart is empty and
pure, the seeds of truth may be sown in the field of the mind. The
spirit will be nourished and perfected, and its usefulness made
available for the whole world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tgl008)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
