[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Taoism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](tgl008) [Next](tgl010.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xl">p. xl</span>

### PERSISTENCE AND CONTINUITY.

<span class="small">UNIFORMITY OF BIRTH AND DEATH.</span>

   Birth and death are the great events of life. There is nothing
greater in popular estimation. Confucian scholars have done much to
encourage such an opinion. The Confucianists emphasised these two events
and made of them the grand events of existence. Consider the
multitudinous ceremonies traditionally bequeathed from one generation to
another. These show that birth is to be rejoiced in and death is to be
mourned over. May this not be a reversal of the proper order? Anyhow the
popular view has won the day, and the observance of birth and death, as
joy and sorrow, has become universal. Birth is welcomed and death is
dreaded. Connected with these two events there are now established many
rites and ceremonies, and the observance of these fulfils the human idea
of civilization.

   These rites have become onerous; for the growing boy has to perform
innumerable ceremonies, from the day of birth to his marriage day. The
wedding ceremonies are important. And in mourning for parents, the
normal wife and the eldest son, there is a three years exclusion. Much
of the life of the strict Confucian scholar is occupied with these
rites. They occupy more of the attention of life than that given to
social service. A succession of deaths in the family takes a period of
12 years, when all public service is barred. Such a view of life and
waste of energies has been severely condemned by Mei Tzû, the great
sociologist.

   The Confucianist fails to recognise that birth and death is only a
transformation, something like a silkworm. Life is a revolution; there
is nothing for glorification and nothing for mourning.

   Chuang Tzû, tells a story of one Li Chih, a beautiful girl of a small
country, who was selected to be the wife of the Duke of Ts‛in. At the
prospect she wept daily on <span id="page_xli">p. xli</span> her
mother's breast. But after the wedding she was very happy in the new
home,—so happy that she forgot her mother completely. And he makes this
a parable of birth and death. So, when he lost his own wife, instead of
the usual wailing and weeping, he began to sing. This astonished his
friends, who were surprised at this uncommon and unusual attitude of a
mourner. So he explained: "During her critical illness I could not but
shed a few tears: but after her death I realised that she originally had
*no life*. Not only so, she had *no form*: moreover she had *no
vitalism*, *ch‛i* (air). In the vast void, there, she was changed to the
positive of these negatives, and there was the vitalism state, the
form-state, the life-state. And death induced the change. The four
seasons, in their succession, are somewhat similar; they change and
transform and develop but the unity persists through all changes. She is
now lying in the big sleeping-room, and I began to weep and made such an
unhappy sound, which I concluded was most unreasonable. Therefore, I am
singing instead of monrning."

   He has also another story about death and burial. When about to die,
his disciples wished to have a sumptuous funeral for the master. But he
declined their suggestion, and said "I have the heaven and earth for my
coffin: I have the sun and moon for my jades: I have the stars and
planets, as the pearls to fill my mouth. I have all things round as my
funeral presents. Don't you think these are ample? And what can be added
to these natural beauties, for funeral ceremonies"? His disciples
replied, "but we are afraid the kites and the hawks will eat you: the
eagle will pounce on you." "To be eaten by birds" he said, "is better
than to be eaten by ants, in the bowels of the earth. You want to rob
the birds and are partial to maggots."

   The Taoists seem to have had a clear view of the meaning and
significance of the change and flux in nature. It is akin to the modern
scientific view that in the perpetual <span id="page_xlii">p.
xlii</span> changes, which matter undergoes, there is no actual loss of
anything. The candle may burn out, but there has been no loss: change of
form has been the only consequence. This truth was strenuously held, and
possibly Chuang's view of death came from this consideration. There is a
persistence and continuity in all things. But it does not seem quite
clear whether they held the persistence of personality. I think perhaps
they did. They affirm that spirit does not undergo the changes that
matter does. Spirit never dies. Indeed, in one of the essays, there is a
very imaginative piece of writing on this point; but whether it was the
fancy of the individual writer or was the view generally held is not
clear. This writer, following the theory held by the founders that
spirit is more permanent than matter, imagines that material existence
may be compared to a dream. When we dream, we feel it reality, and only
on waking are we aware that the experience in sleep was only a passing
show. So he imagines that this material life, in which we now spend our
existence, is no more than a dream. It is when we pass out of it,
through the great change of death, that we come to the reality and enter
real existence. The present is shadowy and but the fabric of a dream.
When this passes, we enter on the truer and more real state of being.
And then there is the question of *being* and *non-being*. These have
their sources in the Tao and find their unity there. And the relation is
indicated by the word *hsuan*, profound.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tgl010.md)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
