[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Taoism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](tgl003) [Next](tgl005.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

INTRODUCTORY

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE LIFE AND TIMES OF LAO TAN

<span class="small">AN INTRODUCTION TO HUAI NAN TZÛ</span>

*Written from materials supplied by Mr. M. T. Lien.*

   The writings and the philosophy of Huai Nan Tzû, are deeply rooted in
the ideas of Lao Tan, the reputed founder of Taoism. In order,
therefore, to have a better understanding of the teaching of Huai Nan
Tzû, it is necessary to be acquainted with the learning of Lao Tan.

   It is well to remember that there were two influences in the training
of Lao Tan, one being his vocation, the other his environment. His
vocation was that of Royal Historiographer. He had, thus, the means of
knowledge and of intercourse denied to most. His environment,
undoubtedly, coloured his views and modified all his ideas. It, in many
respects, directed his thoughts, as he surveyed his surroundings, to a
consideration of the true and lasting foundation of social and political
life. It was the conditions of Eastern Chou that formed his environment.
The laws of the State were in decay and human relationships in ruins.
Loyalty and filial piety, which are the pillars of society, were rotten;
and truth and justice were languishing. Ministers murdered their princes
and sons their fathers. There was anarchy and disloyalty. Lao Tan, being
the historian, knew well the history of the country from ancient times,
and could trace the causes that had produced the lamentable anarchy of
his times. This explains a passage in the Han work, *Records of the Arts
and Literature of the Han* \#\#\# which says that the Taoist stream of
ideas issued from the Ministry of History. The Minister had studied and
knew the successive periods of the rise and fall, the vitality and
dissolution of kingdoms, through the ages, and, therefore, appreciated
important principles and grasped the essentials of the success and
failures of government. The principles of success, he <span
id="page_xii">p. xii</span> judged, depended on purity, spirituality,
humility and yieldingness."

   These sentences may help us to understand the thoughts that sprung up
in the mind of Lao Tzû as he contemplated the lessons of history and the
deplorable conditions that prevailed at his time. So, in a sense, the
Tao Tê Ching is the philosophy of the history of contemporary times.

   That little classic of 5,000 words was the background of Huai Nan Tzû
and his friends, in their studies and writings. So, in reading his
essays, the ideas of Lao Tan must be kept in mind and read with that in
view. We may consider Lao Tan's ideas from six points of view.

   1. *His cosmology*. This is based on Naturalism. He recognised a
fundamental cause. Comparing his view with that of Abraham, we find that
he was less positive. His is a more abstract view than Abraham's. The
latter was more concrete in his theory. He gave the name of Jehovah to
the Power which he saw manifested in the universe. This concrete
appellation was a useful personification of the abstract. It, at once,
revealed the genius of the Hebrew people in religious matters. It was a
more intimate mode of thinking of the Power behind the universe, than
that thought of by Lao Tzû in the word Naturalism. It was, also, less
definite than the name used by Abraham. But they are similar in one
sense: both recognise the manifestation of Power. This is explicitly
stated in Chapter 25 of the Tao Tê Ching. "There was something undefined
and complete, coming into existence before Heaven and Earth. How still
it was and formless, standing alone, and undergoing no change, reaching
everywhere and in no danger (of exhaustion)! It may be regarded as the
mother of all things. "I do not know its name, and I give it the
designation of the Tao." "I am, also, forced to add the name Great."
Great Tao.

   His definition is vague and shadowy, but it is clear, that he thought
of it as independent and unvariable, somewhat <span id="page_xiii">p.
xiii</span> similar to the Christian term 'sole and primary
nature',—'the Absolute, without beginning and ending', "with whom is no
variableness neither shadow of turning." He thus viewed Naturalism as
the absolute. No name was big enough to cover it; so he gave it the
conventional name of Tao. He added the word "Great", lest Tao, alone,
might be confused with the ordinary *tao* in current use. This word
*great* may be compared with *Lord*. In a way it may be synonymous with
Jehovah. Yet it would not be right for us to give the same significance
to Tao.

   Tao begat one, and one begat two: two begat three, and three begat
all things, i.e., Creation. The existent came from the non-existent. Now
Lao Tzû had said that Heaven followed Tao, Tao followed Naturalness. So
when he said, "Tao begat one and one begat two," it may be concluded
that he implied that there was something above Tao which begat it. This
something was Naturalness. This is like 'self-existing'. And it may be
legitimately argued that he was an advocate of monotheism, and,
indirectly his teaching may imply a Trinity.

   2. *His view of Life*. His view of the cosmos being vague,
consequently his view of life, likewise, could not be clear. His view
partakes somewhat of negativity. All things are examined and judged from
the standard supplied by the Annals or the Spring and Autumn Classic.
This classic is a description of the anarchy of the period,—about 242
years. During this period, there were 36 cases of regicide, of which
more than half were parricides. It was this tragic state that led
Confucius to compose the Annals. Though Mencius said this work aroused
fear in the hearts of regicides, yet it is to be questioned whether the
statement is correct. Confucius did his best; but reform, to be
effectual, must be radical in dealing with such conditions. The reforms
of Confucius were not radical enough. In his social system, he placed
the relation of prince and minister at the head of the five
relationships. But in this he erred. The head relationship should be
husband and <span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span> wife. If this had been so
established, the others would follow without derangement.

   Just think! The emperor takes nine wives: the dukes married 5 women
each. Besides these, there were the women in the three palaces, the 27
honourable women on the 6 courts; the 81 "court wives" and a multitude
of others!

   In the palace of the Emperor, Ch‛in Shih, there were concubines who
had not seen the face of the emperor for 36 years! The nine ladies who
were taken, were the sisters of the 9 empresses; and the wives of their
brothers all came into the Court. The idea of getting them all from the
clan, was the hope that it would bring harmony and concord into the
imperial circle, that strife and contention would be averted and the
spirit of coöperation would exist amongst them all. It never occurred to
them that this method was the subversion of the ordinances of Heaven.
Strife and bickerings were rampant in the palace circle, which, in fact,
were more bitter than a war between two countries. The children and the
young people that were brought up in this circle moved in a most
poisonous atmosphere. They heard the gossip of the women from morning to
night. The chief topics would concern state affairs and the work of the
regicides and parricides, and all the rivalries and schemings that were
all too rife. What an environment! What an evil training for young
people who would be future rulers in the kingdom. One can't picture the
iniquities of these women nor be surprised at their machinations. The
blight of Heaven fell and rested on the children, because the marital
relationships were corrupt.

   Confucius did not attempt to make any radical and healthy reform in
all this mass of iniquity, arising from a social condition that was
monstrously wrong. He did not pull tile fire from under the kettle—the
only radical way of reforming the evils,—he simply added a little more
water to the boiling kettle, which, in the end, made things all the
worse. This hell was not quenched, but rather made <span id="page_xv">p.
xv</span> more fierce. He, himself, was a divorced person. His sons and
grandsons were all tainted with the same blemishes. He helped, thus, to
increase the anarchy of the times. Hence, Lao Tzû said, "If the sage
does not die, robbers will not cease from the land.": and again, "Stop
the sages and abandon the wise, and the good of the people will be
advanced a hundred-fold. Stop benevolence, abandon righteousness, and,
then, the people will have filiality. Stop cleverness, give up the
practice of profit, and there will be no robbers." He says again, "When
the Great Way is abandoned, the sage (Confucianist) resorts to *jen i*,
benevolence and justice." But these creations are artificial: they have
the appearance of wisdom and knowledge; but they give rise to many
counterfeits and hypocrisies. "When the six relationships came to lack
harmony, filial sons did appear. When the country came to anarchy, loyal
ministers appeared." (Chap. 18).

   From these words we see that Lao Tzû assigned the anarchy of a
country to the teaching of the sages. Further, that the sages were
illogical in their method of advancing the art of wisdom and cleverness.
That is to say, this method was not radical in reforming and guiding
society. The true method of reform is to take the fuel from under the
pot—the boiling hell.

   To explain the foregoing. The first two sentences mean that the sage,
in his use of *jen* and *i*, was not consistent with the Great Way. His
use of wisdom and cleverness made it easy for counterfeits to appear.
The last two sentences show that the stress on filial piety, by the
sage, led to the loss of other human relations: and the high value
placed on loyalty of minister, sacrificed the interests of the country
leading to anarchy and confusion.

   Lao Tzû, in the passages quoted, wholly opposed the doctrines of the
Confucian sage, and said they should be abolished. Then Society would
benefit. For, as long as they existed, progress was impossible. The
contrast in the result of the one and the other is marked and great. The
<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span> artificial creation of moralities
invariably leads to the desire to possess: the possessive element
appears strongly. But the natural morality has a creative impulse. It
enriches the nature, and therefore there is a constant advance in life
and freedom. The artificial morality tends to enslave men and bind them
down in the bonds of traditionalism. Work depends on the spiritual and
not on the material. In the spiritual sphere, there is always the giving
and the receiving. One does not exist without the other. "He that hath
shall have more: he that hath not, from him shall be taken even that
which he hath.'

   We shall see this more clearly if we examine the official life of
Confucius. When he was Minister in Luh, his face generally wore a smile.
But his rule was stern. He put to death powerful politicians and
dismissed others. He issued death capitulations which were rigorous.
These measures show his domineering nature and his attempt to be the
supreme master. All had to follow his will, and those who refused were
threatened with death. In face of this, Lao Tzû said, "Heaven and Earth
(according to the Confucian creed) have no humanity: all things are
considered as 'grass dogs'. Humanity is of no more value than a
scarecrow." The Confucian justified his severity by saying that nature
produces, in spring, and kills, in autumn. This is a most inhuman
doctrine. Nature's course is constructive and for the well being of man.
The slaying of opponents is quite another matter and bears no relation
to the beneficent work of nature. The sage, in his acts, made it
impossible to find the harmony of things. The result was that the rule
of Confucius lasted only three months.

   When he paid a visit to the temple of Duke Huan and saw the leaning
vessel—which stood upright when half full, but turned right over when
full to the brim, he was awakened to the correct meaning of the lesson
and how man should not be proud of his powers.

   He met Lao Tzû when he visited Chou. Lao Tzû, in <span
id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span> bidding him good-bye, said: "The scholars
of the present time are most learned; but, when they criticise people,
they get near death: wide and profound criticism of life is well; but
when the evil of men is exposed, there is danger to the critic. A man
should not live to himself: a minister should not consider himself."
Confucius said. "Most respectfully do I receive your instruction," When
he saw the bronze man with the sewn-up lips, with the inscription on the
backside saying: "Be warned, Be warned! Don't speak much: many words
mean many defeats. Don't meddle in many things: meddling with many
things means much sorrow. Be warned in your joys, and in your life of
quiet! Good behaviour brings no regrets. Don't say it is of no
consequence; it may bring a long anguish."

   "Don't say: What harm is there in it? The harm may be great. Don't
say: "There is no in jury in doing this." The distress may be
overwhelming. Don't say: "Nobody hears it." (God will not know). The
Spirit watches actions. The flame when not extinguished may burst into a
consuming fire. If the driblets of water are not stopped, they will
become streams and rivers. When the silk thread is pulled without end,
it may become a net (i.e., small faults may entrap you, so that that you
cannot get free). The growing sprig, if not pulled up, will become the
handle of a hammer (which will do mischief). Real carefulness is the
root of happiness." Again we have, "What harm is it?" says one. "Ah!
such a view is the gate of disaster." The aggressive man will not have a
natural death. He who is fond of striving to be first will meet with
defeat. The arrogant and aggressive master will not be welcomed at the
head of affairs. The Superior Man, who understands that an aggressive
person will not stand at the top, keeps humble: he knows the aggressive
man is not liked, so will keep in the background. People long for the
man who is gentle, sincere, virtuous. Meekness will not strive to be
first: yet, nothing will get ahead of it. If all were to scramble for
first place, yet, humility and yieldingness would be my attitude, even
if I was the only one. Were all to hesitate <span id="page_xviii">p.
xviii</span> in following humility, yet, I would follow, even were I the
only one. I would hide my intelligence and not display my skill, even
then were I in a most honourable position, men would not harm me. Who
can act thus? Rivers, though winding, are longer than brooks. The
Heavenly Way, though high and distant, is humbler than men's." Confucius
understood and withdrew.

   3. *His method of self-culture*. This consists of (a) Simplicity. (b)
Self-knowledge. (c) Self-control. Simplicity casts out all lustful
desire. Lust of wine, women, wealth, pleasure, extravagance, luxury,
amusements will be eliminated. This is what Lao Tzû means when he speaks
of the 5 colours blinding men's eyes, the five tones deafening men's
ears and the 5 flavours tickling men's appetites, riding and hunting
which derange men's minds. (Chap. 12). Rare objects, and strange,
encourage the evil desires of men."

   Such are his ideas of simplicity, viz., the elimination and
suppression of the seductions of eye, ear and taste. Lao Tzu said: "He
who knows men, has wisdom: Self knowledge is clarity: he who overcomes
men has strength, and he who overcomes himself is mighty: he who has
contentment has wealth, and he who has self-conquest has will-power.

   Knowledge of men is nothing but a kind of wisdom: but he who knows
himself, has true light. Wisdom is gathered from environment and is
outward; but the true light comes from within. When the inner clarity is
beclouded, wisdom is befogged. Jesus said, "If the light within thee is
dark, the darkness is profound." "The overcoming of men is strength; but
self-mastery is the great energy. True wisdom is wealth and the exercise
of strength is volition. Persistence will ensure eternal life.

   The Taoist method of seeking immortality is not that of the school of
Chang Tao-ling, hunting for the elixir of immortality, and their art for
becoming a genii. All this is unscientific.

   4. *His moral system*. He has three views on ethics, which may be
taken as mottoes of life. (a) Mercifulness. <span id="page_xix">p.
xix</span> (b) Thrift. (c) Meekness. Lao Tzû says, (Chap. 67) "I have 3
precious things which I prize and hold fast. Gentleness, economy and a
shrinking from taking precedence of others" (Legge). Compassion,
self-restraint, refusal to claim precedence of others (Medhurst).

   Compassion gives courage; temperance gives ample-mindedness and
liberality. By shrinking from the struggle for precedence, the physical
life is lengthened. When men abandon these three precious things, they
hurry on in the path of death. Compassion will be victorious in life:
rely on it and you will be firm. Heaven always protects with compassion.

   It is recognised that Lao Tzû had courage; but it is forgotten that
this came from his compassion: men recognise he had liberality but
forget that it sprung from his temperance: they know, too, his
preëminence; but they are unaware that this came from his diffidence and
his not pushing himself forward. Jesus also said: "The last shall be
first and the first last." The spirit that is willing to be last, comes
to be the first.

   5. *His Political theory*. Purity and tranquility are the leading
ideas. Ancillary to these, we have (ning) peace of mind and unity. So
Lao Tzû says: "Heaven is bright and pure, by unity: earth is restful, by
unity: the soul wins unity through the spiritual: the valleys are full
through it (unity); creation is life-giving, through unity: rules get
the model of life, which they give to all, by it. (unity: tao). (C. 39)
All these are the work of the One, (Tao). When the unity or the Cosmic
Spirit is obtained, there is no need for rigorous laws and stern
regulations, in order to win the people and keep them. Hence, the 1st
Emperor of the Han, when he entered and occupied the Han Ku Pass, swept
away the rigorous laws of Ch‛in Shih Huang and made a few simple and
humane laws. These were the foundation of the Han dynasty. These plans
were determined by Hsiao Ao, Ts‛ao Ch‛an, Ch‛en P‛ing, Ch‛ang Liang.
(Advisers of the emperor). As a result of these spiritual ideas, the
Western Han was most peaceful under <span id="page_xx">p. xx</span> the
Taoist regime of ideas. The first principle of the Taoist conception of
government is to have peace and concord. The idea is expressed in the
80th chapter of Tao Tê Ching. It was to be a kingdom of simplicity. That
would be his ideal, if he were ruler. The ideal is wholly different from
the complex state of modern times. It was a state of moderate
population: a people rude and uncultured, abstaining from war and all
travel, having little intercourse with others and without the appliances
of civilization. This is, in idea, similar to other Utopias of the
world.

   6. *His view of war*. Lao Tzû was averse to the use of soldiers and
was definitely anti-war. He has given expression to this in many places,
but, in particular, in the 30th chapter.

   "He who would assist his sovereign by the Tao will not coerce the
State by armies. Such action is most likely to come back on the user.
Where the hosts meet, there thorns and briers will spring up. After
great military movements there is sure to ensue bad years. The soldier
is a vessel of bad omen. If anyone rejoices in using them there are but
ill prospects ahead. The world is a spiritual vessel and should not be
subject to this physical force. He who handles this instrument will be
defeated finally: he who grasps it will lose it. If weapons are used in
the coercion of men, it will be vain: for the people do not fear death
really. So how can death be used to frighten them? People think little
of death, if they can get fulness of life.

   These 6 points express the main ideas of Lao Tzû, as seen in his
little classic of 5,000 words.

   The Taoist view of war may be summed up in this way. Militarism is
not required, when the government is governing. When there is good
government and the military is efficient, no vassal would dare to
attack. When war is inevitable, the organization should be so perfect
that victory would be certain in the most sanguinary conflict. But it is
to be remembered that, over and over again, war is denounced as harmful
and most anti-social.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tgl005.md)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
