[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Taoism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](tgl1) [Next](tgl3)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

### BEGINNING AND REALITY

Unheard the dews around me fall,  
 And heavenly influence shed:  
And silent on this earthly ball  
 Celestial footsteps tread.  

Night moves in silence round the pole,  
 The stars sing on unheard,  
Their music pierces to the soul,  
 Yet borrows not a word.  

Noiseless the morning flings its gold,  
 And still the evenings place:  
And silently the earth is rolled  
 Amidst the vast of space.  

In quietude Thy Spirit grows  
 In man from hour to hour:  
In calm eternal onward flows  
 Thy all-redeeming power.  

Lord, grant my soul to hear at length  
 Thy deep and silent voice:  
To work in stillness, wait in strength,  
 With calmness to rejoice.  

 

S<span class="small">TOPFORD</span> A. B<span
class="small">ROOKE</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   "In the Grand Beginning of all things there was nothing in all the
vacancy of space: there was nothing that could be named. It was in this
state that there arose the first existence: the first existence, but
still without bodily shape. From this, things could be produced,
(receiving) what we call their several characters. That which had no
bodily shape was divided, and then without intermission there was what
we call the process of conferring. The two processes continued to
operate, and things were produced. As they were completed, there
appeared the distinguishing lines of each, which we call the bodily
shape. That shape was the body preserving the spirit, and each had its
peculiar manifestation which we call its nature." Kuang Tzû, translated
by Dr. L<span class="small">EGGE</span>.

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

<span id="dis"></span>II  
DISSERTATION ON BEGINNING AND REALITY

{[notes](tgln1.htm#2)\|[elucidations and analyses](tgln2.htm#2)}

   *Beginning: Reality: The reality of the Cosmic Spirit. There was an
evolution in the non-existence towards the realization of the existene.
This process is described in the terms "The Beginning: The Reality." The
processes of evolution.*

   (1) There was "the beginning:"<span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](tgln1.htm#2_note_1) (2) there was a beginning of an
anteriority to this beginning: (3) there

|                         |
|-------------------------|
| **Reality Beginnings.** |

was a beginning of an anteriority even before the beginning of this
anteriority. (4) There was "the existence." (5) There was "the
non-existence." (6) There was "not yet a beginning of non-existence."
(7) There was "not yet a beginning of the not yet beginning of
non-existence."

   (1) the meaning of "There was the beginning" is that there was a
complex energy which had not yet pullulated into germinal form, nor into
any visible shape of root and seed and rudiment. Even then in this vast
and impalpable void there was apparent the desire to spring into life;
but, as yet, the genera of matter were not formed.

   (2) At "the beginning of anteriority before the beginning" the fluid
of heaven first descended and the fluid of earth first ascended. The
male and female principles interosculated, prompting and striving among
the elements of the cosmos. The forces wandered hither and thither,
pursuing, competing, interpenetrating. Clothed with energy, they moved,
sifted, separated, impregnated the various elements as they moved in the
fluid ocean, each aura desiring to ally itself with another, even when,
as yet, there was no appearance of any created form.

   (3) At the stage "There must be a beginning of an anteriority even
before the beginning of anteriority," Heaven <span id="page_32">p.
32</span> contained the spirit of harmony, but had not, as yet,
descended: earth cherished the vivifying fluid, but had not ascended, as
yet. It was space, still, desolate, vapoury,—a drizzling humid state
with a similitude of vacancy and form. The vitalising fluid floated
about, layer on layer.

   (4) "There was the existence" speaks of the coming of creation and
the immaterial fluids assuming definite forms," implying that the
different elements had become stabilized. The immaterial nuclei and
embryos, generic forms as roots, stems, tissues, twigs and leaves of
variegated hues appeared. Beautiful were the variegated colours.
Butterflies and insects flew hither and thither: insects crawled about.
We now reach the stage of movement and the breath of life on every hand.
At this stage it was possible to feel, to grasp, to see and follow
outward phenomena. They could be counted and distinguished both
quantitatively and qualitatively.

   (5) "The non-existence" period. It was so called because when it was
gazed on no form was seen: when the ear listened, there was no sound:
when the hand grasped, there was nothing tangible: when gazed at, it was
illimitable. It was limitless space, profound and a vast void,—a
quiescent, subtile mass of immeasurable translucency.

   (6) In "There was not yet a beginning of non-existence," implies that
this period wrapped up heaven and earth, shaping and forging the myriad
things of creation: there was an all-penetrating impalpable complexity,
profoundly vast and all-extending; nothing was outside its operations.
The minutest hair and sharpest point were differentiated: nothing within
was left undone. There was no wall around, and the foundation of
non-existence was being laid.

   (7) In the period of "There was not yet a beginning of the not yet
beginning of non-existence," Heaven and Earth were not divided: the four
seasons were not yet separated: the myriad things were not yet come to
birth. <span id="page_33">p. 33</span> Vast-like even and quiet,
still-like, clear and limpid, forms were not visible.

   One says, "I can appreciate non-existence, but the non-existence of
non-existence is too profound for me to apprehend! How may one come to
this apprehension?" These fluxes are most mysterious, beyond the ken of
the mind. None can trace the workings of these mysterious operations and
penetrate into ultimate depths.<span
id="fr_2"></span>[2](tgln1.htm#2_note_2)

   Now Heaven has endowed me with a body and given me work in life. It
has made it pleasant for me during

|                            |
|----------------------------|
| **Joy of life and death.** |

old age and has prepared for my dissolution in death.<span
id="fr_3"></span>[3](tgln1.htm#2_note_3) The agencies that are good for
life are those which are good for death.<span
id="fr_4"></span>[4](tgln1.htm#2_note_4) People assume that a boat
hidden in a cave, or an island in a lake are safe and firm. Nevertheless
a man of mighty

|                   |
|-------------------|
| **Nothing lost.** |

strength may carry them away at midnight and escape, without the
sleepers knowing anything about it.<span
id="fr_5"></span>[5](tgln1.htm#2_note_5)

   If the world is hidden in the world, then there is no

|                         |
|-------------------------|
| **Tao does not decay.** |

possibility of concealing it. In other words the Tao is coextensive with
the universe and it is safe from change and decay.

   The emergence of the human form in creation is pleasureable. If man
undergoes a myriad transformations

|                   |
|-------------------|
| **Resurrection.** |

without end, dying and coming to renewed life, this is a source of joy
that cannot be expressed. Decay and resurrection are triumphant sources
of joy.

   Take an illustration of a person in a dream. He dreams he is a bird
flying in the air; he dreams he is a fish lost (immersed) in the pool.
In the dream he is insensible of its being a dream: only when he returns
to consciousness, does he become aware that it was but a dream. Now is
looked on as the time of life; afterwards this now-life will be looked
on as a great dream.

   In the prenatal state, how can one know the joys of life? Likewise
how can we venture to deny, before we <span id="page_34">p. 34</span>
die, that death has no joy?

   In ancient times, Kung Niu-ai<span
id="fr_6"></span>[6](tgln1.htm#2_note_6) had a fit of madness and,
during seven days, was changed into a tiger. His brother peeped in at
the door to look at him and was seized by the tiger and killed. Hence
the human limbs had changed into the claws and teeth of the wild beast.

|                                                      |
|------------------------------------------------------|
| **A Certain continuity persists when form changes.** |

Will and mind had changed: spirit and body were transformed, and then he
was a tiger. In that state he was ignorant that he had been a human
being previously. Just when he was a man, he was totally unaware that he
would be a tiger as well. Each of these two alternations had its several
pleasures according to the form: but the creature, in the one form, was
wholly unconscious of his existence in the other form. The change of
state by the substitution was immense; but there was a continuity of
pleasure in both the assumed forms. Cunning and stupidity, right and
wrong! Who can say how they spring up?<span
id="fr_7"></span>[7](tgln1.htm#2_note_7)

   Water, on the approach of winter, congeals and becomes ice. Ice meets
with spring and melts to become water again. Water and ice are periodic
changes of form. In the wheel's revolution of flux, who may imagine
which is pain and which is joy? Therefore the bodily form suffers from
the rigours of cold, heat, dryness and dampness. The body wastes, but
the spirit is hale. On the other hand, the spirit may suffer from the
outrages of joy, anger and anxieties. Whilst the vitality of spirit is
being exhausted, the form may remain in abundance of strength. Again,
when the carcasses of worn-out horses are skinned, the hide is found to
be dry and brittle: but the carcass of a young hound, on the other hand,
is found to be full of sap, when

|                                    |
|------------------------------------|
| **Spirit does not die with body.** |

killed. Hence the ghost of him who has an untimely death (from injury)
is troubled. The spirit of him who dies full of years is rigid.<span
id="fr_8"></span>[8](tgln1.htm#2_note_8) All these instances indicate
that body and spirit do not end together<span
id="fr_9"></span>[9](tgln1.htm#2_note_9) and are not identical. Now
<span id="page_35">p. 35</span> the sage makes use of his mind, leans on
his nature, depends on his spirit; and when these are mutually helpful,
a tranquil life is lived and ended. Hence he has no dreams during his
sleep and has no anxieties during consciousness.<span
id="fr_10"></span>[10](tgln1.htm#2_note_10)

   The ancients lodged within the realm of the Tao; desire was
controlled and passion mastered; and, in

|             |
|-------------|
| **Utopia.** |

consequence, the spirit did not wander into the extraneous. They derived
repose from the calm of creation: they were not disturbed by the baneful
effects of comets and the tail of the Great Bear. Though noxious, they
refused to be disturbed by their appearances.

   During this period, the people were in a state of Arcadian
simplicity: they ate and rambled about: they smacked their stomachs and
rejoiced. All together enjoyed the blessings of heaven and ate of the
fruits of the earth. They did not wrangle in mutual recriminations, nor
dispute over rights and wrongs. Peace and plenty existed. This may be
called the Ideal Rule.<span id="fr_11"></span>[11](tgln1.htm#2_note_11)

   During such times, rulers employed, in all offices, men who did not
confuse the nature of the people.<span
id="fr_12"></span>[12](tgln1.htm#2_note_12) There were officers for
guiding and cherishing the people without disturbing the spontaneity of
virtue in their minds. Therefore the artificial doctrines of humanity
and justice<span id="fr_12"></span>[12](tgln1.htm#2_note_12) were
absent, and all creation luxuriated and fattened. Without the device of
rewards and punishments, the whole empire flocked to pay its tribute.
The doctrine is as splendid as it was successful. Nevertheless it is not
easy to specify its movements with any detail, just as progress may not
be manifest in any one day, though a whole year may show great
achievement.

   As the fish forgets its relative existence in the river and lake, so
men forget themselves in their relation to the way and art of the Tao.
The perfect man (Chen-jen) of ancient time stood in the very root and
centre of being, the foundations of Heaven and Earth themselves, and
wandered at will, unhasting and free, in this central seat of being. He
cherished and diffused virtue, he enkindled <span id="page_36">p.
36</span> the spirit of harmony of existence and thus enabled creation
to come to full maturity. Which of them, then, would involve himself in
the commotions of men, and embroil his soul in the pothers of life?

   Nevertheless the Tao has its rules and principles; its connective
relations result in a (Tao) Unity, so that the thousand twigs and myriad
leaves are connected and related. Get at the unit, and the
interrelations will fall into line.

   Hence, when in office, (the superior man) has the means to diffuse
his commands; when out of office, he has the power to forget that he is
of little count; when poor, he rejoices in his work; when difficulties
assail, he can control

|                                |
|--------------------------------|
| **Difficulties show the man.** |

them. It is only with the arrival of the great cold, when the frost and
snow descend, that we become aware of, and appreciate the evergreen of
the pine and cypress. Likewise it is only when difficulties confront
men, and the ways of danger are trodden, and the path in front is
threaded with perils, that we see how the Sage-man never loses the Tao.
Therefore the man who can 'put on the doctrine' treads the path of life
(securely): he who looks into the mirror of the Great Purity, sees with
great clearness. It is the man who can establish the peace of empire who
is made king, i.e. regulates the sacrifices and issues the commands. He
who perambulates in the regions of reconditeness (tao) has equal
lucidity with sun and moon. Consequently, such take the Tao for a rod,
virtue for the fishing line; they use etiquette and music for hook, and
love and justice for bait. They cast these into the rivers and sea
(world), and thus there is nothing that they fail to hook from the
abundant life of creation.<span
id="fr_13"></span>[13](tgln1.htm#2_note_13)

   On the other hand, the person who follows narrow and crooked
conventionalism, who tinkers with things, and who in his plans and
designs for the reform of human institutions, simply cobbles here and
there in altering and improving the ingtitutions of men, acts in a most
superficial <span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

|                                    |
|------------------------------------|
| **Reforms must not be patchwork.** |

way, dealing only with extrinsic and trifling things. I grant that they
give scope to their wills and find satisfaction to their desires. How
much more do they find satisfaction, who cherish the jasper ring
(Tao)<span id="fr_14"></span>[14](tgln1.htm#2_note_14) who, forgetful of
liver and gall—their very life,—abandon eye and ear<span
id="fr_15"></span>[15](tgln1.htm#2_note_15) and are not guided by the
play of the senses, but float in the

|                                    |
|------------------------------------|
| **Tao-men follow Tao not senses.** |

uncircumscribed, transcendental universe; they do not get contaminated
by rubbing with the world, but, going in and out within the
spiritual<span id="fr_16"></span>[16](tgln1.htm#2_note_16) frontiers,
keep in touch with Heaven and Earth. Is it not so? Men such as these
suppress their understanding and cling to the pristine nature, the
uncontaminated root. They take no heed of gain and loss,—worthless dust
are these,—and look on death and life just as night and day. So when
they look upon the Jade Coach<span
id="fr_17"></span>[17](tgln1.htm#2_note_17) with its snow-white ivory
appearance, when they listen to the pure and crystal tones of the
five-reed organ, the equanimity of their soul is not disturbed by these
(sensual objects), When they ascend precipitous and lofty heights of
T‛ai hang, Fei-hu, Ko-Wang,<span
id="fr_18"></span>[18](tgln1.htm#2_note_18) or approach

|                        |
|------------------------|
| **True to principle.** |

some deep abyss, which even a monkey would fear to look on, they do not
become giddy and lose their balance. They may be likened to the jade of
the Kun-lun mountain which, if heated in the fire for three days and
nights, loses none of its liquid and soft colour, showing them to be the
finest work of nature. We may, hence, see that if life fails to enslave
the sage (i.e. he will die if necessary), how, then, will gain move his
mind? If death will not thwart him, much less will danger frighten him!

   They who are clear on the distinction of life and death, (i.e.
different phases of one thing) and who apprehend the alternations of
fortune, will never entertain the idea<span
id="fr_19"></span>[19](tgln1.htm#2_note_19) of giving a hair of their
leg in exchange for the greatest thing in the world: for empire they
will not abandon the Tao.

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

   Such matters as honours and poverty coming on are looked upon as but
a passing breath, i.e. a passing phase

|                    |
|--------------------|
| **Unconquerable.** |

of fortune. Slander and backbiting are no more to such a man than the
flitting of a mosquito or a gadfly over the body. He holds fast the
pristine luminosity and suffers it not to be tarnished. He acts with
pure sincerity: there is no jobbing or double-dealing. Placed in
darkness, he is not dark; lodging in the cold regions of the Arctic
regions, he never succumbs. The Meng-men, Chung-chuang mountains cannot
obstruct his course.

   It is only the man with the Tao who is able not to succumb: neither
rushing waters, nor whirlpools, nor the depth of the Lu-liang can delay
him. The dangers of T‛ai-Hang, Shih-chien, Fei-hu, Ko-wang are no
difficulty to him.

   Therefore, he who, voyaging on the rivers and the seas of life, has
his mind directed on spiritual pilgrimages into the precincts of the
Highest, is the same who is in unity with the One Source (tao). (Or,
another rendering. He who mixing with the world, yet keeps his heart in
the secret place, is he who is united with the Tao.) Who else would not
be defeated?

   Therefore, they who dwell with the perfect man, are led to forget
family poverty; and the honourable of the

|                                   |
|-----------------------------------|
| **Influence of the perfect man.** |

world do not display their splendours when he is present, (one course
suffices for the feast), but rejoice in simplicity. In his presence the
hero shrivels his martial spirit, and the covetous man suppresses his
concupiscence. Sitting down, he has no need to instruct; standing up, he
has no need to criticise; and the guest who comes with receptive heart
goes away loaded with solid truth. So, without speaking, he quenches the
thirst of men with truth. Hence the perfect Tao is *wu wei*, (an action
of the spirit), operating like the action of the dragon or the
snake.<span id="fr_20"></span>[20](tgln1.htm#2_note_20) These stretch
out or contract, change their form and throw off the skin <span
id="page_39">p. 39</span> according to the time. Outwardly he follows
convention, but inwardly he maintains his nature. His eye and ear are
not confused by a show of power, nor is his mind perplexed by doubt. The
spirit which he cherishes being uniquely great, he thereby roams in the
Great Purity (tao), encouraging and stimulating the whole creation. It
may thus be concluded that he who uses his spirit in a complexity of
things, loses his spirit; he who nourishes his spirit, the spirit
abides.

   The Tao issues from the One fountain<span
id="fr_21"></span>[21](tgln1.htm#2_note_21) and communicates with the
nine gates<span id="fr_22"></span>[22](tgln1.htm#2_note_22) of Heaven:
it is distributed

|                      |
|----------------------|
| **The great unity.** |

over the six<span id="fr_23"></span>[23](tgln1.htm#2_note_23)
thoroughfares (of existence): it flows over the uncircumscribed
frontiers of the universe, by immateriality: it acts on matter by
inoperose inaction rather than by operose action (passive evolution).
Matter has been acting in the past; therefore all things have followed
the *tao*, not by personal action of the *tao*, but by evolution of the
*tao*.

   What the dome of Heaven covers, what earth sustains, what the six
corners of the earth embraces, what the positive and negative respire,
what the rain and clouds moisten and fertilise, and what truth and
virtue maintain, all come from the one father and mother<span
id="fr_24"></span>[24](tgln1.htm#2_note_24) and are interpenetrated by
one harmony. Hence, the oak (in the north) and the orange tree (in the
south) are brothers: and the Miao<span
id="fr_25"></span>[25](tgln1.htm#2_note_25) and the San Wei<span
id="fr_25"></span>[25](tgln1.htm#2_note_25) are one family. The eye
watches the flight of geese, the ear listens to the organ, yet, at the

|                             |
|-----------------------------|
| **Unity runs through all.** |

same time, the mind may wing its flight to the distant Yen-men pass.
These experiences happen in one body, and the spirit divides itself and
roams over the six corners of the world: by one movement it traverses a
myriad miles. Hence, from these diversities we see that from that which
is near, the liver and gall, i.e. the one body, may move to the far
south or the distant north. But looked at from the identity of the
person, all things are of one Unity.

   Each school has its own theory, issuing from principles <span
id="page_40">p. 40</span> peculiar to each, such as the theories of Mei,
Yang,

|                                         |
|-----------------------------------------|
| **Schools only contain bits of truth.** |

Shen, Shang<span id="fr_26"></span>[26](tgln1.htm#2_note_26) on the way
of government. Now each may be looked on as the rib of one umbrella or
as the spoke of a wheel. If the complement number is complete, well: if
not, it is of little importance to practical use. These schoolmen
considered themselves important, but were not in line with the nature of
the universe: their range was small. As to their existence, we may take
an example from the smelter in a foundry casting a vessel. It is
inevitable that in the casting of an image some drops of the molten mass
should be scattered on the ground. As these drops touch the ground, they
harden and assume some definite shape. It is possible that such pieces,
thus fortuitously formed, will be of some small service; yet they are
not to be compared with the Nine-tripod Vessel<span
id="fr_27"></span>[27](tgln1.htm#2_note_27) of the Chou house. Much less
could they be compared with a vessel the lines of which have been finely
drawn. The point is, the tenets of these schoolmen are far and away
inferior to the Tao—the body of truth.

   Now the distributions and bifurcations of creation, the divisions of
matter into leaves and twigs, roots and branches, all spring from one
stock. Though having only one trunk, yet the offshoots branch out into
myriad forms. These divisions befall the recipients and not the creative
power, "which is unity. Thus, then, these are all recipients and not the
giver which is the Tao. The recipients are not givers. The giver
embraces everything: he covers the emanations of his creation. These are
the reflections of its own giving, and these reflections of the giver
are owned, like the cloud which falls and moistens all things: but the
cloud is cloud and the moisture is moisture. There is a separation and
yet a unity. In giving itself, this unity is not lost and the *tao* does
not change or lose anything. So it is not itself.

   An example of the statement "there is nothing not received" may be
had in a thick cloud full of rain, particles <span id="page_41">p.
41</span> massed together and distributing themselves in heavy rain. It
steeps the myriad things in moisture, but does not get wet itself, i.e.
it gives itself to others.

   Now a skilful archer has expediences and contrivances, even as the
bow-maker has the skill of rule and compass.

|                                                |
|------------------------------------------------|
| **An expert is only expert in his own craft.** |

Each of these has severally been attained by practice and skill. Each is
expert in his own line. The one could not be an expert in the attainment
of the other, even as Hsi Chung was incapable of becoming a P‛eng Meng:
nor could Tsao Fu be a Pei Lo.<span
id="fr_28"></span>[28](tgln1.htm#2_note_28) That is to say, an
acquaintance with one locality does not give knowledge of the whole
range of a country.

   When an article of purple colour is dyed with black alum, the result
will be that the article becomes darker than the dye itself. Likewise
when a green article is dyed with indigo blue, it will come out a deeper
colour than the dye itself. Though purple is not black, and green not
blue, they owe their origin to black and blue respectively, and they can
never recover their original shade. The colour gets faint and
deteriorates by the dyeing. How much more that which has not yet
undergone the creative agency. The transformations have been innumerable
which no pen can fully describe.<span
id="fr_29"></span>[29](tgln1.htm#2_note_29)

   From all this we may learn that there is no matter which has not
sprung from that which is past. The varieties are profuse in the
extreme.

   Again, the minute autumn hair<span
id="fr_30"></span>[30](tgln1.htm#2_note_30) can disappear into the
non-spatial, yet, though so minute, it is great compared

|                                                   |
|---------------------------------------------------|
| **Tao is most fine so most pervasive and great.** |

with the Tao. The thickness of the feathery nexus within the reed is
almost equal to nothing, and yet it is thick (compared with the Tao).
The Tao, more minute than the hair-like feather of autumn or the
thinness of the feathery nexus, spreads out into every cranny and fills
infinity: nothing can obstruct or stand in its way: subject, as it is,
to the minute and abstruse, it vivifies <span id="page_42">p. 42</span>
creation and controls its fluxes.<span
id="fr_31"></span>[31](tgln1.htm#2_note_31) Its operations are immense.
This goes without saying.

   Now a swift wind that will uproot trees is unable to pull out a hair.
A lofty tower, in falling, will break the backbone or crush the head of
a resident; but small insects will hum as they fly about in the falling
ruins. Creeping and moving insects have equally been endowed with
nature's springs of action. Nevertheless, it is the class of such minute
creatures that can most easily fly, and those creatures of a small and
delicate structure that can save themselves most easily. How much more
so, then, can that which has not received a corporeal form at all, fly
about most easily.

   From such considerations it is clear that the formless produces
forms. Hence, the sage man commits his soul to

|                                                                          |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Form comes from the formless and senses used after Tao illumination.** |

the spiritual realm and reverts to the beginning of creation.<span
id="fr_32"></span>[32](tgln1.htm#2_note_32) He looks into the profound
and listens in the voiceless regions.<span
id="fr_33"></span>[33](tgln1.htm#2_note_33) He, alone, is clear within
the realm of the spirit (profound). Within the immobile void (vast
stillness), he, alone, has the illumination. He can use it, because he
does not use; but later the non-use gives use: he knows, because he does
not know: and afterwards the non-knowing leads to knowing.<span
id="fr_34"></span>[34](tgln1.htm#2_note_34)

   Now when the firmament was not fashioned, the sun and moon could not
run their courses; when the Earth

|                                            |
|--------------------------------------------|
| **Honest truth only from the honest man.** |

was not established, the trees and plants could not be planted. When
that which composes the body, was not stabilized, that which is and
which is not, had no form.<span
id="fr_35"></span>[35](tgln1.htm#2_note_35) Hence, it may be concluded
that when the True man is there, true knowledge,<span
id="fr_36"></span>[36](tgln1.htm#2_note_36) also, is there. They who
hold what is not clear, how can they know that the knowledge I speak of
is the knowledge? Now accumulation of kindnesses, abundance of
generosity, wealth of love, and such things as persuasive speech,
encouragement of the people by <span id="page_43">p. 43</span> largess,
inducements to the people to the enjoyment and to the delighting of
their nature, compose *Jen, benevolence*.

   To set up great merit, to gain fame, to make real the loyalties of
king and ministers, to arrange the regulation of classes, to know laws
of kindred and strangers, to divide the classes, to support falling
states, to preserve a decaying house, to quell rebellions, to control
turmoils, to restore decadent clans, to continue a dying house and to
suppress anarchy, compose *I, righteousness*.<span
id="fr_37"></span>[37](tgln1.htm#2_note_37)

   (What are the real values?) To close up the avenues of the senses; to
repress the ambitions of the mind; to abandon the mere art of cleverness
and knowledge and revert to the state of Wu Shih, non-cognition: to roam
in the void, as outside the world of sensibility and move in the regions
of "nothings" (no affairs); to imbibe the Yin, and exhale the Yang and
move in step with the harmony of creation, is Tê. Therefore, where the
Tao distributes itself, there is *Tê* (and constitutes the variety of
virtues in man). When these attributes abound and overflow, we have (the
real) benevolence, *jen*, and righteousness, *i*.<span
id="fr_38"></span>[38](tgln1.htm#2_note_38) But when the Confucian
school sets up benevolence and righteousness as the ultimate, then the
Tao and its attributes Tê are abandoned and lost.

   A large tree<span id="fr_39"></span>[39](tgln1.htm#2_note_39) is cut
down and carved into sacrificial cups. It is carved with chisel and
foot-measure, with art and skill. It is embellished with the figures of
beautiful bells, of dragon, snake, tiger and leopard. It is most
decorative.<span id="fr_40"></span>[40](tgln1.htm#2_note_40) But a piece
of this timber has fallen as waste. The difference between the carved
goblet and the piece which has gone uncarved is the difference between
beauty and roughness. All the pieces of timber have lost

|                                                 |
|-------------------------------------------------|
| **Broken away from Tao conduct is artificial.** |

the natural sap of wood. Likewise, the spirit of man has lost its sap,
when dispersed abroad and not rooted in the Tao. Its language is garish:
when *tê*, the attribute of the tao, is lost, actions become insincere
and meretricious. <span id="page_44">p. 44</span> This leads to the
death of vitality within. Conduct is regulated by environment. When such
is the case, it is inevitable that the body has become the slave of
matter.

   Now when language is garish and action meretricious, it implies that
the spirit has been trading with the senses

|                                           |
|-------------------------------------------|
| **Fine manners do not make a gentleman.** |

(and not dealing with *tê*, the attributes of the tao). When words are
garish and action meretricious, everything is sought from without and
spiritual vitality vanishes and (in the consequent perplexity) endless
efforts are resorted to in order to supply the lacunae. This process
digorganises the mind and beclouds the spirit, thereby confusing the
foundation of life. Since, therefore, the fundamental basis is reduced
to a state of uncertainty and the mind imbibes from the external world
the base conventions of worldly habits, and since there are
disconnections, inconcinnities {sic}, gaps and failures, the inner light
becomes misty and dim. As a consequence, there ensues a state of inward
conflict, and not a moment of peaceful tranquility can be had.

   The sage-man,<span id="fr_41"></span>[41](tgln1.htm#2_note_41)
however, cultivates the tao-method within and makes no outward adornment
of benevolence

|                                             |
|---------------------------------------------|
| **The sage cultivates Tao first and last.** |

and righteousness. The impressions conveyed by the senses of eye an ear
have no influence on him, but he moves in tune with the soul and spirit.
He who is thus minded penetrates the three fountains<span
id="fr_42"></span>[42](tgln1.htm#2_note_42) below and seeks the nine
entrances into Heaven above. The mind opens out to the frontiers of the
earth and penetrates into the depths of creation. This is the sage's
movement of spirit.

   But the Chen Jen,<span id="fr_43"></span>[43](tgln1.htm#2_note_43)
True Man,<span id="fr_43"></span>[43](tgln1.htm#2_note_43) moves in a
still more exalted sphere. He moves in the regions of the completely

|                                            |
|--------------------------------------------|
| **The true man moves in spiritual realm.** |

immaterial and travels the deserts of annihilation. He rides on the Fei
Lien<span id="fr_44"></span>[44](tgln1.htm#2_note_44) and follows Tun
Yü, (the immortal genii). He journeys into the extra-mundane regions and
rests in a spiritual house. He has the ten <span id="page_45">p.
45</span> suns for his candle, the wind and rain for his servants, the
thunder-lord is his minister, and Kua Fu,<span
id="fr_45"></span>[45](tgln1.htm#2_note_45) the genii, is his messenger.
He allies himself with the female genii, Mi-fei<span
id="fr_46"></span>[46](tgln1.htm#2_note_46) and Chih-nu. How could
Heaven and Earth be enough for the operations of such a being?<span
id="fr_47"></span>[47](tgln1.htm#2_note_47) Hence the Immaterial and
Spiritual is the home of the Tao: equanimity and ease are its nature.
Man, on the other hand, driving his soul, disturbs his spirit. He
strives after insipid honours and gain: he pursues after the things of
the outside world. These efforts all ruin his clarity of spirit and
separate him from its true abode.

   (Now take an example of the theme). He who is freezing in winter
thinks of the genial warmth of spring. The fevered subject of the heat
of summer looks for the cool breezes of autumn. He who has a disease in
his system shows it in heightened colour of the face.

   Again the *ch‛en* tree gives a blue tincture which, when used as a
collyrium, will cure inflammation of the eyes; and some snails, also,
cure ophthalmia. Infusions for the eye are made from these. Now, were
anyone to apply these to an eye without inflammation, they would produce
the very disease they would cure and produce obscurity of vision.<span
id="fr_48"></span>[48](tgln1.htm#2_note_48)

   The means used by the Confucian sage for terrifying

|                                        |
|----------------------------------------|
| **Laws and Punishments not the best.** |

the world will not be used by the perfect man, (the chen jen of Taoism).
The methods used by the Confucian worthies for stemming worldliness will
not be applied by the Taoist sage.

   Further, a shallow pool such as an ox can wade will have no foot-long
carp in it. The hill, K‛uei-fu, will bear no timber of ten-foot girth,
for the reason that the capacity of these hills is limited and they
cannot bear anything big. All material things are circumscribed, which,
by implication, leads us to understand the immensity of the immaterial
and formless. It is the immaterial which creates the great mountains and
deep waters. Great is the Tao!

   Moreover, when men are tied by the world, they are <span
id="page_46">p. 46</span> circumscribed, and the spiritual energies are
cramped.

|                                  |
|----------------------------------|
| **Sensual illusions cramp men.** |

The body thus languishing, the spirit runs to waste, an emptiness is
inevitable. The virtues emanating from the *tao* in a world of perfect
tê gave men a life full of cheerfulness and the elasticity of simplicity
and innocence. They moved in the sphere of the original endowment of
mind. They consulted their natural instincts and eschewed the sensual
illusions of things (were not slaves to the allurements of the world).
They looked to the pristine nature<span
id="fr_49"></span>[49](tgln1.htm#2_note_49) for a standard of life and
roamed unfettered (by the bonds of desire) in the wide fields of nature.

   The Sage, therefore, inhales the fluid of the Yin and Yang, and all
creatures, being full of ease, were expectant on his virtue, in order to
induce general like-mindedness. At this period, with no governing
authority, the people lived their life in quietness. The world was a
unity without division into classes nor separation into orders (lit: a
disorgnised mass): the unaffectedness and homeliness of the natural
heart had not, as yet, been corrupted: the spirit of the age was a
unity, and all creation was in great affluence. Hence, if a man with the
knowledge of *'I'*<span id="fr_50"></span>[50](tgln1.htm#2_note_50)
appeared, the world had no use for him.

   Following the course of history until we come to the decay of the
world, we arrive at the times of Mr. Fu Hsi.<span
id="fr_51"></span>[51](tgln1.htm#2_note_51)

|                                                                  |
|------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Simplicity lost in the complexity of life from new learning.** |

His principles seemed profound and vast, breathing the spirit of virtue
and cherishing the feeling of cordiality. These influenced and stirred
the people: and so there appeared, for the first time, the desire for
learning and its concrete fruits. The people began to abandon simplicity
of heart and they tended to become sensible to the allurements of the
universe. Therefore, their virtue became dissipated over many interests,
so that it was difficult to preserve unity.

   However, it was with the advent of Shen Nung<span
id="fr_52"></span>[52](tgln1.htm#2_note_52) and Huang Ti<span
id="fr_53"></span>[53](tgln1.htm#2_note_53) that there arose a division
and separation of <span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

|                                                  |
|--------------------------------------------------|
| **A veiled attack on the policies of the time.** |

the main elements of life. The spirit of enquiry led men to penetrate
into and regulate the principles of the celestial and terrestrial
hemispheres. They applied Yin and Yang to natural events and harmonized
or adjusted the theories of the hard and soft elements, thus producing
the different divisions and classifications of creation. They gave each
thing its laws and place. Whereupon the people began to be inquisitive
(stare and gape) and interested. All were in an attitude of attention
and expectation through ear and eye. Hence, the spirit of cooperation
was lost in government by the rise of private opinion.

   When we come to a still later time, to the periods of K‛un Wu and
Hsia Hou, we find that the desires of men were centred on the material
and sensual: their intelligence was allured by the objective impression
of the senses, so that they lost hold of the central principles of life.

   Proceeding still further, we come to the decay of the House of Chou.
Purity was vitiated, simplicity

|                              |
|------------------------------|
| **Rise of ceremonies etc.:** |

disappeared. Truth was adulterated by various opinions, and virtue was
restrained in its operation by hurtful actions. Specious theorists
(schismatics) sprung up like mushrooms. With the decay of the Chou
House, the true kingly way, too, fell. Confucian and Meian<span
id="fr_54"></span>[54](tgln1.htm#2_note_54) theories then, first, came
into being. With the rise of private opinion, recusancy and polemics
began. Whereupon the philosophies of Yang and Mei<span
id="fr_54"></span>[54](tgln1.htm#2_note_54) rose and strove for equality
with the sage.<span id="fr_55"></span>[55](tgln1.htm#2_note_55) By
plausible and specious theories, the orthodox<span
id="fr_55"></span>[55](tgln1.htm#2_note_55) was slandered and the
multitude captivated. Confucian writers, too, set up their own schools
of music and dances; and, by embroidering their talk with quotations
from the Odes, they 'bought' fame and became renowned in the world. The
system of ceremonies in imperial interviews or social intercourse became
excessive; the fashions in dress became luxurious. A crowd of assistants
was not sufficient to meet all the changing ceremonies, nor the
accumulation of wealth enough <span id="page_48">p. 48</span> to meet
all the extravagant expenses. At this juncture, the people first began
to form themselves into schools and parties, each desiring to carry out
its own opinion and specious views, and become the oracles of the world.
By

|                          |
|--------------------------|
| **Loss of the Reality.** |

such a show of cleverness and knowledge, they won reputation and êclat.
But the people, groping in the wilderness of bewilderment, lost the
fundamental ideal of life.

   But the wherefore of losing the soul<span
id="fr_56"></span>[{56,}](tgln1.htm#2_note_56) <span
id="fr_57"></span>[57](tgln1.htm#2_note_57) by men was a matter of long
process: the causes of decay and

|                        |
|------------------------|
| **This loss gradual.** |

deterioration came on gradually and imperceptibly. The causes were old.
Hence the doctrine of the Sage is, by the desire of returning nature to
the original, to exercise the mind in non-desire (Hsu).<span
id="fr_58"></span>[58](tgln1.htm#2_note_58) The schoolmen's<span
id="fr_59"></span>[59](tgln1.htm#2_note_59) doctrine is, by desiring
(freedom of nature) to exercise nature in deep knowledge, to have the
consciousness of the abstruse. But as to popular and conventional
philosophy, it is different (i.e. Confucian classics) from either of the
foregoing. Its eclectic ethic cramps nature, leading to an inward
anxiety of spirit and an

|                             |
|-----------------------------|
| **Worldly renown useless.** |

outward misuse of eye and ear. And, for the first time, we have the rise
of a minor philosophy dealing with the small and insignificant details
of things to the detriment of the spiritual values, dissipating the
practices of benevolence, etiquette and music, so that they could not
act, using them with an unusual cleverness to gain a name and renown in
the world. This was not at all praiseworthy, and, personally, I refuse
to imitate them. I hold it is better to have the true ease of spiritual
culture than the sweets

|                              |
|------------------------------|
| **Value of life important.** |

of empire. It is better to roam in the infinitude of naturalness and
have a true apprehension of the relationship between the visible and the
invisible,<span id="fr_60"></span>[60](tgln1.htm#2_note_60) than to have
the pleasure of glory and renown. To possess a well-ordered life and
have a logical apprehension of Being and non-Being<span
id="fr_61"></span>[61](tgln1.htm#2_note_61) is the great thing.
Universal praise adds no <span id="page_49">p. 49</span> encouragement
to such a man, nor would there be any abatement of purpose, even were
the whole realm to be hostile. These men have a clear and definite idea
of the value of life and death, and a clear perception of that which
constitutes honour and shame.

   Were fire or flood to overwhelm the world, the spirits of these men
would not quail, nor would it give them any surprise. Thus they look
upon this span of life as but a feather wafted on the winds, or a
floating straw on the waters, (Empire and its glories are but a bubble).
Who, then, would wish to centre his thoughts on this material and
passing world!

   The nature of water is to be clear and pure; but it is made turbid by
the soil. The disposition of man is serene and tranquil; but lust and
desire have disturbed it. What men have received from Heaven are such
things as the sense of the ear's power of hearing, the eye's
appreciation of colour, the sense of taste and smell, by mouth and nose;
the sense of cold and heat, through skin and nerve. The passions
(Ch‛ing) are one. How is it, then, it may be asked, that some are clever
and some almost stupid? The difference lies in the way of control (one
governs himself by the outward or senses; the other governs himself by
the inward or the *tao*).

   It is clear, then, that the soul is the well of intelligence. When
the well is clear, the intelligence will be pellucid. The intelligence
is the store-house of the mind. When the intelligence is correct, the
mind will be just. Men don't make mirrors of rushing waters, but make
mirrors of still waters, because it is quiet. Men don't peer into
mirrors of rough metal for seeing the form, but into burnished metal, in
order to see their images; and this, because of its evenness. Now,
evenness and stillness are qualities that can reveal the nature of other
things. From which consideration it may be concluded that the positive
rests on the negative, i.e. movement rises from quiescence: or water and
metal are unconscious of having qualities that can be of <span
id="page_50">p. 50</span> service. Hence, the empty room, i.e. the
unsullied heart, begets the white, that is to say the *tao*; and
blessings come to rest there.<span
id="fr_62"></span>[62](tgln1.htm#2_note_62)

   A bright mirror cannot be defiled by dust: the appetites cannot
disorganise a soul that is pure.<span
id="fr_63"></span>[63](tgln1.htm#2_note_63) The spirit that

|                                                            |
|------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Light and truth come from within not from ear and eye.** |

is scattered and dissipated in the external senses, and the efforts to
restore it by works, is nothing other than the neglect of the root and
the attempt to restore it by cultivation of the branches. There is no
correspondence between the outward and the inward: the desire to get in
contact with things bedims the original light and is nothing but a
search for knowledge through ear and eye. What is this but the
abandonment of the brilliancy of the (*tao*) and the pursuance of truth
through the obscurity of the senses? This is what is called losing the
*tao*.

   When the mind has an objective, the spirit follows and is held there.
When a return is attempted to the realm of the spirit, passion, (tao)
and then concupiscence are held in check only by effort. It is thus the
sage nourishes the spirit.

   Hence the rulers of ancient time felt the necessity of an
understanding of the real facts of nature and of the

|                         |
|-------------------------|
| **Unity in diversity.** |

human lot (the rich, poor, educated and illiterate, etc.). Though their
actions were not all alike, yet their agreement with the *tao* was one.

   Furs are not worn in summer, not because people are not fond of furs,
but because of the oppressive heat. Fans are not wanted in winter, not
because people dislike them, but because the air is already cool enough.

   The Sage eats just enough to satisfy his wants, and wears just
sufficient clothes to cover his person.<span
id="fr_64"></span>[64](tgln1.htm#2_note_64) He

|                 |
|-----------------|
| **Simplicity.** |

limits expenditure on himself truly. How, then, could impurity and
concupiscence spring up in his heart! Therefore, were empire within his
grasp, <span id="page_51">p. 51</span> he would not look at it as his
own (from a selfish idea): or, had such an one the capacity to govern,
he would not want to do so. It is not worth it. Were fame to come to
him! Well! He would never make an effort to seek it. The Sage has that
which can be followed: pursuing this, the appetites and desires cease.

   Kung and Mei's disciples taught the methods of benevolence and
justice to the world: nevertheless, they could not

|                                     |
|-------------------------------------|
| **Artificial moralities inferior.** |

personally be free from anxieties, since, being without power, they
failed to put these virtues into operation. How much more so was it the
case with their successors. Why this failure? Their *tao* was an
*outside* one. (They treated the matter extraneously and not
fundamentally). They proceeded backward, by starting with the accidental
and extrinsic<span id="fr_65"></span>[65](tgln1.htm#2_note_65) they
tried to return to the fundamental,—a process that Hsü Yu<span
id="fr_66"></span>[66](tgln1.htm#2_note_66) would not use. And where he
would fail,

|                         |
|-------------------------|
| **Purity gives power.** |

the majority of people would never succeed. Given real permeation into
the nature of life, benevolence and justice will be found to follow;
they will accompany and be the result of a sincere nature. There are no
likes and dislikes (bias) to trip the heart.<span
id="fr_67"></span>[67](tgln1.htm#2_note_67)

   When the soul is not clogged with desires, nor the mind loaded with
sophism, the inward light is clear and penetrating and the mind easy and
at leisure from the weight of the senses; unclogged and unobstructed, it
meets every impression of the senses without bias and in serenity,—a
state which no force can beguile, which no sophist with cunning words
can shake, which no voluptuousness or licentiousness can seduce, nor art
and beauty submerge, which no clever man can move or shake, nor a
powerful man frighten. This is the Tao of the True Man. Such a person as
this shapes creation and cooperates with the Creator in governing man.
Nothing in Heaven or Earth can rob him of immortality!

   The power which brings about organic life does not <span
id="page_52">p. 52</span> die itself,<span
id="fr_68"></span>[68](tgln1.htm#2_note_68) nor does the transformer of
inorganic things

|                                      |
|--------------------------------------|
| **Polished scholarship not enough.** |

change. The spirit<span id="fr_69"></span>[69](tgln1.htm#2_note_69)
crosses the Lu Mountain and the T‛ai Hang without finding difficulty. It
enters the Four Seas and the Nine Rivers<span
id="fr_70"></span>[70](tgln1.htm#2_note_70) without getting soaked.
Placed in the narrowest and most exiguous space, it is not cramped;
stretched out over the vast regions of the Universe, it can do so
without 'panting.' He who does not comprehend this (who has not this
secret), though his eyes were keen enough to count an innumerable herd
of sheep, his ears fine enough to distinguish the eight musical tones,
his feet nimble enough to dance the Yang Ah and his hands adroit enough
te beat the time of the Yen Shui;<span
id="fr_71"></span>[71](tgln1.htm#2_note_71) though he knows the
profundities of creation, and his perspicacity is clear as sun and moon,
though he could juggle with words<span
id="fr_72"></span>[72](tgln1.htm#2_note_72) and were his arguments as
polished as the lustre of jade and stone, such accomplishments were vain
and unprofitable in the government of men.

   Quiescence and ease, contemplation and meditation, ease and
tranquillity (free from passions) are the means for nourishing the
nature. Harmony and happiness, unaffectedness and freedom from passions
(Hsü wu) are the means

|                             |
|-----------------------------|
| **He who has Tao has all.** |

for nourishing tê, virtue. When the outward senses do not produce inward
perturbations, then nature finds its true centre. When passions (hsing)
do not move the harmony (of mind), then tê, virtue, is settled in its
sphere. When life is nourished to pass through life<span
id="fr_73"></span>[73](tgln1.htm#2_note_73) and virtue is cherished to
win full years, this may be called the embodiment of the Tao. In the
case of such people there is no irregularity in their pulses nor noxious
humours in their system. Neither bane nor blessing can disturb their
life. Neither criticism nor praise can raise the least irritation. In
this way Perfection is reached.

   Nevertheless who can reach this standard without a proper
environment? Such a man might, indeed, appear; but if the times were
unpropitious, even *his* life would <span id="page_53">p. 53</span> not
be safe. The man without the *tao* would be much less likely to keep
free of entanglements.

   Further, the senses, (ear and eye) of men are in contact with and
respond to impressions. The mind and

|                                    |
|------------------------------------|
| **Longing for quiet and freedom.** |

will are cognitive of anxiety and joy; the hand and foot feel the itch
of things. People want to avoid heat and cold. When a wasp or scorpion
bites the finger, the spirit is restless; when a mosquito or gnat
(gadfly) bores the skin, the mind is ill at ease.

   The onset of troubles and anxiety harass the mind of men to a far
greater degree than do the poisonous sting of wasp and scorpion or the
annoying pain of the bite of a mosquito. And the longing for quiet,
solitude, detachment and freedom from passion, cannot but be strong. How
can it be attained?

   Again, when the eye examines the speck of autumn hair, the ear does
not hear the clap of thunder: when the ear is intent on distinguishing
and harmonizing the sounds of the jade and stone, the eye does not see
the height of the T‛ai Shan. What then? It is just this. When the little
commands attention, the great is often lost. Now the onset of the world
upheaves our nature and stirs the passions

|                                    |
|------------------------------------|
| **Most easy to sully the spirit.** |

in a continuous stream, like the flow of a fountain. Though one desired
to break away wholly from them, such a wish could hardly be realized.

   Trees planted and cultivated by the work of ten men, by means of
irrigation and fertilisation, could be pulled up by one man and a clean
sweep made of every vestige in one night. How much more so were the
whole country to engage in the work of destruction of what has been
planted! Though a desire existed for a lengthy life, how could it be
attained? Take again the example of a bowl of turbid water standing in
some hall. It would take more than a day for it to settle and become so
transparent that the eye-lashes could be seen <span id="page_54">p.
54</span> reflected: on the other hand, it can he made turbid in a
moment, so that you could not distinguish square from round in it. Man's
spirit is easily befouled and most difficult to clarify: it is very
similar to the example given by the bowl of water. How much befouled the
soul would be if the pollution had been continued through a long time.
Moreover, how can the spirit find a moment's peace, subject to the
worries and cares and temptations of the world?<span
id="fr_74"></span>[74](tgln1.htm#2_note_74)

   In the golden age<span id="fr_75"></span>[75](tgln1.htm#2_note_75) of
ancient time, the shopman found pleasure in his shop, and the farmer had
joy in his farming; the minister found peace in his affairs and the
retired scholars cultivated the way (of the ancient kings). At that
time, winds and rains did not destroy nor injure the

|                      |
|----------------------|
| **Advance the Tao.** |

trees nor did plants die prematurely: the nine tripods<span
id="fr_76"></span>[76](tgln1.htm#2_note_76) were heavy: the jade and
pearl were lustrous. The Lo river threw forth the Red book;<span
id="fr_77"></span>[77](tgln1.htm#2_note_77) the Yellow river emitted the
Green plan (map);<span id="fr_78"></span>[78](tgln1.htm#2_note_78) Hsü
Yu, Fang Hui, Shan Chuan, Pei I,<span
id="fr_79"></span>[79](tgln1.htm#2_note_79) therefore, were able to get
an understanding of their doctrines.

   How did this come about? Because the masters of men (kings) truly
desired to advance the interests of the empire; hence these four men
found the opportunity and leisure to advance the practice of the Truth
(Tao). It was not that these four men had such perfect talents that they
were superior to all others, but no one else could compete with them in
the lustre of their teaching, because they fell on the favourable times
of Tang and Yü.<span id="fr_80"></span>[80](tgln1.htm#2_note_80) But
when we come to the epochs of Chieh of Hsia and Chou of Yin,

|                                    |
|------------------------------------|
| **and the world will have peace.** |

these monsters roasted men alive, they put good men that dared to
criticise them on the top of poles, forcing them, by the heat of irons,
to fall into the lake of fire below, laughing at their agony. They cut
open the hearts of the worthy, and exposed the tendons of hardy
men.<span id="fr_81"></span>[81](tgln1.htm#2_note_81) They made
mince-meat of the daughter of Kuei Hou, and ground the bones of Mei Pei.

   During these monstrosities, the Jao mountain tumbled <span
id="page_55">p. 55</span> down, and the three rivers ran dry. Flying
birds were wounded in the wings and walking wounded beasts limped along.

   It would be wrong to say that it was only during these periods there
were no sages. The fact was they could not do anything to put their
teaching into practice, since they fell on uncongenial times. Birds even
at the height of a thousand jen,<span
id="fr_82"></span>[82](tgln1.htm#2_note_82) and beasts stalking in the
depth of

|                            |
|----------------------------|
| **Environment important.** |

thick reeds, were not safe from the untimely shafts of the hunter. How
much more difficult, then, was the lot of the masses! From this we may
see that the practice of the Truth does not lie with the professor alone
but also hangs on the condition of the age,

   The city of Li Yang<span id="fr_83"></span>[83](tgln1.htm#2_note_83)
(Yang Chow) was turned into a lake, in one evening. Valour, talent, as
well as timidity, the godly and the ungodly were all caught and
engulfed.

   A favourable wind on the height of the Wu mountain carried a fire
forward, consuming the finest tallow-trees and medicinal grasses, as
well as the common plants and grasses. The fishes in the Yellow River
fail to see, on account of the turgid waters: the tender and late grains
fail to mature, because of untimely frosts. These are the results of
naturally unfavourable circumstances.

   Likewise, when there is proper government, the foolish and stupid
individuals cannot alone produce anarchy. Similarly, the wise, alone,
cannot, without cooperation, induce a proper government. Treading in the
way of an anarchical world and failing to put into operation the Tao, as
he would, is a situation similar to that of shackling Ch‛i and I<span
id="fr_84"></span>[84](tgln1.htm#2_note_84) together, and expecting them
to do the full journey of a thousand *li*. Place a monkey in a cage, and
he will be like a pig showing none of his nimbleness and pranks, since
he has no room for exercising these. Shun's

|                           |
|---------------------------|
| **A favourable destiny.** |

ploughing and hoeing could be of no benefit to his native village. When
he was made King, however, his virtue spread over the four <span
id="page_56">p. 56</span> quarters of the empire; not on account of any
more overflowing of merit, but due, rather, to being favourably placed.
An influential position gives the opportunity.

   The Sages-of-old, were men of harmony, joy, ease, and quietude that
pertained to their nature. But it was the favourable destiny (of place
and position) that made it possible for them to propagate the doctrine.

   Hence, when nature is seconded by destiny, things will go: when
destiny is seconded by nature, everything will be clear. The Wu Hao bow,
the Hsi Tzŭ crossbow, could not be shot without the string. The small
boats of Yueh, and the few plank boats of Szechuen cannot be floated
without water.

   When the air above is full of the darts of the crossbow, and the
earth beneath is spread full of nets and snares, though one were to
desire to soar high and stir the world by his teachings, it could not be
done. At the Odes say:—

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>'I was gathering and gathering the mouse-ear,'<br />
'But could not fill my shallow basket,'<br />
'With a sigh for the man of my heart,'<br />
'I placed it there on the high way.'<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Odes Pt. I. Bk. I. Ode 3.   

   A longing is expressed in these words for the days—the golden age—of
the long past.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tgl3)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
