[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico080) 
[Next](nico082) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 14.

#### Discussion of the view that most pleasures are bad, and of the tendency to identify bodily pleasures with pleasure in general.

\(G\) With regard to the bodily pleasures, those who say that some
pleasures are very much to be chosen, viz. the noble pleasures, but not
the bodily pleasures, i.e. those with which the self-indulgent man is
concerned, must consider why, then, the contrary pains are bad. For the
contrary of bad is good. Are the necessary pleasures good in the sense
in which even that which is not bad is good? Or are they good up to a
point? Is it that where you have states and processes of which there
cannot be too much, there cannot be too much of the corresponding
pleasure, and that where there can be too much of the one there can be
too much of the other also? Now there can be too much of bodily goods,
and the bad man is bad by virtue of pursuing the excess, not by virtue
of pursuing the necessary pleasures (for all men enjoy in some way or
other both dainty foods and wines and sexual intercourse, but not all
men do so as they ought). The contrary is the case with pain; for he
does not avoid the excess of it, he avoids it altogether; and this is
peculiar to him, for the alternative to excess of pleasure is not pain,
except to the man who pursues this excess.

Since we should state not only the truth, but also the cause of
error--for this contributes towards producing conviction, since when a
reasonable explanation is given of why the false view appears true, this
tends to produce belief in the true view--therefore we must state why
the bodily pleasures appear the more worthy of choice. (a) Firstly,
then, it is because they expel pain; owing to the excesses of pain that
men experience, they pursue excessive and in general bodily pleasure as
being a cure for the pain. Now curative agencies produce intense
feeling--which is the reason why they are pursued--because they show up
against the contrary pain. (Indeed pleasure is thought not to be good
for these two reasons, as has been said, viz. that (a) some of them are
activities belonging to a bad nature--either congenital, as in the case
of a brute, or due to habit, i.e. those of bad men; while (b) others are
meant to cure a defective nature, and it is better to be in a healthy
state than to be getting into it, but these arise during the process of
being made perfect and are therefore only incidentally good.) (b)
Further, they are pursued because of their violence by those who cannot
enjoy other pleasures. (At all events they go out of their way to
manufacture thirsts somehow for themselves. When these are harmless, the
practice is irreproachable; when they are hurtful, it is bad.) For they
have nothing else to enjoy, and, besides, a neutral state is painful to
many people because of their nature. For the animal nature is always in
travail, as the students of natural science also testify, saying that
sight and hearing are painful; but we have become used to this, as they
maintain. Similarly, while, in youth, people are, owing to the growth
that is going on, in a situation like that of drunken men, and youth is
pleasant, on the other hand people of excitable nature always need
relief; for even their body is ever in torment owing to its special
composition, and they are always under the influence of violent desire;
but pain is driven out both by the contrary pleasure, and by any chance
pleasure if it be strong; and for these reasons they become
self-indulgent and bad. But the pleasures that do not involve pains do
not admit of excess; and these are among the things pleasant by nature
and not incidentally. By things pleasant incidentally I mean those that
act as cures (for because as a result people are cured, through some
action of the part that remains healthy, for this reason the process is
thought pleasant); by things naturally pleasant I mean those that
stimulate the action of the healthy nature.

There is no one thing that is always pleasant, because our nature is not
simple but there is another element in us as well, inasmuch as we are
perishable creatures, so that if the one element does something, this is
unnatural to the other nature, and when the two elements are evenly
balanced, what is done seems neither painful nor pleasant; for if the
nature of anything were simple, the same action would always be most
pleasant to it. This is why God always enjoys a single and simple
pleasure; for there is not only an activity of movement but an activity
of immobility, and pleasure is found more in rest than in movement. But
'change in all things is sweet', as the poet says, because of some vice;
for as it is the vicious man that is changeable, so the nature that
needs change is vicious; for it is not simple nor good.

We have now discussed continence and incontinence, and pleasure and
pain, both what each is and in what sense some of them are good and
others bad; it remains to speak of friendship.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1. Friendship both necessary and noble: main questions
about it](nico082)
