[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico049) 
[Next](nico051) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 7.

#### Natural and legal justice.

Of political justice part is natural, part legal, natural, that which
everywhere has the same force and does not exist by people's thinking
this or that; legal, that which is originally indifferent, but when it
has been laid down is not indifferent, e.g. that a prisoner's ransom
shall be a mina, or that a goat and not two sheep shall be sacrificed,
and again all the laws that are passed for particular cases, e.g. that
sacrifice shall be made in honour of Brasidas, and the provisions of
decrees. Now some think that all justice is of this sort, because that
which is by nature is unchangeable and has everywhere the same force (as
fire burns both here and in Persia), while they see change in the things
recognized as just. This, however, is not true in this unqualified way,
but is true in a sense; or rather, with the gods it is perhaps not true
at all, while with us there is something that is just even by nature,
yet all of it is changeable; but still some is by nature, some not by
nature. It is evident which sort of thing, among things capable of being
otherwise, is by nature, and which is not but is legal and conventional,
assuming that both are equally changeable. And in all other things the
same distinction will apply; by nature the right hand is stronger, yet
it is possible that all men should come to be ambidextrous. The things
which are just by virtue of convention and expediency are like measures;
for wine and corn measures are not everywhere equal, but larger in
wholesale and smaller in retail markets. Similarly, the things which are
just not by nature but by human enactment are not everywhere the same,
since constitutions also are not the same, though there is but one which
is everywhere by nature the best. Of things just and lawful each is
related as the universal to its particulars; for the things that are
done are many, but of them each is one, since it is universal.

There is a difference between the act of injustice and what is unjust,
and between the act of justice and what is just; for a thing is unjust
by nature or by enactment; and this very thing, when it has been done,
is an act of injustice, but before it is done is not yet that but is
unjust. So, too, with an act of justice (though the general term is
rather 'just action', and 'act of justice' is applied to the correction
of the act of injustice).

Each of these must later be examined separately with regard to the
nature and number of its species and the nature of the things with which
it is concerned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8. The scale of degrees of wrongdoing](nico051)
