[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico017) 
[Next](nico019) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 5.

#### Its \[moral virtue's\] genus: it is a state of character, not a passion nor a faculty.

Next we must consider what virtue is. Since things that are found in the
soul are of three kinds--passions, faculties, states of character,
virtue must be one of these. By passions I mean appetite, anger, fear,
confidence, envy, joy, friendly feeling, hatred, longing, emulation,
pity, and in general the feelings that are accompanied by pleasure or
pain; by faculties the things in virtue of which we are said to be
capable of feeling these, e.g. of becoming angry or being pained or
feeling pity; by states of character the things in virtue of which we
stand well or badly with reference to the passions, e.g. with reference
to anger we stand badly if we feel it violently or too weakly, and well
if we feel it moderately; and similarly with reference to the other
passions.

Now neither the virtues nor the vices are passions, because we are not
called good or bad on the ground of our passions, but are so called on
the ground of our virtues and our vices, and because we are neither
praised nor blamed for our passions (for the man who feels fear or anger
is not praised, nor is the man who simply feels anger blamed, but the
man who feels it in a certain way), but for our virtues and our vices we
are praised or blamed.

Again, we feel anger and fear without choice, but the virtues are modes
of choice or involve choice. Further, in respect of the passions we are
said to be moved, but in respect of the virtues and the vices we are
said not to be moved but to be disposed in a particular way.

For these reasons also they are not faculties; for we are neither called
good nor bad, nor praised nor blamed, for the simple capacity of feeling
the passions; again, we have the faculties by nature, but we are not
made good or bad by nature; we have spoken of this before. If, then, the
virtues are neither passions nor faculties, all that remains is that
they should be states of character.

Thus we have stated what virtue is in respect of its genus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6. Its differentia: it is a disposition to choose the
mean](nico019)
