[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico070) 
[Next](nico072) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 4.

#### Solution of the problem, what is the sphere of incontinence: its proper and its extended sense distinguished.

\(2\) We must next discuss whether there is any one who is incontinent
without qualification, or all men who are incontinent are so in a
particular sense, and if there is, with what sort of objects he is
concerned. That both continent persons and persons of endurance, and
incontinent and soft persons, are concerned with pleasures and pains, is
evident.

Now of the things that produce pleasure some are necessary, while others
are worthy of choice in themselves but admit of excess, the bodily
causes of pleasure being necessary (by such I mean both those concerned
with food and those concerned with sexual intercourse, i.e. the bodily
matters with which we defined self-indulgence and temperance as being
concerned), while the others are not necessary but worthy of choice in
themselves (e.g. victory, honour, wealth, and good and pleasant things
of this sort). This being so, (a) those who go to excess with reference
to the latter, contrary to the right rule which is in themselves, are
not called incontinent simply, but incontinent with the qualification
'in respect of money, gain, honour, or anger',--not simply incontinent,
on the ground that they are different from incontinent people and are
called incontinent by reason of a resemblance. (Compare the case of
Anthropos (Man), who won a contest at the Olympic games; in his case the
general definition of man differed little from the definition peculiar
to him, but yet it was different.) This is shown by the fact that
incontinence either without qualification or in respect of some
particular bodily pleasure is blamed not only as a fault but as a kind
of vice, while none of the people who are incontinent in these other
respects is so blamed.

But (b) of the people who are incontinent with respect to bodily
enjoyments, with which we say the temperate and the self-indulgent man
are concerned, he who pursues the excesses of things pleasant--and shuns
those of things painful, of hunger and thirst and heat and cold and all
the objects of touch and taste--not by choice but contrary to his choice
and his judgement, is called incontinent, not with the qualification 'in
respect of this or that', e.g. of anger, but just simply. This is
confirmed by the fact that men are called 'soft' with regard to these
pleasures, but not with regard to any of the others. And for this reason
we group together the incontinent and the self-indulgent, the continent
and the temperate man--but not any of these other types--because they
are concerned somehow with the same pleasures and pains; but though
these are concerned with the same objects, they are not similarly
related to them, but some of them make a deliberate choice while the
others do not.

This is why we should describe as self-indulgent rather the man who
without appetite or with but a slight appetite pursues the excesses of
pleasure and avoids moderate pains, than the man who does so because of
his strong appetites; for what would the former do, if he had in
addition a vigorous appetite, and a violent pain at the lack of the
'necessary' objects?

Now of appetites and pleasures some belong to the class of things
generically noble and good--for some pleasant things are by nature
worthy of choice, while others are contrary to these, and others are
intermediate, to adopt our previous distinction--e.g. wealth, gain,
victory, honour. And with reference to all objects whether of this or of
the intermediate kind men are not blamed for being affected by them, for
desiring and loving them, but for doing so in a certain way, i.e. for
going to excess. (This is why all those who contrary to the rule either
are mastered by or pursue one of the objects which are naturally noble
and good, e.g. those who busy themselves more than they ought about
honour or about children and parents, (are not wicked); for these too
are good, and those who busy themselves about them are praised; but yet
there is an excess even in them--if like Niobe one were to fight even
against the gods, or were to be as much devoted to one's father as
Satyrus nicknamed 'the filial', who was thought to be very silly on this
point.) There is no wickedness, then, with regard to these objects, for
the reason named, viz. because each of them is by nature a thing worthy
of choice for its own sake; yet excesses in respect of them are bad and
to be avoided. Similarly there is no incontinence with regard to them;
for incontinence is not only to be avoided but is also a thing worthy of
blame; but owing to a similarity in the state of feeling people apply
the name incontinence, adding in each case what it is in respect of, as
we may describe as a bad doctor or a bad actor one whom we should not
call bad, simply. As, then, in this case we do not apply the term
without qualification because each of these conditions is no shadness
but only analogous to it, so it is clear that in the other case also
that alone must be taken to be incontinence and continence which is
concerned with the same objects as temperance and self-indulgence, but
we apply the term to anger by virtue of a resemblance; and this is why
we say with a qualification 'incontinent in respect of anger' as we say
'incontinent in respect of honour, or of gain'.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5. Incontinence in its extended sense includes a brutish
and a morbid form](nico072)
