[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico108) 
[Next](nico110) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Book X: Pleasure. Happiness.

### Chapter 1.

#### Two opposed views about pleasure.

AFTER these matters we ought perhaps next to discuss pleasure. For it is
thought to be most intimately connected with our human nature, which is
the reason why in educating the young we steer them by the rudders of
pleasure and pain; it is thought, too, that to enjoy the things we ought
and to hate the things we ought has the greatest bearing on virtue of
character. For these things extend right through life, with a weight and
power of their own in respect both to virtue and to the happy life,
since men choose what is pleasant and avoid what is painful; and such
things, it will be thought, we should least of all omit to discuss,
especially since they admit of much dispute. For some say pleasure is
the good, while others, on the contrary, say it is thoroughly bad--some
no doubt being persuaded that the facts are so, and others thinking it
has a better effect on our life to exhibit pleasure as a bad thing even
if it is not; for most people (they think) incline towards it and are
the slaves of their pleasures, for which reason they ought to lead them
in the opposite direction, since thus they will reach the middle state.
But surely this is not correct. For arguments about matters concerned
with feelings and actions are less reliable than facts: and so when they
clash with the facts of perception they are despised, and discredit the
truth as well; if a man who runs down pleasure is once seen to be alming
at it, his inclining towards it is thought to imply that it is all
worthy of being aimed at; for most people are not good at drawing
distinctions. True arguments seem, then, most useful, not only with a
view to knowledge, but with a view to life also; for since they
harmonize with the facts they are believed, and so they stimulate those
who understand them to live according to them.--Enough of such
questions; let us proceed to review the opinions that have been
expressed about pleasure.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2. Discussion of the view that pleasure is the
good](nico110)
