[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico051) 
[Next](nico053) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 9.

#### Can a man be voluntarily treated unjustly? Is it the distributor or the recipient that is guilty of injustice in distribution? Justice not so easy as it might seem, because it is not a way of acting but an inner disposition.

Assuming that we have sufficiently defined the suffering and doing of
injustice, it may be asked (1) whether the truth is expressed in
Euripides' paradoxical words:

I slew my mother, that's my tale in brief.  
Were you both willing, or unwilling both?

Is it truly possible to be willingly treated unjustly, or is all
suffering of injustice the contrary involuntary, as all unjust action is
voluntary? And is all suffering of injustice of the latter kind or else
all of the former, or is it sometimes voluntary, sometimes involuntary?
So, too, with the case of being justly treated; all just action is
voluntary, so that it is reasonable that there should be a similar
opposition in either case--that both being unjustly and being justly
treated should be either alike voluntary or alike involuntary. But it
would be thought paradoxical even in the case of being justly treated,
if it were always voluntary; for some are unwillingly treated justly.
(2) One might raise this question also, whether every one who has
suffered what is unjust is being unjustly treated, or on the other hand
it is with suffering as with acting. In action and in passivity alike it
is possible to partake of justice incidentally, and similarly (it is
plain) of injustice; for to do what is unjust is not the same as to act
unjustly, nor to suffer what is unjust as to be treated unjustly, and
similarly in the case of acting justly and being justly treated; for it
is impossible to be unjustly treated if the other does not act unjustly,
or justly treated unless he acts justly. Now if to act unjustly is
simply to harm some one voluntarily, and 'voluntarily' means 'knowing
the person acted on, the instrument, and the manner of one's acting',
and the incontinent man voluntarily harms himself, not only will he
voluntarily be unjustly treated but it will be possible to treat oneself
unjustly. (This also is one of the questions in doubt, whether a man can
treat himself unjustly.) Again, a man may voluntarily, owing to
incontinence, be harmed by another who acts voluntarily, so that it
would be possible to be voluntarily treated unjustly. Or is our
definition incorrect; must we to 'harming another, with knowledge both
of the person acted on, of the instrument, and of the manner' add
'contrary to the wish of the person acted on'? Then a man may be
voluntarily harmed and voluntarily suffer what is unjust, but no one is
voluntarily treated unjustly; for no one wishes to be unjustly treated,
not even the incontinent man. He acts contrary to his wish; for no one
wishes for what he does not think to be good, but the incontinent man
does do things that he does not think he ought to do. Again, one who
gives what is his own, as Homer says Glaucus gave Diomede

Armour of gold for brazen, the price of a hundred beeves for nine,

is not unjustly treated; for though to give is in his power, to be
unjustly treated is not, but there must be some one to treat him
unjustly. It is plain, then, that being unjustly treated is not
voluntary.

Of the questions we intended to discuss two still remain for discussion;
(3) whether it is the man who has assigned to another more than his
share that acts unjustly, or he who has the excessive share, and (4)
whether it is possible to treat oneself unjustly. The questions are
connected; for if the former alternative is possible and the distributor
acts unjustly and not the man who has the excessive share, then if a man
assigns more to another than to himself, knowingly and voluntarily, he
treats himself unjustly; which is what modest people seem to do, since
the virtuous man tends to take less than his share. Or does this
statement too need qualification? For (a) he perhaps gets more than his
share of some other good, e.g. of honour or of intrinsic nobility. (b)
The question is solved by applying the distinction we applied to unjust
action; for he suffers nothing contrary to his own wish, so that he is
not unjustly treated as far as this goes, but at most only suffers harm.

It is plain too that the distributor acts unjustly, but not always the
man who has the excessive share; for it is not he to whom what is unjust
appertains that acts unjustly, but he to whom it appertains to do the
unjust act voluntarily, i.e. the person in whom lies the origin of the
action, and this lies in the distributor, not in the receiver. Again,
since the word 'do' is ambiguous, and there is a sense in which lifeless
things, or a hand, or a servant who obeys an order, may be said to slay,
he who gets an excessive share does not act unjustly, though he 'does'
what is unjust.

Again, if the distributor gave his judgement in ignorance, he does not
act unjustly in respect of legal justice, and his judgement is not
unjust in this sense, but in a sense it is unjust (for legal justice and
primordial justice are different); but if with knowledge he judged
unjustly, he is himself aiming at an excessive share either of gratitude
or of revenge. As much, then, as if he were to share in the plunder, the
man who has judged unjustly for these reasons has got too much; the fact
that what he gets is different from what he distributes makes no
difference, for even if he awards land with a view to sharing in the
plunder he gets not land but money.

Men think that acting unjustly is in their power, and therefore that
being just is easy. But it is not; to lie with one's neighbour's wife,
to wound another, to deliver a bribe, is easy and in our power, but to
do these things as a result of a certain state of character is neither
easy nor in our power. Similarly to know what is just and what is unjust
requires, men think, no great wisdom, because it is not hard to
understand the matters dealt with by the laws (though these are not the
things that are just, except incidentally); but how actions must be done
and distributions effected in order to be just, to know this is a
greater achievement than knowing what is good for the health; though
even there, while it is easy to know that honey, wine, hellebore,
cautery, and the use of the knife are so, to know how, to whom, and when
these should be applied with a view to producing health, is no less an
achievement than that of being a physician. Again, for this very reason
men think that acting unjustly is characteristic of the just man no less
than of the unjust, because he would be not less but even more capable
of doing each of these unjust acts; for he could lie with a woman or
wound a neighbour; and the brave man could throw away his shield and
turn to flight in this direction or in that. But to play the coward or
to act unjustly consists not in doing these things, except incidentally,
but in doing them as the result of a certain state of character, just as
to practise medicine and healing consists not in applying or not
applying the knife, in using or not using medicines, but in doing so in
a certain way.

Just acts occur between people who participate in things good in
themselves and can have too much or too little of them; for some beings
(e.g. presumably the gods) cannot have too much of them, and to others,
those who are incurably bad, not even the smallest share in them is
beneficial but all such goods are harmful, while to others they are
beneficial up to a point; therefore justice is essentially something
human.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10. Equity, a corrective of legal justice](nico053)
