[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico111) 
[Next](nico113) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 4.

#### Definition of pleasure.

What pleasure is, or what kind of thing it is, will become plainer if we
take up the question aga from the beginning. Seeing seems to be at any
moment complete, for it does not lack anything which coming into being
later will complete its form; and pleasure also seems to be of this
nature. For it is a whole, and at no time can one find a pleasure whose
form will be completed if the pleasure lasts longer. For this reason,
too, it is not a movement. For every movement (e.g. that of building)
takes time and is for the sake of an end, and is complete when it has
made what it aims at. It is complete, therefore, only in the whole time
or at that final moment. In their parts and during the time they occupy,
all movements are incomplete, and are different in kind from the whole
movement and from each other. For the fitting together of the stones is
different from the fluting of the column, and these are both different
from the making of the temple; and the making of the temple is complete
(for it lacks nothing with a view to the end proposed), but the making
of the base or of the triglyph is incomplete; for each is the making of
only a part. They differ in kind, then, and it is not possible to find
at any and every time a movement complete in form, but if at all, only
in the whole time. So, too, in the case of walking and all other
movements. For if locomotion is a movement from to there, it, too, has
differences in kind--flying, walking, leaping, and so on. And not only
so, but in walking itself there are such differences; for the whence and
whither are not the same in the whole racecourse and in a part of it,
nor in one part and in another, nor is it the same thing to traverse
this line and that; for one traverses not only a line but one which is
in a place, and this one is in a different place from that. We have
discussed movement with precision in another work, but it seems that it
is not complete at any and every time, but that the many movements are
incomplete and different in kind, since the whence and whither give them
their form. But of pleasure the form is complete at any and every time.
Plainly, then, pleasure and movement must be different from each other,
and pleasure must be one of the things that are whole and complete. This
would seem to be the case, too, from the fact that it is not possible to
move otherwise than in time, but it is possible to be pleased; for that
which takes place in a moment is a whole.

From these considerations it is clear, too, that these thinkers are not
right in saying there is a movement or a coming into being of pleasure.
For these cannot be ascribed to all things, but only to those that are
divisible and not wholes; there is no coming into being of seeing nor of
a point nor of a unit, nor is any of these a movement or coming into
being; therefore there is no movement or coming into being of pleasure
either; for it is a whole.

Since every sense is active in relation to its object, and a sense which
is in good condition acts perfectly in relation to the most beautiful of
its objects (for perfect activity seems to be ideally of this nature;
whether we say that it is active, or the organ in which it resides, may
be assumed to be immaterial), it follows that in the case of each sense
the best activity is that of the best-conditioned organ in relation to
the finest of its objects. And this activity will be the most complete
and pleasant. For, while there is pleasure in respect of any sense, and
in respect of thought and contemplation no less, the most complete is
pleasantest, and that of a well-conditioned organ in relation to the
worthiest of its objects is the most complete; and the pleasure
completes the activity. But the pleasure does not complete it in the
same way as the combination of object and sense, both good, just as
health and the doctor are not in the same way the cause of a man's being
healthy. (That pleasure is produced in respect to each sense is plain;
for we speak of sights and sounds as pleasant. It is also plain that it
arises most of all when both the sense is at its best and it is active
in reference to an object which corresponds; when both object and
perceiver are of the best there will always be pleasure, since the
requisite agent and patient are both present.) Pleasure completes the
activity not as the corresponding permanent state does, by its
immanence, but as an end which supervenes as the bloom of youth does on
those in the flower of their age. So long, then, as both the
intelligible or sensible object and the discriminating or contemplative
faculty are as they should be, the pleasure will be involved in the
activity; for when both the passive and the active factor are unchanged
and are related to each other in the same way, the same result naturally
follows.

How, then, is it that no one is continuously pleased? Is it that we grow
weary? Certainly all human beings are incapable of continuous activity.
Therefore pleasure also is not continuous; for it accompanies activity.
Some things delight us when they are new, but later do so less, for the
same reason; for at first the mind is in a state of stimulation and
intensely active about them, as people are with respect to their vision
when they look hard at a thing, but afterwards our activity is not of
this kind, but has grown relaxed; for which reason the pleasure also is
dulled.

One might think that all men desire pleasure because they all aim at
life; life is an activity, and each man is active about those things and
with those faculties that he loves most; e.g. the musician is active
with his hearing in reference to tunes, the student with his mind in
reference to theoretical questions, and so on in each case; now pleasure
completes the activities, and therefore life, which they desire. It is
with good reason, then, that they aim at pleasure too, since for every
one it completes life, which is desirable. But whether we choose life
for the sake of pleasure or pleasure for the sake of life is a question
we may dismiss for the present. For they seem to be bound up together
and not to admit of separation, since without activity pleasure does not
arise, and every activity is completed by the attendant pleasure.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5. Pleasures differ with the activities which they
accompany and complete: criterion of the value of pleasures](nico113)
