[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico033) 
[Next](nico035) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 12.

#### Self-indulgence more voluntary than cowardice: comparison of the self-indulgent man to the spoilt child.

Self-indulgence is more like a voluntary state than cowardice. For the
former is actuated by pleasure, the latter by pain, of which the one is
to be chosen and the other to be avoided; and pain upsets and destroys
the nature of the person who feels it, while pleasure does nothing of
the sort. Therefore self-indulgence is more voluntary. Hence also it is
more a matter of reproach; for it is easier to become accustomed to its
objects, since there are many things of this sort in life, and the
process of habituation to them is free from danger, while with terrible
objects the reverse is the case. But cowardice would seem to be
voluntary in a different degree from its particular manifestations; for
it is itself painless, but in these we are upset by pain, so that we
even throw down our arms and disgrace ourselves in other ways; hence our
acts are even thought to be done under compulsion. For the
self-indulgent man, on the other hand, the particular acts are voluntary
(for he does them with craving and desire), but the whole state is less
so; for no one craves to be self-indulgent.

The name self-indulgence is applied also to childish faults; for they
bear a certain resemblance to what we have been considering. Which is
called after which, makes no difference to our present purpose; plainly,
however, the later is called after the earlier. The transference of the
name seems not a bad one; for that which desires what is base and which
develops quickly ought to be kept in a chastened condition, and these
characteristics belong above all to appetite and to the child, since
children in fact live at the beck and call of appetite, and it is in
them that the desire for what is pleasant is strongest. If, then, it is
not going to be obedient and subject to the ruling principle, it will go
to great lengths; for in an irrational being the desire for pleasure is
insatiable even if it tries every source of gratification, and the
exercise of appetite increases its innate force, and if appetites are
strong and violent they even expel the power of calculation. Hence they
should be moderate and few, and should in no way oppose the rational
principle--and this is what we call an obedient and chastened state--and
as the child should live according to the direction of his tutor, so the
appetitive element should live according to rational principle. Hence
the appetitive element in a temperate man should harmonize with the
rational principle; for the noble is the mark at which both aim, and the
temperate man craves for the things be ought, as he ought, as when he
ought; and when he ought; and this is what rational principle directs.

Here we conclude our account of temperance.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1. Liberality, prodigality, meanness](nico035)
