[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico098) 
[Next](nico100) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 4.

#### Friendship is based on self-love.

Friendly relations with one's neighbours, and the marks by which
friendships are defined, seem to have proceeded from a man's relations
to himself. For (1) we define a friend as one who wishes and does what
is good, or seems so, for the sake of his friend, or (2) as one who
wishes his friend to exist and live, for his sake; which mothers do to
their children, and friends do who have come into conflict. And (3)
others define him as one who lives with and (4) has the same tastes as
another, or (5) one who grieves and rejoices with his friend; and this
too is found in mothers most of all. It is by some one of these
characterstics that friendship too is defined.

Now each of these is true of the good man's relation to himself (and of
all other men in so far as they think themselves good; virtue and the
good man seem, as has been said, to be the measure of every class of
things). For his opinions are harmonious, and he desires the same things
with all his soul; and therefore he wishes for himself what is good and
what seems so, and does it (for it is characteristic of the good man to
work out the good), and does so for his own sake (for he does it for the
sake of the intellectual element in him, which is thought to be the man
himself); and he wishes himself to live and be preserved, and especially
the element by virtue of which he thinks. For existence is good to the
virtuous man, and each man wishes himself what is good, while no one
chooses to possess the whole world if he has first to become some one
else (for that matter, even now God possesses the good); he wishes for
this only on condition of being whatever he is; and the element that
thinks would seem to be the individual man, or to be so more than any
other element in him. And such a man wishes to live with himself; for he
does so with pleasure, since the memories of his past acts are
delightful and his hopes for the future are good, and therefore
pleasant. His mind is well stored too with subjects of contemplation.
And he grieves and rejoices, more than any other, with himself; for the
same thing is always painful, and the same thing always pleasant, and
not one thing at one time and another at another; he has, so to speak,
nothing to repent of.

Therefore, since each of these characteristics belongs to the good man
in relation to himself, and he is related to his friend as to himself
(for his friend is another self), friendship too is thought to be one of
these attributes, and those who have these attributes to be friends.
Whether there is or is not friendship between a man and himself is a
question we may dismiss for the present; there would seem to be
friendship in so far as he is two or more, to judge from the
afore-mentioned attributes of friendship, and from the fact that the
extreme of friendship is likened to one's love for oneself.

But the attributes named seem to belong even to the majority of men,
poor creatures though they may be. Are we to say then that in so far as
they are satisfied with themselves and think they are good, they share
in these attributes? Certainly no one who is thoroughly bad and impious
has these attributes, or even seems to do so. They hardly belong even to
inferior people; for they are at variance with themselves, and have
appetites for some things and rational desires for others. This is true,
for instance, of incontinent people; for they choose, instead of the
things they themselves think good, things that are pleasant but hurtful;
while others again, through cowardice and laziness, shrink from doing
what they think best for themselves. And those who have done many
terrible deeds and are hated for their wickedness even shrink from life
and destroy themselves. And wicked men seek for people with whom to
spend their days, and shun themselves; for they remember many a grevious
deed, and anticipate others like them, when they are by themselves, but
when they are with others they forget. And having nothing lovable in
them they have no feeling of love to themselves. Therefore also such men
do not rejoice or grieve with themselves; for their soul is rent by
faction, and one element in it by reason of its wickedness grieves when
it abstains from certain acts, while the other part is pleased, and one
draws them this way and the other that, as if they were pulling them in
pieces. If a man cannot at the same time be pained and pleased, at all
events after a short time he is pained because he was pleased, and he
could have wished that these things had not been pleasant to him; for
bad men are laden with repentance.

Therefore the bad man does not seem to be amicably disposed even to
himself, because there is nothing in him to love; so that if to be thus
is the height of wretchedness, we should strain every nerve to avoid
wickedness and should endeavour to be good; for so and only so can one
be either friendly to oneself or a friend to another.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5. Relation of friendship to goodwill](nico100)
