[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico025) 
[Next](nico027) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 4.

#### The object of rational wish is the end, i.e. the good or the apparent good.

That wish is for the end has already been stated; some think it is for
the good, others for the apparent good. Now those who say that the good
is the object of wish must admit in consequence that that which the man
who does not choose aright wishes for is not an object of wish (for if
it is to be so, it must also be good; but it was, if it so happened,
bad); while those who say the apparent good is the object of wish must
admit that there is no natural object of wish, but only what seems good
to each man. Now different things appear good to different people, and,
if it so happens, even contrary things.

If these consequences are unpleasing, are we to say that absolutely and
in truth the good is the object of wish, but for each person the
apparent good; that that which is in truth an object of wish is an
object of wish to the good man, while any chance thing may be so the bad
man, as in the case of bodies also the things that are in truth
wholesome are wholesome for bodies which are in good condition, while
for those that are diseased other things are wholesome--or bitter or
sweet or hot or heavy, and so on; since the good man judges each class
of things rightly, and in each the truth appears to him? For each state
of character has its own ideas of the noble and the pleasant, and
perhaps the good man differs from others most by seeing the truth in
each class of things, being as it were the norm and measure of them. In
most things the error seems to be due to pleasure; for it appears a good
when it is not. We therefore choose the pleasant as a good, and avoid
pain as an evil.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5. We are responsible for bad as well as for good
actions](nico027)
