[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico036) 
[Next](nico038) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 3.

#### Pride, vanity, humility.

Pride seems even from its name to be concerned with great things; what
sort of great things, is the first question we must try to answer. It
makes no difference whether we consider the state of character or the
man characterized by it. Now the man is thought to be proud who thinks
himself worthy of great things, being worthy of them; for he who does so
beyond his deserts is a fool, but no virtuous man is foolish or silly.
The proud man, then, is the man we have described. For he who is worthy
of little and thinks himself worthy of little is temperate, but not
proud; for pride implies greatness, as beauty implies a goodsized body,
and little people may be neat and well-proportioned but cannot be
beautiful. On the other hand, he who thinks himself worthy of great
things, being unworthy of them, is vain; though not every one who thinks
himself worthy of more than he really is worthy of in vain. The man who
thinks himself worthy of worthy of less than he is really worthy of is
unduly humble, whether his deserts be great or moderate, or his deserts
be small but his claims yet smaller. And the man whose deserts are great
would seem most unduly humble; for what would he have done if they had
been less? The proud man, then, is an extreme in respect of the
greatness of his claims, but a mean in respect of the rightness of them;
for he claims what is accordance with his merits, while the others go to
excess or fall short.

If, then, he deserves and claims great things, and above all the great
things, he will be concerned with one thing in particular. Desert is
relative to external goods; and the greatest of these, we should say, is
that which we render to the gods, and which people of position most aim
at, and which is the prize appointed for the noblest deeds; and this is
honour; that is surely the greatest of external goods. Honours and
dishonours, therefore, are the objects with respect to which the proud
man is as he should be. And even apart from argument it is with honour
that proud men appear to be concerned; for it is honour that they
chiefly claim, but in accordance with their deserts. The unduly humble
man falls short both in comparison with his own merits and in comparison
with the proud man's claims. The vain man goes to excess in comparison
with his own merits, but does not exceed the proud man's claims.

Now the proud man, since he deserves most, must be good in the highest
degree; for the better man always deserves more, and the best man most.
Therefore the truly proud man must be good. And greatness in every
virtue would seem to be characteristic of a proud man. And it would be
most unbecoming for a proud man to fly from danger, swinging his arms by
his sides, or to wrong another; for to what end should he do disgraceful
acts, he to whom nothing is great? If we consider him point by point we
shall see the utter absurdity of a proud man who is not good. Nor,
again, would he be worthy of honour if he were bad; for honour is the
prize of virtue, and it is to the good that it is rendered. Pride, then,
seems to be a sort of crown of the virtues; for it makes them greater,
and it is not found without them. Therefore it is hard to be truly
proud; for it is impossible without nobility and goodness of character.
It is chiefly with honours and dishonours, then, that the proud man is
concerned; and at honours that are great and conferred by good men he
will be moderately Pleased, thinking that he is coming by his own or
even less than his own; for there can be no honour that is worthy of
perfect virtue, yet he will at any rate accept it since they have
nothing greater to bestow on him; but honour from casual people and on
trifling grounds he will utterly despise, since it is not this that he
deserves, and dishonour too, since in his case it cannot be just. In the
first place, then, as has been said, the proud man is concerned with
honours; yet he will also bear himself with moderation towards wealth
and power and all good or evil fortune, whatever may befall him, and
will be neither over-joyed by good fortune nor over-pained by evil. For
not even towards honour does he bear himself as if it were a very great
thing. Power and wealth are desirable for the sake of honour (at least
those who have them wish to get honour by means of them); and for him to
whom even honour is a little thing the others must be so too. Hence
proud men are thought to be disdainful.

The goods of fortune also are thought to contribute towards pride. For
men who are well-born are thought worthy of honour, and so are those who
enjoy power or wealth; for they are in a superior position, and
everything that has a superiority in something good is held in greater
honour. Hence even such things make men prouder; for they are honoured
by some for having them; but in truth the good man alone is to be
honoured; he, however, who has both advantages is thought the more
worthy of honour. But those who without virtue have such goods are
neither justified in making great claims nor entitled to the name of
'proud'; for these things imply perfect virtue. Disdainful and insolent,
however, even those who have such goods become. For without virtue it is
not easy to bear gracefully the goods of fortune; and, being unable to
bear them, and thinking themselves superior to others, they despise
others and themselves do what they please. They imitate the proud man
without being like him, and this they do where they can; so they do not
act virtuously, but they do despise others. For the proud man despises
justly (since he thinks truly), but the many do so at random.

He does not run into trifling dangers, nor is he fond of danger, because
he honours few things; but he will face great dangers, and when he is in
danger he is unsparing of his life, knowing that there are conditions on
which life is not worth having. And he is the sort of man to confer
benefits, but he is ashamed of receiving them; for the one is the mark
of a superior, the other of an inferior. And he is apt to confer greater
benefits in return; for thus the original benefactor besides being paid
will incur a debt to him, and will be the gainer by the transaction.
They seem also to remember any service they have done, but not those
they have received (for he who receives a service is inferior to him who
has done it, but the proud man wishes to be superior), and to hear of
the former with pleasure, of the latter with displeasure; this, it
seems, is why Thetis did not mention to Zeus the services she had done
him, and why the Spartans did not recount their services to the
Athenians, but those they had received. It is a mark of the proud man
also to ask for nothing or scarcely anything, but to give help readily,
and to be dignified towards people who enjoy high position and good
fortune, but unassuming towards those of the middle class; for it is a
difficult and lofty thing to be superior to the former, but easy to be
so to the latter, and a lofty bearing over the former is no mark of
ill-breeding, but among humble people it is as vulgar as a display of
strength against the weak. Again, it is characteristic of the proud man
not to aim at the things commonly held in honour, or the things in which
others excel; to be sluggish and to hold back except where great honour
or a great work is at stake, and to be a man of few deeds, but of great
and notable ones. He must also be open in his hate and in his love (for
to conceal one's feelings, i.e. to care less for truth than for what
people will think, is a coward's part), and must speak and act openly;
for he is free of speech because he is contemptuous, and he is given to
telling the truth, except when he speaks in irony to the vulgar. He must
be unable to make his life revolve round another, unless it be a friend;
for this is slavish, and for this reason all flatterers are servile and
people lacking in self-respect are flatterers. Nor is he given to
admiration; for nothing to him is great. Nor is he mindful of wrongs;
for it is not the part of a proud man to have a long memory, especially
for wrongs, but rather to overlook them. Nor is he a gossip; for he will
speak neither about himself nor about another, since he cares not to be
praised nor for others to be blamed; nor again is he given to praise;
and for the same reason he is not an evil-speaker, even about his
enemies, except from haughtiness. With regard to necessary or small
matters he is least of all me given to lamentation or the asking of
favours; for it is the part of one who takes such matters seriously to
behave so with respect to them. He is one who will possess beautiful and
profitless things rather than profitable and useful ones; for this is
more proper to a character that suffices to itself.

Further, a slow step is thought proper to the proud man, a deep voice,
and a level utterance; for the man who takes few things seriously is not
likely to be hurried, nor the man who thinks nothing great to be
excited, while a shrill voice and a rapid gait are the results of hurry
and excitement.

Such, then, is the proud man; the man who falls short of him is unduly
humble, and the man who goes beyond him is vain. Now even these are not
thought to be bad (for they are not malicious), but only mistaken. For
the unduly humble man, being worthy of good things, robs himself of what
he deserves, and to have something bad about him from the fact that he
does not think himself worthy of good things, and seems also not to know
himself; else he would have desired the things he was worthy of, since
these were good. Yet such people are not thought to be fools, but rather
unduly retiring. Such a reputation, however, seems actually to make them
worse; for each class of people aims at what corresponds to its worth,
and these people stand back even from noble actions and undertakings,
deeming themselves unworthy, and from external goods no less. Vain
people, on the other hand, are fools and ignorant of themselves, and
that manifestly; for, not being worthy of them, they attempt honourable
undertakings, and then are found out; and tetadorn themselves with
clothing and outward show and such things, and wish their strokes of
good fortune to be made public, and speak about them as if they would be
honoured for them. But undue humility is more opposed to pride than
vanity is; for it is both commoner and worse.

Pride, then, is concerned with honour on the grand scale, as has been
said.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4. Ambition, unambitiousness, and the mean between
them](nico038)
