[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico016) 
[Next](nico018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 4.

#### The actions that produce moral virtue are not good in the same sense as those that flow from it: the latter must fulfil certain conditions not necessary in the case of the arts.

The question might be asked,; what we mean by saying that we must become
just by doing just acts, and temperate by doing temperate acts; for if
men do just and temperate acts, they are already just and temperate,
exactly as, if they do what is in accordance with the laws of grammar
and of music, they are grammarians and musicians.

Or is this not true even of the arts? It is possible to do something
that is in accordance with the laws of grammar, either by chance or at
the suggestion of another. A man will be a grammarian, then, only when
he has both done something grammatical and done it grammatically; and
this means doing it in accordance with the grammatical knowledge in
himself.

Again, the case of the arts and that of the virtues are not similar; for
the products of the arts have their goodness in themselves, so that it
is enough that they should have a certain character, but if the acts
that are in accordance with the virtues have themselves a certain
character it does not follow that they are done justly or temperately.
The agent also must be in a certain condition when he does them; in the
first place he must have knowledge, secondly he must choose the acts,
and choose them for their own sakes, and thirdly his action must proceed
from a firm and unchangeable character. These are not reckoned in as
conditions of the possession of the arts, except the bare knowledge; but
as a condition of the possession of the virtues knowledge has little or
no weight, while the other conditions count not for a little but for
everything, i.e. the very conditions which result from often doing just
and temperate acts.

Actions, then, are called just and temperate when they are such as the
just or the temperate man would do; but it is not the man who does these
that is just and temperate, but the man who also does them as just and
temperate men do them. It is well said, then, that it is by doing just
acts that the just man is produced, and by doing temperate acts the
temperate man; without doing these no one would have even a prospect of
becoming good.

But most people do not do these, but take refuge in theory and think
they are being philosophers and will become good in this way, behaving
somewhat like patients who listen attentively to their doctors, but do
none of the things they are ordered to do. As the latter will not be
made well in body by such a course of treatment, the former will not be
made well in soul by such a course of philosophy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5. Moral virtue's genus: it is a state of character, not
a passion nor a faculty](nico018)
