[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico026) 
[Next](nico028) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 5.

#### We are responsible for bad as well as for good actions.

The end, then, being what we wish for, the means what we deliberate
about and choose, actions concerning means must be according to choice
and voluntary. Now the exercise of the virtues is concerned with means.
Therefore virtue also is in our own power, and so too vice. For where it
is in our power to act it is also in our power not to act, and vice
versa; so that, if to act, where this is noble, is in our power, not to
act, which will be base, will also be in our power, and if not to act,
where this is noble, is in our power, to act, which will be base, will
also be in our power. Now if it is in our power to do noble or base
acts, and likewise in our power not to do them, and this was what being
good or bad meant, then it is in our power to be virtuous or vicious.

The saying that 'no one is voluntarily wicked nor involuntarily happy'
seems to be partly false and partly true; for no one is involuntarily
happy, but wickedness is voluntary. Or else we shall have to dispute
what has just been said, at any rate, and deny that man is a moving
principle or begetter of his actions as of children. But if these facts
are evident and we cannot refer actions to moving principles other than
those in ourselves, the acts whose moving principles are in us must
themselves also be in our power and voluntary.

Witness seems to be borne to this both by individuals in their private
capacity and by legislators themselves; for these punish and take
vengeance on those who do wicked acts (unless they have acted under
compulsion or as a result of ignorance for which they are not themselves
responsible), while they honour those who do noble acts, as though they
meant to encourage the latter and deter the former. But no one is
encouraged to do the things that are neither in our power nor voluntary;
it is assumed that there is no gain in being persuaded not to be hot or
in pain or hungry or the like, since we shall experience these feelings
none the less. Indeed, we punish a man for his very ignorance, if he is
thought responsible for the ignorance, as when penalties are doubled in
the case of drunkenness; for the moving principle is in the man himself,
since he had the power of not getting drunk and his getting drunk was
the cause of his ignorance. And we punish those who are ignorant of
anything in the laws that they ought to know and that is not difficult,
and so too in the case of anything else that they are thought to be
ignorant of through carelessness; we assume that it is in their power
not to be ignorant, since they have the power of taking care.

But perhaps a man is the kind of man not to take care. Still they are
themselves by their slack lives responsible for becoming men of that
kind, and men make themselves responsible for being unjust or
self-indulgent, in the one case by cheating and in the other by spending
their time in drinking bouts and the like; for it is activities
exercised on particular objects that make the corresponding character.
This is plain from the case of people training for any contest or
action; they practise the activity the whole time. Now not to know that
it is from the exercise of activities on particular objects that states
of character are produced is the mark of a thoroughly senseless person.
Again, it is irrational to suppose that a man who acts unjustly does not
wish to be unjust or a man who acts self-indulgently to be
self-indulgent. But if without being ignorant a man does the things
which will make him unjust, he will be unjust voluntarily. Yet it does
not follow that if he wishes he will cease to be unjust and will be
just. For neither does the man who is ill become well on those terms. We
may suppose a case in which he is ill voluntarily, through living
incontinently and disobeying his doctors. In that case it was then open
to him not to be ill, but not now, when he has thrown away his chance,
just as when you have let a stone go it is too late to recover it; but
yet it was in your power to throw it, since the moving principle was in
you. So, too, to the unjust and to the self-indulgent man it was open at
the beginning not to become men of this kind, and so they are unjust and
selfindulgent voluntarily; but now that they have become so it is not
possible for them not to be so.

But not only are the vices of the soul voluntary, but those of the body
also for some men, whom we accordingly blame; while no one blames those
who are ugly by nature, we blame those who are so owing to want of
exercise and care. So it is, too, with respect to weakness and
infirmity; no one would reproach a man blind from birth or by disease or
from a blow, but rather pity him, while every one would blame a man who
was blind from drunkenness or some other form of self-indulgence. Of
vices of the body, then, those in our own power are blamed, those not in
our power are not. And if this be so, in the other cases also the vices
that are blamed must be in our own power.

Now some one may say that all men desire the apparent good, but have no
control over the appearance, but the end appears to each man in a form
answering to his character. We reply that if each man is somehow
responsible for his state of mind, he will also be himself somehow
responsible for the appearance; but if not, no one is responsible for
his own evildoing, but every one does evil acts through ignorance of the
end, thinking that by these he will get what is best, and the aiming at
the end is not self-chosen but one must be born with an eye, as it were,
by which to judge rightly and choose what is truly good, and he is well
endowed by nature who is well endowed with this. For it is what is
greatest and most noble, and what we cannot get or learn from another,
but must have just such as it was when given us at birth, and to be well
and nobly endowed with this will be perfect and true excellence of
natural endowment. If this is true, then, how will virtue be more
voluntary than vice? To both men alike, the good and the bad, the end
appears and is fixed by nature or however it may be, and it is by
referring everything else to this that men do whatever they do.

Whether, then, it is not by nature that the end appears to each man such
as it does appear, but something also depends on him, or the end is
natural but because the good man adopts the means voluntarily virtue is
voluntary, vice also will be none the less voluntary; for in the case of
the bad man there is equally present that which depends on himself in
his actions even if not in his end. If, then, as is asserted, the
virtues are voluntary (for we are ourselves somehow partly responsible
for our states of character, and it is by being persons of a certain
kind that we assume the end to be so and so), the vices also will be
voluntary; for the same is true of them.

With regard to the virtues in general we have stated their genus in
outline, viz. that they are means and that they are states of character,
and that they tend, and by their own nature, to the doing of the acts by
which they are produced, and that they are in our power and voluntary,
and act as the right rule prescribes. But actions and states of
character are not voluntary in the same way; for we are masters of our
actions from the beginning right to the end, if we know the particular
facts, but though we control the beginning of our states of character
the gradual progress is not obvious any more than it is in illnesses;
because it was in our power, however, to act in this way or not in this
way, therefore the states are voluntary.

Let us take up the several virtues, however, and say which they are and
what sort of things they are concerned with and how they are concerned
with them; at the same time it will become plain how many they are. And
first let us speak of courage.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6. Courage concerned with the feelings of fear and
confidence--strictly speaking, with the fear of death in
battle](nico028)
