[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico027) 
[Next](nico029) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 6.

#### Courage concerned with the feelings of fear and confidence--strictly speaking, with the fear of death in battle.

That it is a mean with regard to feelings of fear and confidence has
already been made evident; and plainly the things we fear are terrible
things, and these are, to speak without qualification, evils; for which
reason people even define fear as expectation of evil. Now we fear all
evils, e.g. disgrace, poverty, disease, friendlessness, death, but the
brave man is not thought to be concerned with all; for to fear some
things is even right and noble, and it is base not to fear them--e.g.
disgrace; he who fears this is good and modest, and he who does not is
shameless. He is, however, by some people called brave, by a
transference of the word to a new meaning; for he has in him something
which is like the brave man, since the brave man also is a fearless
person. Poverty and disease we perhaps ought not to fear, nor in general
the things that do not proceed from vice and are not due to a man
himself. But not even the man who is fearless of these is brave. Yet we
apply the word to him also in virtue of a similarity; for some who in
the dangers of war are cowards are liberal and are confident in face of
the loss of money. Nor is a man a coward if he fears insult to his wife
and children or envy or anything of the kind; nor brave if he is
confident when he is about to be flogged. With what sort of terrible
things, then, is the brave man concerned? Surely with the greatest; for
no one is more likely than he to stand his ground against what is
awe-inspiring. Now death is the most terrible of all things; for it is
the end, and nothing is thought to be any longer either good or bad for
the dead. But the brave man would not seem to be concerned even with
death in all circumstances, e.g. at sea or in disease. In what
circumstances, then? Surely in the noblest. Now such deaths are those in
battle; for these take place in the greatest and noblest danger. And
these are correspondingly honoured in city-states and at the courts of
monarchs. Properly, then, he will be called brave who is fearless in
face of a noble death, and of all emergencies that involve death; and
the emergencies of war are in the highest degree of this kind. Yet at
sea also, and in disease, the brave man is fearless, but not in the same
way as the seaman; for he has given up hope of safety, and is disliking
the thought of death in this shape, while they are hopeful because of
their experience. At the same time, we show courage in situations where
there is the opportunity of showing prowess or where death is noble; but
in these forms of death neither of these conditions is fulfilled.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7. The motive of courage is the sense of honour:
characteristics of the opposite vices, cowardice and rashness](nico029)
