[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico073) 
[Next](nico075) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 7.

#### Softness and endurance: two forms of incontinence--weakness and impetuosity.

With regard to the pleasures and pains and appetites and aversions
arising through touch and taste, to which both self-indulgence and
temperance were formerly narrowed down, it possible to be in such a
state as to be defeated even by those of them which most people master,
or to master even those by which most people are defeated; among these
possibilities, those relating to pleasures are incontinence and
continence, those relating to pains softness and endurance. The state of
most people is intermediate, even if they lean more towards the worse
states.

Now, since some pleasures are necessary while others are not, and are
necessary up to a point while the excesses of them are not, nor the
deficiencies, and this is equally true of appetites and pains, the man
who pursues the excesses of things pleasant, or pursues to excess
necessary objects, and does so by choice, for their own sake and not at
all for the sake of any result distinct from them, is self-indulgent;
for such a man is of necessity unlikely to repent, and therefore
incurable, since a man who cannot repent cannot be cured. The man who is
deficient in his pursuit of them is the opposite of self-indulgent; the
man who is intermediate is temperate. Similarly, there is the man who
avoids bodily pains not because he is defeated by them but by choice.
(Of those who do not choose such acts, one kind of man is led to them as
a result of the pleasure involved, another because he avoids the pain
arising from the appetite, so that these types differ from one another.
Now any one would think worse of a man with no appetite or with weak
appetite were he to do something disgraceful, than if he did it under
the influence of powerful appetite, and worse of him if he struck a blow
not in anger than if he did it in anger; for what would he have done if
he had been strongly affected? This is why the self-indulgent man is
worse than the incontinent.) of the states named, then, the latter is
rather a kind of softness; the former is self-indulgence. While to the
incontinent man is opposed the continent, to the soft is opposed the man
of endurance; for endurance consists in resisting, while continence
consists in conquering, and resisting and conquering are different, as
not being beaten is different from winning; this is why continence is
also more worthy of choice than endurance. Now the man who is defective
in respect of resistance to the things which most men both resist and
resist successfully is soft and effeminate; for effeminacy too is a kind
of softness; such a man trails his cloak to avoid the pain of lifting
it, and plays the invalid without thinking himself wretched, though the
man he imitates is a wretched man.

The case is similar with regard to continence and incontinence. For if a
man is defeated by violent and excessive pleasures or pains, there is
nothing wonderful in that; indeed we are ready to pardon him if he has
resisted, as Theodectes' Philoctetes does when bitten by the snake, or
Carcinus' Cercyon in the Alope, and as people who try to restrain their
laughter burst out into a guffaw, as happened to Xenophantus. But it is
surprising if a man is defeated by and cannot resist pleasures or pains
which most men can hold out against, when this is not due to heredity or
disease, like the softness that is hereditary with the kings of the
Scythians, or that which distinguishes the female sex from the male.

The lover of amusement, too, is thought to be self-indulgent, but is
really soft. For amusement is a relaxation, since it is a rest from
work; and the lover of amusement is one of the people who go to excess
in this.

Of incontinence one kind is impetuosity, another weakness. For some men
after deliberating fail, owing to their emotion, to stand by the
conclusions of their deliberation, others because they have not
deliberated are led by their emotion; since some men (just as people who
first tickle others are not tickled themselves), if they have first
perceived and seen what is coming and have first roused themselves and
their calculative faculty, are not defeated by their emotion, whether it
be pleasant or painful. It is keen and excitable people that suffer
especially from the impetuous form of incontinence; for the former by
reason of their quickness and the latter by reason of the violence of
their passions do not await the argument, because they are apt to follow
their imagination.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8. Self-indulgence worse than incontinence](nico075)
