[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Aristotle](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nico008) 
[Next](nico010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter 9.

#### Is happiness acquired by learning or habituation, or sent by God or by chance?

For this reason also the question is asked, whether happiness is to be
acquired by learning or by habituation or some other sort of training,
or comes in virtue of some divine providence or again by chance. Now if
there is any gift of the gods to men, it is reasonable that happiness
should be god-given, and most surely god-given of all human things
inasmuch as it is the best. But this question would perhaps be more
appropriate to another inquiry; happiness seems, however, even if it is
not god-sent but comes as a result of virtue and some process of
learning or training, to be among the most godlike things; for that
which is the prize and end of virtue seems to be the best thing in the
world, and something godlike and blessed.

It will also on this view be very generally shared; for all who are not
maimed as regards their potentiality for virtue may win it by a certain
kind of study and care. But if it is better to be happy thus than by
chance, it is reasonable that the facts should be so, since everything
that depends on the action of nature is by nature as good as it can be,
and similarly everything that depends on art or any rational cause, and
especially if it depends on the best of all causes. To entrust to chance
what is greatest and most noble would be a very defective arrangement.

The answer to the question we are asking is plain also from the
definition of happiness; for it has been said to be a virtuous activity
of soul, of a certain kind. Of the remaining goods, some must
necessarily pre-exist as conditions of happiness, and others are
naturally co-operative and useful as instruments. And this will be found
to agree with what we said at the outset; for we stated the end of
political science to be the best end, and political science spends most
of its pains on making the citizens to be of a certain character, viz.
good and capable of noble acts.

It is natural, then, that we call neither ox nor horse nor any other of
the animals happy; for none of them is capable of sharing in such
activity. For this reason also a boy is not happy; for he is not yet
capable of such acts, owing to his age; and boys who are called happy
are being congratulated by reason of the hopes we have for them. For
there is required, as we said, not only complete virtue but also a
complete life, since many changes occur in life, and all manner of
chances, and the most prosperous may fall into great misfortunes in old
age, as is told of Priam in the Trojan Cycle; and one who has
experienced such chances and has ended wretchedly no one calls happy.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10. Should no man be called happy while he
lives?](nico010)
