[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](blc05)  [Next](blc07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Babylonian Legends of Creation*, by E. A. Wallis Budge, \[1921\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## The Legend of the Creation According to Berosus and Damascius.

Versions in Greek of the Legends found by George Smith had long been
known to classical scholars, owing to the preservation of fragments of
them in the works of later Greek writers, *e.g.*, Eusebius, Syncellus,
and others. The most important of these is derived from the History of
Babylonia, which was written in Greek by BEROSUS, a priest of
Bel-Marduk, *i.e.*, the "Lord Marduk," at Babylon, about 250 B.C. In
this work Berosus reproduced all the known historical facts and
traditions derived from native sources which were current in his day. It
is therefore not surprising to find that his account of the Babylonian
beliefs about the origin of things corresponds very closely with that
given in the cuneiform texts, and that it is of the greatest use in
explaining and partly in expanding these texts. His account of the
primeval abyss, out of which everything came, and of its inhabitants
reads:--

<span id="img_006"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Babylonian Monster.
\[No. 108,979.\]](tn/006.png)  
Click to enlarge](img/006.png)  
Babylonian Monster. \[No. 108,979.\]  
</span>

"There was a time in which there existed nothing but darkness and an
abyss of waters, wherein resided most hideous beings, which were
produced on a two-fold principle. There appeared men, some of whom were
furnished with two wings, others with four, and with two faces. They had
one body but two heads; the one that of a man, the other of a woman; and
likewise in their several organs both male and female. Other human
figures were to be seen with the legs and horns of goats; some had
horses' feet; while others united the hind-quarters of a horse with the
body of a man, resembling in shape the hippo-centaurs. Bulls likewise
were bred there with the heads of men, and dogs with four told bodies,
terminated in their extremities with the tails of fishes; horses also
with the heads of dogs; men too and other animals, with the heads and
bodies of horses and the tails of fishes. In short, there were creatures
in which were combined the limbs of every species of animals. In
addition to these, fishes, reptiles, serpents, with other monstrous
animals, which assumed each other's shape and countenance. Of all which
were preserved delineations in the temple of Belus at Babylon."

<span id="img_007"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Babylonian Demon.
\[No. 93,089.\]](tn/007.png)  
Click to enlarge](img/007.png)  
Babylonian Demon. \[No. 93,089.\]  
</span>

\[THE SLAUGHTER OF THE QUEEN OF THE ABYSS.\]

"The person, who presided over them, was a woman named OMUROCA; which in
the Chaldean language is THALATTH; in Greek THALASSA, the sea; but which
might equally be interpreted the Moon. All things being in this
situation, Belus came, and cut the woman asunder: and of one half of her
he formed the earth, and of the other half the heavens; and at the same
time destroyed the animals within her. All this (he says) was an
allegorical description of nature."

\[THE CREATION OF MAN.\]

"For, the whole universe consisting of moisture, and animals being
generated therein, the deity above-mentioned <span
id="fr_5"></span>[6](blc17.htm#fn_5) took off his own head: upon which
the other gods mixed the blood, as it gushed out, with the earth; and
from whence were formed men. On this account it is that they are
rational and partake of divine knowledge."

\[BELUS CREATES THE UNIVERSE.\]

"This Belus, by whom they signify Jupiter, divided the darkness, and
separated the Heavens from the Earth, and reduced the universe to order.
But the animals not being able to bear the prevalence of light, died.
Belus upon this, seeing a vast space unoccupied, though by nature
fruitful, commanded one <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](blc17.htm#fn_6) of
the gods to take off his head, and to mix the blood with the earth; and
from thence to form other men and animals, which should be capable of
bearing the air. Belus formed also the stars, and the sun, and the moon,
and the five planets. Such, according to Polyhistor Alexander, is the
account which Berosus gives in his first book." (See Cory, *Ancient
Fragments*, London, 1832, pp. 24-26.)

In the sixth century of our era DAMASCIUS the SYRIAN, the last of the
Neo-Platonic philosophers, wrote in Greek in a work on the Doubts and
Solutions of the first Principles, in which he says: "But the
Babylonians, like the rest of the Barbarians, pass over in silence the
One principle of the Universe, and they conceive Two, TAUTHE and APASON;
making APASON the husband of TAUTHE, and denominating her the mother of
the gods. And from these proceeds an only-begotten son, MOYMIS, which I
conceive is no other than the Intelligible World proceeding from the two
principles. From these, also, another progeny is derived, DACHE and
DACHUS; and again, a third, KISSARE and ASSORUS, from which last three
others proceed, ANUS, and ILLINUS, and AUS. And of AUS and DAUCE is born
a son called Belus, who, they say, is the fabricator of the world, the
Demiurgus." (See Cory, *Ancient Fragments*, London, 1832, p. 318.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Seven Tablets of Creation. Description of Their
Contents](blc07)
