[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vig12)  [Next](vig14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="_Toc29619157">CHAPTER X</span>

GLUM now assumed a high position in the district. There was a man named
Gunnstein, who lived at Lón in Högardal, a great and rich man, reckoned
to be one of the most important persons in the land. He had a wife
called Hlif, and their son was Thorgrim, generally known as "Thorgrim
the son of Hlif," being called after his mother because she outlived his
father. She was a woman of a high spirit, and Thorgrim himself was all
that a man ought to be, and became eminent. Another son of theirs was
Grim, surnamed "Eyrarleggr," and their daughter was Halldora, who was a
beautiful woman of a gentle temper. She was esteemed to be about the
best match in the country both on account of her kindred and of her own
accomplishments and great qualities. Glum paid his addresses to her,
stating that he did not want the help of kinsmen to explain what his
family or his property and personal merits were. "All that you know well
enough, and I have set my mind on this marriage is so be that it is
agreeable to her friends." He received a favourable answer to his suit,
and Halldora was betrothed to him with a great portion; so the wedding
went of prosperously, and Glum’s position became one of more dignity
that it was before.  
        Thorvald was the son of Reim, who lived at Bard, in "the
Fleets:"  <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11.md) he had to wife Thurida,
the daughter of Thord of Höfdi. Their children were Klaufi and
Thorgerda, whom Thorarin of Espihole had married. Thorvald the crooked
of Grund wedded Thorkatla of Thiorsádal. Hlenni the Old, the son of
Ornolf "Wallet-back," dwelt at Vidines, and he had to wife Otkatla, the
daughter of Otkel of Thiorsádal. Gizor was the son of Kadal, and lived
at "The Tarns," in the valley of Eyjafirth; his wife was named Saldis,
and she was a worthy matron. Gizor was one of the most considerable
landowners, well to do in respect of property, with two daughters, named
Thordis and Herpruda, both handsome women, who were distinguished in
dress and appearance and were considered good matches. They grew up to
womanhood at home. Gizor’s brother was called Runolf, and he was the
father of Valgerda, mother of Eyiolf of Mödrufell. Thordis was Kadal’s
daughter, and she was married to Thorir of Espihole, and they had the
children who have been named before. Thorgrim, however, the son of
Thorir, although born in wedlock, was not the child of Thordis. He was a
brave and well conditioned man, and he set out to meet Gizor and ask
Thordis his daughter to wife for himself. His brothers and kinsmen too
were engaged in pressing this suit. The maiden’s relatives thought that
they ought all to have a voice in the disposal of their kinswoman, and
they all considered the proposal an excellent one; but notwithstanding
this Thorgrim was refused. It seemed to pepole in general that Thorgrim
had proposed a fair and equal match, and his brothers and kinsmen were
offended at his rejection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[1](vig13.htm#fr_11.md) As a general rule I have
not attempted to translate the proper names, but in this case and in
that of "the Tarns" I have given the corresponding English appelations.
The shallow pieces of water in the Essex marshes are still called
"Fleets," and "Tarn" is well known in the north of England.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](vig14.md)
