[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vig17)  [Next](vig19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="_Toc29619162">CHAPTER XV</span>

THEN Ingolf came out to Iceland and went to Thverá, and asked Glum to
take him in, which was granted. One day he said, "Now, Glum, I should
like you to look over my merchandize." So he did, and it seemed to him
that Ingolf had laid out his money well. Then Ingolf said, "You gave me
the capital for this voyage, and I consider all the goods as belonging
to you." "No," answered Glum, "what you have got is not enough for me to
take anything from you." "Here," answered Ingolf, "are some hangings
which I purchased for you--these you shall accept; and here is a
kirtle." "I will accept your gifts," replied Glum.  
        Another time Glum asked him if he wished to remain at home with
him, and Ingolf answered that his intention was not to part from him if
he had the choice o staying. "My stud-horses I will give you," he said,
and Glum replied, "The horses I will accept, and now to-day we will go
and find Thorkel, at Hamar." Thorkel received Glum well, and the latter
said, "You have wronged Ingolf, and now you must make it up to him by
giving him your daughter in marriage--he is a proper man for this match.
I will lay down some money for him, and I have proved him to be a worthy
fellow. If you do not act thus, you will see that you have made a bad
business of it." So Thorkel consented, and Ingolf got his wife and
settled down as a householder and a good useful man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI](vig19)
