[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vig16)  [Next](vig18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="_Toc29619161">CHAPTER XIV</span>

THERE was a man named Thorkel, who lived at Hamar. Ingolf went thither,
and met this man’s daughter, who was a handsome woman. Her father was
well enough off, but he was not a person of much consideration in the
country. Ingolf, however, attended properly to his duties as
over-looker, but he did not work as a craftsman so much as he had done,
and Márr spoke to him once about it saying, "I see that my father is not
pleased at your being often away from home." Ingolf gave a fair answer,
but it came to the same thing again, and Márr warned him again a second
and third time, but it was no use.  
        One evening it happened that he came home late, and when the men
had had their supper Glum said, "Now let us amuse ourselves, and let
each of us say what or whom he most relies on, and I will have first
choice. Well, I choose three things on which I most rely; the first is
my purse, the second is my axe, and the third is my larder." Then one
man after another made his choice, and Glum called out, "whom do you
chose, Ingolf?" His answer was, "Thorkel, of Hamar." Glum jumped up,
held up a the hilt of his sword, and going up to him said, "A pretty
sort of patron you have chosen." All men saw that Glum was wroth. He
went out, and Ingolf went with him, and then Glum said to him, "Go now
to your patron and tell him you have killed Kálf." "Why," replied he,
"how can I tell him this lie?" "You shall do as I please," answered
Glum, so they both went together, and Glum turned into the barn, where
he saw a calf before him. "Cut it’s head off," he cried, "and then go
southward across the river and tell Thorkel that you look to him alone
for protection, and show him your bloody sword as the token of the deed
you have done." Ingolf did this; went to Thorkel, and told him as news
how he had not forgooten the blow Kálf had given him, and how he had
killed him. The answer was, "You are a fool, and you have killed a good
man; get you gone as quick as you can, I do not choose that you should
be slain on my premises." Then Ingolf came back again to meet Glum, who
asked him "Well, how did your patron turn out?" "Not over well," said
he. "You will have trouble on your hands," remarked Glum, "if Kálf, of
Stockahlad should really be killed."  
        Now Glum himself had killed Kálf, at Stöckahlad, whilst Ingolf
was away, and had thus taken vengeance for him,  <span
id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13.md) and the following day Kálf’s death was
publicly known. Thorkel said at once that a fellow had come thither who
had taken the death on himself, so that everybody thought it was really
so. The winter passed on, and Glum sent Ingolf northward, to the house
of Einar, the son of Konál, and gave him nine hundred ells of cloth.
"You have had no wages," he said, "from me," but with your saving habits
you may turn this to good account, and as regards this matter which is
laid to your charge I will take care of that. It shall not hurt you; I
paid you off for your perverseness in this way, and when you come home
you may come and pay me a visit." Ingolf answered, "One thing I beg of
you, do not let the woman be married to any one else." "This, I promise
you," said Glum. Ingolf’s horses were left where they were. Einar, the
son of Konál, got Ingolf conveyed abroad, but Thorvald began a suit at
the Hegranes Thing for the slaughter of Kálf, and it looked as if Ingolf
would be found guilty. Glum was at the Thing, and some of Ingolf’s
kinsmen came to him, and asked him to look after the case, professing
their readiness to contribute to pay the fine for him. Glum told them,
"I will se to the suit without any fine being paid."  
        When the court went out to sit, and the defendant was called on
for his defence, Glum stated that the suit was null and void, "for you
have proceeded against the wrong man; I did the deed." Then he named his
witnesses, who were to certify that the suit was void; "for though
Ingolf did kill the ’calf’ in the barn, I did not make any charge
against him for that. Now, I will offer an atonement more according to
the worth of the man killed, ant according to the pride of you men of
Espihole." So he did, and the people left the Thing.  
        Ingolf was abroad that winter, and could stand it no longer, but
turned his cash into goods, and purchased valuable articles, and
tapestry hangings of rare quality. Glum had given him a good cloak, and
he exchanged that for a scarlet kirtle. The summer that he had sailed
there came out to Iceland the man called Thiodolf, whose mother lived at
Æsustad. He visited Hamar, and fell in with Helga. One day Glum was
riding up to Hole, and a he went down the hill at Saurbæ, Thiodolf met
him. Glum said to him, "I do not like your visits to Hamar; I mean
myself to provide for Helga’s marriage, and if you do not give this up I
shall challenge you to the ‘Holmgang.’" He answered that he was not
going to math himself with Glum, and so he left off going thither.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[1](vig17.htm#fr_13.md) This sentence appears to be
as sort of gloss introduced in one of the transcripts from the original
MS, but I have inserted it in the text, as it is essential to the
understanding of this strange story. It should be observed that there is
a double pun in the Icelandic which cannot be represented in a
translation. Not only was the man’s name Kálf, but he lived at
Stocka-*Hlad*, and the calf which Ingolf was made to kill was in the
*hlada*, or barn.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV](vig18.md)
