[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vig15)  [Next](vig17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="_Toc29619160">CHAPTER XIII</span>

IT happened one summer, at the Althing, that the Northern men and those
of the West-firths met one another on the wrestling ground in a match
according to their districts. The Northerners had rather the worst of
it, and their leader was Márr, the son of Glum. Now a certain man of the
name of Ingolf, the son of Thorvald, came up, whose father lived at
Rangavellir. Márr addressed him thus--"You are a strong-limbed fellow,
and ought to be sturdy; do me the favour of going into the match and
taking hold." his answer was--"I will do so for your sake," and
forthwith the man he grappled with went down, and thus it was with the
second, and the third, so that the Northerners were well pleased. Then
said Márr, "If you want a good word on my part, I shall be ready to help
you. What may be your plans?" "I have no plans," he answered, "but I had
an inclination to go northward and get work." "Well," rejoined Márr, "I
should like you to go with me; I will get you a place." Ingolf had a
good horse of his own, which he called b the name of "Snækoll," and he
went northward to Thverá, after the Thing was over, and staid there some
time. Márr asked him one day what he intended to do. "There is and
over-looker wanted here, who ought to be somewhat handy; for instance,
here is this sledge to be finished, and if you can do that you can do
something worth having." "I should be too glad of such a place," said
Ingolf, "but it has sometimes happened that my horses have caused
trouble in the pastures of the cattle." "No one will talk about that
here," answered Márr; so Ingiolf set to work on the sledge. Glum came
up, and looked at what he was doing. "That is a good piece of work," he
observed. "What are your plans?" Ingolf answered, "I have no plans."
Glum replied, "I want an over-looker, are you used to that sort of
business?" "Not much, in such a place as this, but I should be glad to
stay with you." "Why should it not be so?" said Glum; "for I see that
you and Márr get on well together." When Márr came home Ingolf told him
what had passed. "I should like it much," he answered, "if it turns out
well, and I will take care, if anything displeases my father, to tell
you of it three times; but if you do not set it right then I must stop."
So Ingolf took to his business, and Glum was pleased with him.  
        One day Glum and Ingolf, his over-looker, went to a horse-fight;
the latter rode a mare, but the horse ran along by their side. The sport
was good; Kálf, of Stockahlad was there, and he had an old working horse
who beat all the others. He called out, "why don’t they bring into the
ring that fine-jawed beast of the Thverá people?" "They are no fair
match," said Glum, "your cart-horse and that stallion." "Ah!" exclaimed
Kálf, "the real reason why you will not fight him is because he has no
spirit in him. It may be the old proverb is proved true, ‘the cattle are
like their master.’" "You know nothing about that," answered Glum, "and
I will not refuse on Ingolf’s part, but the fight must not go on longer
than he chooses." "He will probably know well enough, said Kálf, "that
little will be done against your wishes," The two horses were led out,
and fought well, and all thought Ingolf’s horse had the best of it; Glum
then chose to separate them, and they rode home. Ingolf remained that
year in his place, and Glum was well satisfied with him.  
        Not long after this there was a meeting at Diupadal, whither
Glum, and Ingolf with his horse, came; Kálf also was there. This last
man was a friend of the people of Espihole, and he demanded that they
should now let the horses fight it out. Glum said it depended on Ingolf,
but that he himself was against it; howerer, he did not like to back out
of it, and the horses were led out accordingly. Kálf spurred his horse
on, but Ingolf’s horse had the best of it in every contest. Then Kálf
struck Ingolf’s horse over the ears with his staff in such a way as to
make him giddy, but immediately afterwards he went at his adversary
again. Glum came up, and fair fighting was restore, till in the end
Kálf’s horse bolted from the ring. Then there wars a great shout, and at
last Kálf smote Ingolf with his stick. People interfered, and Glum said,
"Let us take no note of such a matter as this; this is the end of every
horse-fight." Márr, on the other hand, said to Ingolf, "Depend upon it,
my father does not intend that any disgrace shall attach to you for this
blow."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](vig17.md)
