[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vig21)  [Next](vig23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="_Toc29619166">CHAPTER XIX</span>

WHILST Bárd was away Halli took care of his property, and got some
timber cut in a wood in Midárdal which belonged to him, and Bárd brought
out a good deal of timber with him. Sometimes he stayed at his own home,
and sometimes with his father. Bárd said he would go and fetch his
timber home, when Halli remarked, "I would not have you go yourself, for
it is not good to trust that father and son." "Oh," said Bárd, "nobody
will know that I am going." So he went, and a servant with him, to fetch
the timber, and they took a good many horses with them, but his wife Una
had gone to Vidines to see her sister Oddkatla, and Bárd went thither on
his way. Hlenni begged him to send some one else into the wood, and to
stay where he was himself; it seemed more prudent to do so, but Bárd
answered there was no need of it.  
        The two sisters went with him out of the homestead, but when
they were returning Una looked back at him over her shoulder, and fell
down in a swoon. Her sister asked her what she had seen? "I saw dead men
coming to meet Bárd," said she; "he must be fey. We shall never see one
another again." Bárd and his men made their way into the wood, and when
they were there, they got their loads of timber together, and tied up
their horses, but a great mist had come on. Very early that morning the
shepherd from Thverà had been a-foot, and Vigfuss met him and asked him
for tidings, as he often did. "It is wonderful to me," he said, "that
you never fail to find your sheep in such a fog as there is now." The
shepherd answered, "It is a small matter for me to find my flock, but
those men whom I saw in the wood in the morning had more trouble to find
their horses, which were really standing close to them. They were fine
looking fellows; one was in a green kirtle, and they had shields by
their sides." Vigfuss asked him if he knew the man? He said he thought
it was Bárd, for he was the owner of the wood where they were. "Get my
three horses," said Vigfuss. There were two Easterlings staying there
whom Vigfuss asked to ride with him, saying that he was going to the
warm spring; but when he got out of the homestead he made as if he would
ride southward over Laugardal. The Easterlings asked him, "Whither are
you riding now?" "On some business of my own first," said he, so he rode
a good way in front of them, and they went southward above the
enclosures, until they saw Bárd coming out of the wood with his loaded
horses. Bárd’s servant saw some one riding after them, and remarked,
"These men are riding sharp after us." "Who is that?" said Bárd. "It is
Vigfuss," he replied, "and I think we had better get away from him.
There is no disgrace in doing so, whilst we know nothing of their
intentions." Bárd said, "He will not set on me with three men, if you
are not with me." "I would sooner go with the horses," answered the man,
"and do you ride to Vidines. You cannot be blamed for going where you
have business, and you do not know for a certainty what they who are
riding after us want, thought Hlenni told you not to trust them." Bárd
told him then, "You shall ride on forward and, if I am delayed, tell our
men what is going on, for it is likely that I and Vigfuss shall be some
time about it, if we look one another fairly in the face; and he is too
good a man to set on me with three against one. If, on the other hand,
we are two and they are three, they will take the benefit of the
difference in strength."  
        The servant did what Bárd told him, and Bárd himself unstrapped
his shield, and got ready in the best way he could. When they came up he
asked what they wanted? Vigfuss said that both of them would not quit
the meeting-place alive. Bárd replied that he was ready, if they two
only were to play the game out; "but there is no manhood in it if three
are to set on one." The Easterlings then said they would have staid at
home if they had known their errand, but that they could not take part
unless, in consequence of Bárds companion having ridden off, men should
come to his assistance. Vigfuss told them to see first how matters went.
So he and Bárd fought for some time without either being wounded, but it
looked worse for Vigfuss, inasmuch as he had to give ground every time
without being able to make a single blow tell. Bárd had his sword, and
defended himself admirable without being touched. In the mean time the
Easterlings thought it would be a bad business if Vigfuss should be
slain, while they stood by doing nothing, and if men should come up to
help Bárd. They they rushed at him, so that he was dying when Hlenni and
his men got there. Vigfuss and his friends rode home, but Glum was ill
pleased with what they had done, and said that the difficulties in the
district would be greatly increased. Halli went to his foster-son Einar,
at Saurbæ, and asked him to take the case in hand, and he admitted that
he was bound to avenge his kinsman and foster-brother. Then they rode to
Thorarin, and asked for his support; he replied that he knew no man he
would rather have to deal with than Vigfuss, and they confirmed with
oaths their alliance with reference to that and all other matters. The
cause went to the Thing, and attempts were made to compound it, but
there was so much in the way that it was difficult to effect a
compromise, as both the men of Mödrufell and those of Espihole, who
resisted it, were bold in spirit, and well versed in the law. The case
was closed by a verdict against the Easterlings, and by money being
given to allow Vigfuss a safe conduct. He was to have three summers to
get a passage out, and to have three places of refuge in each year, but
he was an outlaw on peril of his life elsewhere, and not allowed to be
at home on account of the sacredness of the place. However, he stayed
long at Upsal, though people thought he was in other quarters of the
island, and he would not go abroad within the period fixed. Then he
became completely outlawed, and Glum kept him concealed, but outlawed
men were not allowed to live there because Frey, who owned the temple,
did not permit it. So matters went on for six winters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX](vig23)
