[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vig30)  [Next](vig32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="_Toc29619175">CHAPTER XXVIII</span>

IT happened one summer that the brothers Gudmund and Einar were riding
back from the Thing, when Glum invited some guests to his house, and he
sent men up to Öxnadal-heath and asked those brothers also, professing
that he wished to be reconciled to them wholly and entirely. "For," said
he, "on account of old age I am fit for nothing, and I will not invite
them only to a meal." Glum was then blind, but he caused a look-out to
be kept for their coming. Gudmund wished to accept the invitation, but
Einar did not; and each of them rode on his own side of the river, till
Glum was told that one of the two troops was coming that way. "Then,"
said he, "Einar will not accept the invitation; he is so distrustful
that he will put confidence in no man." It is reported that Einar called
out to Gudmund and said, "If you go thither this evening, I will be sure
to be there tomorrow;" but Gudmund reflected on those words and said,
"Well, you must mean that you will have to take measures for avenging my
death;" and so he turned round and followed Einar. It was told to Glum
that neither of the two was coming. "Then it is a bad business,"
exclaimed he, "for if I had gone to meet them, I had made up my mind not
to miss both of them." He had a drawn sword under his cloak. So this was
the last thing which passed between Glum and the men of Eyjafirth.  
        When Christianity was introduced in these parts Glum was
baptized, and lived three winters afterwards. He was confirmed in his
last illness by Bishop Kol, and died in white vestments. Márr, Glum’s
son, lived at Forn-Hagi, and caused a church to be built there, in which
Glum and Márr himself, when he died, were buried. Many other people also
were buried there, because for a long time there was but that one church
in Hörgárdal. People relate that for twenty years Glum was the greatest
chief on Eyjafirth; and for another twenty years there were no greater
men there, though some were on an equal footing with him. They say too
that of all the valiant men that have been in this land he had the
noblest spirit. And so ends the Story of Glum.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Supplementary Note](vig32)
