[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bar028)  [Next](bar030.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z4K8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Talmud*, by Joseph Barclay, \[1878\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IX.

1\. The rue, and the sorrel with spreading leaves, and the wild savory,
the coriander of the mountains, and the parsley of the marshes, and the
rocket of the desert, are free from tithes; and they may be bought from
all men in the Sabbatical year, because nothing like them is legally
guarded. Rabbi Judah said, "the sprouts of the mustard are allowed,
because transgressors are not suspected for taking them from a guarded
place." Rabbi Simon said, "all vegetables that sprout again are allowed,
excepting the sprouts of cabbage, because there is not their like
amongst the greens of the field." But the Sages say, "whatever sprouts
again is forbidden."

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

2\. There are three countries to be public property in the Sabbatical
year: Judah and beyond Jordan and Galilee; and each is divided into
three parts: Upper Galilee, Lower Galilee, and the Vale. From the
village of Hananiah and upwards, every part in which the sycamore tree
does not grow is Upper Galilee. And from the village of Hananiah and
lower down, where any sycamore tree grows, is Lower Galilee. And the
neighbourhood of Tiberias is the Vale. And in Judah, the mountains, the
plain, and the vale, and the plain of Lydda is as the plain of the
south. And its mountains are as the king's mountain. <span
id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_76.md) From Bethhoron and to the sea is one
province.

3\. "And wherefore did the Sages say three countries?" "That men might
eat during the Sabbatical year in every one of them, till the last
fruits be finished in it." R. Simon said, "they did not say three
countries, they said only in Judah." And all the other countries are
reckoned as the king's mountain; and all countries are reckoned the same
for olives and dates.

4\. Men may eat so long as there is any fruit legally free, but they
must not eat of that which is legally guarded. Rabbi José "allowed it,
even when guarded." They may eat fruit so long as it is found in bird's
nests, and such fruit as is twice produced in each year, but they must
not eat of winter fruit. R. Judah "allowed it at all times, if it
ripened before the summer ended."

5\. "If men pressed three sorts of fruit in one barrel?" R. Eliezer
said, "they may eat of the first." R. Joshua said, "even of the last."
Rabban Gamaliel said, "everything, the species of which is finished
growing in the field, its species is to be removed from the
barrel." <span id="fr_78"></span>[2](#fn_77.md) Rabbi Simon said, "all
greens are reckoned as one. They are to be cleared away from the house."
They may eat of the leeks till the teasels have ceased growing in the
valley of Beth-Netopha.

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

6\. "He who gathers fresh herbs?" "He may use them till their sap dry
out." "And he who binds the dry in bundles?" "He may use them till the
second rain descends." <span id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_78.md) "The leaves
of reeds and the leaves of vines?" "They may be used till they fall from
their stems." "And he who binds the dry in bundles?" "He may use them
till the second rain descends. Rabbi Akiba said, "they may be used by
all persons till the second rain descends."

7\. "Like to this rule is his case who rented a house to his neighbour
till the rains?" "This means till the second rain descends." "He who by
his vow cannot get assistance from his neighbour till the rains?" "This
means till the second rain descends." "When may the poor enter into the
gardens?" <span id="fr_80"></span>[2](#fn_79.md) "When the second rain
descends." "When may they use and burn the stubble and straw of the
Sabbatical year?" "When the second rain descends."

8\. "A man had fruit of the Sabbatical year, and the time came for
clearing it out from his house?" "He may divide to every one victuals
for three meals; and the poor may eat the fruit after the clearing of it
out, but not the rich." The words of Rabbi Judah. Rabbi José said, "the
poor and the rich are alike, they may eat it after it is cleared out."

9\. "A man had fruits of the Sabbatical year, whether they fell to him
by inheritance, or were given to him by gift?" R. Eliezer said, "let
them be given to those who may eat them." But the Sages say, "the
transgressor must not profit, but let them be sold to those who may eat
them, and let their price be divided to every man." "He who eats dough
of the Sabbatical year before the heave-offering be separated from it?"
"He is guilty of death."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_76"></span>[79:1](bar029.htm#fr_77.md) The king's mountain is
perhaps Mount Ephraim, or the mountain range over the plain of Sharon.
It is also suggested that it might have been the mountains round
Kirjathjearim (Abu Goosh?). It contained Cephar Bish, Cephar Sheclaim,
Cephar Dikraia, etc.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[79:2](bar029.htm#fr_78.md) Others read "and the
decision is as his word."

<span id="fn_78"></span>[80:1](bar029.htm#fr_79.md) The second or the
"latter" rain (Joel ii. 23), called *Malkosh*, falls in Spring chiefly
during the months of March and April.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80:2](bar029.htm#fr_80.md) Lev. xxiii. 22; Deut.
xxiv. 19.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](bar030.md)
