[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bar049)  [Next](bar051) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z4K8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud*, by Joseph Barclay, \[1878\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

### CHAPTER II.

1\. At first every one who wished to (cleanse) the altar, cleansed it.
When they were many, they ran and mounted the ascent, and each one, who
at the middle outstripped his companion by four cubits, won *it*. If two
were equal the president said to them, "lift your fingers." <span
id="fr_201"></span>[1](#fn_198) "And what is that?" "They lifted one or
two fingers, but no one lifted the thumb in the Sanctuary."

2\. It happened that two were equal, and running and mounting the
ascent, one of them thrust his companion, so that he fell, and his leg
was broken. And when the great Sanhedrin saw that they were getting into
danger, they decreed that they should not cleanse the altar save by lot.
There were four lots, and this was the first lot.

3\. The second lot was: Who should slay? Who sprinkle? Who should take
the ashes from the inner altar? and who should take the ashes from the
candlestick? and who should carry the members to the ascent? the head
and the right foot, and the hind feet, the tail, and the left foot, the
breast, and the throat, and the two sides, and the inwards, and the fine
flour, and the pancakes, and the wine. Thirteen priests discharged this
lot. Said Ben Asai in the presence of R. Akiba from the mouth of Rabbi
Joshua, "like to its way of motion" (when alive).

4\. The third lot <span id="fr_202"></span>[2](#fn_199) was for new men
who came to offer incense, and they cast the lots. The fourth lot was
for new men with the old, who should carry the members from the ascent
to the altar.

5\. The daily offering was with nine, ten, eleven, twelve, priests; not
less and not more. "How?" "Itself with nine:

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

at the feast of Tabernacles in the hand of one, a glass of water there
is ten. The evening offering with eleven, itself with nine, and in the
hands of two, two faggots of wood. On Sabbath, eleven; itself with nine,
and two, in their hands two fragments of incense of the shewbread. And
on the Sabbath in the feast of Tabernacles in the hand of one a glass of
water."

6\. The ram was offered with eleven; the flesh with five, the inner
part, and the fine flour and the wine, to each two and two.

7\. The bullock was offered with twenty-four priests. "The head and the
right foot?" "The head with one, and the foot with two." "The chine and
the left foot?" "The tail with two, and the left foot with two." "The
breast and the throat?" "The breast with one, and the throat with three,
the two hind feet with two, and the two sides with two, the inner parts
and the fine flour, and the wine, each with three and three." "Of which
is that said?" "Of the offering for the whole congregation." "But for
the offerings of an individual?" "If he wished to offer, he might
offer." "For the skinning and cutting up?" "For these all were equal."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_198"></span>[121:1](bar050.htm#fr_201) *i.e.* Cast lots,
which was done by placing the priests in a row, and bidding their to
hold up their fingers. After fixing on a certain number, the cap of one
of them was taken off. With this priest the reckoning began, and
proceeded till the prearranged number fell on some one of them; and his
was the lot. Particular care was taken to count the fingers which were
held up, and not to number their persons, as this was considered
unlawful. (1 Chron. xxi. 1.)

<span id="fn_199"></span>[121:2](bar050.htm#fr_202) The third lot for
burning incense was the most important. It was always done by a fresh
man, so that a priest might burn incense only once during his lifetime.
(Luke i. 9; Rev. viii. 3, 4.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](bar051)
