[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bar004)  [Next](bar006.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z4K8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Talmud*, by Joseph Barclay, \[1878\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# INTRODUCTION.

### CHAPTER I.

<span class="small">Compilation of the Talmud—Rabbi Judah the
Holy—Mishna—Gemara—General Survey of the Six Orders or Volumes of the
Mishna.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> Talmud (teaching) comprises the
Mishna and the Gemara. The Mishna ("learning" or "second law") was,
according to Jewish tradition, delivered to Moses on Mount Sinai. "Rabbi
Levi, the son of Chama, says, Rabbi Simon, the son of Lakish, says, what
is that which is written, 'I will give thee tables of stone, and a law
and commandments which I have written, that thou mayest teach
them'? <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) The Tables are the ten
commandments; the Law is the written law; and the commandment is the
Mishna; 'which I have written' means the prophets and sacred writings;
'that thou mayest teach them' means the Gemara. It teaches us that they
were all given to Moses from Mount Sinai." From Moses the Mishna was
transmitted by oral tradition through forty "Receivers," until the time
of Rabbi Judah the Holy. These Receivers were qualified by ordination to
hand it on from generation to generation. Abarbanel and Maimonides
disagree as to the names of these Receivers. While the temple still
stood as a centre of unity to the nation, it was considered unlawful to
reduce these traditions to writing. But when the Temple was burned, and
the Jews were dispersed amongst other peoples, it was considered politic
to form them into a written code, which should serve as a bond of union,
and keep alive the spirit of patriotism. The Jewish leaders saw the
effect of Constitutions

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

and Pandects in consolidating nations—the advantage of written laws over
arbitrary decisions. Numberless precedents of case law, answering to our
common law, were already recorded: and the teachings of the Hebrew
jurisconsults, or "Responsa prudentium," which were held to be binding
on the people, had been preserved from former ages. All these traditions
Rabbi Judah the Holy undertook to reduce into one digest. And this
laborious work he completed about A.D. 190, or more than a century after
the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus. Rabbi Judah was born on the day
that Rabbi Akibah died. Solomon is said to have foretold the event: "One
sun ariseth, and one sun goeth down." Akibah was the setting and Judah
the rising sun. The Mishna of Rabbi Judah, afterwards revised by Abba
Areka in Sura, is the text of the Babylon Talmud. The commentaries
written on this text by various Rabbis in the neighbourhood of Babylon,
until the close of the fifth century, are called the Gemara
(completion); and are published in twelve folio volumes, called the
Babylon Talmud—the Talmud most esteemed by the Jews. The Jerusalem
Talmud contains commentaries written partly by Rabbis in Jamnia and
partly in Tiberias, where they were completed by Rabbi Jochanan in the
beginning of the fourth century. As now published it has only four out
of the six orders or books of the Mishna, with the treatise Niddah from
the sixth. In the time of Maimonides it contained five orders. On
twenty-six treatises it has no Gemara, though in the treatise on shekels
the Gemara of Jerusalem is used for the Babylon Talmud. The six books of
the Mishna are subdivided into sixty-three treatises, in the following
manner:—

#### BOOK I.

This book, called <span class="smallcaps">Order of Seeds</span>,
contains the following treatises:—

1\. *Blessings*, together with prayers and thanksgivings, with the times
and places in which they are to be used.

2\. *A Corner of a Field* (Lev. xxiii. 22; Deut. xxiv. 19)

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

treats of the corners of the field to be left for the poor to glean
them—the forgotten sheaves, olives, and grapes—and of giving alms, etc.

3\. *Doubtful* treats of the doubt about the tithes being paid, as the
Jews were not allowed to use anything without its being first tithed.

4\. *Diversities* (Lev. xix. 19; Deut. xxii. 9-11) treats of the
unlawful mixing or joining together things of a different nature or
kind—of sowing seeds of a different species in one bed—grafting a scion
on a stock of a different kind, suffering cattle of different kinds to
come together.

5\. *The Sabbatical Year* (Exod. xxiii. 11; Lev. xxv. 4) treats of the
laws which regulated the land as it lay fallow and rested.

6\. *Heave Offerings* (Num. xviii. 8) treats of separating the heave
offering—who may eat it, and who may not eat of it—of its pollutions,
etc.

7\. *The First Tithes* (Lev. xxvii. 30; Num. xviii. 28) treats of the
law of tithes for the priests.

8\. *The Second Tithes* (Deut. xiv. 22; xxvi. 14) treats of those which
were to be carried to Jerusalem and there eaten, or to be redeemed and
the money spent in Jerusalem in peace offerings.

9\. *Cake of Dough* (Num. xv. 20) treats of setting apart a cake of
dough for the priests; also, from what kind of dough the cake must be
separated.

10\. *Uncircumcised Fruit* (Lev. xix. 23) treats of the unlawfulness of
eating the fruit of any tree till the fifth year. The first three years
it is uncircumcised; the fourth year it is holy to the Lord; the fifth
year it may be eaten.

11\. *First Fruits* (Exod. xxiii. 19; Deut. xxvi. 1) treats of what
fruits were to be offered in the Temple, and in what manner; also of the
baskets in which they were to be carried.

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

#### BOOK II.

##### THE ORDER OF THE FESTIVALS.

1\. *Sabbath* treats of the laws relating to the seventh day.

2\. *Mixtures*, or combinations, treats of the extension of boundaries,
whereby all the inhabitants of the court, or entry, where the mixture is
made, are counted as one family inhabiting one domicile; and are
therefore allowed to carry victuals from one house to another. It also
treats of the mixtures for a Sabbath day's journey, whereby the distance
may be extended for an additional 2000 cubits.

3\. *Passovers* treats of all rites and ceremonies relating to the
Paschal Lamb.

4\. *Shekels* (Exod. xxx. 13) treats of the half shekel, which every
Jew, rich or poor, was obliged to pay every year to the daily sacrifice.

5\. *Day of Atonement* treats of the solemnities peculiar to it.

6\. *Tabernacles* teaches how they are to be built, and how to be used.

7\. *The egg laid on a Festival* treats of the works which may or may
not be done on any of the Festivals, which are called days of holy
convocation, on which no servile work may be done.

8\. *New Year* treats of the laws and solemnities of the feast of the
New Year, as also of the feasts of the New Moons.

9\. *Fasts* treats of the various fasts throughout the year.

10\. *The Roll* treats of the feast of Purim, and gives instructions how
and in what manner the Book of Esther and other Lessons are to be read.
The Gemara directs Jews to get so drunk on this feast, that they cannot
discern the difference between "Blessed be Mordecai and cursed be
Haman," and "Cursed be Mordecai and blessed be Haman."

11\. *Minor Feasts* treats of the works, that may and that may not be
lawfully done on the 2d, 3d, 4th, 5th, and 6th days, when the first and
seventh are holy; these intermediate days being lesser festivals.

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

12\. *Sacrifices on Festivals* treats of the three great festivals, when
all the males were obliged to appear before the Lord, and of the
sacrifices which they were to bring. It also lays down rules for the
dissolution of vows, which it says "are like mountains hanging on a
hair, for the text is slender and the constitutions many."

#### BOOK III.

##### ON WOMEN.

1\. *Brother's Widow* (Deut. xxv. 5-11) treats of the law obliging a
brother to marry the relict of his deceased brother; also, when the
obligation is to take place, and the ceremonies to be used at its
performance.

2\. *Marriage Settlements* treats of dowries and women who happen to
obtain estates, either real or personal. From this tract the baptism of
infant proselytes can be proved.

3\. *Vows* (Num. xxx. 4-16) shows when vows are binding and when null
and void. When a married woman makes a vow the husband can confirm or
annul it. This tract points out what vows fall under his cognizance and
what do not.

4\. *The Nazarite* (Num. vi. 21) treats of the laws relating to the
different sorts of Nazarites.

5\. *Trial of Jealousy* (Num. v. 11-31) treats of the mode of trial and
punishment of criminals. Men may go home to their wives from voluntary
wars, but not from wars of command. This tract shows the miserable state
of the Jews at the destruction of the second Temple, and at the future
advent of the Messiah.

6\. *Divorces* treats of the laws relating to divorces, also the
formalities to be observed both before and after they are given. A man
may divorce his wife if she spoil his broth, or if he find another more
handsome.

7\. *Betrothing* treats of the laws of espousals and some other previous
rites of marriage. It commands sons to be taught suitable trades. It
states that all ass-drivers are

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

wicked, camel-drivers are honest, sailors are pious, physicians are
destined for hell, and butchers are company for Amalek.

#### BOOK IV.

##### ON DAMAGES.

1\. *First Gate*, so called because in the East law is often
administered in the gateway of a city. It treats of all such damages as
may be received from man or beast. It assesses damages done by a beast
according to the benefit which the beast receives. If it eat a peck of
dates its owner would be fined for a peck of barley, as dates are not
more nourishing for a beast than barley.

2\. *The Middle Gate* treats of laws of usury and trusts, of letting out
on hire, of landlord and tenant, etc.

3\. *Last Gate* treats of the laws of commerce and co-partnership, of
buying and selling, of the laws of inheritance and the right of
succession.

4\. *Sanhedrin* treats of the great national senate.

5\. *Stripes* treats of false witnesses, of the law of the forty stripes
save one, of those who were bound to fly to the cities of refuge.

6\. *Oaths* explains the laws for administering oaths; when an oath is
to be admitted between contending parties who are qualified to take
them. In Hilchoth Eduth. ix. 1 it is taught that ten sorts of persons
are disqualified—women, slaves, children, idiots, deaf persons, the
blind, the wicked, the despised, relations, and those interested in
their evidence.

7\. *Evidences* are a collection of many important decisions gathered
from the testimonies of distinguished Rabbis. It is observable that the
decisions of the School of Shammai are more rigorous than those of the
School of Hillel, from whence it is inferred that the former adhered
more closely to Scripture, the latter to tradition. The former were the
Scribes, and are now represented by the Karaites, who reject the Talmud.

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

8\. *Idolatry*, or the worship of stars and meteors, treats of the way
to avoid this grievous sin.

9\. *The Fathers* contains a history of those who handed down the Oral
Law, also many maxims and proverbs.

10\. *Punishment* treats of the punishment of those disobedient to the
Sanhedrin (Deut. xvii. 8-11).

#### BOOK V.

##### ON HOLY THINGS.

1\. *Sacrifices* treats of the nature and quality of the offerings; the
time, the place, and the persons, by whom they ought to be killed,
prepared, and offered.

2\. *Meat Offerings* treats of the flour, oil, and wine, and the wave
loaves.

3\. *Unconsecrated Things* treats of what is clean and unclean, of not
eating the sinew that shrank, and not killing the dam and her young in
one day (Deut. xxii. 6).

4\. *First Born* treats of their redemption by money, and their being
offered in sacrifice; also of the tithes of all manner of cattle.

5\. *Estimations* (Lev. xxvii. 2) treats of the way in which things
devoted to the Lord are to be valued in order to be redeemed for
ordinary use; also, how a priest is to value a field which a person has
sanctified.

6\. *Exchanges* (Lev. xxvii. 10, 33) treats of the way exchanges are to
be effected between sacred things.

7\. *Cutting off* treats of offenders being cut off from the Lord.

8\. *Trespass* (Num. v. 6, 8) treats of things partaking of the nature
of sacrilege. It asserts that if a man take away a consecrated stone or
beam he commits no trespass. If he give it to his companion he commits a
trespass, but his companion commits none. If he build it into his house
he commits no trespass till he lives in the house long enough to gain
the value of an half-farthing. If he take away a consecrated
half-farthing he commits no trespass. If he

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

give it to his companion he commits a trespass, but his companion
commits none. If he give it to a bath-keeper he commits a trespass
though he does not bathe, because the bath-keeper says to him, "See, the
bath is open; go in and bathe."

9\. *The Daily Sacrifice* treats of the morning and evening offerings.

10\. *The Measurements* treats of the measurements of the Temple.

11\. *Birds’ Nests* treats of the mistakes about doves and beasts
brought into the Temple for sacrifice.

#### BOOK VI.

##### ON PURIFICATIONS.

1\. *Vessels* treats of those which convey uncleanness (Lev. xi. 33).

2\. *Tents* (Num. xix. 14) treats of tents and houses retaining
uncleanness, how persons who enter them become unclean, and how they are
to be cleansed.

3\. *Plagues of Leprosy* treats of leprosy of men, garments, or
dwellings, how their pollution is conveyed, and how they are to be
purified.

4\. *The Red Heifer* directs how she is to be burned, and how her ashes
are to be used in purifying.

5\. *Purifications* teaches how purifications are to be effected.

6\. *Pools of Water* (Num. xxxi. 23) treats of their construction, and
the quantity of water necessary for cleansing.

7\. *Separation* of women.

8\. *Liquors* that dispose seeds and fruits to receive pollution (Lev.
xi. 38).

9\. *Issues* that cause pollution.

10\. *Baptism* on the day of uncleanness (Lev. xxii. 6).

11\. *Hands* treats of the washing of hands before eating <span
class="smallcaps">bread</span>, though dry fruits are allowed to be
eaten without such washing.

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

12\. *Stalks of Fruit which convey Uncleanness* treats of fruits growing
out of the earth, which have a stalk and no husk. They can be polluted
and can pollute, but may not be compounded with anything that was
unclean before. If they have neither stalks nor husks they neither can
be polluted nor can they pollute. It also treats of the hair and wool
that grows on some fruits, and the beards of barley, etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1:1](bar005.htm#fr_0.md) Exod. xxiv. 12.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II.](bar006.md)
