[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bar071)  [Next](bar073) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z4K8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud*, by Joseph Barclay, \[1878\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

### CHAPTER III.

1\. There are more weighty rules for holy things, than for the
heave-offering. Because vessels may be baptized in vessels for the
heave-offering, but not for holy things. The outside and inside and
handle (are reckoned separately) for the heave-offering, but not for
holy things. He who carries that which defiles by treading upon it, may
carry the heave-offering but not the holy flesh. Treading on the
garments of those who eat the heave-offering defiles for the holy flesh.
The measure of the holy flesh is not as the measure of the
heave-offering. Because for the holy flesh one must loose his garments
and dry himself, and baptize and afterwards bind them up. But in the
heave-offering he can bind them up and afterwards baptize himself.

2\. Vessels completed in purity must be baptized for holy things, but
not for the heave-offering. A vessel unites whatever is inside to holy
things, but not to the heave-offering. The fourth degree of legal
uncleanness <span id="fr_363"></span>[1](#fn_358) is disallowed in holy
things, and the third degree in the heave-offering. In the
heave-offering, if one of the hands be unclean, its fellow may be clean,
but in holy things one must baptize both hands; because each renders its
fellow unclean for holy things, but not for the heave-offering.

3\. Men may eat with unwashen hands the dry meat of the heave-offering,
but not the holy flesh. The first day mourner, and he who failed in
atonement, have need of baptism for the holy flesh, but not for the
heave-offering.

4\. There are weighty rules for the heave-offering, because in Judah men
are credited with the purity of wine and oil during the whole year. And
in the time of wine-pressing and oil-pressing (men are credited) even
for the

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

heave-offering. When the time for wine and oil pressing has passed over,
and a barrel of wine is brought for the heave-offering, it must not be
received. But one may let it stand over for the wine-pressing next year.
But if one said, "I put into it a quarter log of holy wine," it is
credited. "Jugs of wine and jugs of oil which are mixed?" "They are
credited in the time of wine-pressing and oil-pressing, and seventy days
before that time."

5\. From Modiyith <span id="fr_364"></span>[1](#fn_359) and
inwards, <span id="fr_365"></span>[2](#fn_360) men are credited for the
purity of earthen vessels. From Modiyith and outwards they are not
credited. "How?" "The potter, when he is selling pots, comes inwards
from Modiyith." One says, "this is the potter," and "these the pots,"
and "these the purchasers," "it is credited." "When he went outwards?"
"It is not credited."

6\. The tax-gatherers when they enter the house, and also the
tax-gatherers when they restore the vessels, are credited in saying, "we
did not touch them." And in Jerusalem they are credited in holy things
(that they did not defile them), and at the time of the feast they are
credited even in the heave-offering.

7\. "He who opened his barrel of wine, <span
id="fr_366"></span>[3](#fn_361) and commenced with his dough for the use
of the feast?" R. Judah said, "he may finish it" (after the feast). But
the Sages say, "he must not finish it." When the feast was over, the
priests looked round for the purity of the Temple court. If the feast
ended on Friday, they did not look round for honour to the approaching
Sabbath. R. Judah said, "even they did not look round on Thursday,
because the priests are not then idle."

8\. "How did they look round for the purity of the court?" "The priests
baptized the vessels, which were in the Sanctuary, and used to say to
the people, 'Watch and do not touch the table and the candlestick, lest
you render them unclean.'" All the vessels in the Sanctuary were double
and treble, because if the first became unclean, they could

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

bring duplicates instead of them. "All the vessels which were in the
Sanctuary required baptism <span id="fr_367"></span>[1](#fn_362) except
the golden altar, and the brazen altar, because they are as earth." The
words of R. Eliezer. But the Sages say, "because they were overlaid."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_358"></span>[173:1](bar072.htm#fr_363) There are reckoned
six degrees of uncleanness: The father of fathers, the fathers, the
first, second, third, and fourth children of defilement. There are
altogether twenty-nine fathers of uncleanness, of which eleven arise
from contact with a dead body.

<span id="fn_359"></span>[174:1](bar072.htm#fr_364) A city about 15
miles from Jerusalem.

<span id="fn_360"></span>[174:2](bar072.htm#fr_365) Towards Jerusalem.

<span id="fn_361"></span>[174:3](bar072.htm#fr_366) This decision refers
to the case of a dealer whose wine or flour might become legally defiled
by contact with the common people.

<span id="fn_362"></span>[175:1](bar072.htm#fr_367) The Tosephta
relates, that when the Pharisees were baptizing the candlestick, the
Sadducees used to mock them by saying, they were baptizing the sun.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](bar073)
