[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bar090)  [Next](bar092) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z4K8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud*, by Joseph Barclay, \[1878\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

### CHAPTER III.

1\. Akabia, son of Mahallalel, said, "ponder on three things, and thou
wilt not be led to the commission of sin; consider from whence thou
comest, and whither thou goest; and in whose presence thou must in
futurity stand to account in judgment. From whence comest thou? from a
foul drop. And whither goest thou? to a place of dust,—worms,—and
reptiles; and in whose presence art thou in future to account in
judgment? even before the King Who is King of kings, and the HOLY ONE,
blessed be He."

2\. Rabbi Chanina, suffragan of the priests, said, "pray for the peace
of the kingdom, for, were it not for its fear, men would swallow each
other alive." Rabbi Chanina, son of Theradion, said, “two who are
sitting together and speak not of the law are an assembly of scorners;
as is said, “Nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful.” <span
id="fr_472"></span>[1](#fn_466) But two who sit together, and speak of
the law, the DIVINE PRESENCE (Shechinah) rests between them; as is said,
"Then they that feared the Lord spake often one to another; and the LORD
hearkened and heard; and a book of remembrance was written before him
for them that feared the Lord; and for them that thought upon His
name." <span id="fr_473"></span>[2](#fn_467) This refers to two; but
whence may we infer, that if but one sits engaged in the study of the
law the Holy One, blessed be He, will appoint him a reward? Because it
is said, "He sitteth alone and keepeth silence, because he hath borne it
upon him." <span id="fr_474"></span>[3](#fn_468)

3\. Rabbi Simon said, "three who have eaten at one table and have not
spoken of the law, are to be considered as if they had eaten of the
sacrifices of the dead, for it is said, 'For all tables are full of
vomit and filthiness, so that there is no place clean.' <span
id="fr_475"></span>[4](#fn_469) But three who have eaten at one table
and have spoken of the law, are considered as if they had eaten at GOD'S
table, as is said, 'And he said unto me This is the table that is before
the LORD.'" <span id="fr_476"></span>[5](#fn_470)

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

4\. R. Chanina, son of Chanina, said, "he who wakes in the night and
travels in the road alone, and turns his heart to vanity, is guilty of
the death of his own soul."

5\. R. Nechunya, son of Hakana, said, "whoever lays on himself the yoke
of the law is relieved. from the yoke of the kingdom and the yoke of the
custom of the world, and whoever breaks off the yoke of the law, imposes
on himself the yoke of the kingdom and the yoke of the custom of the
world."

6\. R. Chalaphta of the village of Chananya said, "ten men who assemble
together and study the law, the Shechinah rests among them, as is said,
'God standeth in the congregation of the mighty.'" <span
id="fr_477"></span>[1](#fn_471) And hence it is inferred that it is also
so with five, because it is said, "and hath founded his troop in the
earth." <span id="fr_478"></span>[2](#fn_472) And hence it is inferred
that it is likewise so with three, because it is said, "He judgeth among
the gods." <span id="fr_479"></span>[3](#fn_473) And hence it is
inferred that it is also thus with two, because it is said, "Then they
that feared the Lord spake often one to another, and the Lord hearkened
and heard, etc." <span id="fr_480"></span>[4](#fn_474) And hence it is
inferred that it is likewise so with one, because it is said, "In all
places where I record my name I will come unto thee, and I will bless
thee." <span id="fr_481"></span>[5](#fn_475)

7\. R. Eleazar of Barthota said, "give unto Him of His own, for thou and
all that thou hast are His." And thus said David, "For all things come
of Thee, and of thine own have we given Thee." <span
id="fr_482"></span>[6](#fn_476) R. Simon said, "he who journeys on the
road, meditating on the law, and ceases therefrom to admire this
beautiful tree or that beautiful fallow ground, is considered in
Scripture as endangering his life."

8\. R. Dosthai the son of Jonai, in the name of R. Meier, said, "whoever
forgetteth anything of what he had obtained by study, is considered in
Scripture as having endangered his life; as is said, "Only take heed to
thyself and guard thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the things which
thine eyes have seen." <span id="fr_483"></span>[7](#fn_477) "Perhaps
his study has been too powerful for him?" "But it is said, 'And lest
they depart from thy heart all the days of thy life.'" <span
id="fr_484"></span>[8](#fn_478) Hence he

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

endangers not his life, till he deliberately removes them from his
heart."

9\. Rabbi Chanina, son of Dose, said, "whosoever's fear of sin precedes
his wisdom, his wisdom will remain; but whosoever's wisdom precedes his
fear of sin, his wisdom will not remain." He used to say, "whosoever's
good deeds exceed his wisdom, his wisdom will remain; but whosoever's
wisdom exceeds his good deeds, his wisdom will not remain."

10\. He also used to say, "with whomsoever the spirit of his companions
is gratified, the Spirit of God is gratified; but with whomsoever the
spirit of his companions is not gratified, the Spirit of God is not
gratified." R. José, son of Harchinas, said, "that morning sleep,
noontide wine, childish conversation, and the assembly of the ignorant,
take man out of the world."

11\. R. Eleazar Hamodai said, "he who profanes the holy offerings,
despises the solemn feasts, puts his neighbour to shame in public, makes
void the covenant of our father Abraham, and expounds the law contrary
to its true sense, although he be well learned in the law and possessed
of good deeds, yet has he no share in the world to come."

12\. R. Ishmael said, "be humble to thy superior, and affable to thy
inferior, and receive all mankind with joy."

13\. R. Akiba said, "laughter and levity accustom mankind to lewdness,
tradition is a fence to the law, tithes are a fence to riches, vows are
a fence to abstinence, the fence to wisdom is silence."

14\. He used to say, "man is beloved as he was created in the image of
God, but an additional love was shown to him that he was created in the
image of God, as is said, 'In the image of God he made man.' <span
id="fr_485"></span>[1](#fn_479) Beloved are Israel in that they are
called the children of God, but an additional love was shown to them in
that they are called the children of God, as is said, 'Ye are the
children of the Lord your God.' <span id="fr_486"></span>[2](#fn_480)
Beloved are Israel, to whom was given the desirable vessel wherewith the
world was created, but an additional love was shown unto them, that the
desirable vessel wherewith

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

the world was created was given unto them, as is said, 'For I give you
good doctrine, forsake ye not my law?'" <span
id="fr_487"></span>[1](#fn_481)

15\. "Everything is seen by God, though freedom of choice is given unto
man; the world is judged in goodness, though all is according to the
greatness of the work."

16\. He used to say, "everything is given to man on pledge, and a net is
spread over all living; the shop is open, and the merchant credits; the
ledger is open, and the hand records, and whosoever chooses to borrow
may come and borrow, as the collectors are daily coming round and
getting payment of man, whether with his consent or without it, for they
have good authority to support them, and the judgment is true justice,
and all things are ready for the feast."

17\. R. Eleazar, son of Azariah, said, "if there be no law, there is no
morality, and if there be no morality, there is no law; if there be no
wisdom, there is no reverence, and if there be no reverence, there is no
wisdom; if there be no understanding, there is no knowledge, and if
there be no knowledge, there is no understanding; if there be no meal,
there can be no study of the law, and if there be no law, there will be
no meal." He used to say, “to what may he be likened whose wisdom
exceeds his good deeds? To a tree whose branches are many and his roots
few, so that the wind comes and plucks it up and overturns it, as is
said, "For he shall be like the heath in the desert, and he shall not
see when good cometh, but shall inhabit the parched places in the
wilderness in a salt land and not inhabited." <span
id="fr_488"></span>[2](#fn_482) But to what is he like whose good deeds
exceed his wisdom? To a tree whose branches are few and its roots many,
so that if all the winds in the world come and assail it, they cannot
move it from its place, as is said, ‘For he shall be like a tree planted
by the waters, and that spreadeth out her roots by the river, and shall
not see when heat cometh, but her leaf shall be green and shall not be
careful in the year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding
fruit.” <span id="fr_489"></span>[3](#fn_483)

18\. R. Eleazar, son of Chisma, said, "sacrifices of doves and
observance of times are important constitutions. Astronomy and geometry
are the ornaments of wisdom."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_466"></span>[224:1](bar091.htm#fr_472) Ps. i. 1.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[224:2](bar091.htm#fr_473) Mal. iii. 16.

<span id="fn_468"></span>[224:3](bar091.htm#fr_474) Lam. iii. 28.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[224:4](bar091.htm#fr_475) Isa. xxviii. 8.

<span id="fn_470"></span>[224:5](bar091.htm#fr_476) Ezek. xli. 22.

<span id="fn_471"></span>[225:1](bar091.htm#fr_477) Ps. lxxxii. 1.

<span id="fn_472"></span>[225:2](bar091.htm#fr_478) Amos ix. 6.

<span id="fn_473"></span>[225:3](bar091.htm#fr_479) Ps. lxxxii. i.

<span id="fn_474"></span>[225:4](bar091.htm#fr_480) Mal. iii. 16.

<span id="fn_475"></span>[225:5](bar091.htm#fr_481) Exod. xx. 24.

<span id="fn_476"></span>[225:6](bar091.htm#fr_482) 1 Chron. xxix. 14.

<span id="fn_477"></span>[225:7](bar091.htm#fr_483) Deut. iv. 9.

<span id="fn_478"></span>[225:8](bar091.htm#fr_484) Deut. iv. 9.

<span id="fn_479"></span>[226:1](bar091.htm#fr_485) Gen. ix. 6.

<span id="fn_480"></span>[226:2](bar091.htm#fr_486) Deut. xiv. i.

<span id="fn_481"></span>[227:1](bar091.htm#fr_487) Prov. iv. 2.

<span id="fn_482"></span>[227:2](bar091.htm#fr_488) Jer. xvii. 6.

<span id="fn_483"></span>[227:3](bar091.htm#fr_489) Jer. xvii. 8.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](bar092)
