[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bar062)  [Next](bar064) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z4K8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud*, by Joseph Barclay, \[1878\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER II.

1\. If a witness were unknown, another was sent to testify to him. At
first they received evidence of the new moon from any one; but when the
heretics <span id="fr_294"></span>[2](#fn_290) bribed (the witnesses),
they ordained that evidence should only be received from those who were
known.

2\. At first high flames were lighted, but when the Samaritans mimicked
them, it was ordained that messengers should be sent forth.

3\. "How were these high flames lighted?" "They brought long staves of
cedarwood, canes, and branches of the olive tree, and the tow of flax,
which was tied with twine. And one went to the top of the mountain and
lighted them, and waved the flame to and fro, up and down, till he could
perceive his companion doing so on the second mountain, and so on the
third mountain," etc.

4\. "And where were these high flames lighted?" "From the Mount of
Olives to Sartaba; from Sartaba to Grophinah; from Grophinah to Hoveran;
from Hoveran to Bethbaltin; there they did not cease to wave them to and
fro, up and down, till the whole country of the captivity <span
id="fr_295"></span>[3](#fn_291) looked like torches of fire."

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

5\. There was a large court in Jerusalem called Beth Yangzek, <span
id="fr_296"></span>[1](#fn_292) there all the witnesses met, and there
the Sanhedrin examined them. And they made great feasts for them, that
they might come often. At first they did not stir from thence all
day. <span id="fr_297"></span>[2](#fn_293) Rabban Gamaliel the elder
ordained, that they might go two thousand cubits on every side. And not
only they, but the midwife going to a birth; and they who go to rescue
from fire, or from enemies, or from inundation, or from fallen
buildings. These are as inhabitants of the place, and they have two
thousand cubits on every side.

6\. "How did they examine the witnesses?" "The first pair which came
were examined first, and they brought in the eldest of them, and they
said to him, 'Tell us how you saw the moon—(her horns) towards the sun,
or away from the sun? To the north, or to the south? What was her
altitude? Towards where her declination? And what was her breadth?' If
he said 'towards the sun,' he said nothing. Afterwards they brought in
the second and examined; if the evidence was found to agree, the
evidence stood. The remaining pairs of witnesses were then superficially
examined, not because there was necessity for their evidence, but not to
discourage them, that they might be willing to come again."

7\. The chief of the Sanhedrin said, ("the feast) is sanctified;" and
all the people answered after him, "Sanctified, sanctified." Whether the
new moon had been seen in its season, or not, they sanctified it. R.
Eleazar, son of Zadok, said, "if it were not seen in its season, they
did not sanctify it, for heaven had already sanctified it."

8\. Rabban Gamaliel had on a tablet and on the wall of his chamber
figures and phases of the moon which he showed to ignorant witnesses,
and said, "was it like this you saw her, or like that?" It happened once
that two witnesses came, and said, "we saw the moon in the morning in
the east, and in the evening in the west;" said R. Johanan, son

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

of Nourrie, "they are false witnesses," but when they came to Jamnia,
Rabban Gamaliel received their evidence. Two other witnesses came, and
said, "we saw the moon in her season, but on the next evening of the
intercalary day she was invisible," and R Gamaliel received them. Said
R. Dosah, son of Arkenaz, "they are false witnesses, for how can they
testify of a woman being delivered, and on the morrow she is still
pregnant?" To him said R. Joshua, "I approve thy words."

9\. Rabban Gamaliel sent to (R. Joshua), "I order thee to come to me
with thy staff and money on the day of atonement, according to thy
reckoning." <span id="fr_298"></span>[1](#fn_294) R. Akivah went to (R.
Joshua), and found him sorrowing. He said to him, "I can prove that all
Rabban Gamaliel has done is well done, for it is said, 'These are the
feasts of the Lord, even holy convocations, which ye shall proclaim in
their seasons,' <span id="fr_299"></span>[2](#fn_295) or out of their
seasons; I have no other feasts but these." R. Joshua came to R. Dose,
son of Arkenaz. He said to him, "if we are to judge the tribunal of
Rabban Gamaliel, we must also judge the tribunals which have existed
from the days of Moses till now," for it is said, "Then went up Moses
and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel." <span
id="fr_300"></span>[3](#fn_296) "And why were not the names of the
elders mentioned, but to inform us that every three men in Israel who
compose a tribunal, are as a tribunal of Moses?" R. Joshua took his
staff and money in his hand, and went to Jamnia to Rabban Gamaliel on
the day when the atonement began, according to his reckoning. Rabban
Gamaliel stood up and kissed him on his head, saying to him, "come in
peace, my master and disciple,—my master in wisdom, my disciple in
obeying my words."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_290"></span>[151:2](bar063.htm#fr_294) Lit. Bithosin, the
followers of Biothos, who, with Zadok, the founder of the Sadducees, was
a scholar of Antigonus of Socho.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[151:3](bar063.htm#fr_295) Babylon.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[152:1](bar063.htm#fr_296) So called in the
Mishna. It means "the place fenced in." The Gemara reads, Beth Yazak,
"the place of chains."

<span id="fn_293"></span>[152:2](bar063.htm#fr_297) *i.e.* the Sabbath,
when they could only go four cubits.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[153:1](bar063.htm#fr_298) To carry money on
the day of atonement was unlawful, but according to R. Joshua's
reckoning it would have been a day too late

<span id="fn_295"></span>[153:2](bar063.htm#fr_299) Lev. xxiii. 4.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[153:3](bar063.htm#fr_300) Exod. xxiv. 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](bar064)
