[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bar055)  [Next](bar057) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z4K8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud*, by Joseph Barclay, \[1878\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VIII.

1\. On the day of atonement, food, and drink, and washing, and
anointing, and the sandal latchet, <span id="fr_241"></span>[3](#fn_237)
and marriage duties, are restricted. "But the king and bride are allowed
to wash their face, and the woman after childbirth may wear sandals."
The words of R. Eleazar, but the Sages forbid them.

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

2\. The person who eats the size of a big date and its grain, and drinks
a jawful, is liable to punishment. All edible things are united for the
measure of the date, and all drinkable things are united for the measure
of the jawful. Eating and drinking are not united.

3\. He who eats and drinks unwittingly, is only liable for one
sin-offering. If he eat and work, he is liable for two sin-offerings. He
who eats what is disagreeable for food, and drinks what is disagreeable
for drinking, and he who drinks fish brine, or salt gravy, is free.

4\. They do not afflict young children in the day of atonement, but they
coax them one or two years before, that they may be accustomed to the
commandments.

5\. If the pregnant woman be affected by the odour, they give her food,
till her strength return. To the sick person they give food by order
from the physicians. If there be no physicians, they give him food at
his own demand until he say "it is enough."

6\. Him who is affected with blindness, they fed even with unclean
things, till his eyes got the power of vision. Him who is bitten by a
mad dog, they fed not with the caul of his liver. But R. Mathia Ben
Charash said, "it is allowed;" and again said R. Mathia Ben Charash, "to
him who had throat complaint they administered medicine in his mouth on
the Sabbath day, since there is uncertainty of life, and all uncertainty
of life abrogates the Sabbath."

7\. "On whomsoever an old ruin falls, if there be a doubt, whether one
be under it or not; if there be doubt, whether he be alive or dead; if
there be a doubt, whether he be a foreigner or an Israelite?" "They open
over him the heap. If they find him alive, they open fully, but if dead,
they leave him."

8\. The sin-offering, and the offering for known transgression make
atonement. Death and the day of atonement with repentance make
atonement. Repentance atones for light transgressions, for commands
positive and negative. But grave offences are suspended, till the day of
atonement come, and it will atone.

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

9\. He who said "I will sin and repent—I will sin and repent?" "They did
not give him the opportunity of repentance." "I will sin, and the day of
atonement shall atone?" "The day of atonement makes no atonement."
Transgressions between man and The Place <span
id="fr_242"></span>[1](#fn_238) the day of atonement expiates.
Transgressions between man and his neighbour, the day of atonement does
not expiate, until his companion be reconciled. This R. Eleazar Ben
Azariah explained "From all thy sins before the LORD thou shalt be
cleansed." Transgressions between man and The Place, the day of
atonement expiated. Transgressions between man and his companion, the
day of atonement did not expiate, until his companion be reconciled.
Said R. Akiba, "Happy are ye, Israel! before whom are ye to be pure? Who
will purify you? Your Father in heaven, as is said, 'I will sprinkle
clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean.' Then said the Fountain of
Israel, the LORD, "As the fountain purifies the defiled, so the Holy
One, blessed be He, purifies Israel."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_237"></span>[133:3](bar056.htm#fr_241) Sandals were,
however, allowed where there was fear of serpents and scorpions. Woollen
socks might be used.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[135:1](bar056.htm#fr_242) *i.e.* God
omnipresent. The Jews in a spirit of reverence use the words "Place" and
the "Name" to denote God. In reading they do not now pronounce the word
Jehovah, but substitute Adonai for it; and when Jehovah is followed by
the word Adonai they then use the word Elohim. The true pronunciation of
the Name has been a subject of much contention. It has been variously
given, as Yeheveh, Yehveh, Yahveh, Yahavah, Yahaveh, and Yehovah. When
it was uttered on the Day of Atonement the worshippers "fell on their
faces" in reverence for it (vi. 2). It was spoken for the last time in
the Temple by the mouth of Simon the Just. Henceforward, the Gemara says
whoever attempts to pronounce it shall have no part in the world to
come.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](bar057)
