[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bar060)  [Next](bar062) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z4K8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud*, by Joseph Barclay, \[1878\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER V.

1\. The musical pipes were (played) for five and (sometimes) six days.
That is to say, the pipes of the water-drawing, which supersedes neither
the Sabbath day nor the feast. The (Sages) said, "he who has not seen
the joy <span id="fr_267"></span>[3](#fn_263) of the water-drawing, has
never seen joy in his life."

2\. With the departure of the first day of the feast, they went down
into the women's court, and made great

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

preparations. <span id="fr_268"></span>[1](#fn_264) Four golden
candlesticks were there, and four golden basins on their tops, and four
ladders to each candlestick, and four lads from the young priests, and
in their hands were jars of oil containing one hundred and twenty logs,
with which they replenished each basin.

3\. The cast-off breeches and belts of the priests were torn to wicks,
which they lighted. And there was not a court in Jerusalem that was not
lit up by the lights of the water-drawing.

4\. Pious and experienced men danced with lighted torches in their
hands, singing hymns and lauds before them. And the Levites accompanied
them with harps, psalteries, cymbals, trumpets, and numberless musical
instruments. On the fifteen steps which went down from the court of
Israel into the women's court, corresponding with the fifteen songs of
degrees, <span id="fr_269"></span>[2](#fn_265) stood the Levites with
their musical instruments, and sang. And at the upper gate, which went
down from the court of Israel to the court of the women, stood two
priests with trumpets in their hands. When the cock crew, they blew a
blast, an alarm, and a blast. <span id="fr_270"></span>[3](#fn_266) When
they reached the tenth step, they blew a blast, an alarm, and a blast.
And when they got into the court, they blew a blast, an alarm, and a
blast. They went on blowing as they went, until they reached the gate,
that leads out to the east. When they reached the gate, that leads out
to the east, they turned their faces westward, <span
id="fr_271"></span>[4](#fn_267) and said,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Our fathers, who were in this place,  
 Turned their backs upon the temple;  
 And their faces towards the east,  
 And worshipped the sun eastward." <span
id="fr_272"></span>[5](#fn_268)</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> R. Judah says,
they repeated again and again,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"But we unto the LORD;  
 To the LORD are our eyes." <span id="fr_273"></span>[6](#fn_269)</span>

</div>

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

5\. In the sanctuary they did not blow the trumpet less than twenty-one
times, nor oftener than forty-eight times. Every day they blew the
trumpet twenty-one times, thrice at opening the gates, nine times at the
daily offering of the morning, and nine times at the daily offering of
the evening. When there were additional offerings they blew nine times
more. On the eve of the Sabbath they again blew six times; thrice to
interdict the people from work, and thrice to separate the holy from the
ordinary day. But on the eve of the Sabbath during the feast they blew
forty-eight times: thrice at the opening of the gates, thrice at the
upper gate, thrice at the lower gate, thrice at the water-drawing,
thrice over the altar, nine times at the daily offering of the morning,
nine times at the daily offering of the evening, nine times at the
additional offerings, thrice to interdict the people from work, and
thrice to separate the holy from the ordinary day.

6\. On the first day of the feast there were thirteen bullocks, two
rams, and one goat. There then remained fourteen lambs for eight courses
of priests. <span id="fr_274"></span>[1](#fn_270) On the first day six
courses offered two lambs each, and the other (two) courses one lamb
each. On the second day five courses offered two lambs each, and the
remaining (four) courses one lamb each. On the third day four courses
offered two lambs each, and the remaining six one lamb each. On the
fourth day three courses offered two lambs each, and the remaining eight
one lamb each. On the fifth day two courses offered two lambs each, and
the remaining ten one lamb each. On the sixth day one course offered two
lambs, and the remaining twelve one lamb each. On the seventh day they
were all equal. On the eighth day they cast lots, as on other feasts.
They said, "that the order which offered bullocks to-day, was not
permitted to offer bullocks to-morrow." But they changed in rotation.

7\. Three times in the year all the courses shared alike in the
offerings of the great feasts, and in the distribution of the

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

shewbread. In the Solemn Assembly <span id="fr_275"></span>[1](#fn_271)
they say to each priest, "Here is unleavened bread for thee, and here is
leavened for thee." The course in regular succession offered the daily
sacrifices, vows, and free-will offerings, and all the other sacrifices
and services of the congregation. If a feast be next to the Sabbath,
either before or after it, all the courses shared alike in the
distribution of the shewbread.

8\. "But if a day intervene between the two?" "The course in regular
succession took ten loaves, and the loiterers <span
id="fr_276"></span>[2](#fn_272) took two." At other times of the year,
the course entering on duty took six loaves, and the course going off
duty took six. R. Judah says, "the course entering took seven, and that
going off took five." Those entering shared them on the north side (of
the temple court), and those going out on the south side. The course
Bilgah always shared theirs on the south side. But their slaughter-ring
was fastened down, and the window of their closet was shut up. <span
id="fr_277"></span>[3](#fn_273)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_263"></span>[145:3](bar061.htm#fr_267) Isaiah xii. 3; John
vii. 37, 38.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[146:1](bar061.htm#fr_268) Galleries were
erected for the women, and the men stood below them.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[146:2](bar061.htm#fr_269) Psalms cxx. to
cxxxiv. inclusive.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[146:3](bar061.htm#fr_270) The signal for
drawing water.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[146:4](bar061.htm#fr_271) The orthodox
worshippers in the Temple looked towards the west, or Holy of Holies.
The Baal or Sun worshippers turned towards the east, and used the
eastward position. Under the Christian dispensation believers are
directed to look to Jesus, who promises to be in their midst (Matt.
xviii. 20).

<span id="fn_268"></span>[146:5](bar061.htm#fr_272) Ezekiel viii. 16.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[146:6](bar061.htm#fr_273) This is one of the
very few specimens of Hebrew poetry, apart from Scripture (dating prior
to the destruction of the Temple) which have come down to us.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[147:1](bar061.htm#fr_274) The priesthood was
divided into twenty-four courses (1 Chron. xxiv. 719). During the feast
all the courses ministered, and, as each day the number of bullocks was
decreased by one, the lambs were redistributed so as to supply an
offering for every course.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[148:1](bar061.htm#fr_275) In the feast of
weeks there were two leavened wave loaves (Lev. xxiii. 17).

<span id="fn_272"></span>[148:2](bar061.htm#fr_276) Those priests who
were slow in attendance, as they were obliged to share their perquisites
with the whole priesthood.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[148:3](bar061.htm#fr_277) The course Bilgah
was fifteenth (1 Chron. xxiv. 14). Each course had a ring to which the
heads of the victims were tied, and also a closet for stores. These were
taken from the course Bilgah as a mark of disgrace. During the
persecution of Antiochus, Miriam, a daughter of Bilgah, married a
Syro-Grecian husband. When the Greeks took the Temple, she struck the
altar with her shoe, exclaiming, "O wolf, wolf, how long art thou to
consume the wealth of Israel, and canst not preserve them in their hour
of need!" It was supposed that she must have learned something evil in
her father's house, and the whole course was therefore degraded. The
Rabbis say that the courses of the priests were first ordained by Moses,
and that he established eight of them. Four courses he assigned to the
line of Eleazar, and four he assigned to the line of Ithamar. Samuel is
said to have added eight courses more, and the remaining eight were
added by David. The Scriptures, however, assert that David arranged the
whole twenty-four courses. This arrangement continued till the
captivity. After the captivity only four courses returned—namely
Jedaiah, Harim, Pashur, and Immer. The Babylon Talmud mentions Jojarib
instead of Harim. To restore again the number of courses, twenty-four
lots were cast into a box, and each head of the four courses, which
returned, drew six lots—one for himself, and five for the courses which
they wished to revive. The restored order of courses continued as of
old, except in the case of Jojarib, who yielded the first rank to
Jedaiah, as Jedaiah was of the family of the High Priest Joshua, the son
of Jozedek. They soon increased in numbers, and we read that each course
kept a station of two thousand four hundred priests at Jerusalem, and
half a station at Jericho. The lesser number was stationed at Jericho to
give honour to Jerusalem.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](bar062)
