[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bar050)  [Next](bar052.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z4K8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Talmud*, by Joseph Barclay, \[1878\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER III.

1\. The overseer said to them, "go and look if the time for slaughter is
come." If it came, the watchman said, "it is brightening." <span
id="fr_203"></span>[1](#fn_200.md) Matthew the son of Samuel said, "is the
whole east light as far as Hebron?" and he said "yes."

2\. "And why was that necessary?" "Because it once happened that the
light of the moon came up, and they deemed it the light from the east."
And they slaughtered the daily offering, and they brought it to the
house of burning. And they brought down the High Priest to the house of
Baptism. This was the rule in the Sanctuary that every one who covered
his feet (was required) to wash; and every one retiring was required to
sanctify his hands and feet.

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

3\. No one entered the court for service, however clean, until he
washed. The High Priest made five washings and ten purifications in this
day, and all were in the Holy place above the house of Parva, <span
id="fr_204"></span>[1](#fn_201.md) with the exception of this first one
alone.

4\. They made a screen of linen between him and the people. He
undressed, descended, and washed. He came up and wiped himself. They
brought to him robes of gold, and he dressed, and he sanctified his
hands and feet. They brought to him the daily offering. He cut (its
throat), and another finished the slaughter at his hand. He received the
blood and sprinkled it. He entered to offer the morning incense and to
trim the lights, and to offer the head and the members, and the things
fried in the pan, and the wine.

5\. The morning incense was offered between the blood and the members.
That of the evening <span id="fr_205"></span>[2](#fn_202.md) between the
members and the libations. If the High Priest were old, or delicate,
they heated for him (iron), and they put it into the cold water, that
its temperature should be changed.

6\. They brought him to the house of Parva, and it was in the Sanctuary.
They divided with the screen of linen between him and the people. He
sanctified his hands and feet and undressed. R. Meier said, he undressed
and sanctified his hands and feet, he descended and washed, he came up
and he wiped himself. They brought to him white robes, he dressed and
sanctified his hands and feet.

7\. "In the morning he was dressed with Pelusian linen worth twelve
minas, <span id="fr_206"></span>[3](#fn_203.md) and in the evening with
Indian linen worth eight hundred zuz." <span
id="fr_207"></span>[4](#fn_204.md) The words of R. Meier. But the Sages
say, "that in the morning his dress was worth eighteen minas, and in the
evening twelve minas;" all these thirty minas were from the
congregation, find if he wished to add to them he might add of himself.

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

8\. He came to the side of his bullock, and the bullock was standing
between the porch and the altar; his head to the North, and his face to
the West; and the Priest stood in the East, and his face Westward, and
he placed both hands upon him and made confession, and thus he spake, “I
beseech thee, O Name, I have committed iniquity. I have sinned before
Thee—I, and my house—I beseech thee, O Name, pardon <span
id="fr_208"></span>[1](#fn_205.md) now the iniquities and the
transgressions and the sins which I have perversely committed, and
transgressed, and sinned before thee, I, and my house, as is written in
the law of Moses thy servant, that in this day “He will atone for you,”
etc. And they answered after him, “BLESSED BE THE NAME. THE HONOUR OF
HIS KINGDOM FOR EVER AND EVER.”

9\. He came to the east of the court to the north of the altar. The
Sagan was at his right hand, and the chief of the fathers at his left.
And there were the two goats; and the urn was there, and in it were two
lots of boxwood, and Ben Gamla made them of gold, and they commemorated
him as praiseworthy.

10\. The son of Katin made twelve pipes to the laver, where before there
were but two; and also he made a wheel for the laver, lest its water
should be polluted by night. Monobazus <span
id="fr_209"></span>[2](#fn_206.md) the king made all the handles of the
vessels, of gold for the day of atonement. Helena, his mother, made a
chandelier of gold near the door of the Sanctuary, and she also made a
tablet of gold upon which the section of the Sota <span
id="fr_210"></span>[3](#fn_207.md) was written. Wonders were wrought for
the doors of Nicanor, <span id="fr_211"></span>[4](#fn_208.md) and they
were commemorated as praiseworthy.

11\. And these were in ignominy: The family of Garmu, who were unwilling
to instruct in the preparation of the shew bread. The family of Abtinas,
who were unwilling to instruct in the preparation of incense. Hogrus,
the son of Levi, knew a tune in the chant, and was unwilling to
instruct. The son of Kamzar was unwilling to instruct in

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

the art of writing. Concerning the former it is said, "The memory of the
just is blessed;" and concerning the latter it is said, "but the name of
the wicked shall rot" (Prov. x. 7).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_200"></span>[122:1](bar051.htm#fr_203.md) Or, as your wish

<span id="fn_201"></span>[123:1](bar051.htm#fr_204.md) The Gemara says it
was so called because Parva a magician built this room and digged
through from it to see the service of the High Priest on the day of
atonement; or else because it was used for storing "bullock-hides."

<span id="fn_202"></span>[123:2](bar051.htm#fr_205.md) Lit. between the
evenings.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[123:3](bar051.htm#fr_206.md) The mina of the
sanctuary was worth about £5 : 14s., consequently the morning dress cost
about £68 : 8s.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[123:4](bar051.htm#fr_207.md) The zuz was worth
about 6½d., consequently the evening dress cost about £21 : 13 : 4.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[124:1](bar051.htm#fr_208.md) Literally "cover
over," *i.e.* "atone for."

<span id="fn_206"></span>[124:2](bar051.htm#fr_209.md) King of Adiabene, a
proselyte to judaism about A.D. 45.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[124:3](bar051.htm#fr_210.md) The accused woman.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[124:4](bar051.htm#fr_211.md) See Treatise on
"Measurements," II. 3, note.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](bar052.md)
