[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bar039)  [Next](bar041.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z4K8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Talmud*, by Joseph Barclay, \[1878\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

### CHAPTER II.

1\. The whole time that it is allowed to eat leaven, men may feed beasts
with it, and wild animals and fowls, and they may sell it to a stranger.
And they are allowed to enjoy it in every way. When that season has
passed over its enjoyment is disallowed, and they must not heat with it
an oven or a stove. Rabbi Judah said, "there is no riddance of leaven
but by burning." But the Sages say, "also by powdering and scattering it
to the wind, or casting it into the sea."

2\. "The leaven of a stranger, over which the passover has passed?" "Its
enjoyment is allowed." "But of an Israelite?" "Its enjoyment is
disallowed," as is said, <span id="fr_127"></span>[1](#fn_124.md) "And
there shall no leavened bread be seen with thee."

3\. "The stranger who has lent money to an Israelite on his leaven?"
"After passover its enjoyment is allowed." "And an Israelite who lent
money to the stranger on his leaven?" "Its enjoyment after passover is
disallowed." "Leaven over which a building fell?" "It is as though it
was cleared away." Rabban Simon, son of Gamaliel, said, "all after which
the dog cannot snuff."

4\. "He who has eaten a leavened heave-offering during the passover in
error?" "He must pay its value and a fifth more." "In presumption?" "He
is free from the payment, and from its value even for fuel." <span
id="fr_128"></span>[2](#fn_125.md)

5\. These are the things by which one can discharge his obligation to
eat unleavened bread during the passover; with cakes made of wheat, and
barley, and rye, and oats, and spelt; and they discharge their
obligation in that of which the tithing was doubtful, and in the first
tithe after the heave-offering was separated from it, and in second
tithes and holy things after their redemption. And the priests discharge
their obligation with cakes of dough-offering and heave-offering, but
not with that which owes first tithes, or before the heave-offering was
separated from it, nor with

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

that which owes second tithes or holy things before their redemption.
"The loaves of the praise-offering and the cakes of the Nazarite?" "If
made for themselves, they do not discharge the obligation: if made for
sale in the market, they discharge the obligation."

6\. And these are the herbs with which one discharges his obligation to
eat bitter herbs in the passover:—lettuce, endives, horse-radish,
liquorice, and coriander. The obligation can be discharged whether they
be moist or dry, but not if they be pickled, or much boiled, or even a
little boiled. And they may be united to form the size of an olive. And
the obligation may be discharged with their roots; and also if their
tithes be in doubt; and with their first tithing, when the
heave-offering has been taken from them; and with their second tithe,
and with holy things which are redeemed.

7\. Persons must not moisten bran during the passover for chickens, but
they may scald it. A woman must not moisten bran in her hand when she
goes to the bath. But she may rub it dry on her flesh. A man should not
chew wheat and leave it on a wound during Passover, because it becomes
leavened.

8\. People must not put flour into the charoseth <span
id="fr_129"></span>[1](#fn_126.md) or into the mustard. "But if one puts
it?" "He must eat it offhand." But Rabbi Meier forbids it. They must not
boil the passover offering in liquids nor in fruit juice. But one may
smear it (after it is roasted), or dip it into them. Water used by the
baker must be poured away because it becomes leavened.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_124"></span>[97:1](bar040.htm#fr_127.md) Exod. xiii. 7.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[97:2](bar040.htm#fr_128.md) *i.e.* He is to be
put to death forthwith.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[98:1](bar040.htm#fr_129.md) Fruit-sauce; a
mixture of dates, raisins, and other fruits, to recall the memory of the
mortar from which the bricks in Egypt were made.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](bar041.md)
