[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bar106)  [Next](bar108.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z4K8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Talmud*, by Joseph Barclay, \[1878\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

## TREATISE XV.

<span id="img_26700"></span> ![Leprosy.](img/26700.jpg.md)

 <span id="fr_594"></span>[1](#fn_588.md)

<span class="small">Indications of
Leprosy—Inspection—Uncleanness—Boils—Burnings—Scalls—Time—White
Hair—Quickflesh—Black Hair—Spots—Pronouncing—Inclosing—Cleanness and
Uncleanness—Yellow Hair—Shaving—The
Beard—Garments—Buildings—Warp—Woof—Bobbins—Webs—Articles liable to
Leprosy—Houses—Stones, Wood, and Mud—Inspection—Plaster—Breaking
down—Causing Uncleanness—Cleansing—The Birds—The
Cedar—Sacrifices—Bathing—Applying the Blood—The Offering.</span>

### CHAPTER I.

1\. <span class="smallcaps">The</span> indications of leprosy are two,
and these again (contain) four. "First, there is a spot white as
snow; <span id="fr_595"></span>[2](#fn_589.md) next to it one like the lime
of the temple, and its swelling like the shell of an egg; next to it one
like white wool." The words of Rabbi Meier. But the Sages say, "the
swelling is like white wool, and second to it a spot like the shell of
an egg."

2\. "What of the mixture in the snow?" "Its colour is like wine mingled
in snow." "What of the mixture in lime?" "Its colour is like blood
mingled with milk." The words of Rabbi Ishmael. R. Akiba said, "that
which is reddish in each is like wine mingled in water, save that in the
snow is bright, but that in the lime is duller than it."

3\. These four indications are reckoned together in pronouncing "clean,"
in pronouncing "fretting," and in "inclosing." <span
id="fr_596"></span>[3](#fn_590.md) They are reckoned together for inclosing
that which is

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

stationary at the close of the first week; in pronouncing clean that
which is stationary at the close of the second week; in pronouncing
unclean, that in which there is produced quickflesh or white hair at
once, or at the close of the first week, or at the close of the second
week, even after the pronouncing clean. They are reckoned together for
pronouncing unclean, when the spreading is produced, at the close of the
first week, or at the close of the second week, even after the
pronouncing clean; in pronouncing unclean that which has turned all
white, after being pronounced clean; in pronouncing clean that which has
turned all white, after being pronounced unclean, or after being
inclosed. These are the indications of leprosy on which all leprosy
depends.

4\. Rabbi Chanina, the suffragan of the priests, said, "the indications
of leprosy are sixteen." R. Dosa the son of Harcinus, said, "the
indications of leprosy are thirty-six." Akabia, the son of Mahallalel,
said, "seventy-two." Rabbi Chanina, the suffragan of the priests, said,
"priests do not examine lepers on the day after the Sabbath, lest their
week fall on the Sabbath, nor on the second day, lest their second week
fall on the Sabbath. And buildings are not examined on the third day,
lest their third week fall on the Sabbath." Rabbi Akiba said, "they must
examine at all times." Should the day for examination fall on the
Sabbath, they can postpone it till after the Sabbath, and so it may be
more convenient, or more inconvenient.

5\. "How more convenient?" "In the leprosy there was white hair, and the
white hair went away. The hairs were white and became black; one was
white and one black; both became black. They were long and became short,
one was long and one short, and both became short. A boil has come close
to both or to one of them, a boil has encompassed both or one of them,
or the boil has divided them, or the quickflesh of the boil, or a
burning, or the quickflesh of a burning, or a freckled spot, or there
was in it quickflesh, and the quickflesh went away. It was square and
became round or elongated. It was inclosed and it became one-sided, it
was contracted and it became dispersed, and the

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

boil came and entered into its midst, it encompassed it, it divided it,
or the boil diminished it, or the quickflesh of the boil, or the
burning, or the quickflesh of the burning, or the freckled spot. It was
spreading, and the spreading went away, or its source went away, or it
began to diminish, and there is not left in both of them a measure of
three lentils square. <span id="fr_597"></span>[1](#fn_591.md) The boil and
the quickflesh of the boil, and the burning and the quickflesh of the
burning, and the freckled spot dividing between the source and the place
of spreading disappeared; these symptoms are convenient."

6\. "How more inconvenient?" "The leprosy had no white hair, and white
hair sprang up; the hairs were black and became white; one was black and
one was white, and both became white; they were short and became long;
one was short and one was long, and both became long; a boil has come
close to both, or to one of them; a boil has encompassed both, or one of
them; or the boil has divided it, or the quickflesh of the boil; or the
burning, or the quick-flesh of the burning; and the freckled spot; and
they went away; there was no quickflesh, and quickflesh was produced; it
was round or elongated, and it became square; it was one-sided, and it
filled up the inclosure; it was dispersed and became contracted; and the
boil came and entered into its midst; it encompassed it, it divided it,
or the boil diminished it, or the quickflesh of the boil; the burning or
the quickflesh of the burning; and the freckled spot; and they went
away; there was no spreading of the leprosy, and spreading was produced
in it; the boil and the quickflesh of the boil, the burning and the
quickflesh of the burning; and the freckled spot dividing between the
source and the place of its spreading disappeared; these symptoms are
inconvenient."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_588"></span>[267:1](bar107.htm#fr_594.md) This treatise on
leprosy (the divine stroke) is held in the highest estimation by the
Jews, and is considered one of the most important in the Talmud.

<span id="fn_589"></span>[267:2](bar107.htm#fr_595.md) This is explained to
mean "deeper in appearance than the skin, like the sunshine near the
shade." I have seen a case of leprosy in Jerusalem precisely answering
to this description.

<span id="fn_590"></span>[267:3](bar107.htm#fr_596.md) *i.e.* with a mark
round the affected spot.

<span id="fn_591"></span>[269:1](bar107.htm#fr_597.md) The gris, the
measure mentioned in the original, equals three lentils square, or
thirty-six hairs in breadth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](bar108.md)
