[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bar102)  [Next](bar104.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z4K8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Talmud*, by Joseph Barclay, \[1878\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER II.

1\. The Mountain of the House was five hundred cubits square. The
largest space was on the south, the second on the east, the third on the
north, and the least westward. In the place largest in measurement was
held most service.

2\. All who entered the Mountain of the House entered on the right-hand
side, and went round, and passed out on the left: except to whomsoever
an accident occurred, he turned to the left. "Why do you go to the
left?" "I am in mourning." "He that dwelleth in this House comfort
thee." "I am excommunicate." "He that dwelleth in this House put in thy
heart (repentance), and they shall receive thee." The words of Rabbi
Meier. To him said Rabbi José, "thou hast acted as though they had
transgressed against him in judgment; but, 'may He that dwelleth in this
House put it in thy heart that thou hearken to the words of thy
neighbours, and they shall receive thee'"

3\. Inside of the (Mountain of the House) was a reticulated

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

wall, ten hand-breadths high; and in it were thirteen breaches, broken
down by the Greek kings. The (Jews) restored, and fenced them, and
decreed before them thirteen acts of obeisance. Inside of it was the
Chel, ten cubits broad, and twelve steps were there. The height of each
step was half a cubit, and the breadth half a cubit. All the steps there
were in height half a cubit, and in breadth half a cubit, except those
of the porch. All the doors there were in height twenty cubits, and in
breadth ten cubits, except that of the porch. All the gateways there had
doors, except that of the porch. All the gates there had lintels, except
Tadi; there two stones inclined one upon the other. All the gates there
were transformed into gold, except the gate Nicanor, <span
id="fr_577"></span>[1](#fn_571.md) because to it happened a wonder, though
some said "because its brass glittered like gold."

4\. And all the walls there were high, except the eastern wall, that the
priest who burned the heifer, might stand on the top of the Mount of
Olives, and look straight into the door of the Sanctuary when he
sprinkled the blood.

5\. The Court of the women was one hundred and thirty-five cubits in
length, by one hundred and thirty-five in breadth. And in its four
corners were four chambers, each forty cubits square, and they had no
roofs; and so they will be in future, as is said, "Then he brought me
forth into the utter court, and caused me to pass by the four corners of
the court; and, behold, in every corner of the court there was a
court." <span id="fr_578"></span>[2](#fn_572.md) In the four corners of the
court there were courts smoking, yet not smoking, since they were
roofless. And what was their use? The south-east one was the chamber of
the Nazarites, for there the Nazarites cooked their peace-offerings, and
polled their hair, and cast it under the pot. The north-east was the
chamber for the wood, and there the priests with blemishes gathered out
the worm-eaten wood. And every stick in which a worm was found, was
unlawful

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

for the altar. The north-west was the chamber for the lepers. The
south-west? Rabbi Eleazar, the son of Jacob, said, "I forget for what it
served." Abashaul said, "there they put wine, and oil." It was called
the chamber of the house of oil. And it was open at first and surrounded
with lattice work, that the women might see from above and the men from
beneath, lest they should be mixed. And fifteen steps corresponding to
the fifteen steps in the Psalms, ascended from it to the court of
Israel; upon them the Levites chanted. They were not angular, but
deflected like the half of a round threshing-floor.

6\. And under the court of Israel were chambers open to the court of the
women. There the Levites deposited their harps, and psalteries, and
cymbals, and all instruments of music. The court of Israel was one
hundred and thirty-five cubits long, and eleven broad; and likewise the
court of the priests was one hundred and thirty-five cubits long, and
eleven broad. And pointed rails separated the court of Israel from the
court of the priests. Rabbi Eleazar, the son of Jacob, said, "there was
a step a cubit high, and a dais placed over it. And in it were three
steps each half a cubit in height." We find that the priests’ court was
two and a half cubits higher than the court of Israel. The whole court
was one hundred and eighty-seven cubits in length, and one hundred and
thirty-five cubits in breadth, and the thirteen places for bowing were
there. Abajose, the son of Chanan, said, "in front of the thirteen
gates." In the south near to the west were the upper gate, the gate of
flaming, the gate of the firstborn, the water gate. And why is it called
the water gate? Because through it they bring bottles of water for
pouring out during the feast of Tabernacles. Rabbi Eleazar the son of
Jacob said, "through it the water returned out, and in future it will
issue from under the threshold of the house." And there were opposite to
them in the north, near to the west, the gate of Jochania, the gate of
the offering, the gate of the women, the gate of music. And "why was it
called the gate of Jochania?" "Because through it Jochania went out in
his captivity." In the east was the gate Nicanor, and in it were

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

two wickets, one on the right, and one on the left, and two in the west
which were nameless.

<span class="smallcaps">Our Beauty be upon Thee, O Mountain of the
House</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_571"></span>[258:1](bar103.htm#fr_577.md) So called either
because Nicanor a Pharisee had the gate made in Alexandria, and though
it was thrown overboard from a ship in a storm, it yet came safe to
land: or because Nicanor, a Greek prince, was slain there in the time of
the Asmoneans.

<span id="fn_572"></span>[258:2](bar103.htm#fr_578.md) Ezekiel xlvi. 21.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](bar104.md)
