[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bar105)  [Next](bar107) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z4K8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud*, by Joseph Barclay, \[1878\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER V.

1\. The length of the whole court <span id="fr_592"></span>[2](#fn_586)
was one hundred and eighty-seven cubits. The breadth one hundred and
thirty-five. From east to west one hundred and eighty-seven. The place
for the tread of the feet of Israel was eleven cubits. The place for the
tread of the priests eleven cubits. The altar thirty-two. Between the
porch and the altar twenty-two cubits. The Temple one hundred cubits;
and eleven cubits behind the House of Atonement.

2\. From north to south there were one hundred and thirty-five cubits.
From the sloping ascent to the altar sixty-two. From the altar to the
rings eight cubits. The space for the rings twenty-four. From the rings
to the tables four. From the tables to the pillars four. From the
pillars to the wall of the court eight cubits. And the remainder lay
between the sloping ascent and the wall and the place of the pillars.

3\. In the court were six chambers, three in the north, and three in the
south. In the north, the chamber of salt, the chamber of parva, the
chamber of washers. In the camber of salt they added salt to the
offerings. In the chamber of parva they salted the skins of the
offerings; and upon its roof was the house of baptism for the High
Priest on the day of atonement. In the chamber of washers they

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

cleansed the inwards of the offerings; and from thence a gallery
extended up to the top of the house of parva.

4\. In the south were the chamber of wood, the chamber of the captivity,
and the chamber of hewn stone. The chamber of wood, said Rabbi Eleazar,
the son of Jacob, "I forget for what it served." Abashaul said, “the
chamber of the High Priest was behind them both, and the roof of the
three chambers was even. In the chamber of the captivity was sunk the
well with the wheel attached to it, and from thence water was supplied
to the whole court. In the chamber of Hewn Stone the great Sanhedrin of
Israel sat, and judged the priesthood, and the priest in whom defilement
was discovered, clothed in black, and veiled in black, went out and
departed; and when no defilement was found in him, clothed in white, and
veiled in white, he went in and served with his brethren the priests.
And they made a feast-day, because no defilement was found in the seed
of Aaron the Priest, and thus they said, “Blessed be the Place. Blessed
be He, since no defilement is found in the seed of Aaron. And blessed be
He who has chosen Aaron and his sons to stand and minister <span
id="fr_593"></span>[1](#fn_587) before the Lord in the House of the Holy
of Holies.

<span class="smallcaps">Our Beauty be upon Thee, Whole Court</span>;

<span class="smallcaps">And Completion to Thee, Tract</span>

MEASUREMENTS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_586"></span>[265:2](bar106.htm#fr_592) "The king only, and
no man else (remarks Maimonides) might sit in the court of the temple in
any place; and even this privilege was confined to a king of the family
of David." Cunœus further observes, "that the king was esteemed nearer
to God than the priests themselves, and a greater president of
religion."

<span id="fn_587"></span>[266:1](bar106.htm#fr_593) The Temple services
were arranged by the council of fourteen. This council was composed of
the High Priest, the Sagan (the deputy or Suffragan of the High Priest),
two Katholikin, who had charge of the treasuries, three Gizbarim, who
were assistants of the Katholikin, seven Ammarcalin, who had charge of
the gates.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](bar107)
