[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bar119)  [Next](bar121) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z4K8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud*, by Joseph Barclay, \[1878\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

### CHAPTER XIV.

1\. "How was the leper cleansed?" “He brought a new earthen vessel, and
put into it a quarter of a log of running water, and he brought two tame
birds. He killed one of them over the earthen vessel and over the
running water. He dug and buried it before him. He took cedar-wood and
hyssop, and scarlet (wool), and rolled them in the rest <span
id="fr_619"></span>[1](#fn_612) of the piece of wool. And he attached to
them the tips of the wings, and the end of the tail of the second bird.
The priest dipped them into the earthen vessel, and sprinkled the water
and blood seven times on the back of the hand of the leper, and some say
on his forehead. And so also was the order of sprinkling on the lintel
of the leprous house outside.

2\. The priest proceeded to let loose the living bird. He turned his
face neither towards the sea, nor the city, nor the wilderness, as is
said, "And shall let the living bird out from the city into the open
field." <span id="fr_620"></span>[2](#fn_613) He proceeds to shave the
leper. He causes the razor to pass over all his flesh. And the leper
washes his clothes and bathes. He is clean, so as not to render others
unclean by his entrance into a house; but he still causes uncleanness
like the creeping thing. He may enter within the city wall. He remains a
wanderer from his home seven days, and the use of his bed is forbidden.

3\. On the seventh day he undergoes a second shaving like to the first.
He washes his clothes and bathes. He is clean from causing uncleanness
like the creeping thing; and he is as one daily baptized. He may eat of
the tithes. When the sun is setting, he may eat of the heave-offering.
When he brought his atonement, he may eat of the holy things. There
exist three cleansings for leprosy, and three cleansings for childbirth.

4\. Three persons must shave, and they are shaved by legal command, the
Nazarite, and the leper, and the Levites;

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

and all these if they be shaved without a razor, or were left with two
hairs, did nothing.

5\. The two birds are ordered to be equal in colour, and size, and
price, and to be procured at the same time. Even if they be unequal,
they are allowed. If one be procured to-day, and the other procured
to-morrow they are allowed. "If one be killed, and it be found that it
is not tame?" "The leper must take a pair for the second bird." The
first bird is lawful for food. "If it be killed, and it be found
unlawful?" "He must take a pair for the second bird." The first is
lawful for ordinary use. <span id="fr_621"></span>[1](#fn_614) "If its
blood be poured away?" "The one to be let loose must die in its stead."
"If the one to be let loose die?" "The blood of the one killed must be
poured away." <span id="fr_622"></span>[2](#fn_615)

6\. The cedar is ordered to be a cubit in length, and in breadth the
quarter of a bedpost split into halves, and these halves again split
into quarters. The hyssop is ordered not to be Greek hyssop, or coloured
hyssop, or Roman hyssop, or desert hyssop, or any sort of hyssop with a
distinctive name.

7\. On the eighth day the leper must bring three sacrifices, the
sin-offering, and the trespass-offering, and the burnt-offering; and the
poor man must bring a bird for the sin-offering, and for the
burnt-offering a bird.

8\. He came beside his trespass-offering, and laid both his hands upon
it, and slew it, and two priests received its blood; one of them
received it in a vessel, and one received it in his hand. He who
received it in the vessel came and sprinkled it on the side of the
altar; and he who received it in his hand came beside the leper. And the
leper bathed in the leper's chamber, and went and stood in the gate of
Nicanor. R. Judah said, "the bathing was not necessary."

9\. The leper stretched in his head from the gate of Nicanor, and the
priest put (the blood) of his trespass-offering

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

on the tip <span id="fr_623"></span>[1](#fn_616) of his ear; he
stretched in his hand, and he put it on the thumb of his hand; he
stretched in his foot, and he put it on the great toe of his foot. R.
Judah said, "he might stretch in the three at once." If he had no thumb,
or great toe, or right ear, he could never be cleansed. R. Eleazar said,
"the priest put (the blood) in their places." R. Simon said, "if the
priest put it on the left hand members the leper went free. It was well
done."

10\. The priest took the log of oil, and poured it into the palm of his
brother priest, and if he poured it into his own palm, it was well done.
He dipped his finger into the oil and sprinkled it seven times before
the Holy of Holies. At every sprinkling he dipped in his finger. He came
beside the leper. On the place where he put the blood there he put the
oil, as is said, "Upon the place of the blood of the
trespass-offering." <span id="fr_624"></span>[2](#fn_617) And the
remainder of the oil which was on the palm of the priest, he must put on
the head of him that is to be cleansed to make an atonement. "If he put
it on, he atoned. And if he did not put it on, he made no atonement."
The words of R. Akiba. R. Johanan, the son of Nuri, said, "the command
is free between putting on the oil or not putting it on." "He has
atoned, but without the oil?" "It is not reckoned to him as a complete
atonement." "If the log of oil failed before he poured it out?" "He may
refill it." "If it failed from the time of pouring it out?" "He must
bring another log as in the beginning." The words of R. Akiba. R. Simon
said, "if the log failed before the priest sprinkled it he may refill
it. If it failed at the time of sprinkling it he must bring another, as
in the beginning."

11\. "A leper who brought his offering as a poor man, and became rich,
or as a rich man, and became poor?" "All depends on the sin-offering."
The words of R. Simon. R. Judah said, "on the trespass-offering."

12\. "If a poor leper brought the offering of the rich?" "It is well
done." "But if a rich one brought the offering of the poor?" "It is
nothing." A man may bring for his

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

son, for his daughter, for his man-servant or for his maidservant the
offering of the poor, and they may eat of their sacrifices. R. Judah
said, "but for his wife he must bring the offering of the rich, and so
likewise every offering for which she is responsible."

13\. "Two lepers whose offerings were mixed, and the offering of one of
them is already made, and one of them died?" This question the men of
Alexandria asked of R. Joshua. He answered them, "the survivor must
write his property in the name of another man, and bring the offering of
the poor."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_612"></span>[296:1](bar120.htm#fr_619) The piece that
extended over after the wool was laid parallel with the cedar and
hyssop.

<span id="fn_613"></span>[296:2](bar120.htm#fr_620) Lev. xiv. 7.

<span id="fn_614"></span>[297:1](bar120.htm#fr_621) Some commentators
think that the use of the bird was forbidden, but after examining
several editions of the Mishna, I have translated as in the text.

<span id="fn_615"></span>[297:2](bar120.htm#fr_622) By reference to the
tract on the Day of Atonement vi. 1, it will be found that the
regulations for the goats are similar in principle to the regulations
for the birds of the leper.

<span id="fn_616"></span>[298:1](bar120.htm#fr_623) Or on the middle of
the inside of his ear.

<span id="fn_617"></span>[298:2](bar120.htm#fr_624) Lev. xiv. 28.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](bar121)
