[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bar108)  [Next](bar110) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z4K8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud*, by Joseph Barclay, \[1878\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

### CHAPTER III.

1\. Every one afflicted with leprosy is legally unclean, excepting
foreigners and the sojourning stranger. Every one is eligible for the
inspection of leprosy, but the declaration of uncleanness and of
cleansing belongs to the priest. They say to him "pronounce unclean;"
and he says "unclean." "Pronounce clean;" and he says "clean." Two
leprosies are not inspected at once, whether in one man or in two men;
but the priest inspects the first, and he incloses it, or pronounces it
fretting, or legally frees him; and then he turns to the second. They do
not inclose that which is already inclosed, and they do not pronounce
fretting, that which is pronounced fretting, they do not inclose that
which is pronounced fretting; and they do not pronounce fretting, that
which is inclosed. But in the beginning, or in the end of the seven
days, him who is inclosed the priest can inclose; him who is pronounced
fretting, the priest can pronounce fretting. He can inclose and he can
free. He can declare "fretting" and he can declare "free."

2\. To the bridegroom in whom leprosy has appeared the Sages permit the
seven days of the feast, be the leprosy in himself, in his house, or in
his clothing. And so also in a festival, they permit to him all the days
of the feast.

3\. The skin of the flesh is unclean in two weeks, and with three marks;
with white hair, and quickflesh, and spreading. With white hair and
quickflesh in the beginning and in the end of the first week, and in the
end of the second week, even after being pronounced free. And with
spreading in the end of the first week, and in the end of the second
week even after being pronounced free, and it renders the leper unclean
for two weeks which make thirteen days.

4\. The boil and the burning cause uncleanness for one week with two
marks, with white hair and with spreading. With white hair in the
beginning or in the end of the week, even after being pronounced free.
And in spreading in the end of the week, even after being pronounced
free.

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And they render
the leper unclean for one week which has seven days.

5\. Scalls <span id="fr_601"></span>[1](#fn_595) cause uncleanness in
two weeks with two marks, with thin yellow hair, and with spreading.
With thin yellow hair in the beginning, or in the end of the first week,
or in the end of the second week, even after being pronounced free. And
in spreading, in the end of the first week, or in the end of the second
week, even after being pronounced free. And they cause uncleanness in
two weeks which have thirteen days.

6\. The scall on the back of the bald head, or on the bald forehead
causes uncleanness in two weeks with two marks, with quickflesh and with
spreading. With quickflesh in the beginning or in the end of the first
week, or in the end of the second week, even after being pronounced
free. And with spreading in the end of the first week, or in the end of
the second week, even after being pronounced free. And they cause
uncleanness in two weeks which have thirteen days.

7\. Garments cause uncleanness in two weeks, and with three
marks—greenish, reddish, and spreading. Greenish and reddish (marks) in
the beginning, or in the end of the first week, or in the end of the
second week even after being pronounced free. And in spreading, in the
end of the first week, or in the end of the second week, even after
being pronounced free. And they cause uncleanness in two weeks which
have thirteen days.

8\. Houses cause uncleanness in three weeks and with three
marks—greenish, reddish, and spreading. Greenish and reddish (marks) in
the beginning, or in the end of the first week, or in the end of the
second week, or in the end of the third week, even after being
pronounced free. And spreading in the end of the first week, or in the
end of the second week, or in the end of the third week, even after
being pronounced free. And they cause uncleanness in three weeks which
have nineteen days. For leprosy there is no separation for less than one
week, or for more than three weeks.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_595"></span>[272:1](bar109.htm#fr_601) In the head.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](bar110)
