[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bar128)  [Next](bar130) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z4K8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud*, by Joseph Barclay, \[1878\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IX.

1\. "A pan full of the water of purification into which ordinary water,
however little, has fallen?" R. Eliezer said, "one must sprinkle twice
with it." But the Sages "disallow it." "If dew fell into it?" R. Eliezer
said, "let him leave it in the sun, and the dew evaporates." But the
Sages "disallow it." "If fluid has fallen into it, or fruit juice?" "Let
him pour it out, and it is necessary to dry it." Ink, gum, and vitriol,
and everything which can be remarked, must be poured out, and there is
no necessity to dry it.

2\. "If insects and worms have fallen in, and burst or changed their
appearance?" "The water is disallowed" A black beetle, though not burst
nor changed, disallows it, since it is like a pipe. Rabbi Simon and R.
Eliezer the son of Jacob said, "the wheat worm and the grain worm are
allowed, because there is no matter in them."

3\. "If a beast or animal drink of it?" "They disallow it." All fowls
disallow it, excepting the dove, because it sucks. All creeping animals
do not disallow it, excepting

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

the weasel, because it laps. Rabban Gamaliel said, "also the serpent
because it spues." R. Eliezer said, "also the mouse."

4\. "If one think to drink the water of purification?" R. Eliezer said,
"it is disallowed." R. Joshua said, "when he drew it (towards him)." R.
José said, "of what are they talking, of water in which there are no
ashes." "But of water in which there are ashes?" R. Eliezer said, "when
he drew it (towards him)." R. Joshua said, "when he drinks." But if it
be poured into his throat, it is allowed.

5\. Water of purification which is disallowed, must not be kneaded in
mortar, lest it bring misfortune to others. R. Judah said, "it is
worthless." "A cow which drank water of purification?" "Her flesh is
unclean for twenty-four hours." <span id="fr_656"></span>[1](#fn_649) R.
Judah said, "it becomes worthless in her intestines."

6\. The water of purification and the ashes of purification must not be
passed over a river even in a boat, nor may they be floated on the
surface of water. Nor may one stand on one side and throw them to the
other side. But one may pass with them through water, which is up to his
neck. He who is cleansed for purification, may pass over water with
empty vessels in his hand cleansed for purification, and with water in
which there are no ashes.

7\. "Ashes which are allowed for purification; when they are mixed in
ordinary ashes?" "We must follow the majority <span
id="fr_657"></span>[2](#fn_650) (in reference to uncleanness) and they
do not purify with them." Rabbi Eleazar said, "they may purify with them
all."

8\. Water intended for purification which was disallowed, renders
unclean (him who was) cleansed for the heave-offering in his hands and
body, but it does not render unclean him who was cleansed for
purification, either in his hands or in his body. "If it were rendered
unclean?" "It renders unclean (him who was) cleansed for the
heave-offering in his hands and in his body, but (him who was) cleansed
for purification it renders unclean, in his hands, but not in his body."

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

9\. Ashes which are allowed when put on the surface of water, which is
unsuitable for purification, render unclean him who was cleansed for the
heave-offering in his hands and body, but it does not render unclean him
who was cleansed for purification, either in his hands or in his body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_649"></span>[316:1](bar129.htm#fr_656) Lit. from time to
time.

<span id="fn_650"></span>[316:2](bar129.htm#fr_657) The meaning is, that
if the greater part of the ashes be legal, purification would follow.
But if the greater part be ordinary ashes, there would be no
purification.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](bar130)
