[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bar104)  [Next](bar106) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z4K8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud*, by Joseph Barclay, \[1878\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IV.

1\. The doorway of the Sanctuary <span id="fr_585"></span>[2](#fn_579)
was twenty cubits in height, and ten in breadth. And it had four doors,
two within and two without, as is said, "Two doors to the temple and the
holy place." <span id="fr_586"></span>[3](#fn_580) The outside (doors)
opened into the doorway to cover the thickness of the wall, and the
inside doors opened into the Sanctuary to cover (the space) behind the
doors, because the whole house was overlaid with gold excepting behind
the doors. Rabbi Judah said, "they stood in

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

the middle of the doorway, and like a pivot these folded behind them two
cubits and a half; and those two cubits and a half, half a cubit and a
jamb on this side, and half a cubit and a jamb on the other side." It is
said, "two doors to two doors folding back, two leaves to one door and
two leaves to the other." <span id="fr_587"></span>[1](#fn_581)

2\. And the great gate had two wickets, one in the north, and one in the
south. Through the one in the south no man ever entered. And with regard
to it Ezekiel declared, as is said, "The Lord said unto me; this gate
shall be shut, it shall not be opened, and no man shall enter in by it;
because the Lord, the God of Israel, hath entered in by it, therefore it
shall be shut." <span id="fr_588"></span>[2](#fn_582) The priest took
the key, and opened the wicket, and went into the little chamber, and
from the chamber to the Sanctuary. Rabbi Judah said, "he went in the
thickness of the wall, until he found himself standing between the two
gates, and he opened the outside gates from inside, and the inside from
outside."

3\. And there were thirty-eight little chambers, fifteen in the north,
fifteen in the south, and eight in the west. The northern and southern
ones were (placed) five over five, and five over them; and in the west
three over three, and two over them. To each were three doors: one to
the little chamber on the right, one to the little chamber on the left,
and one to the little chamber over it. And in the northeastern corner
were five gates: one to the little chamber on the right, and one to the
little chamber over it, and one to the gallery, and one to the wicket,
and one to the Sanctuary.

4\. The lowest row was five cubits, and the roofing six cubits, and the
middle row six, and the roofing seven, and 'the upper was seven, as is
said, "the nethermost chamber was five cubits broad, and the middle six
cubits broad, and the third seven cubits broad." <span
id="fr_589"></span>[3](#fn_583)

5\. And a gallery ascended from the north-eastern corner to the
south-western corner. Through it they went up to the roofs of the little
chambers. One went up in the gallery with his face to the west. So he
proceeded all along the

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

northern side, till he reached the west. On reaching the west, he turned
his face southward, going along the west side, till he reached the
south. On reaching the south, with his face to the east, he went along
the south side till he arrived at the door of the upper storey, because
the door of the upper storey opened in the south side. And at the door
of the upper storey were two cedar beams. By them they went up to the
roof of the upper storey, and on its summit rails separated between the
Holy and the Holy of Holies. And in the attic, trapdoors opened to the
Holy of Holies. Through them they let down the workmen in boxes, lest
they should feast their eyes in the Holy of Holies.

6\. The Sanctuary was a square of one hundred cubits, and its height one
hundred. The foundation six cubits, and the height (of the wall) forty
cubits, and the string course one cubit, and the rain channel two
cubits, and the beams one cubit, and the covering plaster one cubit; and
the height of the upper storey was forty cubits, and the string
course <span id="fr_590"></span>[1](#fn_584) one cubit, and the rain
channel two cubits, and the beams one cubit, and the covering plaster
one cubit, and the battlement three cubits, and the scarecrow one cubit.
Rabbi Judah said, "the scarecrow was not counted in the measurement; but
the battlement was four cubits."

7\. From east to west there were one hundred cubits, the wall of the
porch five, and the porch eleven, and the wall of the Sanctuary six, and
the interior forty, and the partition space (between the Vails) one, and
the Holy of Holies twenty cubits. The wall of the Sanctuary was six, and
the little chamber six, and the wall of the little chamber five. From
north to south there were seventy (cubits). The wall of the gallery
five, the gallery three, the wall of the little chamber five, the little
chamber six, the wall of the Sanctuary six, its interior twenty, the
wall of the Sanctuary six, the little chamber six, the wall of the
little chamber five, the place for the descent of the water three, and
the wall five cubits. The porch was extended beyond it fifteen cubits in
the north, and fifteen in the south; and this space

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

was called, "the house of the instruments of slaughter," because the
knives were there deposited. And the Sanctuary was narrow behind and
broad in front, and it was like a lion, as is said, "Ho! Ariel, the city
where David dwelt, <span id="fr_591"></span>[1](#fn_585) as a lion is
narrow behind and broad in front, so the Sanctuary is narrow behind and
broad in front."

<span class="smallcaps">Our Beauty be upon Thee, Door of the
Sanctuary</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_579"></span>[262:2](bar105.htm#fr_585) The Rabbis say that
"the world is like an eye. The ocean is the white of the eye. The pupil
is Jerusalem. And the image in the pupil is the Sanctuary."

<span id="fn_580"></span>[262:3](bar105.htm#fr_586) Ezekiel xli. 23.

<span id="fn_581"></span>[263:1](bar105.htm#fr_587) Ezekiel xli. 24.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[263:2](bar105.htm#fr_588) Ezekiel xliv. 2.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[263:3](bar105.htm#fr_589) 1 Kings vi. 6.

<span id="fn_584"></span>[264:1](bar105.htm#fr_590) Curiously graven and
gilt.

<span id="fn_585"></span>[265:1](bar105.htm#fr_591) Isaiah xxix. 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](bar106)
