[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](trw01)  [Next](trw03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Revealing Word*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1959\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

abate--To lessen; to moderate. In making a demonstration, when we reach
the point where the mind changes from the negative to the positive state
the troubled thoughts begin to abate. A certain set of negative ideas
has run its course, and the restorative thought forces are in evidence.

Abba--A word of endearment signifying father. It is only as we come to
know our sonship, our true relation to God, that we enter into the
consciousness of love and tender affiliation with Spirit, signified by
the word Abba. (see Mark 14:36)

abdicate--To let go; to relinquish; to renounce. The ability to abdicate
is twofold in action: it eliminates the error, and it expands the good.
When the ego consciously lets go and willingly gives up its personal
ideas and loves, it has fulfilled the law of denial and is restored to
the Father's house.

abide--To continue in a fixed thought of God, the All-Good; to dwell in
the Christ consciousness. "If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you,
ask whatsoever ye will, and it shall be done unto you" (John 15:7).

abiding--A conscious centering of the mind in divine Principle within us
by means of repeated affirmations of our faith and trust in Principle.

abiding Presence--Christ, the presence of light, peace, joy, love, life,
and substance that is ever within, about, before, and beside man. (see
presence of God)

Absolute, the--Divine Mind; unlimited Principle; the almighty One; the
all-pervading Spirit; the Infinite; the Eternal; the Supreme Being. The
one ultimate creative Mind; the Source of all things. That which is
unconditioned, unlimited, unrestricted, and free from all limitations.
The self-existent God.

Absolute, to place judgment in the--The metaphysician

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

finds it necessary to place his judgment in the Absolute in order to
demonstrate His supreme power. This is accomplished by first declaring
that one's judgment is spiritual and not material, that its origin is in
God, that all its conclusions are based on Truth, and that they are
absolutely free from prejudice, false sympathy, or personal ignorance.

Absolute, treating in the--Treating in the consciousness of the Spirit
of God; affirming the absolute Truth of Being for man.

Absolute, unification of man with the--Man unifies himself with the
Absolute through recognition that he is the son and heir of the Father,
in whose image and likeness he was created. By realizing the Mind of
Christ, he becomes one with the Absolute.

abstract, the--The realm of pure ideas such as goodness, purity, wisdom,
and love.

abundance, spiritual--Ideas in consciousness of the omnipresent supply
and support of the one Mind; invisible substance, with infinite capacity
of expansion when held in mind, affirmed, and praised. "All things
whatsoever the Father hath are mine" (John 16:15).

abundance, steps in demonstrating--First, we must recognize abundance as
an idea that is real and has the power to expand. Then, we must talk
abundance--choose words representing abundance--and thus build up an
invisible world of substance. In this way, we build or form in our mind
that which draws to us an abundance of every good thing. "For whosoever
hath, to him shall be given" (Luke 8:18).

accident--An unfortunate event that takes place without our conscious
foreknowledge.

accidents, cause and cure of--The cause of all accidents lies in sense
consciousness. To be free from all accidents, we must raise our
consciousness, so that it is

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

spiritually positive and Christlike. Then we shall attract only good.

accuser--Opposer; hater; an enemy. (see Devil and Satan) The accuser is
overcome by casting him down in the name of Jesus Christ.

achievement, universal desire for--The craving for accomplishment,
innate in every man. The universal desire for worth-while achievement,
giving a mighty impulse to all things, is divinely good.

acquisitiveness--The desire to acquire. It is a legitimate faculty of
mind, but covetousness is the Judas trait. When a man seeks to acquire
from God only, acquisitiveness builds up his consciousness, but when he
oversteps the law and seeks that which belongs to another his
acquisitiveness becomes a destroyer. (see covetousness)

activity, spiritual--Thoughts in relation to spiritual Principle. Mind
movement in accordance with the activity of Divine Mind.

Adam--Red; reddish. The first movement of mind in its contact with life
and substance. Adam was created from the "dust of the ground" (Gen.
2:7). Dust represents the radiant earth or substance. When spiritual man
(I AM) enters into this substance and makes use of the God ideas
inherent in him, he brings forth the ideal body in its elemental
perfection. Adam was first perfect as an idea in elemental divinity.

Adam man--Unregenerate sense man; antichrist: the man who has fallen
away from spirituality. Originally Adam was the spiritually illumined
man of God. The Adam man was primitively identified with an infinite
capacity for expansion. When he recognizes his identity as spiritual he
expands in divine order and brings forth only good.

Adam man, ills of--The many ills of the Adam man grew out of his belief
that he could satisfy and nourish himself with material food and drink
alone. To feed the

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

body is not enough. The spiritual man hungers for the bread of life and
thirsts for living water, even the Word of God.

Adam man, transformation of--We are not to erase Adam, but we are to
transform him by the renewing of our mind. "And be not fashioned
according to this world: but be ye transformed by the renewing of your
mind, that ye may prove what is the good and acceptable and perfect will
of God" (Rom. 12:2).

adjustment--The rearrangement of thoughts according to the divine order
of the Christ Mind; a bringing of man's consciousness into exact
correspondence with God's perfect harmony, or heaven. "And the crooked
shall become straight, and the rough ways smooth" (Luke 3:5).

adultery--Mixed thoughts, errors that have their existence in the
unregenerated feelings; thoughts that have not come under the dominion
of the I AM.

Adversary, the--The vain imagination that there could, in reality, be
anything opposed to Divine Mind, or could be any separation of man from
it, led to the forming of a state of mind that is described in the Bible
as the "adversary." We find that the various names--Satan; Devil;
Adversary; accuser; carnal mind; old man; man of sin; and
personality--all refer to the consciousness that man has built up in his
ignorance of his true estate.

affirm--To hold steadfast in mind or to speak aloud a statement of
Truth.

affirm the salvation of the Lord--To realize silently and to declare
audibly that the Christ within us is taking charge of all our affairs.

affirmation--A positive statement of Truth. By the use of affirmations
we claim and appropriate that which is ours in Truth. (see denial)

affirmation, act of--The "yes" action of the mind; the act of affirming;
the declaring of Truth; the mental movement that asserts confidently and
persistently the

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

Truth of Being in the face of all appearances to the contrary.

affirmation and denial--Two movements of the mind that express power to
accept or to reject, to lay hold of or to let go. (see denial)

affirmation, how made--Affirmations do not have to be made only in set
terms such as, "I affirm my body to be spiritual." The sum total of
thought in all its positive aspects composes the affirmations that bring
ideas into form.

affirmation, purpose of--To establish in consciousness a broad
understanding of the divine principles on which all life and existence
depend. By affirming Truth we are lifted out of false thinking into the
consciousness of Spirit.

affirmation, remedial effects of--All unrighteous conditions may be
adjusted through affirming the power of the great universal Spirit of
justice. Affirm: "The infinite Spirit of love and justice is now
operating in all my affairs, and all is well."

age--A cycle or a dispensation. Jesus was acquainted with cycles or ages
of spiritual development of which the natural man knew nothing. Jesus
came at the end of an age. Age to mortal man is the measurement of the
life or existence of a person or thing. It is based on the false concept
of time as reality. "What is the signal of Your presence, and the
completion of this age?" (Matt. 24:3, Fenton.)

air--The deific breath of God. It symbolizes a purifying, vitalizing
power that revives and makes alive.

alchemy, divine--Transmutation; changing in action and in character from
the mortal into the spiritual. It has been said that the mind is the
crucible in which the ideal is transmuted into the real.

alcoholism--A diseased condition brought about by one who, thirsting for
the true stimulation of Spirit, resorts to the excessive use of false
stimulants, such as

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

alcoholic beverages. The way to demonstrate over this condition is to
turn wholeheartedly to Spirit and to realize and to affirm that the
desire for false stimulants is dissolved and dissipated and that the
pure spiritual life of Christ satisfies and uplifts.

allegiance to the Father--The consciousness that divine wisdom is
guiding the universe and man, which gives man a feeling of security.
Allegiance to the Father signifies a constant devotion to and trust in
the Father.

allegory--A symbolical representation of Truth. "Which things contain an
allegory" (Gal. 4:24).

All-Good--Divine Mind; God; the principle of divine benevolence that
permeates the universe.

almighty--All-powerful; having all power or force to accomplish
anything. All things are possible with God, because He is infinitely
all-mighty. All the power, all the force, all the might of the universe
are God's; He is, in truth, almighty God. "Jehovah appeared to Abram,
and said unto him, I am God Almighty" (Gen. 17:1).

Alpha and Omega--The beginning and the end; the Son of God; all in all.
"I am the Alpha and the Omega" (Rev. 22:13).

altar--Stabilized place of worship. A fixed, definite center in
consciousness; the place in consciousness where we meet the Lord and are
willing to give up our sins, to give up the lower for the higher, the
personal for the impersonal.

The altar mentioned in Rev. 11:1 symbolizes the consciousness of full
consecration that takes place first in the temple of worship within:
"Present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which
is your spiritual service" (Rom. 12:1).

altar, brazen, of temple worship--Represents the generative life.

altar, golden, of incense--Symbolizes the establishing of permanent
resolutions of purity and covenants with the

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

higher law of obedience, although it may entail daily sacrifice. (This
applies to the altar of the burnt offerings also.)

altar, to an unknown God--A yearning to know the unrevealed Spirit and a
reaching out for a fuller realization of its source.

alternate between good and evil--To swing the mind from good to evil and
vice versa, with consequent variation in the application of Truth
principles. Alternation is fatal to realization. "For let not that man
think that he shall receive anything of the Lord; a double-minded man,
unstable in all his ways" (James 1:7,8).

ambition--A subtle mental force that drives men toward their goals. If
it is dedicated wholly to Spirit and acts from Principle, it will work
for good. If its motto is, "The end justifies the means," it is a
menace.

ancestors--Forefathers. Those who think of themselves as descended from
human ancestors are in bondage to all the limitations of those
ancestors, regardless of their claims to the contrary. It is a falling
short of the full stature of man to regard himself as descending from
the human family. This is the sin that keeps the majority of men in
bondage to sense consciousness.

angel--A messenger of God; the projection into consciousness of a
spiritual idea direct from the Fountainhead, Jehovah. "And there
appeared unto him an angel of the Lord standing on the right side of the
altar" (Luke 1:11). The word of Truth, in which is centered the power of
God to overcome all limited beliefs and conditions.

angel, of Jehovah--The quickening thought of God appearing in the form
of light or divine intelligence, intuition, and understanding.

angels, ascending and descending--The imaging power of the mind
receiving divine ideas and reflecting them into the consciousness.

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

angels, office of--To guard, to direct, and to redeem the natural forces
of the body and mind, which have in them the future of the whole man.

anointed of God, the--One who is conscious of the real spiritual
outpouring from the source of his being; a consecrated person, "The
Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he anointed me" (Luke 4:18).

anointing--A symbolical expression of the pouring out of the spirit of
love on one who has faith in God. Rubbing with oil; consecrating the
body with the living Spirit of Christ. "But thou, when thou fastest,
anoint thy head, and wash thy face" (Matt. 6:17).

antichrist--That which denies or opposes the idea that the Christ dwells
in and is the true self of each individual. The active effort in the
world to exalt death and to delude men into believing that death is the
way to eternal life is an instance of work that is antichrist. Such a
thought is opposed to Christ. Jesus came to deliver the human race from
death and to fulfill in man God's perfect will, abundant life. The
antichrist thoughts must be persistently denied. The perfect will of God
for all men is abundant life, not death.

anxiety--A form of fear; a negative mental attitude that keeps God's
good from man.

apostles--Those sent forth; messengers; ambassadors; active spiritual
thoughts. Jesus conferred this title on the Twelve whom He sent forth to
teach and to heal.

In order to command our powers and to bring them into unity of action,
we must know what they are and their respective places on the staff of
Being. The Grand Man, Christ, has twelve powers of fundamental ideas,
represented in the history of Jesus by the Twelve Apostles. So each of
us has twelve faculties or fundamental ideas to make manifest, to bring
out, and to use in the attainment of his ideals. There are innumerable
other ideas, but each one stems from some one of these fundamental
ideas.

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

Jesus' twelve apostles were: Peter (faith); Andrew (strength); James,
son of Zebedee (wisdom or judgment); John (love); Philip (power);
Bartholomew (imagination); Thomas (understanding); Matthew (will); James
(order); Simon the Cananaean (zeal); Thaddaeus (renunciation or
elimination); and Judas (life conserver). (see disciple, calling of)

appetite--Either the craving of the sense man for fulfillment of his
fleshly desires or the hunger and thirst of the spirit for its divine
inheritance. "But he awaketh . . . and, behold, he is faint, and his
soul hath appetite" (Isa. 29:8).

appetite, carnal or sensual--A hunger and thirst for sensual pleasures;
misdirected effort to obtain satisfaction through feeding the insatiable
sense man. All indulgence of such appetite must be denied out of man's
consciousness before Christ can be manifested.

appreciation--The act of appreciating; esteeming. Spiritually, man's
mind esteems to a great measure the loveliness and power of omnipresent
God, All-Good. "I will give thee thanks with my whole heart" (Psalms
138:1).

appropriation--The act of taking possession of something. To appropriate
the word of Truth is to take the substance of the word into one's mind
and heart.

ark--A holy place; a sanctuary; a tabernacle; the Christ center within
wherein man is one with pure Being.

ark, Noah's--Symbolizes the spiritual part of oneself, built in the
midst of the flood of error. One builds one's ark on the scientific
understanding of the wisdom, presence, and power of God and on the
affirmations of what one is in Spirit.

The only refuge from the Flood (see Gen. 6:18) was the ark of Jehovah.
The ark represents a positive, saving state of consciousness, which
agrees with or forms a covenant with the principle of Being, with
subconscious

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

inspiration, with Christ. This ark is the product of "rest" (Noah) in
the spiritual part of us, right in the midst of the flood of error.

Ark of the Covenant--Represents the original spark of divinity in man's
being, which is a sacred and holy thing. On its development depends
man's immortality. The original spark (Ark of the Covenant) occupies the
most holy place in the body temple and must be cared for with great
devotion; otherwise, the spiritual forces are scattered.

No human hand is allowed to touch this ark of the covenant. No human
thought can enter the sacred precincts, which are kept veiled from all
eyes.

armor of God--The robe of righteousness. Error cannot enter the
consciousness that is strongly fortified with the light, life, power,
and substance of Spirit.

ascension--The ascending or progressive unfoldment of man from the
animal to the spiritual. It is measured by three degrees or states of
consciousness: first, the animal; second, the mental or psychical; and
third, the spiritual. Jesus first manifested Himself as the man on the
physical plane, from which He was resurrected to the mental or
psychical; from thence He ascended to the spiritual.

asceticism--The practice of severe self-denial; the attempt to deny the
body itself as an evil thing instead of beholding it as the sacred
temple of the living God to be revered, respected, and loved.

aspirations--The deep longing of man for union with his source, with his
Father-Mother, God.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"As the hart panteth after the water brooks,  
So panteth my soul after thee, O God.  
My soul thirsteth for God, for the living God"  
(Psalms 42:1, 2).  
</span>

</div>

ass--In Oriental countries in Bible times kings and rulers rode the ass,
and it was the accepted bearer of

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

royalty. The animal part of the human consciousness is typified by the
ass, and the purpose of Jesus' riding an ass into Jerusalem was to
portray the mastery by the I AM of the animal nature and its
manifestation (colt). Jerusalem is the city of peace or spiritual
consciousness. The characteristics of the ass are stubbornness,
persistency, and endurance. To ride these is to make them obedient to
one's will.

association, spiritual--Living in an uninterrupted relationship with
ideas that come into consciousness from God.

astrology--"The pseudo science which treats of the influence of the
stars upon human affairs, and of foretelling terrestrial events by their
position and aspects" (Webster). Astrology represents the belief in man
that his good depends wholly on something outside himself--his ruling
star, fate, providence--instead of depending on the power of his own
thoughts to establish within himself and his world what he wills.

It is true that we are in sympathy with all nature, which includes the
earth, the sun, the moon, and the stars. These are all ensouled, and
their actions can affect us when we do not believe in a higher power.
But there is a higher power in everyone: Spirit. In Genesis it is stated
that spiritual man, the image-and-likeness man, was given dominion over
all creation.

astronomy--"The science which treats of the celestial bodies, their
magnitudes, motions, constitution, etcetera" (Webster).

The material universe is only the outpicturing of the spiritual
universe. The pulsations of the spiritual forces impinge on and sway
men, nations, and planets according to laws whose sweep in space and
time is so stupendous as to be beyond the ken or comprehension of
astronomy. But the fact should not be overlooked that higher astronomy
had its votaries in the past. The Magi and the illumined

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

sages of Chaldea and Egypt had astronomical knowledge of universal
scope.

There is evidence that proves that the sages of the distant past knew a
higher astronomy than do we of this age and that they predicted the
future of this planet through cycles and aeons--its nights of mental
darkness and the dawn of its spiritual day--with the same accuracy that
our astronomers do its present-day planetary revolutions.

Jesus evidently understood this higher astronomy, and He knew that His
work as a teacher and demonstrator of spiritual law was related to it,
yet not controlled by it. He co-operated with the "law . . . and the
prophets," as far as they went, but He knew the higher law of the Christ
man and affirmed His supremacy in the words, "All authority hath been
given unto me in heaven and on earth" (Matt. 28:18).

atmosphere--Individually, an extension of consciousness; collectively,
the pervading influence of the predominating thoughts.

atom--"One of the small parts out of which any physical quantity is
built up" (Webster). A particle charged with tremendous energy that may
be released and made to give to man powers beyond expression. Jesus used
the dynamic power of thought to break the bonds of the atoms composing
the few loaves and fishes of the boy's lunch--and five thousand persons
were fed. Material science says that each atom of matter has force and
intelligence and a certain individuality; hence, it is a form of mind.

atonement--Reconciliation between God and man through Christ; the
uniting of our consciousness with the higher consciousness. Jesus became
the way by which all who accept Him may "pass over" to the higher
consciousness. We have atonement through Him.

attainment, intellectual--Intellectual attainments are

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

not in themselves of use in matters spiritual. They have their end in
teaching the student how to command his faculties and to bring them into
subjection. We must drop them out of our mind as quickly as we can and
be willing to commence anew in the school of the higher life. Let us
affirm often: "I am meek and lowly of heart. I am led of the Spirit."

attainment, spiritual--A laying hold of the high and lofty ideas of the
Christ Mind; the bringing of spiritual ideas into manifestation in one's
mind, body, and affairs.

attention--(see concentration)

attitude--The state of mind in relation to some matter or situation; a
mental position. Attitude of mind toward environment determines the
nature of man's environment. A positive attitude draws the good; a
negative attitude brings its train of sin, sickness, poverty, and death.
"For as he thinketh within himself, so is he" (Prov. 23:7).

attributes of Being--That which is inherent in the twelve powers of
faculties.

augury--The blind following of the commands of some omen or voice, not
of Spirit.

aura--The thought emanation that surrounds every person. As to whether
it is an illumined aura, or medium, or dark and cloudy depends on the
dominant thought force of each person. The aura around the bodies of
sincere, honest persons is usually bright blue or some modification of
blue. The aura is not visible to all persons, but only to those who have
their psychical nature quickened on the spiritual plane.

There are in the world today men and women who have followed the
teaching of Jesus and developed in their bodies a superenergy or life
that not only permeates the physical structure but envelops it in a
luminous aura that can be and is felt by both themselves and others.
Spirit reveals that spiritual thinking breaks open the physical cells
and atoms and releases their imprisoned

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

life, which originally came from Divine Mind. Jesus carried this process
so far that His whole body was transformed and became a conscious part
of the Father's life and intelligence. (see halo)

aura, how created--Prayer liberates the energies pent up in the mind and
body. Those who pray much create a spiritual aura that eventually
envelops the whole body. The bands of light painted by artists around
the heads of saints are not imaginary; they actually exist and are
visible to the sharp eye of the painter. Luke testifies (9:29) that when
Jesus was praying "his countenance was altered, and his raiment became
white and dazzling." After Moses had been praying on the mountain his
face shone so brightly that the people could not look at it, and he had
to wear a veil.

authority--Rightful power; mastery; or dominion. "For he taught them as
having authority" (Mark 1:22).

authority, having--Inspired by Spirit within. The Spirit of truth is the
one and only authority in the study of Truth. (see John 16:13)

authority, parental--Human parental authority is a thought of bondage or
slavery in mortal consciousness based on desire of parents to domineer
and to wield power. Divine parental authority is child guidance based on
love and understanding. It includes willingness to grant freedom to the
child by helping him to know and to live Truth.

autosuggestion--The conscious impression of selected thoughts on the
subconscious mind by oneself.

avarice--Inordinate greed for material riches. (Symbolized by "the
money-changers.") The avaricious suffer most in body and are the most
difficult to heal, because of the mental bias that prompts them to get
all things as cheaply as possible, including the kingdom of heaven.

avarice, how to be free from--Establish in consciousness the idea of
giving generously and freely, not from

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

compulsion or for the sake of reward but from the pure love of giving.

awakening, spiritual--Becoming conscious of the things of Spirit, or
God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: B](trw03.md)
