[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](trw12)  [Next](trw14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Revealing Word*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1959\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

lack--"Fact or state of being deficient or wanting" (Webster). In the
great Mind of Spirit there is no thought of lack. Such a thought has no
rightful place in man's mind. Deny all thoughts of lack; affirm God's
ever-present abundance in all your affairs.

ladder, Jacob's--Represents the step-by-step realization by means of
which man assimilates the divine ideas of Truth that come to him from
Jehovah.

lamb--Represents innocent, guileless forms of life on the animal plane
of consciousness.

lamb, killed and eaten in the night--Represents the giving up of the
animal life propensity in the mortal body. The command is that the lamb
shall be without spot or blemish, and be wholly eaten after being
roasted with fire. This refers to the complete transmutation and
surrender of the human life to Spirit after it has been purified by the
fires of regeneration.

Lamb of God--The pure life and substance of Being. By His overcoming
Jesus restored to mankind the consciousness of this pure life and
substance, which flows into man's consciousness through the spiritual
body. Its nature is to vivify with perpetual life all things that it
touches. Jesus is called "the Lamb of God" (John 1:29).

language--An arbitrary arrangement of sounds used to express thoughts.
Thus the same thought in the minds of two men may be beyond their power
to communicate to each other because they are not familiar with the
intellect's provincial dialect. If these men were conscious of the
mental plane where images are the basis of language, they would have no
trouble in communicating though they were born of diverse races. The
image of a horse in one mind would be seen by the other mind instantly,
and communication be easy. The common language of mankind is based

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

on thought images. We shall never realize the universal language that is
the dream of the philologist until we have dropped the arbitrary word
plane and ascended into the realm of thought images.

laver--Basin or bowl. The laver with water therein is the word of denial
ever at hand ready to cleanse every impure thought that comes into
consciousness.

law--The faculty of the mind that holds every thought and act strictly
to the Truth of Being, regardless of circumstances or environment. Law
is a mathematical faculty. It places first things first.

Laws of mind are just as exact and undeviating as the laws of
mathematics. To recognize this is the starting point in finding God.

Man does not make the law; the law is, and it was established for our
benefit before the world was formed. Back of the judge is the law out of
which he reads. Laws, whether natural or artificial, are but the
evidence of an unseen power.

The development of man is under law. Creative mind is not only law, but
is governed by the action of the law that it sets up. We have thought
that man was brought forth under the fiat or edict of the great creative
Mind that can make or unmake at will, or change its mind and declare a
new law at any time. But a clear understanding of ourselves and of the
unchangeableness of Divine Mind makes us realize that everything has its
foundation in a rule of action, a law, that must be observed by both
creator and created.

law, all-providing--God is the all-providing law. He is the spiritual
substance out of which is made everything the race needs; the Father who
supplies all His children bountifully out of His own abundance.

God is Mind; man, the offspring of God, is mind. To know the law of God,
man must adjust his mind to God-Mind. The first step in applying this
law is recognition of

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

it as Truth. Unless God is known as the source of all supply, men look
to the material world for support. This violates the law and breaks the
connection with the one Source of all good.

law, divine--Divine law is the orderly working out of the principles of
Being, or the divine ideals, into expression and manifestation
throughout creation. Man, by keeping the law of right thought, works in
perfect harmony with divine law, and thus paves his way into spiritual
consciousness.

Divine law cannot be broken. It holds man responsible for the result of
his labors. It is revealed to the mind of man through his consciously
thinking on spiritual ideas.

The law that Moses laid down for the Children of Israel was one of
denial and affirmation, principally denial. The law that Jesus gave was
one of affirmation and love. So in taking control of the forces within,
keep on the affirmative side. Let the preponderance of your thought be
positive, and do not spend much time saying, "I am not." You may find it
helpful sometimes to say, "I am not afraid," but more often you should
say, "I am bold, fearless, courageous."

law, evolutionary--Upward trend of all things; in the individual the
rising of man from sense consciousness to spiritual consciousness. This
law is set into action by our thinking and is continually supported by
our thoughts.

law, generic--The law that operates in each group; that from which
anything springs; the germ seed that brings forth after its kind.

law, mortal--The law of limitation that man has made for himself.

law, natural--The law of seed, cultivation, and harvest that natural man
is subject to for the provision of his wants.

law of attraction--The law that all conditions and circumstances in
affairs and body are attracted to us to

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

accord with the thoughts we hold steadily in consciousness.

law of conservation--Building up a large reserve consciousness of
substance, life, strength, and power, instead of laying up material
treasures. This is done through prayer.

"Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon the earth, where moth and rust
consume, and where thieves break through and steal: but lay up for
yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth
consume, and where thieves do not break through nor steal" (Matt. 6:19,
20).

law of giving and receiving--The law of substance that equalizes all
things. To realize and maintain divine order, substance must have both
an inlet and an outlet in consciousness, and must be kept moving.

To demonstrate substance as supply, the law governing it must be
recognized and kept. Those who, from pride or ignorance, do not open
themselves to the inflow of substance do not demonstrate supply, and all
who by selfishness refuse it an outlet, also fail. Everyone must receive
freely and give as freely as he receives. Disregard of the basic
principle of supply frequently hinders man's realization of the divine
good. Readiness to give and readiness to receive are equally essential.

law of infinite expansion--The principle of never-ceasing growth and
development toward the fulfillment of God's perfect idea that is firmly
fixed in all creation.

law of justice--Many persons doubt that there is an infinite law of
justice working in all things. Let them now take heart and know that
this law has not worked in their affairs previously because they have
not "called" it into activity at the creative center of consciousness.
(see justice)

law of righteousness--The law of spiritual and mental growth that is
raising man from sense consciousness to spiritual consciousness. The
nature of the universe is purity and goodness. By abiding in the Christ
consciousness, man

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

aligns himself with this divine law. He becomes the "light of the world"
(Matt. 5: 14).

law of sin and death--A misnomer. Sin and death are contrary to the law
of love and life. They are false beliefs endowed with power through
man's erroneous thinking. This seeming law can be transcended by
application of the higher and true law of immutable good. Law is Truth,
and in Truth all is good. There is no Truth and no reality in sin.

law of thought purification--A rule of mind action whereby man overcomes
"the world, the flesh, and the devil" by building the pure Christ
consciousness.

law, transgression of--Thinking thoughts that violate the principle of
harmony inherent in Being. Such transgression is followed by evil
conditions. Through the strength, power, purity, and love that Jesus
imparted to the race mind, we can rise superior to the penalty of
transgressed law and live forever in our present body forms made
glorious.

law written in our "inward parts"--A law either in or around the cells,
that controls their formation and duplicates the pattern laid down ages
ago in mother Eve and father Adam. "I will put my law in their inward
parts, and in their heart will I write it; and I will be their God, and
they shall be my people" (Jer. 31:33).

"Lazarus, come forth"--(John 11:43). This refers to the power of the
Word to arouse mind energy to such an extent that the physical becomes
immersed in the healing life, enabling the spiritually perfect man to
come into manifestation.

leaven--The leaven is the Truth. "The kingdom of heaven is like unto
leaven, which a woman took, and hid in three measures of meal, till it
was all leavened" (Matt. 13:33). When a word of Truth seems to be hidden
in the mind, it is not idle but is quietly spreading from point to

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

point. This process continues until the whole consciousness is vitalized
by Spirit.

"Take heed, beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and the leaven of
Herod" (Mark 8:15). In this case, the leaven represents limited
thoughts. When we attempt to confine the divine law to the customary
avenues of expression and scoff at anything beyond, we are letting the
leaven of the Pharisees work in us. When we allow the finer forces of
the body to fulfill lust and appetite, we are letting the leaven of
Herod work to our undoing.

"Wherefore let us keep the feast, not with old leaven, neither with the
leaven of malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of
sincerity and truth" (I Cor. 5:8).

letting go of the old--Erasing from consciousness thoughts contrary to
Truth. This is done by denial.

liberation--We are not to be liberated through suppression of sense or
by violent overcoming; but through a steady, step-by-step demonstration
over every error.

life--That expression of Being which manifests as animation, activity,
vigor. Life and substance are ideas in Divine Mind. Life is the acting
principle; substance is the thing acted upon. In the phenomenal world,
life is the energy that propels all forms to action. Life is not in
itself intelligent; it requires the directive power of an entity that
knows where and how to apply its force in order to get the best results.

In order to give man a body having life in itself, God had to endow him
with a focal life center, located in the generative organs. This center
of activity in the organism is also the seat of sensation, which is the
most subtle and enticing of all factors that enter into being. But these
qualities (sensation and generation) are necessary to man's character,
and without them he would not be the complete representative, or image
and likeness, of God.

Life does not emanate from the mind; it is not a

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

psychic or purely mental quality, nor does it spring from the physical.
Life is divine, spiritual, and its source is God, Spirit. The river of
life is within man in his spiritual consciousness. He comes into
consciousness of the river of life through the quickening of Spirit. He
can be truly quickened with new life and vitalized in mind and body only
by consciously contacting Spirit. This contact is made through prayer,
meditation, and good works.

life, crown of--Living eternally in the presence of God. Its attainment
depends on the understanding of the science of right thinking.

life, higher--The higher life is a higher state of mind. We know it when
we realize I AM the Son of God.

lifted up in consciousness--Resurrected. One who has discovered the
Truth of Being is raised, lifted up in consciousness, resurrected daily
out of his old, subconscious, negative thought condition into the one
positive Reality.

light--The understanding principle in mind. In divine order it always
comes first into consciousness. Light is a symbol of wisdom. When Jesus
said, "I am the light of the world" (John 8:12), He meant that He was
the expresser of Truth in all its aspects.

light, inner--The illumination of Spirit resident in the center of every
man's being.

lightning--Represents force, light, power. Jesus said, "Think not that I
came to destroy the law or the prophets: I came not to destroy, but to
fulfill" (Matt. 5:17); that is, He came to demonstrate that natural and
spiritual law are one. He foresaw this very period when "the powers of
the heavens shall be shaken" (Matt. 24:29)--that is, the mental realms
were to be broken up--and He attributed this phenomenon to the coming of
the Christ as "lightning."

limitation--Thoughts in consciousness that are narrow or restricted and
which keep one in bondage to error. Belief

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

in lack, illness, sin, or death are limitations in consciousness.

lion--"And one of the elders saith unto me, Weep not; behold, the Lion
that is of the tribe of Judah, the Root of David, hath overcome to open
the book and the seven seals thereof" (Rev. 5:5). The lion symbolizes
courage, fearlessness, initiative, life. We must have the courage to
enter fearlessly into the overcoming life and into the understanding of
things. But courage alone will not do. We must have reverence of
spiritual things--a devotional attitude--in order to receive spiritual
inspiration. The phrase, "of the tribe of Judah," bespeaks this
reverential nature and attitude.

lips, sinful--Lips that utter faultfinding words, condemnatory words.
The law is, "The lips of the wise shall preserve them" (Prov. 14:3).

logic--(derived from the word Logos, which see). A rational relation or
connection between idea and expression. Logic in its strictest sense is
the only accurate method of arriving at Truth. Any system of philosophy
or religious doctrine that does not admit of the rules of perfect logic
in reaching its conclusion from a stated premise, must be outside the
pale of pure reason and in the realm of man-made dogma. Logic and Logos
are almost synonymous terms, and the highest scriptural authority tells
us that all things were made by the Word. Hence, the word of reason or
the reasonable word is the very foundation of the universe. Therefore,
to know accurately about the reality of things we must disregard all
appearances as indicated by the five senses, and go into pure
reason--the Spirit from which was created everything that has permanent
existence.

Logos--The Word of God; the divine archetype idea that contains all
ideas: the Christ, the Son of God, spiritual man in manifestation.
Divine Mind in action. This supreme

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

idea is the creative power, the Christ consciousness formulated by
universal Principle.

Logos, law of the--The law of divine creation produces the order and
harmony of perfect thought. Law puts first things first. It is a rule of
action.

An understanding of the Logos reveals to us the law under which all
things are brought forth, the law of mind action. Divine Mind creates by
thought, through ideas.

Lord--The activity of the spiritual I AM as the ruling consciousness.
The Lord God of the Scriptures is Christ, the Spiritual Man; our divine
consciousness; the creative power within us.

Lord, absence from--A state in which both mind and body are functioning
in carnality.

Lord is One, the--Oneness of thought and purpose in the individual, as
well as the one Presence and one Power--the omnipotent good, which man
must know and consider in his contact with the world without. The
principle of oneness controls life.

Lord, wrath of the--(see wrath of God)

Lord's Prayer--A series of ideas illustrative of man's relationship to
his Creator.

Lord's Supper--(Matt. 26:26-30). Metaphysically, God's covenant with
mankind, through His perfect idea, Christ Jesus. This compact was
completed through Jesus' breaking the bread and blessing the cup. The
bread symbolizes spiritual substance, or the body. The wine symbolizes
the blood of Jesus, or spiritual life.

We eat the body of Jesus by affirming the one spiritual substance to be
the substance of our body and we drink His blood by affirming and
realizing our oneness with the one divine, omnipresent life of Spirit.

love--The pure essence of Being that binds together the whole human
family. Of all the attributes of God, love is undoubtedly the most
beautiful. In Divine Mind, love is the power that joins and binds in
divine harmony

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

the universe and everything in it; the great harmonizing principle known
to man.

Divine love is impersonal; it loves for the sake of loving. It is not
concerned with what or who it loves, nor with a return of love. Like the
sun, its joy is in the shining forth of its nature. "Love suffereth
long, and is kind; love envieth not; love vaunteth not itself, is not
puffed up" (I Cor. 13:4).

Love is an inner quality that sees good everywhere and in everybody. It
insists that all is good, and by refusing to see anything but good it
causes that quality finally to appear uppermost in itself, and in all
things.

Love is the great harmonizer and healer. Whoever calls on God as Holy
Spirit for healing is calling on divine love. Divine love will bring
your own to you, adjust all misunderstandings, and make your life and
affairs healthy, happy, harmonious, and free, "Love therefore is the
fulfilment of the law" (Rom. 13:10).

luck--All things come about through law. Men sometimes blindly keep the
law or part of it for a time, and it works for them. Not understanding
the cause that produced their success, they call it "luck" and build up
a belief in "chance."

lust of the flesh--Sense consciousness, which causes man to be tempted.
So long as he is ruled by the serpent of sense, man is not fulfilling
divine law. The activity of the cleansing, refining process of Spirit is
hindered in man when he lets lustful desire enter the love
consciousness.

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: M](trw14.md)
