[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](trw09)  [Next](trw11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*The Revealing Word*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1959\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

I AM--Spiritual identity; the real or Christ Mind, of each individual.
The I AM Being. God is I AM, and man, His offspring, is also I AM. I AM
is the indwelling Lord of life, love, wisdom, and all the ideas
eternally in Divine Mind.

The I AM is the metaphysical name of the spiritual self, as
distinguished from the human self. One is governed by Spirit, the other
by personal will. Christ and Jehovah are the scriptural names for
spiritual I AM. Jesus called it the Father. I AM is eternal, without
beginning or ending:

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

the true spiritual man whom God made in His image and likeness.

The I AM has its being in heaven; its home is in the realm of God
ideals. It is the center around which all the thoughts of man revolve.
The narrow concept of the personal I AM should be led out into the
consciousness of the great and only I AM. Man identifies himself with
that to which he attaches his I AM, and whatever he identifies himself
with, that he manifests. Hitch your I AM to the star of Christ, and
infinite joy will follow as night the day.

I AM identity--As the will of God, man represents I AM identity.
Individual consciousness is like an eddy in the ocean--all the elements
that are found in the ocean are also found in the eddy, and every eddy
may, in due course, receive and give forth all that is in the ocean.
This is individual consciousness, freedom to act without dictation of
any kind, selfhood without consciousness of cause, the power to make or
break without limitation.

I AM, used adversely--Man seeking happiness through sense pleasure. This
is sin (missing the mark), and the wages are pain, sickness, poverty,
and death. Think I AM in harmony with God-Mind, and health, wealth, and
harmony will be yours.

"I am the light of the world"--(John 8:12). Refers to Christ as the
expresser of Truth in all its aspects.

idea--Original, primary, or unlimited thought of Being; in God-Mind the
eternal Word or Logos.

The first-born of everything in the universe is an idea in Divine Mind.
The divine idea of the universal creation is called in Scripture Christ,
"who is the image of the invisible God, the first born of all creation"
(Col. 1:15). Everything is first an idea in mind, and this law holds
good, not only in the creations of God, but in the forms made by man as
well. The table upon which you write was first an idea in the mind of
the maker. All creation is summed up or concentrated in man. Everything
found in

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

the universe is found in his constitution. "In him dwelleth all the
fulness of the Godhead bodily" (Col. 2:9).

idea, Christ--The one complete idea of perfect man in Divine Mind. Jesus
is the name that represents an individual expression of the Christ idea.
Jesus Christ is the name often applied to the man of Galilee who
demonstrated perfection. Christ Jesus is the idea that is being
expressed by men as a result of their faith in and understanding of
Truth. In this idea are involved all the potentialities of that which is
to be evolved through man. The idea itself becomes the evolving power
through which it makes its inherencies manifest.

Christ ideas are the most heavily charged with Spirit. Every expressed
idea of the Christ Mind is powerful in raising consciousness. Jesus
could well say, "I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men
unto myself" (John 12:32).

ideas are catching--We are all heavily charged with ideas, and when
these ideas are released they spring forth and pass from mind to mind,
being "recorded" as they fly; when they are expressed the whole race is
lifted up--if the idea is charged with the uplifting Spirit.

ideas, relation of, to the mind--As the son is to the father, so is the
idea to the mind. Mind is one with its ideas, so the Father (God-Mind)
is one with its offspring, the idea, the Son. Mind is coexistent with
its ideas, and there is continual interaction and communion.

ideal--A mental pattern of perfection.

ideal, divine--The Christ man; the divine idea of man.

ideal of Spirit--The ideals in the Mind of Being that produce the
perfect creation.

ideal unfoldment--When the illumined intellect wholly co-operates with
Spirit there is a merging and blending of these powers until the
intellect ceases to be mere intellect and is lost in Spirit.

idealism, divine--God's standard of perfection.

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

idol--In scriptural language, a false god. Even as Jesus was tempted by
Satan, we are often tempted to worship the false gods of greed,
covetousness, jealousy, retaliation, and other forms of negation.

ignorance, how dissolved--Ignorance (lack of knowledge) that results
from association with ignorant minds can be dissolved by using the Word.

ills, cause of--Anger, jealousy, fear, hate, lust often cause ills of
the body. These result from our failure to adjust our mind to Divine
Mind. When the sinning state of mind is forgiven and the heavenly state
of mind established, man is restored to his primal and natural
wholeness. "The Son of man hath authority on earth to forgive sins"
(Luke 5:24). This is wholly a mind process. All wrong and right
conditions of man result from his thinking. "As he thinketh within
himself, so is he" (Prov. 23:7).

illumination--The light of Christ; spiritual understanding; intuitive
knowing. Spiritual illumination is a state of consciousness resulting
from Holy Spirit baptism. It is good to affirm: "Christ radiance lights
my mind, and my whole being is illumined with Truth."

illumined consciousness--A mind purified by the light of Truth.

illumined thoughts--Thoughts quickened through their conscious
relationship to Spirit.

illusion--(see ghosts)

image--"A mental representation of anything not actually present to the
senses" (Webster). Everything that is manifested was first a mental
picture and was brought into expression by the forming power of the
imagination. Man accumulates a mass of ideas about substance and life,
and with his imagination he molds them into shape. Each one of us must
not only see the image of our desires as a theory, but we must also form
it into a living, breathing thing through every motive and act.

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

Man gets the ideal images necessary to express his perfect organism from
the one perfect Mind. The perfect body will be demonstrated through his
beholding the perfect, eternal, living, glorified Christ body.

image, graven--(Exod. 20:4). Graven images of God are made by mental
pictures. The thought of God as a great king in a place called heaven
makes just such a material image in our thought realm, and we grow to
believe in and worship such an imaginary being, instead of the true God,
who is Spirit.

imagination--The faculty of mind that images and forms; the power to
shape and form thought. The imaging faculty presides at the nerve center
between the eyes. Through this faculty the formless takes form.

With our imagination we lay hold of ideas and clothe them with
substance. The body is the product of the mind. What man pictures or
imagines in his mind will eventually appear in his body. In the
communication of God with man, the imaging power of the mind plays an
important part. It receives divine ideas and reflects their character to
the consciousness. According to Scripture this is the opening of the
heavens and the seeing the "angels of God ascending and descending upon
the Son of man" (John 1:51).

immaculate conception--(Luke 1:26-35). The coming into activity of the
Christ in us is the result of an exalted idea sown in the mind.
Therefore Mary, the soul, becomes devout and expectant and believes in
the so-called miraculous as a possibility. Mary expected the birth of
the Messiah as the Holy Spirit had promised. She was overshadowed by
that high idea, and it formed in her mind the seed that quickened into
the cell. In due season there were aggregations of cells strong enough
in their activity, and what is called the birth of Jesus took place.

Metaphysically interpreted, Mary, the virgin mother, represents a pure
state of mind that ponders spiritual

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

things and believes in revelations from angels and messengers from God.

Mary was "found with child of the Holy Spirit," which refers to the
miraculous conception by which the Virgin Mary is held to have conceived
without original sin. Joseph, not fully understanding the prophecy, "was
minded to put her away privily," which refers to the fact that in the
first stages of the birth of Christ in us we do not understand the
process, and sometimes are moved to put it away from us.

immanent--Indwelling, abiding in, remaining or operating within. God is
immanent in all creation including man. "One God and father of all, who
is over all, and through all, and in all" (Eph. 4:6).

Immanuel (or Emmanuel)--A Hebrew word meaning "God with us." The
consciousness that God is with us and we are one with Him. The
understanding of how "the Word became flesh" (John 1:14).

immortal--Not subject to death; that which has everlasting existence;
incorruptible.

impulse--Metaphysically, a movement of mind that urges man on to
spiritual achievement. That which urges man to go forward. Thought
activity that arises in the inner, or spiritual mind.

impurity, how eliminated--The consciousness of personal impurity is
taken away through the realization of divine purity in thoughts and
words.

incarnate Word of God--The word of God made flesh. Spiritual man,
Christ, is the incarnate Word of God.

incense--A symbol of prayer. There must be a constant going forth of the
word of the Spirit, proclaiming Truth. This spiritual essence should
radiate from center to circumference, and permeate the whole
consciousness.

The symbology of the burning of incense (Luke 1:9) is transmutation. The
finer essences of the body are transmuted to what may be termed the
fourth or radiant dimension,

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

and a firm foundation laid for an organism of permanent character. Paul
calls it the "celestial" body (I Cor. 15:40). This process of
transmutation takes place whenever the I AM makes union in the body with
the Lord, or higher self.

incorporate--To unite with or introduce into a body. We incorporate
spiritual substance into our body through prayer.

individuality--The true self; that which is undivided from God; our
spiritual identity; the God part of us. That which characterizes one as
a distinct entity or particular manifestation of divine Principle.
Individuality is eternal; it can never be destroyed. (see personality)

infinite--That which embraces all. The totality of Being including all
knowledge, all space, all life; the complete all. That which was from
the beginning, is now, and ever shall be. Without end or limitation. It
is that which is boundless, immeasurable, inexhaustible. God is infinite
and eternal.

influence--"Emanation or effusion, especially of a spiritual or moral
force" (Webster). One's mental attitude, thoughts, and words are the
creative or destructive influences in one's world. Do not say: "I am
sick," "I am poor," "I am unhappy." Say: "I am well," "I am at peace,"
"I am wealthy."

inheritance--"A possession or blessing" (Webster). Man's inheritance
from God is divine ideas. These ideas find expression, and the
expression forms what man calls his good. Back of the expression is the
idea.

iniquities--The mental habits that shut God out of the consciousness.

injustice--"Violation of another's rights; wrong" (Webster). The belief
in injustice may be overcome by understanding the divine law of justice
and fixing faith firmly in it. The remedy for all that appears unjust is
denial of condemnation of others or self. Thus the healing

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

and forgiving law of Christ is allowed to function. Say: "I deny all
condemnation, judgment, and criticism of myself and all others."

inn--(Luke 10:34). One's pure thought; the price of the care received
there is paid through overcoming.

inner chamber--(Matt. 6:6). The place within where we consciously meet
God. It is also called the "secret place of the Most High" (Psalms
91:1), and the "Holy of holies" (Heb. 9:3). Jesus names it "the Father
in me" (John 14:11), and "the kingdom of God . . . within you" (Luke
17:21).

insanity--An unbalanced condition of the faculties of mind. The remedy
is to know and realize that the unclouded Christ Mind dominates all
one's thinking, and that there is perfect balance and control in both
mind and body.

inspiration--Inbreathing of Spirit. The breath of God infused into man,
endowing him with super light and life. "He breathed on them, and saith
unto them, Receive ye the Holy Spirit" (John 20:22).

inspiration, original--The writings of the Hebrew prophets are good
examples of original inspiration, which is divine wisdom.

inspiration, spiritual--An inflow of divine ideas; activity of a
spiritual character; understanding that comes from God.

instinct--"The native or hereditary factor in behavior" (Webster). It is
akin to intuition. Man instinctively trusts in a higher power.

integration--When all the desire of the mind and heart is to express
God, man is made whole, unified, integrated. "Blessed are your eyes, for
they see; and your ears, for they hear" (Matt. 13:16). Man is
spiritually integrated when he experiences unity of mind and body
through the Christ consciousness.

integrity, spiritual--That quality of the consciousness

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

which makes one unswerving in his conformity to the divine standard.

intellect--"The power or faculty of knowing" (Webster). Intellect is not
wise. Wisdom is not its office. Intellect is the executive officer of
wisdom, and can do right only when faithfully carrying out the
instruction of its principal. Intellect follows the letter of the law.

It is hard for the intellect to realize the spiritual "I AM THAT I AM"
(Exod. 3:14). The intellect always argues back and forth, endeavoring to
prove that it is the highest authority. Jesus condemned the sins of the
intellect, of which self-righteousness is the greatest, as worse than
moral sins. People who live wholly in the intellect deny that man can
know anything about God, because they do not have quickened faith.

intellectualism--Knowledge as independent of feeling. Literal knowledge
without consideration of the Spirit. The devotee of intellectualism is
often impractical and unsuccessful; he has accumulated more knowledge
than he has wisdom and power to apply.

intelligence--The expression of man's powers and capacities through the
avenue of the limited mental attitude termed the intellect. When the
same avenue loses its boundaries and catches sight of the great sea of
infinite understanding, which is always open to it, it takes on that
phase of knowing more properly termed wisdom.

intelligence, divine--Intelligence that accords with or comes from
Divine Mind. The next great proclamation of scientific minds will be
that one directive intelligence is an essential cause of the harmonious
universe.

intemperance--"Immoderate indulgence of appetites or passions"
(Webster). Men need and desire the stimulant of Spirit, but not being in
spiritual understanding they do not know what it is they crave and they
seek satisfaction in material things.

intuition--The natural knowing capacity. Inner knowing;

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

the immediate apprehension of spiritual Truth without resort to
intellectual means. The wisdom of the heart. It is very much surer in
guidance than the head. When one trusts Spirit and looks to it for
understanding, a certain confidence in the invisible good develops. This
faith awakens the so-called sixth sense, intuition, or divine knowing.
Through the power of intuition, man has direct access to all knowledge
and the wisdom of God.

invisible, the--Reality that cannot be seen, touched, or comprehended by
any of the outer senses. In this realm a great and mighty work is being
accomplished.

invocation--The calling forth of the presence of Spirit through the
power of the Word.

involution (and evolution)--Involution (infolding) always precedes
evolution (unfolding). That which is involved in mind evolves through
matter. (see evolution)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: J](trw11)
