[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](trw16)  [Next](trw18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*The Revealing Word*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1959\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

pagan--One in any age who believes in the power of material things.

paganism--The religion of pagans, pertaining to idolatrous worship. The
worship of money as God is a form of paganism.

pain--An indication that the vital forces of the body are at work to
bring about health.

palm trees--Metaphysically, realizations in the physical of unlimited
resource of strength.

pantheism--"The doctrine that the universe, taken or conceived of as a
whole, is God; the doctrine that there is no God but the combined forces
and laws which are manifested in the existing universe" (Webster).

In its last analysis what we call nature, pantheists would name God.
Metaphysically, pantheism refers to God as omnipresence, the one living,
all-powerful, intelligent Mind, pervading and sustaining all things and
directing them in love, wisdom, and order.

Pantheism and the teachings of Unity differ widely: pantheism diminishes
the importance of the individual, while Unity teaches that man always
retains his individual identity in God-Mind.

parable--A brief symbolical story told to illustrate Truth. "He taught
them many things in parables" (Mark 4:2).

paradise--A state of high spiritual consciousness.

parsimony--In mortal consciousness, the idea of closeness in
expenditures; undue thrift. Indicates lack of understanding of
accessibility of supply through omnipresent substance.

Passover--Outwardly a Jewish feast; symbolically, a mental attitude in
which we are bridging over from an old

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

state of consciousness and entering a new. In taking on the Christ
consciousness men pass over from the mortal to the spiritual
consciousness.

pasture--Metaphysically, a pasture represents substance in a form in
which it can be utilized by the individual. "He maketh me to lie down in
green pastures" (Psalms 23).

patience--An attitude of mind characterized by poise, inner calmness,
and quiet endurance, especially in the face of trying conditions.
Patience has its foundation in faith, and it is perfected only in those
who have unwavering faith in God. "The proving of your faith worketh
patience" (James 1:3).

pattern--The divine incarnation of Jesus is the divine pattern for all
men who are seeking the Christ way of life.

peace-Harmony and tranquillity derived from awareness of the Christ
consciousness. "Peace I leave with you; my peace I give unto you" (John
14:27). Steadfast affirmations of peace will harmonize the whole body
structure and open the way to attainment of health conditions in mind
and body.

Until world peace is based on the divine law of love and this law
incorporated into the pact of peace as well as into the minds of those
who sign the pact, there will be no permanent peace.

peacemaker--One who has the ability to say "peace" to the turbulent
waves of thought and have them obey. A peacemaker is one who reduces to
peace and harmony all the thoughts of strife, anger, and retaliation in
his own mind. The ability to say "peace" to thoughts, and have them
obey, entitles man to sonship of the Most High. "Blessed are the
peacemakers: for they shall be called sons of God" (Matt. 5:9).

pearl of great price--The Truth that no man can afford to barter away,
although all the kingdoms of the

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

earth and the glory of them be weighed in the balance against this one
treasure.

Pentateuch--The first five books of the Bible, called the books of law,
or the books of Moses.

Pentecost--The "day of Pentecost" was with the Israelites the great
"feast of harvest," or "day of the first-fruits" (Exod. 23:16; Num.
28:26).

"That day of Pentecost" signifies a gathering of spiritual powers for
the purpose of harvesting the first fruits of Spirit; otherwise, a
dedicating of these new forces of Spirit to unselfish service in the
vineyard of the Lord.

The first Pentecost after Jesus' ascension was the time of the first
recorded coming of the Holy Spirit baptism upon His apostles and
immediate followers. The descent into consciousness of the Jesus Christ
life may have taken place on the day of Pentecost in the company of the
apostles as described. They were in the upper room of the mind, which is
a spiritual state of mind, and had been praying for ten days with one
accord for the fulfillment of the promise of the Holy Spirit as given by
Jesus. This attitude of many minds forms a mental magnet and brings
about results in flashes of light and spiritual illumination. Religious
revivals have demonstrated this to greater or lesser degree.

people, holy--The members of the body of Christ are called a holy people
because they are different from the world about them in that they refer
all things to the in-dwelling Presence. In their method of praying and
of attaining health and plently, in their manner of conversation, and in
all vital points their lives are set to a higher standard than that of
the people of the world.

perception, spiritual--Apprehension of Truth through intuition; the
ability to perceive spiritually; the faculty of seeing spiritual reality
in spite of appearances that may suggest the contrary.

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

perfection--A state of consciousness completely free from any shadow of
negation.

perfection, attainment of--Jesus said, "Ye therefore shall be perfect,
as your heavenly Father is perfect" (Matt. 5:48). We attain divine
perfection through spiritual aspiration, by never ceasing to erase false
thoughts and by affirming Truth as the law of our being.

perseverance--Metaphysically, to persist in pursuit of Truth. Through
perseverance we make connection with the higher realms of consciousness.

persistency--The inner spiritual quality of an abiding conviction that
urges one on to accomplishment. Persistency in prayer awakens the
spiritual consciousness. When this awakening has been accomplished, one
is in a constant state of thanksgiving and praising, and the joy of a
conscious union with creative Mind is realized.

personal aims--Personal aims are concerned exclusively with one's own
welfare. They are always narrow and selfish. So long as these exist and
take the place of the rightful one, there is no room for the higher
self, the Christ of God. "Let him deny himself . . . and follow me"
(Matt. 16:24).

personal man--Adam.

personality--The sum total of characteristics that man has personalized
as distinct of himself, independent of others or of divine principle.
The word personality as used by metaphysicians is contrasted with the
word individuality. Individuality is the real; personality is the
unreal, the mortal, the part of us that is governed by the selfish
motives of the natural man. (see individuality)

Personality is a veil or mask worn by man that conceals the real, the
spiritual I AM. Jesus shattered this mask and revealed Christ, the true
man of God.

Individuality is Jehovah, ideal man; image and likeness of Elohim,
universal creative Mind.

Personality is Adam, man formed by Jehovah and commanded

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

to develop his individuality in Eden, an environment of all potential
possibilities.

Personality is what man seems to be when he thinks in his
three-dimensional consciousness; individuality is what he really is when
he thinks in his unlimited spiritual consciousness.

As the true Christ self emerges, personality decreases. The real self,
the individuality, begins to express. "He must increase, but I must
decrease" (John 3:30).

pessimism--An unhappy mental state resulting from beholding the shadow
of reality, termed evil.

pests--All vermin and pests of every kind come from wrong thoughts and
expressions of life in man and by man. God is life, and all life springs
from the one perfect life-idea. Man brings the life of God into
manifestation through his thoughts, words, and acts. Through ignorance
and wrong thinking man has worked out of divine order with the great
principle of life and has brought about the different manifestations of
life that prey on and torment him today.

Pharisee--One who observes the letter of the religious law but not its
spirit; lacking in understanding of the Truth.

The Pharisees were hypocrites. Jesus denounced them with greater
severity than any other class of sinners. They pretended to practice the
divine law, but failed to do so. They represent the son who said, "I go,
sir; and went not" (Matt. 21:30).

Physician, the Great--The omnipresent, healing, in-dwelling Spirit of
Jesus Christ.

pillar of cloud--Light of spiritual understanding to guide us.

pillar of fire--Witness of the Spirit on the altar of love as a glow of
light that opens the understanding.

"place" that Jesus prepared--(John 14:2) Jesus said He had prepared a
"place" for us. This "place" is a

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

spiritual current in the cosmic ether in which we live, and we can feel
it when we direct our attention to Jesus Christ in prayer and
meditation. "The kingdom of God is nigh" (Luke 21:31).

planes--The different realms of ideas in which men function. There are
many planes of life, one above or below another, yet not conflicting.
All creation is based on life activity, or as it is called in physical
science, rates of vibration. A certain activity in the life current
forms worlds on a plane, which we may call the physical; a little
increase in the vibratory rate makes another system, which we may
designate as the psychical; a still higher rate makes a universe where
spiritual ideas prevail.

These are all interlaced and interblended in the presence around and
within us, hence the "kingdom of God is within you" (Luke 17:21), or
"among you," as one translator gives it.

plumb line--The divine law that measures uprighteousness or integrity.

poise--A state of consciousness that beholds the world from the harmony
of the Christ Mind; a freedom from personal thinking.

pool---Metaphysically, the realization in consciousness that our life is
being constantly purified, healed, and made new by the activity of mind.

poor in spirit--Those who have denied personal consciousness. They are
poor in the spirit of selfishness, but rich in the Spirit of Christ.
"Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven"
(Matt. 5:3).

poverty, cure for--When love has begun its silent pulsations at one's
center of consciousness, one cannot remain in want or poverty. From the
invisible currents of the inner ether, love will draw to any man all
that belongs to him, and all belongs to him that is required to make him
happy and contented.

power--Man's innate control over his thoughts and

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

feelings. A quickening from on high must precede his realization of
dominion. "Ye shall receive power, when the Holy Spirit is come upon
you" (Acts 1:8). God is All-Power, thus all things are possible with
Him.

The mind and the body of man have power to transform energy from one
plane of consciousness to another. This is the power and dominion
implanted in man from the beginning. The climax of man's power and
dominion is set forth in the resurrection and ascension of the type man,
Jesus.

In mind, power is increased through exalted ideas. These show us the
relation between the world without and the mind within, and we find that
they are parallel. Whatever you see in the external, you may be assured
has its parallel in mind.

The same law is operating in the spiritual realm and the material realm
under different masks of manifestation. The one thing to understand is
that whatever we see without is controlled by something within. This
law, once revealed to the mind, clears up the whole creation, and shows
how God works.

Man is the power of God in action. To man is given the highest power in
the universe, the conscious power of thought. There is a universal,
creative force that urges man forward to the recognition of the creative
power of his individual thought. This thought is elemental, and all its
attributes come under the dominion of man. When he co-operates with
Principle, man sits on the throne of his authority and the elemental
force is subject to him.

Spiritual power is omnipresent. It is released in our body by
spiritualizing our consciousness. This divine energy will surge through
us as we erase negative thoughts from consciousness and become one with
God-Mind.

powers, man's twelve--Faith, wisdom, love, life, power, strength,
imagination, understanding, will, law of order, zeal, renunciation.

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

practical Christianity--The teachings of Jesus practically applied in
one's daily life.

praise--The quality of mind that eulogizes the good; one of the avenues
through which spirituality expresses.

The purpose of praise is to awaken in ourselves a higher realization of
the omnipresence and power of God. Prayer and praise change man, not
God. The mental attitude that praise sets up stimulates, quickens,
whirls into action, and finally establishes in character the ideals of
which they are the vehicle.

Through an inherent law of mind action we increase whatever we praise.
The whole creation responds to praise, and is glad. Animals and children
quickly respond to praise. One can praise a weak body into strength, a
fearful heart into peace and trust, shattered nerves into poise and
power, a failing business into prosperity and success, want and
insufficiency into supply and support.

We make practical application of the law of praise by giving thanks
always for all things, recognizing that "to them that love God all
things work together for good" (Rom. 8:28).

prayer--Communion between God and man. This communion takes place in the
innermost part of man's being. It is the only way to cleanse and perfect
the consciousness and thus permanently heal the body.

Prayer is the most highly accelerated mind action known. It steps up
mental action until man's consciousness synchronizes with the Christ
Mind. It is the language of spirituality; when developed it makes man
master in the realm of creative ideas.

Prayer is more than supplication. It is an affirmation of Truth that
eternally exists, but which has not yet come into consciousness. It
comes into consciousness not by supplication but by affirmation.

Do not supplicate or beg God to give you what you need, but get still
and think about the inexhaustible resources

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

of infinite Mind, its presence in all its fullness, and its constant
readiness to manifest itself for you when its laws are complied with.
This is what Jesus meant when He said, "Seek ye first his kingdom, and
his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you" (Matt.
6:33).

It is necessary to pray believing that we have received because God is
all that we desire. The good always exists in Divine Mind as ideas, and
we bring it into manifestation through the prayer of faith, affirmation,
praise, and acknowledgment.

All through the Scriptures, the different attitudes of mind necessary in
prayer are pointed out. We are told to be instant in prayer, to pray
with the Spirit, to pray in understanding. We have thought that prayer
was something we could go to, in any way, at any time. But we have
learned that to get results, we must pray with persistence and
understanding, and with faith. This practice establishes a consciousness
where doubt cannot enter. Jesus was in this consciousness. Is it
possible for the ordinary man? Yes. But he must watch and pray. He must
not only pray; he must watch also.

These are the seven necessary conditions for true prayer:

1\. God should be recognized as Father.

2\. Oneness with God should be acknowledged.

3\. Prayer must be made within, in "the secret place" (Psalms 91).

4\. The door must be closed on all thoughts and interests of the outer
world.

5\. The one who prays must believe that he has received.

6\. The kingdom of God must be desired above all things, and sought
first.

7\. The mind must let go of every unforgiving thought.

prayer, chamber of--"Enter into thine inner chamber

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

and . . . shut thy door" (Matt. 6:6). The inner chamber is the "secret
place of the Most High" (Psalms 91:1). It is the very depths of a man's
consciousness. To enter it is to turn the attention from the without to
the within. To "shut thy door" is to still the senses and close the mind
against every disturbing exterior thought.

prayer, intercessory--The 17th chapter of John is known as the
intercessory prayer. In this chapter Jesus first prayed for Himself,
then for His apostles, and then for all who would accept salvation
through Him, which prayer is extended to all generations.

"And now, Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory
which I had with thee before the world was. I manifested thy name unto
the men whom thou gavest me out of the world" (John 17:5, 6). "I pray
for them: I pray not for the world, but for those whom thou hast given
me" (John 17:9). "Neither for these only do I pray, but for them also
that believe on me" (John 17:20).

prayer for health--This prayer is the one most quickly answered, because
natural laws that create and sustain the body are really divine laws.
When man silently asks for the intervention of Spirit in restoring
health, he is calling into increased activity the natural forces of the
body. Through prayer the mind is renewed and the body transformed.

predestination--"The preordination of men to everlasting happiness or
misery" (Webster). Since man is created in the image and after the
likeness of God, he is predestined to bring the perfect pattern into
expression. "I am God Almighty; walk before me, and be thou perfect"
(Gen. 17:1).

The belief that God makes men do certain things cannot be true in a
single instance, because, if it were, man would not be a free agent. If
God interfered with man's will in some things, it would follow that He
could interfere in any and all things. Logic and observation

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

clearly reveal the freedom of man in everything. He was given freedom of
thought, and must work out his own salvation.

It is well to use daily an affirmation such as this in the name of Jesus
Christ: I am the son of God, and the Spirit of the Most High dwells in
me. I am the lord of my mind, and express only that which is
constructive and upbuilding. I am predestined to be the perfect
expression of my Father, and the fullness of all good is mine.

predictions--The law of mind action will bring to pass what man believes
in and expects. If he has faith in what he has been told by mediums and
fortunetellers, he brings it to pass himself by his faith.

preparation, the--(John 19:31). Refers to the observances preliminary to
the celebration of the Jewish Sabbath, or to the festival the day before
the Sabbath. Among the Jews there was a law to the effect that a
lifeless body should not remain on the cross on the Sabbath, as this was
a day set aside for rest and freedom from all troubled or contentious
thoughts.

presence of God--The awareness of Spirit within one's own being. It
manifests as increased life, peace, love, and a deep sense of spiritual
joy. (see abiding Presence)

presents--The presents that the Wise Men brought are symbolical of the
inner resources open to the Christ child. They may be from the stored-up
good deeds and thoughts of previous incarnations that the wisdom within
carefully guards and gives to a man as an inheritance.

pride, spiritual--A form of personal vanity over spiritual achievement;
a proud personal spirit; a "holier than thou" attitude.

"Blessed are the poor in \[personal\] spirit: for theirs is the kingdom
of heaven" (Matt. 5:3).

priests--Metaphysically, ideas of priestly authority and the religious
guidance of the intellect. The "priests and

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

Levites" represent our so-called natural religious tendencies. These
officiate in the rites and ceremonies of the tent, or tabernacle, and
when the more permanent structure (temple) is built, they bring up all
the "holy vessels" from the tent or tabernacle.

primary law and secondary law--Primary law is the one law of God.
Secondary law is the law of diet, of economics, of medicine, and many
other secondary things. A true metaphysician always looks to the law of
God.

prince of Peace--Jesus is the Prince of Peace. When asking the Father
for that which belongs to the Son under the divine law, man should
assume the power and dignity of the Prince of Peace. He should not crawl
and cringe before an imaginary king on a throne but rather feel that he
is the image of an invisible Being who created him to represent His
mightiness as well as His loving-kindness. We should affirm with
conviction those mighty words of Jesus: "All authority hath been given
unto me in heaven and on earth" (Matt. 28:18).

Principle--Fundamental Truth. Divine Principle is fundamental Truth in a
universal sense, or as pertaining to God, the Divine. It is the
underlying plan by which Spirit (God) moves in expressing itself; the
oversoul of this planet which works its way into expression through
Jesus.

God immanent in the universe is the great underlying cause of all
manifestation; the source from which form proceeds. Although Principle
is formless, it is that by which all form is produced.

Principle is the I AM of every man. As the principle of music moves
through tones, so does the principle of mind move through ideas. A word
is a spoken thought, or idea. Therefore, God as creative Mind, moves
through the expressed thought of Divine Mind, referred to in Scripture
as the Word of God.

progress, spiritual--Growth in the conception and expression of
spiritual ideas.

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

Promised Land--Metaphysically, a realization of divine substance. It is
the foundation of the substratum of the new body in Christ. It is not a
dream that man is to possess a body of immortality.

When there wells up in a man a great desire to be free from the bondage
of ignorance and the animal propensities, his journey to the Promised
Land begins.

promises, God's--Free will gives to man the privilege to accept or
reject the promises of God. If he rejects them there is no way for them
to be fulfilled in him.

No one who holds back part of the price can find the way into the
kingdom. The works of the flesh must be entirely overcome. Every flesh
desire must be put away so that the pure and holy desires of the Christ
man may be given expression. All the life substance must be conserved,
spiritualized, and used in making the body whole and perfect like the
body of the Lord Jesus Christ.

prophet--One who receives the inspiration of Spirit, understands
spiritual law, and imparts it to others. The prophets of old seemed to
stand between God and the people; it was through them that the people
received divine guidance.

Metaphysically, the prophet is that in us which discerns the working of
the law. Transgressed law brings its own punishment, and it is the
prophet of the Lord that sees its outworking in our life. It is the
prophet in us that often warns and keeps us from transgressing the law,
because we discern what the result will be.

prophets, false--Deceptive thoughts that have been built up by error;
selfish desires. False prophets are the representations of deceptive
religious thoughts. They seem innocent and harmless like sheep, but are
in reality selfish and dangerous. "Beware of false prophets, who come to
you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves" (Matt: 7:15).

proselyte--Metaphysically, one who has turned away

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

from the old, set, religious forms and ceremonies, and realizes Truth
for himself.

proselyting--The act of one endeavoring to convert another to his way of
thinking. This is not in accord with divine law. The Spirit of truth
within is man's one and only guide.

No one has the right to dictate what another shall do. However, we do
teach principles boldly without regard to whether mortal man accepts or
rejects. It is ours to give forth the Truth; the responsibility of
acceptance rests with those who hear. If the higher self hears the Word
and the lower self resists and rebels, that is a matter for the
individual to work out according to his own choice and faith.

prosperity--The consciousness of God as the abundant, everywhere present
resource, unfailing, ready for all who open themselves to it through
faith. "They that seek Jehovah shall not want any good thing" (Psalms
34:10).

Prosperity is based on the conscious possession of the idea of God's
abundance back of all things. Things come and go, but the idea of
abundance endures. Things appear at its command. Jesus had no visible
possessions, but He could supply thousands of persons with food through
praising and giving thanks to the invisible Spirit of plenty.

The difference between spiritual prosperity and material prosperity is
that spiritual prosperity is founded on understanding of the
inexhaustible, omnipresent substance of Spirit as the source of supply;
the material belief is that the possession of things constitutes
prosperity.

"Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon the earth . . . but lay up for
yourselves treasures in heaven" (Matt. 6:19-20).

In demonstrating prosperity, you should praise and give thanks for every
little evidence of financial improvement. Be confident of the immediate
co-operation of God's Spirit

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

with you in bringing to pass that for which you have given thanks. The
divine resource never fails. God is the omnipresent, unfailing resource
for all who trust Him and who make all their thoughts chord with Divine
Mind. God is your prosperity. Stamp this thought daily on your mind and
you will reap financial success.

Giving in the right mental attitude creates prosperity. Giving with the
fear of lack leads to poverty. Giving with the thought of a large
resource opens the way for a large income. "Give, and it shall be given
unto you; good measure, pressed down, shaken together, running over"
(Luke 6:38).

psalm--The Truth of God spoken in poetry or music; a hymn of praise or
joy; spiritual aspiration of the soul. "Is any cheerful? let him sing
praise" (James 5:13).

psyche--A word prominent in Greek mythology, meaning "the soul." Psyche
may be thought of as man in his many earthly experiences, in his
failures and his successes.

psychic--Pertaining to mental powers not common to ordinary man; mental
powers outreaching the scope of the physical man, but not yet quickened
to the standard of Spirit.

Man has a body in the ether that is the counterpart of the physical. It
is through this psychic body that he has sensations in the physical. It
is possible to think of the psychic body and cultivate its sensations
until it appears as real as the physical. Many persons have done this
until they have formed a psychic world consciousness and are often
unable to separate it from the physical. To them the realm of thought
forms is the finality of creation instead of the mental pictures of that
which is about to appear.

The first step of a Truth student in handling the psychic forces of
consciousness is the same as that in handling any other, and that is to
realize that God is the one and only power; to declare with Byron:
"There is no god but God!--to prayer--lo! God is great!"

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

Next make conscious contact with this all-powerful God-Mind and realize
that every phase of the mind, every thought is brought into the
captivity of the Christ, and that through your I AM power and dominion
you are master over every situation.

psychoanalysis--Analysis of the subconscious mind. The followers of
Jesus go one step farther in mind therapy than the psychoanalyst; they
incorporate Spirit with soul and make Spirit the primal source and
sustainer of both soul and body. "It is the spirit that giveth life"
(John 6:63).

psychology and religion--Thought control is imperative, and there is
urgent need of teachers on both the mental and spiritual plane of
consciousness if the race is to go forward in development. To this end
there needs to be more co-operation between these two schools, because
they complement each other. Religion becomes practical and effective in
everyday life when it incorporates psychology as part of its litany.
Without religion psychology is weak in its fundamentals, and without
psychology religion fails to give proper attention to the outlet of its
ideals. The fact is that religion, comprehended in its fullness,
includes psychology. Jesus was a profound psychologist.

The carping critic cries, "Your religion is psychology instead of
Christianity." Our answer is that the new Christianity includes an
understanding of psychology and does not stop with an analysis of the
mind but goes on to the highest phase of mind's possibilities, unity
with Spirit.

punishment--Man does not receive punishment from an outside force. Man
punishes himself by holding false thoughts. He escapes from punishment
as soon as he aligns his thought with that of God.

pure in heart--The "pure in heart" are those who are completely free
from all anxiety, resentment, selfishness, lust, and every other form of
antichrist thought and feeling.

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

"Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God" (Matt. 5:8).

purity of the Christ Mind--The deep purity and mighty strength of the
Christ Mind are made manifest in men as they develop spiritually.
Instead of consciously and unconsciously tempting one another in sense
ways, these qualities in each will incite in the other holy aspirations
to fulfill the law of righteousness. "And every one that hath this hope
set on him purifieth himself, even as he \[the Father\] is pure" (I John
3:3).

purification of blood--If your lung capacity is not equal to the
purification of your blood, increase it by declaring the law of active
life. Anemic blood may be made vigorous and virile by daily centering
the attention in the lungs and affirming them to be spiritual, and under
the perpetual inflow of new life and the outflow of old life the lungs
will do your will.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Q](trw18)
