[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](trw13)  [Next](trw15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Revealing Word*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1959\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

magnify the Lord--The mind possesses magnifying power, which it
exercises habitually, either consciously or unconsciously. This power
makes the mind the fertile side of man's nature, out of which spring
"the issues of life." We magnify the Lord by anticipation, by expecting,
by declaring that only the good is true, by steadfastly declaring that
every blessing is ours now.

malefactors, crucified with Jesus--Represent duality--belief in good and
evil, past and future--comprising all the thought consciousness of
opposites that has been built up since man began to eat, or enter into
the conscious knowledge of "good and evil" (Gen. 2:17).

mammon--Treasure; wealth; the material or worldly thought and belief
regarding riches, possessions, and wealth, compared with the true inner
riches of the mind, which are the understanding and the realization of
the spiritual substance, life, and intelligence that lie back of every
outer manifestation.

man--An idea in Divine Mind; the epitome of being. The apex of God's
creation, created in His image and likeness.

Man appears unlike God because he, through disobedience, fell into sin.
Through accepting race thoughts, man has adopted wrong ideas about
himself and his relation to his Source. He has believed that he is
unlike God and separate from Him, and these concepts have, by the law of
thought, become manifest.

Ideal man is the perfect man, the Christ, the offspring of Divine Mind.
Manifest man should be as perfect as the ideal, and he will be when the
individual identifies himself with the Christ. When he is identified
with anything less than perfection he manifests some degree of
imperfection.

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

Man makes his world through the activity of ideas in his
consciousness--ideas of wisdom, power, intelligence. The real man is the
embodiment of God, and all the God-substance and the power to make it
active is inherent within him.

When we are quickened to spiritual understanding and fully realize the
true character of God and our own nature as the image, or idea, of God
we will begin to live as Jesus lived in order that we may bring forth
the likeness. To perceive the true character of God and His attributes
and then to grasp our relationship to Him is to realize that His
attributes are our attributes, His power is our power; His character is
our character.

man, age of--Man is not limited in life. He has existed with the Father
always. At the very beginning of creation he was born into being through
the Son, the Christ, the perfect, ideal man whom God made in His image
and likeness.

"Jesus said . . . Before Abraham was born, I am" (John 8:58).

man, duality of--Man is a duality in seeming only. He is a unit when he
knows himself. His ignorance of himself and his relation to God is the
cause of the seeming duality. When wisdom comes to him and he makes
wisdom his own, there is no longer war between the ideal man in God and
the becoming man in the Lord God.

man, fall of--The result that follows man's failure to recognize his
divinity. By his error he falls into a state of consciousness where he
is bound in limitation and error. He falls short of his divine
possibilities.

man idea--Before there could be a man there must have been an idea of
man. God, the Father, Divine Mind, had an idea of man, and this idea is
his Son, the perfect man idea, the offspring of God-Mind. This Son is
the Christ, the only begotten of the Father. The Son, being the express
image and likeness of the Father, is perfect,

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

even as the Father which is in heaven is perfect. All that we find in
Divine Mind we find in its offspring, "who is the image of the invisible
God, the firstborn of all creation" (Col. 1:15). "In him dwelleth all
the fulness of the Godhead bodily" (Col. 2:9).

man, illumined intellectual--John the Baptist represents the illumined
intellectual man who perceives with spiritual vision the unfoldment of
this natural, intellectual man into the Christ man.

man, mortal--An error concept or expression of man, a misunderstanding
of his true nature that results in an untrue expression of God-given
powers and ends in death.

man, new--(Eph. 4:24; Col. 3:10). The "new man" is born of a divine idea
through the overshadowing of the Holy Spirit. This idea is that man is a
spiritual being; he is a "holy thing."

man of sin--The "man of sin" is the carnal mind in each individual, and
it always opposes and misrepresents the Truth; sometimes it poses as an
angel of light and Truth. Everyone who overcomes this inner adversary
will be saved from all deception that may be practiced by anybody or
anything that claims the place of the Lord Jesus Christ.

man, sense--The earth man, who lives through his senses. He gathers his
information and makes his judgments from evidence gathered by the
senses. He seeks his pleasure through the satisfaction of his sense
appetites. He is the false man, the antichrist man.

man, Son of--Unregenerate man; personality, the name of the personal
consciousness. The spiritual man is God's Son; the personal man is man's
son.

man, spiritual--The sum total of the attributes or perfect idea of
Being, identified and individualized. This man is the "only begotten
Son" (John 3:16) of God.

Jehovah, or "I AM THAT I AM" (Exod. 3:14), is the name of this divine
man. He was manifested as the higher

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

self of Jesus. In the New Testament He is called the Christ. Jesus named
Him the "Father in me" (John 14: 10). He called Him Father more than
forty times.

man, ungodly--The ungodly man is unlike God; he seeks to accumulate
material riches, to gain worldly knowledge or fame. He does not know God
as the prosperity of himself and all others. "But the way of the wicked
\[ungodly\] shall perish" (Psalms 1:6).

manna--The bread of life; the Word of God. Represents the realization
that the divine substance is everywhere present, in every part of the
consciousness.

manger--Represents the animal life of the body in which the new life is
first manifested.

manifestation--The materialization of a Truth idea; the coming forth
into visibility of that which has been affirmed; the appearance of an
idea.

mansions, many--(John 14:2). Degrees of realization of the Truth of
Being. The "place" that Jesus prepared is a definite state of
realization of Truth into which may come all who take up the same
denials and affirmations that He took up.

mantle of Elijah--Represents the reflected power that falls on us and
becomes the abiding part of our consciousness, after we have declared
the Truth in the highest until it makes visible the mental currents
("chariots") and vital powers ("horsemen") of Being (II Kings 2:12).

mark on Cain--The mark set on Cain to keep him from being slain was the
consciousness of his divine origin. No matter how deep in transgressions
the body may be, it still bears the stamp of God.

marriage, spiritual--Spiritually, marriage represents the union of two
dominant states of consciousness. When we open the door of the mind by
consciously affirming the presence and power of the divine I AM in our
midst, there is a marriage or union of the higher forces in being with

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

the lower and we find that we are quickened in every part; the life of
the I AM has been poured out for us.

masters--Certain persons who call themselves "masters" claim that they
have forged ahead of the race in their understanding and use of some of
the powers of mind and have in personal egotism set up kingdoms and put
themselves on thrones. These so-called "masters" and members of occult
brotherhoods are attracting susceptible minds away from the straight and
narrow path and leading them to believe that there is a short cut into
the kingdom. Jesus described the situation forcibly and clearly in
Matthew 24:24: "For there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets,
and shall show great signs and wonders; so as to lead astray, if
possible, even the elect."

mastery and dominion--We demonstrate mastery and dominion by
persistently thinking thoughts of power and strength in the absolute
principle of Truth, and through the I AM establishing them in our own
consciousness.

materiality--The concept that the material universe is real, that the
three-dimension world really exists. The truth is that the material
world is a limitation of the four-dimension world; it has no permanent
existence and will come to an end. This is attested to by both religion
and science.

matter--Man's limited concept of divine substance that he has "formed"
in consciousness; a thought of substance as dense, solid, weighty, and
separate from the spiritual life that underlies it. When man is
quickened of the Spirit he knows Spirit to be all, in all, and he gives
all thought to this reality.

matter, rule of--That state of man where material ideas and standards
are the established rule of his life and actions.

meat eating--Meat eating stimulates the sense man and interferes with
the development of spiritual power. For many reasons it is better to
abstain from a meat diet.

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

First, because of the command, "Thou shalt not kill" (Exod. 20:13).
Injustice and cruelty react on the one who practices them, whether he
himself kills or partakes of that which has been killed for him by
others. Meat eating requires the spilling of blood, which destroys Truth
in consciousness. Destructive ideas are introduced into the stomach,
producing doubts and fears and physical inharmonies. The love of God
should be expressed toward all animals.

meditation--Continuous and contemplative thought; to dwell mentally on
anything; realizing the reality of the Absolute; a steady effort of the
mind to know God; man's spiritual approach to God.

The purpose of meditation is to expand the consciousness Christward; to
bring into realization divine Truth; to be transformed in spirit, soul,
and body by the renewing of the mind.

meek, the--Anyone highly trained to react to all negative stimuli with
love instead of with "an eye for an eye." "Blessed are the meek: for
they shall inherit the earth" (Matt. 5:5).

men of Israel--The religious thoughts and aspirations of man, which give
him access to resurrection life through faith in the Christ.

men of valor, mighty--Strong, courageous, conquering thoughts expressed
by man, inspired by the establishment of praise (Judah) and faith
(Benjamin) in consciousness.

mental assimilation--The mind assimilates what it affirms.

mental atmosphere--Surrounding or prevailing mental influence. Your
mental attitude, thoughts, and words are creative or destructive
influences in your world.

mental discipline--The practice of the daily training of the mind
through denials of error and affirmations of Truth.

mental premise--A basic mental premise is an original

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

proposition of Truth that serves as the ground for affirmation, such as,
"All is good."

mentality, adverse--The mortal mind with its beliefs and thoughts
opposed to the perfect Mind of Christ is the adverse mentality. All sin,
suffering, disease, and death are the work of the adverse mentality.

merchant--One who is seeking the "jewel" of spiritual good, through
exchange of thought, discussion, and argument. In order to attain the
inner pearl, the unadulterated Truth, man must give up the so-called
values and realize his oneness with the Christ within.

mercy--Christlike treatment toward the suffering. The important point in
desiring to be merciful is righteous adjustment, as this results in true
overcoming.

messenger--An intellectual perception of Truth that cleanses the mind
and heart and leads to the coming or conscious presence of the
indwelling Spirit of truth, the Christ.

messengers of God--Spiritual thoughts that always bring messages of
light and point the way to a harmonious co-operation between the
indwelling love of the heart and the understanding of the head.

Messiah--The promise of the visible manifestation of the Christ. Christ
is the fulfillment in man of this promise.

metaphysician--One skilled in the science of Being; a student and
teacher of the laws of Spirit.

metaphysics--The systematic study of the science of Being; that which
transcends the physical. By pure metaphysics is meant a clear
understanding of the realm of ideas and their legitimate expression.

microbes, how formed--Microbes or germs are formed by the power of
thought. Thoughts become entities and have identity according to the
character of the thought in the mind of the thinker. Error thoughts make
disease microbes. Positive thoughts form intelligent body-builders.

middle wall of partition--The division between the

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

conscious mind and the subconscious mind, caused by man's lack of
understanding of his true I AM nature. This partition is broken down by
the realization and manifestation of the one Divine Mind.

midnight--The darkened negative state of consciousness.

millennium--Man has for untold ages looked forward to a millennium day.
That day will always be in the future until we let go of our thought of
a future. The millennium day is now. It is established today--this very
hour.

millstone--A seeming hindrance of an earthly nature; a heavy burden.

Mind--By the term Mind, we mean God--the universal Principle, which
includes all principles.

As an aid in understanding how the universal Mind creates, we can
observe the action of our own mind because we are the offspring of the
one Mind and we bring forth in like manner. "The Son can do nothing of
himself, but what he seeth the Father doing: for what things so-ever he
doeth, these the Son also doeth in like manner" (John 5:19).

Man in the consciousness of the one Mind has no sense of apartness.
Through affirmation he can attune himself to Being, transmute his
thoughts into ideas, and accomplish the seemingly impossible.

mind--The starting point of every act and thought and feeling; the
common meeting ground of God and man. God is mind, and we cannot
describe God with human language, so we cannot describe mind. We can
only say: I am mind; I know. God is mind; He knows.

The mind is the seat of perception of the things we see, hear, and feel.
It is through the mind that we see the beauties of the earth and sky, of
music, of art, in fact, of everything. That silent shuttle of thought
working in and out through cell and nerve weaves into one harmonious
whole the myriad moods of mind, and we call it life.

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

mind, affirmative state of--A binding, holding process. If man affirms
his unity with the life, substance, and intelligence of God, he lays
hold of these spiritual qualities.

mind, carnal--Misuse of mind powers, arising from ignorance of the
relationship between God and man. A state of consciousness formed about
a false ego or false concept of man. All the "works of the flesh" (Gal.
5:19) are the product of carnal mind.

mind, change of--A change of mind is the very first requisite of the new
life in Christ. We go into this new and higher state of consciousness as
we would go into another country. The kingdom of heaven is right here in
our midst and will become tangible reality to us when we have developed
the faculties necessary to comprehend it.

mind, fixed state of--A combination of thoughts in consciousness that is
hard to change; ideas that have crystallized.

mind, mortal--Error consciousness in unregenerate man, or man composed
of ungodlike thoughts. It is the opposite of the Christ Mind, which is
the perfect Mind of God in man. Mortal mind gathers its information
through the senses. It judges by appearances, which are often false
judgments. Man must renounce this false state of mind if he is to be one
with God. Mortal mind breeds sin, poverty, sickness, and death.

mind of the flesh--(Rom. 8:7) Mixed thoughts, selfishness, fear, and the
like. These thoughts are what we find in persons of Gentile
consciousness, and in the regeneration they must be eliminated.

mind, subconscious--The sum of all man's past thinking; also his memory.
The subconscious mind sometimes acts as though separate from the
conscious mind: for instance, in dreams. The subconscious mind has no
power to do original thinking. It can act only upon what is given

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

to it through the conscious or the superconscious mind.

mind, three phases of--Conscious mind, subconscious mind, and
superconscious mind, called the Lord. The superconscious mind transcends
both the conscious and subconscious phases of mind. The harmonious
working together of these three seemingly separate minds is necessary to
the bringing forth of the latent possibilities of man.

miracle--"An event or effect in the physical world beyond or out of the
ordinary course of things, deviating from the known laws of nature, or
transcending our knowledge of these laws" (Webster). In reality miracles
are events that take place as a result of the operation of a higher,
unknown law. All true action is governed by law. Nothing just happens.
All happenings are the result of cause and can be explained under the
law of cause and effect.

Mighty things have been wrought in the past by those who had mere blind
faith to guide them. To faith we now add understanding of the law, and
our achievements will be a fulfillment of the promise of Jesus, "He that
believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also; and greater works
than these shall he do" (John 14:12).

mist--Lack of clear understanding between the earth consciousness and
the spiritual Mind.

money--A medium of exchange and a measurement of value. The
materialization of spiritual substance. The symbol of the idea of
prosperity.

Money is a symbol that represents values in goods, land, or service.
Substance in the form of money is given to us for constructive uses. The
money idea is good and draws to us good when we are functioning in
divine order.

Love of money is the root of much evil. Man should love the source of
all money, God.

money changers--Dishonest thoughts of materialism and greed. The
consciousness must be cleansed of these if the body temple is to be kept
pure and holy.

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

moon--Represents personal intelligence; the intellect.

Its light is supplied by the sun, symbol of spiritual light.

mortal beliefs--Beliefs in sickness, sin, poverty, trouble, accident,
and death, which are prevalent in the race mind.

mortal consciousness--Consciousness of self as separate from God. This
is a false consciousness. Consciousness must harmonize with God-Mind to
be free from thoughts of poverty, sin, sickness, and death.

mortal ego--Identification of the I AM with the whole array of false
race and individual mental patterns.

mortal plane--That realm of ideas conceived in mortal, or material
consciousness.

mortal words--Words spoken by the intellectual man. They are empty
because they lack the life and substance necessary to impart spiritual
life and nourishment to the mind.

motherhood, divine--The brooding, nourishing element of Divine Mind, or
God, in which spiritual ideals are brought to fruition.

mountain--A mountain represents an exalted state of mind where the
divine plan may be perceived and unfolded; a state of spiritual
realization.

The "high mountain" to which personality carries us in our spiritual
uplift is the consciousness of power over mortal thought in all its
earthly avenues of expression. Going up into the mountain to pray means
elevating our thoughts and our aspirations to the spiritual viewpoint.

mule--Represents human will. When it is ridden and is obedient, it
infers subjection of that faculty to the established order.

multitude--The "great multitude" of John 6:5 is composed of our own
hungry thoughts. They want an influx of the Truth of Spirit into
consciousness. "Man doth not live by bread only, but by everything that
proceedeth out of the mouth of Jehovah doth man live" (Deut. 8:3).

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

mustard seed--The mustard seed comparison shows the capacity of the
apparently small thought of Truth to develop in consciousness until it
becomes the abiding place of a higher range of thoughts (birds of the
air).

myrrh--An aromatic gum resin; a slightly pungent perfume, used for
incense. Metaphysically myrrh represents the eternity of Spirit, an
emblem of the Resurrection, an ointment of love.

mystic--One who has intimate, firsthand acquaintance with God; a man of
prayer. Jesus was the greatest mystic of all ages.

mysticism--The practice of the presence of God; the life of prayer that
results in intuitive knowledge and experience of God.

The Bible contains more high mysticism than all other books. Spiritual
things are spiritually discerned. It is necessary to call on one's own
spiritual light to enter into the deep mysticism of the Bible.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: N](trw15.md)
