[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](trw20)  [Next](trw22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*The Revealing Word*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1959\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

tabernacle--Represents the temporal body of man, as the Temple built by
Solomon in Jerusalem represents the permanent body. In the wilderness of
sense, man worships God in a tent, or a temporary, transitory state of
mind, which makes a perishable body. Yet in this flimsy structure are
all the furnishings of the great temple that is to be built. So the body
of every man is the promise of an imperishable one.

tables of stone--Represent the very foundation of our being, on which
are engraved the memories of all our religious experiences.

talents (Matt. 25:14-30)--Symbolize our spiritual

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

gifts of life, love, truth, substance, intelligence, faith, power,
judgment, and will. Every inherent attribute of man's being has its root
in God. All the gifts of Spirit are to be used to our fullest capacity.

teacher--Jesus appointed but one teacher in His school: the Spirit of
truth, the Comforter in every man. "But the Comforter, even the Holy
Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all
things, and bring to you remembrance all that I said unto you" (John
14:25).

telepathy--Thought transference; exchange of thought between persons
without visible means of transmission. This is a limited concept of
omnipresent knowing. When one becomes spiritually developed he does not
send his thought to another, but realizes omnipresent knowing, and the
ideas he wishes to communicate are received and understood.

Temple, Solomon's--Metaphysically, a symbol of the regenerated body of
man, which when he attains it he will never leave. This enduring temple
is built in the understanding of Spirit as the one and only cause of all
things.

temptation--A proving, testing, or trying. The temptations in the
wilderness (Matt. 4:1-11) represent the desires and ambitions of the
untried and untrained forces in the subconsciousness. When in the
wilderness, Jesus was tempted by the Adversary, or personality; but with
His superior understanding, He withstood the deceptive promises made to
Him. When the personality suggested that Jesus make matter out of
substance, use His power to rule over others, or do other marvelous
things to prove His mastery, He said to the satanic personality, "Get
thee hence, Satan."

That the temptations in the wilderness were not physical is quite
evident, because there was no mountain from which all the kingdoms of
the earth could be seen, nor was there a temple in the wilderness to
which the Adversary could

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

have taken Jesus. All these, and many more, including the royal entry of
Jesus into Jerusalem riding on an ass, are allegorical representations
of the way in which certain states of mind are handled by the initiate.

tents--The flesh bodies of man that he puts on and off again and again.
(see tabernacle)

thanksgiving--Rendering our grateful thoughts to God for His manifold
blessings. "Surely goodness and loving-kindness shall follow me all the
days of my life" (Psalms 23:6). We give thanks that this is Truth.

Thanksgiving will keep the heart fresh; for true thanksgiving may be
likened to rain falling upon ready soil, refreshing it and increasing
its productiveness.

therapy--That phase of metaphysics which treats of divine healing. We
are all interested in the soul and how to save it. Those who follow
Jesus go one step farther in soul therapy than the average
psychoanalyst; they incorporate Spirit with soul and make it the primal
source and sustainer of both soul and body. "It is the spirit that
giveth life" (John 6:63).

things--Thoughts lowered in vibration to the level of sense perception.
The things that appear are the formulations of man's ideas of himself
and God. Back of everything is a thought. Still the senses and you will
perceive the thought behind the things.

thinking--The formulating process of mind. It is a faculty of the ego,
the omnipotent I AM of each one of us. The thinking faculty is the inlet
and the outlet of all your ideas. It is active, zealous, impulsive, but
not always wise. Its nature is to think, and think it will. If you are
ignorant of your office--a prince in the house of David--and stand
meekly by and let it think unsifted thoughts, your thinking faculty will
prove an unruly servant. Its food is ideas--symbolized in the Gospels as
fishes--and it is forever casting its net on the right, on the left, for
a draught. You alone can direct where its net shall be cast.

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

You are the one who says, "Cast the net on the right side" (John 21:6).

The thinking faculty in you makes you a free agent, because it is your
creative center; in and through this one power you establish your
consciousness--you build your world. Through the volition of this
faculty, you can refuse to receive ideas from Christ, you can cut
yourself away from the realm of original Truth, or from the illusionary
universe in which you are forever unraveling tangled ends and chasing
shadows. Thus we see clearly that this faculty is the rock, the
foundation upon which the consciousness must be built.

Be no longer a slave to the thinking faculty; command it to be still and
know. Stand at the center of your being and say "I and the Father are
one" (John 10:30). "I am meek and lowly in heart" (Matt. 11:29). "All
authority hath been given unto me in heaven and on earth" (Matt. 28:18).
"There is no God else besides me" (Isa. 45:21).

thought--A product of thinking; a mental vibration or impulse. Each
thought is an identity that has a central ego, around which all its
elements revolve. Thoughts are capable of expressing themselves. Every
thought clothes itself in a life form according to the character given
it by the thinker. The form is simply the conclusion of the thought.

One of the axiomatic truths of metaphysics is that "thoughts are
things." That the mind of man marshals its faculties and literally makes
into living entities the thoughts that it entertains is also a foregone
conclusion. The word things expresses poorly the active and very vital
character of the thoughts to which the mind gives life, substance, and
intelligence. We see many inanimate "things" around us in the material
world. If we compare our creative thoughts with them we get an inferior
conception of the marvelous ability of our mind in its creative
capacity.

Thought is controlled by the right use of affirmation and denial--by the
power of the mind to accept and

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

reject. This power of the mind is the I AM, and it is through the avenue
of expression (I AM) that thought control, dominion, and mastery are
obtained. Thoughts are controlled by the mind through its power to say
"yes" or "no." To "hold a thought" is to affirm or deny a certain
proposition both mentally and audibly until the logic of the mind is
satisfied and spiritual realization is attained.

thought atmosphere--The surrounding mental climate created by each
person in accordance with the character of his thinking. Thoughts of
negation build an antagonistic and discordant atmosphere. Thoughts of
love and prosperity, of health and faith, create a harmonious mental
atmosphere.

thought center--A collection or aggregation of ideas in the mind.
Thoughts of one kind are attracted one to another, form in
consciousness, group themselves in the body, and build organs through
which they manifest. For example, love manifests through the heart.

thought, colony of--Like attracts like. A thought will take up its abode
in our consciousness with thoughts of like character. This law of
attraction continues until combined thoughts make a colony. This colony
of thoughts expresses itself in the cells of the body--for good or ill.

thought power--The moving force within an idea that gives it expression.
All structures are built by thought power. This power is transmitted
from mind to mind and from mind to body in all living forms.

thought-stuff--The omnipresent, invisible substance ever ready to take
form in accordance with one's mental pattern. The thought-stuff of the
universe is more sensitive than a phonographic record; it transcribes
not only all sounds, but even the slightest vibration of thought.

thought vibrations--Energies sent out by the force and power of thought.
All who are in like planes of consciousness with the thinker of the
thought receive these thought energies. In this way telepathic messages
are sent

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

and received. When one sends thoughts in personal consciousness, the
process is laborious and dangerous. There is a law of Spirit that
equalizes all forces generated by the mind. This law is in the keeping
of divine Principle, and there is neither success nor safety in using
thought energies without its guiding wisdom.

time--The limitation of man's consciousness of space. A day is a measure
of time in the realm of effects. A sidereal day is that period in which
the earth rotates once on its axis. Man divided that period into
seconds, minutes, hours, and thus invented time.

Time is the measure that man gives to passing events. The only power in
time is what man imparts to it. When man gets into the understanding of
the Absolute, he takes his freedom from all bondage of time and declares
that time shall no more enter into the substance of his mind or body or
affairs.

tithe--A tenth part. In the Old Testament the tithe or tenth is
mentioned as a reasonable and just return to the Lord by way of
acknowledging Him as the source of supply.

tithing--Giving a tenth of one's supply to God and His work. Tithing is
a tacit agreement that man is in partnership with God in the conduct of
his finances. This leads to confidence and assurance that whatever is
done will bring increase of some kind. "Give, and it shall be given unto
you" (Luke 6:38).

Tithing, which is based on a law that cannot fail, establishes method in
giving. It brings into the consciousness a sense of divine order that is
manifested in one's outer life and affairs as increased efficiency and
greater prosperity. It is the surest way ever found to demonstrate
plenty, for it is God's own law and way of giving. "Freely ye received,
freely give" (Matt. 10:8).

tolerance--Forbearance; allowing to be done without hindering. Tolerance
is passive, and good as far as it goes.

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

Love is active good will. Love takes the initiative in doing and
thinking good, and is far superior to tolerance.

tomb of Joseph of Arimathea--A tomb is a resting place; Arimathea
represents an aggregation of thoughts of lofty character, a high state
of consciousness in man; Joseph represents a state of consciousness in
which we are improving spiritually.

The tomb where Jesus was laid to rest represents an elevated, peaceful
state of consciousness in which He rested the three days previous to His
resurrection. The word of Truth within Jesus did not die, but was
quietly spreading from point to point during this period, getting ready
for the supreme test: the overcoming of the appearance of death. For us,
the tomb represents a high state of consciousness in us in which we
improve in character along all lines. We not only grow into a broader
understanding but also we increase in vitality and substance. We are
resting in God, and at the same time gathering strength for the power of
greater demonstrations to follow. In this state of consciousness the
word of Truth is not idle, but quietly spreading. This process continues
until the whole consciousness is vitalized by the Holy Spirit.

tongues, speaking with--Symbolizes increased ability to express Truth
clearly and freely.

traits, inherited--Belief in the authority of our forefathers to
determine our physical and mental characteristics. A form of error
thinking. "Call no man your father on the earth" (Matt. 23:9).

transcendent God--God above or beyond His universe, apart from it. God
is more than His universe; He is prior to and is exalted above it, but
at once He is in His universe as the very essence of it. God is both
transcendent and immanent.

transfiguration--Supernatural change of appearance that takes place as
one experiences the full flow of divine power through his being. A
lifting up of the soul that

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

electrifies the body, causing it to shine. An example held before every
follower of the Christ, of the glory it is possible to experience
through habitual uplift of life and thought.

transgression of the law--Thinking thoughts that violate the principle
of mental harmony inherent in Being.

transmutation--Change in character, from one phase to another. The
lifting up of mind and body, from material aspect to spiritual
character.

According to modern science this whole universe of forms can be
dissolved into energy, from which it may again be formed. Science does
not say that the directive and formative power is man, but the Bible so
teaches and especially Jesus. Jesus said that all authority was given to
Him in heaven and on earth. He manifested His power in a small way by
multiplying a few loaves and fishes to feed more than five thousand
persons. In various other instances He demonstrated that He had an
understanding of the transmutation of substance. He raised His flesh
body to an energy level far higher in potential life and substance than
any reached before.

transubstantiation--The doctrine that the consecration by the minister
of bread and wine changes the material elements to Christ elements,
without affecting their appearance. At the Last Supper Jesus taught that
the bread and wine which He consecrated were His body and His blood, and
He told His followers to partake of them in remembrance of Him. He did
not say that these elements were symbols of His blood and body, but that
they were essentially the same substance and life as His body. This also
has been the teaching of the church, as interpreted by the Council of
Trent: "Under each species and under each particle of each species
Christ is contained whole and entire."

This doctrine has been attacked both within and without the church, the
majority of ministers and laymen accepting

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

it on faith as in some way related to the miraculous. But the
discoveries of the elemental character of matter by modern science are
revealing the universal unity of substance and the possibility of its
transformation from one thing to another by changing the number of
arrangement of the electrons in the atom.

treatment--Spiritual realization of God's Truth for oneself or another.
Spiritual process, or prayer, by which man receives the healing power of
God.

A treatment is a prayer of faith and understanding for healing, harmony,
wisdom, prosperity, or any other good that man may desire. Its object is
to raise the consciousness of the one being treated to a high spiritual
consciousness through which healing is accomplished.

trees--Represent nerves, and nerves are expressions of thoughts of
unity. They connect thought centers. The trees growing on both sides of
the river represent the nerves radiating from the vital flow on each
side of the spinal column, and connecting and unifying the whole
organism.

From the center of our being there spreads into every department of mind
and body, the life-giving, everbearing tree of the Spirit of God. Its
fruits are intelligence to the mind, substance to the body, and life to
the entire being.

tree, oak--An oak tree in itself stands for something very strong and
protective; but in Hebrew it has a deeper significance than this. The
word comes from the root from which is derived the word Elohim; so we
are reminded of the truth that those who trust God as their defense, as
their refuge, their fortress, and dwell "in the secret place of the Most
High, shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty," and shall not only
be kept from all evil and its results, but shall continue to grow and
unfold in understanding, in spirituality, and in every good.

"tree of life" (Gen. 2:9).--The eternal, omnipresent life of God that is
within man. The tree of life "in the midst of the garden" is the innate,
indwelling idea of immortal

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

life, and the fruit of that tree is the consciousness of eternal life in
the body.

The "tree of life" (figuratively in the midst of the garden) manifests
in the body as a reserve force. The brain is the center, the solar
plexus is the subcenter, and there are innumerable minor centers
throughout the organism, the spinal cord, and nervous system. A
conservation of the life and substance of the organism is necessary to
its spiritualization and redemption.

"tree of the knowledge of good and evil" (Gen. 2:9)--Indicates a dual
state of consciousness, a belief in both good and error, which
eventually drives man out of the garden (his body temple).

tree, olive--Growing both under and above water, represents the
restoration of unity between the material and spiritual, or God and man.

trinity--The religious terms for the trinity are Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit. The metaphysical terms are mind, idea, and expression.

Father is the source, origin, essence, root, creator of all. Son is that
which proceeds from, is begotten of the Father, like Him in nature, and
essentially all that the Father is. Holy Spirit is God's word in
movement: the working, moving, breathing, brooding of Spirit, made known
to men through revelation, inspiration, and guidance. The Holy Spirit is
the Comforter who will bring all things to their remembrance.

The doctrine of the trinity is often a stumbling block, because we find
it difficult to understand how three persons can be one. Three persons
cannot be one, and theology will always be a mystery until theologians
become metaphysicians.

God is the name of the all-encompassing Mind. Christ is the name of the
all-loving Mind. Holy Spirit is the all-active manifestation. These
three are one fundamental Mind in its three creative aspects.

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

trouble--Calamity, difficulty, disaster; the sure result of wrong
thinking. All economic, social, and personal trouble can be traced back
to selfishness of the sense man. When spiritual man takes control of
mind substance, all trouble of every kind dissolves into thin air.

trumpets and cymbals (Ezra 3: 10)--The trumpets and cymbals in the hands
of the priests and Levites are the thrills and waves of harmonious
energy. They go to every part of our mind and our body when we rejoice
in Spirit, when our heart is filled with gratitude, and we express
ourselves in thanksgiving to the Author of our being.

Truth--The Absolute; that which accords with God as divine principle;
that which is, has been, and ever will be; that which eternally is. The
Truth of God is reality: "the same yesterday and to-day, yea and for
ever." The verities of being are eternal and have always existed. Truth
abides in fullness at the very core of man's being. As his consciousness
(awareness) expands, he touches the everlasting Truth. What seems new is
but the unveiling of that which always has been.

The basic principle of Truth is that the mind of each individual may be
consciously unified with Divine Mind through the indwelling Christ. By
affirming at-one-ment with God-Mind, we eventually realize that perfect
mind which was in Christ Jesus.

Truth, road of--The straight and narrow path along which Spirit directs,
and which proves so smooth and safe that one refuses to allow oneself to
be misled by habit into trusting sense perception.

Truth, source of--God is a special, personal Father to all His children,
and from no other source can they get absolute Truth.

truth, Spirit of--God's thought projecting into our mind ideas that will
build spiritual consciousness like that of Jesus. The Spirit of truth
watches every detail of our life. When we ask and by affirmation
proclaim its presence,

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

it brings new life into both mind and body and moves us to observe
spiritual and physical laws that restore health.

twelve--Metaphysically, twelve always refers to spiritual fulfillment.
"And Elijah took twelve stones, according to the number of the tribes of
the sons of Jacob . . . And with the stones he built an altar in the
name of Jehovah" (I Kings 18:31, 32). The twelve stones represent the
twelve most important nerve centers in the body. All material things
represent spiritual realities.

Before we can realize unfettered power we must establish permanent
resolutions of purity and covenants of conformity with the higher law of
obedience. Elijah repaired the altar of Jehovah that had been thrown
down. Obedience seems a simple matter, but the twelve fundamental
faculties enter into its perfect expression. Elijah took twelve stones
and fitted them together to form the altar, each stone representing one
of the sons of Jacob, who won the name Israel in recognition of his
perseverance toward perfection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: U](trw22)
