[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ptn05)  [Next](ptn07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048641812X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002H9XT7I/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Popular Tales from the Norse*, by George Webbe Dasent, \[1904\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DIFFUSION.

This general affinity established, we proceed to narrow our subject to
its proper limits, and to confine it to the consideration, *first*, of
Popular Tales in general, and, *secondly*, of those Norse Tales in
particular, which form the bulk of this volume.

In the first place, then, the fact which we remarked on setting out,
that the groundwork or plot of many of

<span id="page_lviii">p. lviii</span>

these tales is common to all the nations of Europe, is more important,
and of greater scientific interest, than might at first appear. They
form, in fact, another link in the chain of evidence of a common origin
between the East and West, and even the obstinate adherents of the old
classical theory, according to which all resemblances were set down to
sheer copying from Greek or Latin patterns, are now forced to confess
not only that there was no such wholesale copying at all, but that, in
many cases, the despised vernacular tongues have preserved the common
traditions far more faithfully than the writers of Greece and Rome, The
sooner in short that this theory of copying, which some even besides the
classicists have maintained, is abandoned, the better, not only for the
truth but for the literary reputation of those who put it forth. No one
can, of course, imagine that during that long succession of ages when
this mighty wedge of Aryan migration was driving its way through that
prehistoric race, that nameless nationality, the traces of which we
everywhere find underlying the intruders in their monuments and
implements of bone and stone—a race akin, in all probability, to the
Mongolian family, and whose miserable remnants we see pushed aside, and
huddled up in the holes and corners of Europe, as Lapps, and Finns, and
Basques—no one, we say, can suppose for a moment, that in that long
process of contact and absorption, some traditions of either race should
not have been caught up and adopted by the other. We know it to be a
fact with regard to their language, from the evidence of philology,
which cannot lie; and the witness borne by such a word as the Gothic
Atta for *father*, where a Mongolian has been

<span id="page_lix">p. lix</span>

adopted in preference to an Aryan word, is irresistible on this point;
but that, apart from such natural assimilation, all the thousand shades
of resemblance and affinity which gleam and flicker through the whole
body of popular tradition in the Aryan race, as the Aurora plays and
flashes in countless rays athwart the Northern heaven, should be the
result of mere servile copying of one tribe's traditions by another, is
a supposition as absurd as that of those good country-folk, who, when
they see an Aurora, fancy it must be a great fire, the work of some
incendiary, and send off the parish engine to put it out. No! when we
find in such a story as "The Master Thief" traits which are to be found
in the Sanscrit *Hitopadesa*, <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21) and
which

<span id="page_lx">p. lx</span>

reminds us at once of the story of Rhampsinitus in Herodotus; which are
also to be found in German, Italian, and Flemish popular tales, but told
in all with such variations of character and detail, and such
adaptations to time and place, as evidently show the original working of
the national consciousness upon a stock of tradition common to all the
race, but belonging to no tribe of that race in particular; and when we
find this occurring not in one tale but in twenty, we are forced to
abandon the theory of such universal copying, for fear lest we should
fall into a greater difficulty than that for which we were striving to
account.

To set this question in a plainer light, let us take a well-known
instance; let us take the story of William Tell and his daring shot,
which is said to have been made in the year 1307. It is just possible
that the feat might be historical, and, no doubt, thousands believe it
for the sake of the Swiss patriot, as firmly as they believe in
anything; but, unfortunately, this story of the bold archer who saves
his life by shooting an apple from the head of his child at the command
of a tyrant is common to the whole Aryan race. It appears in Saxo
Grammaticus, who flourished in the twelfth century, where it is told of
Palnatoki,

<span id="page_lxi">p. lxi</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> King Harold
Gormson's thane and assassin. In the thirteenth century the Wilkina Saga
relates it of Egill, Völundr's—our Wayland Smith's—younger brother. So
also in the Norse Saga of Saint Olof, king and martyr: the king, who
died in 1030, eager for the conversion of one of his heathen chiefs
Eindridi, competes with him in various athletic exercises, first in
swimming and then in archery. After several famous shots on either side,
the king challenges Eindridi to shoot a tablet off his son's head
without hurting the child. Eindridi is ready, but declares he will
revenge himself if the child is hurt. The king has the first shot, and
his arrow strikes close to the tablet. Then Eindridi is to shoot, but at
the prayers of his mother and sister, refuses the shot, and has to yield
and be converted. <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22) So, also, King
Harold Sigurdarson, who died 1066, backed himself against a famous
marksman, Hemingr, and ordered him to shoot a hazel-nut off the head of
his brother Björn, and Hemingr performed the feat. <span
id="fr_23"></span>[2](#fn_23) In the middle of the fourteenth century,
the *Malleus Maleficarum* refers it to Puncher, a magician of the Upper
Rhine. Here in England, we have it in the old English ballad of Adam
Bell, Clym. of the Clough, and William of Cloudesly, where William
performs the feat. <span id="fr_24"></span>[3](#fn_24) It is not told at
all of Tell in Switzerland before the year 1499, and the earlier Swiss
chronicles omit it altogether. It is common to the Turks and Mongolians;
and a legend of the wild Samoyeds, who never heard of Tell

<span id="page_lxii">p. lxii</span>

or saw a book in their lives, relates it, chapter and verse, of one of
their famous marksmen. What shall we say then, but that the story of
this bold master-shot was primeval amongst many tribes and races, and
that it only crystallised itself round the great name of Tell by that
process of attraction which invariably leads a grateful people to throw
such mythic wreaths, such garlands of bold deeds of precious memory,
round the brow of its darling champion. <span
id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25)

<span id="page_lxiii">p. lxiii</span>

Nor let any pious Welshman be shocked if we venture to assert that
Gellert, that famous hound upon whose last resting place the traveller
comes as he passes down the lovely vale of Gwynant, is a mythical dog,
and never

<span id="page_lxiv">p. lxiv</span>

snuffed the fresh breeze in the forest of Snowdon, nor saved his
master's child from ravening wolf. This, too, is a primeval story, told
with many variations. Sometimes the foe is a wolf, sometimes a bear,
sometimes a snake. Sometimes the faithful guardian of the child is an
otter, a weasel, or a dog. It, too, came from the East. It is found in
the *Pantcha-Tantra*, in the *Hitopadesa*, in Bidpai's

<span id="page_lxv">p. lxv</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Fables, in the
Arabic original of the Seven Wise Masters,—that famous collection of
stories which illustrate a stepdame's calumny and hate—and in many
medieval versions of those originals. <span
id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26) Thence it passed into the Latin *Gesta
Romanorum*, where, as well as in the Old English version published by
Sir Frederick Madden, it may be read as a

<span id="page_lxvi">p. lxvi</span>

service rendered by a faithful hound against a snake. This, too, like
Tell's master-shot, is as the lightning which shineth over the whole
heaven at once, and can be claimed by no one tribe of the Aryan race, to
the exclusion of the rest. "The Dog of Montargis" is in like manner
mythic, though perhaps not so widely spread. It first occurs in France,
as told of Sybilla, a fabulous wife of Charlemagne; but it is at any
rate as old as the time of Plutarch, who relates it as an anecdote of
brute sagacity in the days of Pyrrhus.

There can be no doubt, with regard to the question of the origin of
these tales, that they were common in germ at least to the Aryan tribes
before their migration. We find those germs developed in the popular
traditions of the Eastern Aryans, and we find them developed in a
hundred forms and shapes in every one of the nations into which the
Western Aryans have shaped themselves in the course of ages. We are led,
therefore, irresistibly to the conclusion, that these traditions are as
much a portion of the common inheritance of our ancestors, as their
language unquestionably is; and that they form, along with that
language, a double chain of evidence, which proves their Eastern origin.
If we are to seek for a simile, or an analogy, as to the relative
positions of these tales and traditions, and to the mutual resemblances
which exist between them as the several branches of our race have
developed them from the common stock, we may find it in one which will
come home to every reader as he looks round the domestic hearth, if he
should be so happy as to have one. They are like as sisters of one house
are like. They have what would be called a strong family likeness;

<span id="page_lxvii">p. lxvii</span>

but besides this likeness, which, they owe to father or mother, as the
case may be, they have each their peculiarities of form and eye and
face, and, still more, their differences of intellect and mind. This may
be dark, that fair; this may have grey eyes, that black; this may be
open and graceful, that reserved and close; this you may love, that you
can take no interest in. One may be bashful, another winning, a third
worth knowing, and yet hard to know. They are so like, and so unlike. At
first it may be, as an old English writer beautifully expresses it,
"their father hath writ them as his own little story," but as they grow
up they throw off the copy, educate themselves for good or ill, and
finally assume new forms of feeling and feature under an original
development of their own.

Or shall we take another likeness, and say they are national dreams;
that they are like the sleeping thoughts of many men upon one and the
same thing, Suppose a hundred men to have been eye-witnesses of some
event on the same day, and then to have slept and dreamt of it; we
should have as many distinct representations of that event, all turning
upon it and bound up with it in some way, but each preserving the
personality of the sleeper, and working up the common stuff in a higher
or lower degree, just as the fancy and the intellect of the sleeper was
at a higher or lower level of perfection. There is, indeed, greater
truth in this likeness than may at first sight appear. In the popular
tale, properly so called, the national mind dreams all its history over
again; in its half-conscious state it takes this trait and that trait,
this feature and that feature, of times and ages long past. It

<span id="page_lxviii">p. lxviii</span>

snatches up bits of its old beliefs, and fears, and griefs, and glory,
and pieces them together with something that happened yesterday, and
then holds up the distorted reflection in all its inconsequence, just as
it has passed before that magic glass, as though it were genuine
history, and matter for pure belief. And here it may be as well to say,
that besides that old classical foe of vernacular tradition, there is
another hardly less dangerous, which returns to the charge of copying,
but changes what lawyers call the venue of the trial from classical to
Eastern lands. According to this theory, which came up when its
classical predecessor was no longer tenable, the traditions and tales of
Western Europe came from the East, but they were still all copies. They
were supposed to have proceeded entirely from two sources: one the
*Directorium Humanæ Vitæ* of John of Capua, translated between 1262-78
from a Hebrew version, which again came from an Arabic version of the
eighth century, which came from a Pehlvi version made by one Barzouyeh,
at the command of Chosrou Noushirvan, King of Persia, in the sixth
century, which again came from the *Pantcha-Tantra*, a Sanscrit original
of unknown antiquity. This is that famous book of *Calila* and *Dimna*,
as the Persian version is called, attributed to Bidpai, and which was
thus run to earth in India. The second source of Western tradition was
held to be that still more famous collection of stories commonly known
by the name of the "Story of the Seven Sages," but which, under many
names—Kaiser Octavianus, Diocletianus, Dolopathos, Erastus, etc.—plays a
most important part in medieval romance. This, too, by a similar
process, has been traced to India, appearing first in

<span id="page_lxix">p. lxix</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Europe at the
beginning of the thirteenth century in the Latin Historia Septem
Sapientum Romæ, by Dame Jehans, monk in the Abbey of Haute Selve. Here,
too, we have a Hebrew, an Arabic, and a Persian version; which last came
avowedly from a Sanscrit original, though that original has not vet been
discovered. From these two sources of fable and tradition, according to
the new copying theory, our Western fables and tales had come by direct
translation from the East. Now it will be at once evident that this
theory hangs on what ma be called a single thread. Let us say, then,
that all that can be found in *Calila* and *Dimna*, or the later Persian
version, made A.D. 1494, of Hossein Vaez, called the *Anvari Sohaili*,
"the Canopic Lights,"—from which, when published in Paris by David Sahid
of Ispahan, in the year 1644, La Fontaine drew the substance of many of
his best fables.—Let us say, too, that all can be found in the "Life of
the Seven Sages," "or the Book of Sendabad," as it was called in Persia,
after an apocryphal Indian sage—came by translation—that is to say,
through the cells of Brahmins, magians, and monks, and the labours of
the learned—into the popular literature of the West. Let us give up all
that, and then see where we stand. What are we to say of the many tales
and fables which are to be found in neither of those famous collections,
and not tales alone, but traits and features of old tradition, broken
bits of fable, roots and germs of mighty growths of song and story, nay,
even the very words, which exist in Western popular literature, and
which modern philology has found obstinately sticking in Sanscrit, and
of which fresh proofs and instances are discovered every day? What

<span id="page_lxx">p. lxx</span>

are we to say of such a remarkable resemblance as this?—

"The noble King Putraka fled into the Vindhya mountains in order to live
apart from his unkind kinsfolk; and as he wandered about there he met
two men who wrestled and fought with one another. 'Who are you?' he
asked. 'We are the sons of Mayâsara, and here lie our riches; this bowl,
this staff, and these shoes; these are what we are fighting for, and
whichever is stronger is to have them for his own.'

"So when Putraka had heard that, he asked them with a laugh, 'Why,
what's the good of owning these things?'

"Then they answered, 'Whoever puts on these shoes gets the power to fly;
whatever is pointed at with this staff rises up at once; and whatever
food one wishes for in this bowl, it comes at once.'

"So when Putraka had heard that he said, 'Why fight about it? Let this
be the prize; whoever beats the other in a race, let him have them all.'

"'So be it,' said the two fools, and set off running, but Putraka put on
the shoes at once, and flew away with the staff and bowl up into the
clouds."

Well, this is a story neither in the *Pantcha-Tantra* nor the
*Hitopadesa*, the Sanscrit originals of *Calila* and *Dimna*. It is not
in the *Directorium Humanæ Vitæ*, and has not passed west by that way.
Nor is it in the *Book of Sendabad*, and thence come west in the
"History of the Seven Sages." Both these paths are stopped. it comes
from the Katha Sarit Sagara, the "Sea of Streams of Story" of *Somadeva
Bhatta* of Cashmere, who, in the middle of the twelfth century of our
era, worked up the tales found in an earlier collection, called the
*Vrikat* 

<span id="page_lxxi">p. lxxi</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Katha*, "the
lengthened story," in order to amuse his mistress, the Queen of
Cashmere. Somadeva's collection has only been recently known and
translated. But west the story certainly came long before, and in the
extreme north-west we still find it in these Norse Tales in "The Three
Princesses of Whiteland," [p. 181](ptn36.htm#page_181).

"'Well!' said the man, 'as this is so, I'll give you a bit of advice.
Hereabouts, on a moor, stand three brothers, and there they have stood
these hundred years, fighting about a bat, a cloak, and a pair of boots.
If any one has these three things, he can make himself invisible, and
wish himself anywhere he pleases. You can tell them you wish to try the
things, and after that, you'll pass judgment between them, whose they
shall be.'

"Yes! the king thanked the man, and went and did as he told him.

"'What's all this?' he said to the brothers. 'Why do you stand here
fighting for ever and a day? Just lot me try these things, and I'll give
judgment whose they shall be.'

"They were very willing to do this; but as soon as he had got the hat,
cloak, and boots, he said—

"'When we meet next time I'll tell you my judgment;' and with these
words he wished himself away."

Nor in the Norse Tales alone. Other collections shew bow thoroughly at
home this story was in the East. In the Relations of *Ssidi K'ur*, a
Tartar tale, a Chan's son first gets possession of a cloak which two
children stand and fight for, which has the gift of making the wearer
invisible, and afterwards of a pair of boots, with which one can wish
one's-self to whatever place one chooses. Again, in a Wallachian tale,
we read of three devils who

<span id="page_lxxii">p. lxxii</span>

fight for their inheritance—a club which turns everything to stone, a
hat which makes the wearer invisible, and a cloak by help of which one
can wish one's-self whithersoever one pleases. Again, in a Mongolian
tale, the Chan's son comes upon a group of children who fight for a hood
which makes the wearer invisible; he is to be judge between. them, makes
them run a race for it, but meanwhile puts it on and vanishes from their
sight. A little further on he meets another group, who are quarrelling
for a pair of boots, the wearer of which can wish himself whithersoever
he pleases, and gains possession of them in the same way. <span
id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27)

Nor in one Norse tale alone, but in many, we find traces of these three
wonderful things, or of things like them. They are very like the cloth,
the ram, and the stick, which the lad got from the North Wind instead of
his meal. Very like, too, the cloth, the scissors, and the tap, which
will be found in [p. 252](ptn46.htm#page_252), "The Best Wish." If we
drop the number three, we find the Boots again in "Soria Moria Castle,"
[p. 396](ptn66.htm#page_396). Leaving the Norse Tales, we see at once
that they are the seven-league boots of Jack the Giant Killer. In the
Nibelungen Lied, when Siegfried finds Schilbung and Niblung, the weird
heirs of the famous "Hoard," striving for the possession of that heap of
red gold and gleaming stones; when they beg him to share it for them,
promising him, as his meed, Balmung, best of swords; when he shares it,
when they are discontent, and when in the struggle which ensues he gets
possession of he *tarnhut*, the "cloak of darkness," which gave its

<span id="page_lxxiii">p. lxxiii</span>

wearer the strength of twelve men, and enabled him to go where he would
unseen, and which was the great prize among the treasures of the
dwarfs; <span id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28) who is there that does not
see the broken fragments of that old Eastern story of the heirs
struggling for their inheritance, and calling in the aid of some one of
better wit or strength, who ends by making the very prize for which they
fight his own?

And now to return for a moment to *Calila* and *Dimna*, and "The Seven
Sages." Since we have seen that there are other stories, and many of
them, for this is by no means the only resemblance to be found in
*Somadeva's* book <span id="fr_29"></span>[2](#fn_29) which are common
to the Eastern and

<span id="page_lxxiv">p. lxxiv</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Western Aryans,
but which did not travel to Europe by translation; let us go on to say
that it is by no means certain, even when some Western story or fable is
found in these Sanscrit originals and their translations, that that was
the only way by which they came to Europe. A single question will prove
this. How did the fables and apologues which are found in Æsop, and
which are also found in the *Pantcha-Tantra* and the *Hitopadesa* come
West? That they came from the East is certain; but by what
way?—certainly not by translation or copying, for they had travelled
west long before translations were thought of. How was it that
Themistius, a Greek orator of the fourth century, <span
id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30) had heard of that fable of the lion, fox,
and bull, which is in substance the same as that of the lion, the bull,
and the two jackals in the *Pantcha-Tantra* and the *Hitopadesa*? How,
but along the path of that primeval Aryan migration, and by that deep
ground-tone of tradition by which man speaks to man, nation to nation,
and age to age; along which comparative philology has, in these last
days, travelled back thither, listened to the accents spoken, and so
found in the East the cradle of a common language and common belief.

And now having, as we hope, finally established this Indian affinity,
and disposed of mere Indian copying, let us lift our eyes and see if
something more is not to be discerned on the wide horizon now open on
our view. The most interesting problem for man to solve is the origin of
his race. Of late years comparative philology,

<span id="page_lxxv">p. lxxv</span>

having accomplished her task in proving the affinity of language between
Europe and the East, and so taken a mighty step towards fixing the first
seat of the greatest—greatest in wit and wisdom, if not in actual
numbers—portion of the human race, has pursued her inquiries into the
languages of the Turanian, the Semitic, and the Chamitic or African
races, with more or less successful results. In a few more years, when
the African languages are better known, and the roots of Egyptian and
Chinese words are more accurately detected, Science will be better able
to speak as to the common affinity of all the tribes that throng the
earth. In the meantime, let the testimony of tradition and popular tales
be heard, which in this case have outstripped comparative philology, and
lead instead of following her. It is beyond the scope of this essay,
which aims at being popular and readable rather than learned and
lengthy, to go over a prolonged scientific investigation step by step.
We repeat it: the reader must have faith in the writer, and believe the
words now written are the results of an inquiry, and not ask for the
inquiry itself. In all mythologies and traditions, then, there are what
may be called natural resemblances, parallelisms suggested to the senses
of each race by natural objects and every-day events, and these might
spring up spontaneously all over the earth as home growths, neither
derived by imitation from other tribes, nor from seeds of common
tradition shed from a common stock. Such resemblances have been well
compared by William Grimm <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31) to

<span id="page_lxxvi">p. lxxvi</span>

those words which are found in all languages derived from the imitation
of natural sounds, or, we may add, from the first lisping accents of
infancy. But the case is very different when this or that object which
strikes the senses is accounted for in a way so extraordinary and
peculiar, as to stamp the tradition with a character of its own. Then
arises a like impression on the mind, if we find the same tradition in
two tribes at the opposite ends of the earth, as is produced by meeting
twin brothers, one in Africa and the other in Asia; we say at once, "I
know you are so-and-so's brother, you are so like him." Take an
instance: In these Norse Tales, [p. 172](ptn33.htm#page_172), we are
told how it was the bear came to have a stumpy tail, and in an African
tale <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32) we find how it was the hyæna
became tailless and earless. Now, the tailless condition both of the
bear and the hyæna could scarcely fail to attract attention in a race of
hunters, and we might expect that popular tradition would attempt to
account for both; but how are we to explain the fact, that both Norseman
and African account for it in the same way—that both owe their loss to
the superior cunning of another animal? In Europe the fox bears away the
palm for wit from all other animals, so he it is that persuades the bear
in the Norse Tales to sit with his tail in a hole in the ice till it is
fast frozen in, and snaps short off when he tries to tug it out. In
Bornou, in the heart of Africa,

<span id="page_lxxvii">p. lxxvii</span>

it is the weasel who is the wisest of beasts, and who, having got some
meat in common with the hyæna, put it into a hole, and said,—

"'Behold two men came out of the forest, took the meat, and put it into
a hole: stop, I will go into the hole, and then thou mayst stretch out
thy tail to me, and I will tie the meat to thy tail for thee to draw it
out.' So the weasel went into the hole, the hyæna stretched its tail out
to it, but the weasel took the hyæna's tail, fastened a stick, and tied
the hyæna's tail to the stick, and then said to the hyæna, 'I have tied
the meat to thy tail; draw, and pull it out.' The hyæna was a fool, it
did not know the weasel surpassed it in subtlety; it thought the meat
was tied; but when it tried to draw out its tail, it was fast. When the
weasel said again to it, 'Pull,' it pulled, but could not draw it out;
so it became vexed, and on pulling with force, its tail broke. The tail
being torn out, the weasel was no more seen by the hyæna: the weasel was
hidden in the hole with its meat, and the hyæna saw it not." <span
id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33)

Here we have a fact in natural history accounted for, but accounted for
in such a peculiar way as shews that the races among which they are
current must have derived them from some common tradition. The mode by
which the tail is lost is different indeed; but the manner in which the
common ground-work is suited in one case to the cold of the North, and
the way in which fish are commonly caught at holes in the ice as they
rise to breathe; and in the other to Africa and her pit-falls for wild
beasts, is only another proof of the oldness of the tradition, and that
it is not merely a copy.

<span id="page_lxxviii">p. lxxviii</span>

Take another instance. Every one knows the story in the Arabian Nights,
where the man who knows the speech of beasts laughs at something said by
an ox to an ass. His wife wants to know why he laughs, and persists,
though he tells her it will cost him his life if he tells her. As he
doubts what to do, he hears the cock say to the house-dog, "Our master
is not wise; I have fifty hens who obey me; if he followed my advice,
he'd just take a good stick, shut up his wife in a room with him, and
give her a good cudgelling." The same story is told in Straparola <span
id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34) with so many variations as to show it is
no copy; it is also told in a Servian popular tale, with variations of
its own; and now here we find it in Bornou, as told by Kölle.

"There was a servant of God who had one wife and one horse; but his wife
was one-eyed, and they lived in their house. Now this servant of God
understood the language of the beasts of the forest when they spoke, and
of the birds of the air when they talked as they flew by. This servant
of God also understood the cry of the hyæna when it arose at night in
the forest, and came to the houses and cried near them; so, likewise,
when his horse was hungry and neighed, he understood what it neighed,
rose up, brought the horse grass, and then returned and sat down. It
happened one day that birds had their talk as they wore flying by above,
and the servant of God understood what they talked. This caused him to
laugh, whereupon his wife said to him, 'What dost thou hear that

<span id="page_lxxix">p. lxxix</span>

thou laughest?' He replied to his wife, 'I shall not tell thee what I
hear, and why I laugh.' The woman said to her husband, 'I know why thou
laughest; thou laughest at me because I am one-eyed.' The man then said
to his wife, 'I saw that thou wast one-eyed before I loved thee, and
before we married and sat down in our house.' When the woman heard her
husband's word she was quiet.

"But once at night, as they were lying on their bed, and it was past
midnight, it happened that a rat played with his wife on the top of the
house, and that both fell to the ground. Then the wife of the rat said
to her husband, 'Thy sport is bad; thou saidst to me that thou wouldst
play, but when we came together we fell to the ground, so that I broke
my back.

"When the servant of God heard the talk of the rat's wife, as he was
lying on his bed, he laughed. Now, as soon as he laughed his wife arose,
seized him, and said to him as she held him fast, 'Now this time I will
not let thee go out of this house except thou tell me what thou hearest
and why thou laughest.' The man begged the woman, saying, 'Let me go;'
but the woman would not listen to her husband's entreaty."

The husband then tells his wife that he knows the language of beasts and
birds, and she is content; but when he wakes in the morning he finds he
has lost his wonderful gift; and the moral of the tale is added most
ungallantly, "If a man shows and tells his thoughts to a woman, God will
punish him for it." Though, perhaps, it is better, for the sake of the
gentler sex, that the tale should be pointed with this unfair moral,
than that the African story should proceed like all the other
variations, and save the husband's gift at the cost of the wife's skin,

<span id="page_lxxx">p. lxxx</span>

Take other African instances. How is it that the wandering Bechuanas got
their story of "The Two Brothers," the ground-work of which is the same
as "The Machandelboom" and "The Milk-white Doo," and where the incidents
and even the words are almost the same? How is it that in some of its
traits that Bechuana story embodies those of that earliest of all
popular tales, recently published from an Egyptian Papyrus, coeval with
the abode of the Israelites in Egypt? and how is it that that same
Egyptian tale has other traits which remind us of the Dun Bull in "Katie
Woodencloak," as well as incidents which are the germ of stories long
since reduced to writing in Norse Sagas of the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries? <span id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35) How is it that we still
find among the Negroes in the West Indies <span
id="fr_36"></span>[2](#fn_36) a rich store of popular tales, and the
Beast Epic in full bloom, brought with them from Africa to the islands
of the West; and among those tales and traditions, how is it that we
find a "Wishing Tree," the counterpart of that in a German popular tale,
and "a little dirty scrub of a child," whom his sisters despise, but who
is own brother to Boots in the Norse Tales, and like him outwits the
Troll, spoils his substance, and saves his sisters? How is it that we
find the good woman who washes the loathsome head rewarded, while the
bad man who refuses to do that dirty work is punished for his pride; the
very groundwork, nay the very words, that we meet in "Bushy Bride,"

<span id="page_lxxxi">p. lxxxi</span>

another Norse tale? How is it that we find a Mongolian tale, which came
confessedly from India, made up of two of our Norse Tales, "Rich Peter
the Pedlar," and "The Giant that had no heart in his body"? <span
id="fr_37"></span>[1](ptn07.htm#fn_37) How should all these things be,
and how could they possibly be, except on that theory which day by day
becomes more and more a matter of fact: this, that the whole human race
sprung from one stock, planted in the East, which has stretched out its
boughs and branches, laden with the fruit of language, and bright with
the bloom of song and story, by successive offshoots to the utmost parts
of the earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[lix:1](ptn06.htm#fr_21) "A Brahmin, who had
vowed a sacrifice, went to the market to buy a goat. Three thieves saw
him, and wanted to get hold of the goat. They stationed themselves at
intervals on the high-road. When the Brahmin, who carried the goat on
his back, approached the first thief, the thief said, 'Brahmin, why do
you carry a dog on your back?' The Brahmin replied: 'It is not a dog, it
is a goat.' A little while after, he was accosted by the second thief,
who said, 'Brahmin, why do you carry a dog on your back?' The Brahmin
felt perplexed, put the goat down, examined it, and walked on. Soon
after he was stopped by the third thief, who said, 'Brahmin, why do you
carry a dog on your back?' Then the Brahmin was frightened, threw down
the goat, and walked home to perform his ablutions for having touched an
unclean animal. The thieves took the goat and ate it." See the notice of
the Norse Tales in the *Saturday Review*, January 15th. In Max Müller's
translation of the *Hitopadesa*, the story has a different ending. See
also *Le Piacevoli Notti di* <span id="page_lx">p. lx</span> *M. Giovan
Francesco Straparola da Caravaggio*. Venice, 1567. Notte Prima, Favola
III. "Pre Scarpacifico da tre malandrini una sol volta gabbato, tre
fiate gabba loro, finalmente vittorioso con la sua Nina lietamente
rimane." In which tale the beginning is a parallel to the first part of
"The Master Thief," while the end answers exactly to the Norse tale
added in this edition, and called "Big Peter and Little Peter."

<span id="fn_22"></span>[lxi:1](ptn06.htm#fr_22) Forum. Sög., ii. 272.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[lxi:2](ptn06.htm#fr_23) Müller's *Saga Bibl*.,
iii. 359.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[lxi:3](ptn06.htm#fr_24) See the ballad in
Percy's *Reliques*.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[lxii:1](ptn06.htm#fr_25) The following are
translations from Saxo, the *Wilkina Saga*, and the *Malleus
Maleficarum*. The question is completely set at rest by Grimm, D. M. p.
353 fol. and p. 1214.

"Nor is the following story to be wrapped in silence. A certain
Palnatoki, for some time among King Harold's bodyguard, had made his
bravery odious to very many of his fellow-soldiers by the zeal with
which he surpassed them in the discharge of his duty. This man once,
when talking, tipsily over his cups, had boasted that he was so skilled
an archer, that he could hit the smallest apple placed a long way off on
a wand at the first shot; which talk, caught up at first by the ears of
backbiters, soon came to the hearing of the king. Now, mark how the
wickedness of the king turned the confidence of the sire to the peril of
the son, by commanding that this dearest pledge of his life should be
placed instead of the wand, with a threat that, unless the author of
this promise could strike off the apple at the first flight of the
arrow, he should pay the penalty of his empty boasting by the loss of
his head. The king's command forced the soldier to perform more than he
had promised, and what he *had* said, reported by the tongues of
slanderers, bound him to accomplish what he had not said." . . . . "Nor
did his sterling <span id="page_lxiii">p. lxiii</span> courage, thought
caught in the snare of slander, suffer him to lay aside his firmness of
heart; nay, he accepted the trial the more readily because it was hard.
So Palnatoki warned the boy urgently when he took his stand to await the
coming of the hurtling arrow with calm ears and unbent head, lest by a
slight turn of his body he should defeat the practised skill of the
bowman; and, taking further counsel to prevent his fear, he turned away
his face, lest he should be scared at the sight of the weapon. Then
taking three arrows from the quiver, he struck the mark given him with
the first he fitted to the string. But, if chance had brought the head
of the boy before the shaft, no doubt the penalty of the son would have
recoiled to the peril of the father, and the swerving of the shaft that
struck the boy would have linked them both in common ruin. I am in
doubt, then, whether to admire most the courage of the father or the
temper of the son, of whom the one by skill in his art avoided being the
slayer of his child, while the other by patience of mind and quietness
of body saved himself alive, and spared the natural affection of his
father. Nay, the youthful frame strengthened the aged heart, and showed
as much courage in awaiting the arrow as the father skill in launching
it. But Palnatoki, when asked by the king why he had taken more arrows
from the quiver, when it had been settled that he should only try the
fortune of the bow *once*, made answer, 'That I might avenge on thee the
swerving of the first by the points of the rest, lest perchance my
innocence might have been punished, while your <span id="page_lxiv">p.
lxiv</span> violence escaped scot-free.'"-Saxo Gram., Book x. p. 166,
ed. Frankf.

"About that time the young Egill, Wayland's brother, came to the court
of King Nidung, because Wayland (Smith) had sent him word. Egill was the
fairest of men, and one thing he had before all other men—he shot better
with the bow than any other man. The king took to him well, and Egill
was there a long time. Now, the king wished to try whether Egill shot so
well as was said or not, so he let Egill's son, a boy of three years
old, be taken, and made them put an apple on his head, and bade Egill
shoot so that the shaft struck neither above the head nor to the left
nor to the right; the apple only was he to split. But it was not
forbidden him to shoot the boy, for the king thought it certain that he
would do that on no account, if he could at all help it. And he was to
shoot one arrow only, no more. So Egill takes three, and strokes their
feathers smooth, and fits one to his string, and shoots and hits the
apple in the middle, so that the arrow took along with it half the
apple, and then fell to the ground. This master-shot has long been
talked about, and the king made much of him, and he was the most famous
of men. Now, King Nidung asked Egill why he took out three arrows, when
it was settled that one only was to be shot with. Then Egill answered,
'Lord,'. said he, 'I will not lie to you; had <span id="page_lxv">p.
lxv</span> I stricken the lad with that one arrow, then I had meant
these two for you.' But the king took that well from him, and all
thought it was boldly spoken."—*Wilkina Saga*, ch. 27, ed. Pering.

"It is related of him \[Puncher\] that a certain lord, who wished to
obtain a sure trial of his skill, set up his little son as a butt, and
for a mark a shilling on the boy's cap, commanding him to carry off the
shilling without the cap with his arrow. But when the wizard said he
could do it, though he would rather abstain, lest the Devil should decoy
him to destruction; still, being led on by the words of the chief, he
thrust one arrow through his collar, and, fitting the other to his
crossbow, struck off the coin from the boy's cap without doing him any
harm; seeing which, when the lord asked the wizard why he had placed the
arrow in his collar? he answered, 'If by the Devil's deceit I had slain
the boy, when I needs must die, I would have transfixed you suddenly
with the other arrow, that even so I might have avenged my
death.'"—*Malleus Malef*., P. ii. ch. 16.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[lxv:1](ptn06.htm#fr_26) See *Pantcha-Tantra*,
v. ii. of Wilson's Analysis, quoted by Loiseleur Deslongchamps, *Essai
sur les Fables Indiennes*, Paris (Techener), 1838, p. 54, where the
animal that protects the child is a mangouste (Viverra Mungo). See also
*Hitopadesa*, Max Müller's Translation, Leipzig (Brockhaus), p. 178,
where the guardian is an otter. In both the foe is a snake.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[lxxii:1](ptn06.htm#fr_27) Moe: Introd.
xxxii.-iii.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[lxxiii:1](ptn06.htm#fr_28) The account in the
Nibelungen respecting the *tarnhut* is confused, and the text probably
corrupt; but so much is plain, that Siegfried got it from Elberich in
the struggle which ensued with Schilbung and Niblung, after he had
shared the Hoard.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[lxxiii:2](ptn06.htm#fr_29) Thus we find in it
the originals or the parallels of Grendel in Beowulf, of
Rumpelstiltskin, of the recovery of the Bride by the ring dropped into
the cup, as related in Soria Moria Castle, and other tales; of the
"wishing ram," which in the Indian story becomes a "wishing cow," and
thus reminds us of the bull in one of these Norse Tales, out of whose
ear came a "wishing cloth"; of the lucky child, who finds a purse of
gold under his pillow every morning; and of the red lappet sown on the
sleeping lover, as on Siegfried in the Nibelungen. The devices of
Upakosa, the faithful wife, remind us at once of "The Mastermaid," and
the whole of the stories of Saktideva and the Golden City, and of
Viduschaka, King Adityasena's daughter, are the same in groundwork and
in many of their incidents as "East o' the Sun, and West o' <span
id="page_lxxiv">p. lxxiv</span> the Moon," "The Three Princesses of
Whiteland," and "Soria Moria Castle."

<span id="fn_30"></span>[lxxiv:1](ptn06.htm#fr_30) J. Grimm: Reinhart
Fuchs, cclxiii. Intr.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[lxxv:1](ptn06.htm#fr_31) *Kinder- und
Hausmärchen*, vol. iii., 3d ed., Göttingen, 1856; a volume worthy of the
utmost attention.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[lxxvi:1](ptn06.htm#fr_32) Kölle: *Kanuri
Proverbs and Fables*, London Church Missionary House, 1854. A book of
great philological interest, and one which reflects great credit on the
religious society by which it was published.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[lxxvii:1](ptn06.htm#fr_33) *Kanuri Proverbs*,
p. 167.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[lxxviii:1](ptn06.htm#fr_34) Notte Duodecima.
Favola terza. "Federigo da Pozzuolo che intendeva il linguaggio de gli
animali, astretto dalla moglie dirle un segreto, quella stranamente
battè."

<span id="fn_35"></span>[lxxx:1](ptn06.htm#fr_35) The Story of the Two
Brothers Anesou and Satou, from the D'Orbiney Papyrus, by De Rougé:
Paris, 1852.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[lxxx:2](ptn06.htm#fr_36) See the Ananzi Stories
in the Appendix, which have been taken down from the mouth of a West
Indian nurse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Norse Mythology](ptn07)
