[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ptn03)  [Next](ptn05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048641812X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002H9XT7I/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Popular Tales from the Norse*, by George Webbe Dasent, \[1904\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

### SIR GEORGE WEBBE DASENT, D.C.L.

IN presenting to the world a new edition of Sir George Webbe Dasent's
*Norse Tales* a brief memoir of its author will not be deemed out of
place.

The Dasent family is believed to have been originally of French
extraction, the name having been traced to an ancient Norman source. It
has owned property in the West Indies since the Restoration, and is
represented in the island of St. Vincent at the present day. Some of its
members were amongst the earliest colonists in St. Christopher's at a
time when that island and Martinique were held jointly by the French and
the English; and the highest judicial and administrative offices in St.
Christopher's, in Nevis, in Antigua, and, more recently, in St. Vincent
itself were filled by Sir George Dasent's ancestors. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

His grandfather was Chief Justice of Nevis when Nelson first served on
the West Indian station—so long the battle-ground of England and France
for the supremacy of the sea, and the cradle, so to speak, of our naval
empire.

His father, John Roche Dasent, son of the Chief

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Justice of Nevis
by his wife, Eleanor Roche, became Attorney-General of St. Vincent the
year after Trafalgar.

It was in this volcanic island, perpetually robed in luxuriant tropical
vegetation from mountain top to seashore, that the subject of our memoir
was born on May 22nd, 1817.

His mother, the second wife of his father, was Charlotte Martha, younger
daughter and co-heiress of Captain Alexander Burrowes Irwin, of an
ancient Irish family in the counties of Dublin, Meath, and Tipperary,
and of the Union Estate in St. Vincent.

Captain Irwin had come with the 32nd Foot to these pleasant summer seas
in 1764, and he served with it there for ten years. He did not, however,
return to Ireland with his regiment, as, having obtained a grant of land
in one of the most fruitful hollows of the old home of the Caribs, he
passed the remainder of his life on his estate in St. Vincent, and died
there in 1806. His only son, Henry Bury Irwin, captain in the 68th
Regiment, was killed at the battle of the Nivelle in the Peninsular War.

Like his father and others of the family before him, George Webbe Dasent
was sent over to England to be educated at Westminster School, entering
there so long ago as 1830 (after being for a short time at Lendon's
well-known preparatory school at Totteridge), when George the Fourth was
still upon the throne.

He boarded at Mrs. Stelfox's house, and amongst his schoolfellows were
the present Duke of Richmond, Lord Esher, the late Master of the Polls,
and Sir John Mowbray, until quite lately the Father of the House of
Commons.

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

He witnessed, as a Westminster boy, the coronation of William the
Fourth. The ceremony in the Abbey, and the burning of the old Houses of
Parliament a few years later were, he used to say, the things which most
impressed themselves upon his boyish memory at the time. Nor was it
likely that the agitation prevailing in the country at the time of the
great Reform Movement would find much reflection within the walls of St.
Peter's College on the Isle of Thorns, although Westminster was then the
favoured school of the great Whig families of England.

In 1832 Dasent's father died, and the final emancipation of the slaves a
little later proving the death-knell of the commercial prosperity of the
West Indian islands, it became increasingly difficult for the
proprietors to live upon their estates. The care of the younger children
devolved in great measure upon their half-brother John Bury Dasent
\[late Judge of County Courts, who died, aged eighty-one, in 1888\],
then a young student of the Middle Temple, residing on very slender
means in Serjeants' Inn, Fleet Street.

It so happened that John Sterling, the amiable son of the "Thunderer of
the *Times*," had visited St. Vincent in 1831, shortly before old Mr.
Dasent's death, to assume the management of a sugar estate at a place
called Colonarie. His health had been very indifferent, and it was hoped
that a voyage to the tropics in a sailing-ship on would restore it. An
intimacy, not without influence the future career of young George
Dasent, as will be seen hereafter, soon sprang up between the two
families.

After leaving Westminster, Dasent, went for a time to

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> King's College,
London, and it was there that he first became intimately acquainted with
his life-long friend and future brother-in-law, John Thadeus Delane. In
1836 they both matriculated at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, of which Dr.
Macbride was then the Principal, and Jacobson, afterwards Bishop of
Chester, the Vice-Principal.

At Oxford, Dasent read hard, and became a good classical scholar, though
by no means neglecting the river or the cricket-field, his interest
indeed in athletics and any feats of endurance only ceasing with life
itself.

He soon became a favourite with Jacobson, as did Delane; and another
lasting friendship begun at Magdalen Hall was with Manuel Johnson who,
after taking his degree, was appointed to succeed Rigaud as Radcliffe
Observer.

Johnson was very popular in the university, and the Observatory became
the resort of the leaders of the High Church party in Oxford. Here
Dasent, who was a frequent visitor, came for a time under the spell of
Newman; but a more enduring religious influence seems to have been
exerted over him by Maurice, whose kindly nature never failed to appeal
to the young. We gather from Dasent's diary that he rarely missed the
university sermon when Newman or Pusey preached, and that so great was
the crowd at St. Mary's to hear the latter that undergraduates waited
patiently for the doors to open, when a scramble ensued for places, like
the rush at the doors of a popular theatre.

In Easter Term 1840 he took his degree, obtaining a Second Class in
Classics in the company of James Anthony Froude, Lord Farrer, and the
late Mr. John

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Walter. In his
diary he records that he "did not know whether to be pleased or not. On
the whole, perhaps, I have no cause to complain as the first and second
\[classes\] are both small, and I have beaten some men thought better
than myself, and have been beaten by no one thought worse."

At any rate he was placed in a company not less distinguished in after
achievement than is to be found in the first class of the same honours
list.

After going down from the university he spent some little time in
London, where his mother had now removed from the West Indies. Delane,
who about this time was established in the editorial chair of the Times,
was in constant association with him, and it was at this early period of
his career that Dasent began to write articles for the paper which he
afterwards served so faithfully and so well in an official capacity.

Sterling, who had returned from St. Vincent some years before,
introduced him to his father, and Dasent became a frequent visitor at
the white house in South Place, Knightsbridge. Here he became acquainted
with Carlyle, whose works he had long admired, and whose rugged honesty
of purpose and independent character proved an immediate attraction to
his opening mind; with John Stuart Mill, with Julius Hare, and with
Thackeray, the latter then only known to fame from the publication of
the *Yellow-Plush Papers*.

The elder Sterling, in the evening of his days, after he had practically
ceased to launch his thunderbolts in the press, loved to gather men of
intellect, both young and, round his dinner-table. Carlyle, in his *Life
of John* 

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Sterling*, speaks
of the miscellany of social faces round him, of his "kindly advice to
the young," and of the "frank and joyous parties" at the Knightsbridge
house, a "sunny islet" in the literary London of that age.

Dasent next proceeded to Stockholm as secretary to Sir Thomas
Cartwright, the British Envoy to the Court of Sweden, having been
recommended to him by his old tutor Jacobson as a young man of great
promise and ability.

In these days of rapid railway travelling when the Swedish capital has
been brought within fifty hours of London, it is interesting to read the
description given by him in his Ms. diary of the dangers and
difficulties attending a journey to northern Europe during the bitter
winter of 1840-41.

After taking leave of his mother, on New Year's Day 1841, he, the only
cabin passenger in the ship, embarked on the *City of Hamburg*, lying
off the Tower Stairs, and reached Cuxhaven on the 4th of January,
posting the seventy miles on to Hamburg in twenty-nine hours!

Thence the Copenhagen diligence crawled at a snail's pace through
Holstein till a heavy fall of snow compelled him to take to a sledge,
"escorted," the diary tells its, "by a band of the most savage peasantry
it is possible to conceive." The Danish capital was not reached till the
14th of the month; and here he learnt from Sir Henry Wynn, to whom he
brought letters of introduction, that he had missed the diligence for
Stockholm by a day. In spite, however, of the extreme cold then
prevailing, Dasent, whose impetuous nature was always impatient of
delay, again resorted to an open sledge contrary to Wynn's advice, and
reaching Elsinore he bargained for a boat to carry him to Helsingborg.

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

But soon after thrusting out from the land "we heard a harsh grating
sound against our bows, and found we were on the edge of what seemed to
be a boundless sheet of ice on its way from the Baltic to the North Sea,
which appeared willing to rest for the night off the harbour of
Elsinore." The next day, the ice having shifted a little, Dasent landed
safely on Swedish soil, and again taking a sledge, and carrying his
provisions with him, he at last reached Stockholm, by dint of travelling
night and day in the bitterest of weather, on the twenty-fifth day after
going on board ship in the Thames.

At Stockholm he remained about four years, paying however occasional
visits to England, and visiting Frankfort-on-the-Main, and other places
in Germany, with the Cartwright family.

It was during his stay in Stockholm that he developed that genuine and
lasting love of Scandinavian literature and the mythology of the North,
with which his name has always been so conspicuously associated.
Encouraged by the great Jacob Grimm to master the languages of the
North, he soon devoted himself to the study of the Sagas. Few human
records, indeed, exist which portray society in its primitive form so
graphically, abundantly, and truthfully as the Sagas of Iceland.

"It is with the everyday life of the Icelanders that we feel ourselves
thoroughly at home. In the hall of the gallant Gunnar at Lithend, or
with the peaceful and law-skilled Njal at Bergthorsknoll, we meet men
who think and act as men of noble minds and gentle hearts have ever
acted, and will never cease to act, so long as human nature remains the
same. Gish, the generous outlaw,

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

and Snorri, the worldly-wise priest, Mord Valgardson, the wily traitor,
and Hallgerda, the overbearing hateful wife, are characters true for all
time, whose works and ways are but eminent examples of our common
humanity, and at once arouse our sympathy or our antipathy." <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)

In 1842 he dedicated his first book to Thomas Carlyle in gratitude for
the encouragement he received from him to definitely devote himself to
literature.

This was a translation of the *Prose, or Younger Edda*, and was
published at Stockholm. In the course of the following year appeared his
*Grammar of the Icelandic or Old Norse Tongue*, from the Swedish of
Erasmus Rask; and his *Theophilus in Icelandic, Low German and other
Tongues*, from mss. to which he had access in the Royal Library at
Stockholm, followed in 1845.

He returned to England in the spring of this latter year and joined
Delane at the *Times* Office as assistant editor, a post which he
continued to fill with remarkable ability for the next quarter of a
century.

Of very different natures each of the two young brothers-in-law, "John
Walter's three-year-olds," as they were sometimes called, contributed
something which was wanting in the character of the other, and the
result was a remarkable smoothness and evenness in the conduct of the
paper. Though neither was at any time of his life what could be called a
party man the instincts of Delane were decidedly Liberal; and Dasent
himself wrote that during his whole tenure of office the columns of the
Times "are composed out of the very ore of liberty and progress, and
will for ever remain the best monument to his memory."

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

The late Mr. Mowbray Morris, another brother-in-law of Delane's, became
the business manager of the paper, and it is no exaggeration to say that
under Delane's able guidance the literary reputation of the *Times*
reached its zenith.

Surrounded by a band of brilliant writers, unsurpassed before or since
for the purity of their style and the vigour and soundness of their
opinions, Delane commanded the valuable services, in addition to George
Webbe Dasent, of Robert Lowe, Abraham Hayward, Henry Reeve (playfully
alluded to in Dasent's correspondence with Delane as "Don Pomposo"),
Thomas Mozley (Newman's brother-in-law), Laurence Oliphant, Matthew
Arnold, and Doctor now Sir William, Russell, the first of all
war-correspondents, and at the present day the only survivor of the
great Delane dynasty in Printing House Square. Dasent's intimacy with
Bunsen also proved of great service to Delane in connection with the
foreign policy of the paper. <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2)

In the happy phraseology of Sir James Graham, the Times through its
masterly editing at this period "saved the English language." Dasent's
literary activity and capacity for hard work in early middle life was
prodigious. Notwithstanding late hours six nights in every week spent in
the service of the great newspaper, to which

<span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

he contributed in addition to leading articles a large proportion of the
reviews of current literature and the biographical notices of eminent
men; <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3) he worked assiduously at his
translation of the Norse Tales of Asbjornsen: one of which, "The Master
Thief," first appeared in *Blackwood's Magazine* for November 1851.

The first collected edition of these celebrated stories appeared in 1859
(the preface is dated from his house, No. 6 Broad Sanctuary,
Westminster, December 12th, 1858); and the long introductory essay on
the origin and diffusion of popular tales, explaining the migration of
these stories from Asia to the north of Europe, which he considered to
be the best piece of work he ever did, has been pronounced by so
competent an authority as Max Müller to be one of the purest specimens
of English literature produced in our own or any other age.

A second edition, greatly enlarged, containing thirteen new tales, and
an appendix, consisting of Ananzi stories told by the negroes in the
West Indies, was called for within three months. A selection from the
Norse tales for the use of children, with illustrations, followed in
1862, and a third edition of the unabridged collection was published in
1888.

*The Norsemen in Iceland* was published in the *Oxford Essays*, 1858, a
volume which, it is interesting to note, also contained Lord,
Salisbury's celebrated article on Parliamentary Reform.

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

In 1852 Dasent was called to the Bar at the Middle Temple, becoming an
Advocate in Doctors' Commons in November of the same year. At the time
of his death he was one of the last survivors of that ancient legal
Corporation.

In 1852 he also took his degree as D.C.L. He now accepted, under Jelf,
the post of Professor of English Literature and Modern History at King's
College, and the lectures delivered by him in that capacity from 1853 to
1865 were uniformly of a high order of merit, and well deserve
publication in a collected form. Through the instrumentality of Lowe,
who quickly perceived his value for educational purposes, he was
frequently employed henceforth as a Government examiner of candidates
for admission to the Army and the permanent Civil Service. In the autumn
of 1854 Delane, whose interest in military affairs was always a keen
one, was so impressed by Russell's letters from the front describing the
pitiable condition of our troops, that he went to the Crimea to see for
himself how the war was progressing, leaving Dasent in supreme command
at Printing House Square.

During a similar interregnum in the following year Reeve took umbrage at
the alterations which the temporary editor thought it necessary to make
in his contributions to the paper on foreign policy, but Delane upheld
Dasent's line of action, and Reeve withdrew from the *Times* to assume
the editorship of the *Edinburgh Review*. <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4)

<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

In addition to all his other work, Dasent wrote constantly for the
*Quarterly* and the *Edinburgh*, and the principal literary periodicals,
including the now defunct *Fraser's Magazine*, of which he was at one
time offered the editorship.

Having been approached by the representatives of Richard Cleasby, who
had been for years engaged in collecting materials for an
Icelandic-English Dictionary, Dasent warmly interested himself in the
task of completing the work. He brought Gúdbrandr Vígfússon, an
Icelandic scholar of great industry and intelligence, already well-known
for his labours in the field of his native literature, over to England
to complete the final revision and arrangement of the manuscripts, and
was successful, through the instrumentality of Liddell, in inducing the
University of Oxford to bring out the work at the Clarendon Press. For
this great undertaking Dasent wrote the introduction and also the life
of Richard Cleasby—his only experiment in contemporary biography which
has come down to us in book form.

The first edition of *Burnt Njal*, a work of which we gladly repeat the
deliberate judgment of a distinguished American writer that "it is
unsurpassed by any existing monument in the narrative department of any
literature ancient or modern," <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5)
appeared in 1861.

He had conceived the notion of giving an English dress to the Njal's
Saga so early as in 1843, but, as the preface informs us, it was
destined to rank among those things which, begun in youth, must wait for
their completion

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

in middle age. But the delay need not be regretted since it enables us
to enjoy this great epic tale in as perfect a form as patient erudition
and a genuine love of the most untrodden paths of antiquity could
present it.

The interest of this tragic story revolves around the duties and the
rights of the blood-feud, and shows us how a man, gentle, generous, and
forgiving, like Njal, was, in spite of all his virtues, gradually
involved in a network of bloody retaliation; how in spite of all his
wise and pacific counsel massacre replied to massacre around him, until
he and his whole household perished in blood and fire, leaving, however,
a fearful heritage of vengeance to be exacted by Kari, his son-in-law.

In 1861, and again in the following year, Dasent visited Iceland in
person, in company with the late Mr. John Campbell of Islay (himself an
earnest student of the folklore and popular tales of the Western
Highlands) and other friends.

He was received with great cordiality at Reykjavik and entertained at a
public banquet by the authorities, who acclaimed him as the foremost
Icelandic scholar in Europe. He rode across the gigantic snowfield of
the Vatna Jokull, and visited many of the places of interest in the
country, whose physical features were already well known to him through
its literature.

The adventures of the party on the occasion of Dasent's second visit to
Iceland were so humorously described by the late Sir Charles Clifford in
his Travels by Umbra, and the disposition and personal appearance of
each of the five members of this merry group so admirably

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

burlesqued, that we make no apology for reproducing their portraits:—

'First—he who by tacit consent was reckoned the head of our party—was
surnamed Archibald M'Diarmid. <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6)

'I believe the addition of esquire is considered a sort of insult in the
Highlands, whence he came, so I omit it. M'Diarmid, like Crichton, did
all things well, being a first-rate sportsman, a good draughtsman; was a
follower of science, and an author to boot.

'He possessed qualities of coolness, deliberation and courage, that
would have fitted him to be the leader of a party bound on an expedition
far more adventurous than our own.

'He was, moreover, a pleasant companion, but lest it should be thought
that I am describing a too perfect character, I will admit that he
cherished two superstitions. First, he believed in Ossian; secondly, he
held it as an article of faith, not to be doubted, that his tent was
completely waterproof.

'Next to him I will introduce Mr. Darwin, <span
id="fr_7"></span>[2](#fn_7) a really celebrated personage. He had
written a learned book on northern antiquities, in recompense of which a
Scandinavian potentate created him a Knight of the second class of the
Order of the Walrus, the ribbon of which illustrious Order was suspended
across his brawny shoulders. Of Herculean height and strength, with his
long black beard descending to his waist, he resembled a Viking of old,
and such I conceive he at times supposed himself to be. In fact, so
deeply was he imbued with

<span id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span>

the spirit of antiquity, that a continual antagonism between the past
and the present, or rather, I should say, between the imaginary and the
real, existed in his breast.

'He was two gentlemen at once. Though a sincerely religious man, still I
cannot help suspecting that in his heart of hearts he looked on
Christianity as a somewhat parvenu creed, and deemed that Thor, Odin,
Freya, etc., were the proper objects of worship. In dull fact he was an
excellent citizen, a householder, paying rates and taxes, an
affectionate husband, and the good father of a family; but in the dream,
the fancy—"the spirit, Master Shallow"—he was a Berserker, a Norse
pirate, ploughing the seas in his dragon-shaped barque, making his
trusty falchion ring on the casques of his enemies, slaying, pillaging,
burning, ravishing, and thus gratifying a laudable taste for adventure.
I fear he preferred the glorious dream to the sober reality. I think he
inwardly pined at his own respectability, that he considered himself
misplaced in the narrow sphere of duties. But he was a most agreeable
comrade.

'Third was Ragner, Lord Lodbrog, an Irish peer, <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8) and then a student at the University. He
derived his descent from a chieftain of that name, who had slain a
dragon after encasing himself in impenetrable hairy breeches; and it was
still a custom in his family, out of respect to this ancestor, to wear
hirsute nether garments.

'How gay was Lodbrog! the life and soul of our company: his cheerfulness
never failed. As he cantered

<span id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span>

on ahead of all, *Cum spumantis equi foderet calcaribus armos*, a
crimson sash round his waist, the plumage of the wild swan in his cap,
and round his shoulders slung a horn, which had erst, to the great
disgust of the Dons, awoke the echoes of Peckwater Quad, he was hailed
by us as decidedly the "Skarzmadur" or Dandy of the party.

'Fourth was Mr. X, a member of Parliament, <span
id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9) who had come out late in the session. I am
not aware that he ever enlightened the senate by his eloquence. He was
rather a silent, reserved person, and his chief talent seemed to consist
in smoking tobacco. However, to do him justice, he was always
good-tempered, lent a willing hand at the packing in the morning, and
never bored any of us by quoting bluebooks, which is much to his credit.
When he did speak, it was generally to make some citation from the
classics or Shakespeare, which was tedious, but happily brief.

'Fifth was Mr. Digwell, <span id="fr_10"></span>[2](#fn_10) a relative
of Mr. Darwin, Fellow of a College at Cambridge, and, unfortunately for
him, smitten with a taste for Geology, which had impelled him to come to
Iceland. He was a tall, thin man, and always carried a hammer to aid him
in his favourite pursuit. He also brought an ancient military saddle,
which an ancestor of his had used in the Duke of Marlborough's
campaigns. On an Iceland pony it seemed somewhat misplaced. Besides his
zeal for science, Digwell was passionately fond of poetry, and for hours
together would repeat verses, embodying the mysterious

<span id="page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span>

longings of the soul. Unluckily nature had endowed him with another
craving entirely opposed to romance; namely a most inordinate appetite.'

Later on in this delightful book, the key to the characters in which is
now for the first time made public, is introduced Grimur Thomsen of
Copenhagen, under the disguise of 'Mr. Jonson.'

The great success of *Burnt Njal* led to the publication, in 1866, of
*Gisli the Outlaw*, in which will be found a beautiful map of Iceland,
and a second series of popular stories, entitled *Tales from the Fjeld*,
appeared in 1874.

At the beginning of 1870, Mr. Gladstone, to whom he had been made known
by Lowe, wrote to offer him the important appointment of one of Her
Majesty's Civil Commissioners, and though it was a great wrench to him
to sever his long connection with Delane at the *Times* Office, and an
immediate loss of income, after some hesitation he accepted the post on
the advice of his family. No longer constrained to work every night into
the small hours of the morning, he was now free to go more into London
society; and bringing to it, as he did, a well-stored mind, a fund of
native humour, <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11) great capacity for
enjoyment, and rare conversational powers, he became one of its
recognised favourites, and a welcome guest, like Delane himself, at its
dinner-tables. One of his most

<span id="page_xxxiv">p. xxxiv</span>

valued friends throughout his lifetime, and they had been up at Oxford
together, was William Bromley Davenport, <span
id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12) an English sportsman of the best type, and
as clever a letter writer as the Victorian Age has produced, though not
strikingly successful as a public speaker.

Scarce a ear passed without Dasent's visiting him at his Cheshire home,
and the last country visit he ever paid was to his widow at Capesthorne.

Intimate, too, with Arthur Penrhyn Stanley (after whom his youngest son
was christened), he was frequently at the Deanery, Westminster, and,
like Stanley himself, took the greatest interest in all that concerned
the history and archæology of the Abbey, which he had known and loved
from boyhood. He was present with the Dean when some of the Royal tombs
were opened with a view to the more complete identification of their
contents.

At Lord Granville's, both in town and at Walmer Castle, he increased his
already extensive knowledge of the political world, and he was a welcome
guest at Highclere, at Raby, at Althorp, and at Chatsworth.

He enjoyed the close friendship of Sir Thomas Erskine May (Lord
Farnborough), of Matthew Arnold, and the late Sir Charles Bowen—all,
like himself, *habitués* of the

<span id="page_xxxv">p. xxxv</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Athenæum Club,
where his unfailing spirits and cultivated talk were long
appreciated. <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13)

Another very dear friend was the late Sir Robert Meade, the permanent
Under-Secretary of the Colonial Office, who was also a neighbour in
Berkshire, at Englemere, Mowbray Morris's former home near Ascot Heath.

A member also of the Cosmopolitan Club in Charles Street, Berkeley
Square, the favourite resort of such wits as Lord Houghton, and the
better-known figures in the political and social world of London, Dasent
became as prominent socially as he was already amongst men of letters.

A constant visitor to Baron Meyer de Rothschild at Mentmore in the early
seventies, he warmly interested himself with the Baroness in support of
the movement for the Oral Instruction of the Deaf and Dumb, a scheme
generously forwarded by the Rothschild family by every means in their
power. In 1872 the Prince of Wales presided at a public dinner in
furtherance of the scheme, at which Dasent explained the advantages of
the system over any other method of educating deaf mutes and lightening
the burden of their lives. For many years he attended the meetings of
the Committee of the Association, and strove to influence public opinion
on. its behalf.

While continuing to write reviews for the *Times*, so

<span id="page_xxxvi">p. xxxvi</span>

long as Delane remained at his post, Dasent now for the first time
turned his attention to contemporary fiction. His first novel—*The
Annals of an Eventful Life* <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14)—issued
at first anonymously in 1870, went through several editions in the
course of a few months, and has since been frequently re-issued in one
volume.

The capacity for fiction displayed in this highly original work, and its
instantaneous success, led to his writing *Three to One* in 1872 and
*Half a Life* in 1874.

To those who knew him well it is easy to see that the latter is mainly
autobiographical, and while not amongst his best writings, it will
always be interesting for the vivid account in its pages of his
Westminster school-days.

The *Vikings of the Baltic*, an ingenious attempt to dilute the
Jomsvikinga Saga into a modern three-volume novel, was published in
1875.

On June 27th, 1876, on Mr. Disraeli's recommendation, Dasent received
the honour of knighthood "for public services." <span
id="fr_15"></span>[2](#fn_15) He was already a Knight of the Danish
Order of the Dannebrog; another compliment which he received from the
Danes being a beautiful silver drinking-horn, shaped like a Viking ship,
in recognition of his services to Northern literature. On the
institution of the Royal Commission on Historical Manuscripts, he was
invited by the Government

<span id="page_xxxvii">p. xxxvii</span>

to be one of its original members, and many of its subsequently printed
volumes are the result of his personal knowledge of unpublished literary
treasures long lying unheeded in the muniment rooms of many an English
home.

On the retirement of Sir Thomas Erskine May from the clerkship of the
House of Commons in 1886, Gladstone was inclined to appoint Dasent as
his successor in that high office, but his infirmity of lameness, the
result, in the first instance, of a fall in 1863, aggravated by other
accidents of a like nature, was held to be an insuperable obstacle to
the efficient discharge of the onerous duties attaching to the post, and
he remained at the Civil Service Commission, of which he had become, on
the death of Lord Hampton, the official chief. In 1890 he sustained a
severe shock through the total destruction by fire of his country house
at Tower Hill, Berks, and the loss or grievous damage of much valuable
property, including an extensive library dating from his Oxford days,
old furniture, pictures, plate, china, and curiosities collected during
a long life in all parts of the world.

In this connection it should be mentioned that he was one of the first
to give serious attention to the study of hall-marks on plate, long
before the appearance of Chaffers's and Cripps's books on this subject,
and that he had secured in middle age an unrivalled collection of
antique silver, including specimens from the Stowe sale, which he
attended in person, and from the Bernal and Hastings collections.

Many choice examples of old Norwich, York, and other provincial work
came into his possession, at a time when

<span id="page_xxxviii">p. xxxviii</span>

the secret of the various alphabetical cycles was known, perhaps, only
to himself and the late Mr. Octavius Morgan. A portion of his collection
was sold at Christie's in 1875, and realised prices then regarded as
enormous, though since largely exceeded on the dispersal at the same
rooms of the Milbank and Dunn-Gardner collections. The exhaustive
article on "Plate and Plate Buyers," in the Quarterly Review (No. 282)
for April 1876—the lamp at which all subsequent writers on Old English
Silver have lit their torch—was from his pen.

The thorough grasp and appreciation of the subject therein displayed,
the timely warnings as to forgeries, addressed to would-be buyers with
long purses but little real knowledge, and the confident prediction
expressed by him, and since abundantly verified, that genuine specimens
of mediæval and pre-Caroline plate (of which there were some thirty in
his own collection), must greatly increase in value as their extreme
rarity was better realised, render the whole article of singular
interest to collectors at the present day.

With characteristic energy, although his health was now beginning to
fail, he applied himself to the task of rebuilding his ruined home, and
on his final retirement from the public service in 1892, he withdrew
altogether from London society to end his days in the peaceful
atmosphere of Windsor Forest, a neighbourhood to which both he and
Delane had been strongly attached from their boyhood. His services at
the Civil Service Commission are thus commemorated in the opening words
of the thirty-sixth Report of that body:—

<span class="small">"This Commission has sustained a heavy loss owing to
the</span>

<span id="page_xxxix">p. xxxix</span>

<span class="small">superannuation of Sir George Webbe Dasent at the
close of the last financial year. Appointed Commissioner in 1870, before
the principle of open competition was applied to the Home Civil Service,
he helped, in conjunction with the late Sir Edward Ryan, aided by the
late Mr. Theodore Walrond, then secretary to the Commissioners, to
organise the new system; he continued to watch over and guide its
development; and whatever success has attended its administration has
been largely due to his ability and judgment."</span>

He was forced to retire, notwithstanding his unwearied exertions in the
public interest, on a very inadequate pension: in such fashion does an
ungrateful Treasury reward its best servants. His last contribution to
the *Times* was a letter which appeared on December 6th, 1893, when he
wrote from his retirement at Tower Hill to claim the authorship of a
classical epigram made on the occasion of the marriage of Mr. Henry
Wyndham West to Miss Violet Campbell, which had been wrongly attributed
(in a mention of Mr. West's death in the same newspaper) to Abraham
Hayward. The epigram ran as follows:—

"Quaerebat Zephyrus brumali tempore florem:  
En! Campis Bellis incidit in Violam."

And to the right understanding of this dainty classical morsel it should
be added that Mr. West's nickname in early life was "Zephyr," and that
he was married in midwinter to Miss Violet Campbell, a sister of Lady
Granville, and half-sister of Dasent's old friend, John Campbell of
Islay.

Yet another book was to be published under his name before the curtain
fell—his masterly translation of the Orkney and Hacon Sagas issued in
1894 for the series of

<span id="page_xl">p. xl</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> National
Historical Publications by the Master of the Rolls; but it should here
be stated that in the revision of this work he received great assistance
from his eldest son, Mr. John Roche Dasent, C.B., who is himself engaged
at the present time in editing the Acts of the Privy Council of England,
a task left unfinished by Sir Harris Nicolas.

The publication of these two Sagas completed the labours of more than
half a century devoted to the popularisation of the literature of
Scandinavia and its bearings upon the history of England. His
contemplated Life of Delane, whose vast and unique correspondence passed
into his keeping, and fortunately escaped the flames at Tower Hill, is
withheld from publication for the present, though it will surely see the
light when the times are ripe for it to be given to the world. <span
id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16)

Dasent's once iron frame at last began to break down, and a gradual
decay of his powers set in. For the last year and a half of his life be
was confined to his room by a distressing malady, which be bore with
admirable fortitude, rarely uttering a word of complaint, though he
suffered constant and acute pain. The end came on Thursday, June 11th,
1896, when he passed away, surrounded by his family, at his house at
Tower Hill, overlooking the wild landscape of Bagshot Heath, and the
woodlands of Swinley which he loved so well.

<span id="page_xli">p. xli</span>

On the Monday following his remains were quietly interred in the
picturesque churchyard of the old forest parish of Easthampstead, where,
too, his life-long friend, John Delane, rests from his labours. Dasent
married, at St. James's, Piccadilly, in 1846, Fanny Louisa, third
daughter of the late Mr. William Frederick Augustus Delane, of Old
Bracknell, Easthampstead, the only son of Cavin Delane, of an ancient
Irish family in Roscommon and the Queen's County, Serjeant-at-Arms to
George the Third, in 1775, by his wife Elizabeth Davenport. By this
lady, who survives him, Dasent had four children:—

\(1\) John Roche Dasent, C.B., educated at Westminster School and Christ
Church, Oxford, assistant secretary to the Board of Education, married
in 1878 to Ellen, younger daughter and co-heiress of Admiral of the
Fleet Sir Henry Codrington, K.C.B., by whom he has two sons, Manuel and
Walter, both in the Royal Navy.

\(2\) George William Manuel, also at Westminster and Christ Church,
accidentally drowned at Oxford in 1872.

\(3\) Frances Emily Mary.

\(4\) Arthur Irwin, educated at Eton, and now one of the clerks of the
House of Commons, married, 5th February 1901, at St. Paul's,
Knightsbridge, to Helen Augusta Essex, youngest daughter of the late
Lieutenant-Colonel Alfred Tippinge, Grenadier Guards, of Longparish
House, Hants.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[xvii:1](ptn04.htm#fr_0) For a detailed pedigree
of the family of Dasent, see V. L. Oliver's *History of the Island of
Antigua*. 1894. Volume i. pp. 190-194, and Burke's *Landed Gentry*, 8th
edition, pp. 469, 470.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[xxiv:1](ptn04.htm#fr_1) Introduction to the
*Icelandic-English Dictionary*, p. xlvii.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[xxv:1](ptn04.htm#fr_2) Kinglake, who was well
acquainted with Delane and competent to appreciate his remarkable
talents, has given us an insight into his method of conducting the
paper, derived from personal observation of the great editor and the
principal members of his staff at their nightly work in Printing House
Square.—*Invasion of the Crimea*, vol. vi. pp. 249-251.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xxvi:1](ptn04.htm#fr_3) Much of his best and
freshest writing perforce lies buried in the anonymous columns of the
*Times*. Some of his contributions to the paper and the principal
reviews were published by him in 1873, in two volumes, entitled *Jest
and Earnest*.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xxvii:1](ptn04.htm#fr_4) In his
recently-published diary Reeve states that between 1840 and 1855 he
wrote nearly two thousand five hundred articles for the paper, and
received for them upwards of £13,000.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xxviii:1](ptn04.htm#fr_5) See *The Saturday
Review*, vol. xi. p. 429.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xxx:1](ptn04.htm#fr_6) John Campbell of Islay.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xxx:2](ptn04.htm#fr_7) George Webbe Dasent.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xxxi:1](ptn04.htm#fr_8) Then Lord Newry, and now
Earl of Kilmorey.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xxxii:1](ptn04.htm#fr_9) Charles Cavendish
Clifford.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xxxii:2](ptn04.htm#fr_10) John Roche Dakyns.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xxxiii:1](ptn04.htm#fr_11) His innate love of a
joke occasionally illumined the cold print of the Times columns. On one
occasion, when he was acting for Delane, a letter came to the office
from a Mr. Wieass for publication. The signature was an indistinct
scrawl which defied all efforts to decipher, and the name of the writer
was printed 'Wiseass.' The writer of the letter <span id="page_xxxiv">p.
xxxiv</span> was exceedingly wroth and wrote to complain. To cool the
inflamed mind of the correspondent there appeared next morning an
editorial excuse. It stated that 'after a careful study of the writer's
caligraphy, we came to the conclusion that a difficulty existed as to
deciphering the first part of the signature, but there was no mistake as
to the latter part.'

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xxxiv:1](ptn04.htm#fr_12) Late M.P. for North
Warwickshire.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xxxv:1](ptn04.htm#fr_13) Elected to the
Athenæum under the rule which provides for the admission of men "of
distinguished eminence in literature, science, or the arts," without the
ordeal of the ballot, his name remained on the list of members for forty
years.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[xxxvi:1](ptn04.htm#fr_14) This he wrote at his
London house, No. 19 Chesham Place, S.W., whilst lying on his back
during the enforced inactivity following on an accident to his knee.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[xxxvi:2](ptn04.htm#fr_15)

The Queen has knighted Dasent;  
Wit well deserves a handle to its name."  
                           —*Punch*, 8th July 1876.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[xl:1](ptn04.htm#fr_16) Delane wrote to Reeve,
October 22nd, 1874:—"The world moves too quickly for long intervals of
suppressed publication," à propos of the *Times* review of the Greville
*Memoirs*. Dasent wrote the article referred to, and sat up all night to
finish it, as was his wont when absorbed in his subject.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Origin](ptn05)
