[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ptn66)  [Next](ptn68) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048641812X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002H9XT7I/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Popular Tales from the Norse*, by George Webbe Dasent, \[1904\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Bruin and Reynard

The Bear and the Fox had once bought a firkin of butter together; they
were to have it at Yule, and hid it till then under a thick spruce bush.

After that they went a little way off and lay down on a sunny bank to
sleep. So when they had lain a while the Fox got up, shook himself, and
bawled out "yes."

Then he ran off straight to the firkin and ate a good third part of it.
But when he came back, and the Bear asked him where he had been since he
was so fat about the paunch, he said,—

<span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

"Don't you believe then that I was bidden to barsel, to a christening
feast."

"So, so," said the Bear, "and pray what was the bairn's name."

"Just-begun," said the Fox.

So they lay down to sleep again. In a little while up jumped the Fox
again, bawled out "yes," and ran off to the firkin.

This time, too, he ate a good lump. When he came back, and the Bear
asked him again where he had been, he said,—

"Oh wasn't I bidden to barsel again, don't you think."

"And pray what was the bairn's name this time," asked the Bear.

"Half-eaten," said the Fox.

The Bear thought that a very queer name, but he hadn't wondered long
over it before he began to yawn and gape, and fell asleep. Well, he
hadn't lain long before the Fox jumped up as he had done twice before,
bawled out "yes," and ran off to the firkin, which this time he cleared
right out. When he got back he had been bidden to barsel again, and when
the Bear wanted to know the bairn's name he answered,—

"Licked-to-the-bottom."

After that they lay down again, and slept a long time; but then they
were to go to the firkin to look at the butter, and when they found it
eaten up, the Bear threw the blame on the Fox, and the Fox on the Bear;
and each said the one had been at the firkin while the other slept.

"Well, well," said Reynard, "we'll soon find this out, which of us has
eaten the butter. We'll just lay down in the sunshine, and he whose
cheeks and chaps are greasiest when we wake, he is the thief."

<span id="page_411">p. 411</span>

Yes, that trial Bruin was ready to stand; and as he knew in his heart he
had never so much as tasted the butter, he lay down without a care to
sleep in the sun.

Then Reynard stole off to the firkin for a morsel of butter, which stuck
there in a crack, and then he crept back to the Bear, and greased his
chaps and cheeks with it; and then he, too, lay down to sleep as if
nothing had happened.

So when they both woke, the sun had melted the butter, and the Bear's
whiskers were all greasy; and so it was Bruin after all, and no one
else, who had eaten the butter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tom Totherhouse](ptn68)
