[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ptn69)  [Next](ptn71) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048641812X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002H9XT7I/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Popular Tales from the Norse*, by George Webbe Dasent, \[1904\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_419">p. 419</span>

### INTRODUCTION TO APPENDIX

# ANANZI STORIES.

THE Negroes in the West Indies still retain the tales and traditions
which their fathers and grandfathers brought with them from Africa. Some
thirty years back these "Ananzi Stories," as they are called, were
invariably told at the Negro wakes, which lasted for nine successive
nights. The reciters were always men. In those days when the slaves were
still half heathen, and when the awful Obeah was universally believed
in, such of the Negroes as attended church or chapel kept their children
away from these funeral gatherings. The wakes are now, it is believed,
almost entirely discontinued, and with them have gone the stories. The
Negroes are very shy of telling them, and both the clergyman of the
Church of England, and the Dissenting Minister, set their faces against
them, and call them foolishness. The translator, whose early childhood
was passed in those islands, remembers to have heard such stories from
his nurse, who was an African born; but beyond a stray fragment here and
there, the rich store which she possessed has altogether escaped his
memory. The following stories have been taken down from the mouth of a
West Indian nurse in his sister's

<span id="page_420">p. 420</span>

house, who, born and bred in it, is rather regarded as a member of the
family than as a servant. They are printed just as she told him, and
both their genuineness and their affinity with the stories of other
races will be self-evident. Thus we have the "Wishing Tree" of the
Hindoos, the *Kalpa Vriksha* of Somadeva, and of the German Fairy Tales
in the "Pumpkin Tree," which throws down as many pumpkins as the poor
widow wishes. In one story we have "Boots" to the life, while the man
whom he outwits is own brother to the Norse Trolls. In another we find a
"speaking heart," which reminds us at once of the Egyptian story of
Anessou and Satou, as well as of the "Machandelboom," and the
"Milk-white Doo." We find here the woman who washes the dirty head
rewarded and the man who refuses to wash it punished, in the very words
used in "The Bushy Bride." We find, too, in "Nancy Fairy," the same
story, both in groundwork and incident, as we have in "The Lassie and
her Godmother;" and most surprising of all, in the story of "Ananzi and
Quanqua," we find the very trait about a trick played with the tail of
an ox, which is met with in a variation to "Boots who ate a match with
the Troll." Here is the variation: "Whilst he was with the Troll, the
lad was to go out to watch the swine, so he drove them home to his
father's house, but first he cut their tails off, and stuck them into
the ground. Then he went home to the Troll, and begged him to come and
see how his swine were going down to Hell. But when the Troll saw the
swine's tails sticking out of the ground he wanted to pull them back
again, so he caught hold of them and gave a great tug, and then down he
fell with his heels up in the air, and the tails in his fist."

<span id="page_421">p. 421</span>

They are called "Ananzi Stories," because so many of them turn on the
feats of Ananzi, whose character is a mixture of "The Master-thief," and
of "Boots;" but the most curious thing about him is, that he illustrates
the Beast Epic in a remarkable way. In all the West Indian Islands,
"Ananzi" is the name of spiders <span id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_84) in
general, and of a very beautiful spider with yellow strips in
particular. The Negroes think that this spider is the "Ananzi" of their
stories, but that his superior cunning enables him to take any shape he
pleases. In fact, he is the example which the African tribes from which
these stories came, have chosen to take as pointing out the superiority
of wit over brute strength. In this way they have matched the cleverness
and dexterity of the Spider, against the bone and muscle of the Lion,
invariably to the disadvantage of the latter.

After this introduction, we let the Tales speak for themselves, only
premising that the "Jack-Spaniard" in the first story is a very pretty
fly of the wasp kind, and, like his European brother, very small in the
waist; that the "Cush-cush," is a little red yam which imparts a strong
red dye to everything with which it is boiled; and that the "Doukana" is
a forest tree which bears a fruit, though of what kind it is hard to
say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_84"></span>[421:1](ptn70.htm#fr_84) Compare Crowther's
Yoruba Glossary, where *Alansasa* is given as the Yoruban for *spider*.
The change of *n* into *l* is not uncommon, even supposing the West
Indian word to be uncorrupt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Note](ptn71)
