[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rok14)  [Next](rok16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295RH82/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Religion of the Koran*, by Arthur N. Wollaston, \[1911\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

### ALMSGIVING

CHAPTER II., Verse 211.—They will ask thee what they are to expend in
alms: say, "Whatsoever good ye expend it should be for parents and
kinsmen, and the orphan and the poor, and the son of the road; and
whatsoever good ye do, verily, of it God knows!"

…Verse 255.—O ye who believe! expend in alms of what we have bestowed
upon you, before the day comes in which is no barter, and no friendship,
and no intercession; and the misbelievers, they are the unjust.

…Verse 263.—The likeness of those who expend their wealth in God's way
is as the likeness of a grain that grows to seven ears, in every ear a
hundred grains; for God will double unto whom he pleases; for God both
embraces and knows.

Those who expend their wealth in God's way then do not follow up what
they expend by taunting with it, and by annoyance; these have their hire
with their Lord, and no fear is on them, neither shall they grieve.

(265).—Kind speech and pardon are better than almsgiving, followed by
annoyance, and God is rich and clement.

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

O ye who believe! make not your almsgiving vain by taunts and annoyance,
like him who expends what he has for the sake of appearances before men,
and believes not in God and the last day; for his likeness is as the
likeness of a flint with soil upon it, and a heavy shower falls on it
and leaves it bare rock; they can do nought with what they earn, for God
guides not the misbelieving folk.

But the likeness of those who expend their wealth craving the goodwill
of God, and as an insurance for their souls, is as the likeness of a
garden on a hill. A heavy shower falls on it, and it brings forth its
eatables twofold; and if no heavy shower falls on it the dew does, and
God on what ye do doth look.

Chapter III., Verse 86.—Ye cannot attain to righteousness until ye
expend in alms of what ye love. But what ye expend in alms, that God
knows.

Chapter LXIV., Verse 16.—Then fear God as much as ye can! and hear, and
obey, and expend in alms, it is better for yourselves. But whosoever is
saved from his own covetousness—these are the prosperous!

If ye lend to God a goodly loan, He will double it for you, and will
forgive you; for God is grateful, clement!

He knows the unseen and the visible; the mighty, the wise!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fasting](rok16)
