[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tgm00)  [Next](tgm02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

# EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION

The Great March represents a selection of Jewish stories for little
children covering the period beginning with the Destruction of the First
Temple and ending with the expulsion from Spain. As the book is intended
to meet the needs of children in Grades Three or Four, the stories are
written in simple style. A definite attempt was made by the author to
write the stories as they would be told to the child by the teacher in
the class or by the mother in the home. It is important that those using
the book should bear this in mind. It will help them to make adequate
use of the story material presented.

Too often stories in books intended for little children are abbreviated
and condensed, the writers being under a mistaken impression that an
abbreviated story shortened from a more expanded narrative for adults
constitutes a good story for children. Actually, children need more
details, more vivid and concrete writing. So the stories in this book
were written especially in conversational tone, and the concreteness and
vividness with which they are told should render them easy for
dramatization. For this reason, too, the language, the style, and the
sentence structure follow essentially the rule of simplicity.

It is well for teachers using this book to remember that the chief aim
in teaching Jewish stories of the Post-Biblical Period to children in
the early grades is not so much to convey information as to give
inspiration. The cultivation of favorable Jewish attitudes is one of the
most important aims vi

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

in any such course of instruction. Whatever information the children may
obtain should be considered quite incidental. While we expect them, as a
result of study of this book, to know some outstanding Jewish names and
some important Jewish events, the primary end is that of cultivating a
love for Jewish heroes, for the Jewish people, and for Jewish idealism.

Since the book was not written as a history, it was not deemed necessary
to include certain historical events which, though significant, ought
not to be included in a book for little children. In other words, good
teaching practice at times dictated the omission of some events and some
stories. Likewise, the arrangement of the stories, it was thought, need
not necessarily be strictly chronological. So, though for the most part
the chronological arrangement is maintained, the author departed from it
whenever, for psychological reasons, it was deemed advisable to do so.

The author of this book has had years of experience as a teacher and as
a critic-teacher, especially in charge of extracurricular activities in
the schools of the Associated Talmud Torahs of Philadelphia. Many of the
stories included in this book were tried out experimentally for two or
three years with children in the younger grades.

The Union of American Hebrew Congregations sincerely hopes that this
book will help meet the needs of our schools, especially in the primary
grades. Suggestions and criticisms will be welcomed both by the author
and by the editor. If the book should help some of our little boys and
girls to develop a love for their people and its ideals, we shall all
feel amply repaid for our efforts.

EMANUEL GAMORAN

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Note to Fourteenth Printing, Revised](tgm02)
