[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tgm16)  [Next](tgm18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

<span id="img_07600"></span> ![](img/07600.jpg)

# 14. THE WICKED NEIGHBOR

MOST of the rabbis were very poor. But the poorest of all was Haninah
ben Dosah. Even on Friday, his wife had nothing to cook and nothing to
bake. You know how busy your mother is on Friday. You know what good
odors come out of the kitchen. You can smell the freshly baked pies,
cakes, and cookies. You can smell the chicken soup. But the wife of Ben
Dosah didn't even have to build the fire, for she had nothing to cook on
it.

"Dear me!" she said. "All the women around me are busy getting ready for
Shabbas. Only my home is cold and empty. I don't want them to pity us.
Who can tell? Some kind neighbor may even bring us some food. O dear! O
dear! What shall I do?"

You know at that time they did not have gas ranges or even coal stoves.
They had ovens made of earthen clay. So Ben Dosah's wife took some wood
and built a fire. The wood burned and the smoke went up through the
chimney.

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

 

<span id="img_07700"></span>

[![](tn/07700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/07700.jpg)

 

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

It didn't take long before all the neighbors were talking about the
wonderful thing that had happened. Haninah's wife had something to cook
and to bake. And most of them were happy.

Now Ben Dosah's wife had one wicked neighbor. When she saw the smoke
coming out of the chimney, she thought:

"The Rabbi's wife has nothing in her oven. What is all that smoke about?
I must go in to see what she is burning in her oven." So the wicked
neighbor threw her shawl over her shoulders and walked across to the
Rabbi's house. She knocked at the door and waited a while. The Rabbi's
wife, however, was ashamed to meet her. Therefore, instead of answering
the knock, she ran into the next room. Again the wicked neighbor knocked
at the door.

"O dear!" she thought. "I guess she is ashamed to meet me. Well, I'll go
in anyway." So without waiting for any answer to her knock, she quickly
opened the door and went into the house.

What do you think she saw? There on the stove all kinds of puddings and
Shabbas dishes were being prepared. And she could smell cherry pies and
honey cookies in the stove. It even seemed to her that she smelled the
cookies burning.

When she saw all this she called to the Rabbi's

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

wife, "Hurry up, bring in your cookie turner. Your cookies are burning."

"What was that? What did you say?" the Rabbi's wife called from the
other room. She was sure that she hadn't heard aright, because she knew
that there was nothing in the stove. "Is it possible that she is making
fun of me?" the Rabbi's wife thought as she was about to grasp her long
cookie turner.

"Well, what are you waiting for? Hurry before they are all burnt," the
neighbor's voice was heard again.

The Rabbi's wife, full of joy, seized her cookie turner and ran into the
kitchen. She was blushing. But it didn't matter. She looked as if she
were hot because of the hard work. Going over to the stove, she touched
the cookies to make sure that they were real, and said:

"'I had just run out to get my cookie turner when you knocked on the
door."

Now it was the wicked neighbor who felt ashamed, and without another
word she went home.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 15. The Shepherd Rabbi](tgm18)
