[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](loj100)  [Next](loj102) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PREFACE

Was sich nie und nirgends hat begeben, das allein veraltet nie.

The term Rabbinic was applied to the Jewish Literature of post-Biblical
times by those who conceived the Judaism of the later epoch to be
something different from the Judaism of the Bible, something actually
opposed to it. Such observers held that the Jewish nation ceased to
exist with the moment when its political independence was destroyed. For
them the Judaism of the later epoch has been a Judaism of the Synagogue,
the spokesmen of which have been the scholars, the Rabbis. And what this
phase of Judaism brought forth has been considered by them to be the
product of the schools rather than the product of practical, pulsating
life. Poetic phantasmagoria, frequently the vaporings of morbid
visionaries, is the material out of which these scholars construct the
theologic system of the Rabbis, and fairy tales, the spontaneous
creations of the people, which take the form of sacred legend in Jewish
literature, are denominated the Scriptural exegesis of the Rabbis, and
condemned incontinently as nugae rabbinorum.

As the name of a man clings to him, so men cling to names. For the
primitive savage the name is part of the essence of a person or thing,
and even in the more advanced stages of culture, judgments are not
always formed in agreement with facts as they are, but rather according
to the names by which they are called. The current estimate of Rabbinic
Literature is a case in point. With the label Rabbinic later ages
inherited from former ages a certain distorted view of the literature so
designated. To this day, and even among scholars that approach its
investigation with unprejudiced minds, the opinion prevails that it is
purely a learned product. And yet the truth is that the most prominent
feature of Rabbinic Literature is its popular character.

The school and the home are not mutually opposed to each other in the
conception of the Jews. They study in their homes, and they live in
their schools. Likewise there is no distinct class of scholars among
them, a class that withdraws itself from participation in the affairs of
practical life. Even in the domain of the Halakah, the Rabbis were not
so much occupied with theoretic principles of law as with the concrete
phenomena of daily existence. These they sought to grasp and shape. And
what is true of the Halakah is true with greater emphasis of the
Haggadah, which is popular in the double sense of appealing to the
people and being produced in the main by the people. To speak of the
Haggadah of the Tannaim and Amoraim is as far from fact as to speak of
the legends of Shakespeare and Scott. The ancient authors and their
modern brethren of the guild alike elaborate legendary material which
they found at hand.

It has been held by some that the Haggadah contains no popular legends,
that it is wholly a factitious, academic product. A cursory glance at
the pseudepigraphic literature of the Jews, which is older than the
Haggadah literature by several centuries, shows how untenable this view
is. That the one literature should have drawn from the other is
precluded by historical facts. At a very early time the Synagogue
disavowed the pseudepigraphic literature, which was the favorite reading
matter of the sectaries and the Christians. Nevertheless the inner
relation between them is of the closest kind. The only essential
difference is that the Midrashic form prevails in the Haggadah, and the
parenetic or apocalyptic form in the pseudepigrapha. The common element
must therefore depart from the Midrash on the one hand and from
parenesis on the other.

Folklore, fairy tales, legends, and all forms of story telling akin to
these are comprehended, in the terminology of the post-Biblical
literature of the Jews, under the inclusive description Haggadah, a name
that can be explained by a circumlocution, but cannot be translated.
Whatever it is applied to is thereby characterized first as being
derived from the Holy Scriptures, and then as being of the nature of a
story. And, in point of fact, this dualism sums up the distinguishing
features of Jewish Legend. More than eighteen centuries ago the Jewish
historian Josephus observed that "though we be deprived of our wealth,
of our cities, or of the other advantages we have, our law continues
immortal." The word he meant to use was not law, but Torah, only he
could not find an equivalent for it in Greek. A singer of the Synagogue
a thousand years after Josephus, who expressed his sentiments in Hebrew,
uttered the same thought: "The Holy City and all her daughter cities are
violated, they lie in ruins, despoiled of their ornaments, their
splendor darkened from sight. Naught is left to us save one eternal
treasure alone--the Holy Torah." The sadder the life of the Jewish
people, the more it felt the need of taking refuge in its past. The
Scripture, or, to use the Jewish term, the Torah, was the only remnant
of its former national independence, and the Torah was the magic means
of making a sordid actuality recede before a glorious memory. To the
Scripture was assigned the task of supplying nourishment to the mind as
well as the soul, to the intellect as well as the imagination, and the
result is the Halakah and the Haggadah.

The fancy of the people did not die out in the post-Biblical time, but
the bent of its activity was determined by the past.

Men craved entertainment in later times as well as in the earlier, only
instead of resorting for its subject-matter to what happened under their
eyes, they drew from the fountain-head of the past. The events in the
ancient history of Israel, which was not only studied, but lived over
again daily, stimulated the desire to criticize it. The religious
reflections upon nature laid down in the myths of the people, the fairy
tales, which have the sole object of pleasing, and the legends, which
are the people's verdict upon history--all these were welded into one
product. The fancy of the Jewish people was engaged by the past
reflected in the Bible, and all its creations wear a Biblical hue for
this reason. This explains the peculiar form of the Haggadah.

But what is spontaneously brought forth by the people is often preserved
only in the form impressed upon it by the feeling and the thought of the
poet, or by the speculations of the learned. Also Jewish legends have
rarely been transmitted in their original shape. They have been
perpetuated in the form of Midrash, that is, Scriptural exegesis. The
teachers of the Haggadah, called Rabbanan d'Aggadta in the Talmud, were
no folklorists, from whom a faithful reproduction of legendary material
may be expected. Primarily they were homilists, who used legends for
didactic purposes, and their main object was to establish a close
connection between the Scripture and the creations of the popular fancy,
to give the latter a firm basis and secure a long term of life for them.

One of the most important tasks of the modern investigation of the
Haggadah is to make a clean separation between the original elements and
the later learned additions. Hardly a beginning has been made in this
direction. But as long as the task of distinguishing them has not been
accomplished, it is impossible to write out the Biblical legends of the
Jews without including the supplemental work of scholars in the products
of the popular fancy.

In the present work, "The Legends of the Jews," I have made the first
attempt to gather from the original sources all Jewish legends, in so
far as they refer to Biblical personages and events, and reproduce them
with the greatest attainable completeness and accuracy. I use the
expression Jewish, rather than Rabbinic, because the sources from which
I have levied contributions are not limited to the Rabbinic literature.
As I expect to take occasion elsewhere to enter into a description of
the sources in detail, the following data must suffice for the present.

The works of the Talmudic Midrashic literature are of the first
importance. Covering the period from the second to the fourteenth
century, they contain the major part of the Jewish legendary material.
Akin to this in content if not always in form is that derived from the
Targumim, of which the oldest versions were produced not earlier than
the fourth century, and the most recent not later than the tenth. The
Midrashic literature has been preserved only in fragmentary form. Many
Haggadot not found in our existing collections are quoted by the authors
of the Middle Ages. Accordingly, a not inconsiderable number of the
legends here printed are taken from medieval Bible commentators and
homilists. I was fortunate in being able to avail myself also of
fragments of Midrashim of which only manuscript copies are extant.

The works of the older Kabbalah are likewise treasuries of quotations
from lost Midrashim, and it was among the Kabbalists, and later among
the Hasidim, that new legends arose. The literatures produced in these
two circles are therefore of great importance for the present purpose.

Furthermore, Jewish legends can be culled not from the writings of the
Synagogue alone; they appear also in those of the Church. Certain Jewish
works repudiated by the Synagogue were accepted and mothered by the
Church. This is the literature usually denominated
apocryphal-pseudepigraphic. From the point of view of legends, the
apocryphal books are of subordinate importance, while the pseudepigrapha
are of fundamental value. Even quantitatively the latter are an imposing
mass. Besides the Greek writings of the Hellenist Jews, they contain
Latin, Syrian, Ethiopic, Aramean, Arabic, Persian, and Old Slavic
products translated directly or indirectly from Jewish works of
Palestinian or Hellenistic origin. The use of these pseudepigrapha
requires great caution. Nearly all of them are embellished with
Christian interpolations, and in some cases the inserted portions have
choked the original form so completely that it is impossible to
determine at first sight whether a Jewish or a Christian legend is under
examination. I believe, however, that the pseudepigraphic material made
use of by me is Jewish beyond the cavil of a doubt, and therefore it
could not have been left out of account in a work like the present.

However, in the appreciation of Jewish Legends, it is the Rabbinic
writers that should form the point of departure, and not the
pseudepigrapha. The former represent the main stream of Jewish thought
and feeling, the latter only an undercurrent. If the Synagogue cast out
the pseudepigrapha, and the Church adopted them with a great show of
favor, these respective attitudes were not determined arbitrarily or by
chance. The pseudepigrapha originated in circles that harbored the germs
from which Christianity developed later on. The Church could thus
appropriate them as her own with just reason.

In the use of some of the apocryphal and pseudepigraphic writings, I
found it expedient to quote the English translations of them made by
others, in so far as they could be brought into accord with the general
style of the book, for which purpose I permitted myself the liberty of
slight verbal changes. In particulars, I was guided, naturally, by my
own conception of the subject, which the Notes justify in detail.

Besides the pseudepigrapha there are other Jewish sources in Christian
garb. In the rich literature of the Church Fathers many a Jewish legend
lies embalmed which one would seek in vain in Jewish books. It was
therefore my special concern to use the writings of the Fathers to the
utmost.

The luxuriant abundance of the material to be presented made it
impossible to give a verbal rendition of each legend. This would have
required more than three times the space at my disposal. I can therefore
claim completeness for my work only as to content. In form it had to
suffer curtailment. When several conflicting versions of the same legend
existed, I gave only one in the text, reserving the other one, or the
several others, for the Notes, or, when practicable, they were fused
into one typical legend, the component parts of which are analyzed in
the Notes. In other instances I resorted to the expedient of citing one
version in one place and the others in other appropriate places, in
furtherance of my aim, to give a smooth presentation of the matter, with
as few interruptions to the course of the narrative as possible. For
this reason I avoided such transitional phrases as "Some say," "It has
been maintained," etc. That my method sometimes separates things that
belong together cannot be considered a grave disadvantage, as the Index
at the end of the work will present a logical rearrangement of the
material for the benefit of the interested student. I also did not
hesitate to treat of the same personage in different chapters, as, for
instance, many of the legends bearing upon Jacob, those connected with
the latter years of the Patriarch, do not appear in the chapter bearing
his name, but will be found in the sections devoted to Joseph, for the
reason that once the son steps upon the scene, he becomes the central
figure, to which the life and deeds of the father are subordinated.
Again, in consideration of lack of space the Biblical narratives
underlying the legends had to be omitted--surely not a serious omission
in a subject with which widespread acquaintance may be presupposed as a
matter of course.

As a third consequence of the amplitude of the material, it was thought
advisable to divide it into several volumes. The references, the
explanations of the sources used, and the interpretations given, and,
especially, numerous emendations of the text of the Midrashim and the
pseudepigrapha, which determined my conception of the passages so
emended, will be found in the last volume, the fourth, which will
contain also an Introduction to the History of Jewish Legends, a number
of Excursuses, and the Index.

As the first three volumes are in the hands of the printer almost in
their entirety, I venture to express the hope that the whole work will
appear within measurable time, the parts following each other at short
intervals.

LOUIS GINZBERG.

NEW YORK, March 24, 1909

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](loj102)
