[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](loj102)  [Next](loj104) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# I

THE CREATION OF THE WORLD--THE FIRST THINGS CREATED--THE ALPHABET--THE
FIRST DAY--THE SECOND DAY--THE THIRD DAY--THE FOURTH DAY--THE FIFTH
DAY--THE SIXTH DAY--ALL THINGS PRAISE THE LORD

### THE CREATION OF THE WORLD--THE FIRST THINGS CREATED

In the beginning, two thousand years before the heaven and the earth,
seven things were created: the Torah written with black fire on white
fire, and lying in the lap of God; the Divine Throne, erected in the
heaven which later was over the heads of the Hayyot; Paradise on the
right side of God, Hell on the left side; the Celestial Sanctuary
directly in front of God, having a jewel on its altar graven with the
Name of the Messiah, and a Voice that cries aloud, "Return, ye children
of men."

When God resolved upon the creation of the world, He took counsel with
the Torah. Her advice was this: "O Lord, a king without an army and
without courtiers and attendants hardly deserves the name of king, for
none is nigh to express the homage due to him." The answer pleased God
exceedingly. Thus did He teach all earthly kings, by His Divine example,
to undertake naught without first consulting advisers.

The advice of the Torah was given with some reservations. She was
skeptical about the value of an earthly world, on account of the
sinfulness of men, who would be sure to disregard her precepts. But God
dispelled her doubts. He told her, that repentance had been created long
before, and sinners would have the opportunity of mending their ways.
Besides, the Temple service would be invested with atoning power, and
Paradise and hell were intended to do duty as reward and punishment.
Finally, the Messiah was appointed to bring salvation, which would put
an end to all sinfulness.

Nor is this world inhabited by man the first of things earthly created
by God. He made several worlds before ours, but He destroyed them all,
because He was pleased with none until He created ours. But even this
last world would have had no permanence, if God had executed His
original plan of ruling it according to the principle of strict justice.
It was only when He saw that justice by itself would undermine the world
that He associated mercy with justice, and made them to rule jointly.
Thus, from the beginning of all things prevailed Divine goodness,
without which nothing could have continued to exist. If not for it, the
myriads of evil spirits had soon put an end to the generations of men.
But the goodness of God has ordained, that in every Nisan, at the time
of the spring equinox, the seraphim shall approach the world of spirits,
and intimidate them so that they fear to do harm to men. Again, if God
in His goodness had not given protection to the weak, the tame animals
would have been extirpated long ago by the wild animals. In Tammuz, at
the time of the summer solstice, when the strength of behemot is at its
height, he roars so loud that all the animals hear it, and for a whole
year they are affrighted and timid, and their acts become less ferocious
than their nature is. Again, in Tishri, at the time of the autumnal
equinox, the great bird ziz flaps his wings and utters his cry, so that
the birds of prey, the eagles and the vultures, blench, and they fear to
swoop down upon the others and annihilate them in their greed. And,
again, were it not for the goodness of God, the vast number of big fish
had quickly put an end to the little ones. But at the time of the winter
solstice, in the month of Tebet, the sea grows restless, for then
leviathan spouts up water, and the big fish become uneasy. They restrain
their appetite, and the little ones escape their rapacity.

Finally, the goodness of God manifests itself in the preservation of His
people Israel. It could not have survived the enmity of the Gentiles, if
God had not appointed protectors for it, the archangels Michael and
Gabriel. Whenever Israel disobeys God, and is accused of misdemeanors by
the angels of the other nations, he is defended by his designated
guardians, with such good result that the other angels conceive fear of
them. Once the angels of the other nations are terrified, the nations
themselves venture not to carry out their wicked designs against Israel.

That the goodness of God may rule on earth as in heaven, the Angels of
Destruction are assigned a place at the far end of the heavens, from
which they may never stir, while the Angels of Mercy encircle the Throne
of God, at His behest.

### THE ALPHABET

When God was about to create the world by His word, the twenty-two
letters of the alphabet descended from the terrible and august crown of
God whereon they were engraved with a pen of flaming fire. They stood
round about God, and one after the other spake and entreated, "Create
the world through me! The first to step forward was the letter Taw. It
said: "O Lord of the world! May it be Thy will to create Thy world
through me, seeing that it is through me that Thou wilt give the Torah
to Israel by the hand of Moses, as it is written, 'Moses commanded us
the Torah.' " The Holy One, blessed be He, made reply, and said, "No!"
Taw asked, "Why not?" and God answered: "Because in days to come I shall
place thee as a sign of death upon the foreheads of men." As soon as Taw
heard these words issue from the mouth of the Holy One, blessed be He,
it retired from His presence disappointed.

The Shin then stepped forward, and pleaded: "O Lord of the world, create
Thy world through me: seeing that Thine own name Shaddai begins with
me." Unfortunately, it is also the first letter of Shaw, lie, and of
Sheker, falsehood, and that incapacitated it. Resh had no better luck.
It was pointed out that it was the initial letter of Ra', wicked, and
Rasha' evil, and after that the distinction it enjoys of being the first
letter in the Name of God, Rahum, the Merciful, counted for naught. The
Kof was rejected, because Kelalah, curse, outweighs the advantage of
being the first in Kadosh, the Holy One. In vain did Zadde call
attention to Zaddik, the Righteous One; there was Zarot, the misfortunes
of Israel, to testify against it. Pe had Podeh, redeemer, to its credit,
but Pesha: transgression, reflected dishonor upon it. 'Ain was declared
unfit, because, though it begins 'Anawah, humility, it performs the same
service for 'Erwah, immorality. Samek said: "O Lord, may it be Thy will
to begin the creation with me, for Thou art called Samek, after me, the
Upholder of all that fall." But God said: "Thou art needed in the place
in which thou art; thou must continue to uphold all that fall." Nun
introduces Ner, "the lamp of the Lord," which is "the spirit of men,"
but it also introduces Ner, "the lamp of the wicked," which will be put
out by God. Mem starts Melek, king, one of the titles of God. As it is
the first letter of Mehumah, confusion, as well, it had no chance of
accomplishing its desire. The claim of Lamed bore its refutation within
itself. It advanced the argument that it was the first letter of Luhot,
the celestial tables for the Ten Commandments; it forgot that the tables
were shivered in pieces by Moses. Kaf was sure of victory Kisseh, the
throne of God, Kabod, His honor, and Keter, His crown, all begin with
it. God had to remind it that He would smite together His hands, Kaf, in
despair over the misfortunes of Israel. Yod at first sight seemed the
appropriate letter for the beginning of creation, on account of its
association with Yah, God, if only Yezer ha-Ra' the evil inclination,
had not happened to begin with it, too. Tet is identified with Tob, the
good. However, the truly good is not in this world; it belongs to the
world to come. Het is the first letter of Hanun, the Gracious One; but
this advantage is offset by its place in the word for sin, Hattat. Zain
suggests Zakor, remembrance, but it is itself the word for weapon, the
doer of mischief. Waw and He compose the Ineffable Name of God; they are
therefore too exalted to be pressed into the service of the mundane
world. If Dalet Wad stood only for Dabar, the Divine Word, it would have
been used, but it stands also for Din, justice, and under the rule of
law without love the world would have fallen to ruin. Finally, in spite
of reminding one of Gadol, great, Gimel would not do, because Gemul,
retribution, starts with it.

After the claims of all these letters had been disposed of, Bet stepped
before the Holy One, blessed be He, and pleaded before Him: "O Lord of
the world! May it be Thy will to create Thy world through me, seeing
that all the dwellers in the world give praise daily unto Thee through
me, as it is said, 'Blessed be the Lord forever. Amen, and Amen.' " The
Holy One, blessed be He, at once granted the petition of Bet. He said,
"Blessed be he that cometh in the name of the Lord." And He created His
world through Bet, as it is said, "Bereshit God created the heaven and
the earth." The only letter that had refrained from urging its claims
was the modest Alef, and God rewarded it later for its humility by
giving it the first place in the Decalogue.

### THE FIRST DAY

On the first day of creation God produced ten things: the heavens and
the earth, Tohu and Bohu, light and darkness, wind and water, the
duration of the day and the duration of the night.

Though the heavens and the earth consist of entirely different elements,
they were yet created as a unit, "like the pot and its cover." The
heavens were fashioned from the light of God's garment, and the earth
from the snow under the Divine Throne. Tohu is a green band which
encompasses the whole world, and dispenses darkness, and Bohu consists
of stones in the abyss, the producers of the waters. The light created
at the very beginning is not the same as the light emitted by the sun,
the moon, and the stars, which appeared only on the fourth day. The
light of the first day was of a sort that would have enabled man to see
the world at a glance from one end to the other. Anticipating the
wickedness of the sinful generations of the deluge and the Tower of
Babel, who were unworthy to enjoy the blessing of such light, God
concealed it, but in the world to come it will appear to the pious in
all its pristine glory.

Several heavens were created, seven in fact, each to serve a purpose of
its own. The first, the one visible to man, has no function except that
of covering up the light during the night time; therefore it disappears
every morning. The planets are fastened to the second of the heavens; in
the third the manna is made for the pious in the hereafter; the fourth
contains the celestial Jerusalem together with the Temple, in which
Michael ministers as high priest, and offers the souls of the pious as
sacrifices. In the fifth heaven, the angel hosts reside, and sing the
praise of God, though only during the night, for by day it is the task
of Israel on earth to give glory to God on high. The sixth heaven is an
uncanny spot; there originate most of the trials and visitations
ordained for the earth and its inhabitants. Snow lies heaped up there
and hail; there are lofts full of noxious dew, magazines stocked with
storms, and cellars holding reserves of smoke. Doors of fire separate
these celestial chambers, which are under the supervision of the
archangel Metatron. Their pernicious contents defiled the heavens until
David's time. The pious king prayed God to purge His exalted dwelling of
whatever was pregnant with evil; it was not becoming that such things
should exist near the Merciful One. Only then they were removed to the
earth.

The seventh heaven, on the other hand, contains naught but what is good
and beautiful: right, justice, and mercy, the storehouses of life,
peace, and blessing, the souls of the pious, the souls and spirits of
unborn generations, the dew with which God will revive the dead on the
resurrection day, and, above all, the Divine Throne, surrounded by the
seraphim, the ofanim, the holy Hayyot, and the ministering angels.

Corresponding to the seven heavens, God created seven earths, each
separated from the next by five layers. Over the lowest earth, the
seventh, called Erez, lie in succession the abyss, the Tohu, the Bohu, a
sea, and waters. Then the sixth earth is reached, the Adamah, the scene
of the magnificence of God. In the same way the Adamah is separated from
the fifth earth, the Arka, which contains Gehenna, and Sha'are Mawet,
and Sha'are Zalmawet, and Beer Shahat, and Tit ha-Yawen, and Abaddon,
and Sheol, and there the souls of the wicked are guarded by the Angels
of Destruction. In the same way Arka is followed by Harabah, the dry,
the place of brooks and streams in spite of its name, as the next,
called Yabbashah, the mainland, contains the rivers and the springs.
Tebel, the second earth, is the first mainland inhabited by living
creatures, three hundred and sixty-five species, all essentially
different from those of our own earth. Some have human heads set on the
body of a lion, or a serpent, or an ox; others have human bodies topped
by the head of one of these animals. Besides, Tebel is inhabited by
human beings with two heads and four hands and feet, in fact with all
their organs doubled excepting only the trunk. It happens sometimes that
the parts of these double persons quarrel with each other, especially
while eating and drinking, when each claims the best and largest
portions for himself. This species of mankind is distinguished for great
piety, another difference between it and the inhabitants of our earth.

Our own earth is called Heled, and, like the others, it is separated
from the Tebel by an abyss, the Tohu, the Bohu, a sea, and waters.

Thus one earth rises above the other, from the first to the seventh, and
over the seventh earth the heavens are vaulted, from the first to the
seventh, the last of them attached to the arm of God. The seven heavens
form a unity, the seven kinds of earth form a unity, and the heavens and
the earth together also form a unity.

When God made our present heavens and our present earth, "the new
heavens and the new earth" were also brought forth, yea, and the hundred
and ninety-six thousand worlds which God created unto His Own glory.

It takes five hundred years to walk from the earth to the heavens, and
from one end of a heaven to the other, and also from one heaven to the
next, and it takes the same length of time to travel from the east to
the west, or from the south to the north. Of all this vast world only
one-third is inhabited, the other two-thirds being equally divided
between water and waste desert land.

Beyond the inhabited parts to the east is Paradise with its seven
divisions, each assigned to the pious of a certain degree. The ocean is
situated to the west, and it is dotted with islands upon islands,
inhabited by many different peoples. Beyond it, in turn, are the
boundless steppes full of serpents and scorpions, and destitute of every
sort of vegetation, whether herbs or trees. To the north are the
supplies of hell-fire, of snow, hail, smoke, ice, darkness, and
windstorms, and in that vicinity sojourn all sorts of devils, demons,
and malign spirits. Their dwelling-place is a great stretch of land, it
would take five hundred years to traverse it. Beyond lies hell. To the
south is the chamber containing reserves of fire, the cave of smoke, and
the forge of blasts and hurricanes. Thus it comes that the wind blowing
from the south brings heat and sultriness to the earth. Were it not for
the angel Ben Nez, the Winged, who keeps the south wind back with his
pinions, the world would be consumed. Besides, the fury of its blast is
tempered by the north wind, which always appears as moderator, whatever
other wind may be blowing.

In the east, the west, and the south, heaven and earth touch each other,
but the north God left unfinished, that any man who announced himself as
a god might be set the task of supplying the deficiency, and stand
convicted as a pretender.

The construction of the earth was begun at the centre, with the
foundation stone of the Temple, the Eben Shetiyah, for the Holy Land is
at the central point of the surface of the earth, Jerusalem is at the
central point of Palestine, and the Temple is situated at the centre of
the Holy City. In the sanctuary itself the Hekal is the centre, and the
holy Ark occupies the centre of the Hekal, built on the foundation
stone, which thus is at the centre of the earth. Thence issued the first
ray of light, piercing to the Holy Land, and from there illuminating the
whole earth. The creation of the world, however, could not take place
until God had banished the ruler of the dark. "Retire," God said to him,
"for I desire to create the world by means of light." Only after the
light had been fashioned, darkness arose, the light ruling in the sky,
the darkness on the earth. The power of God displayed itself not only in
the creation of the world of things, but equally in the limitations
which He imposed upon each. The heavens and the earth stretched
themselves out in length and breadth as though they aspired to
infinitude, and it required the word of God to call a halt to their
encroachments.

### THE SECOND DAY

On the second day God brought forth four creations, the firmament, hell,
fire, and the angels. The firmament is not the same as the heavens of
the first day. It is the crystal stretched forth over the heads of the
Hayyot, from which the heavens derive their light, as the earth derives
its light from the sun. This firmament saves the earth from being
engulfed by the waters of the heavens; it forms the partition between
the waters above and the waters below. It was made to crystallize into
the solid it is by the heavenly fire, which broke its bounds, and
condensed the surface of the firmament. Thus fire made a division
between the celestial and the terrestrial at the time of creation, as it
did at the revelation on Mount Sinai. The firmament is not more than
three fingers thick, nevertheless it divides two such heavy bodies as
the waters below, which are the foundations for the nether world, and
the waters above, which are the foundations for the seven heavens, the
Divine Throne, and the abode of the angels.

The separation of the waters into upper and lower waters was the only
act of the sort done by God in connection with the work of creation. All
other acts were unifying. It therefore caused some difficulties. When
God commanded, "Let the waters be gathered together, unto one place, and
let the dry land appear," certain parts refused to obey. They embraced
each other all the more closely. In His wrath at the waters, God
determined to let the whole of creation resolve itself into chaos again.
He summoned the Angel of the Face, and ordered him to destroy the world.
The angel opened his eyes wide, and scorching fires and thick clouds
rolled forth from them, while he cried out, "He who divides the Red Sea
in sunder!"--and the rebellious waters stood. The all, however, was
still in danger of destruction. Then began the singer of God's praises:
"O Lord of the world, in days to come Thy creatures will sing praises
without end to Thee, they will bless Thee boundlessly, and they will
glorify Thee without measure. Thou wilt set Abraham apart from all
mankind as Thine own; one of his sons Thou wilt call 'My first-born';
and his descendants will take the yoke of Thy kingdom upon themselves.
In holiness and purity Thou wilt bestow Thy Torah upon them, with the
words, 'I am the Lord your God,' whereunto they will make answer, 'All
that God hath spoken we will do.' And now I beseech Thee, have pity upon
Thy world, destroy it not, for if Thou destroyest it, who will fulfil
Thy will?" God was pacified; He withdrew the command ordaining the
destruction of the world, but the waters He put under the mountains, to
remain there forever. The objection of the lower waters to division and
Separation was not their only reason for rebelling. The waters had been
the first to give praise to God, and when their separation into upper
and lower was decreed, the waters above rejoiced, saying, "Blessed are
we who are privileged to abide near our Creator and near His Holy
Throne." Jubilating thus, they flew upward, and uttered song and praise
to the Creator of the world. Sadness fell upon the waters below. They
lamented: "Woe unto us, we have not been found worthy to dwell in the
presence of God, and praise Him together with our companions." Therefore
they attempted to rise upward, until God repulsed them, and pressed them
under the earth. Yet they were not left unrewarded for their loyalty.
Whenever the waters above desire to give praise to God, they must first
seek permission from the waters below.

The second day of creation was an untoward day in more than the one
respect that it introduced a breach where before there had been nothing
but unity; for it was the day that saw also the creation of hell.
Therefore God could not say of this day as of the others, that He "saw
that it was good." A division may be necessary, but it cannot be called
good, and hell surely does not deserve the attribute of good. Hell has
seven divisions, one beneath the other. They are called Sheol, Abaddon,
Beer Shahat, Tit ha-Yawen, Sha'are Mawet, Sha'are Zalmawet: and Gehenna.
It requires three hundred years to traverse the height, or the width, or
the depth of each division, and it would take six thousand three hundred
years to go over a tract of land equal in extent to the seven divisions.

Each of the seven divisions in turn has seven subdivisions, and in each
compartment there are seven rivers of fire and seven of hail. The width
of each is one thousand ells, its depth one thousand, and its length
three hundred, and they flow one from the other, and are supervised by
ninety thousand Angels of Destruction. There are, besides, in every
compartment seven thousand caves, in every cave there are seven thousand
crevices, and in every crevice seven thousand scorpions. Every scorpion
has three hundred rings, and in every ring seven thousand pouches of
venom, from which flow seven rivers of deadly poison. If a man handles
it, he immediately bursts, every limb is torn from his body, his bowels
are cleft asunder, and he falls upon his face. There are also five
different kinds of fire in hell. One devours and absorbs, another
devours and does not absorb, while the third absorbs and does not
devour, and there is still another fire, which neither devours nor
absorbs, and furthermore a fire which devours fire. There are coals big
as mountains, and coals big as hills, and coals as large as the Dead
Sea, and coals like huge stones, and there are rivers of pitch and
sulphur flowing and seething like live coals.

The third creation of the second day was the angel hosts, both the
ministering angels and the angels of praise. The reason they had not
been called into being on the first day was, lest men believe that the
angels assisted God in the creation of the heavens and the earth. The
angels that are fashioned from fire have forms of fire, but only so long
as they remain in heaven. When they descend to earth, to do the bidding
of God here below, either they are changed into wind, or they assume the
guise of men. There are ten ranks or degrees among the angels.

The most exalted in rank are those surrounding the Divine Throne on all
sides, to the right, to the left, in front, and behind, under the
leadership of the archangels Michael, Gabriel, Uriel, and Raphael.

All the celestial beings praise God with the words, "Holy, holy, holy,
is the Lord of hosts," but men take precedence of the angels herein.
They may not begin their song of praise until the earthly beings have
brought their homage to God. Especially Israel is preferred to the
angels. When they encircle the Divine Throne in the form of fiery
mountains and flaming hills, and attempt to raise their voices in
adoration of the Creator, God silences them with the words, "Keep quiet
until I have heard the songs, praises, prayers, and sweet melodies of
Israel." Accordingly, the ministering angels and all the other celestial
hosts wait until the last tones of Israel's doxologies rising aloft from
earth have died away, and then they proclaim in a loud voice, "Holy,
holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts." When the hour for the glorification
of God by the angels draws nigh, the august Divine herald, the angel
Sham'iel, steps to the windows of the lowest heaven to hearken to the
songs, prayers, and praises that ascend from the synagogues and the
houses of learning, and when they are finished, he announces the end to
the angels in all the heavens. The ministering angels, those who come in
contact with the sublunary world, now repair to their chambers to take
their purification bath. They dive into a stream of fire and flame seven
times, and three hundred and sixty-five times they examine themselves
carefully, to make sure that no taint clings to their bodies. Only then
they feel privileged to mount the fiery ladder and join the angels of
the seventh heaven, and surround the throne of God with Hashmal and all
the holy Hayyot. Adorned with millions of fiery crowns, arrayed in fiery
garments, all the angels in unison, in the same words, and with the same
melody, intone songs of praise to God.

### THE THIRD DAY

Up to this time the earth was a plain, and wholly covered with water.
Scarcely had the words of God, "Let the waters be gathered together,"
made themselves heard, when mountains appeared all over and hills, and
the water collected in the deep-lying basins. But the water was
recalcitrant, it resisted the order to occupy the lowly spots, and
threatened to overflow the earth, until God forced it back into the sea,
and encircled the sea with sand. Now, whenever the water is tempted to
transgress its bounds, it beholds the sand, and recoils.

The waters did but imitate their chief Rahab, the Angel of the Sea, who
rebelled at the creation of the world. God had commanded Rahab to take
in the water. But he refused, saying, "I have enough." The punishment
for his disobedience was death. His body rests in the depths of the sea,
the water dispelling the foul odor that emanates from it.

The main creation of the third day was the realm of plants, the
terrestrial plants as well as the plants of Paradise. First of all the
cedars of Lebanon and the other great trees were made. In their pride at
having been put first, they shot up high in the air. They considered
themselves the favored among plants. Then God spake, "I hate arrogance
and pride, for I alone am exalted, and none beside," and He created the
iron on the same day, the substance with which trees are felled down.
The trees began to weep, and when God asked the reason of their tears,
they said: "We cry because Thou hast created the iron to uproot us
therewith. All the while we had thought ourselves the highest of the
earth, and now the iron, our destroyer, has been called into existence."
God replied: "You yourselves will furnish the axe with a handle. Without
your assistance the iron will not be able to do aught against you."

The command to bear seed after their kind was given to the trees alone.
But the various sorts of grass reasoned, that if God had not desired
divisions according to classes, He would not have instructed the trees
to bear fruit after their kind with the seed thereof in it, especially
as trees are inclined of their own accord to divide themselves into
species. The grasses therefore reproduced themselves also after their
kinds. This prompted the exclamation of the Prince of the World, "Let
the glory of the Lord endure forever; let the Lord rejoice in His
works."

The most important work done on the third day was the creation of
Paradise. Two gates of carbuncle form the entrance to Paradise, and
sixty myriads of ministering angels keep watch over them. Each of these
angels shines with the lustre of the heavens. When the just man appears
before the gates, the clothes in which he was buried are taken off him,
and the angels array him in seven garments of clouds of glory, and place
upon his head two crowns, one of precious stones and pearls, the other
of gold of Parvaim, and they put eight myrtles in his hand, and they
utter praises before him and say to him, "Go thy way, and eat thy bread
with joy." And they lead him to a place full of rivers, surrounded by
eight hundred kinds of roses and myrtles. Each one has a canopy
according to his merits, and under it flow four rivers, one of milk, the
other of balsam, the third of wine, and the fourth of honey. Every
canopy is overgrown by a vine of gold, and thirty pearls hang from it,
each of them shining like Venus. Under each canopy there is a table of
precious stones and pearls, and sixty angels stand at the head of every
just man, saying unto him: "Go and eat with joy of the honey, for thou
hast busied thyself with the Torah, and she is sweeter than honey, and
drink of the wine preserved in the grape since the six days of creation,
for thou hast busied thyself with the Torah, and she is compared to
wine." The least fair of the just is beautiful as Joseph and Rabbi
Johanan, and as the grains of a silver pomegranate upon which fall the
rays of the sun. There is no light, "for the light of the righteous is
the shining light." And they undergo four transformations every day,
passing through four states. In the first the righteous is changed into
a child. He enters the division for children, and tastes the joys of
childhood. Then he is changed into a youth, and enters the division for
the youths, with whom he enjoys the delights of youth. Next he becomes
an adult, in the prime of life, and he enters the division of men, and
enjoys the pleasures of manhood. Finally, he is changed into an old man.
He enters the division for the old, and enjoys the pleasures of age.

There are eighty myriads of trees in every corner of Paradise, the
meanest among them choicer than all the spice trees. In every corner
there are sixty myriads of angels singing with sweet voices, and the
tree of life stands in the middle and shades the whole of Paradise. It
has fifteen thousand tastes, each different from the other, and the
perfumes thereof vary likewise. Over it hang seven clouds of glory, and
winds blow upon it from all four sides, so that its odor is wafted from
one end of the world to the other. Underneath sit the scholars and
explain the Torah. Over each of them two canopies are spread, one of
stars, the other of sun and moon, and a curtain of clouds of glory
separates the one canopy from the other. Beyond Paradise begins Eden,
containing three hundred and ten worlds and seven compartments for seven
different classes of the pious. In the first are "the martyr victims of
the government," like Rabbi Akiba and his colleagues; in the second
those who were drowned; in the third Rabbi Johanan ben Zakkai and his
disciples; in the fourth those who were carried off in the cloud of
glory; in the fifth the penitents, who occupy a place which even a
perfectly pious man cannot obtain; in the sixth are the youths who have
not tasted of sin in their lives; in the seventh are those poor who
studied Bible and Mishnah, and led a life of self-respecting decency.
And God sits in the midst of them and expounds the Torah to them.

As for the seven divisions of Paradise, each of them is twelve myriads
of miles in width and twelve myriads of miles in length. In the first
division dwell the proselytes who embraced Judaism of their own free
will, not from compulsion. The walls are of glass and the wainscoting of
cedar. The prophet Obadiah, himself a proselyte, is the overseer of this
first division. The second division is built of silver, and the
wainscoting thereof is of cedar. Here dwell those who have repented, and
Manasseh, the penitent son of Hezekiah, presides over them. The third
division is built of silver and gold. Here dwell Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, and all the Israelites who came out of Egypt, and the whole
generation that lived in the desert. Also David is there, together with
all his sons except Absalom, one of them, Chileab, still alive. And all
the kings of Judah are there, with the exception of Manasseh, the son of
Hezekiah, who presides in the second division, over the penitents. Moses
and Aaron preside over the third division. Here are precious vessels of
silver and gold and jewels and canopies and beds and thrones and lamps,
of gold, of precious stones, and of pearls, the best of everything there
is in heaven. The fourth division is built of beautiful rubies, and its
wainscoting is of olive wood. Here dwell the perfect and the steadfast
in faith, and their wainscoting is of olive wood, because their lives
were bitter as olives to them. The fifth division is built of silver and
gold and refined gold, and the finest of gold and glass and bdellium,
and through the midst of it flows the river Gihon. The wainscoting is of
silver and gold, and a perfume breathes through it more exquisite than
the perfume of Lebanon. The coverings of the silver and gold beds are
made of purple and blue, woven by Eve, and of scarlet and the hair of
goats, woven by angels. Here dwells the Messiah on a palanquin made of
the wood of Lebanon, "the pillars thereof of silver, the bottom of gold,
the seat of it purple." With him is Elijah. He takes the head of
Messiah, and places it in his bosom, and says to him, "Be quiet, for the
end draweth nigh." On every Monday and Thursday and on Sabbaths and
holidays, the Patriarchs come to him, and the twelve sons of Jacob, and
Moses, Aaron, David, Solomon, and all the kings of Israel and of Judah,
and they weep with him and comfort him, and say unto him, "Be quiet and
put trust in thy Creator, for the end draweth nigh. "Also Korah and his
company, and Dathan, Abiram, and Absalom come to him on every Wednesday,
and ask him: "How long before the end comes full of wonders? When wilt
thou bring us life again, and from the abysses of the earth lift us?"
The Messiah answers them, "Go to your fathers and ask them"; and when
they hear this, they are ashamed, and do not ask their fathers.

In the sixth division dwell those who died in performing a pious act,
and in the seventh division those who died from illness inflicted as an
expiation for the sins of Israel.

### THE FOURTH DAY

The fourth day of creation produced the sun, the moon, and the stars.
These heavenly spheres were not actually fashioned on this day; they
were created on the first day, and merely were assigned their places in
the heavens on the fourth. At first the sun and the moon enjoyed equal
powers and prerogatives. The moon spoke to God, and said: "O Lord, why
didst Thou create the world with the letter Bet?" God replied: "That it
might be made known unto My creatures that there are two worlds." The
moon: "O Lord: which of the two worlds is the larger, this world or the
world to come?" God: "The world to come is the larger." The moon: "O
Lord, Thou didst create two worlds, a greater and a lesser world; Thou
didst create the heaven and the earth, the heaven exceeding the earth;
Thou didst create fire and water, the water stronger than the fire,
because it can quench the fire; and now Thou hast created the sun and
the moon, and it is becoming that one of them should be greater than the
other." Then spake God to the moon: "I know well, thou wouldst have me
make Thee greater than the sun. As a punishment I decree that thou
mayest keep but one-sixtieth of thy light." The moon made supplication:
"Shall I be punished so severely for having spoken a single word?" God
relented: "In the future world I will restore thy light, so that thy
light may again be as the light of the sun." The moon was not yet
satisfied. "O Lord," she said, "and the light of the sun, how great will
it be in that day?" Then the wrath of God was once more enkindled:
"What, thou still plottest against the sun? As thou livest, in the world
to come his light shall be sevenfold the light he now sheds." The Sun
runs his course like a bridegroom. He sits upon a throne with a garland
on his head. Ninety-six angels accompany him on his daily journey, in
relays of eight every hour, two to the left of him, and two to the
right, two before Him, and two behind. Strong as he is, he could
complete his course from south to north in a single instant, but three
hundred and sixty-five angels restrain him by means of as many
grappling-irons. Every day one looses his hold, and the sun must thus
spend three hundred and sixty-five days on his course. The progress of
the sun in his circuit is an uninterrupted song of praise to God. And
this song alone makes his motion possible. Therefore, when Joshua wanted
to bid the sun stand still, he had to command him to be silent. His song
of praise hushed, the sun stood still.

The sun is double-faced; one face, of fire, is directed toward the
earth, and one of hail, toward heaven, to cool off the prodigious heat
that streams from the other face, else the earth would catch afire. In
winter the sun turns his fiery face upward, and thus the cold is
produced. When the sun descends in the west in the evening, he dips down
into the ocean and takes a bath, his fire is extinguished, and therefore
he dispenses neither light nor warmth during the night. But as soon as
he reaches the east in the morning, he laves himself in a stream of
flame, which imparts warmth and light to him, and these he sheds over
the earth. In the same way the moon and the stars take a bath in a
stream of hail before they enter upon their service for the night.

When the sun and the moon are ready to start upon their round of duties,
they appear before God, and beseech him to relieve them of their task,
so that they may be spared the sight of sinning mankind. Only upon
compulsion they proceed with their daily course. Coming from the
presence of God, they are blinded by the radiance in the heavens, and
they cannot find their way. God, therefore, shoots off arrows, by the
glittering light of which they are guided. It is on account of the
sinfulness of man, which the sun is forced to contemplate on his rounds,
that he grows weaker as the time of his going down approaches, for sins
have a defiling and enfeebling effect, and he drops from the horizon as
a sphere of blood, for blood is the sign of corruption. As the sun sets
forth on his course in the morning, his wings touch the leaves on the
trees of Paradise, and their vibration is communicated to the angels and
the holy Hayyot, to the other plants, and also to the trees and plants
on earth, and to all the beings on earth and in heaven. It is the signal
for them all to cast their eyes upward. As soon as they see the
Ineffable Name, which is engraved in the sun, they raise their voices in
songs of praise to God. At the same moment a heavenly voice is heard to
say, "Woe to the sons of men that consider not the honor of God like
unto these creatures whose voices now rise aloft in adoration." These
words, naturally, are not heard by men; as little as they perceive the
grating of the sun against the wheel to which all the celestial bodies
are attached, although the noise it makes is extraordinarily loud. This
friction of the sun and the wheel produces the motes dancing about in
the sunbeams. They are the carriers of healing to the sick, the only
health-giving creations of the fourth day, on the whole an unfortunate
day, especially for children, afflicting them with disease. When God
punished the envious moon by diminishing her light and splendor, so that
she ceased to be the equal of the sun as she had been originally, she
fell, and tiny threads were loosed from her body. These are the stars.

### THE FIFTH DAY

On the fifth day of creation God took fire and water, and out of these
two elements He made the fishes of the sea. The animals in the water are
much more numerous than those on land. For every species on land,
excepting only the weasel, there is a corresponding species in the
water, and, besides, there are many found only in the water.

The ruler over the sea-animals is leviathan. With all the other fishes
he was made on the fifth day. Originally he was created male and female
like all the other animals. But when it appeared that a pair of these
monsters might annihilate the whole earth with their united strength,
God killed the female. So enormous is leviathan that to quench his
thirst he needs all the water that flows from the Jordan into the sea.
His food consists of the fish which go between his jaws of their own
accord. When he is hungry, a hot breath blows from his nostrils, and it
makes the waters of the great sea seething hot. Formidable though
behemot, the other monster, is, he feels insecure until he is certain
that leviathan has satisfied his thirst. The only thing that can keep
him in check is the stickleback, a little fish which was created for the
purpose, and of which he stands in great awe. But leviathan is more than
merely large and strong; he is wonderfully made besides. His fins
radiate brilliant light, the very sun is obscured by it, and also his
eyes shed such splendor that frequently the sea is illuminated suddenly
by it. No wonder that this marvellous beast is the plaything of God, in
whom He takes His pastime.

There is but one thing that makes leviathan repulsive, his foul smell:
which is so strong that if it penetrated thither, it would render
Paradise itself an impossible abode.

The real purpose of leviathan is to be served up as a dainty to the
pious in the world to come. The female was put into brine as soon as she
was killed, to be preserved against the time when her flesh will be
needed. The male is destined to offer a delectable sight to all
beholders before he is consumed. When his last hour arrives, God will
summon the angels to enter into combat with the monster. But no sooner
will leviathan cast his glance at them than they will flee in fear and
dismay from the field of battle. They will return to the charge with
swords, but in vain, for his scales can turn back steel like straw. They
will be equally unsuccessful when they attempt to kill him by throwing
darts and slinging stones; such missiles will rebound without leaving
the least impression on his body. Disheartened, the angels will give up
the combat, and God will command leviathan and behemot to enter into a
duel with each other. The issue will be that both will drop dead,
behemot slaughtered by a blow of leviathan's fins, and leviathan killed
by a lash of behemot's tail. From the skin of leviathan God will
construct tents to shelter companies of the pious while they enjoy the
dishes made of his flesh. The amount assigned to each of the pious will
be in proportion to his deserts, and none will envy or begrudge the
other his better share. What is left of leviathan's skin will be
stretched out over Jerusalem as a canopy, and the light streaming from
it will illumine the whole world, and what is left of his flesh after
the pious have appeased their appetite, will be distributed among the
rest of men, to carry on traffic therewith.

On the same day with the fishes, the birds were created, for these two
kinds of animals are closely related to each other. Fish are fashioned
out of water, and birds out of marshy ground saturated with water.

As leviathan is the king of fishes, so the ziz is appointed to rule over
the birds. His name comes from the variety of tastes his flesh has; it
tastes like this, zeh, and like that, zeh. The ziz is as monstrous of
size as leviathan himself. His ankles rest on the earth, and his head
reaches to the very sky.

It once happened that travellers on a vessel noticed a bird. As he stood
in the water, it merely covered his feet, and his head knocked against
the sky. The onlookers thought the water could not have any depth at
that point, and they prepared to take a bath there. A heavenly voice
warned them: "Alight not here! Once a carpenter's axe slipped from his
hand at this spot, and it took it seven years to touch bottom." The bird
the travellers saw was none other than the ziz. His wings are so huge
that unfurled they darken the sun. They protect the earth against the
storms of the south; without their aid the earth would not be able to
resist the winds blowing thence. Once an egg of the ziz fell to the
ground and broke. The fluid from it flooded sixty cities, and the shock
crushed three hundred cedars. Fortunately such accidents do not occur
frequently. As a rule the bird lets her eggs slide gently into her nest.
This one mishap was due to the fact that the egg was rotten, and the
bird cast it away carelessly. The ziz has another name, Renanin, because
he is the celestial singer. On account of his relation to the heavenly
regions he is also called Sekwi, the seer, and, besides, he is called
"son of the nest," because his fledgling birds break away from the shell
without being hatched by the mother bird; they spring directly from the
nest, as it were. Like leviathan, so ziz is a delicacy to be served to
the pious at the end of time, to compensate them for the privations
which abstaining from the unclean fowls imposed upon them.

### THE SIXTH DAY

As the fish were formed out of water, and the birds out of boggy earth
well mixed with water, so the mammals were formed out of solid earth,
and as leviathan is the most notable representative of the fish kind,
and ziz of the bird kind, so behemot is the most notable representative
of the mammal kind. Behemot matches leviathan in strength, and he had to
be prevented, like leviathan, from multiplying and increasing, else the
world could not have continued to exist; after God had created him male
and female, He at once deprived him of the desire to propagate his kind.
He is so monstrous that he requires the produce of a thousand mountains
for his daily food. All the water that flows through the bed of the
Jordan in a year suffices him exactly for one gulp. It therefore was
necessary to give him one stream entirely for his own use, a stream
flowing forth from Paradise, called Yubal. Behemot, too, is destined to
be served to the pious as an appetizing dainty, but before they enjoy
his flesh, they will be permitted to view the mortal combat between
leviathan and behemot, as a reward for having denied themselves the
pleasures of the circus and its gladiatorial contests.

Leviathan, ziz, and behemot are not the only monsters; there are many
others, and marvellous ones, like the reem, a giant animal, of which
only one couple, male and female, is in existence. Had there been more,
the world could hardly have maintained itself against them. The act of
copulation occurs but once in seventy years between them, for God has so
ordered it that the male and female reem are at opposite ends of the
earth, the one in the east, the other in the west. The act of copulation
results in the death of the male. He is bitten by the female and dies of
the bite. The female becomes pregnant and remains in this state for no
less than twelve years. At the end of this long period she gives birth
to twins, a male and a female. The year preceding her delivery she is
not able to move. She would die of hunger, were it not that her own
spittle flowing copiously from her mouth waters and fructifies the earth
near her, and causes it to bring forth enough for her maintenance. For a
whole year the animal can but roll from side to side, until finally her
belly bursts, and the twins issue forth. Their appearance is thus the
signal for the death of the mother reem. She makes room for the new
generation, which in turn is destined to suffer the same fate as the
generation that went before. Immediately after birth, the one goes
eastward and the other westward, to meet only after the lapse of seventy
years, propagate themselves, and perish. A traveller who once saw a reem
one day old described its height to be four parasangs, and the length of
its head one parasang and a half. Its horns measure one hundred ells,
and their height is a great deal more.

One of the most remarkable creatures is the "man of the mountain," Adne
Sadeh, or, briefly, Adam. His form is exactly that of a human being, but
he is fastened to the ground by means of a navel-string, upon which his
life depends. The cord once snapped, he dies. This animal keeps himself
alive with what is produced by the soil around about him as far as his
tether permits him to crawl. No creature may venture to approach within
the radius of his cord, for he seizes and demolishes whatever comes in
his reach. To kill him, one may not go near to him, the navel-string
must be severed from a distance by means of a dart, and then he dies
amid groans and moans. Once upon a time a traveller happened in the
region where this animal is found. He overheard his host consult his
wife as to what to do to honor their guest, and resolve to serve "our
man," as he said. Thinking he had fallen among cannibals, the stranger
ran as fast as his feet could carry him from his entertainer, who sought
vainly to restrain him. Afterward, he found out that there had been no
intention of regaling him with human flesh, but only with the flesh of
the strange animal called "man." As the "man of the mountain" is fixed
to the ground by his navel-string, so the barnacle-goose is grown to a
tree by its bill. It is hard to say whether it is an animal and must be
slaughtered to be fit for food, or whether it is a plant and no ritual
ceremony is necessary before eating it.

Among the birds the phoenix is the most wonderful. When Eve gave all the
animals some of the fruit of the tree of knowledge, the phoenix was the
only bird that refused to eat thereof, and he was rewarded with eternal
life. When he has lived a thousand years, his body shrinks, and the
feathers drop from it, until he is as small as an egg. This is the
nucleus of the new bird.

The phoenix is also called "the guardian of the terrestrial sphere." He
runs with the sun on his circuit, and he spreads out his wings and
catches up the fiery rays of the sun. If he were not there to intercept
them, neither man nor any other animate being would keep alive. On his
right wing the following words are inscribed in huge letters, about four
thousand stadia high: "Neither the earth produces me, nor the heavens,
but only the wings of fire." His food consists of the manna of heaven
and the dew of the earth. His excrement is a worm, whose excrement in
turn is the cinnamon used by kings and princes. Enoch, who saw the
phoenix birds when he was translated, describes them as flying
creatures, wonderful and strange in appearance, with the feet and tails
of lions, and the heads of crocodiles; their appearance is of a purple
color like the rainbow; their size nine hundred measures. Their wings
are like those of angels, each having twelve, and they attend the
chariot of the sun and go with him, bringing heat and dew as they are
ordered by God. In the morning when the sun starts on his daily course,
the phoenixes and the chalkidri sing, and every bird flaps its wings,
rejoicing the Giver of light, and they sing a song at the command of the
Lord. Among reptiles the salamander and the shamir are the most
marvellous. The salamander originates from a fire of myrtle wood which
has been kept burning for seven years steadily by means of magic arts.
Not bigger than a mouse, it yet is invested with peculiar properties.
One who smears himself with its blood is invulnerable, and the web woven
by it is a talisman against fire. The people who lived at the deluge
boasted that, were a fire flood to come, they would protect themselves
with the blood of the salamander.

King Hezekiah owes his life to the salamander. His wicked father, King
Ahaz, had delivered him to the fires of Moloch, and he would have been
burnt, had his mother not painted him with the blood of the salamander,
so that the fire could do him no harm.

The shamir was made at twilight on the sixth day of creation together
with other extraordinary things. It is about as large as a barley corn,
and it possesses the remarkable property of cutting the hardest of
diamonds. For this reason it was used for the stones in the breastplate
worn by the high priest. First the names of the twelve tribes were
traced with ink on the stones to be set into the breastplate, then the
shamir was passed over the lines, and thus they were graven. The
wonderful circumstance was that the friction wore no particles from the
stones. The shamir was also used for hewing into shape the stones from
which the Temple was built, because the law prohibited iron tools to be
used for the work in the Temple. The shamir may not be put in an iron
vessel for safe-keeping, nor in any metal vessel, it would burst such a
receptacle asunder. It is kept wrapped up in a woollen cloth, and this
in turn is placed in a lead basket filled with barley bran. The shamir
was guarded in Paradise until Solomon needed it. He sent the eagle
thither to fetch the worm. With the destruction of the Temple the shamir
vanished. A similar fate overtook the tahash, which had been created
only that its skin might be used for the Tabernacle. Once the Tabernacle
was completed, the tahash disappeared. It had a horn on its forehead,
was gaily colored like the turkey-cock, and belonged to the class of
clean animals. Among the fishes there are also wonderful creatures, the
sea-goats and the dolphins, not to mention leviathan. A sea-faring man
once saw a sea-goat on whose horns the words were inscribed: "I am a
little sea-animal, yet I traversed three hundred parasangs to offer
myself as food to the leviathan." The dolphins are half man and half
fish; they even have sexual intercourse with human beings; therefore
they are called also "sons of the sea," for in a sense they represent
the human kind in the waters.

Though every species in the animal world was created during the last two
days of the six of creation, yet many characteristics of certain animals
appeared later. Cats and mice, foes now, were friends originally. Their
later enmity had a distinct cause. On one occasion the mouse appeared
before God and spoke: "I and the cat are partners, but now we have
nothing to eat." The Lord answered: "Thou art intriguing against thy
companion, only that thou mayest devour her. As a punishment, she shall
devour thee." Thereupon the mouse: "O Lord of the world, wherein have I
done wrong?" God replied: "O thou unclean reptile, thou shouldst have
been warned by the example of the moon, who lost a part of her light,
because she spake ill of the sun, and what she lost was given to her
opponent. The evil intentions thou didst harbor against thy companion
shall be punished in the same way. Instead of thy devouring her, she
shall devour thee." The mouse: "O Lord of the world! Shall my whole kind
be destroyed?" God: "I will take care that a remnant of thee is spared."
In her rage the mouse bit the cat, and the cat in turn threw herself
upon the mouse, and hacked into her with her teeth until she lay dead.
Since that moment the mouse stands in such awe of the cat that she does
not even attempt to defend herself against her enemy's attacks, and
always keeps herself in hiding. Similarly dogs and cats maintained a
friendly relation to each other, and only later on became enemies. A dog
and a cat were partners, and they shared with each other whatever they
had. It once happened that neither could find anything to eat for three
days. Thereupon the dog proposed that they dissolve their partnership.
The cat should go to Adam, in whose house there would surely be enough
for her to eat, while the dog should seek his fortune elsewhere. Before
they separated, they took an oath never to go to the same master. The
cat took up her abode with Adam, and she found sufficient mice in his
house to satisfy her appetite. Seeing how useful she was in driving away
and extirpating mice, Adam treated her most kindly. The dog, on the
other hand, saw bad times. The first night after their separation he
spent in the cave of the wolf, who had granted him a night's lodging. At
night the dog caught the sound of steps, and he reported it to his host,
who bade him repulse the intruders. They were wild animals. Little
lacked and the dog would have lost his life. Dismayed, the dog fled from
the house of the wolf, and took refuge with the monkey. But he would not
grant him even a single night's lodging; and the fugitive was forced to
appeal to the hospitality of the sheep. Again the dog heard steps in the
middle of the night. Obeying the bidding of his host, he arose to chase
away the marauders, who turned out to be wolves. The barking of the dog
apprised the wolves of the presence of sheep, so that the dog innocently
caused the sheep's death. Now he had lost his last friend. Night after
night he begged for shelter, without ever finding a home. Finally, he
decided to repair to the house of Adam, who also granted him refuge for
one night. When wild animals approached the house under cover of
darkness, the dog began to bark, Adam awoke, and with his bow and arrow
he drove them away. Recognizing the dog's usefulness, he bade him remain
with him always. But as soon as the cat espied the dog in Adam's house,
she began to quarrel with him, and reproach him with having broken his
oath to her. Adam did his best to pacify the cat. He told her he had
himself invited the dog to make his home there, and he assured her she
would in no wise be the loser by the dog's presence; he wanted both to
stay with him. But it was impossible to appease the cat. The dog
promised her not to touch anything intended for her. She insisted that
she could not live in one and the same house with a thief like the dog.
Bickerings between the dog and the cat became the order of the day.
Finally the dog could stand it no longer, and he left Adam's house, and
betook himself to Seth's. By Seth he was welcomed kindly, and from
Seth's house, he continued to make efforts at reconciliation with the
cat. In vain. Yes, the enmity between the first dog and the first cat
was transmitted to all their descendants until this very day.

Even the physical peculiarities of certain animals were not original
features with them, but owed their existence to something that occurred
subsequent to the days of creation. The mouse at first had quite a
different mouth from its present mouth. In Noah's ark, in which all
animals, to ensure the preservation of every kind, lived together
peaceably, the pair of mice were once sitting next to the cat. Suddenly
the latter remembered that her father was in the habit of devouring
mice, and thinking there was no harm in following his example, she
jumped at the mouse, who vainly looked for a hole into which to slip out
of sight. Then a miracle happened; a hole appeared where none had been
before, and the mouse sought refuge in it. The cat pursued the mouse,
and though she could not follow her into the hole, she could insert her
paw and try to pull the mouse out of her covert. Quickly the mouse
opened her mouth in the hope that the paw would go into it, and the cat
would be prevented from fastening her claws in her flesh. But as the
cavity of the mouth was not big enough, the cat succeeded in clawing the
cheeks of the mouse. Not that this helped her much, it merely widened
the mouth of the mouse, and her prey after all escaped the cat. After
her happy escape, the mouse betook herself to Noah and said to him, "O
pious man, be good enough to sew up my cheek where my enemy, the cat,
has torn a rent in it." Noah bade her fetch a hair out of the tail of
the swine, and with this he repaired the damage. Thence the little
seam-like line next to the mouth of every mouse to this very day.

The raven is another animal that changed its appearance during its
sojourn in the ark. When Noah desired to send him forth to find out
about the state of the waters, he hid under the wings of the eagle. Noah
found him, however, and said to him, "Go and see whether the waters have
diminished." The raven pleaded: "Hast thou none other among all the
birds to send on this errand?" Noah: "My power extends no further than
over thee and the dove." But the raven was not satisfied. He said to
Noah with great insolence: "Thou sendest me forth only that I may meet
my death, and thou wishest my death that my wife may be at thy service."
Thereupon Noah cursed the raven thus: "May thy mouth, which has spoken
evil against me, be accursed, and thy intercourse with thy wife be only
through it." All the animals in the ark said Amen. And this is the
reason why a mass of spittle runs from the mouth of the male raven into
the mouth of the female during the act of copulation, and only thus the
female is impregnated. Altogether the raven is an unattractive animal.
He is unkind toward his own young so long as their bodies are not
covered with black feathers, though as a rule ravens love one another.
God therefore takes the young ravens under His special protection. From
their own excrement maggots come forth, which serve as their food during
the three days that elapse after their birth, until their white feathers
turn black and their parents recognize them as their offspring and care
for them.

The raven has himself to blame also for the awkward hop in his gait. He
observed the graceful step of the dove, and envious of her tried to
enmulate it. The outcome was that he almost broke his bones without in
the least succeeding in making himself resemble the dove, not to mention
that he brought the scorn of the other animals down upon himself. His
failure excited their ridicule. Then he decided to return to his own
original gait, but in the interval he had unlearnt it, and he could walk
neither the one way nor the other properly. His step had become a hop
betwixt and between. Thus we see how true it is, that he who is
dissatisfied with his small portion loses the little he has in striving
for more and better things.

The steer is also one of the animals that have suffered a change in the
course of time. Originally his face was entirely overgrown with hair,
but now there is none on his nose, and that is because Joshua kissed him
on his nose during the siege of Jericho. Joshua was an exceedingly heavy
man. Horses, donkeys, and mules, none could bear him, they all broke
down under his weight. What they could not do, the steer accomplished.
On his back Joshua rode to the siege of Jericho, and in gratitude he
bestowed a kiss upon his nose.

The serpent, too, is other than it was at first. Before the fall of man
it was the cleverest of all animals created, and in form it resembled
man closely. It stood upright, and was of extraordinary size. Afterward,
it lost the mental advantages it had possessed as compared with other
animals, and it degenerated physically, too; it was deprived of its
feet, so that it could not pursue other animals and kill them. The mole
and the frog had to be made harmless in similar ways; the former has no
eyes, else it were irresistible, and the frog has no teeth, else no
animal in the water were sure of its life.

While the cunning of the serpent wrought its own undoing, the cunning of
the fox stood him in good stead in many an embarrassing situation. After
Adam had committed the sin of disobedience, God delivered the whole of
the animal world into the power of the Angel of Death, and He ordered
him to cast one pair of each kind into the water. He and leviathan
together thus have dominion over all that has life. When the Angel of
Death was in the act of executing the Divine command upon the fox, he
began to weep bitterly. The Angel of Death asked him the reason of his
tears, and the fox replied that he was mourning the sad fate of his
friend. At the same time he pointed to the figure of a fox in the sea,
which was nothing but his own reflection. The Angel of Death, persuaded
that a representative of the fox family had been cast into the water,
let him go free. The fox told his trick to the cat, and she in turn
played it on the Angel of Death. So it happened that neither cats nor
foxes are represented in the water, while all other animals are.

When leviathan passed the animals in review, and missing the fox was
informed of the sly way in which he had eluded his authority, he
dispatched great and powerful fish on the errand of enticing the truant
into the water. The fox walking along the shore espied the large number
of fish, and he exclaimed, "How happy he who may always satisfy his
hunger with the flesh of such as these." The fish told him, if he would
but follow them, his appetite could easily be appeased. At the same time
they informed him that a great honor awaited him. Leviathan, they said,
was at death's door, and he had commissioned them to install the fox as
his successor. They were ready to carry him on their backs, so that he
had no need to fear the water, and thus they would convey him to the
throne, which stood upon a huge rock. The fox yielded to these
persuasions, and descended into the water. Presently an uncomfortable
feeling took possession of him. He began to suspect that the tables were
turned; he was being made game of instead of making game of others as
usual. He urged the fish to tell him the truth, and they admitted that
they had been sent out to secure his person for leviathan, who wanted
his heart, that he might become as knowing as the fox, whose wisdom he
had heard many extol. The fox said reproachfully: "Why did you not tell
me the truth at once? Then I could have brought my heart along with me
for King Leviathan, who would have showered honors upon me. As it is,
you will surely suffer punishment for bringing me without my heart. The
foxes, you see," he continued, "do not carry their hearts around with
them. They keep them in a safe place, and when they have need of them,
they fetch them thence." The fish quickly swam to shore, and landed the
fox, so that he might go for his heart. No sooner did he feel dry land
under his feet than he began to jump and shout, and when they urged him
to go in search of his heart, and follow them, he said: "O ye fools,
could I have followed you into the water, if I had not had my heart with
me? Or exists there a creature able to go abroad without his heart?" The
fish replied: "Come, come, thou art fooling us." Whereupon the fox: "O
ye fools, if I could play a trick on the Angel of Death, how much easier
was it to make game of you?" So they had to return, their errand undone,
and leviathan could not but confirm the taunting judgment of the fox:
"In very truth, the fox is wise of heart, and ye are fools."

### ALL THINGS PRAISE THE LORD

"Whatever God created has value." Even the animals and the insects that
seem useless and noxious at first sight have a vocation to fulfil. The
snail trailing a moist streak after it as it crawls, and so using up its
vitality, serves as a remedy for boils. The sting of a hornet is healed
by the house-fly crushed and applied to the wound. The gnat, feeble
creature, taking in food but never secreting it, is a specific against
the poison of a viper, and this venomous reptile itself cures eruptions,
while the lizard is the antidote to the scorpion. Not only do all
creatures serve man, and contribute to his comfort, but also God
"teacheth us through the beasts of the earth, and maketh us wise through
the fowls of heaven." He endowed many animals with admirable moral
qualities as a pattern for man. If the Torah had not been revealed to
us, we might have learnt regard for the decencies of life from the cat,
who covers her excrement with earth; regard for the property of others
from the ants, who never encroach upon one another's stores; and regard
for decorous conduct from the cock, who, when he desires to unite with
the hen, promises to buy her a cloak long enough to reach to the ground,
and when the hen reminds him of his promise, he shakes his comb and
says, "May I be deprived of my comb, if I do not buy it when I have the
means." The grasshopper also has a lesson to teach to man. All the
summer through it sings, until its belly bursts, and death claims it.
Though it knows the fate that awaits it, yet it sings on. So man should
do his duty toward God, no matter what the consequences. The stork
should be taken as a model in two respects. He guards the purity of his
family life zealously, and toward his fellows he is compassionate and
merciful. Even the frog can be the teacher of man. By the side of the
water there lives a species of animals which subsist off aquatic
creatures alone. When the frog notices that one of them is hungry, he
goes to it of his own accord, and offers himself as food, thus
fulfilling the injunction, "If thine enemy be hungry, give him bread to
eat; and if he be thirsty, give him water to drink."

The whole of creation was called into existence by God unto His glory,
and each creature has its own hymn of praise wherewith to extol the
Creator. Heaven and earth, Paradise and hell, desert and field, rivers
and seas--all have their own way of paying homage to God. The hymn of
the earth is, "From the uttermost part of the earth have we heard songs,
glory to the Righteous." The sea exclaims, "Above the voices of many
waters, the mighty breakers of the sea, the Lord on high is mighty."

Also the celestial bodies and the elements proclaim the praise of their
Creator--the sun, moon, and stars, the clouds and the winds, lightning
and dew. The sun says, "The sun and moon stood still in their
habitation, at the light of Thine arrows as they went, at the shining of
Thy glittering spear"; and the stars sing, "Thou art the Lord, even Thou
alone; Thou hast made heaven, the heaven of heavens, with all their
host, the earth and all things that are thereon, the seas and all that
is in them, and Thou preservest them all; and the host of heaven
worshippeth Thee."

Every plant, furthermore, has a song of praise. The fruitful tree sings,
"Then shall all the trees of the wood sing for joy, before the Lord, for
He cometh; for He cometh to judge the earth"; and the ears of grain on
the field sing, "The pastures are covered with flocks; the valleys also
are covered over with corn; they shout for joy, they also sing."

Great among singers of praise are the birds, and greatest among them is
the cock. When God at midnight goes to the pious in Paradise, all the
trees therein break out into adoration, and their songs awaken the cock,
who begins in turn to praise God. Seven times he crows, each time
reciting a verse. The first verse is: "Lift up your heads, O ye gates;
and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall
come in. Who is the King of glory? The Lord strong and mighty, the Lord
mighty in battle." The second verse: "Lift up your heads, O ye gates;
yea, lift them up, ye everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall
come in. Who is this King of glory? The Lord of hosts, He is the King of
glory." The third: "Arise, ye righteous, and occupy yourselves with the
Torah, that your reward may be abundant in the world hereafter." The
fourth: "I have waited for Thy salvation, O Lord!" The fifth: "How long
wilt thou sleep, O sluggard? When wilt thou arise out of thy sleep?" The
sixth: "Love not sleep, lest thou come to poverty; open thine eyes, and
thou shalt be satisfied with bread." And the seventh verse sung by the
cock runs: "It is time to work for the Lord, for they have made void Thy
law."

The song of the vulture is: "I will hiss for them, and gather them; for
I have redeemed them, and they shall increase as they have
increased"--the same verse with which the bird will in time to come
announce the advent of the Messiah, the only difference being, that when
he heralds the Messiah he will sit upon the ground and sing his verse,
while at all other times he is seated elsewhere when he sings it.

Nor do the other animals praise God less than the birds. Even the beasts
of prey give forth adoration. The lion says: "The Lord shall go forth as
a mighty man; He shall stir up jealousy like a man of war; He shall cry,
yea, He shall shout aloud; He shall do mightily against his enemies."
And the fox exhorts unto justice with the words: "Woe unto him that
buildeth his house by unrighteousness, and his chambers by injustice;
that useth his neighbor's service without wages, and giveth him not his
hire."

Yea, the dumb fishes know how to proclaim the praise of their Lord. "The
voice of the Lord is upon the waters," they say, "the God of glory
thundereth, even the Lord upon many waters"; while the frog exclaims,
"Blessed be the name of the glory of His kingdom forever and ever."

Contemptible though they are, even the reptiles give praise unto their
Creator. The mouse extols God with the words: "Howbeit Thou art just in
all that is come upon me; for Thou hast dealt truly, but I have done
wickedly." And the cat sings: "Let everything that hath breath praise
the Lord. Praise ye the Lord."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II: Adam](loj104)
