[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](loj107)  [Next](loj200.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# VI

JACOB--THE BIRTH OF ESAU AND JACOB--THE FAVORITE OF ABRAHAM--THE SALE OF
THE BIRTHRIGHT--ISAAC WITH THE PHILISTINES--ISAAC BLESSES JACOB--ESAU'S
TRUE CHARACTER REVEALED--JACOB LEAVES HIS FATHER'S HOUSE--JACOB PURSUED
BY ELIPHAZ AND ESAU--THE DAY OF MIRACLES--JACOB WITH LABAN--THE MARRIAGE
OF JACOB--THE BIRTH OF JACOB'S CHILDREN--JACOB FLEES BEFORE LABAN--THE
COVENANT WITH LABAN--JACOB AND ESAU PREPARE TO MEET--JACOB WRESTLES WITH
THE ANGEL--THE MEETING BETWEEN ESAU AND JACOB--THE OUTRAGE AT SHECHEM--A
WAR FRUSTRATED--THE WAR WITH THE NINEVITES--THE WAR WITH THE
AMORITES--ISAAC BLESSES LEVI AND JUDAH--JOY AND SORROW IN THE HOUSE OF
JACOB--ESAU'S CAMPAIGN AGAINST JACOB--THE DESCENDANTS OF ESAU

### JACOB--THE BIRTH OF ESAU AND JACOB

Isaac was the counterpart of his father in body and soul. He resembled
him in every particular--"in beauty, wisdom, strength, wealth, and noble
deeds." It was, therefore, as great an honor for Isaac to be called the
son of his father as for Abraham to be called the father of his son, and
though Abraham was the progenitor of thirty nations, he is always
designated as the father of Isaac.

Despite his many excellent qualities, Isaac married late in life. God
permitted him to meet the wife suitable to him only after he had
successfully disproved the mocking charges of Ishmael, who was in the
habit of taunting him with having been circumcised at the early age of
eight days, while Ishmael had submitted himself voluntarily to the
operation when be was thirteen years old. For this reason God demanded
Isaac as a sacrifice when he had attained to full manhood, at the age of
thirty-seven, and Isaac was ready to give up his life. Ishmael's jibes
were thus robbed of their sting, and Isaac was permitted to marry. But
another delay occurred before his marriage could take place. Directly
after the sacrifice on Mount Moriah, his mother died, and he mourned her
for three years. Finally he married Rebekah, who was then a maiden of
fourteen.

Rebekah was "a rose between thorns." Her father was the Aramean Bethuel,
and her brother was Laban, but she did not walk in their ways. Her piety
was equal to Isaac's. Nevertheless their marriage was not entirely
happy, for they lived together no less than twenty years without
begetting children. Rebekah besought her husband to entreat God for the
gift of children, as his father Abraham had done. At first Isaac would
not do her bidding. God had promised Abraham a numerous progeny, and he
thought their childlessness was probably Rebekah's fault, and it was her
duty to supplicate God, and not his. But Rebekah would not desist, and
husband and wife repaired to Mount Moriah together to pray to God there.
And Isaac said: "O Lord God of heaven and earth, whose goodness and
mercies fill the earth, Thou who didst take my father from his father's
house and from his birthplace, and didst bring him unto this land, and
didst say unto him, To thee and thy seed will I give the land, and didst
promise him and declare unto him, I will multiply thy seed as the stars
of heaven and as the sand of the sea, now may Thy words be verified
which Thou didst speak unto my father. For Thou art the Lord our God,
our eyes are toward Thee, to give us seed of men as Thou didst promise
us, for Thou art the Lord our God, and our eyes are upon Thee." Isaac
prayed furthermore that all children destined for him might be born unto
him from this pious wife of his, and Rebekah made the same petition
regarding her husband Isaac and the children destined for her.

Their united prayer was heard. Yet it was chiefly for the sake of Isaac
that God gave them children. It is true, Rebekah's piety equalled her
husband's, but the prayer of a pious man who is the son of a pious man
is far more efficacious than the prayer of one who, though pious
himself, is descended from a godless father.

The prayer wrought a great miracle, for Isaac's physique was such that
he could not have been expected to beget children, and equally it was
not in the course of nature that Rebekah should bear children.

When Rebekah had been pregnant seven months, she began to wish that the
curse of childlessness had not been removed from her. She suffered
torturous pain, because her twin sons began their lifelong quarrels in
her womb. They strove to kill each other. If Rebekah walked in the
vicinity of a temple erected to idols, Esau moved in her body, and if
she passed a synagogue or a Bet ha-Midrash, Jacob essayed to break forth
from her womb. The quarrels of the children turned upon such differences
as these. Esau would insist that there was no life except the earthly
life of material pleasures, and Jacob would reply: "My brother, there
are two worlds before us, this world and the world to come. In this
world, men eat and drink, and traffic and marry, and bring up sons and
daughters, but all this does not take place in the world to come. If it
please thee, do thou take this world, and I will take the other." Esau
had Samael as his ally, who desired to slay Jacob in his mother's womb.
But the archangel Michael hastened to Jacob's aid. He tried to burn
Samael, and the Lord saw it was necessary to constitute a heavenly court
for the purpose of arbitrating the case of Michael and Samael. Even the
quarrel between the two brothers regarding the birthright had its
beginning before they emerged from the womb of their mother. Each
desired to be the first to come into the world. It was only when Esau
threatened to carry his point at the expense of his mother's life that
Jacob gave way.

Rebekah asked other women whether they, too, had suffered such pain
during their pregnancy, and when they told her they had not heard of a
case like hers, except the pregnancy of Nimrod's mother, she betook
herself to Mount Moriah, whereon Shem and Eber had their Bet ha-Midrash.
She requested them as well as Abraham to inquire of God what the cause
of her dire suffering was. And Shem replied: "My daughter, I confide a
secret to thee. See to it that none finds it out. Two nations are in thy
womb, and how should thy body contain them, seeing that the whole world
will not be large enough for them to exist in it together peaceably? Two
nations they are, each owning a world of its own, the one the Torah, the
other sin. From the one will spring Solomon, the builder of the Temple,
from the other Vespasian, the destroyer thereof. These two are what are
needed to raise the number of nations to seventy. They will never be in
the same estate. Esau will vaunt lords, while Jacob will bring forth
prophets, and if Esau has princes, Jacob will have kings. They, Israel
and Rome, are the two nations destined to be hated by all the world. One
will exceed the other in strength. First Esau will subjugate the whole
world, but in the end Jacob will rule over all. The older of the two
will serve the younger, provided this one is pure of heart, otherwise
the younger will be enslaved by the older."

The circumstances connected with the birth of her twin sons were as
remarkable as those during the period of Rebekah's pregnancy. Esau was
the first to see the light, and with him all impurity came from the
womb; Jacob was born clean and sweet of body. Esau was brought forth
with hair, beard, and teeth, both front and back, and he was blood-red,
a sign of his future sanguinary nature. On account of his ruddy
appearance he remained uncircumcised. Isaac, his father, feared that it
was due to poor circulation of the blood, and he hesitated to perform
the circumcision. He decided to wait until Esau should attain his
thirteenth year, the age at which Ishmael had received the sign of the
covenant. But when Esau grew up, he refused to give heed to his father's
wish, and so he was left uncircumcised. The opposite of his brother in
this as in all respects, Jacob was born with the sign of the covenant
upon his body, a rare distinction. But Esau also bore a mark upon him at
birth, the figure of a serpent, the symbol of all that is wicked and
hated of God.

The names conferred upon the brothers are pregnant with meaning. The
older was called Esau, because he was 'Asui, fully developed when he was
born, and the name of the younger was given to him by God, to point to
some important events in the future of Israel by the numerical value of
each letter. The first letter in Ya'akob, Yod, with the value of ten,
stands for the decalogue; the second, 'Ayin, equal to seventy, for the
seventy elders, the leaders of Israel; the third, Kof, a hundred, for
the Temple, a hundred ells in height; and the last, Bet, for the two
tables of stone.

### THE FAVORITE OF ABRAHAM

While Esau and Jacob were little, their characters could not be judged
properly. They were like the myrtle and the thorn-bush, which look alike
in the early stages of their growth. After they have attained full size,
the myrtle is known by its fragrance, and the thorn-bush by its thorns.

In their childhood, both brothers went to school, but when they reached
their thirteenth year, and were of age, their ways parted. Jacob
continued his studies in the Bet ha Midrash of Shem and Eber, and Esau
abandoned himself to idolatry and an immoral life. Both were hunters of
men, Esau tried to capture them in order to turn them away from God, and
Jacob, to turn them toward God. In spite of his impious deeds, Esau
possessed the art of winning his father's love. His hypocritical conduct
made Isaac believe that his first-born son was extremely pious.
"Father," he would ask Isaac, "what is the tithe on straw and salt?" The
question made him appear God-fearing in the eyes of his father, because
these two products are the very ones that are exempt from tithing. Isaac
failed to notice, too, that his older son gave him forbidden food to
eat. What he took for the flesh of young goats was dog's meat.

Rebekah was more clear-sighted. She knew her sons as they really were,
and therefore her love for Jacob was exceeding great. The oftener she
heard his voice, the deeper grew her affection for him. Abraham agreed
with her. He also loved his grandson Jacob, for he knew that in him his
name and his seed would be called. And he said unto Rebekah, "My
daughter, watch over my son Jacob, for he shall be in my stead on the
earth and for a blessing in the midst of the children of men, and for
the glory of the whole seed of Shem." Having admonished Rebekah thus to
keep guard over Jacob, who was destined to be the bearer of the blessing
given to Abraham by God, he called for his grandson, and in the presence
of Rebekah he blessed him, and said: "Jacob, my beloved son, whom my
soul loveth, may God bless thee from above the firmament, and may He
give thee all the blessing wherewith He blessed Adam, and Enoch, and
Noah, and Shem, and all the things of which He told me, and all the
things which He promised to give me may He cause to cleave to thee and
to thy seed forever, according to the days of the heavens above the
earth. And the spirit of Mastema shall not rule over thee or over thy
seed, to turn thee from the Lord, who is thy God from henceforth and
forever. And may the Lord God be a father to thee, and mayest thou be
His first-born son, and may He be a father to thy people always. Go in
peace, my son."

And Abraham had good reason to be particularly fond of Jacob, for it was
due to the merits of his grandson that he had been rescued from the
fiery furnace.

Isaac and Rebekah, knowing of Abraham's love for their young son, sent
their father a meal by Jacob on the last Feast of Pentecost which
Abraham was permitted to celebrate on earth, that he might eat and bless
the Creator of all things before he died. Abraham knew that his end was
approaching, and he thanked the Lord for all the good He had granted him
during the days of his life, and blessed Jacob and bade him walk in the
ways of the Lord, and especially he was not to marry a daughter of the
Canaanites. Then Abraham prepared for death. He placed two of Jacob's
fingers upon his eyes, and thus holding them closed he fell into his
eternal sleep, while Jacob lay beside him on the bed. The lad did not
know of his grandfather's death, until he called him, on awakening next
morning, "Father, father," and received no answer.

### THE SALE OF THE BIRTHRIGHT

Though Abraham reached a good old age, beyond the limit of years
vouchsafed later generations, he yet died five years before his allotted
time. The intention was to let him live to be one hundred and eighty
years old, the same age as Isaac's at his death, but on account of Esau
God brought his life to an abrupt close. For some time Esau had been
pursuing his evil inclinations in secret. Finally he dropped his mask,
and on the day of Abraham's death he was guilty of five crimes: he
ravished a betrothed maiden, committed murder, doubted the resurrection
of the dead, scorned the birthright, and denied God. Then the Lord said:
"I promised Abraham that he should go to his fathers in peace. Can I now
permit him to be a witness of his grandson's rebellion against God, his
violation of the laws of chastity, and his shedding of blood? It is
better for him to die now in peace."

The men slain by Esau on this day were Nimrod and two of his adjutants.
A long-standing feud had existed between Esau and Nimrod, because the
mighty hunter before the Lord was jealous of Esau, who also devoted
himself assiduously to the chase. Once when he was hunting it happened
that Nimrod was separated from his people, only two men were with him.
Esau, who lay in ambush, noticed his isolation, and waited until he
should pass his covert. Then he threw himself upon Nimrod suddenly, and
felled him and his two companions, who hastened to his succor. The
outcries of the latter brought the attendants of Nimrod to the spot
where he lay dead, but not before Esau had stripped him of his garments,
and fled to the city with them.

These garments of Nimrod had an extraordinary effect upon cattle,
beasts, and birds. Of their own accord they would come and prostrate
themselves before him who was arrayed in them. Thus Nimrod and Esau
after him were able to rule over men and beasts.

After slaying Nimrod, Esau hastened cityward in great fear of his
victim's followers. Tired and exhausted he arrived at home to find Jacob
busy preparing a dish of lentils. Numerous male and female slaves were
in Isaac's household. Nevertheless Jacob was so simple and modest in his
demeanor that, if he came home late from the Bet ha-Midrash, he would
disturb none to prepare his meal, but would do it himself. On this
occasion he was cooking lentils for his father, to serve to him as his
mourner's meal after the death of Abraham. Adam and Eve had eaten
lentils after the murder of Abel, and so had the parents of Haran, when
he perished in the fiery furnace. The reason they are used for the
mourner's meal is that the round lentil symbolizes death: as the lentil
rolls, so death, sorrow, and mourning constantly roll about among men,
from one to the other.

Esau accosted Jacob thus, "Why art thou preparing lentils?"

Jacob: "Because our grandfather passed away; they shall be a sign of my
grief and mourning, that he may love me in the days to come."

Esau: "Thou fool! Dost thou really think it possible that man should
come to life again after he has been dead and has mouldered in the
grave?" He continued to taunt Jacob. "Why dost thou give thyself so much
trouble?" he said. "Lift up thine eyes, and thou wilt see that all men
eat whatever comes to hand--fish, creeping and crawling creatures,
swine's flesh, and all sorts of things like these, and thou vexest
thyself about a dish of lentils."

Jacob: "If we act like other men, what shall we do on the day of the
Lord, the day on which the pious will receive their reward, when a
herald will proclaim: Where is He that weigheth the deeds of men, where
is He that counteth?"

Esau: "Is there a future world? Or will the dead be called back to life?
If it were so, why hath not Adam returned? Hast thou heard that Noah,
through whom the world was raised anew, hath reappeared? Yea, Abraham,
the friend of God, more beloved of Him than any man, hath he come to
life again?"

Jacob: "If thou art of opinion that there is no future world, and that
the dead do not rise to new life, then why dost thou want thy
birthright? Sell it to me, now, while it is yet possible to do so. Once
the Torah is revealed, it cannot be done. Verily, there is a future
world, in which the righteous receive their reward. I tell thee this,
lest thou say later I deceived thee."

Jacob was little concerned about the double share of the inheritance
that went with the birthright. What he thought of was the priestly
service, which was the prerogative of the first-born in ancient times,
and Jacob was loth to have his impious brother Esau play the priest, he
who despised all Divine service.

The scorn manifested by Esau for the resurrection of the dead he felt
also for the promise of God to give the Holy Land to the seed of
Abraham. He did not believe in it, and therefore he was willing to cede
his birthright and the blessing attached thereto in exchange for a mess
of pottage. In addition, Jacob paid him in coin, and, besides, he gave
him what was more than money, the wonderful sword of Methuselah, which
Isaac had inherited from Abraham and bestowed upon Jacob.

Esau made game of Jacob. He invited his associates to feast at his
brother's table, saying, "Know ye what I did to this Jacob? I ate his
lentils, drank his wine, amused myself at his expense, and sold my
birthright to him." All that Jacob replied was, "Eat and may it do thee
good!" But the Lord said, "Thou despisest the birthright, therefore I
shall make thee despised in all generations." And by way of punishment
for denying God and the resurrection of the dead, the descendants of
Esau were cut off from the world.

As naught was holy to Esau, Jacob made him swear, concerning the
birthright, by the life of their father, for he knew Esau's love for
Isaac, that it was strong. Nor did he fail to have a document made out,
duly signed by witnesses, setting forth that Esau had sold him the
birthright together with his claim upon a place in the Cave of
Machpelah.

Though no blame can attach to Jacob for all this, yet he secured the
birthright from him by cunning, and therefore the descendants of Jacob
had to serve the descendants of Esau.

### ISAAC WITH THE PHILISTINES

The life of Isaac was a faithful reflex of the life of his father.
Abraham had to leave his birthplace; so also Isaac. Abraham was exposed
to the risk of losing his wife; so also Isaac. The Philistines were
envious of Abraham; so also of Isaac. Abraham long remained childless;
so also Isaac. Abraham begot one pious son and one wicked son; so also
Isaac. And, finally, as in the time of Abraham, so also in the time of
Isaac, a famine came upon the land.

At first Isaac intended to follow the example of his father and remove
to Egypt, but God appeared unto him, and spake: "Thou art a perfect
sacrifice, without a blemish, and as a burnt offering is made unfit if
it is taken outside of the sanctuary, so thou wouldst be profaned if
thou shouldst happen outside of the Holy Land. Remain in the land, and
endeavor to cultivate it. In this land dwells the Shekinah, and in days
to come I will give unto thy children the realms possessed by mighty
rulers, first a part thereof, and the whole in the Messianic time."

Isaac obeyed the command of God, and he settled in Gerar. When he
noticed that the inhabitants of the place began to have designs upon his
wife, he followed the example of Abraham, and pretended she was his
sister. The report of Rebekah's beauty reached the king himself, but he
was mindful of the great danger to which he had once exposed himself on
a similar occasion, and he left Isaac and his wife unmolested. After
they had been in Gerar for three months, Abimelech noticed that the
manner of Isaac, who lived in the outer court of the royal palace, was
that of a husband toward Rebekah. He called him to account, saying, "It
might have happened to the king himself to take the woman thou didst
call thy sister." Indeed, Isaac lay under the suspicion of having
illicit intercourse with Rebekah, for at first the people of the place
would not believe that she was his wife. When Isaac persisted in his
statement, Abimelech sent his grandees for them, ordered them to be
arrayed in royal vestments, and had it proclaimed before them, as they
rode through the city: "These two are man and wife. He that toucheth
this man or his wife shall surely be put to death."

Thereafter the king invited Isaac to settle in his domains, and he
assigned fields and vineyards to him for cultivation, the best the land
afforded. But Isaac was not self-interested. The tithe of all he
possessed he gave to the poor of Gerar. Thus he was the first to
introduce the law of tithing for the poor, as his father Abraham had
been the first to separate the priests' portion from his fortune. Isaac
was rewarded by abundant harvests; the land yielded a hundred times more
than was expected, though the soil was barren and the year unfruitful.
He grew so rich that people wished to have "the dung from Isaac's
she-mules rather than Abimelech's gold and silver." But his wealth
called forth the envy of the Philistines, for it is characteristic of
the wicked that they begrudge their fellow-men the good, and rejoice
when they see evil descend upon them, and envy brings hatred in its
wake, and so the Philistines first envied Isaac, and then hated him. In
their enmity toward him, they stopped the wells which Abraham had had
his servants dig. Thus they broke their covenant with Abraham and were
faithless, and they have only themselves to blame if they were
exterminated later on by the Israelites.

Isaac departed from Gerar, and began to dig again the wells of water
which they had digged in the days of Abraham his father, and which the
Philistines had stopped. His reverence for his father was so great that
he even restored the names by which Abraham had called the wells. To
reward him for his filial respect, the Lord left the name of Isaac
unchanged, while his father and his son had to submit to new names.

After four attempts to secure water, Isaac was successful; he found the
well of water that followed the Patriarchs. Abraham had obtained it
after three diggings. Hence the name of the well, Beer-sheba, "the well
of seven diggings," the same well that will supply water to Jerusalem
and its environs in the Messianic time.

Isaac's success with his wells but served to increase the envy of the
Philistines, for he had come upon water in a most unlikely spot and,
besides, in a year of drouth. But "the Lord fulfils the desire of them
that fear Him." As Isaac executed the will of his Creator, so God
accomplished his desire. And Abimelech, the king of Gerar, speedily came
to see that God was on the side of Isaac, for, to chastise him for
having instigated Isaac's removal from Gerar, his house was ravaged by
robbers in the night, and he himself was stricken with leprosy. The
wells of the Philistines ran dry as soon as Isaac left Gerar, and also
the trees failed to yield their fruit. None could be in doubt but that
these things were the castigation for their unkindness.

Now Abimelech entreated his friends, especially the administrator of his
kingdom, to accompany him to Isaac and help him win back his friendship.
Abimelech and the Philistines spake thus to Isaac: "We have convinced
ourselves that the Shekinah is with thee, and therefore we desire thee
to renew the covenant which thy father made with us, that thou wilt do
us no hurt, as we also did not touch thee." Isaac consented. It
illustrates the character of the Philistines strikingly that they took
credit unto themselves for having done him no hurt. It shows that they
would have been glad to inflict harm upon him, for "the soul of the
wicked desireth evil."

The place in which the covenant was made between Isaac and the
Philistines was called Shib'ah, for two reasons, because an oath was
"sworn" there, and as a memorial of the fact that even the heathen are
bound to observe the "seven" Noachian laws.

For all the wonders executed by God for Isaac, and all the good he
enjoyed throughout his life, he is indebted to the merits of his father.
For his own merits he will be rewarded in future. On the great day of
judgment it will be Isaac who will redeem his descendants from Gehenna.
On that day the Lord will speak to Abraham, "Thy children have sinned,"
and Abraham will make reply, "Then let them be wiped out, that Thy Name
be sanctified." The Lord will turn to Jacob, thinking that he who had
suffered so much in bringing his sons to manhood's estate would display
more love for his posterity. But Jacob will give the same answer as
Abraham. Then God will say: "The old have no understanding, and the
young no counsel. I will now go to Isaac. Isaac," God will address him,
"thy children have sinned," and Isaac will reply: "O Lord of the world,
sayest Thou my children, and not THINE? When they stood at Mount Sinai
and declared themselves ready to execute all Thy bidding before even
they heard it, Thou didst call Israel 'My first-born,' and now they are
MY children, and not THINE! Let us consider. The years of a man are
seventy. From these twenty are to be deducted, for Thou inflictest no
punishment upon those under twenty. Of the fifty years that are left,
one-half are to be deducted for the nights passed in sleep. There remain
only twenty-five years, and these are to be diminished by twelve and a
half, the time spent in praying, eating, and attending to other needs in
life, during which men commit no sins. That leaves only twelve years and
a half. If Thou wilt take these upon Thyself, well and good. If not, do
Thou take one-half thereof, and I will take the other half." The
descendants of Isaac will then say, "Verily, thou art our true father!"
But he will point to God, and admonish them, "Nay, give not your praises
to me, but to God alone," and Israel, with eyes directed heavenward,
will say, "Thou, O Lord, art our Father; our Redeemer from everlasting
is Thy name."

It was Isaac, or, as he is sometimes called, Elihu the son of Barachel,
who revealed the wonderful mysteries of nature in his arguments with
Job.

At the end of the years of famine, God appeared unto Isaac, and bade him
return to Canaan. Isaac did as he was commanded, and he settled in
Hebron. At this time he sent his younger son Jacob to the Bet ha-Midrash
of Shem and Eber, to study the law of the Lord. Jacob remained there
thirty-two years. As for Esau, he refused to learn, and he remained in
the house of his father. The chase was his only occupation, and as he
pursued beasts, so he pursued men, seeking to capture them with cunning
and deceit.

On one of his hunting expeditions, Esau came to Mount Seir, where he
became acquainted with Judith, of the family of Ham, and he took her
unto himself as his wife, and brought her to his father at Hebron.

Ten years later, when Shem his teacher died, Jacob returned home, at the
age of fifty. Another six years passed, and Rebekah received the joyful
news that her sister-in-law 'Adinah, the wife of Laban, who, like all
the women of his house, had been childless until then, had given birth
to twin daughters, Leah and Rachel. Rebekah, weary of her life on
account of the woman chosen by her older son, exhorted Jacob not to
marry one of the daughters of Canaan, but a maiden of the family of
Abraham. He assured his mother that the words of Abraham, bidding him to
marry no woman of the Canaanites, were graven upon his memory, and for
this reason he was still unmarried, though he had attained the age of
sixty-two, and Esau had been urging him for twenty-two years past to
follow his example and wed a daughter of the people of the land in which
they lived. He had heard that his uncle Laban had daughters, and he was
resolved to choose one of them as his wife. Deeply moved by the words of
her son, Rebekah thanked him and gave praise unto God with the words:
"Blessed be the Lord God, and may His Holy Name be blessed for ever and
ever, who hath given me Jacob as a pure son and a holy seed; for he is
Thine, and Thine shall his seed be continually and throughout all the
generations for evermore. Bless him, O Lord, and place in my mouth the
blessing of righteousness, that I may bless him."

And when the spirit of the Lord came over her, she laid her hands upon
the head of Jacob and gave him her maternal blessing. It ended with the
words, "May the Lord of the world love thee, as the heart of thy
affectionate mother rejoices in thee, and may He bless thee."

### ISAAC BLESSES JACOB

Esau's marriage with the daughters of the Canaanites was an abomination
not only in the eyes of his mother, but also in the eyes of his father.
He suffered even more than Rebekah through the idolatrous practices of
his daughters in-law. It is the nature of man to oppose less resistance
than woman to disagreeable circumstances. A bone is not harmed by a
collision that would shiver an earthen pot in pieces. Man, who is
created out of the dust of the ground, has not the endurance of woman
formed out of bone. Isaac was made prematurely old by the conduct of his
daughters-in-law, and he lost the sight of his eyes. Rebekah had been
accustomed in the home of her childhood to the incense burnt before
idols, and she could therefore bear it under her own roof-tree. Unlike
her, Isaac had never had any such experience while he abode with his
parents, and he was stung by the smoke arising from the sacrifices
offered to their idols by his daughters-in-law in his own house. Isaac's
eyes had suffered earlier in life, too. When he lay bound upon the
altar, about to be sacrificed by his father, the angels wept, and their
tears fell upon his eyes, and there they remained and weakened his
sight.

At the same time he had brought the scourge of blindness down upon
himself by his love for Esau. He justified the wicked for a bribe, the
bribe of Esau's filial love, and loss of vision is the punishment that
follows the taking of bribes. "A gift," it is said, "blinds the eyes of
the wise."

Nevertheless his blindness proved a benefit for Isaac as well as Jacob.
In consequence of his physical ailments, Isaac had to keep at home, and
so he was spared the pain of being pointed out by the people as the
father of the wicked Esau. And, again, if his power of vision had been
unimpaired, he would not have blessed Jacob. As it was, God treated him
as a physician treats a sick man who is forbidden to drink wine, for
which, however, he has a strong desire. To placate him, the physician
orders that warm water be given him in the dark, and he be told that it
is wine.

When Isaac reached the age of one hundred and twenty three, and was thus
approaching the years attained by his mother, he began to meditate upon
his end. It is proper that a man should prepare for death when he comes
close to the age at which either of his parents passed out of life.
Isaac reflected that he did not know whether the age allotted to him was
his mother's or his father's, and he therefore resolved to bestow his
blessing upon his older son, Esau, before death should overtake him. He
summoned Esau, and he said, "My son," and Esau replied, "Here am I," but
the holy spirit interposed: "Though he disguises his voice and makes it
sound sweet, put no confidence in him. There are seven abominations in
his heart. He will destroy seven holy places--the Tabernacle, the
sanctuaries at Gilgal, Shiloh, Nob, and Gibeon, and the first and the
second Temple."

Gently though Esau continued to speak to his father, he yet longed for
his end to come. But Isaac was stricken with spiritual as well as
physical blindness. The holy spirit deserted him, and he could not
discern the wickedness of his older son. He bade him sharpen his
slaughtering knives and beware of bringing him the flesh of an animal
that had died of itself, or had been torn by a beast, and he was to
guard also against putting an animal before Isaac that had been stolen
from its rightful owner. "Then," continued Isaac, "will I bless him who
is worthy of being blessed."

This charge was laid upon Esau on the eve of the Passover, and Isaac
said to him: "To-night the whole world will sing the Hallel unto God. It
is the night when the storehouses of dew are unlocked. Therefore prepare
dainties for me, that my soul may bless thee before I die." But the holy
spirit interposed, "Eat not the bread of him that hath an evil eye."
Isaac's longing for tidbits was due to his blindness. As the sightless
cannot behold the food they eat, they do not enjoy it with full relish,
and their appetite must be tempted with particularly palatable morsels.

Esau sallied forth to procure what his father desired, little recking
the whence or how, whether by robbery or theft. To hinder the quick
execution of his father's order, God sent Satan on the chase with Esau.
He was to delay him as long as possible. Esau would catch a deer and
leave him lying bound, while he pursued other game. Immediately Satan
would come and liberate the deer, and when Esau returned to the spot,
his victim was not to be found. This was repeated several times. Again
and again the quarry was run down, and bound, and liberated, so that
Jacob was able meanwhile to carry out the plan of Rebekah whereby he
would be blessed instead of Esau.

Though Rebekah had not heard the words that had passed between Isaac and
Esau, they nevertheless were revealed to her through the holy spirit,
and she resolved to restrain her husband from taking a false step. She
was not actuated by love for Jacob, but by the wish of keeping Isaac
from committing a detestable act. Rebekah said to Jacob: "This night the
storehouses of dew are unlocked; it is the night during which the
celestial beings chant the Hallel unto God, the night set apart for the
deliverance of thy children from Egypt, on which they, too, will sing
the Hallel. Go now and prepare savory meat for thy father, that he may
bless thee before his death. Do as I bid thee, obey me as thou art wont,
for thou art my son whose children, every one, will be good and
God-fearing--not one shall be graceless."

In spite of his great respect for his mother, Jacob refused at first to
heed her command. He feared he might commit a sin, especially as he
might thus bring his father's curse down upon him. As it was, Isaac
might still have a blessing for him, after giving Esau his. But Rebekah
allayed his anxieties, with the words: "When Adam was cursed, the
malediction fell upon his mother, the earth, and so shall I, thy mother,
bear the imprecation, if thy father curses thee. Moreover, if the worst
comes to the worst, I am prepared to step before thy father and tell
him, 'Esau is a villain, and Jacob is a righteous man.' "

Thus constrained by his mother, Jacob, in tears and with body bowed,
went off to execute the plan made by Rebekah. As he was to provide a
Passover meal, she bade him get two kids, one for the Passover sacrifice
and one for the festival sacrifice. To soothe Jacob's conscience, she
added that her marriage contract entitled her to two kids daily. "And,"
she continued, "these two kids will bring good unto thee, the blessing
of thy father, and they will bring good unto thy children, for two kids
will be the atoning sacrifice offered on the Day of Atonement."

Jacob's hesitation was not yet removed. His father, he feared, would
touch him and convince himself that he was not hairy, and therefore not
his son Esau. Accordingly, Rebekah tore the skins of the two kids into
strips and sewed them together, for Jacob was so tall a giant that
otherwise they would not have sufficed to cover his hands. To make
Jacob's disguise complete, Rebekah felt justified in putting Esau's
wonderful garments on him. They were the high priestly raiment in which
God had clothed Adam, "the first-born of the world," for in the days
before the erection of the Tabernacle all the first-born males
officiated as priests. From Adam these garments descended to Noah, who
transmitted them to Shem, and Shem bequeathed them to Abraham, and
Abraham to his son Isaac, from whom they reached Esau as the older of
his two sons. It was the opinion of Rebekah that as Jacob had bought the
birthright from his brother, he had thereby come into possession of the
garments as well. There was no need for her to go and fetch them from
the house of Esau. He knew his wives far too well to entrust so precious
a treasure to them; they were in the safe-keeping of his mother.
Besides, he used them most frequently in the house of his parents. As a
rule, he did not lay much stress upon decent apparel. He was willing to
appear on the street clad in rags, but he considered it his duty to wait
upon his father arrayed in his best. "My father," Esau was in the habit
of saying, "is a king in my sight, and it would ill become me to serve
before him in any thing but royal apparel." To the great respect he
manifested toward his father, the descendants of Esau owe all their good
fortune on earth. Thus doth God reward a good deed.

Rebekah led Jacob equipped and arrayed in this way to the door of
Isaac's chamber. There she parted from him with the words, "Henceforward
may thy Creator assist thee." Jacob entered, addressing Isaac with
"Father," and receiving the response, "Here am I! Who art thou, my son?"
he replied equivocally, "It is I, thy first-born son is Esau." He sought
to avoid a falsehood, and yet not betray that he was Jacob. Isaac then
said: "Thou art greatly in haste to secure thy blessing. Thy father
Abraham was seventy-five years old when he was blessed, and thou art but
sixty-three." Jacob replied awkwardly, "Because the Lord thy God sent me
good speed." Isaac concluded at once that this was not Esau, for he
would not have mentioned the name of God, and he made up his mind to
feel the son before him and make sure who he was. Terror seized upon
Jacob at the words of Isaac, "Come near, I pray thee, that I may feel
thee, my son." A cold sweat covered his body, and his heart melted like
wax. Then God caused the archangels Michael and Gabriel to descend. The
one seized his right hand, the other his left hand, while the Lord God
Himself supported him, that his courage might not fail him. Isaac felt
him, and, finding his hands hairy, he said, "The voice is Jacob's voice,
but the hands are the hands of Esau," words in which he conveyed the
prophecy that so long as the voice of Jacob is heard in the houses of
prayer and of learning, the hands of Esau will not be able to prevail
against him. "Yes," he continued, "it is the voice of Jacob, the voice
that imposes silence upon those on earth and in heaven," for even the
angels may not raise their voices in praise of God until Israel has
finished his prayers.

Isaac's scruples about blessing the son before him were not yet removed,
for with his prophetical eye he foresaw that this one would have
descendants who would vex the Lord. At the same time, it was revealed to
him that even the sinners in Israel would turn penitents, and then he
was ready to bless Jacob. He bade him come near and kiss him, to
indicate that it would be Jacob who would imprint the last kiss upon
Isaac before he was consigned to the grave- he and none other. When
Jacob stood close to him, he discerned the fragrance of Paradise
clinging to him, and he exclaimed, "See, the smell of my son is as the
smell of the field which the Lord hath blessed."

The fragrance emanating from Jacob was not the only thing about him
derived from Paradise. The archangel Michael had fetched thence the wine
which Jacob gave his father to drink, that an exalted mood might descend
upon him, for only when a man is joyously excited the Shekinah rests
upon him. The holy spirit filled Isaac, and he gave Jacob his tenfold
blessing: "God give thee of the dew of heaven," the celestial dew
wherewith God will awaken the pious to new life in days to come; "and of
the fatness of the earth," the goods of this world; "and plenty of corn
and wine," the Torah and the commandments which bestow the same joy upon
man as abundant harvests; "peoples shall serve thee," the Japhethites
and the Hamites; "nations shall bow down to thee," the Shemite nations;
"thou wilt be lord over thy brethren," the Ishmaelites and the
descendants of Keturah; "thy mother's sons will bow down to thee," Esau
and his princes; "cursed be every one that curseth thee," like Balaam;
"and blessed be every one that blesseth thee," like Moses.

For each blessing invoked upon Jacob by his father Isaac, a similar
blessing was bestowed upon him by God Himself in the same words. As
Isaac blessed him with dew, so also God: "And the remnant of Jacob shall
be in the midst of many peoples as dew from the Lord." Isaac blessed him
with the fatness of the earth, so also God: "And he shall give the rain
of thy seed, that thou shalt sow the ground withal; and bread of the
increase of the ground, and it shall be fat and plenteous." Isaac
blessed him with plenty of corn and wine, so also God: "I will send you
corn and wine." Isaac said, "Peoples shall serve thee," so also God:
"Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their queens thy nursing
mothers; they shall bow down to thee with their faces to the earth, and
lick the dust of thy feet." Isaac said, "Nations shall bow down to
thee," so also God: "And He will make thee high above all nations which
He hath made, in praise, and in name, and in honor."

To this double blessing his mother Rebekah joined hers: "For He shall
give His angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. They
shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy feet against a
stone. Thou shalt tread upon the lion and adder; the young lion and the
serpent shalt thou trample under feet. Because he hath set his love upon
me, therefore will I deliver him; I will set him on high, because he
hath known my name."

The holy spirit added in turn: "He shall call upon me, and I will answer
him; I will be with him in trouble; I will deliver him, and honor him.
With long life will I satisfy him, and show him my salvation."

Jacob left the presence of his father crowned like a bridegroom, adorned
like a bride, and bathed in celestial dew, which filled his bones with
marrow, and transformed him into a hero and a giant.

Of a miracle done for him at that very moment Jacob himself was not
aware. Had he tarried with his father an instant longer, Esau would have
met him there, and would surely have slain him. It happened that exactly
as Jacob was on the point of leaving the tent of his father, carrying in
his hands the plates off which Isaac had eaten, he noticed Esau
approaching, and he concealed himself behind the door. Fortunately, it
was a revolving door, so that though he could see Esau, he could not be
seen by him.

### ESAU'S TRUE CHARACTER REVEALED

Esau arrived after a delay of four hours. In spite of all the efforts he
had put forth, he had not succeeded in catching any game, and he was
compelled to kill a dog and prepare its flesh for his father's meal. All
this had made Esau ill-humored, and when he bade his father partake of
the meal, the invitation sounded harsh. "Let my father arise," he said,
"and eat of his son's venison." Jacob had spoken differently; he had
said, "Arise, I pray thee, sit and eat of my venison." The words of Esau
terrified Isaac greatly. His fright exceeded that which he had felt when
his father was about to offer him as a sacrifice, and he cried out, "Who
then is he that hath been the mediator between me and the Lord, to make
the blessing reach Jacob?"- words meant to imply that he suspected
Rebekah of having instigated Jacob's act.

Isaac's alarm was caused by his seeing hell at the feet of Esau.
Scarcely had he entered the house when the walls thereof began to get
hot on account of the nearness of hell, which he brought along with him.
Isaac could not but exclaim, "Who will be burnt down yonder, I or my son
Jacob?" and the Lord answered him, "Neither thou nor Jacob, but the
hunter."

Isaac told Esau that the meat set before him by Jacob had had marvellous
qualities. Any savor that one desired it possessed, it was even endowed
with the taste of the food that God will grant the pious in the world to
come. "I know not," he said, "what the meat was. But I had only to wish
for bread, and it tasted like bread, or fish, or locusts, or flesh of
animals, in short, it had the taste of any dainty one could wish for."
When Esau heard the word "flesh," he began to weep, and he said: "To me
Jacob gave no more than a dish of lentils, and in payment for it he took
my birthright. What must he have taken from thee for flesh of animals?"
Hitherto Isaac had been in great anguish on account of the thought that
he had committed a wrong in giving his blessing to his younger son
instead of the firstborn, to whom it belonged by law and custom. But
when he heard that Jacob had acquired the birthright from Esau, he said,
"I gave my blessing to the right one!"

In his dismay, Isaac had had the intention of cursing Jacob for having
wrested the blessing from him through cunning. God prevented him from
carrying out his plan. He reminded him that he would but curse himself,
seeing that his blessing contained the words, "Cursed be every one that
curseth thee." But Isaac was not willing to acknowledge his blessing
valid as applied to Jacob, until he was informed that his second son was
the possessor of the birthright. Only then did he say, "Yea, he shall be
blessed," whereat Esau cried with an exceeding great and bitter cry. By
way of punishment for having been the cause of such distress, a
descendant of Jacob, Mordecai, was also made to cry with a loud and
bitter cry, and his grief was brought forth by the Amalekite Haman, the
descendant of Esau. At the words of Isaac, "Thy brother came with
wisdom, and hath taken away thy blessing," Esau spat out in vexation,
and said, "He took away my birthright, and I kept silence, and now that
he takes away my blessing, should I also keep silence? Is not he rightly
named Jacob? for he hath supplanted me these two times."

Isaac continued to speak to Esau: "Behold, I have made him thy lord, he
is thy king, and do what thou wilt, thy blessings will still belong to
him; all his brethren have I given to him for slaves, and what slaves
possess belongs to their owner. There is nothing for it, thou must be
content that thou wilt receive thy bread baked from thy master." The
Lord took it ill of Isaac that he cheered him with such kind words. "To
Mine enemy," He reproached him, "thou sayest, 'What shall I do for thee,
my son?' " Isaac replied, "O that he might find grace with Thee!" God:
"He is a recreant." Isaac: "Doth he not act righteously when he honors
his parents?" God: "In the land of uprightness will he deal wrongfully,
he will stretch his hand forth in days to come against the Temple."
Isaac: "Then let him enjoy much good in this world, that he may not
behold the abiding-place of the Lord in the world to come."

When it became plain to Esau that he could not induce his father to
annul the blessing bestowed upon Jacob, he tried to force a blessing for
himself by an underhand trick. He said: "Hast thou but one blessing, my
father? bless me, even me also, O my father, else it will be said thou
hast but one blessing to bestow. Suppose both Jacob and I had been
righteous men, had not then thy God had two blessings, one for each?"
The Lord Himself made reply: "Silence! Jacob will bless the twelve
tribes, and each blessing will be different from every other." But Isaac
felt great pity for his older son, and he wanted to bless him, but the
Shekinah forsook him, and he could not carry out what he purposed.
Thereupon Esau began to weep. He shed three tears--one ran from his
right eye, the second from his left eye, and the third remained hanging
from his eyelash. God said, "This villain cries for his very life, and
should I let him depart empty-handed?" and then He bade Isaac bless his
older son.

The blessing of Isaac ran thus: "Behold, of the fat of the earth shall
be thy dwelling," by which he meant Greater Greece, in Italy; "and of
the dew of heaven from above," referring to Bet-Gubrin; "and by thy
sword shalt thou live, and thou shalt serve thy brother," but when he
casts off the yoke of the Lord, then shalt thou "shake his yoke from off
thy neck," and thou wilt be his master.

The blessing which Isaac gave to his older son was bound to no condition
whatsoever. Whether he deserved them or not, Esau was to enjoy the goods
of this world. Jacob's blessing, however, depended upon his pious deeds;
through them he would have a just claim upon earthly prosperity. Isaac
thought: "Jacob is a righteous man, he will not murmur against God,
though it should come to pass that suffering be inflicted upon him in
spite of his upright life. But that reprobate Esau, if he should do a
good deed, or pray to God and not be heard, he would say, 'As I pray to
the idols for naught, so it is in vain to pray to God.' " For this
reason did Isaac bestow an unconditional blessing upon Esau.

### JACOB LEAVES HIS FATHER'S HOUSE

Esau hated his brother Jacob on account of the blessing that his father
had given him, and Jacob was very much afraid of his brother Esau, and
he fled to the house of Eber, the son of Shem, and he concealed himself
there fourteen years on account of his brother Esau, and he continued
there to learn the ways of the Lord and His commandments. When Esau saw
that Jacob had fled and escaped from him, and Jacob had cunningly
obtained the blessing, then Esau grieved exceedingly, and he was also
vexed at his father and mother. He also rose up and took his wife, and
went away from his father and mother to the land of Seir. There he
married his second wife, Basemath, the daughter of Elon the Hittite, and
he called her name Adah, saying that the blessing had in that time
passed from him. After dwelling in Seir for six months, Esau returned to
the land of Canaan, and placed his two wives in his father's house in
Hebron. And the wives of Esau vexed and provoked Isaac and Rebekah with
their works, for they walked not in the ways of the Lord, but served
their fathers' gods of wood and stone, as their fathers had taught them,
and they were more wicked than their fathers. They sacrificed and burnt
incense to the Baalim, and Isaac and Rebekah became weary of them. And
at the end of fourteen years of Jacob's residing in the house of Eber,
Jacob desired to see his father and his mother, and he returned home.
Esau had forgotten in those days what Jacob had done to him, in having
taken the blessing from him, but when Esau saw Jacob returning to his
parents, he remembered what Jacob had done to him, and he was greatly
incensed against him, and he sought to slay him.

But Esau would not kill Jacob while his father was yet alive, lest Isaac
beget another son. He wanted to be sure of being the only heir. However,
his hatred against Jacob was so great that he determined to hasten the
death of his father and then dispatch Jacob. Such murderous plans Esau
cherished in his heart, though he denied that he was harboring them. But
God spoke, "Probably thou knowest not that I examine the hearts of men,
for I am the Lord that searcheth the heart." And not God alone knew the
secret desires of Esau. Rebekah, like all the Mothers, was a prophetess,
and she delayed not to warn Jacob of the danger that hung over him. "Thy
brother," she said to him, "is as sure of accomplishing his wicked
purpose as though thou wert dead. Now therefore, my son, obey my voice,
and arise, flee thou to Laban my brother, to Haran, and tarry with him
for seven years, until thy brother's fury turn away." In the goodness of
her heart, Rebekah could not but believe that the anger of Esau was only
a fleeting passion, and would disappear in the course of time. But she
was mistaken, his hate persisted until the end of his life.

Courageous as he was, Jacob would not run away from danger. He said to
his mother, "I am not afraid; if he wishes to kill me, I will kill him,"
to which she replied, "Let me not be bereaved of both my sons in one
day." By words Rebekah again showed her prophetic gift. As she spoke, so
it happened--when their time came, Esau was slain while the burial of
Jacob was taking place.

And Jacob said to Rebekah: "Behold, thou knowest that my father has
become old and does not see, and if I leave him and go away, he will be
angry and will curse me. I will not go; if he sends me, only then will I
go."

Accordingly, Rebekah went to Isaac, and amid tears she spoke to him
thus: "If Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, what good shall my
life do me?" And Isaac called Jacob, and charged him, and said unto him:
"Thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan, for thus did our
father Abraham command us according to the word of the Lord, which He
had commanded him, saying, 'Unto thy seed will I give the land; if thy
children keep My covenant that I have made with thee, then will I also
perform to thy children that which I have spoken unto thee, and I will
not forsake them.' Now therefore, my son, hearken to my voice, to all
that I shall command thee, and refrain from taking a wife from amongst
the daughters of Canaan. Arise, go to Haran, to the house of Bethuel,
thy mother's father, and take thee a wife from thence of the daughters
of Laban, thy mother's brother. Take heed lest thou shouldst forget the
Lord thy God and all His ways in the land to which thou goest, and
shouldst join thyself to the people of the land, and pursue vanity, and
forsake the Lord thy God. But when thou comest to the land, serve the
Lord. Do not turn to the right or to the left from the way which I
commanded thee, and which thou didst learn. And may the Almighty God
grant thee favor before the people of the land, that thou mayest take a
wife there according to thy choice, one who is good and upright in the
way of the Lord. And may God give unto thee and thy seed the blessing of
thy father Abraham and make thee fruitful and multiply thee, and mayest
thou become a multitude of people in the land whither thou goest, and
may God cause thee to return to thy land, the land of thy father's
dwelling, with children and with great riches, with joy and with
pleasure."

As the value of a document is attested by its concluding words, the
signature of the witnesses, so Isaac confirmed the blessing he had
bestowed upon Jacob. That none might say Jacob had secured it by
intrigue and cunning, he blessed him again with three blessings, in
these words, "In so far as I am endowed with the power of blessing, I
bestow blessing upon thee. May God, with whom there is endless blessing,
give thee His, and also the blessing wherewith Abraham desired to bless
me, desisting only in order not to provoke the jealousy of Ishmael."

Seeing with his prophetic eye that the seed of Jacob would once be
compelled to go into exile, Isaac offered up one more petition, that God
would bring the exiles back again. He said, "He shall deliver thee in
six troubles, and in the seventh there shall no evil touch thee." And
also Rebekah prayed to God in behalf of Jacob: "O Lord of the world, let
not the purpose prosper which Esau harbors against Jacob. Put a bridle
upon him, that he accomplish not all he wills to do."

When Esau observed that even his father's love had passed from him to
Jacob, he went away, to Ishmael, and he addressed him as follows: "Lo,
as thy father gave all his possessions to thy brother Isaac, and
dismissed thee with empty hands, so my father purposeth to do to me.
Make thyself ready then, go forth and slay thy brother, and I will slay
mine, and then we two shall divide the whole world between us." And
Ishmael replied: "Why dost thou want me to slay thy father? thou canst
do it thyself." Esau said: "It hath happened aforetime that a man killed
his brother- Cain murdered Abel. But that a son should kill his father
is unheard of."

Esau did not really shrink back from parricide, only it chanced not to
fit the plan he had hatched. "If Ishmael slays my father," he said to
himself, "I am the rightful redeemer, and I shall kill Ishmael to avenge
my father, and if, then, I murder Jacob, too, everything will belong to
me, as the heir of my father and my uncle." This shows that Esau's
marriage with Mahalath, the daughter of Ishmael and grandchild of
Abraham, was not concluded out of regard for his parents, who were
opposed to his two other wives, daughters of the Canaanites. All he
desired was to enter into amicable relations with Ishmael in order to
execute his devilish plan.

But Esau reckoned without his host. The night before his wedding with
Mahalath Ishmael died, and Nebaioth, the son of Ishmael, stepped into
his father's place, and gave away his sister. How little it had been in
Esau's mind to make his parents happy by taking a granddaughter of
Abraham to wife, appears from the fact that he kept his two other wives,
the Canaanitish women. The daughter of Ishmael followed the example of
her companions, and thus she but added to the grief caused the parents
of Esau by their daughters-in-law. And the opportunity might have been a
most favorable one for Esau to turn aside from his godless ways and
amend his conduct, for the bridegroom is pardoned on his wedding day for
all his sins committed in years gone by.

Scarcely had Jacob left his father's house, when Rebekah began to weep,
for she was sorely distressed about him. Isaac comforted her, saying:
"Weep not for Jacob! In peace doth he depart, and in peace will he
return. The Lord, God Most High, will guard him against all evil and be
with him. He will not forsake him all the days of his life. Have no fear
for him, for he walketh on the right path, he is a perfect man, and he
hath faith in God--he will not perish."

### JACOB PURSUED BY ELIPHAZ AND ESAU

When Jacob went away to go to Haran, Esau called his son Eliphaz, and
secretly spoke unto him, saying: "Now hasten, take thy sword in thy hand
and pursue Jacob, and pass before him in the road, and lurk for him and
slay him with thy sword in one of the mountains, and take all belonging
unto him, and come back." And Eliphaz was dexterous and expert with the
bow, as his father had taught him, and he was a noted hunter in the
field and a valiant man. And Eliphaz did as his father had commanded
him. And Eliphaz was at that time thirteen years old, and he arose and
went and took ten of his mother's brothers with him, and pursued Jacob.
And he followed Jacob closely, and when he overtook him, he lay in
ambush for him on the borders of the land of Canaan, opposite to the
city of Shechem. And Jacob saw Eliphaz and his men pursuing after him,
and Jacob stood in the place in which he was going in order to know what
it was, for he did not understand their purpose. Eliphaz drew his sword
and went on advancing, he and his men, toward Jacob, and Jacob said unto
them, "Wherefore have you come hither, and why do you pursue with your
swords?" Eliphaz came near to Jacob, and answered as follows, "Thus did
my father command me, and now therefore I will not deviate from the
orders which my father gave me." And when Jacob saw that Esau had
impressed his command urgently upon Eliphaz, he approached and
supplicated Eliphaz and his men, saying, "Behold, all that I have, and
that which my father and mother gave unto me, that take unto thee and go
from me, and do not slay me, and may this thing that thou wilt do with
me be accounted unto thee as righteousness." And the Lord caused Jacob
to find favor in the sight of Eliphaz and his men, and they hearkened to
the voice of Jacob, and they did not put him to death, but took all his
belongings, together with the silver and gold that he had brought with
him from Beer-sheba. They left him nothing. When Eliphaz and his men
returned to Esau, and told him all that had happened to them with Jacob,
he was wroth with his son Eliphaz and with his men, because they had not
put Jacob to death. And they answered, and said unto Esau, "Because
Jacob supplicated us in this matter, not to slay him, our pity was moved
toward him, and we took all belonging to him, and we came back." Esau
then took all the silver and gold which Eliphaz had taken from Jacob,
and he put them by in his house.

Nevertheless Esau did not give up the hope of intercepting Jacob on his
flight and slaying him. He pursued him, and with his men occupied the
road along which he had to journey to Haran. There a great miracle
happened to Jacob. When he observed what Esau's intention was, he turned
off toward the Jordan river, and, with eyes directed to God, he cleft
the waters with his wanderer's staff, and succeeded in crossing to the
other side. But Esau was not to be deterred. He kept up the pursuit, and
reached the hot springs at Baarus before his brother, who had to pass by
there. Jacob, not knowing that Esau was on the watch for him, decided to
bathe in the spring, saying, "I have neither bread nor other things
needful, so I will at least warm my body in the waters of the well."
While he was in the bath, Esau occupied every exit, and Jacob would
surely have perished in the hot water, if the Lord had not caused a
miracle to come to pass. A new opening formed of itself, and through it
Jacob escaped. Thus were fulfilled the words, "When thou passest through
the waters, I will be with thee; when thou walkest through the fire,
thou shalt not be burnt," for Jacob was saved from the waters of the
Jordan and from the fire of the hot spring.

At the same time with Jacob, a rider, leaving his horse and his clothes
on the shore, had stepped into the river to cool off, but he was
overwhelmed by the waves, and he met his death. Jacob put on the dead
man's clothes, mounted his horse, and went off. It was a lucky chance,
for Eliphaz had stripped him of everything, even his clothes, and the
miracle of the river had happened only that he might not be forced to
appear naked among men.

Though Jacob was robbed of all his possessions, his courage did not fail
him. He said: "Should I lose hope in my Creator? I set my eyes upon the
merits of my fathers. For the sake of them the Lord will give me His
aid." And God said: "Jacob, thou puttest thy trust in the merits of thy
fathers, therefore I will not suffer thy foot to be moved; He that
keepeth thee will not slumber. Yea, still more! While a keeper watcheth
only by day as a rule, and sleepeth by night, I will guard thee day and
night, for, behold, He that keepeth Israel shall neither slumber nor
sleep. The Lord will keep thee from all evil, from Esau as well as
Laban; He will keep thy soul, that the Angel of Death do thee no hurt;
He will keep thy going out and thy coming in, He will support thee now
thou art leaving Canaan, and when thou returnest to Canaan."

Jacob was reluctant to leave the Holy Land before he received direct
permission from God. "My parents," he reflected, "bade me go forth and
sojourn outside of the land, but who knows whether it be the will of God
that I do as they say, and beget children outside of the Holy Land?"
Accordingly, he betook himself to Beer-sheba. There, where the Lord had
given permission to Isaac to depart from Canaan and go to Philistia, he
would learn the will of the Lord concerning himself.

He did not follow the example of his father and grandfather and take
refuge with Abimelech, because he feared the king might force also him
into a covenant, and make it impossible for his descendants of many
generations to take possession of the Philistine land. Nor could he stay
at home, because of his fear that Esau might wrest the birthright and
the blessing from him, and to that he would not and could not agree. He
was as little disposed to take up the combat with Esau, for he knew the
truth of the maxim, "He who courts danger will be overcome by it; he who
avoids danger will overcome it." Both Abraham and Isaac had lived
according to this rule. His grandfather had fled from Nimrod, and his
father had gone away from the Philistines.

### THE DAY OF MIRACLES

Jacob's journey to Haran was a succession of miracles. The first of the
five that befell for his sake in the course of it was that the sun sank
while Jacob was passing Mount Moriah, though it was high noon at the
time. He was following the spring that appeared wherever the Patriarchs
went or settled. It accompanied Jacob from Beer-sheba to Mount Moriah, a
two days' journey. When he arrived at the holy hill, the Lord said to
him: "Jacob, thou hast bread in thy wallet, and the spring of waters is
near by to quench thy thirst. Thus thou hast food and drink, and here
thou canst lodge for the night." But Jacob replied: "The sun has barely
passed the fifth of its twelve day stages, why should I lie down to
sleep at so unseemly an hour?" But then Jacob perceived that the sun was
about to sink, and he prepared to make ready his bed. It was the Divine
purpose not to let Jacob pass the site of the future Temple without
stopping; he was to tarry there at least one night. Also, God desired to
appear unto Jacob, and He shows Himself unto His faithful ones only at
night. At the same time Jacob was saved from the pursuit of Esau, who
had to desist on account of the premature darkness.

Jacob took twelve stones from the altar on which his father Isaac had
lain bound as a sacrifice, and he said: "It was the purpose of God to
let twelve tribes arise, but they have not been begotten by Abraham or
Isaac. If, now, these twelve stones will unite into a single one, then
shall I know for a certainty that I am destined to become the father of
the twelve tribes." At this time the second miracle came to pass, the
twelve stones joined themselves together and made one, which he put
under his head, and at once it became soft and downy like a pillow. It
was well that he had a comfortable couch. He was in great need of rest,
for it was the first night in fourteen years that he did not keep
vigils. During all those years, passed in Eber's house of learning, he
had devoted the nights to study. And for twenty years to come he was not
to sleep, for while he was with his uncle Laban, he spent all the night
and every night reciting the Psalms.

On the whole it was a night of marvels. He dreamed a dream in which the
course of the world's history was unfolded to him. On a ladder set up on
the earth, with the top of it reaching to heaven, he beheld the two
angels who had been sent to Sodom. For one hundred and thirty-eight
years they had been banished from the celestial regions, because they
had betrayed their secret mission to Lot. They had accompanied Jacob
from his father's house thither, and now they were ascending heavenward.
When they arrived there, he heard them call the other angels, and say,
"Come ye and see the countenance of the pious Jacob, whose likeness
appears on the Divine throne, ye who yearned long to see it," and then
he beheld the angels descend from heaven to gaze upon him. He also saw
the angels of the four kingdoms ascending the ladder. The angel of
Babylon mounted seventy rounds, the angel of Media, fifty-two, that of
Greece, one hundred and eighty, and that of Edom mounted very high,
saying, "I will ascend above the heights of the clouds, I will be like
the Most High," and Jacob heard a voice remonstrating, "Yet thou shalt
be brought down to hell, to the uttermost parts of the pit." God Himself
reproved Edom, saying, "Though thou mount on high as the eagle, and
though thy nest be set among the stars, I will bring thee down from
thence."

Furthermore, God showed unto Jacob the revelation at Mount Sinai, the
translation of Elijah, the Temple in its glory and in its spoliation,
Nebuchadnezzar's attempt to burn the three holy children in the fiery
furnace, and Daniel's encounter with Bel.

In this, the first prophetic dream dreamed by Jacob, God made him the
promise that the land upon which he was lying would be given to him, but
the land he lay upon was the whole of Palestine, which God had folded
together and put under him. "And," the promise continued, "thy seed will
be like unto the dust of the earth. As the earth survives all things, so
thy children will survive all the nations of the earth. But as the earth
is trodden upon by all, so thy children, when they commit trespasses,
will be trodden upon by the nations of the earth." And, furthermore, God
promised that Jacob should spread out to the west and to the east, a
greater promise than that given to his fathers Abraham and Isaac, to
whom He had allotted a limited land. Jacob's was an unbounded
possession.

From this wondrous dream Jacob awoke with a start of fright, on account
of the vision he had had of the destruction of the Temple. He cried out,
"How dreadful is this place! this is none other but the house of God,
wherein is the gate of heaven through which prayer ascends to Him." He
took the stone made out of the twelve, and set it up for a pillar, and
poured oil upon the top of it, which had flowed down from heaven for
him, and God sank this anointed stone unto the abyss, to serve as the
centre of the earth, the same stone, the Eben Shetiyah, that forms the
centre of the sanctuary, whereon the Ineffable Name is graven, the
knowledge of which makes a man master over nature, and over life and
death.

Jacob cast himself down before the Eben Shetiyah, and entreated God to
fulfil the promise He had given him, and also he prayed that God grant
him honorable sustenance. For God had not mentioned bread to eat and
raiment to put on, that Jacob might learn to have faith in the Lord.
Then he vowed to give the tenth of all he owned unto God, if He would
but grant his petition. Thus Jacob was the first to take a vow upon
himself, and the first, too, to separate the tithe from his income.

God had promised him almost all that is desirable, but he feared he
might forfeit the pledged blessings through his sinfulness, and again he
prayed earnestly that God bring him back to his father's house
unimpaired in body, possessions, and knowledge, and guard him, in the
strange land whither he was going, against idolatry, an immoral life,
and bloodshed.

His prayer at an end, Jacob set out on his way to Haran, and the third
wonder happened. In the twinkling of an eye he arrived at his
destination. The earth jumped from Mount Moriah to Haran. A wonder like
this God has executed only four times in the whole course of history.

The first thing to meet his eye in Haran was the well whence the
inhabitants drew their supply of water. Although it was a great city,
Haran suffered from dearth of water, and therefore the well could not be
used by the people free of charge. Jacob's sojourn in the city produced
a change. By reason of his meritorious deeds the water springs were
blessed, and the city had water enough for its needs.

Jacob saw a number of people by the well, and he questioned them, "My
brethren, whence be ye?" He thus made himself a model for all to follow.
A man should be companionable, and address others like brothers and
friends, and not wait for them to greet him. Each one should strive to
be the first to give the salutation of peace, that the angels of peace
and compassion may come to meet him. When he was informed that the
by-standers hailed from Haran, he made inquiry about the character and
vocation of his uncle Laban, and whether they were on terms of friendly
intercourse with him. They answered briefly: "There is peace between us,
but if thou art desirous of inquiring further, here comes Rachel the
daughter of Laban. From her thou canst learn all thou hast a mind to
learn." They knew that women like to talk, wherefore they referred him
to Rachel.

Jacob found it strange that so many should be standing idle by the well,
and he questioned further: "Are you day laborers? then it is too early
for you to put by your work. But if you are pasturing your own sheep,
why do you not water your flocks and let them feed?" They told him they
were waiting until all the shepherds brought their flocks thither, and
together rolled the stone from the mouth of the well. While he was yet
speaking with them, Rachel came with her father's sheep, for Laban had
no sons, and a pest having broken out shortly before among his cattle,
so few sheep were left that a maiden like Rachel could easily tend them.
Now, when Jacob saw the daughter of his mother's brother approaching, he
rolled the great stone from the mouth of the well as easily as a cork is
drawn from a bottle--the fourth wonder of this extraordinary day.
Jacob's strength was equal to the strength of all the shepherds; with
his two arms alone he accomplished what usually requires the united
forces of a large assemblage of men. He had been divinely endowed with
this supernatural strength on leaving the Holy Land. God had caused the
dew of the resurrection to drop down upon him, and his physical strength
was so great that even in a combat with the angels he was victorious.

The fifth and last wonder of the day was that the water rose from the
depths of the well to the very top, there was no need to draw it up, and
there it remained all the twenty years that Jacob abode in Haran.

### JACOB WITH LABAN

Rachel's coming to the well at the moment when Jacob reached the
territory belonging to Haran was an auspicious omen. To meet young
maidens on first entering a city is a sure sign that fortune is
favorable to one's undertakings. Experience proves this through Eliezer,
Jacob, Moses, and Saul. They all encountered maidens when they
approached a place new to them, and they all met with success.

Jacob treated Rachel at once as his cousin, which caused significant
whispering among the by-standers. They censured Jacob for his demeanor
toward her, for since God had sent the deluge upon the world, on account
of the immoral life led by men, great chastity had prevailed, especially
among the people of the east. The talk of the men reduced Jacob to
tears. Scarcely had he kissed Rachel when he began to weep, for he
repented of having done it.

There was reason enough for tears. Jacob could not but remember sadly
that Eliezer, his grandfather's slave, had brought ten camels laden with
presents with him to Haran, when he came to sue for a bride for Isaac,
while he had not even a ring to give to Rachel. Moreover, he foresaw
that his favorite wife Rachel would not lie beside him in the grave, and
this, too, made him weep.

As soon as Rachel heard that Jacob was her cousin, she ran home to tell
her father about his coming. Her mother was no longer among the living,
else she would naturally have gone to her. In great haste Laban ran to
receive Jacob. He reflected, if Eliezer, the bondman, had come with ten
camels, what would not the favorite son of the family bring with him,
and when he saw that Jacob was unattended, he concluded that he carried
great sums of money in his girdle, and he threw his arms about his waist
to find out whether his supposition was true. Disappointed in this, he
yet did not give up hope that his nephew Jacob was a man of substance.
Perhaps he concealed precious stones in his mouth, and he kissed him in
order to find out whether he had guessed aright. But Jacob said to him:
"Thou thinkest I have money. Nay, thou art mistaken, I have but words."
Then he went on to tell him how it had come about that he stood before
him empty-handed. He said that his father Isaac had sent him on his way
provided with gold, silver, and money, but he had encountered Eliphaz,
who had threatened to slay him. To this assailant Jacob had spoken thus:
"Know that the descendants of Abraham have an obligation to meet, they
will have to serve four hundred years in a land that is not theirs. If
thou slayest me, then you, the seed of Esau, will have to pay the debt.
It were better, therefore, to take all I have, and spare my life, so
that what is owing may be paid by me. Hence," Jacob continued, "I stand
before thee bare of all the substance carried off by Eliphaz."

This tale of his nephew's poverty filled Laban with dismay. "What," he
exclaimed, "shall I have to give food and drink for a month or, perhaps,
even a year to this fellow, who has come to me empty-handed!" He betook
himself to his teraphim, to ask them for counsel upon the matter, and
they admonished him, saying: "Beware of sending him away from thy house.
His star and his constellation are so lucky that good fortune will
attend all his undertakings, and for his sake the blessing of the Lord
will rest upon all thou doest, in thy house or in thy field."

Laban was satisfied with the advice of the teraphim, but he was
embarrassed as to the way in which he was to attach Jacob to his house.
He did not venture to offer him service, lest Jacob's conditions be
impossible of fulfilment. Again he resorted to the teraphim, and asked
them with what reward to tempt his nephew, and they replied: "A wife is
his wage; he will ask nothing else of thee but a wife. It is his nature
to be attracted by women, and whenever he threatens to leave thee, do
but offer him another wife, and he will not depart.

Laban went back to Jacob, and said, "Tell me, what shall thy wages be?"
and he replied, "Thinkest thou I came hither to make money? I came only
to get me a wife," for Jacob had no sooner beheld Rachel than he fell in
love with her and made her a proposal of marriage. Rachel consented, but
added the warning: "My father is cunning, and thou art not his match."
Jacob: "I am his brother in cunning." Rachel: "But is deception becoming
unto the pious?" Jacob: "Yes, 'with the righteous righteousness is
seemly, and with the deceiver deception.' But," continued Jacob, "tell
me wherein he may deal cunningly with me." Rachel: "I have an older
sister, whom he desires to see married before me, and he will try to
palm her off on thee instead of me." To be prepared for Laban's
trickery, Jacob and Rachel agreed upon a sign by which he would
recognize her in the nuptial night.

Thus warned to be on his guard against Laban, Jacob worded his agreement
with him regarding his marriage to Rachel with such precision that no
room was left for distortion or guile. Jacob said: "I know that the
people of this place are knaves, therefore I desire to put the matter
very clearly to thee. I will serve thee seven years for Rachel, hence
not Leah; for thy daughter, that thou bringest me not some other woman
likewise named Rachel; for the younger daughter, that thou exchangest
not their names in the meantime."

Nothing of all this availed: "It profits not if a villain is cast into a
sawmill"--neither force nor gentle words can circumvent a rascal. Laban
deceived not only Jacob, but also the guests whom he invited to the
wedding.

### THE MARRIAGE OF JACOB

After Jacob had served Laban seven years, he said to his uncle: "The
Lord destined me to be the father of twelve tribes. I am now eighty-four
years old, and if I do not take thought of the matter now, when can I?"
Thereupon Laban consented to let him have his daughter Rachel to wife,
and he was married forty-four years after his brother Esau. The Lord
often defers the happiness of the pious, while He permits the wicked to
enjoy the fulfilment of their desires soon. Esau, however, had purposely
chosen his fortieth year for his marriage; he had wanted to indicate
that he was walking in the footsteps of his father Isaac, who had
likewise married at forty years of age. Esau was like a swine that
stretches out its feet when it lies down, to show that it is
cloven-footed like the clean animals, though it is none the less one of
the unclean animals. Until his fortieth year Esau made a practice of
violating the wives of other men, and then at his marriage he acted as
though he were following the example of his pious father. Accordingly,
the woman he married was of his own kind, Judith, a daughter of Heth,
for God said: "This one, who is designed for stubble, to be burnt by
fire, shall take unto wife one of a people also destined for utter
destruction." They, Esau and his wife, illustrated the saying, "Not for
naught does the raven consort with the crow; they are birds of a
feather."

Far different it was with Jacob. He married the two pious and lovely
sisters, Leah and Rachel, for Leah, like her younger sister, was
beautiful of countenance, form, and stature. She had but one defect, her
eyes were weak, and this malady she had brought down upon herself,
through her own action. Laban, who had two daughters, and Rebekah, his
sister, who had two sons, had agreed by letter, while their children
were still young, that the older son of the one was to marry the older
daughter of the other, and the younger son the younger daughter. When
Leah grew to maidenhood, and inquired about her future husband, all her
tidings spoke of his villainous character, and she wept over her fate
until her eyelashes dropped from their lids. But Rachel grew more and
more beautiful day by day, for all who spoke of Jacob praised and
extolled him, and "good tidings make the bones fat."

In view of the agreement between Laban and Rebekah, Jacob refused to
marry the older daughter Leah. As it was, Esau was his mortal enemy, on
account of what had happened regarding the birthright and the paternal
blessing. If, now, Jacob married the maiden appointed for him, Esau
would never forgive his younger brother. Therefore Jacob resolved to
take to wife Rachel, the younger daughter of his uncle.

Laban was of another mind. He purposed to marry of his older daughter
first, for he knew that Jacob would consent to serve him a second period
of seven years for love of Rachel. On the day of the wedding he
assembled the inhabitants of Haran, and addressed them as follows: "Ye
know well that we used to suffer from lack of water, and as soon as this
pious man Jacob came to dwell among us, we had water in abundance."
"What hast thou in mind to do?" they asked Laban. He replied: "If ye
have naught to say against it, I will deceive him and give him Leah to
wife. He loves Rachel with an exceeding great love, and for her sake he
will tarry with us yet seven other years." "Do as it pleaseth thee," his
friends said. "Well, then," said Laban, "let each one of you give me a
pledge that ye will not betray my purpose."

With the pledges they left with him, Laban bought wine, oil, and meat
for the wedding feast, and he set a meal before them which they had
themselves paid for. Because he deceived his fellow-citizens thus, Laban
is called Arami, "the deceiver." They feasted all day long, until late
at night, and when Jacob expressed his astonishment at the attention
shown him, they said to him: "Through thy piety thou didst a great
service of lovingkindness unto us, our supply of water was increased
unto abundance, and we desire to show our gratitude therefor." And,
indeed, they tried to give him a hint of Laban's purpose. In the
marriage ode which they sang they used the refrain "Halia," in the hope
that he would understand it as Ha Leah, "This is Leah." But Jacob was
unsuspicious and noticed nothing.

When the bride was led into the nuptial chamber, the guests extinguished
all the candles, much to Jacob's amazement. But their explanation
satisfied him. "Thinkest thou," they said, "we have as little sense of
decency as thy countrymen?" Jacob therefore did not discover the
deception practiced upon him until morning. During the night Leah
responded whenever he called Rachel, for which he reproached her
bitterly when daylight came. "O thou deceiver, daughter of a deceiver,
why didst thou answer me when I called Rachel's name?" "Is there a
teacher without a pupil?" asked Leah, in return. "I but profited by thy
instruction. When thy father called thee Esau, didst thou not say, Here
am I?"

Jacob was greatly enraged against Laban, and he said to him: "Why didst
thou deal treacherously with me? Take back thy daughter, and let me
depart, seeing thou didst act wickedly toward me." Laban pacified him,
however, saying, "It is not so done in our place, to give the younger
before the first-born," and Jacob agreed to serve yet seven other years
for Rachel, and after the seven days of the feast of Leah's wedding were
fulfilled, he married Rachel.

With Leah and Rachel, Jacob received the handmaids Zilpah and Bilhah,
two other daughters of Laban, whom his concubines had borne unto him.

### THE BIRTH OF JACOB'S CHILDREN

The ways of God are not like unto the ways of men. A man clings close to
his friend while he has riches, and forsakes him when he falls into
poverty. But when God sees a mortal unsteady and faltering, He reaches a
hand out to him, and raises him up. Thus it happened with Leah. She was
hated by Jacob, and God visited her in mercy. Jacob's aversion to Leah
began the very morning after their wedding, when his wife taunted him
with not being wholly free from cunning and craft himself. Then God
said, "Help can come to Leah only if she gives birth to a child; then
the love of her husband will return to her." God remembered the tears
she had shed when she prayed that her doom, chaining her to that
recreant Esau, be averted from her, and so wondrous are the uses of
prayer that Leah, besides turning aside the impending decree, was
permitted to marry Jacob before her sister and be the first to bear him
a child. There was another reason why the Lord was compassionately
inclined toward Leah. She had gotten herself talked about. The sailors
on the sea, the travellers along the highways, the women at their looms,
they all gossiped about Leah, saying, "She is not within what her
seeming is without. She appears to be pious, but if she were, she would
not have deceived her sister." To put an end to all this tattle, God
granted her the distinction of bearing a son at the end of seven months
after her marriage. He was one of a pair of twins, the other child being
a daughter. So it was with eleven of the sons of Jacob, all of them
except Joseph were born twins with a girl, and the twin sister and
brother married later on. Altogether it was an extraordinary childbirth,
for Leah was barren, not formed by nature to bear children.

She called her first-born son Reuben, which means "See the normal man,"
for he was neither big nor little, neither dark nor fair, but exactly
normal. In calling her oldest child Reuben, "See the son," Leah
indicated his future character. "Behold the difference," the name
implied, "between my first-born son and the first-born son of my father
in-law. Esau sold his birthright to Jacob of his own free will, and yet
he hated him. As for my first-born son, although his birthright was
taken from him without his consent, and given to Joseph, it was
nevertheless he who rescued Joseph from the hands of his brethren."

Leah called her second son Shime'on, "Yonder is sin," for one of his
descendants was that Zimri who was guilty of vile trespasses with the
daughters of Moab.

The name of her third son, Levi, was given him by God Himself, not by
his mother. The Lord summoned him through the angel Gabriel, and
bestowed the name upon him as one who is "crowned" with the twenty-four
gifts that are the tribute due to the priests.

At the birth of her fourth son, Leah returned thanks to God for a
special reason. She knew that Jacob would beget twelve sons, and if they
were distributed equally among his four wives, each would bear three.
But now it appeared that she had one more than her due share, and she
called him Jehudah, "thanks unto God." She was thus the first since the
creation of the world to give thanks to God, and her example was
followed by David and Daniel, the descendants of her son Judah.

When Rachel saw that her sister had borne Jacob four sons, she envied
Leah. Not that she begrudged her the good fortune she enjoyed, she only
envied her for her piety, saying to herself that it was to her righteous
conduct that she owed the blessing of many children. Then she besought
Jacob: "Pray unto God for me, that He grant me children, else my life is
no life. Verily, there are four that may be regarded as though they were
dead, the blind, the leper, the childless, and he who was once rich and
has lost his fortune." Jacob's anger was kindled against Rachel, and he
said: "It were better thou shouldst address thy petition to God, and not
to me, for am I in God's stead, who hath withheld from thee the fruit of
the womb?" God was displeased with this answer that Jacob made to his
sad wife. He rebuked him with the words: "Is it thus thou wouldst
comfort a grief-stricken heart? As thou livest, the day will come when
thy children will stand before the son of Rachel, and he will use the
same words thou hast but now used, saying, 'Am I in the place of the
Lord?' "

Rachel also made reply to Jacob, saying: "Did not thy father, too,
entreat God for thy mother with earnest words, beseeching Him to remove
her barrenness?" Jacob: "It is true, but Isaac had no children, and I
have several." Rachel: "Remember thy grandfather Abraham, thou canst not
deny that he had children when he supplicated God in behalf of Sarah!"
Jacob: "Wouldst thou do for me what Sarah did for my grandfather?"
Rachel: "Pray, what did she?" Jacob: "She herself brought a rival into
her house." Rachel: "If that is all that is necessary, I am ready to
follow the example of Sarah, and I pray that as she was granted a child
for having invited a rival, so may I be blessed, too." Thereupon Rachel
gave Jacob Bilhah, her freed handmaid, to wife, and she bore him a son,
whom Rachel called Dan, saying, "As the Lord was gracious unto me and
gave me a son according to my petition, so He will permit Samson, the
descendant of Dan, to judge his people, that it fall not into the hands
of the Philistines." Bilhah's second son Rachel named Naphtali, saying,
"Mine is the bond that binds Jacob to this place, for it was for my sake
that he came to Laban." At the same time she wanted to convey by this
name that the Torah, which is as sweet as Nofet, "honeycomb," would be
taught in the territory of Naphtali. And the name had still a third
meaning: "As God hath heard my fervent prayer for a son, so He will
hearken unto the fervent prayer of the Naphtalites when they are beset
by their enemies."

Leah, seeing that she had left bearing, while Bilhah, her sister's
handmaid, bore Jacob two sons, concluded that it was Jacob's destiny to
have four wives, her sister and herself, and their half-sisters Bilhah
and Zilpah. Therefore she also gave him her handmaid to wife. Zilpah was
the youngest of the four women. It was the custom of that time to give
the older daughter the older handmaid, and the younger daughter the
younger handmaid, as their dowry, when they got married. Now, in order
to make Jacob believe that his wife was the younger daughter he had
served for, Laban had given Leah the younger handmaid as her marriage
portion. This Zilpah was so young that her body betrayed no outward
signs of pregnancy, and nothing was known of her condition until her son
was born. Leah called the boy Gad, which means "fortune," or it may mean
"the cutter," for from Gad was descended the prophet Elijah, who brings
good fortune to Israel, and he also cuts down the heathen world. Leah
had other reasons, too, for choosing this name of double meaning. The
tribe of Gad had the good fortune of entering into possession of its
allotment in the Holy Land before any of the others, and, also, Gad the
son of Jacob was born circumcised.

To Zilpah's second son Leah gave the name of Asher, "praise," for, she
said, "Unto me all manner of praise is due, for I brought my handmaid
into the house of my husband as wife. Sarah did likewise, but only
because she had no children, and so it was also with Rachel. But as for
me, I had children, and nevertheless I subdued my passion, and without
jealousy I gave my handmaid to my husband for wife. Verily, all will
praise and extol me." Furthermore she spoke: "As the women will praise
me, so the sons of Asher will in time to come praise God for their
fruitful possession in the Holy Land."

The next son born unto Jacob was Issachar, "a reward," and once more it
was Leah who was permitted to bring forth the child, as a reward from
God for her pious desire to have the twelve tribes come into the world.
To secure this result, she left no means untried.

It happened once that her oldest son Reuben was tending his father's ass
during the harvest, and he bound him to a root of dudaim, and went his
way. On returning, he found the dudaim torn out of the ground, and the
ass lying dead beside it. The beast had uprooted it in trying to get
loose, and the plant has a peculiar quality, whoever tears it up must
die. As it was the time of the harvest, when it is permitted for any one
to take a plant from a field, and as dudaim is, besides, a plant which
the owner of a field esteems lightly, Reuben carried it home. Being a
good son, he did not keep it for himself, but gave it to his mother.
Rachel desired the dudaim, and she asked the plant of Leah, who parted
with it to her sister, but on the condition that Jacob, when he returned
from work in the evening, should tarry with her for a while. It was
altogether unbecoming conduct in Rachel to dispose thus of her husband.
She gained the dudaim, but she lost two tribes. If she had acted
otherwise, she would have borne four sons instead of two. And she
suffered another punishment, her body was not permitted to rest in the
grave beside her husband's.

Jacob came home from the field after night had fallen, for he observed
the law obliging a day laborer to work until darkness sets in, and
Jacob's zeal in the affairs of Laban was as great in the last seven
years, after his marriage, as in the first seven, while he was serving
for the hand of Rachel. When Leah heard the braying of Jacob's ass, she
ran to meet her husband, and without giving him time to wash his feet,
she insisted upon his turning aside into her tent. At first Jacob
refused to go, but God compelled him to enter, for unto God it was known
that Leah acted from pure, disinterested motives. Her dudaim secured two
sons for her, Issachar, the father of the tribe that devotes itself to
the study of the Torah, whence his name meaning "reward," and Zebulon,
whose descendants carried on commerce, using their profits to enable
their brethren of Issachar to keep at their studies. Leah called this
last-born son of hers Zebulon, "dwelling-place," for she said, "Now will
my husband dwell with me, seeing that I have borne him six sons, and,
also, the sons of Zebulon will have a goodly dwelling-place in the Holy
Land."

Leah bore once more, and this last time it was a daughter, a man child
turned into a woman by her prayer. When she conceived for the seventh
time, she spake as follows: "God promised Jacob twelve sons. I bore him
six, and each of the two handmaids has borne him two. If, now, I were to
bring forth another son, my sister Rachel would not be equal even unto
the handmaids." Therefore she prayed to God to change the male embryo in
her womb into a female, and God hearkened unto her prayer.

Now all the wives of Jacob, Leah, Rachel, Zilpah, and Bilhah, united
their prayers with the prayer of Jacob, and together they besought God
to remove the curse of barrenness from Rachel. On New Year's Day, the
day whereon God sits in judgment upon the inhabitants of the earth, He
remembered Rachel, and granted her a son. And Rachel spake, "God hath
taken away my reproach," for all the people had said that she was not a
pious woman, else had she borne children, and now that God had hearkened
to her, and opened her womb, such idle talk no longer had any reason.

By bearing a son, she had escaped another disgrace. She had said to
herself: "Jacob hath a mind to return to the land of his birth, and my
father will not be able to hinder his daughters who have borne him
children from following their husband thither with their children. But
he will not let me, the childless wife, go, too, and he will keep me
here and marry me to one of the uncircumcised." She said furthermore,
"As my son hath removed my reproach, so Joshua, his descendant, will
roll away a reproach from the Israelites, when he circumcises them
beyond Jordan."

Rachel called her son Joseph, "increase," saying, "God will give me an
additional son." Prophetess as she was, she foresaw she would have a
second son. But an increase added on by God is larger than the original
capital itself. Benjamin, the second son, whom Rachel regarded merely as
a supplement, had ten sons, while Joseph begot only two. These twelve
together may be considered the twelve tribes borne by Rachel. Had Rachel
not used the form of expression, "The Lord add to me another son," she
herself would have begotten twelve tribes with Jacob.

### JACOB FLEES BEFORE LABAN

Jacob had only been waiting for Joseph to be born to begin preparations
for his journey home. The holy spirit had revealed to him that the house
of Joseph would work the destruction of the house of Esau, and,
therefore, Jacob exclaimed at the birth of Joseph, "Now I need not fear
Esau or his legions.

About this time, Rebekah sent her nurse Deborah, the daughter of Uz,
accompanied by two of Isaac's servants, to Jacob, to urge him to return
to his father's house, now that his fourteen years of service had come
to an end. Then Jacob approached Laban, and spoke, "Give me my wives and
my children, that I may go unto mine own place, and to my country, for
my mother has sent messengers unto me, bidding me to return to my
father's house." Laban answered, saying, "O that I might find favor in
thine eyes! By a sign it was made known unto me that God blesseth me for
thy sake." What Laban had in mind was the treasure he had found on the
day Jacob came to him, and he considered that a token of his beneficent
powers. Indeed, God had wrought many a thing in the house of Laban that
testified to the blessings spread abroad by the pious. Shortly before
Jacob came, a pest had broken out among Laban's cattle, and with his
arrival it ceased. And Laban had had no son, but during Jacob's sojourn
in Haran sons were born unto him.

All the hire he asked in return for his labor and for the blessings he
had brought Laban was the speckled and spotted among the goats of his
herd, and the black among the sheep. Laban assented to his conditions,
saying, "Behold, I would it might be according to thy word." The
arch-villain Laban, whose tongue wagged in all directions, and who made
all sorts of promises that were never kept, judged others by himself,
and therefore suspected Jacob of wanting to deceive him. And yet, in the
end, it was Laban himself who broke his word. No less than a hundred
times he changed the agreement between them. Nevertheless his
unrighteous conduct was of no avail. Though a three days' journey had
been set betwixt Laban's flocks and Jacob's, the angels were wont to
bring the sheep belonging to Laban down to Jacob's sheep, and Jacob's
droves grew constantly larger and better. Laban had given only the
feeble and sick to Jacob, yet the young of the flock, raised under
Jacob's tendance, were so excellent in quality that people bought them
at a heavy price. And Jacob had no need to resort to the peeled rods. He
had but to speak, and the flocks bare according to his desire. What
Laban deserved was utter ruin, for having permitted the pious Jacob to
work for him without hire, and after his wages had been changed ten
times, and ten times Laban had tried to overreach him, God rewarded him
in this way. But his good luck with the flocks was only what Jacob
deserved. Every faithful laborer is rewarded by God in this world, quite
regardless of what awaits him in the world to come. With empty hands
Jacob had come to Laban, and he left him with herds numbering six
hundred thousand. Their increase had been marvellous, an increase that
will be equalled only in the Messianic time.

The wealth and good fortune of Jacob called forth the envy of Laban and
his sons, and they could not hide their vexation in their intercourse
with him. And the Lord said unto Jacob, "Thy father-in-law's countenance
is not toward thee as beforetime, and yet thou tarriest with him? Do
thou rather return unto the land of thy fathers, and there I will let My
Shekinah rest upon thee, for I cannot permit the Shekinah to reside
outside of the Holy Land." Immediately Jacob sent the fleet messenger
Naphtali to Rachel and Leah to summon them to a consultation, and he
chose as the place of meeting the open field, where none could overhear
what was said.

His two wives approved the plan of returning to his home, and Jacob
resolved at once to go away with all his substance, without as much as
acquainting Laban with his intention. Laban was gone to shear his sheep,
and so Jacob could execute his plan without delay.

That her father might not learn about their flight from his teraphim,
Rachel stole them, and she took them and concealed them upon the camel
upon which she sat, and she went on. And this is the manner they used to
make the images: They took a man who was the first-born, slew him and
took the hair off his head, then salted the head, and anointed it with
oil, then they wrote "the Name" upon a small tablet of copper or gold,
and placed it under his tongue. The head with the tablet under the
tongue was then put in a house where lights were lighted before it, and
at the time when they bowed down to it, it spoke to them on all matters
that they asked of it, and that was due to the power of the Name which
was written upon it.

### THE COVENANT WITH LABAN

Jacob departed and crossed the Euphrates, and set his face toward
Gilead, for the holy spirit revealed to him that God would bring help
there to his children in the days of Jephthah. Meantime the shepherds of
Haran observed that the well, which had been filled to overflowing since
the arrival of Jacob in their place, ran dry suddenly. For three days
they watched and waited, in the hope that the waters would return in the
same abundance as before. Disappointed, they finally told Laban of the
misfortune, and he divined at once that Jacob had departed thence, for
he knew that the blessing had been conferred upon Haran only for the
sake of his son-in-law's merits.

On the morrow Laban rose early, assembled all the people of the city,
and pursued Jacob with the intention of killing him when he overtook
him. But the archangel Michael appeared unto him, and bade him take heed
unto himself, that he do not the least unto Jacob, else would he suffer
death himself. This message from heaven came to Laban during the night,
for when, in extraordinary cases, God finds it necessary to reveal
Himself unto the heathen, He does it only in the dark, clandestinely as
it were, while He shows Himself to the prophets of the Jews openly,
during daylight.

Laban accomplished the journey in one day for which Jacob had taken
seven, and he overtook him at the mountain of Gilead. When he came upon
Jacob, he found him in the act of praying and giving praise unto God.
Immediately Laban fell to remonstrating with his son-in-law for having
stolen away unawares to him. He showed his true character when he said,
"It is in the power of my hand to do thee hurt, but the God of thy
father spake unto me yesternight, saying, Take heed to thyself that thou
speak not to Jacob either good or bad." That is the way of the wicked,
they boast of the evil they can do. Laban wanted to let Jacob know that
only the dream warning him against doing aught that was harmful to Jacob
prevented him from carrying out the wicked design he had formed against
him.

Laban continued to take Jacob to task, and he concluded with the words,
"And now, though thou wouldst needs be gone, because thou sore longedst
after thy father's house, yet wherefore hast thou stolen my gods?" When
he pronounced the last words, his grandchildren interrupted him, saying,
"We are ashamed of thee, grandfather, that in thy old age thou shouldst
use such words as 'my gods.' " Laban searched all the tents for his
idols, going first to the tent of Jacob, which was Rachel's at the same
time, for Jacob always dwelt with his favorite wife. Finding nothing, he
went thence to Leah's tent, and to the tents of the two handmaids, and,
noticing that Rachel was feeling about here and there, his suspicions
were aroused, and he entered her tent a second time. He would now have
found what he was looking for, if a miracle had not come to pass. The
teraphim were transformed into drinking vessels, and Laban had to desist
from his fruitless search.

Now Jacob, who did not know that Rachel had stolen her father's teraphim
in order to turn him aside from his idolatrous ways, was wroth with
Laban, and began to chide with him. In the quarrel between them, Jacob's
noble character manifested itself. Notwithstanding his excitement, he
did not suffer a single unbecoming word to escape him. He only reminded
Laban of the loyalty and devotion with which he had served him, doing
for him what none other would or could have done. He said: "I dealt
wrongfully with the lion, for God had appointed of Laban's sheep for the
lion's daily sustenance, and I deprived him thereof. Could another
shepherd have done thus? Yes, the people abused me, calling me robber
and sneak thief, for they thought that only by stealing by day and
stealing by night could I replace the animals torn by wild beasts. And
as to my honesty," he continued, "is it likely there is another
son-in-law who, having lived with his father-in-law, hath not taken some
little thing from the household of his father-in-law, a knife, or other
trifle? But thou hast felt about all my stuff, what hast thou found of
all thy household stuff? Not so much as a needle or a nail."

In his indignation, and conscious of his innocence, Jacob exclaimed,
"With whomsoever thou findest thy gods, he shall not live," words which
contained a curse--the thief was cursed with premature death, and
therefore Rachel had to die in giving birth to Benjamin. Indeed, the
curse would have taken effect at once, had it not been the wish of God
that Rachel should bear Jacob his youngest son.

After the quarrel, the two men made a treaty, and with his gigantic
strength Jacob set up a huge rock as a memorial, and a heap of stones as
a sign of their covenant. In this matter Jacob followed the example of
his fathers, who likewise had covenanted with heathen nations, Abraham
with the Jebusites, and Isaac with the Philistines. Therefore Jacob did
not hesitate to make a treaty with the Arameans. Jacob summoned his
sons, calling them brethren, for they were his peers in piety and
strength, and he bade them cast up heaps of stones. Thereupon he swore
unto his father-in-law that he would take no wives beside his four
daughters, either while they were alive or after their death, and Laban,
on his part, swore that he would not pass over the heaps or over the
pillar unto Jacob with hostile intent, and he took the oath by the God
of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, while Jacob made mention of the Fear
of Isaac. He refrained from using the term "the God of Isaac," because
God never unites His name with that of a living person, for the reason
that so long as a man has not ended his years, no trust may be put in
him, lest he be seduced by the evil inclination. It is true, when He
appeared unto Jacob at Beth-el, God called Himself "the God of Isaac."
There was a reason for the unusual phrase. Being blind, Isaac led a
retired life, within his tent, and the evil inclination had no power
over him any more. But though God had full confidence in Isaac, yet
Jacob could not venture to couple the name of God with the name of a
living man, wherefore he took his oath by "the Fear of Isaac."

Early in the morning after the day of covenanting, Laban rose up, and
kissed his grandchildren and his daughters, and blessed them. But these
acts and words of his did not come from the heart; in his innermost
thoughts he regretted that Jacob and his family and his substance had
escaped him. His true feelings he betrayed in the message which he sent
to Esau at once upon his return to Haran, by the hand of his son Beor
and ten companions of his son. The message read: "Hast thou heard what
Jacob thy brother has done unto me, who first came to me naked and bare,
and I went to meet him, and took him to my house with honor, and brought
him up, and gave him my two daughters for wives, and also two of my
maids? And God blessed him on my account, and he increased abundantly,
and had sons and daughters and maidservants, and also an uncommon stock
of flocks and herds, camels and asses, also silver and gold in
abundance. But when he saw that his wealth increased, he left me while I
went to shear my sheep, and he rose up and fled in secrecy. And he put
his wives and children upon camels, and he led away all his cattle and
substance which he acquired in my land, and he resolved to go to his
father Isaac, to the land of Canaan. And he did not suffer me to kiss my
sons and daughters, and he carried away my daughters as captives of the
sword, and he also stole my gods, and he fled. And now I have left him
in the mountain of the brook of Jabbok, he and all belonging to him, not
a jot of his substance is lacking. If it be thy wish to go to him, go,
and there wilt thou find him, and thou canst do unto him as thy soul
desireth."

Jacob had no need to fear either Laban or Esau, for on his journey he
was accompanied by two angel hosts, one going with him from Haran to the
borders of the Holy Land, where he was received by the other host, the
angels of Palestine. Each of these hosts consisted of no less than six
hundred thousand angels, and when he beheld them, Jacob said: "Ye belong
neither to the host of Esau, who is preparing to go out to war against
me, nor the host of Laban, who is about to pursue me again. Ye are the
hosts of the holy angels sent by the Lord." And he gave the name
Mahanaim, Double-Host, to the spot on which the second army relieved the
first.

### JACOB AND ESAU PREPARE TO MEET

The message of Laban awakened Esau's old hatred toward Jacob with
increased fury, and he assembled his household, consisting of sixty men.
With them and three hundred and forty inhabitants of Seir, he went forth
to do battle with Jacob and kill him. He divided his warriors into seven
cohorts, giving to his son Eliphaz his own division of sixty, and
putting the other six divisions under as many of the Horites.

While Esau was hastening onward to meet Jacob, the messengers which
Laban had sent to Esau came to Rebekah and told her that Esau and his
four hundred men were about to make war upon Jacob, with the purpose of
slaying him and taking possession of all he had. Anxious lest Esau
should execute his plan while yet Jacob was on the journey, she hastily
dispatched seventy-two of the retainers of Isaac's household, to give
him help. Jacob, tarrying on the banks of the brook Jabbok, rejoiced at
the sight of these men, and he greeted them with the words, "This is
God's helping host," wherefore he called the place of their meeting
Mahanaim, Host.

After the warriors sent by Rebekah had satisfied his questions regarding
the welfare of his parents, they delivered his mother's message unto
him, thus: "I have heard, my son, that thy brother Esau hath gone forth
against thee on the road, with men of the children of Seir the Horite,
and therefore, my son, hearken to my voice, and take counsel with
thyself what thou wilt do, and when he cometh up to thee, supplicate
him, and do not speak roughly to him, and give him a present from what
thou possessest, and from what God has favored thee with. And when he
asketh thee concerning thy affairs, conceal nothing from him, perhaps he
may turn from his anger against thee, and thou wilt thereby save thy
soul, thou and all belonging to thee, for it is thy duty to honor him,
since he is thy elder brother."

And when Jacob heard the words of his mother which the messengers had
spoken to him, he lifted up his voice and wept bitterly, and did as his
mother commanded him.

He sent messengers to Esau to placate him, and they said unto him: "Thus
speaketh thy servant Jacob: My lord, think not that the blessing which
my father bestowed upon me profited me. Twenty years I served Laban, and
he deceived me, and changed my hire ten times, as thou well knowest. Yet
did I labor sorely in his house, and God saw my affliction, my labor,
and the work of my hands, and afterward He caused me to find grace and
favor in the sight of Laban. And through God's great mercy and kindness,
I acquired oxen and asses and cattle and men-servants and maid servants.
And now I am coming to my country and to my home, to my father and
mother, who are in the land of Canaan. And I have sent to let my lord
know all this in order to find favor in the eyes of my lord, so that he
may not imagine that I have become a man of substance, or that the
blessing with which my father blessed me has benefited me."

Furthermore spake the messengers: "Why dost thou envy me in respect to
the blessing wherewith my father blessed me? Is it that the sun shineth
in my land, and not in thine? Or doth the dew and the rain fall only
upon my land, and not upon thine? If my father blessed me with the dew
of heaven, he blessed thee with the fatness of the earth, and if he
spoke to me, Peoples will serve thee, he hath said unto thee, By thy
sword shalt thou live. How long, then, wilt thou continue to envy me?
Come, now, let us set up a covenant between us, that we will share
equally all the vexations that may occur."

Esau would not agree to this proposal, his friends dissuaded him
therefrom, saying, "Accept not these conditions, for God hath said to
Abraham, Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land
that is not theirs, and shall serve the people thereof, and the aliens
shall afflict them four hundred years. Wait, therefore, until Jacob and
his family go down into Egypt to pay off this debt."

Jacob also sent word to Esau, saying: "Though I dwelt with that heathen
of the heathen, Laban, yet have I not forgotten my God, but I fulfil the
six hundred and thirteen commandments of the Torah. If thy mind be set
upon peace, thou wilt find me ready for peace. But if thy desire be war,
thou wilt find me ready for war. I have with me men of valor and
strength, they have but to utter a word, and God fulfils it. I tarried
with Laban until Joseph should be born, he who is destined to subdue
thee. And though my descendants be held in bondage in this world, yet a
day will come when they will rule over their rulers."

In reply to all these gentle words, Esau spoke with arrogance: "Surely I
have heard, and truly it has been told unto me what Jacob has been to
Laban, who brought him up in his house, and gave him his daughters for
wives, and he begot sons and daughters, and abundantly increased in
wealth and riches in Laban's house and with his help. And when he saw
that his wealth was abundant and his riches were great, he fled with all
belonging to him from Laban's house, and he carried away Laban's
daughters from their father as captives of the sword, without telling
him of it. And not only to Laban hath Jacob done thus, but also unto me
hath he done so, and he hath twice supplanted me, and shall I be silent?
Now, I have this day come with my camp to meet him, and I will do unto
him according to the desire of my heart."

The messengers dispatched by Jacob now returned to him, and reported
these words of Esau unto him. They also told him that his brother was
advancing against him with an army consisting of four hundred crowned
heads, each leading a host of four hundred men. "It is true, thou art
his brother, and thou treatest him as a brother should," they said to
Jacob, "but he is an Esau, thou must be made aware of his villainy."

Jacob bore in mind the promise of God, that He would bring him back to
his father's house in peace, yet the report about his brother's purpose
alarmed him greatly. A pious man may never depend upon promises of
earthly good. God does not keep the promise if he is guilty of the
smallest conceivable trespass, and Jacob feared that he might have
forfeited happiness by reason of a sin committed by him. Moreover, he
was anxious lest Esau be the one favored by God, inasmuch as he had
these twenty years been fulfilling two Divine commands that Jacob had
had to disregard. Esau had been living in the Holy Land, Jacob outside
of it; the former had been in attendance upon his parents, the latter
dwelling at a distance from them. And much as he feared defeat, Jacob
also feared the reverse, that he might be victorious over Esau, or might
even slay his brother, which would be as bad as to be slain by him. And
he was depressed by another apprehension, that his father had died, for
he reasoned that Esau would not take such warlike steps against his own
brother, were his father still alive.

When his wives saw the anxiety that possessed Jacob, they began to
quarrel with him, and reproach him for having taken them away from their
father's house, though he knew that such danger threatened from Esau.
Then Jacob determined to apply the three means that might save him from
the fate impending: he would cry to God for help, appease Esau's wrath
with presents, and hold himself in readiness for war if the worst came
to the worst.

He prayed to God: "O Thou God of my father Abraham, and God of my father
Isaac, God of all who walk in the ways of the pious and do like unto
them! I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and of all the
truth, which Thou hast showed unto Thy servant. O Lord of the world, as
Thou didst not suffer Laban to execute his evil designs against me, so
also bring to naught the purpose of Esau, who desireth to slay me. O
Lord of the world, in Thy Torah which Thou wilt give us on Mount Sinai
it is written, And whether it be cow or ewe, ye shall not kill it and
her young both in one day. If this wretch should come and murder my
children and their mothers at the same time, who would then desire to
read Thy Torah which Thou wilt give us on Mount Sinai? And yet Thou
didst speak, For the sake of thy merits and for the merits of thy
fathers I will do good unto thee, and in the future world thy children
shall be as numerous as the sand of the sea."

As Jacob prayed for his own deliverance, so also he prayed for the
salvation of his descendants, that they might not be annihilated by the
descendants of Esau.

Such was the prayer of Jacob when he saw Esau approaching from afar, and
God heard his petition and looked upon his tears, and He gave him the
assurance that for his sake his descendants, too, would be redeemed from
all distress.

Then the Lord sent three angels, and they went before Esau, and they
appeared unto Esau and his people as hundreds and thousands of men
riding upon horses. They were furnished with all sorts of weapons, and
divided into four columns. And one division went on, and they found Esau
coming with four hundred men, and the division ran toward them, and
terrified them. Esau fell off his horse in alarm, and all his men
separated from him in great fear, while the approaching column shouted
after them, "Verily, we are the servants of Jacob, the servant of God,
and who can stand against us?" Esau then said unto them, "O, then my
lord and brother Jacob is your lord, whom I have not seen these twenty
years, and now that I have this day come to see him, do you treat me in
this manner?" The angels answered, "As the Lord liveth, were not Jacob
thy brother, we had not left one remaining of thee and thy people, but
on account of Jacob we will do nothing to thee." This division passed
from Esau, and when he had gone from there about a league, the second
division came toward him, and they also did unto Esau and his men as the
first had done to them, and when they permitted him to go on, the third
came and did like the first, and when the third had passed also, and
Esau still continued with his men on the road to Jacob, the fourth
division came and did to them as the others had done. And Esau was
greatly afraid of his brother, because he thought that the four columns
of the army which he had encountered were the servants of Jacob.

After Jacob had made an end of praying, he divided all that journeyed
with him into two companies, and he set over them Damesek and Alinus,
the two sons of Eliezer, the bondman of Abraham, and their sons. Jacob's
example teaches us not to conceal the whole of our fortune in one
hiding-place, else we run the danger of losing everything at one stroke.

Of his cattle he sent a part to Esau as a present, first dividing it
into three droves in order to impress his brother more. When Esau
received the first drove, he would think he had the whole gift that had
been sent to him, and suddenly he would be astonished by the appearance
of the second portion, and again by the third. Jacob knew his brother's
avarice only too well.

The men who were the bearers of Jacob's present to Esau were charged
with the following message, "This is an offering to my lord Esau from
his slave Jacob." But God took these words of Jacob in ill part, saying,
"Thou profanest what is holy when thou callest Esau lord." Jacob excused
himself; he was but flattering the wicked in order to escape death at
his hands.

### JACOB WRESTLES WITH THE ANGEL

The servants of Jacob went before him with the present for Esau, and he
followed with his wives and his children. As he was about to pass over
the ford of Jabbok, he observed a shepherd, who likewise had sheep and
camels. The stranger approached Jacob and proposed that they should ford
the stream together, and help each other move their cattle over, and
Jacob assented, on the condition that his possessions should be put
across first. In the twinkling of an eye Jacob's sheep were transferred
to the other side of the stream by the shepherd. Then the flocks of the
shepherd were to be moved by Jacob, but no matter how many he took over
to the opposite bank, always there remained some on the hither shore.
There was no end to the cattle, though Jacob labored all the night
through. At last he lost patience, and he fell upon the shepherd and
caught him by the throat, crying out, "O thou wizard, thou wizard, at
night no enchantment succeeds!" The angel thought, "Very well, let him
know once for all with whom he has had dealings," and with his finger he
touched the earth, whence fire burst forth. But Jacob said, "What! thou
thinkest thus to affright me, who am made wholly of fire?"

The shepherd was no less a personage than the archangel Michael, and in
his combat with Jacob he was assisted by the whole host of angels under
his command. He was on the point of inflicting a dangerous wound upon
Jacob, when God appeared, and all the angels, even Michael himself, felt
their strength ooze away. Seeing that he could not prevail against
Jacob, the archangel touched the hollow of his thigh, and injured him,
and God rebuked him, saying, "Dost thou act as is seemly, when thou
causest a blemish in My priest Jacob?" Michael said in astonishment,
"Why, it is I who am Thy priest!" But God said, "Thou art My priest in
heaven, and he is My priest on earth." Thereupon Michael summoned the
archangel Raphael, saying, "My comrade, I pray thee, help me out of my
distress, for thou art charged with the healing of all disease," and
Raphael cured Jacob of the injury Michael had inflicted.

The Lord continued to reproach Michael, saying, "Why didst thou do harm
unto My first-born son?" and the archangel answered, "I did it only to
glorify Thee," and then God appointed Michael as the guardian angel of
Jacob and his seed unto the end of all generations, with these words:
"Thou art a fire, and so is Jacob a fire; thou art the head of the
angels, and he is the head of the nations; thou art supreme over all the
angels, and he is supreme over all the peoples. Therefore he who is
supreme over all the angels shall be appointed unto him who is supreme
over all the peoples, that he may entreat mercy for him from the Supreme
One over all."

Then Michael said unto Jacob, "How is it possible that thou who couldst
prevail against me, the most distinguished of the angels, art afraid of
Esau?"

When the day broke, Michael said to Jacob, "Let me go, for the day
breaketh," but Jacob held him back, saying, "Art thou a thief, or a
gambler with dice, that thou fearest the daylight?" At that moment
appeared many different hosts of angels, and they called unto Michael:
"Ascend, O Michael, the time of song hath come, and if thou art not in
heaven to lead the choir, none will sing." And Michael entreated Jacob
with supplications to let him go, for he feared the angels of 'Arabot
would consume him with fire, if he were not there to start the songs of
praise at the proper time. Jacob said, "I will not let thee go, except
thou bless me," whereto Michael made reply: "Who is greater, the servant
or the son? I am the servant, and thou art the son. Why, then, cravest
thou my blessing?" Jacob urged as an argument, "The angels that visited
Abraham did not leave without blessing him," but Michael held, "They
were sent by God for that very purpose, and I was not." Yet Jacob
insisted upon his demand, and Michael pleaded with him, saying, "The
angels that betrayed a heavenly secret were banished from their place
for one hundred and thirty eight years. Dost thou desire that I should
acquaint thee with what would cause my banishment likewise?" In the end
the angel nevertheless had to yield; Jacob could not be moved, and
Michael took counsel with himself thus: "I will reveal a secret to him,
and if God demands to know why I revealed it, I will make answer, Thy
children stand upon their wishes with Thee, and Thou dost yield to them.
How, then, could I have left Jacob's wish unfulfilled?"

Then Michael spoke to Jacob, saying: "A day will come when God will
reveal Himself unto thee, and He will change thy name, and I shall be
present when He changeth it. Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but
Israel, for happy thou, of woman born, who didst enter the heavenly
palace, and didst escape thence with thy life." And Michael blessed
Jacob with the words, "May it be the will of God that thy descendants be
as pious as thou art."

At the same time the archangel reminded Jacob that he had promised to
give a tithe of his possessions unto God, and at once Jacob separated
five hundred and fifty head of cattle from his herds, which counted
fifty-five hundred. Then Michael went on, "But thou hast sons, and of
them thou hast not set apart the tenth." Jacob proceeded to pass his
sons in review: Reuben, Joseph, Dan, and Gad being the first-born, each
of his mother, were exempt, and there remained but eight sons, and when
he had named them, down to Benjamin, he had to go back and begin over
again with Simon, the ninth, and finish with Levi as the tenth.

Michael took Levi with him into heaven, and presented him before God,
saying, "O Lord of the world, this one is Thy lot, and the tenth
belonging unto Thee," and God stretched forth His hand and blessed Levi
with the blessing that his children should be the servants of God on
earth as the angels were His servants on high. Michael spoke again,
"Doth not a king provide for the sustenance of his servants?" whereupon
God appointed for the Levites all that was holy unto the Lord.

Then Jacob spoke to the angel: "My father conferred the blessing upon me
that was intended for Esau, and now I desire to know whether thou wilt
acknowledge the blessing as mine, or wilt bring charges against me on
account of it." And the angel said: "I acknowledge the blessing to be
thine by right. Thou didst not gain it by craft and cunning, and I and
all the heavenly powers recognize it to be valid, for thou hast shown
thyself master over the mighty powers of the heavens as over Esau and
his legions."

And even then Jacob would not let the angel depart, he had to reveal his
name to him first, and the angel made known to him that it was Israel,
the same name that Jacob would once bear.

At last the angel departed, after Jacob had blessed him, and Jacob
called the place of wrestling Penuel, the same place to which before he
had given the name Mahanaim, for both words have but one meaning, the
place of encounter with angels.

### THE MEETING BETWEEN ESAU AND JACOB

At the break of day the angel left off from wrestling with Jacob. The
dawn on that day was of particularly short duration. The sun rose two
hours before his time, by way of compensation for having set early, on
the day on which Jacob passed Mount Moriah on his journey to Haran, to
induce him to turn aside and lodge for a night on the future Temple
place. Indeed, the power of the sun on this same day was altogether
remarkable. He shone with the brilliance and ardor with which he was
invested during the six days of the creation, and as he will shine at
the end of days, to make whole the halt and the blind among the Jews and
to consume the heathen. This same healing and devastating property he
had on that day, too, for Jacob was cured, while Esau and his princes
were all but burnt up by his terrible heat.

Jacob was in dire need of healing lotions for the injury he had
sustained in the encounter with the angel. The combat between them had
been grim, the dust whirled up by the scuffle rose to the very throne of
God. Though Jacob prevailed against his huge opponent, as big as
one-third of the whole world, throwing him to the ground and keeping him
pinned down, yet the angel had injured him by clutching at the sinew of
the hip which is upon the hollow of the thigh, so that it was
dislocated, and Jacob halted upon his thigh. The healing power of the
sun restored him, nevertheless his children took it upon themselves not
to eat the sinew of the hip which is upon the hollow of the thigh, for
they reproached themselves with having been the cause of his mishap,
they should not have left him alone in that night.

Now, although Jacob had prepared for the worst, for open hostilities
even, yet when he saw Esau and his men, he thought it discreet to make
separate divisions of the households of Leah, Rachel, and the handmaids,
and divide the children unto each of them. And he put the handmaids and
their children foremost, and Leah and her children after, and Rachel and
Joseph hindermost. It was the stratagem which the fox used with the
lion. Once upon a time the king of beasts was wroth with his subjects,
and they looked hither and thither for a spokesman who mastered the art
of appeasing their ruler. The fox offered himself for the undertaking,
saying, "I know three hundred fables which will allay his fury." His
offer was accepted with joy. On the way to the lion, the fox suddenly
stood still, and in reply to the questions put to him, he said, "I have
forgotten one hundred of the three hundred fables." "Never mind," said
those accompanying him, "two hundred will serve the purpose." A little
way further on the fox again stopped suddenly, and, questioned again, he
confessed that he had forgotten half of the two hundred remaining
fables. The animals with him still consoled him that the hundred he knew
would suffice. But the fox halted a third time, and then he admitted
that his memory had failed him entirely, and he had forgotten all the
fables he knew, and he advised that every animal approach the king on
his own account and endeavor to appease his anger. At first Jacob had
had courage enough to enter the lists with Esau in behalf of all with
him. Now he came to the conclusion to let each one try to do what he
could for himself.

However, Jacob was too fond a father to expose his family to the first
brunt of the danger. He himself passed over before all the rest, saying,
"It is better that they attack me than my children." After him came the
handmaids and their children. His reason for placing them there was
that, if Esau should be overcome by passion for the women, and try to
violate them, he would thus meet the handmaids first, and in the
meantime Jacob would have the chance of preparing for more determined
resistance in the defense of the honor of his wives. Joseph and Rachel
came last, and Joseph walked in front of his mother, though Jacob had
ordered the reverse. But the son knew both the beauty of his mother and
the lustfulness of his uncle, and therefore he tried to hide Rachel from
the sight of Esau.

In the vehemence of his rage against Jacob, Esau vowed that he would not
slay him with bow and arrow, but would bite him dead with his mouth, and
suck his blood. But he was doomed to bitter disappointment, for Jacob's
neck turned as hard as ivory, and in his helpless fury Esau could but
gnash his teeth. The two brothers were like the ram and the wolf. A wolf
wanted to tear a ram in pieces, and the ram defended himself with his
horns, striking them deep into the flesh of the wolf. Both began to
howl, the wolf because he could not secure his prey, and the ram from
fear that the wolf renew his attacks. Esau bawled because his teeth were
hurt by the ivory-like flesh of Jacob's neck, and Jacob feared that his
brother would make a second attempt to bite him.

Esau addressed a question to his brother. "Tell me," he said, "what was
the army I met?" for on his march against Jacob he had had a most
peculiar experience with a great host of forty thousand warriors. It
consisted of various kinds of troops, armor-clad soldiers walking on
foot, mounted on horses, and seated in chariots, and they all threw
themselves upon Esau when they met. He demanded to know whence they
came, and the strange soldiers hardly interrupted their savage onslaught
to reply that they belonged to Jacob. Only when Esau told them that
Jacob was his brother did they leave off, saying, "Woe to us if our
master hears that we did thee harm." This was the army and the encounter
Esau inquired about as soon as he met his brother. But the army was a
host of angels, who had the appearance of warriors to Esau and his men.
Also the messengers sent by Jacob to Esau had been angels, for no mere
human being could be induced to go forth and face the recreant.

Jacob now gave Esau the presents intended for him, a tenth of all his
cattle, and also pearls and precious stones, and, besides, a falcon for
the chase. But even the animals refused to give up their gentle master
Jacob and become the property of the villain Esau. They all ran away
when Jacob wanted to hand them over to his brother, and the result was
that the only ones that reached Esau were the feeble and the lame, all
that could not make good their escape.

At first Esau declined the presents offered to him. Naturally, that was
a mere pretense. While refusing the gifts with words, he held his hand
outstretched ready to receive them. Jacob took the hint, and insisted
that he accept them, saying: "Nay, I pray thee, if now I have found
grace in thy sight, then receive my present at my hand, forasmuch as I
have seen thy face, as I have seen the face of angels, and thou art
pleased with me." The closing words were chosen with well-calculated
purpose. Jacob wanted Esau to derive the meaning that he had intercourse
with angels, and to be inspired with awe. Jacob was like the man invited
to a banquet by his mortal enemy who has been seeking an opportunity to
slay him. When the guest divines the purpose for which he has been
brought thither, he says to the host: "What a magnificent and delicious
meal this is! But once before in my life did I partake of one like it,
and that was when I was bidden by the king to his table"--enough to
drive terror to the heart of the would-be slayer. He takes good care not
to harm a man on such intimate terms with the king as to be invited to
his table!

Jacob had valid reason for recalling his encounter with the angel, for
it was the angel of Esau who had measured his strength with Jacob's, and
had been overcome.

As Esau accepted the presents of Jacob willingly on this first occasion,
so he continued to accept them for a whole year; daily Jacob gave him
presents as on the day of their meeting, for, he said, " 'A gift doth
blind the eyes of the wise,' and how much more doth it blind the wicked!
Therefore will I give him presents upon presents, perhaps he will let me
alone." Besides, he did not attach much value to the possessions he had
acquired outside of the Holy Land. Such possessions are not a blessing,
and he did not hesitate to part with them.

Beside the presents which Jacob gave Esau, he also paid out a large sum
of money to him for the Cave of Machpelah. Immediately upon his arrival
in the Holy Land he sold all he had brought with him from Haran, and a
pile of gold was the proceeds of the sale. He spoke to Esau, saying:
"Like me thou hast a share in the Cave of Machpelah, wilt thou take this
pile of gold for thy portion therein?" "What care I for the Cave?"
returned Esau. "Gold is what I want," and for his share in Machpelah he
took the gold realized from the sale of the possessions Jacob had
accumulated outside of the Holy Land. But God "filled the vacuum without
delay," and Jacob was as rich as before.

Wealth was not an object of desire to Jacob. He would have been well
content, in his own behalf and in behalf of his family, to resign all
earthly treasures in favor of Esau and his family. He said to Esau: "I
foresee that in future days suffering will be inflicted by thy children
upon mine. But I do not demur, thou mayest exercise thy dominion and
wear thy crown until the time when the Messiah springs from my loins,
and receives the rule from thee." These words spoken by Jacob will be
realized in days to come, when all the nations will rise up against the
kingdom of Edom, and take away one city after another from him, one
realm after another, until they reach Bet-Gubrin, and then the Messiah
will appear and assume his kingship. The angel of Edom will flee for
refuge to Bozrah, but God will appear there, and slay him, for though
Bozrah is one of the cities of refuge, yet will the Lord exercise the
right of the avenger therein. He will seize the angel by his hair, and
Elijah will slaughter him, letting the blood spatter the garments of
God. All this Jacob had in mind when he said to Esau, "Let my lord, I
pray thee, pass over before his servant, until I come unto my lord unto
Seir." Jacob himself never went to Seir. What he meant was the Messianic
time when Israel shall go to Seir, and take possession thereof.

Jacob tarried in Succoth a whole year, and he opened a house of learning
there. Then he journeyed on to Shechem, while Esau betook himself to
Seir, saying to himself, "How long shall I be a burden to my brother?"
for it was during Jacob's sojourn at Succoth that Esau received daily
presents from Jacob.

And Jacob, after abiding these many years in a strange land, came to
Shechem in peace, unimpaired in mind and body. He had forgotten none of
the knowledge he had acquired before; the gifts he gave to Esau did not
encroach upon his wealth; the injury inflicted by the angel that
wrestled with him had been healed, and likewise his children were sound
and healthy.

Jacob entered Shechem on a Friday, late in the afternoon, and his first
concern was to lay out the boundaries of the city, that the laws of the
Sabbath might not be transgressed. As soon as he was settled in the
place, he sent presents to the notables. A man must be grateful to a
city from which he derives benefits. No less did the common people enjoy
his bounty. For them he opened a market where he sold all wares at low
prices.

Also he lost no time in buying a parcel of ground, for it is the duty of
every man of substance who comes to the Holy Land from outside to make
himself the possessor of land there. He gave a hundred lambs for his
estate, a hundred yearling sheep, and a hundred pieces of money, and
received in return a bill of sale, to which he attached his signature,
using the letters Yod-He for it. And then he erected an altar to God
upon his land, and he said, "Thou art the Lord of all celestial things,
and I am the lord of all earthly things." But God said, "Not even the
overseer of the synagogue arrogates privileges in the synagogue, and
thou assumest lordship with a high hand? Forsooth, on the morrow thy
daughter will go abroad, and she shall be humbled."

### THE OUTRAGE AT SHECHEM

While Jacob and his sons were sitting in the house of learning, occupied
with the study of the Torah, Dinah went abroad to see the dancing and
singing women, whom Shechem had hired to dance and play in the streets
in order to entice her forth. Had she remained at home, nothing would
have happened to her. But she was a woman, and all women like to show
themselves in the street. When Shechem caught sight of her, he seized
her by main force, young though she was, and violated her in beastly
fashion.

This misfortune befell Jacob as a punishment for his excessive
self-confidence. In his negotiations with Laban, he had used the
expression, "My righteousness shall answer for me hereafter." Besides,
on his return to Palestine, when he was preparing to meet his brother,
he concealed his daughter Dinah in a chest, lest Esau desire to have her
for wife, and he be obliged to give her to him. God spoke to him,
saying: "Herein hast thou acted unkindly toward thy brother, and
therefore Dinah will have to marry Job, one that is neither circumcised
nor a proselyte. Thou didst refuse to give her to one that is
circumcised, and one that is uncircumcised will take her. Thou didst
refuse to give her to Esau in lawful wedlock, and now she will fall a
victim to the ravisher's illicit passion."

When Jacob heard that Shechem had defiled his daughter, he sent twelve
servants to fetch Dinah from Shechem's house, but Shechem went out to
them with his men, and drove them from his house, and he would not
suffer them to come unto Dinah, and he kissed and embraced her before
their eyes. Jacob then sent two maidens of his servants' daughters to
remain with Dinah in the house of Shechem. Shechem bade three of his
friends go to his father Hamor, the son of Haddakum, the son of Pered,
and say, "Get me this damsel to wife." Hamor tried at first to persuade
his son not to take a Hebrew woman to wife, but when Shechem persisted
in his request, he did according to the word of his son, and went forth
to communicate with Jacob concerning the matter. In the meanwhile the
sons of Jacob returned from the field, and, kindled with wrath, they
spoke unto their father, saying, "Surely death is due to this man and
his household, because the Lord God of the whole earth commanded Noah
and his children that man shall never rob nor commit adultery. Now,
behold, Shechem has ravaged and committed fornication with our sister,
and not one of all the people of the city spake a word to him." And
whilst they were speaking, Hamor came to speak to Jacob the words of his
son concerning Dinah, and after he ceased to speak, Shechem himself came
to Jacob and repeated the request made by his father. Simon and Levi
answered Hamor and Shechem deceitfully, saying: "All you have spoken
unto us we will do. And, behold, our sister is in your house, but keep
away from her until we send to our father Isaac concerning this matter,
for we can do nothing without his counsel. He knows the ways of our
father Abraham, and whatever he saith unto us we will tell you, we will
conceal nothing from you."

Shechem and his father went home thereafter, satisfied with the result
achieved, and when they had gone, the sons of Jacob asked him to seek
counsel and pretext in order to kill all the inhabitants of the city,
who had deserved this punishment on account of their wickedness. Then
Simon said to them: "I have good counsel to give you. Bid them be
circumcised. If they consent not, we shall take our daughter from them,
and go away. And if they consent to do this, then, when they are in
pain, we shall attack them and slay them." The next morning Shechem and
his father came again to Jacob, to speak concerning Dinah, and the sons
of Jacob spoke deceitfully to them, saying: "We told our father Isaac
all your words, and your words pleased him, but he said, that thus did
Abraham his father command him from God, that any man that is not of his
descendants, who desireth to take one of his daughters to wife, shall
cause every male belonging to him to be circumcised."

Shechem and his father hastened to do the wishes of the sons of Jacob,
and they persuaded also the men of the city to do likewise, for they
were greatly esteemed by them, being the princes of the land.

On the next day, Shechem and his father rose up early in the morning,
and they assembled all the men of the city, and they called for the sons
of Jacob, and they circumcised Shechem, his father, his five brothers,
and all the males in the city, six hundred and forty-five men and two
hundred and seventy-six lads. Haddakum, the grandfather of Shechem, and
his six brothers would not be circumcised, and they were greatly
incensed against the people of the city for submitting to the wishes of
the sons of Jacob.

In the evening of the second day, Shechem and his father sent to have
eight little children whom their mothers had concealed brought to them
to be circumcised. Haddakum and his six brothers sprang at the
messengers, and sought to slay them, and sought to slay also Shechem,
Hamor, and Dinah. They chided Shechem and his father for doing a thing
that their fathers had never done, which would raise the ire of the
inhabitants of the land of Canaan against them, as well as the ire of
all the children of Ham, and that on account of a Hebrew woman. Haddakum
and his brothers finished by saying: "Behold, to-morrow we will go and
assemble our Canaanitish brethren, and we will come and smite you and
all in whom you trust, that there shall not be a remnant left of you or
them."

When Hamor and his son Shechem and all the people of the city heard
this, they were sore afraid, and they repented what they had done, and
Shechem and his father answered Haddakum and his brothers: "Because we
saw that the Hebrews would not accede to our wishes concerning their
daughter, we did this thing, but when we shall have obtained our request
from them, we will then do unto them that which is in your hearts and in
ours, as soon as we shall become strong."

Dinah, who heard their words, hastened and dispatched one of her maidens
whom her father had sent to take care of her in Shechem's house, and
informed Jacob and his sons of the conspiracy plotted against them. When
the sons of Jacob heard this, they were filled with wrath, and Simon and
Levi swore, and said, "As the Lord liveth, by to-morrow there shall not
be a remnant left In the whole city."

They began the extermination by killing eighteen of the twenty young men
who had concealed themselves and were not circumcised, and two of them
fled and escaped to some lime pits that were in the city. Then Simon and
Levi slew all the city, not leaving a male over, and while they were
looking for spoils outside of the city, three hundred women rose against
them and threw stones and dust upon them, but Simon single-handed slew
them all, and returned to the city, where he joined Levi. Then they took
away from the people outside of the city their sheep, their oxen, their
cattle, and also the women and the little children, and they led all
these away, and took them to the city to their father Jacob. The number
of women whom they did not slay, but only took captive, was eighty-five
virgins, among them a young damsel of great beauty by the name of Bunah,
whom Simon took to wife. The number of the males which they took captive
and did not slay was forty-seven, and all these men and women were
servants to the sons of Jacob, and to their children after them, until
the day they left Egypt.

### A WAR FRUSTRATED

When Simon and Levi had gone from the city, the two young men who had
concealed themselves in the lime pits, and were not slain amongst the
people of the city, rose up, and they found the city desolate, without a
man, only weeping women, and they cried out, saying, "Behold, this is
the evil which the sons of Jacob did who destroyed one of the Canaanite
cities, and were not afraid of all the land of Canaan."

They left the city and went to Tappuah, and told the inhabitants all
that the sons of Jacob had done to the city of Shechem. Jashub, the king
of Tappuah, sent to Shechem to see whether these young men told the
truth, for he did not believe them, saying, "How could two men destroy a
large city like Shechem?" The messengers of Jashub returned, and they
reported, "The city is destroyed, not a man is left there, only weeping
women, neither are there flocks and cattle there, for all that was in
the city was taken away by the sons of Jacob."

Jashub wondered thereat, for the like had not been heard from the days
of Nimrod, and not even from the remotest times, that two men should be
able to destroy so large a city, and he decided to go to war against the
Hebrews, and avenge the cause of the people of Shechem. His counsellors
said to him: "If two of them laid waste a whole city, surely if thou
goest against them, they all will rise up against us, and destroy us.
Therefore, send to the kings round about, that we all together fight
against the sons of Jacob, and prevail against them."

The seven kings of the Amorites, when they heard the evil that the sons
of Jacob had done to the city of Shechem, assembled together, with all
their armies, ten thousand men, with drawn swords, and they came to
fight against the sons of Jacob. And Jacob was greatly afraid, and he
said to Simon and Levi, "Why have you brought such evil upon me? I was
at rest, and you provoked the inhabitants of the land against me by your
acts."

Then Judah spoke to his father: "Was it for naught that Simon and Levi
killed the inhabitants of Shechem? Verily, it was because Shechem
dishonored our sister, and transgressed the command of our God to Noah
and his children, and not one of the inhabitants of the city interfered
in the matter. Now, why art thou afraid, and why art thou displeased at
my brethren? Surely, our God, who delivered the city of Shechem and its
people into their hand, He will also deliver into our hands all the
Canaanitish kings who are coming against us. Now cast away thy fears,
and pray to God to assist us and deliver us."

Judah then addressed his brethren, saying: "The Lord our God is with us!
Fear naught, then! Stand ye forth, each man girt with his weapons of
war, his bow and his sword, and we will go and fight against the
uncircumcised. The Lord is our God, He will save us."

Jacob, his eleven sons, and one hundred servants belonging to Isaac, who
had come to their assistance, marched forward to meet the Amorites, a
people exceedingly numerous, like unto the sand upon the sea-shore. The
sons of Jacob sent unto their grandfather Isaac, at Hebron, requesting
him to pray unto the Lord to protect them from the hand of the
Canaanites, and he prayed as follows: "O Lord God, Thou didst promise my
father, saying, I will multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven, and
also me Thou didst promise that Thou wouldst establish Thy word to my
father. Now, O Lord, God of the whole world, pervert, I pray Thee, the
counsel of these kings, that they may not fight against my sons, and
impress the hearts of their kings and their people with the terror of my
sons, and bring down their pride that they turn away from my sons.
Deliver my sons and their servants from them with Thy strong hand and
outstretched arm, for power and might are in Thy hands to do all this."

Jacob also prayed unto God, and said: "O Lord God, powerful and exalted
God, who hast reigned from days of old, from then until now and forever!
Thou art He who stirreth up wars and causeth them to cease. In Thy hand
are power and might to exalt and to bring low. O may my prayer be
acceptable unto Thee, that Thou mayest turn to me with Thy mercies, to
impress the hearts of these kings and their people with the terror of my
sons, and terrify them and their camps, and with Thy great kindness
deliver all those that trust in Thee, for Thou art He who subdues the
peoples under us, and the nations under our feet."

God heard the prayers of Isaac and Jacob, and He filled the hearts of
all the advisers of the Canaanite kings with great fear and terror, and
when the kings, who were undecided whether to undertake a campaign
against the sons of Jacob, consulted them, they said: "Are you silly, or
is there no understanding in you, that you propose to fight with the
Hebrews? Why do you take delight in your own destruction this day?
Behold, two of them came to the city of Shechem without fear or terror,
and they put all the inhabitants of the city to the sword, no man stood
up against them, and how will you be able to fight with them all?"

The royal counsellors then proceeded to enumerate all the mighty things
God had done for Abraham, Jacob, and the sons of Jacob, such as had not
been done from days of old and by any of the gods of the nations. When
the kings heard all the words of their advisers, they were afraid of the
sons of Jacob, and they would not fight against them. They turned back
with their armies on that day, each to his own city. But the sons of
Jacob kept their station that day till evening, and seeing that the
kings did not advance to do battle with them in order to avenge the
inhabitants of Shechem whom they had killed, they returned home.

The wrath of the Lord descended upon the inhabitants of Shechem to the
uttermost on account of their wickedness. For they had sought to do unto
Sarah and Rebekah as they did unto Dinah, but the Lord had prevented
them. Also they had persecuted Abraham when he was a stranger, and they
had vexed his flocks when they were big with young, and Eblaen, one born
in his house, they had handled most shamefully. And thus they did to all
strangers, taking away their wives by force.

### THE WAR WITH THE NINEVITES

The destruction of Shechem by Simon and Levi terrified the heathen all
around. If two sons of Jacob had succeeded in ruining a great city like
Shechem, they argued, what would Jacob and all his sons accomplish
acting together? Jacob meanwhile left Shechem, hindered by none, and
with all his possessions he set out, to betake himself to his father
Isaac. But after an eight days' march he encountered a powerful army,
which had been dispatched from Nineveh to levy tribute upon the whole
world and subjugate it. On coming in the vicinity of Shechem, this army
heard to what the city had been exposed at the hands of the sons of
Jacob, and fury seized the men, and they resolved to make war upon
Jacob.

But Jacob said to his sons: "Fear not, God will be your helper, and He
will fight for you against your enemies. Only you must put away from you
the strange gods in your possession, and you must purify yourselves, and
wash your garments clean."

Girt with his sword, Jacob advanced against the enemy, and in the first
onslaught he slew twelve thousand of the weak in the army. Then Judah
spake to him, and said, "Father, thou art tired and exhausted, let me
fight the enemy alone." And Jacob replied, saying, "Judah, my son, I
know thy strength and thy bravery, that they are exceeding great, so
that none in the world is like unto thee therein." His countenance like
a lion's and inflamed with wrath, Judah attacked the army, and slew
twelve myriads of tried and famous warriors. The battle raged hot in
front and in the rear, and Levi his brother hastened to his aid, and
together they won a victory over the Ninevites. Judah alone slew five
thousand more soldiers, and Levi dealt blows right and left with such
vigor that the men of the enemy's army fell like grain under the scythe
of the reaper.

Alarmed about their fate, the people of Nineveh said: "How long shall we
fight with these devils? Let us return to our land, lest they
exterminate us root and branch, without leaving a remnant." But their
king desired to restrain them, and he said: "O ye heroes, ye men of
might and valor, have you lost your senses that you ask to return to
your land? Is this your bravery? After you have subdued many kingdoms
and countries, ye are not able to hold out against twelve men? If the
nations and the kings whom we have made tributary to ourselves hear of
this, they will rise up against us as a man, and make a laughing-stock
of us, and do with us according to their desire. Take courage, ye men of
the great city of Nineveh, that your honor and your name be exalted, and
you become not a mockery in the mouth of your enemies."

These words of their king inspired the warriors to continue the
campaign. They sent messengers to all the lands to ask for help, and,
reinforced by their allies, the Ninevites assaulted Jacob a second time.
He spoke to his sons, saying, "Take courage and be men, fight against
your enemies." His twelve sons then took up their stand in twelve
different places, leaving considerable intervals between one and
another, and Jacob, a sword in his right hand and a bow in his left,
advanced to the combat. It was a desperate encounter for him. He had to
ward off the enemy to the right and the left. Nevertheless he inflicted
a severe blow, and when a band of two thousand men beset him, he leapt
up in the air and over them and vanished from their sight. Twenty-two
myriads he slew on this day, and when evening came he planned to flee
under cover of darkness. But suddenly ninety thousand men appeared, and
he was compelled to continue the fight. He rushed at them with his
sword, but it broke, and he had to defend himself by grinding huge rocks
into lime powder, and this he threw at the enemy and blinded them so
that they could see nothing. Luckily, darkness was about to fall, and he
could permit himself to take rest for the night.

In the morning, Judah said to Jacob, "Father, thou didst fight the whole
of yesterday, and thou art weary and exhausted. Let me fight this day."
When the warriors caught sight of Judah's lion face and his lion teeth,
and heard his lion voice, they were greatly afraid. Judah hopped and
jumped over the army like a flea, from one warrior to the next, raining
blows down upon them incessantly, and by evening he had slain eighty
thousand and ninety-six men, armed with swords and bows. But fatigue
overcame him, and Zebulon took up his station at his brother's left
hand, and mowed down eighty thousand of the enemy. Meantime Judah
regained some of his strength, and, rising up in wrath and fury, and
gnashing his teeth with a noise like unto thunder claps in midsummer, he
put the army to flight. It ran a distance of eighteen miles, and Judah
could enjoy a respite that night.

But the army reappeared on the morrow, ready for battle again, to take
revenge on Jacob and his children. They blew their trumpets, whereupon
Jacob spake to his sons, "Go forth and fight with your enemies."
Issachar and Gad said that this day they would take the combat upon
themselves, and their father bade them do it while their brothers kept
guard and held themselves in readiness to aid and relieve the two
combatants when they showed signs of weariness and exhaustion.

The leaders of the day slew forty-eight thousand warriors, and put to
flight twelve myriads more, who concealed themselves in a cave. Issachar
and Gad fetched trees from the woods, piled the trunks up in front of
the opening of the cave, and set fire to them. When the fire blazed with
a fierce flame, the warriors spoke, saying: "Why should we stay in this
cave and perish with the smoke and the heat? Rather will we go forth and
fight with our enemies, then we may have a chance of saving ourselves."
They left the cave, going through openings at the side, and they
attacked Issachar and Gad in front and behind. Dan and Naphtali saw the
plight of their brothers and ran to their assistance. They laid about
with their swords, hewing a way for themselves to Issachar and Gad, and,
united with them, they, too, opposed the foe.

It was the third day of the conflict, and the Ninevites were reinforced
by an army as numerous as the sand on the sea-shore. All the sons of
Jacob united to oppose it, and they routed the host. But when they
pursued after the enemy, the fugitives faced about and resumed the
battle, saying: "Why should we run away? Let us rather fight them,
perhaps we may be victorious, now they are weary." A stubborn combat
ensued, and when Jacob saw the vehement attack upon his children, he
himself sprang into the thick of the battle and dealt blows right and
left. Nevertheless the heathen were victorious, and succeeded in
separating Judah from his brethren. As soon as Jacob was aware of the
peril of his son, he whistled, and Judah responded, and his brethren
hastened to his aid. Judah was fatigued and parched with thirst, and
there was no water for him to drink, but he dug his finger into the
ground with such force that water gushed out in the sight of the whole
army. Then said one warrior to another, "I will flee before these
devils, for God fights on their side," and he and all the army fled
precipitately, pursued by the sons of Jacob. Soldiers without number
they slew, and then they went back to their tents. On their return they
noticed that Joseph was missing, and they feared he had been killed or
taken captive. Naphtali ran after the retreating enemy, to make search
for Joseph, and he found him still fighting against the Ninevite army.
He joined Joseph, and killed countless soldiers, and of the fugitives
many drowned, and the men that were besetting Joseph ran off and left
him in safety.

At the end of the war Jacob continued his journey, unhindered, to his
father Isaac.

### THE WAR WITH THE AMORITES

At first the people that lived round about Shechem made no attempt to
molest Jacob, who had returned thither after a while, together with his
household, to take up his abode there and establish himself. But at the
end of seven years the heathen began to harass him. The kings of the
Amorites assembled together against the sons of Jacob to slay them in
the Valley of Shechem. "Is it not enough," they said, "that they have
slain all the men of Shechem? Should they be permitted now to take
possession of their land, too?" and they advanced to render battle.

Judah leapt into the midst of the ranks of the foot soldiers of the
allied kings, and slew first of all Jashub, the king of Tappuah, who was
clad in iron and brass from top to toe. The king was mounted, and from
his horse he cast his spears downward with both hands, in front of him
and in back, without ever missing his aim, for he was a mighty warrior,
and he could throw javelins with one hand or the other. Nevertheless
Judah feared neither him nor his prowess. He ran toward him, snatching a
stone of sixty sela'im from the ground and hurling it at him. Jashub was
at a distance of one hundred and seventy-seven ells and one-third of an
ell, and, protected with iron armor and throwing spears, he moved
forward upon Judah. But Judah struck him on his shield with the stone,
and unhorsed him. When the king attempted to rise, Judah hastened to his
side to slay him before he could get on his feet. But Jashub was nimble,
he stood ready to attack Judah, shield to shield, and he drew his sword
to cut off Judah's head. Quickly Judah raised his shield to catch the
blow upon it, but it broke in pieces. What did Judah now? He wrested the
shield of his opponent away from him, and swung his sword against
Jashub's feet, cutting them off above the ankles. The king fell
prostrate, his sword slipped from his grasp, and Judah hastened to him
and severed his head from his body.

While Judah was removing the armor of his slain adversary, nine of
Jashub's followers appeared. Judah slung a stone against the head of the
first of them that approached him, with such force that he dropped his
shield, which Judah snatched from the ground and used to defend himself
against his eight assailants. His brother Levi came and stood next to
him, and shot off an arrow that killed Elon, king of Gaash, and then
Judah killed the eight men. And his father Jacob came and killed Zerori
king of Shiloh. None of the heathen could prevail against these sons of
Jacob, they had not the courage to stand up before them, but took to
flight, and the sons of Jacob pursued after them, and each slew a
thousand men of the Amorites on that day, before the going down of the
sun. And the other sons of Jacob set forth from the Hill of Shechem,
where they had taken up their stand, and they also pursued after them as
far as Hazor. Before this city they had another severe encounter with
the enemy, more severe than that in the Valley of Shechem. Jacob let his
arrows fly, and slew Pirathon king of Hazor, and then Pasusi king of
Sartan, Laban king of Aram, and Shebir king of Mahanaim.

Judah was the first to mount the walls of Hazor. As he approached the
top, four warriors attacked him, but he slew them without stopping in
his ascent, and before his brother Naphtali could bring him succor.
Naphtali followed him, and the two stood upon the wall, Judah to the
right and Naphtali to the left, and thence they dealt out death to the
warriors. The other sons of Jacob followed their two brothers in turn,
and made an end of exterminating the heathen host on that day. They
subjugated Hazor, slew the warriors thereof, let no man escape with his
life, and despoiled the city of all therein.

On the day following they went to Sartan, and again a bloody battle took
place. Sartan was situated upon high land, and the hill before the city
was likewise very high, so that none could come near unto it, and also
none could come near unto the citadel, because the wall thereof was
high. Nevertheless they made themselves masters of the city. They scaled
the walls of the citadel, Judah on the east side being the first to
ascend, then Gad on the west side, Simon and Levi on the north, and
Reuben and Dan on the south, and Naphtali and Issachar set fire to the
hinges upon which the gates of the city were hung.

In the same way the sons of Jacob subdued five other cities, Tappuah,
Arbel, Shiloh, Mahanaim, and Gaash, making an end of all of them in five
days. On the sixth day all the Amorites assembled, and they came to
Jacob and his sons unarmed, bowed down before them, and sued for peace.
And the sons of Jacob made peace with the heathen, who ceded Timna to
them, and all the land of Harariah. In that day also Jacob concluded
peace with them, and they made restitution to the sons of Jacob for all
the cattle they had taken, two head for one, and they restored all the
spoil they had carried off. And Jacob turned to go to Timna, and Judah
went to Arbel, and thenceforth the Amorites troubled them no more.

### ISAAC BLESSES LEVI AND JUDAH

If a man voweth a vow, and he does not fulfil it in good time, he will
stumble through three grave sins, idolatry, unchastity, and bloodshed.
Jacob had been guilty of not accomplishing promptly the vow he had taken
upon himself at Beth-el, and therefore punishment overtook him--his
daughter was dishonored, his sons slew men, and they kept the idols
found among the spoils of Shechem. Therefore, when Jacob prostrated
himself before God after the bloody outrage at Shechem, He bade him
arise, and go to Beth-el and accomplish the vow he had vowed there.
Before Jacob set out for the holy place to do the bidding of God, he
took the idols which were in the possession of his sons, and the
teraphim which Rachel had stolen from her father, and he shivered them
in pieces, and buried the bits under an oak upon Mount Gerizim,
uprooting the tree with one hand, concealing the remains of the idols in
the hollow left in the earth, and planting the oak again with one hand.

Among the destroyed idols was one in the form of a dove, and this the
Samaritans dug up later and worshipped.

On reaching Beth-el he erected an altar to the Lord, and on a pillar he
set up the stone whereon he had rested his head during the night which
he had passed there on his journey to Haran. Then he bade his parents
come to Beth-el and take part in his sacrifice. But Isaac sent him a
message, saying, "O my son Jacob, that I might see thee before I die,"
whereupon Jacob hastened to his parents, taking Levi and Judah with him.
When his grandchildren stepped before Isaac, the darkness that shrouded
his eyes dropped away, and he said, "My son, are these thy children, for
they resemble thee?" And the spirit of prophecy entered his mouth, and
he grasped Levi with his right hand and Judah with his left in order to
bless them, and he spoke these words to Levi: "May the Lord bring thee
and thy seed nigh unto Him before all flesh, that ye serve in His
sanctuary like the Angel of the Face and the Holy Angels. Princes,
judges, and rulers shall they be unto all the seed of the children of
Jacob. The word of God they will proclaim in righteousness, and all His
judgments they will execute in justice, and they will make manifest His
ways unto the children of Jacob, and unto Israel His paths." And unto
Judah he spake, saying: "Be ye princes, thou and one of thy sons, over
the sons of Jacob. In thee shall be the help of Jacob, and the salvation
of Israel shall be found in thee. And when thou sittest upon the throne
of the glory of thy justice, perfect peace shall reign over all the seed
of the children of my beloved Abraham."

On the morrow, Isaac told his son that he would not accompany him to
Beth-el on account of his great age, but he bade him not delay longer to
fulfil his vow, and gave him permission to take his mother Rebekah with
him to the holy place. And Rebekah and her nurse Deborah went to Beth-el
with Jacob.

### JOY AND SORROW IN THE HOUSE OF JACOB

Deborah, the nurse of Rebekah, and some of the servants of Isaac had
been sent to Jacob by his mother, while he still abode with Laban, to
summon him home at the end of his fourteen years' term of service. As
Jacob did not at once obey his mother's behest, the two servants of
Isaac returned to their master, but Deborah remained with Jacob then and
always. Therefore, when Deborah died in Beth-el, Jacob mourned for her,
and he buried her below Beth-el under the palm-tree, the same under
which the prophetess Deborah sat later, when the children of Israel came
to her for judgment.

But a short time elapsed after the death of the nurse Deborah, and
Rebekah died, too. Her passing away was not made the occasion for public
mourning. The reason was that, as Abraham was dead, Isaac blind, and
Jacob away from home, there remained Esau as the only mourner to appear
in public and represent her family, and beholding that villain, it was
feared, might tempt a looker-on to cry out, "Accursed be the breasts
that gave thee suck." To avoid this, the burial of Rebekah took place at
night.

God appeared unto Jacob to comfort him in his grief, and with Him
appeared the heavenly family. It was a sign of grace, for all the while
the sons of Jacob had been carrying idols with them the Lord had not
revealed Himself to Jacob. At this time God announced to Jacob the birth
of Benjamin soon to occur, and the birth of Manasseh and Ephraim, who
also were to be founders of tribes, and furthermore He told him that
these three would count kings among their descendants, Saul and
Ish-bosheth, of the seed of Benjamin, Jeroboam the Ephraimite, and Jehu
of the tribe of Manasseh. In this vision, God confirmed the change of
his name from Jacob to Israel, promised him by the angel with whom he
had wrestled on entering the Holy Land, and finally God revealed to him
that he would be the last of the three with whose names the Name of God
would appear united, for God is called only the God of Abraham, the God
of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, and never the God of any one else.

In token of this revelation from God, Jacob set up a pillar of stone,
and he poured out a drink offering thereon, as in a later day the
priests were to offer libations in the Temple on the Feast of
Tabernacles, and the libation brought by Jacob at Beth-el was as much as
all the waters in the Sea of Tiberias.

At the time when Deborah and Rebekah died, occurred also the death of
Rachel, at the age of thirty-six, but not before her prayer was heard,
that she bear Jacob a second son, for she died in giving birth to
Benjamin. Twelve years she had borne no child, then she fasted twelve
days, and her petition was granted her. She brought forth the youngest
son of Jacob, whom he called Benjamin, the son of days, because he was
born in his father's old age, and with him a twin sister was born.

Rachel was buried in the way to Ephrath, because Jacob, gifted with
prophetic spirit, foresaw that the exiles would pass this place on their
march to Babylon, and as they passed, Rachel would entreat God's mercy
for the poor outcasts.

Jacob journeyed on to Jerusalem.

During Rachel's lifetime, her couch had always stood in the tent of
Jacob. After her death, he ordered the couch of her handmaid Bilhah to
be carried thither. Reuben was sorely vexed thereat, and he said, "Not
enough that Rachel alive curtailed the rights of my mother, she must
needs give her annoyance also after death!" He went and took the couch
of his mother Leah and placed it in Jacob's tent instead of Bilhah's
couch. Reuben's brothers learned of his disrespectful act from Asher. He
had found it out in one way or another, and had told it to his brethren,
who ruptured their relations with him, for they would have nothing to do
with an informer, and they did not become reconciled with Asher until
Reuben himself confessed his transgression. For it was not long before
Reuben recognized that he had acted reprehensibly toward his father, and
he fasted and put on sackcloth, and repented of his misdeed. He was the
first among men to do penance, and therefore God said to him: "Since the
beginning of the world it hath not happened that a man hath sinned and
then repented thereof. Thou art the first to do penance, and as thou
livest, a prophet of thy seed, Hosea, shall be the first to proclaim, 'O
Israel, return.'"

### ESAU'S CAMPAIGN AGAINST JACOB

When Isaac felt his end approaching, he called his two sons to him, and
charged them with his last wish and will, and gave them his blessing. He
said: "I adjure you by the exalted Name, the praised, honored, glorious,
immutable, and mighty One, who hath made heaven and earth and all things
together, that ye fear Him, and serve Him, and each shall love his
brother in mercy and justice, and none wish evil unto the other, now and
henceforth unto all eternity, all the days of your life, that ye may
enjoy good fortune in all your undertakings, and that ye perish not."

Furthermore he commanded them to bury him in the Cave of Machpelah, by
the side of his father Abraham, in the grave which he had dug for
himself with his own hands. Then he divided his possessions between his
two sons, giving Esau the larger portion, and Jacob the smaller. But
Esau said, "I sold my birthright to Jacob, and I ceded it to him, and it
belongs unto him." Isaac rejoiced greatly that Esau acknowledged the
rights of Jacob of his own accord, and he closed his eyes in peace.

The funeral of Isaac was not disturbed by any unseemly act, for Esau was
sure of his heritage in accordance with the last wishes expressed by his
father. But when the time came to divide Isaac's possessions between the
two brothers, Esau said to Jacob, "Divide the property of our father
into two portions, but I as the elder claim the right of choosing the
portion I desire." What did Jacob do? He knew well that "the eye of the
wicked never beholds treasures enough to satisfy it," so he divided
their common heritage in the following way: all the material possessions
of his father formed one portion, and the other consisted of Isaac's
claim upon the Holy Land, together with the Cave of Machpelah, the tomb
of Abraham and Isaac. Esau chose the money and the other things
belonging to Isaac for his inheritance, and to Jacob were left the Cave
and the title to the Holy Land. An agreement to this effect was drawn up
in writing in due form, and on the strength of the document Jacob
insisted upon Esau's leaving Palestine. Esau acquiesced, and he and his
wives and his sons and daughters journeyed to Mount Seir, where they
took up their abode.

Though Esau gave way before Jacob for the nonce, he returned to the land
to make war upon his brother. Leah had just died, and Jacob and the sons
borne by Leah were mourning for her, and the rest of his sons, borne
unto him by his other wives, were trying to comfort them, when Esau came
upon them with a powerful host of four thousand men, well equipped for
war, clad in armor of iron and brass, all furnished with bucklers, bows,
and swords. They surrounded the citadel wherein Jacob and his sons dwelt
at that time with their servants and children and households, for they
had all assembled to console Jacob for the death of Leah, and they sat
there unconcerned, none entertained a suspicion that an assault upon
them was meditated by any man. And the great army had already encircled
their castle, and still none within suspected any harm, neither Jacob
and his children nor the two hundred servants. Now when Jacob saw that
Esau presumed to make war upon them, and sought to slay them in the
citadel, and was shooting darts at them, he ascended the wall of the
citadel and spake words of peace and friendship and brotherly love to
Esau. He said: "Is this the consolation which thou hast come to bring
me, to comfort me for my wife, who hath been taken by death? Is this in
accordance with the oath thou didst swear twice unto thy father and thy
mother before they died? Thou hast violated thy oath, and in the hour
when thou didst swear unto thy father, thou wast judged." But Esau made
reply: "Neither the children of men nor the beasts of the field swear an
oath to keep it unto all eternity, but on every day they devise evil
against one another, when it is directed against an enemy, or when they
seek to slay an adversary. If the boar will change his skin and make his
bristles as soft as wool, or if he can cause horns to sprout forth on
his head like the horns of a stag or a ram, then shall I observe the tie
of brotherhood with thee."

Then spoke Judah to his father Jacob, saying: "How long wilt thou stand
yet wasting words of peace and friendship upon him? And he attacks us
unawares, like an enemy, with his mail-clad warriors, seeking to slay
us." Hearing these words, Jacob grasped his bow and killed Adoram the
Edomite, and a second time he bent his bow, and the arrow struck Esau
upon the right thigh. The wound was mortal, and his sons lifted Esau up
and put him upon his ass, and he came to Adora, and there he died.

Judah made a sally to the south of the citadel, and with him were
Naphtali and Gad, aided by fifty of Jacob's servants; to the east Levi
and Dan went forth with fifty servants; Reuben, Issachar, and Zebulon
with fifty servants, to the north; and Simon, Benjamin, and Enoch, the
last the son of Reuben, with fifty servants, to the west. Judah was
exceedingly brave in battle. Together with Naphtali and Gad he pressed
forward into the ranks of the enemy, and captured one of their iron
towers. On their bucklers they caught the sharp missiles hurled against
them in such numbers that the light of the sun was darkened by reason of
the rocks and darts and stones. Judah was the first to break the ranks
of the enemy, of whom he killed six valiant men, and he was accompanied
on the right by Naphtali and by Gad on the left. They also hewed down
two soldiers each, while their troop of servants killed one man each.
Nevertheless they did not succeed in forcing the army away from the
south of the citadel, not even when all together, Judah and his
brethren, made an united attack upon the enemy, each of them picking out
a victim and slaying him. And they were still unsuccessful in a third
combined attack, though this time each killed two men.

When Judah saw now that the enemy remained in possession of the field,
and it was impossible to dislodge them, he girded himself with strength,
and an heroic spirit animated him. Judah, Naphtali, and Gad united, and
together they pierced the ranks of the enemy, Judah slaying ten of them,
and his brothers each eight. Seeing this, the servants took courage, and
they joined their leaders and fought at their side. Judah laid about him
to right and to left, always aided by Naphtali and Gad, and so they
succeeded in forcing the enemy one ris further to the south, away from
the citadel. But the hostile army recovered itself, and maintained a
brave stand against all the sons of Jacob, who were faint from the
hardships of the combat, and could not continue to fight. Thereupon
Judah turned to God in prayer, and God hearkened unto his petition, and
He helped them. He set loose a storm from one of His treasure chambers,
and it blew into the faces of the enemy, and filled their eyes with
darkness, and they could not see how to fight. But Judah and his
brothers could see clearly, for the wind blew upon their backs. Now
Judah and his two brothers wrought havoc among them, they hewed the
enemy down as the reaper mows down the stalks of grain and heaps them up
for sheaves.

After they had routed the division of the army assigned to them on the
south, they hastened to the aid of their brothers, who were defending
the east, north, and west of the citadel with three companies. On each
side the wind blew into the faces of the enemy, and so the sons of Jacob
succeeded in annihilating their army. Four hundred were slain in battle,
and six hundred fled, among the latter Esau's four sons, Reuel, Jeush,
Lotan, and Korah. The oldest of his sons, Eliphaz, took no part in the
war, because he was a disciple of Jacob, and therefore would not bear
arms against him.

The sons of Jacob pursued after the fleeing remnant of the army as far
as Adora. There the sons of Esau abandoned the body of their father, and
continued their flight to Mount Seir. But the sons of Jacob remained in
Adora over night, and out of respect for their father they buried the
remains of his brother Esau. In the morning they went on in pursuit of
the enemy, and besieged them on Mount Seir. Now the sons of Esau and all
the other fugitives came and fell down before them, bowed down, and
entreated them without cease, until they concluded peace with them. But
the sons of Jacob exacted tribute from them.

### THE DESCENDANTS OF ESAU

The worthiest among the sons of Esau was his first-born Eliphaz. He had
been raised under the eyes of his grandfather Isaac, from whom he had
learnt the pious way of life. The Lord had even found him worthy of
being endowed with the spirit of prophecy, for Eliphaz the son of Esau
is none other than the prophet Eliphaz, the friend of Job. It was from
the life of the Patriarchs that he drew the admonitions which he gave
unto Job in his disputes with him. Eliphaz spake: "Thou didst ween
thyself the equal of Abraham, and thou didst marvel, therefore, that God
should deal with thee as with the generation of the confusion of
tongues. But Abraham stood the test of ten temptations, and thou
faintest when but one toucheth thee. When any that was not whole came to
thee, thou wouldst console him. To the blind thou wouldst say, If thou
didst build thyself a house, thou wouldst surely put windows in it, and
if God hath denied thee light, it is but that He may be glorified
through thee in the day when 'the eyes of the blind shall be opened.' To
the deaf thou wouldst say, If thou didst fashion a water pitcher, thou
wouldst surely not forget to make ears for it, and if God created thee
without hearing, it is but that He may be glorified through thee in the
day when 'the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped.' In such wise thou
didst endeavor to console the feeble and the maimed. But now it is come
unto thee, and thou art troubled. Thou sayest, I am an upright man, why
doth He chastise me? But who, I pray thee, ever perished, being
innocent? Noah was saved from the flood, Abraham from the fiery furnace,
Isaac from the slaughtering knife, Jacob from angels, Moses from the
sword of Pharaoh, and Israel from the Egyptians that were drowned in the
Sea. Thus shall all the wicked fare."

Job answered Eliphaz, and said, "Look at thy father Esau!"

But Eliphaz returned: "I have nothing to do with him, the son should not
bear the iniquity of the father. Esau will be destroyed, because he
executed no good deeds, and likewise his dukes will perish. But as for
me, I am a prophet, and my message is not unto Esau, but unto thee, to
make thee render account of thyself." But God rebuked Eliphaz, and said:
"Thou didst speak harsh words unto My servant Job. Therefore shall
Obadiah, one of thy descendants, utter a prophecy of denunciation
against thy father's house, the Edomites."

The concubine of Eliphaz was Timna, a princess of royal blood, who had
asked to be received into the faith of Abraham and his family, but they
all, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, had rejected her, and she said, "Rather
will I be a maid servant unto the dregs of this nation, than mistress of
another nation," and so she was willing to be concubine to Eliphaz. To
punish the Patriarchs for the affront they had offered her, she was made
the mother of Amalek, who inflicted great injury upon Israel.

Another one of Esau's descendants, Anah, had a most unusual experience.
Once when he was pasturing his father's asses in the wilderness, he led
them to one of the deserts on the shores of the Red Sea, opposite the
wilderness of the nations, and while he was feeding the beasts, a very
heavy storm came from the other side of the sea, and the asses could not
move. Then about one hundred and twenty great and terrible animals came
out from the wilderness at the other side of the sea, and they all came
to the place where the asses were, and they placed themselves there.
From the middle down, these animals were in the shape of a man, and from
the middle up some had the likeness of bears, some of apes, and they all
had tails behind them like the tail of the dukipat, from between their
shoulders reaching down to the earth. The animals mounted the asses, and
they rode away with them, and unto this day no eye hath seen them. One
of them approached Anah, and smote him with its tail, and then ran off.

When Anah saw all this, he was exceedingly afraid on account of his
life, and he fled to the city, where he related all that had happened to
him. Many sallied forth to seek the asses, but none could find them.
Anah and his brothers went no more to the same place from that day
forth, for they were greatly afraid on account of their lives.

This Anah was the offspring of an incestuous marriage; his mother was at
the same time the mother of his father Zibeon. And as he was born of an
unnatural union, so he tried to bring about unnatural unions among
animals. He was the first to mix the breed of the horse and the ass and
produce the mule. As a punishment, God crossed the snake and the lizard,
and they brought forth the habarbar, whose bite is certain death, like
the bite of the white she-mule.

The descendants of Esau had eight kings before there reigned any king
over the descendants of Jacob. But a time came when the Jews had eight
kings during whose reign the Edomites had none and were subject to the
Jewish kings. This was the time that intervened between Saul, the first
Israelitish king, who ruled over Edom, and Jehoshaphat, for Edom did not
make itself independent of Jewish rule until the time of Joram, the son
of Jehoshaphat. There was a difference between the kings of Esau's seed
and the kings of Jacob's seed. The Jewish people always produced their
kings from their own midst, while the Edomites had to go to alien
peoples to secure theirs. The first Edomite king was the Aramean Balaam,
called Bela in his capacity as ruler of Edom. His successor Job, called
Jobab also, came from Bozrah, and for furnishing Edom with a king this
city will be chastised in time to come. When God sits in judgment on
Edom, Bozrah will be the first to suffer punishment.

The rule of Edom was of short duration, while the rule of Israel will be
unto all times, for the standard of the Messiah shall wave forever and
ever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Title Page](loj200.md)
