[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](loj105)  [Next](loj107) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# IV

NOAH--THE BIRTH OF NOAH--THE PUNISHMENT OF THE FALLEN ANGELS--THE
GENERATION OF THE DELUGE--THE HOLY BOOK--THE INMATES OF THE ARK--THE
FLOOD--NOAH LEAVES THE ARK--THE CURSE OF DRUNKENNESS--NOAH'S DESCENDANTS
SPREAD ABROAD--THE DEPRAVITY OF MANKIND--NIMROD--THE TOWER OF BABEL

### NOAH--THE BIRTH OF NOAH

Methuselah took a wife for his son Lamech, and she bore him a man child.
The body of the babe was white as snow and red as a blooming rose, and
the hair of his head and his long locks were white as wool, and his eyes
like the rays of the sun. When he opened his eyes, he lighted up the
whole house, like the sun, and the whole house was very full of light.
And when he was taken from the hand of the midwife, he opened his mouth
and praised the Lord of righteousness. His father Lamech was afraid of
him, and fled, and came to his own father Methuselah. And he said to
him: "I have begotten a strange son; he is not like a human being, but
resembles the children of the angels of heaven, and his nature is
different, and he is not like us, and his eyes are as the rays of the
sun, and his countenance is glorious. And it seems to me that he is not
sprung from me, but from the angels, and I fear that in his days a
wonder may be wrought on the earth. And now, my father, I am here to
petition thee and implore thee, that thou mayest go to Enoch, our
father, and learn from him the truth, for his dwelling place is among
the angels."

And when Methuselah heard the words of his son, he went to Enoch, to the
ends of the earth, and he cried aloud, and Enoch heard his voice, and
appeared before him, and asked him the reason of his coming. Methuselah
told him the cause of his anxiety, and requested him to make the truth
known to him. Enoch answered, and said: "The Lord will do a new thing in
the earth. There will come a great destruction on the earth, and a
deluge for one year. This son who is born unto thee will be left on the
earth, and his three children will be saved with him, when all mankind
that are on the earth shall die. And there will be a great punishment on
the earth, and the earth will be cleansed from all impurity. And now
make known to thy son Lamech that he who was born is in truth his son,
and call his name Noah, for he will be left to you, and he and his
children will be saved from the destruction which will come upon the
earth." When Methuselah had heard the words of his father, who showed
him all the secret things, he returned home, and he called the child
Noah, for he would cause the earth to rejoice in compensation for all
destruction.

By the name Noah he was called only by his grandfather Methuselah; his
father and all others called him Menahem. His generation was addicted to
sorcery, and Methuselah apprehended that his grandson might be bewitched
if his true name were known, wherefore he kept it a secret. Menahem,
Comforter, suited him as well as Noah; it indicated that he would be a
consoler, if but the evil-doers of his time would repent of their
misdeeds. At his very birth it was felt that he would bring consolation
and deliverance. When the Lord said to Adam, "Cursed is the ground for
thy sake," he asked, "For how long a time?" and the answer made by God
was, "Until a man child shall be born whose conformation is such that
the rite of circumcision need not be practiced upon him." This was
fulfilled in Noah, he was circumcised from his mother's womb.

Noah had scarcely come into the world when a marked change was
noticeable. Since the curse brought upon the earth by the sin of Adam,
it happened that wheat being sown, yet oats would sprout and grow. This
ceased with the appearance of Noah: the earth bore the products planted
in it. And it was Noah who, when he was grown to manhood, invented the
plough, the scythe, the hoe, and other implements for cultivating the
ground. Before him men had worked the land with their bare hands.

There was another token to indicate that the child born unto Lamech was
appointed for an extraordinary destiny. When God created Adam, He gave
him dominion over all things: the cow obeyed the ploughman, and the
furrow was willing to be drawn. But after the fall of Adam all things
rebelled against him: the cow refused obedience to the ploughman, and
also the furrow was refractory. Noah was born, and all returned to its
state preceding the fall of man.

Before the birth of Noah, the sea was in the habit of transgressing its
bounds twice daily, morning and evening, and flooding the land up to the
graves. After his birth it kept within its confines. And the famine that
afflicted the world in the time of Lamech, the second of the ten great
famines appointed to come upon it, ceased its ravages with the birth of
Noah.

### THE PUNISHMENT OF THE FALLEN ANGELS

Grown to manhood, Noah followed in the ways of his grandfather
Methuselah, while all other men of the time rose up against this pious
king. So far from observing his precepts, they pursued the evil
inclination of their hearts, and perpetrated all sorts of abominable
deeds. Chiefly the fallen angels and their giant posterity caused the
depravity of mankind. The blood spilled by the giants cried unto heaven
from the ground, and the four archangels accused the fallen angels and
their sons before God, whereupon He gave the following orders to them:
Uriel was sent to Noah to announce to him that the earth would be
destroyed by a flood, and to teach him how to save his own life. Raphael
was told to put the fallen angel Azazel into chains, cast him into a pit
of sharp and pointed stones in the desert Dudael, and cover him with
darkness, and so was he to remain until the great day of judgment, when
he would be thrown into the fiery pit of hell, and the earth would be
healed of the corruption he had contrived upon it. Gabriel was charged
to proceed against the bastards and the reprobates, the sons of the
angels begotten with the daughters of men, and plunge them into deadly
conflicts with one another. Shemhazai's ilk were handed over to Michael,
who first caused them to witness the death of their children in their
bloody combat with each other, and then he bound them and pinned them
under the hills of the earth, where they will remain for seventy
generations, until the day of judgment, to be carried thence to the
fiery pit of hell.

The fall of Azazel and Shemhazai came about in this way. When the
generation of the deluge began to practice idolatry, God was deeply
grieved. The two angels Shemhazai and Azazel arose, and said: "O Lord of
the world! It has happened, that which we foretold at the creation of
the world and of man, saying, 'What is man, that Thou art mindful of
him?' " And God said, "And what will become of the world now without
man?" Whereupon the angels: "We will occupy ourselves with it." Then
said God: "I am well aware of it, and I know that if you inhabit the
earth, the evil inclination will overpower you, and you will be more
iniquitous than ever men." The angels pleaded, "Grant us but permission
to dwell among men, and Thou shalt see how we will sanctify Thy Name."
God yielded to their wish, saying, "Descend and sojourn among men!"

When the angels came to earth, and beheld the daughters of men in all
their grace and beauty, they could not restrain their passion. Shemhazai
saw a maiden named Istehar, and he lost his heart to her. She promised
to surrender herself to him, if first he taught her the Ineffable Name,
by means of which he raised himself to heaven. He assented to her
condition. But once she knew it, she pronounced the Name, and herself
ascended to heaven, without fulfilling her promise to the angel. God
said, "Because she kept herself aloof from sin, we will place her among
the seven stars, that men may never forget her," and she was put in the
constellation of the Pleiades.

Shemhazai and Azazel, however, were not deterred from entering into
alliances with the daughters of men, and to the first two sons were
born. Azazel began to devise the finery and the ornaments by means of
which women allure men. Thereupon God sent Metatron to tell Shemhazai
that He had resolved to destroy the world and bring on a deluge. The
fallen angel began to weep and grieve over the fate of the world and the
fate of his two sons. If the world went under, what would they have to
eat, they who needed daily a thousand camels, a thousand horses, and a
thousand steers?

These two sons of Shemhazai, Hiwwa and Hiyya by name, dreamed dreams.
The one saw a great stone which covered the earth, and the earth was
marked all over with lines upon lines of writing. An angel came, and
with a knife obliterated all the lines, leaving but four letters upon
the stone. The other son saw a large pleasure grove planted with all
sorts of trees. But angels approached bearing axes, and they felled the
trees, sparing a single one with three of its branches.

When Hiwwa and Hiyya awoke, they repaired to their father, who
interpreted the dreams for them, saying, "God will bring a deluge, and
none will escape with his life, excepting only Noah and his sons." When
they heard this, the two began to cry and scream, but their father
consoled them: "Soft, soft! Do not grieve. As often as men cut or haul
stones, or launch vessels, they shall invoke your names, Hiwwa! Hiyya!"
This prophecy soothed them.

Shemhazai then did penance. He suspended himself between heaven and
earth, and in this position of a penitent sinner he hangs to this day.
But Azazel persisted obdurately in his sin of leading mankind astray by
means of sensual allurements. For this reason two he-goats were
sacrificed in the Temple on the Day of Atonement, the one for God, that
He pardon the sins of Israel, the other for Azazel, that he bear the
sins of Israel.

Unlike Istehar, the pious maiden, Naamah, the lovely sister of
Tubal-cain, led the angels astray with her beauty, and from her union
with Shamdon sprang the devil Asmodeus. She was as shameless as all the
other descendants of Cain, and as prone to bestial indulgences. Cainite
women and Cainite men alike were in the habit of walking abroad naked,
and they gave themselves up to every conceivable manner of lewd
practices. Of such were the women whose beauty and sensual charms
tempted the angels from the path of virtue. The angels, on the other
hand, no sooner had they rebelled against God and descended to earth
than they lost their transcendental qualities, and were invested with
sublunary bodies, so that a union with the daughters of men became
possible. The offspring of these alliances between the angels and the
Cainite women were the giants, known for their strength and their
sinfulness; as their very name, the Emim, indicates, they inspired fear.
They have many other names. Sometimes they go by the name Rephaim,
because one glance at them made one's heart grow weak; or by the name
Gibborim, simply giants, because their size was so enormous that their
thigh measured eighteen ells; or by the name Zamzummim, because they
were great masters in war; or by the name Anakim, because they touched
the sun with their neck; or by the name Ivvim, because, like the snake,
they could judge of the qualities of the soil; or finally, by the name
Nephilim, because, bringing the world to its fall, they themselves fell.

### THE GENERATION OF THE DELUGE

While the descendants of Cain resembled their father in his sinfulness
and depravity, the descendants of Seth led a pious, well-regulated life,
and the difference between the conduct of the two stocks was reflected
in their habitations. The family of Seth was settled upon the mountains
in the vicinity of Paradise, while the family of Cain resided in the
field of Damascus, the spot whereon Abel was slain by Cain.

Unfortunately, at the time of Methuselah, following the death of Adam,
the family of Seth became corrupted after the manner of the Cainites.
The two strains united with each other to execute all kinds of
iniquitous deeds. The result of the marriages between them were the
Nephilim, whose sins brought the deluge upon the world. In their
arrogance they claimed the same pedigree as the posterity of Seth, and
they compared themselves with princes and men of noble descent.

The wantonness of this generation was in a measure due to the ideal
conditions under which mankind lived before the flood. They knew neither
toil nor care, and as a consequence of their extraordinary prosperity
they grew insolent. In their arrogance they rose up against God. A
single sowing bore a harvest sufficient for the needs of forty years,
and by means of magic arts they could compel the very sun and moon to
stand ready to do their service. The raising of children gave them no
trouble. They were born after a few days' pregnancy, and immediately
after birth they could walk and talk; they themselves aided the mother
in severing the navel string. Not even demons could do them harm. Once a
new-born babe, running to fetch a light whereby his mother might cut the
navel string, met the chief of the demons, and a combat ensued between
the two. Suddenly the crowing of a cock was heard, and the demon made
off, crying out to the child, "Go and report unto thy mother, if it had
not been for the crowing of the cock, I had killed thee!" Whereupon the
child retorted, "Go and report unto thy mother, if it had not been for
my uncut navel string, I had killed thee!"

It was their care-free life that gave them space and leisure for their
infamies. For a time God, in His long-suffering kindness, passed by the
iniquities of men, but His forbearance ceased when once they began to
lead unchaste lives, for "God is patient with all sins save only an
immoral life."

The other sin that hastened the end of the iniquitous generation was
their rapacity. So cunningly were their depredations planned that the
law could not touch them. If a countryman brought a basket of vegetables
to market, they would edge up to it, one after the other, and abstract a
bit, each in itself of petty value, but in a little while the dealer
would have none left to sell.

Even after God had resolved upon the destruction of the sinners, He
still permitted His mercy to prevail, in that He sent Noah unto them,
who exhorted them for one hundred and twenty years to amend their ways,
always holding the flood over them as a threat. As for them, they but
derided him. When they saw him occupying himself with the building of
the ark, they asked, "Wherefore this ark?"

Noah: "God will bring a flood upon you."

The sinners: "What sort of flood? If He sends a fire flood, against that
we know how to protect ourselves. If it is a flood of waters, then, if
the waters bubble up from the earth, we will cover them with iron rods,
and if they descend from above, we know a remedy against that, too."

Noah: "The waters will ooze out from under your feet, and you will not
be able to ward them off."

Partly they persisted in their obduracy of heart because Noah had made
known to them that the flood would not descend so long as the pious
Methuselah sojourned among them. The period of one hundred and twenty
years which God had appointed as the term of their probation having
expired, Methuselah died, but out of regard for the memory of this pious
man God gave them another week's respite, the week of mourning for him.
During this time of grace, the laws of nature were suspended, the sun
rose in the west and set in the east. To the sinners God gave the
dainties that await man in the future world, for the purpose of showing
them what they were forfeiting. But all this proved unavailing, and,
Methuselah and the other pious men of the generation having departed
this life, God brought the deluge upon the earth.

### THE HOLY BOOK

Great wisdom was needed for building the ark, which was to have space
for all beings on earth, even the spirits. Only the fishes did not have
to be provided for. Noah acquired the necessary wisdom from the book
given to Adam by the angel Raziel, in which all celestial and all
earthly knowledge is recorded.

While the first human pair were still in Paradise, it once happened that
Samael, accompanied by a lad, approached Eve and requested her to keep a
watchful eye upon his little son until he should return. Eve gave him
the promise. When Adam came back from a walk in Paradise, he found a
howling, screaming child with Eve, who, in reply to his question, told
him it was Samael's. Adam was annoyed, and his annoyance grew as the boy
cried and screamed more and more violently. In his vexation he dealt the
little one a blow that killed him. But the corpse did not cease to wail
and weep, nor did it cease when Adam cut it up into bits. To rid himself
of the plague, Adam cooked the remains, and he and Eve ate them.
Scarcely had they finished, when Samael appeared and demanded his son.
The two malefactors tried to deny everything; they pretended they had no
knowledge of his son. But Samael said to them: "What! You dare tell
lies, and God in times to come will give Israel the Torah in which it is
said, 'Keep thee far from a false word'?"

While they were speaking thus, suddenly the voice of the slain lad was
heard proceeding from the heart of Adam and Eve, and it addressed these
words to Samael: "Go hence! I have penetrated to the heart of Adam and
the heart of Eve, and never again shall I quit their hearts, nor the
hearts of their children, or their children's children, unto the end of
all generations."

Samael departed, but Adam was sore grieved, and he put on sackcloth and
ashes, and he fasted many, many days, until God appeared unto him, and
said: "My son, have no fear of Samael. I will give thee a remedy that
will help thee against him, for it was at My instance that he went to
thee." Adam asked, "And what is this remedy?" God: "The Torah." Adam:
"And where is the Torah?" God then gave him the book of the angel
Raziel, which he studied day and night. After some time had passed, the
angels visited Adam, and, envious of the wisdom he had drawn from the
book, they sought to destroy him cunningly by calling him a god and
prostrating themselves before him, in spite of his remonstrance, "Do not
prostrate yourselves before me, but magnify the Lord with me, and let us
exalt His Name together." However, the envy of the angels was so great
that they stole the book God had given Adam from him, and threw it in
the sea. Adam searched for it everywhere in vain, and the loss
distressed him sorely. Again he fasted many days, until God appeared
unto him, and said: "Fear not! I will give the book back to thee," and
He called Rahab, the Angel of the Sea, and ordered him to recover the
book from the sea and restore it to Adam. And so he did.

Upon the death of Adam, the holy book disappeared, but later the cave in
which it was hidden was revealed to Enoch in a dream. It was from this
book that Enoch drew his knowledge of nature, of the earth and of the
heavens, and he became so wise through it that his wisdom exceeded the
wisdom of Adam. Once he had committed it to memory, Enoch hid the book
again.

Now, when God resolved upon bringing the flood on the earth, He sent the
archangel Raphael to Noah, as the bearer of the following message: "I
give thee herewith the holy book, that all the secrets and mysteries
written therein may be made manifest unto thee, and that thou mayest
know how to fulfil its injunction in holiness, purity, modesty, and
humbleness. Thou wilt learn from it how to build an ark of the wood of
the gopher tree, wherein thou, and thy sons, and thy wife shall find
protection."

Noah took the book, and when he studied it, the holy spirit came upon
him, and he knew all things needful for the building of the ark and the
gathering together of the animals. The book, which was made of
sapphires, he took with him into the ark, having first enclosed it in a
golden casket. All the time he spent in the ark it served him as a
time-piece, to distinguish night from day. Before his death, he
entrusted it to Shem, and he in turn to Abraham. From Abraham it
descended through Jacob, Levi, Moses, and Joshua to Solomon, who learnt
all his wisdom from it, and his skill in the healing art, and also his
mastery over the demons.

### THE INMATES OF THE ARK

The ark was completed according to the instructions laid down in the
Book of Raziel. Noah's next task was gathering in the animals. No less
than thirty-two species of birds and three hundred and sixty-five of
reptiles he had to take along with him. But God ordered the animals to
repair to the ark, and they trooped thither, and Noah did not have to do
so much as stretch out a finger. Indeed, more appeared than were
required to come, and God instructed him to sit at the door of the ark
and note which of the animals lay down as they reached the entrance and
which stood. The former belonged in the ark, but not the latter. Taking
up his post as he had been commanded, Noah observed a lioness with her
two cubs. All three beasts crouched. But the two young ones began to
struggle with the mother, and she arose and stood up next to them. Then
Noah led the two cubs into the ark. The wild beasts, and the cattle, and
the birds which were not accepted remained standing about the ark all of
seven days, for the assembling of the animals happened one week before
the flood began to descend. On the day whereon they came to the ark, the
sun was darkened, and the foundations of the earth trembled, and
lightning flashed, and the thunder boomed, as never before. And yet the
sinners remained impenitent. In naught did they change their wicked
doings during those last seven days.

When finally the flood broke loose, seven hundred thousand of the
children of men gathered around the ark, and implored Noah to grant them
protection. With a loud voice he replied, and said: "Are ye not those
who were rebellious toward God, saying, 'There is no God'? Therefore He
has brought ruin upon you, to annihilate you and destroy you from the
face of the earth. Have I not been prophesying this unto you these
hundred and twenty years, and you would not give heed unto the voice of
God? Yet now you desire to be kept alive!" Then the sinners cried out:
"So be it! We all are ready now to turn back to God, if only thou wilt
open the door of thy ark to receive us, that we may live and not die."
Noah made answer, and said: "That ye do now, when your need presses hard
upon you. Why did you not turn to God during all the hundred and twenty
years which the Lord appointed unto you as the term of repentance? Now
do ye come, and ye speak thus, because distress besets your lives.
Therefore God will not hearken unto you and give you ear; naught will
you accomplish!"

The crowd of sinners tried to take the entrance to the ark by storm, but
the wild beasts keeping watch around the ark set upon them, and many
were slain, while the rest escaped, only to meet death in the waters of
the flood. The water alone could not have made an end of them, for they
were giants in stature and strength. When Noah threatened them with the
scourge of God, they would make reply: "If the waters of the flood come
from above, they will never reach up to our necks; and if they come from
below, the soles of our feet are large enough to dam up the springs."
But God bade each drop pass through Gehenna before it fell to earth, and
the hot rain scalded the skin of the sinners. The punishment that
overtook them was befitting their crime. As their sensual desires had
made them hot, and inflamed them to immoral excesses, so they were
chastised by means of heated water.

Not even in the hour of the death struggle could the sinners suppress
their vile instincts. When the water began to stream up out of the
springs, they threw their little children into them, to choke the flood.

It was by the grace of God, not on account of his merits, that Noah
found shelter in the ark before the overwhelming force of the waters.
Although he was better than his contemporaries, he was yet not worthy of
having wonders done for his sake. He had so little faith that he did not
enter the ark until the waters had risen to his knees. With him his
pious wife Naamah, the daughter of Enosh, escaped the peril, and his
three sons, and the wives of his three sons."

Noah had not married until he was four hundred and ninety-eight years
old. Then the Lord had bidden him to take a wife unto himself. He had
not desired to bring children into the world, seeing that they would all
have to perish in the flood, and he had only three sons, born unto him
shortly before the deluge came. God had given him so small a number of
offspring that he might be spared the necessity of building the ark on
an overlarge scale in case they turned out to be pious. And if not, if
they, too, were depraved like the rest of their generation, sorrow over
their destruction would but be increased in proportion to their number.

As Noah and his family were the only ones not to have a share in the
corruptness of the age, so the animals received into the ark were such
as had led a natural life. For the animals of the time were as immoral
as the men: the dog united with the wolf, the cock with the pea-fowl,
and many others paid no heed to sexual purity. Those that were saved
were such as had kept themselves untainted.

Before the flood the number of unclean animals had been greater than the
number of the clean. Afterward the ratio was reversed, because while
seven pairs of clean animals were preserved in the ark, but two pairs of
the unclean were preserved.

One animal, the reem, Noah could not take into the ark. On account of
its huge size it could not find room therein. Noah therefore tied it to
the ark, and it ran on behind. Also, he could not make space for the
giant Og, the king of Bashan. He sat on top of the ark securely, and in
this way escaped the flood of waters. Noah doled out his food to him
daily, through a hole, because Og had promised that he and his
descendants would serve him as slaves in perpetuity.

Two creatures of a most peculiar kind also found refuge in the ark.
Among the beings that came to Noah there was Falsehood asking for
shelter. He was denied admission, because he had no companion, and Noah
was taking in the animals only by pairs. Falsehood went off to seek a
partner, and he met Misfortune, whom he associated with himself on the
condition that she might appropriate what Falsehood earned. The pair
were then accepted in the ark. When they left it, Falsehood noticed that
whatever he gathered together disappeared at once, and he betook himself
to his companion to seek an explanation, which she gave him in the
following words, "Did we not agree to the condition that I might take
what you earn?" and Falsehood had to depart empty-handed."

### THE FLOOD

The assembling of the animals in the ark was but the smaller part of the
task imposed upon Noah. His chief difficulty was to provide food for a
year and accommodations for them. Long afterward Shem, the son of Noah,
related to Eliezer, the servant of Abraham, the tale of their
experiences with the animals in the ark. This is what he said: "We had
sore troubles in the ark. The day animals had to be fed by day, and the
night animals by night. My father knew not what food to give to the
little zikta. Once he cut a pomegranate in half, and a worm dropped out
of the fruit, and was devoured by the zikta. Thenceforth my father would
knead bran, and let it stand until it bred worms, which were fed to the
animal. The lion suffered with a fever all the time, and therefore he
did not annoy the others, because he did not relish dry food. The animal
urshana my father found sleeping in a corner of the vessel, and he asked
him whether he needed nothing to eat. He answered, and said: 'I saw thou
wast very busy, and I did not wish to add to thy cares.' Whereupon my
father said, 'May it be the will of the Lord to keep thee alive
forever,' and the blessing was realized."

The difficulties were increased when the flood began to toss the ark
from side to side. All inside of it were shaken up like lentils in a
pot. The lions began to roar, the oxen lowed, the wolves howled, and all
the animals gave vent to their agony, each through the sounds it had the
power to utter.

Also Noah and his sons, thinking that death was nigh, broke into tears.
Noah prayed to God: "O Lord, help us, for we are not able to bear the
evil that encompasses us. The billows surge about us, the streams of
destruction make us afraid, and death stares us in the face. O hear our
prayer, deliver us, incline Thyself unto us, and be gracious unto us!
Redeem us and save us!"

The flood was produced by a union of the male waters, which are above
the firmament, and the female waters issuing from the earth. The upper
waters rushed through the space left when God removed two stars out of
the constellation Pleiades. Afterward, to put a stop to the flood, God
had to transfer two stars from the constellation of the Bear to the
constellation of the Pleiades. That is why the Bear runs after the
Pleiades. She wants her two children back, but they will be restored to
her only in the future world.

There were other changes among the celestial spheres during the year of
the flood. All the time it lasted, the sun and the moon shed no light,
whence Noah was called by his name, "the resting one," for in his life
the sun and the moon rested. The ark was illuminated by a precious
stone, the light of which was more brilliant by night than by day, so
enabling Noah to distinguish between day and night.

The duration of the flood was a whole year. It began on the seventeenth
day of Heshwan, and the rain continued for forty days, until the
twenty-seventh of Kislew. The punishment corresponded to the crime of
the sinful generation. They had led immoral lives, and begotten bastard
children, whose embryonic state lasts forty days. From the twenty
seventh of Kislew until the first of Siwan, a period of one hundred and
fifty days, the water stood at one and the same height, fifteen ells
above the earth. During that time all the wicked were destroyed, each
one receiving the punishment due to him. Cain was among those that
perished, and thus the death of Abel was avenged. So powerful were the
waters in working havoc that the corpse of Adam was not spared in its
grave.

On the first of Siwan the waters began to abate, a quarter of an ell a
day, and at the end of sixty days, on the tenth day of Ab, the summits
of the mountains showed themselves. But many days before, on the tenth
of Tammuz, Noah had sent forth the raven, and a week later the dove, on
the first of her three sallies, repeated at intervals of a week. It took
from the first of Ab until the first of Tishri for the waters to subside
wholly from the face of the earth. Even then the soil was so miry that
the dwellers in the ark had to remain within until the twenty-seventh
day of Heshwan, completing a full sun year, consisting of twelve moons
and eleven days.

Noah had experienced difficulty all along in ascertaining the state of
the waters. When he desired to dispatch the raven, the bird said: "The
Lord, thy Master, hates me, and thou dost hate me, too. Thy Master hates
me, for He bade thee take seven pairs of the clean animals into the ark,
and but two pairs of the unclean animals, to which I belong. Thou hatest
me, for thou dost not choose, as a messenger, a bird of one of the kinds
of which there are seven pairs in the ark, but thou sendest me, and of
my kind there is but one pair. Suppose, now, I should perish by reason
of heat or cold, would not the world be the poorer by a whole species of
animals? Or can it be that thou hast cast a lustful eye upon my mate,
and desirest to rid thyself of me?" Where unto Noah made answer, and
said: "Wretch! I must live apart from my own wife in the ark. How much
less would such thoughts occur to my mind as thou imputest to me!"

The raven's errand had no success, for when he saw the body of a dead
man, he set to work to devour it, and did not execute the orders given
to him by Noah. Thereupon the dove was sent out. Toward evening she
returned with an olive leaf in her bill, plucked upon the Mount of
Olives at Jerusalem, for the Holy Land had not been ravaged by the
deluge. As she plucked it, she said to God: "O Lord of the world, let my
food be as bitter as the olive, but do Thou give it to me from Thy hand,
rather than it should be sweet, and I be delivered into the power of
men."

### NOAH LEAVES THE ARK

Though the earth assumed its old form at the end of the year of
punishment, Noah did not abandon the ark until he received the command
of God to leave it. He said to himself, "As I entered the ark at the
bidding of God, so I will leave it only at His bidding." Yet, when God
bade Noah go out of the ark, he refused, because he feared that after he
had lived upon the dry land for some time, and begotten children, God
would bring another flood. He therefore would not leave the ark until
God swore He would never visit the earth with a flood again.

When he stepped out from the ark into the open, he began to weep
bitterly at sight of the enormous ravages wrought by the flood, and he
said to God: "O Lord of the world! Thou art called the Merciful, and
Thou shouldst have had mercy upon Thy creatures." God answered, and
said: "O thou foolish shepherd, now thou speakest to Me. Thou didst not
so when I addressed kind words to thee, saying: 'I saw thee as a
righteous man and perfect in thy generation, and I will bring the flood
upon the earth to destroy all flesh. Make an ark for thyself of gopher
wood.' Thus spake I to thee, telling thee all these circumstances, that
thou mightest entreat mercy for the earth. But thou, as soon as thou
didst hear that thou wouldst be rescued in the ark, thou didst not
concern thyself about the ruin that would strike the earth. Thou didst
but build an ark for thyself, in which thou wast saved. Now that the
earth is wasted, thou openest thy mouth to supplicate and pray."

Noah realized that he had been guilty of folly. To propitiate God and
acknowledge his sin, he brought a sacrifice. God accepted the offering
with favor, whence he is called by his name Noah. The sacrifice was not
offered by Noah with his own hands; the priestly services connected with
it were performed by his son Shem. There was a reason for this. One day
in the ark Noah forgot to give his ration to the lion, and the hungry
beast struck him so violent a blow with his paw that he was lame forever
after, and, having a bodily defect, he was not permitted to do the
offices of a priest.

The sacrifices consisted of an ox, a sheep, a goat, two turtle doves,
and two young pigeons. Noah had chosen these kinds because he supposed
they were appointed for sacrifices, seeing that God had commanded him to
take seven pairs of them into the ark with him. The altar was erected in
the same place on which Adam and Cain and Abel had brought their
sacrifices, and on which later the altar was to be in the sanctuary at
Jerusalem.

After the sacrifice was completed, God blessed Noah and his sons. He
made them to be rulers of the world as Adam had been, and He gave them a
command, saying, "Be fruitful and multiply upon the earth," for during
their sojourn in the ark, the two sexes, of men and animals alike, had
lived apart from each other, because while a public calamity rages
continence is becoming even to those who are left unscathed. This law of
conduct had been violated by none in the ark except by Ham, by the dog,
and by the raven. They all received a punishment. Ham's was that his
descendants were men of dark-hued skin.

As a token that He would destroy the earth no more, God set His bow in
the cloud. Even if men should be steeped in sin again, the bow proclaims
to them that their sins will cause no harm to the world. Times came in
the course of the ages when men were pious enough not to have to live in
dread of punishment. In such times the bow was not visible.

God accorded permission to Noah and his descendants to use the flesh of
animals for food, which had been forbidden from the time of Adam until
then. But they were to abstain from the use of blood. He ordained the
seven Noachian laws, the observance of which is incumbent upon all men,
not upon Israel alone. God enjoined particularly the command against the
shedding of human blood. Whoso would shed man's blood, his blood would
be shed. Even if human judges let the guilty man go free, his punishment
would overtake him. He would die an unnatural death, such as he had
inflicted upon his fellow-man. Yea, even beasts that slew men, even of
them would the life of men be required.

### THE CURSE OF DRUNKENNESS

Noah lost his epithet "the pious" when he began to occupy himself with
the growing of the vine. He became a "man of the ground," and this first
attempt to produce wine at the same time produced the first to drink to
excess, the first to utter curses upon his associates, and the first to
introduce slavery. This is the way it all came about. Noah found the
vine which Adam had taken with him from Paradise, when he was driven
forth. He tasted the grapes upon it, and, finding them palatable, he
resolved to plant the vine and tend it. On the selfsame day on which he
planted it, it bore fruit, he put it in the wine-press, drew off the
juice, drank it, became drunken, and was dishonored--all on one day. His
assistant in the work of cultivating the vine was Satan, who had
happened along at the very moment when he was engaged in planting the
slip he had found. Satan asked him: "What is it thou art planting here?"

Noah: "A vineyard."

Satan: "And what may be the qualities of what it produces?"

Noah: "The fruit it bears is sweet, be it dry or moist. It yields wine
that rejoiceth the heart of man."

Satan: "Let us go into partnership in this business of planting a
vineyard."

Noah: "Agreed!"

Satan thereupon slaughtered a lamb, and then, in succession, a lion, a
pig, and a monkey. The blood of each as it was killed he made to flow
under the vine. Thus he conveyed to Noah what the qualities of wine are:
before man drinks of it, he is innocent as a lamb; if he drinks of it
moderately, he feels as strong as a lion; if he drinks more of it than
he can bear, he resembles the pig; and if he drinks to the point of
intoxication, then he behaves like a monkey, he dances around, sings,
talks obscenely, and knows not what he is doing.

This deterred Noah no more than did the example of Adam, whose fall had
also been due to wine, for the forbidden fruit had been the grape, with
which he had made himself drunk.

In his drunken condition Noah betook himself to the tent of his wife.
His son Ham saw him there, and he told his brothers what he had noticed,
and said: "The first man had but two sons, and one slew the other; this
man Noah has three sons, yet he desires to beget a fourth besides." Nor
did Ham rest satisfied with these disrespectful words against his
father. He added to this sin of irreverence the still greater outrage of
attempting to perform an operation upon his father designed to prevent
procreation.

When Noah awoke from his wine and became sober, he pronounced a curse
upon Ham in the person of his youngest son Canaan. To Ham himself he
could do no harm, for God had conferred a blessing upon Noah and his
three sons as they departed from the ark. Therefore he put the curse
upon the last-born son of the son that had prevented him from begetting
a younger son than the three he had." The descendants of Ham through
Canaan therefore have red eyes, because Ham looked upon the nakedness of
his father; they have misshapen lips, because Ham spoke with his lips to
his brothers about the unseemly condition of his father; they have
twisted curly hair, because Ham turned and twisted his head round to see
the nakedness of his father; and they go about naked, because Ham did
not cover the nakedness of his father. Thus he was requited, for it is
the way of God to mete out punishment measure for measure.

Canaan had to suffer vicariously for his father's sin. Yet some of the
punishment was inflicted upon him on his own account, for it had been
Canaan who had drawn the attention of Ham to Noah's revolting condition.
Ham, it appears, was but the worthy father of such a son. The last will
and testament of Canaan addressed to his children read as follows:
"Speak not the truth; hold not yourselves aloof from theft; lead a
dissolute life; hate your master with an exceeding great hate; and love
one another."

As Ham was made to suffer requital for his irreverence, so Shem and
Japheth received a reward for the filial, deferential way in which they
took a garment and laid it upon both their shoulders, and walking
backward, with averted faces, covered the nakedness of their father.
Naked the descendants of Ham, the Egyptians and Ethiopians, were led
away captive and into exile by the king of Assyria, while the
descendants of Shem, the Assyrians, even when the angel of the Lord
burnt them in the camp, were not exposed, their garments remained upon
their corpses unsinged. And in time to come, when Gog shall suffer his
defeat, God will provide both shrouds and a place of burial for him and
all his multitude, the posterity of Japheth.

Though Shem and Japheth both showed themselves to be dutiful and
deferential, yet it was Shem who deserved the larger meed of praise. He
was the first to set about covering his father. Japheth joined him after
the good deed had been begun. Therefore the descendants of Shem received
as their special reward the tallit, the garment worn by them, while the
Japhethites have only the toga. A further distinction accorded to Shem
was the mention of his name in connection with God's in the blessing of
Noah. "Blessed be the Lord, the God of Shem," he said, though as a rule
the name of God is not joined to the name of a living person, only to
the name of one who has departed this life.

The relation of Shem to Japheth was expressed in the blessing their
father pronounced upon them: God will grant a land of beauty to Japheth,
and his sons will be proselytes dwelling in the academies of Shem. At
the same time Noah conveyed by his words that the Shekinah would dwell
only in the first Temple, erected by Solomon, a son of Shem, and not in
the second Temple, the builder of which would be Cyrus, a descendant of
Japheth.

### NOAH'S DESCENDANTS SPREAD ABROAD

When it became known to Ham that his father had cursed him, he fled
ashamed, and with his family he settled in the city built by him, and
named Neelatamauk for his wife. Jealous of his brother, Japheth followed
his example. He likewise built a city which he named for his wife,
Adataneses. Shem was the only one of the sons of Noah who did not
abandon him. In the vicinity of his father's home, by the mountain, he
built his city, to which he also gave his wife's name, Zedeketelbab. The
three cities are all near Mount Lubar, the eminence upon which the ark
rested. The first lies to the south of it, the second to the west, and
the third to the east.

Noah endeavored to inculcate the ordinances and the commands known to
him upon his children and his children's children. In particular he
admonished them against the fornication, the uncleanness, and all the
iniquity which had brought the flood down upon the earth. He reproached
them with living apart from one another, and with their jealousies, for
he feared that, after his death, they might go so far as to shed human
blood. Against this he warned them impressively, that they be not
annihilated from the earth like those that went before. Another law
which he enjoined upon them, to observe it, was the law ordaining that
the fruit of a tree shall not be used the first three years it bears,
and even in the fourth year it shall be the portion of the priests
alone, after a part thereof has been offered upon the altar of God. And
having made an end of giving his teachings and injunctions, Noah said:
"For thus did Enoch, your ancestor, exhort his son Methuselah, and
Methuselah his son Lamech, and Lamech delivered all unto me as his
father had bidden him, and now I do exhort you, my children, as Enoch
exhorted his son. When he lived, in his generation, which was the
seventh generation of man, he commanded it and testified it unto his
children and his children's children, until the day of his death."

In the year 1569 after the creation of the world, Noah divided the earth
by lot among his three sons, in the presence of an angel. Each one
stretched forth his hand and took a slip from the bosom of Noah. Shem's
slip was inscribed with the middle of the earth, and this portion became
the inheritance of his descendants unto all eternity. Noah rejoiced that
the lot had assigned it to Shem. Thus was fulfilled his blessing upon
him, "And God in the habitation of Shem," for three holy places fell
within his precincts--the Holy of Holies in the Temple, Mount Sinai, the
middle point of the desert, and Mount Zion, the middle point of the
navel of the earth.

The south fell to the lot of Ham, and the north became the inheritance
of Japheth. The land of Ham is hot, Japheth's cold, but Shem's is
neither hot nor cold, its temperature is hot and cold mixed.

This division of the earth took place toward the end of the life of
Peleg, the name given to him by his father Eber, who, being a prophet,
knew that the division of the earth would take place in the time of his
son. The brother of Peleg was called Joktan, because the duration of the
life of man was shortened in his time.

In turn, the three sons of Noah, while they were still standing in the
presence of their father, divided each his portion among his children,
Noah threatening with his curse any who should stretch out his hand to
take a portion not assigned to him by lot. And they all cried, "So be
it! So be it!"

Thus were divided one hundred and four lands and ninety-nine islands
among seventy-two nations, each with a language of its own, using
sixteen different sets of characters for writing. To Japheth were
allotted forty-four lands, thirty-three islands, twenty-two languages,
and five kinds of writing; Ham received thirty-four lands, thirty-three
islands, twenty-four languages, and five kinds of writing; and Shem
twenty-six lands, thirty-three islands, twenty-six languages, and six
kinds of writing--one set of written characters more to Shem than to
either of his brothers, the extra set being the Hebrew.

The land appointed as the inheritance of the twelve sons of Jacob was
provisionally granted to Canaan, Zidon, Heth, the Jebusites, the
Amorites, the Girgashites, the Hivites, the Arkites, the Sinites, the
Arvadites, the Zemarites, and the Hamathites. It was the duty of these
nations to take care of the land until the rightful owners should come.

No sooner had the children of Noah and their children's children taken
possession of the habitations apportioned to them, than the unclean
spirits began to seduce men and torment them with pain and all sorts of
suffering leading to spiritual and physical death. Upon the entreaties
of Noah God sent down the angel Raphael, who banished nine-tenths of the
unclean spirits from the earth, leaving but one-tenth for Mastema, to
punish sinners through them. Raphael, supported by the chief of the
unclean spirits, at that time revealed to Noah all the remedies residing
in plants, that he might resort to them at need. Noah recorded them in a
book, which he transmitted to his son Shem. This is the source to which
go back all the medical books whence the wise men of India, Aram,
Macedonia, and Egypt draw their knowledge. The sages of India devoted
themselves particularly to the study of curative trees and spices; the
Arameans were well versed in the knowledge of the properties of grains
and seeds, and they translated the old medical books into their
language. The wise men of Macedonia were the first to apply medical
knowledge practically, while the Egyptians sought to effect cures by
means of magic arts and by means of astrology, and they taught the
Midrash of the Chaldees, composed by Kangar, the son of Ur, the son of
Kesed. Medical skill spread further and further until the time of
aesculapius. This Macedonian sage, accompanied by forty learned
magicians, journeyed from country to country, until they came to the
land beyond India, in the direction of Paradise. They hoped there to
find some wood of the tree of life, and thus spread their fame abroad
over the whole world. Their hope was frustrated. When they arrived at
the spot, they found healing trees and wood of the tree of life, but
when they were in the act of stretching forth their hands to gather what
they desired, lightning darted out of the ever-turning sword, smote them
to the ground, and they were all burnt. With them disappeared all
knowledge of medicine, and it did not revive until the time of the first
Artaxerxes, under the Macedonian sage Hippocrates, Dioscorides of Baala,
Galen of Caphtor, and the Hebrew Asaph.

### THE DEPRAVITY OF MANKIND

With the spread of mankind corruption increased. While Noah was still
alive, the descendants of Shem, Ham, and Japheth appointed princes over
each of the three groups- Nimrod for the descendants of Ham, Joktan for
the descendants of Shem, and Phenech for the descendants of Japheth. Ten
years before Noah's death, the number of those subject to the three
princes amounted to millions. When this great concourse of men came to
Babylonia upon their journeyings, they said to one another: "Behold, the
time is coming when, at the end of days, neighbor will be separated from
neighbor, and brother from brother, and one will carry on war against
the other. Go to, let us build us a city, and a tower, whose top may
reach unto heaven, and let us make us a great name upon the earth. And
now let us make bricks, and each one write his name upon his brick." All
agreed to this proposal, with the exception of twelve pious men, Abraham
among them. They refused to join the others. They were seized by the
people, and brought before the three princes, to whom they gave the
following reason for their refusal: "We will not make bricks, nor remain
with you, for we know but one God, and Him we serve; even if you burn us
in the fire together with the bricks, we will not walk in your ways."
Nimrod and Phenech flew into such a passion over the twelve men that
they resolved to throw them into the fire. Joktan, however, besides
being a God-fearing man, was of close kin to the men on trial, and he
essayed to save them. He proposed to his two colleagues to grant them a
seven days' respite. His plan was accepted, such deference being paid
him as the primate among the three. The twelve were incarcerated in the
house of Joktan. In the night he charged fifty of his attendants to
mount the prisoners upon mules and take them to the mountains. Thus they
would escape the threatened punishment. Joktan provided them with food
for a month. He was sure that in the meantime either a change of
sentiment would come about, and the people desist from their purpose, or
God would help the fugitives. Eleven of the prisoners assented to the
plan with gratitude. Abraham alone rejected it, saying: "Behold, to-day
we flee to the mountains to escape from the fire, but if wild beasts
rush out from the mountains and devour us, or if food is lacking, so
that we die by famine, we shall be found fleeing before the people of
the land and dying in our sins. Now, as the Lord liveth, in whom I
trust, I will not depart from this place wherein they have imprisoned
me, and if I am to die through my sins, then will I die by the will of
God, according to His desire."

In vain Joktan endeavored to persuade Abraham to flee. He persisted in
his refusal. He remained behind alone in the prison house, while the
other eleven made their escape. At the expiration of the set term, when
the people returned and demanded the death of the twelve captives,
Joktan could produce only Abraham. His excuse was that the rest had
broken loose during the night. The people were about to throw themselves
upon Abraham and cast him into the lime kiln. Suddenly an earthquake was
felt, the fire darted from the furnace, and all who were standing round
about, eighty four thousand of the people, were consumed, while Abraham
remained untouched. Thereupon he repaired to his eleven friends in the
mountains, and told them of the miracle that had befallen for his sake.
They all returned with him, and, unmolested by the people, they gave
praise and thanks to God.

### NIMROD

The first among the leaders of the corrupt men was Nimrod. His father
Cush had married his mother at an advanced age, and Nimrod, the
offspring of this belated union, was particularly dear to him as the son
of his old age. He gave him the clothes made of skins with which God had
furnished Adam and Eve at the time of their leaving Paradise. Cush
himself had gained possession of them through Ham. From Adam and Eve
they had descended to Enoch, and from him to Methuselah, and to Noah,
and the last had taken them with him into the ark. When the inmates of
the ark were about to leave their refuge, Ham stole the garments and
kept them concealed, finally passing them on to his first-born son Cush.
Cush in turn hid them for many years. When his son Nimrod reached his
twentieth year, he gave them to him. These garments had a wonderful
property. He who wore them was both invincible and irresistible. The
beasts and birds of the woods fell down before Nimrod as soon as they
caught sight of him arrayed in them, and he was equally victorious in
his combats with men. The source of his unconquerable strength was not
known to them. They attributed it to his personal prowess, and therefore
they appointed him king over themselves. This was done after a conflict
between the descendants of Cush and the descendants of Japheth, from
which Nimrod emerged triumphant, having routed the enemy utterly with
the assistance of a handful of warriors. He chose Shinar as his capital.
Thence he extended his dominion farther and farther, until he rose by
cunning and force to be the sole ruler of the whole world. the first
mortal to hold universal sway, as the ninth ruler to possess the same
power will be the Messiah.

His impiousness kept pace with his growing power. Since the flood there
had been no such sinner as Nimrod. He fashioned idols of wood and stone,
and paid worship to them. But not satisfied to lead a godless life
himself, he did all he could to tempt his subjects into evil ways,
wherein he was aided and abetted by his son Mardon. This son of his
outstripped his father in iniquity. It was their time and their life
that gave rise to the proverb, "Out of the wicked cometh forth
wickedness."

The great success that attended all of Nimrod's undertakings produced a
sinister effect. Men no longer trusted in God, but rather in their own
prowess and ability, an attitude to which Nimrod tried to convert the
whole world. Therefore people said, "Since the creation of the world
there has been none like Nimrod, a mighty hunter of men and beasts, and
a sinner before God."

And not all this sufficed unto Nimrod's evil desire. Not enough that he
turned men away from God, he did all he could to make them pay Divine
honors unto himself. He set himself up as a god, and made a seat for
himself in imitation of the seat of God. It was a tower built out of a
round rock, and on it he placed a throne of cedar wood, upon which
arose, one above the other, four thrones, of iron, copper, silver, and
gold. Crowning all, upon the golden throne, lay a precious stone, round
in shape and gigantic in size. This served him as a seat, and as he sate
upon it, all nations came and paid him Divine homage.

### THE TOWER OF BABEL

The iniquity and godlessness of Nimrod reached their climax in the
building of the Tower of Babel. His counsellors had proposed the plan of
erecting such a tower, Nimrod had agreed to it, and it was executed in
Shinar by a mob of six hundred thousand men. The enterprise was neither
more nor less than rebellion against God, and there were three sorts of
rebels among the builders. The first party spoke, Let us ascend into the
heavens and wage warfare with Him; the second party spoke, Let us ascend
into the heavens, set up our idols, and pay worship unto them there; and
the third party spoke, Let us ascend into the heavens, and ruin them
with our bows and spears.

Many, many years were passed in building the tower. It reached so great
a height that it took a year to mount to the top. A brick was,
therefore, more precious in the sight of the builders than a human
being. If a man fell down, and met his death, none took notice of it,
but if a brick dropped, they wept, because it would take a year to
replace it. So intent were they upon accomplishing their purpose that
they would not permit a woman to interrupt herself in her work of
brick-making when the hour of travail came upon her. Moulding bricks she
gave birth to her child, and, tying it round her body in a sheet, she
went on moulding bricks.

They never slackened in their work, and from their dizzy height they
constantly shot arrows toward heaven, which, returning, were seen to be
covered with blood. They were thus fortified in their delusion, and they
cried, "We have slain all who are in heaven." Thereupon God turned to
the seventy angels who encompass His throne, and He spake: "Go to, let
us go down, and there confound their language, that they may not
understand one another's speech." Thus it happened. Thenceforth none
knew what the other spoke. One would ask for the mortar, and the other
handed him a brick; in a rage, he would throw the brick at his partner
and kill him. Many perished in this manner, and the rest were punished
according to the nature of their rebellious conduct. Those who had
spoken, "Let us ascend into the heavens, set up our idols, and pay
worship unto them there," God transformed into apes and phantoms; those
who had proposed to assault the heavens with their arms, God set against
each other so that they fell in the combat; and those who had resolved
to carry on a combat with God in heaven were scattered broadcast over
the earth. As for the unfinished tower, a part sank into the earth, and
another part was consumed by fire; only one-third of it remained
standing. The place of the tower has never lost its peculiar quality.
Whoever passes it forgets all he knows.

The punishment inflicted upon the sinful generation of the tower is
comparatively lenient. On account of rapine the generation of the flood
were utterly destroyed, while the generation of the tower were preserved
in spite of their blasphemies and all their other acts offensive to God.
The reason is that God sets a high value upon peace and harmony.
Therefore the generation of the deluge, who gave themselves up to
depredation, and bore hatred to one another, were extirpated, root and
branch, while the generation of the Tower of Babel dwelling amicably
together, and loving one another, were spared alive, at least a remnant
of them.

Beside the chastisement of sin and sinners by the confounding of speech,
another notable circumstance was connected with the descent of God upon
earth--one of only ten such descents to occur between the creation of
the world and the day of judgment. It was on this occasion that God and
the seventy angels that surround His throne cast lots concerning the
various nations. Each angel received a nation, and Israel fell to the
lot of God. To every nation a peculiar language was assigned, Hebrew
being reserved for Israel--the language made use of by God at the
creation of the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V: Abraham](loj107)
