[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](loj411)  [Next](loj413.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# XI. THE RETURN OF THE CAPTIVITY

### BELSHAZZAR'S FEAST

When God resolved to take revenge upon Babylon for all the sufferings it
had inflicted on Israel, He chose Darius and Cyrus as the agents of
vengeance. Cyrus, the king of Persia, and his father-in-law Darius, the
king of Media, together went up against Belshazzar, the ruler of the
Chaldeans. The war lasted a considerable time, and fortune favored first
one side, then the other, until finally the Chaldeans won a decisive
victory. To celebrate the event, Belshazzar arranged a great banquet,
which was served from the vessels taken out of the Temple at Jerusalem
by his father. While the king and his guests were feasting, the angel
sent by God put the "Mene, Mene, Tekel, Upharsin" on the wall, Aramaic
words in Hebrew characters, written with red ink. The angel was seen by
none but the king. His grandees and the princes of the realm who were
present at the orgy perceived nothing. The king himself did not see the
form of the angel, only his awesome fingers as they traced the words
were visible to him.

The interpretation given to the enigmatical words by Daniel put an end
to the merry-making of the feasters. They scattered in dread and fear,
leaving none behind except the king and his attendants. In the same
night the king was murdered by an old servant, who knew Daniel from the
time of Nebuchadnezzar, and doubted not that his sinister prophecy would
be fulfilled. With the head of King Belshazzar he betook himself to
Darius and Cyrus, and told them how his master had desecrated the sacred
vessels, told them of the wonderful writing on the wall, and of the way
it had been interpreted by Daniel. The two kings were moved by his
recital to vow solemnly that they would permit the Jews to return to
Palestine, and would grant them the use of the Temple vessels.

They resumed the war against Babylonia with more energy, and God
vouchsafed them victory. They conquered the whole of Belshazzar's realm,
and took possession of the city of Babylon, whose inhabitants, young and
old, were made to suffer death. The subjugated lands were divided
between Cyrus and Darius, the latter receiving Babylon and Media, the
former Chaldea, Persia, and Assyria.

But this is not the whole story of the fall of Babylon. The wicked king
Belshazzar arranged the banquet at which the holy vessels were
desecrated in the fifth year of his reign, because he thought it wholly
certain then that all danger was past of the realization of Jeremiah's
prophecy, foretelling the return of the Jews to Palestine at the end of
seventy years of Babylonian rule over them. Nebuchadnezzar had governed
twenty-five years, and Evil-merodach twenty-three, leaving five years in
the reign of Belshazzar for the fulfilment of the appointed time. Not
enough that the king scoffed at God by using the Temple vessels, he
needs must have the pastry for the banquet, which was given on the
second day of the Passover festival, made of wheaten flour finer than
that used on this day for the \`Omer in the Temple.

Punishment followed hard upon the heels of the atrocity. Cyrus and
Darius served as door-keepers of the royal palace on the evening of the
banquet. They had received orders from Belshazzar to admit none, though
he should say he was the king himself. Belshazzar was forced to leave
his apartments for a short time, and he went out unnoticed by the two
door-keepers. On his return, when he asked to be admitted, they felled
him dead, even while he was asseverating that he was the king.

### DANIEL UNDER THE PERSIAN KINGS

Daniel left Belshazzar and fled to Shushtar, where he was kindly
received by Cyrus, who promised him to have the Temple vessels taken
back to Jerusalem, provided Daniel would pray to God to grant him
success in his war with the king of Mosul. God gave Daniel's prayer a
favorable hearing, and Cyrus was true to his promise.

Daniel now received the Divine charge to urge Cyrus to rebuild the
Temple. To this end he was to introduce Ezra and Zerubbabel to the king.
Ezra then went from place to place and called upon the people to return
to Palestine. Sad to say, only a tribe and a half obeyed his summons.
Indeed, the majority of the people were so wroth against Ezra that they
sought to slay him. He escaped the peril to his life only by a Divine
miracle.

Daniel, too, was exposed to much suffering at this time. King Cyrus cast
him into a den of lions, because he refused to bow down before the idol
of the king. For seven days Daniel lay among the wild beasts, and not a
hair of his head was touched. When the king at the end of the week found
Daniel alive, he could not but acknowledge the sovereign grandeur of
God. Cyrus released Daniel, and instead had his calumniators thrown to
the lions. In an instant they were rent in pieces.

In general Cyrus fell far short of coming up to the expectations set in
him for piety and justice. Though he granted permission to the Jews to
rebuild the Temple, they were to use no material but wood, so that it
might easily be destroyed if the Jews should take it into their head to
rebel against him. Even in point of morals, the Persian king was not
above reproach.

Another time Cyrus pressingly urged Daniel to pay homage to the idol
Bel. As proof of the divinity of the idol the king advanced the fact
that it ate the dishes set before it, a report spread by the priests of
Bel, who entered the Temple of the idol at night, through subterranean
passages, themselves ate up the dishes, and then attributed their
disappearance to the appetite of the god. But Daniel was too shrewd to
be misled by a fabricated story. He had the ashes strewn upon the floor
of the Temple, and the foot-prints visible the next morning convinced
the king of the deceit practiced by the priests.

Pleasant relations did not continue to subsist forever between Cyrus and
Darius. A war broke out between them, in which Cyrus lost life and
lands. Fearing Darius, Daniel fled to Persia. But an angel of God
appeared to him with the message: "Fear not the king, not unto him will
I surrender thee." Shortly afterward he received a letter from Darius
reading as follows: "Come to me, Daniel! Fear naught, I shall be even
kinder to thee than Cyrus was." Accordingly Daniel returned to Shushtar,
and was received with great consideration by Darius.

One day the king chanced to remember the sacred garments brought by
Nebuchadnezzar out of the Temple at Jerusalem to Babylon. They had
vanished, and no trace of them could be discovered. The king suspected
Daniel of having had something to do with their disappearance. It booted
little that he protested his innocence, he was cast into prison. God
sent an angel who was to blind Darius, telling him at the same time that
he was deprived of the light of his eyes because he was keeping the
pious Daniel in durance, and sight would be restored to him only if
Daniel interceded for him. The king at once released Daniel, and the two
together journeyed to Jerusalem to pray on the holy place for the
restoration of the king. An angel appeared to Daniel, and announced to
him that his prayer had been heard. The king had but to wash his eyes,
and vision would return to them. So it happened. Darius gave thanks to
God, and in his gratitude assigned the tithe of his grain to the priests
and the Levites. Besides, he testified his appreciation to Daniel by
loading him down with gifts, and both returned to Shushtar. The recovery
of the king convinced many of his subjects of the omnipotence of God,
and they converted to Judaism.

Following the advice of Daniel, Darius appointed a triumvirate to take
charge of the administration of his realm, and Daniel was made the chief
of the council of three. His high dignity he was second to none but the
king himself exposed him to envy and hostility on all sides. His enemies
plotted his ruin. With cunning they induced the king to sign an order
attaching the penalty of death to prayers addressed to any god or any
man other than Darius. Though the order did not require Daniel to commit
a sin, he preferred to give his life for the honor of the one God rather
than omit his devotions to Him. When his jealous enemies surprised him
during his prayers, he did not interrupt himself. He was dragged before
the king, who refused to give credence to the charge against Daniel.
Meanwhile the hour for the afternoon prayer arrived, and in the presence
of the king and his princes Daniel began to perform his devotions. This
naturally rendered unavailing all efforts made by the king to save his
friend from death. Daniel was cast into a pit full of lions. The
entrance to the pit was closed up with a rock, which had all of its own
accord rolled from Palestine to protect him against any harm
contemplated by his enemies. The ferocious beasts welcomed the pious
Daniel like dogs fawning upon their master on his return home, licking
his hands and wagging their tails.

While this was passing in Babylon, an angel appeared to the prophet
Habakkuk in Judea. He ordered the prophet to bring Daniel the food he
was about to carry to his laborers in the field. Astonished, Habakkuk
asked the angel how he could carry it to so great a distance, whereupon
he was seized by his hair, and in a moment set down before Daniel. They
dined together, and then the angel transported Habakkuk back to his
place in Palestine. Early in the morning Darius went to the pit of the
lions to discover the fate of Daniel. The king called his name, but he
received no answer, because Daniel was reciting the Shema at that
moment, after having spent the night in giving praise and adoration to
God. Seeing that he was still alive, the king summoned the enemies of
Daniel to the pit. It was their opinion that the lions had not been
hungry, and therefore Daniel was still unhurt. The king commanded them
to put the beasts to the test with their own persons. The result was
that the hundred and twenty-two enemies of Daniel, together with their
wives and children numbering two hundred and forty-four persons, were
torn in shreds by fourteen hundred and sixty-four lions.

The miraculous escape of Daniel brought him more distinguished
consideration and greater honors than before. The king published the
wonders done by God in all parts of his land, and called upon the people
to betake themselves to Jerusalem and help in the erection of the
Temple.

Daniel entreated the king to relieve him of the duties of his position,
for the performance of which he no longer felt himself fit, on account
of his advanced age. The king consented on condition that Daniel
designate a successor worthy of him. His choice fell upon Zerubbabel.
Loaded with rich presents and amid public demonstrations designed to
honor him, Daniel retired from public life. He settled in the city of
Shushan, where he abode until his end. Though he was no prophet, God
vouchsafed to him a knowledge of the "end of time" not granted his
friends, the prophets Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi, but even he, in
the fulness of his years, lost all memory of the revelation with which
he had been favored.

### THE GRAVE OF DANIEL

Daniel was buried in Shushan, on account of which a sore quarrel was
enkindled among the inhabitants of the city. Shushan is divided in two
parts by a river. The side containing the grave of Daniel was occupied
by the wealthy inhabitants, and the poor citizens lived on the other
side of the river. The latter maintained that they, too, would be rich
if the grave of Daniel were in their quarter. The frequent disputes and
conflicts were finally adjusted by a compromise; one year the bier of
Daniel reposed on one side of the river, the next year on the other.
When the Persian king Sanjar came to Shushan, he put a stop to the
practice of dragging the bier hither and thither. He resorted to another
device for guarding the peace of the city. He had the bier suspended
from chains precisely in the middle of the bridge spanning the river. In
the same spot he erected a house of prayer for all confessions, and out
of respect to Daniel he prohibited fishing in the river for a distance
of a mile on either side of the memorial building. The sacredness of the
spot appeared when the godless tried to pass by. They were drowned,
while the pious remained unscathed. Furthermore, the fish that swam near
it had heads glittering like gold.

Beside the house of Daniel lay a stone, under which he had concealed the
holy Temple vessels. Once an attempt was made to roll the stone from its
place, but whoever ventured to touch it, fell dead. The same fate
overtook all who later tried to make excavations near the spot; a storm
broke out and mowed them down.

### ZERUBBABEL

The successor to Daniel in the service of the king, Zerubbabel, enjoyed
equally as much royal consideration and affection. He occupied a higher
position than all the other servants and officials, and he and two
others constituted the body-guard of the king. Once when the king lay
wrapped in deep slumber, his guards resolved to write down what each of
them considered the mightiest thing in the world, and he who wrote the
sagest saying should be given rich presents and rewards by the king.
What they wrote they laid under the pillow on which the head of the king
rested, that he might not delay to make a decision after he awoke. The
first one wrote: "Wine is the mightiest thing there is"; the second
wrote: "The king is the mightiest on earth," and the third, Zerubbabel,
wrote: "Women are the mightiest in the world, but truth prevails over
all else." When the king awoke, and he perused the document, he summoned
the grandees of his realm and the three youths as well. Each of the
three was called upon to justify his saying. In eloquent words the first
described the potency of wine. When it takes possession of the senses of
a man, he forgets grief and sorrow. Still more beautiful and convincing
were the words of the second speaker, when his turn came to establish
the truth of his saying, that the king was the mightiest on earth.
Finally Zerubbabel depicted in glowing words the power of woman, who
rules even over kings. "But," he continued, "truth is supreme over all;
the whole earth asks for truth, the heavens sing the praises of truth,
all creation quakes and trembles before truth, naught of wrong can be
found in truth. Unto truth belongeth the might, the dominion, the power,
and the glory of all times. Blessed be the God of truth." When
Zerubbabel ceased from speaking, the assembly broke out into the words:
"Great is truth, it is mightier than all else!" The king was so charmed
with the wisdom of Zerubbabel that he said to him: "Ask for aught thou
wishest, it shall be granted thee." Zerubbabel required nothing for
himself, he only sought permission of the king to restore Jerusalem,
rebuild the sanctuary, and return the holy Temple vessels to the place
whence they had been carried off. Not only did Darius grant what
Zerubbabel wished for, not only did he give him letters of safe-conduct,
but he also conferred numerous privileges upon the Jews who accompanied
Zerubbabel to Palestine, and he sent abundant presents to the Temple and
its officers.

As unto his predecessor Daniel, so unto Zerubbabel, God vouchsafed a
knowledge of the secrets of the future. Especially the archangel
Metatron dealt kindly with him. Besides revealing to him the time at
which the Messiah would appear, he brought about an interview between
the Messiah and Zerubbabel.

In reality, Zerubbabel was none other than Nehemiah, who was given this
second name because he was born in Babylon. Richly endowed as
Zerubbabel-Nehemiah was with admirable qualities, he yet did not lack
faults. He was excessively self-complacent, and he did not hesitate to
fasten a stigma publicly upon his predecessors in the office of governor
in the land of Judah, among whom was so excellent a man as Daniel. To
punish him for these transgressions, the Book of Ezra does not bear the
name of its real author Nehemiah.

When Darius felt his end approach, he appointed his son-in-law Cyrus,
who had hitherto reigned only over Persia, to be the ruler over his
kingdom as well. His wish was honored by the princes of Media and
Persia. After Darius had departed this life, Cyrus was proclaimed king.

In the very first year of his reign, Cyrus summoned the most
distinguished of the Jews to appear before him, and he gave them
permission to return to Palestine and rebuild the Temple at Jerusalem.
More than this, he pledged himself to contribute to the Temple service
in proportion to his means, and pay honor to the God who had invested
him with strength to subdue the Chaldeans. These actions of Cyrus partly
flowed from his own pious inclinations, and partly were due to his
desire to accomplish the dying behests of Darius, who had admonished him
to give the Jews the opportunity of rebuilding the Temple.

When the first sacrifice was to be brought by the company of Jews who
returned to Jerusalem under the leadership of Ezra, and set about
restoring the Temple, they missed the celestial fire which had dropped
from heaven on the altar in the time of Moses, and had not been
extinguished so long as the Temple stood. They turned in supplication to
God to be instructed by Him. The celestial fire had been hidden by
Jeremiah at the time of the destruction of the Holy City, and the law
did not permit them to bring "strange fire" upon the altar of God. An
old man suddenly remembered the spot in which Jeremiah had buried the
holy fire, and he led the elders thither. They rolled away the stone
covering the spot, and from under it appeared a spring flowing not with
water, but with a sort of oil. Ezra ordered this fluid to be sprinkled
upon the altar, and forthwith an all-consuming flame shot up. The
priests themselves scattered in fright. But after the Temple and its
vessels were purified by the flame, it confined itself to the altar
never more to leave it, for the priest guarded it so that it might not
be extinguished.

Among the band of returned exiles were the prophets Haggai, Zechariah,
and Malachi. Each one of them had a place of the greatest importance to
fill in the rebuilding of the Temple. By the first the people were shown
the plan of the altar, which was larger than the one that had stood in
Solomon's Temple. The second informed them of the exact location of the
altar, and the third taught them that the sacrifices might be brought on
the holy place even before the completion of the Temple. On the
authority of one of the prophets, the Jews, on their return from
Babylonia, gave up their original Hebrew characters, and re-wrote the
Torah in the "Assyrian" characters still in use at this day.

While the Temple work was in progress, the builders found the skull of
Araunah, the owner of the Temple site in the time of David. The priests,
unlearned as they were, could not decide to what extent the corpse lying
there had defiled the holy place. It was for this that Haggai poured out
his reproaches upon them.

### EZRA

The complete resettlement of Palestine took place under the direction of
Ezra, or, as the Scriptures sometimes call him, Malachi. He had not been
present at the earlier attempts to restore the sanctuary, because he
could not leave his old teacher Baruch, who was too advanced in years to
venture upon the difficult journey to the Holy Land.

In spite of Ezra's persuasive efforts, it was but a comparatively small
portion of the people that joined the procession winding its way
westward to Palestine. For this reason the prophetical spirit did not
show itself during the existence of the Second Temple. Haggai,
Zechariah, and Malachi were the last representatives of prophecy.
Nothing was more surprising than the apathy of the Levites. They
manifested no desire to return to Palestine. Their punishment was the
loss of the tithes, which were later given to the priest, though the
Levites had the first claim upon them.

In restoring the Jewish state in Palestine, Ezra cherished two hopes, to
preserve the purity of the Jewish race, and to spread the study of the
Torah until it should become the common property of the people at large.
To help on his first purpose, he inveighed against marriages between the
Jews and the nations round about. He himself had carefully worked out
his own pedigree before he consented to leave Babylonia, and in order to
perpetuate the purity of the families and groups remaining in the East,
he took all the "unfit" with him to Palestine.

In the realization of his second hope, the spread of the Torah, Ezra was
so zealous and efficient that it was justly said of him: "If Moses had
not anticipated him, Ezra would have received the Torah." In a sense he
was, indeed, a second Moses. The Torah had fallen into neglect and
oblivion in his day, and he restored and re-established it in the minds
of his people. It is due to him chiefly that it was divided up into
portions, to be read annually, Sabbath after Sabbath, in the synagogues,
and he it was, likewise, who originated the idea of re-writing the
Pentateuch in "Assyrian" characters. To further his purpose still more,
he ordered additional schools for children to be established everywhere,
though the old ones sufficed to satisfy the demand. He thought the
rivalry between the old and the new institutions would redound to the
benefit of the pupils.

Ezra is the originator of institutions known as "the ten regulations of
Ezra." They are the following: 1. Readings from the Torah on Sabbath
afternoons. 2. Readings from the Torah on Mondays and Thursdays. 3.
Sessions of the court on Mondays and Thursdays. 4. To do laundry work on
Thursdays, not Fridays. 5. To eat garlic on Friday on account of its
salutary action. 6. To bake bread early in the morning that it may be
ready for the poor whenever they ask for some. 7. Women are to cover the
lower parts of their bodies with a garment called Sinar. 8. Before
taking a ritual bath, the hair is to be combed. 9. The ritual bath
prescribed for the unclean is to cover the case of one who desires to
offer prayer or study the law. 10. Permission to peddlers to sell
cosmetics to women in the towns.

Ezra was not only a great teacher of his people and their wise leader,
he was also their advocate with the celestials, to whom his relation was
of a peculiarly intimate character. Once he addressed a prayer to God,
in which he complained of the misfortune of Israel and the prosperity of
the heathen nations. Thereupon the angel Uriel appeared to him, and
instructed him how that evil has its appointed time in which to run its
course, as the dead have their appointed time to sojourn in the nether
world. Ezra could not rest satisfied with this explanation, and in
response to his further question, seven prophetic visions were
vouchsafed him, and interpreted by the angel for him. They typified the
whole course of history up to his day, and disclosed the future to his
eyes. In the seventh vision he heard a voice from a thorn-bush, like
Moses aforetimes, and it admonished him to guard in his heart the
secrets revealed to him. The same voice had given Moses a similar
injunction: "These words shalt thou publish, those shalt thou keep
secret." Then his early translation from earth was announced to him. He
besought God to let the holy spirit descend upon him before he died, so
that he might record all that had happened since the creation of the
world as it was set down in the Torah, and guide men upon the path that
leads to God.

Hereupon God bade him take the five experienced scribes, Sarga, Dabria,
Seleucia, Ethan, and Aziel, with him into retirement, and dictate to
them for forty days. After one day spent with these writers in
isolation, remote from the city and from men, a voice admonished him:
"Ezra, open thy mouth, and drink whereof I give thee to drink." He
opened his mouth, and a chalice was handed to him, filled to the brim
with a liquid that flowed like water, but in color resembled fire. His
mouth opened to drink, and for forty days it was not closed. During all
that time, the five scribes put down, "in signs they did not
understand," they were the newly adopted Hebrew characters, all that
Ezra dictated to them, and it made ninety-four books. At the end of the
forty days' period, God spoke to Ezra thus: "The twenty-four books of
the Holy Scriptures thou shalt publish, for the worthy and the unworthy
alike to read; but the last seventy books thou shalt withhold from the
populace, for the perusal of the wise of thy people." On account of his
literary activity, he is called "the Scribe of the science of the
Supreme Being unto all eternity."

Having finished his task, Ezra was removed from this mundane world, and
he entered the life everlasting. But his death did not occur in the Holy
Land. It overtook him at Khuzistan, in Persia, on his journey to King
Artachshashta.

At Raccia, in Mesopotamia, there stood, as late as the twelfth century,
the synagogue founded by Ezra when he was journeying from Babylonia to
Palestine.

At his grave, over which columns of fire are often seen to hover at
night, a miracle once happened. A shepherd fell asleep by the side of
it. Ezra appeared to him and bade him tell the Jews that they were to
transport his bier to another spot. If the master of the new place
refused assent, he was to be warned to yield permission, else all the
inhabitants of his place would perish. At first the master refused to
allow the necessary excavations to be made. Only after a large number of
the non-Jewish inhabitants of the place had been stricken down suddenly,
he consented to have the corpse transported thither. As soon as the
grave was opened, the plague ceased.

Shortly before the death of Ezra, the city of Babylon was totally
destroyed by the Persians. There remained but a portion of the wall
which was impregnable by human strength. All the prophecies hurled
against the city by the prophets were accomplished. To this day there is
a spot on its site which no animal can pass unless some of the earth of
the place is strewn upon it.

### THE MEN OF THE GREAT ASSEMBLY

At the same time with Ezra, or, to speak more accurately, under his
direction, the Great Assembly carried on its beneficent activities,
which laid the foundations of Rabbinical Judaism, and constituted the
binding link between the Jewish Prophet and the Jewish Sage. The great
men who belonged to this august assembly once succeeded, through the
efficacy of their prayers, in laying hands upon the seducers unto sin,
and confining them, to prevent them from doing more mischief. Thus they
banished from the world "the desire unto idolatry." They tried to do the
same to "the desire unto lustfulness." This evil adversary warned them
against making away with him, for the world would cease to exist without
him. For three days they kept him a prisoner, but then they had to
dismiss him and let him go free. They found that not even an egg was to
be had, for sexual appetite had vanished from the world. However, he did
not escape altogether unscathed. They plastered up his eyes, and from
that time on he gave up inflaming the passions of men against their
blood relations.

Among the decrees and ordinances of the Great Assembly, the most
prominent is the fixation of the prayer of the Eighteen Benedictions.
The several benedictions composing this prayer date back to remote
ancient times. The Patriarchs were their authors, and the work of the
Great Assembly was to put them together in the order in which we now
have them. We know how each of the benedictions originated: 1. When
Abraham was saved from the furnace angels spoke: "Blessed art Thou, O
Lord, the Shield of Abraham," which is the essence of the first of the
Eighteen. 2. When Isaac lay stunned by fright on Mount Moriah, God sent
His dew to revive him, whereupon the angels spoke: "Blessed art Thou, O
Lord, who quickenest the dead." 3. When Jacob arrived at the gates of
heaven and proclaimed the holiness of God, the angels spoke: "Blessed
art Thou, O Lord, Thou holy God." 4. When Pharaoh was about to make
Joseph the ruler over Egypt, and it appeared that he was unacquainted
with the seventy tongues which an Egyptian sovereign must know, the
angel Gabriel came and taught him those languages, whereupon the angels
spoke: "Blessed art Thou, O Lord, who graciously bestowest knowledge."
5. When Reuben committed the trespass against his father, sentence of
death was pronounced upon him in the heavens. But when he repented, he
was permitted to continue to live, and the angels spoke: "Blessed art
Thou, O Lord, who hast delight in repentance." 6. When Judah had
committed a trespass against Tamar, and confessing his guilt obtained
forgiveness, the angels spoke: "Blessed art Thou, O Lord, who pardonest
greatly." 7. When Israel was sore oppressed by Mizraim, and God
proclaimed his redemption, the angels spoke: "Blessed art Thou, O Lord,
who redeemest Israel." 8. When the angel Raphael came to Abraham to
soothe the pain of his circumcision, the angels spoke: "Blessed art
Thou, O Lord, who healest the sick." 9. When Israel's sowing in the land
of the Philistines bore an abundant harvest, the angels spoke: "Blessed
art Thou, O Lord, who blessest the years." 10. When Jacob was reunited
with Joseph and Simon in Egypt, the angels spoke: "Blessed art Thou, O
Lord, who gatherest the dispersed of Thy people Israel." 11. When the
Torah was revealed and God communicated the code of laws to Moses, the
angels spoke: "Blessed art Thou, O Lord, who lovest righteousness and
justice." 12. When the Egyptians were drowned in the Red Sea, the angels
spoke: "Blessed art Thou, O Lord, who shatterest the enemy and
humiliatest the presumptuous." 13. When Joseph laid his hands on the
eyes of his father Jacob, the angels spoke: "Blessed art Thou, O Lord,
who are the stay and the support of the pious." 14. When Solomon built
the Temple, the angels spoke: "Blessed art Thou, O Lord, who buildest
Jerusalem." 15. When the children of Israel singing hymns of praise unto
God passed through the Red Sea, the angels spoke: "Blessed art Thou, O
Lord, who causest the hour of salvation to sprout forth." 16. When God
lent a gracious ear to the prayer of the suffering Israelites in Egypt,
the angels spoke: "Blessed art Thou, O Lord, who hearest our prayer."
17. When the Shekinah descended between the Cherubim in the Tabernacle,
the angels spoke: "Blessed art Thou, O Lord, who wilt restore Thy Divine
Presence to Jerusalem." 18. When Solomon dedicated his Temple, the
angels spoke: "Blessed art Thou, O Lord, whose Name is worthy of
praise." 19. When Israel entered the Holy Land, the angels spoke:
"Blessed art Thou, O Lord, who establishest peace."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII: Esther](loj413.md)
