[Intangible Textual
Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index) [Buddhist
Articles](../../bud/etc/index)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# AVALOKITEŠWARA'S DESCENT INTO THE HELL AVÎCHI.

### (from the *Kâra.n.da-vyûha*)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##### THE

# INDIAN ANTIQUARY,

### A JOURNAL OF ORIENTAL RESEARCH

##### IN

##### ARCHÆOLOGY, HISTORY, LITERATURE, LANGUAGES, PHILOSOPHY, RELIGION, FOLKLORE, &c., &c., &c.

 

##### EDITED BY

#### JAS. BURGESS, M.R.A.S., F.R.G.S.

 

#### VOL. VIII.--1879

###### \[Bombay, Education Society's Press\]

###### {Scanned and edited by Christopher M. Weimer, April 2002. Errata printed in the journal have been corrected.}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

## THE NORTHERN BUDDHIST LEGEND OF AVALOKITEŠWARA'S DESCENT INTO THE HELL AVÎCHI.

BY PROF. EDWARD B. COWELL, M.A., CAMBRIDGE.

   One of the most remarkable features of the Northern Buddhism, current
in Nepal, Tibet, Tartary, and China, as distinguished from the Southern,
current in Ceylon, Burma, and Siam, is the worship paid to the
Bodhisattwa Avalokitešwara.

   This Bodhisattwa<sup><span class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> is
supposed to be the son of Buddha Amitâbha, who reigns in the Western
heaven, called Sukhâvatî; to him is attributed the famous formula *Om
ma.ni padme hûm*, and he is looked upon as the tutelary saint of Tibet.
In China he is worshipped under a female form (corresponding apparently
to the Hindu notion of a deity's *šakti*, or personified power), as
Kwan-yin, or the Goddess of Mercy; and the Rev. S. Beal has translated
the Confessional Service addressed to her, in the second volume (new
series) of the *Journal of the R. A. Society*<sup><span
class="small">\[2\]</span></sup> (pp. 403-425).

   The name and attributes of Avalokitešwara are entirely unknown to the
Southern Buddhists; and his worship is one of the later additions which
have attached themselves to the simpler original system, as it spread
through India, and ultimately made its way to China and Japan.

   We cannot tell when this new deity first rose on the popular horizon;
but there are some indications which may help us to approximate in
fixing the date. Burnouf has remarked that the earlier and simpler
Northern books contain no allusion to this object of worship. "Ce nom
n'est pas cité une seule fois dans les Sûtras, ni dans les légendes de
*l'Avadâna Šataka*, ni dans celles du *Divya-Avadâna*, tandis qu'il
figure au premier rang dans notre *Lotus de la bonne loi*" (*Introd*. p.
115).

   Fa Hian, the Chinese traveller, who travelled in India from 399 to
414 A.D., expressly says (ch. xvi.) "men who belong to the Great
Translation worship the Prajnâ Pâramitâ, Manjušrî and Avalokitešwara;"
and in a subsequent chapter he describes himself as invoking
Avalokitešwara when exposed to a storm during his homeward voyage from
Ceylon to China. Hiwen Thsang also (who travelled in India in the
seventh century) is well acquainted with this saint, and mentions him in
several places. He finds his statue in Kapiša, south of the Hindu Kush,
and in a monastery in Udyâna, and in Kashmir, and he also mentions a
celebrated statue on the bank of the Ganges, famed for its power of
working miracles.

   The two best known Northern works which contain details respecting
Avalokitešwara are the *Kâra.n.da-vyûha* and the
*Saddharma-Pu.n.darîka*; the latter belongs to the collection of nine
books which, under the name 'the nine *dharmas*,' is regarded with such
veneration in Nepâl. The latter was translated by Burnouf as *Le lotus
de la bonne loi*; the text of the former has been recently published at
Calcutta, in a native series of Sansk.rit books. The editor does not
mention where he found the original MS. from which he has printed his
text; but it was probably one of the many MSS. presented by Mr. B. H.
Hodgson to the Bengal Asiatic Society, between 1824 and 1839.

   The twenty-fourth chapter of the *Lotus* is

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. A Bodhisattwa is a potential Buddha, one who has only one more
birth before he attains *nirvâ.na*. Burnouf explains Avalôkitešwara as a
barbarous Sansk.rit compound, meaning 'le seigneur qui a regardé en bas'
(*Introd*., p. 226).

2\. Cf. also the *Catena of Buddhist Scriptures from the Chinese*, pp.
383-409.\]

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span> devoted to the praises of
Avalokitešwara. To pronounce his name once is said to be equal in merit
to the continual worship of as many Buddhas as there are sands in the
sixty-two Ganges; and to invoke his aid in any difficulty or sorrow
brings certain deliverance. He is also represented as assuming various
forms in different worlds to proclaim the law of Buddha to different
creatures; to some he appears under the form of a Buddha; to others of a
Bodhisattwa, to others of Brahmâ, Indra, Mahešwara or even of a
universal monarch, a Brâhman or a Pišâcha, "in order to teach the law to
those beings made to be converted by these respective teachers." The
*Lotus* is mentioned by Hiwen Thsang; and when he visits the mountain
G.ridhrakû.ta in South Bihâr, he expressly adds that at the bottom of
the southern edge of the mountain there was a stûpa, and "here in olden
time Buddha explained the book of the lotus-flower of the law."

   The *Kâra.n.da-vyûha* has as its principal topic throughout the glory
of Avalokitešwara; and towards the end of the book we have glowing
accounts of the efficacy of the celebrated formula attributed to him.
The work is found in two different recensions, the one in prose, the
other in verse. The latter has been partly analysed by Burnouf
(*Introd*., pp. 220-231), but it is evidently the more modern version;
the MS. of the prose version at Paris, however, was too incorrect for
him to attempt to translate it. This defect has now been supplied by the
Calcutta text.

   The peculiar characteristic of Avalokitešwara, as worshipped by all
the Northern Buddhists, is that he has declared his purpose, under the
most solemn oath, to manifest himself to every creature in the universe,
in order to deliver all beings from the consequences of sin.<sup><span
class="small">\[3\]</span></sup>

   The first few chapters of the *Kâra.n.da-vyûha* are occupied with a
description of Avalokitešwara's descent into the hell Avîchi to deliver
the souls there held captive by Yama, the lord of the lower world. As
these seem to me to bear a curious resemblance to the apocryphal *Gospel
of Nicodemus*, I subjoin a translation from the Calcutta text, only
occasionally condensing the narrative where we have the usual repetition
of the nortoern Buddhist writings.

   The *Kâra.n.da-vyûha* (or 'arrangement of the basket of
Avalokitešwara's excellences') professes to be a narrative by the
disciple Ânanda, who was present at the original discourse as uttered by
Buddha, and it therefore commences with the usual formula *evam mayâ
šrutam*, "thus was it heard by me."

   *Chapter I*.--The work opens with the description of an assembly held
in the Jetavana Garden at Šrâvastî, where Buddha is attended by a vast
throng of mendicant followers as well as a still more numerous audience
from the spiritual world, thousands of Bodhisattwas, and sons of the
devas, with Indra, Brahmâsahâmpati, the Sun, the Moon, the Wind,
Varu.na, &c., at their head, with countless Nâgas, Gandharvas and
Kinnaras, with their daughters, and Apsarasas, besides hundreds of
thousands of lay devotees of both sexes.

   "When the vast assembly was met together, suddenly beams of light
issued forth in the hell Avîchi; and having issued forth they reached to
the monastery of Jetavana, and decorated the whole place. The pillars
appeared to be inlaid with heavenly gems, the upper chambers to be
covered with gold, the doors, staircases, &c., to be all of gold, and
the grounds outside to be filled with heavenly trees, with golden trunks
and silver leaves, and hung with costly garments, pearl wreaths, and all
kinds of ornaments, while the eye wandered over lakes filled with
water<sup><span class="small">\[4\]</span></sup> and various kinds of
flowers.

   *Chapter II*.--"Then in the midst of that assembly a noble
Bodhisattwa named Sarva.nîvara.navishkambhin, having risen from his
seat, and thrown his upper garment over one shoulder and bent his right
knee to the ground, putting his hands to his forehead, and turning
reverentially towards Buddha, thus addressed him, 'I am filled with
excessive wonder, O holy one; whence come these rays? of what Tathâgata
are they the visible majesty?'

   "Buddha replied, 'This is not the majesty of a Tathâgata<sup><span
class="small">\[5\]</span></sup>; O noble youth, the glorious
Bodhisattwa Avalokitešwara has entered into the great hell Avichi; and,
having delivered the beings there, is entering the city of the
*pretas*<sup><span class="small">\[6\]</span></sup>; hence is it that
these my rays have been emitted.'

<span class="small"></span>

\[3. Beal, *Buddhist Catena*, p. 383.

4\. This water has a curious epithet *ash.tângopeta-vâri*; does this
mean 'water flowing downwards,' *i.e.* prostrate, or endowed with the
eight qualities? Burnouf (*Introd*. p. 191) translates it 'vivifiante.'

5\. A title of a Buddha.

6\. The *pretas* are beings in a state of punishment, and are described
as always emaciated and hunger-stricken.\]

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

   "Then the Bodhisattwa Sarva.nîvara.navishkambhin addressed Buddha, 'O
holy one, what beings are found in Avîchi? there where no joy (vîchi) is
known, does he preach the law? in Avîchi, whose iron realm surrounded by
walls and ramparts is as it were one uninterrupted flame, like a casket
of flashing jewels. In that hell is a great wailing cauldron, wherein
myriads of beings are thrown; just as kidney beans or pulse sweat rising
and sinking in a pot full of boiling water, so do these beings endure
corporeal pain in Avîchi. How then, O holy one, does the Bodhisattwa
Avalokitešwara enter there?'

   "Buddha answered, 'O noble youth, just as an emperor enters into a
garden full of all precious things, attended with all his royal pomp, so
Avalokitešwara enters into the hell Avîchi. But his body undergoes no
change. When he approaches the hell, it becomes cool. Then the guards of
Yama, bewildered and alarmed, begin to think, 'what is this inauspicious
sign which has appeared in Avîchi?' When Avalokitešwara enters, then
there appear there lotuses as large as chariot wheels, and the cauldron
bursts open, and within that bed of fire a lake of honey is manifested.

   "Then Yama's guards, seizing all manner of weapons, swords, clubs,
javelins, &c. and all the defensive armour of hell, repaired to Yama,
the lord of justice, and addressed him: 'Let our king know that our
field of action<sup><span class="small">\[7\]</span></sup> is destroyed,
and is become a place of pleasure and filled with all joy.'

   "Yama replied, 'What is the reason that your field of action is
destroyed?'

   "The guards answered, 'Let our lord also know that an inauspicious
sign has appeared in Avîchi, all has become quiet and cool, and a man
assuming all shapes at will has entered there, wearing matted locks and
a diadem, and decked with divine ornaments, with his mind excessively
benevolent, and like an orb of gold. Such is the man who has entered,
and immediately on his entrance lotuses have appeared as large as
chariot wheels, and the cauldron has burst open, and within that bed of
fire a lake of honey is manifested.' Then Yama reflected, 'Of what god
is this the majesty? Of Mahêšwara, great in power, or Nârâya.na
worshipped by the five oceans, or have any of the other sons of the gods
obtained by boon such preëminent reward, and descended to this place, or
has some Râkshasa arisen, some rival of Râva.na?' Thus he stood and
pondered, and beholding with his divine eye he saw no such power in the
world of the gods,<sup><span class="small">\[8\]</span></sup> and who
else can have such power.

   "Then again he looked back to the hell Avîchi, and therein he beheld
the Bodhisattwa Avalokitešwara. Then Yama, the lord of justice, went
where he was, and having saluted his feet with his head began to utter
his praise. 'Glory to thee Avalokitešwara Mahêšwara, Padmašrî, the giver
of boons, the subduer, best overlooker of the earth, &c.<sup><span
class="small">\[9\]</span></sup> Thus having uttered his special praise,
Yama thrice circumnambulated round the Bodhisattwa and went out.'

   *Chapter III*.--"Then Sarva.nîvara.navishkambhin thus addressed
Buddha, 'When does the glorious Bodhisattwa Avalokitešwara come back?'
Buddha answered, 'Noble son, he has gone out of hell, and has entered
the city of the *pretas*. There hundreds of thousand of *pretas* run
before him, with forms like burned pillars, tall like skeletons, with
bellies like mountains, and mouths like needles' eyes. When
Avalôkitešwara comes to the *preta* city, the city becomes cold, the
thunderbolt ceases, and the doorkeeper, with uplifted javelin, his hand
busy with poison, and his eyes red with anger, suddenly by his power
begins to feel the influence of benevolence; saying, 'I must not have to
do with such a field of labour.'

   "Then the Bodhisattwa Avalôkitešwara having beheld that abode of
beings, being filled with compassion, caused ten Vaitara.nî rivers to
issue from his ten fingers, and ten more from his toes; and likewise in
his great compassion rivers of water poured from all his pores down to
those afflicted beings. And when the *pretas* tasted that water, their
throats became expanded and their limbs filled, and they were satiated
with food of a heavenly flavour. Then, regaining human consciousness,
they begin to think of worldly things. 'Alas, happy are the men of
Jambudwîpa who can seek cool shade, who can always live near their
parents and wives; who can cut the sacred staves, and repair the broken

<span class="small"></span>

\[7. *Asmâka"m karmabhûmih*.

8\. In p. 10 l. 20, I read *balam* for *varam*; the best Cambridge MS.
has *tachcha dêvanikâyê na pašyati sma îd.raša"m balam*.

9\. I omit the remainder of this address, which extends to a page.\]

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span> and crumbling monasteries and
shattered topes; who can always wait on those who recite, write, or read
the sacred books, and behold the miracles and various wonderworks of the
Tathâgatas, Pratyeka-buddhas, Arhats, and Bodhisattwas.

   "Thus meditating, they abandoned their *preta* bodies of punishment,
and became capable of attaining their desire. Then from Avalôkitešwara
there issued the precious royal *sûtra* of the 'great translation,' the
*kara.n.da vyûha*. Then having split with the thunderbolt of knowledge
the twenty-peaked mountain of the delusion which teaches that the body
exists,<sup><span class="small">\[10\]</span></sup> they were all born
in the Sukhâvatî world as Bodhisattwas named Âkânkshita-mukhâ.h. Then
Avalôkitešwara, when these beings were released and born in the land of
the Bodhisattwas, went out again from the city of the *pretas*.

   *Chapter IV*.--"Then Sarva.nîvara.navishkambhin said to Buddha, 'Does
Avalôkitešwara still delay to come?'

   "Buddha answered, 'Noble son, he is maturing the experience of many
thousands of myriads of beings; day by day he comes and matures them,
there never was such a manifestation of the Tathâgatas as there is of
the glorious Bodhisattwa Avalôkitešwara.'"

   Buddha then describes an assembly held in a former æon by a Buddha
named Sikhin, who sees Avalôkitešwara coming to him with a present of
heavenly flowers from Amitâbha. The Buddha Sikhin asks where he is
performing his works of merit. Avalôkitešwara replies that he is
visiting the innumerable hells in the universe, and that he has resolved
that he himself shall not grasp the perfect knowledge of a Buddha until
all beings have been not only delivered from punishment, but are settled
in the world of Nirvâ.na.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   If we now turn to the second part of the Apocryphal *Gospel of
Nicodemus*, we find a curious parallel to this legend.

   The two sons of Simeon, who are described as having been raised from
their graves at Christ's death, are brought before the chief priests.
They then call for ink, pens, and paper, and relate how they were in
Hades with the fathers, when suddenly "at the hour of midnight, upon
those dark places, there arose, as it were, the light of the sun, and
shone, and we were all lighted and saw one another." Satan then goes to
Hades and tells him of Jesus, his crucifixion and death, and tells him
to hold him firmly when he comes. Hades replies that Christ had lately
rescued Lazarus,--"I conjure thee both for thy benefit and mine, not to
bring him hither; for I think that he is coming here in order to raise
up all the dead. And this I say to thee, by the darkness which we keep,
if thou dost bring him hither, none of the dead will be left to me."

   While Satan and Hades were thus talking together, there came a great
voice like thunder, quoting [*Psalm* xxiv.
7](../../bib/kjv/psa.htm#24:7). "And when Hades heard, he said to Satan,
'Go forth if thou art able and resist him.' Therefore Satan went forth.
Then said Hades to his demons, 'secure well and firmly the brazen gates
and the iron bars, and hold down my bolts, and stand upright and watch
everything; for if he should enter here, woe will seize us.' On hearing
these things, the forefathers all began to reproach him, saying,
'All-devouring and insatiate, open that the King of Glory may come
in'...... The voice therefore came again, 'Lift up the gates.' Hades
hearing the voice a second time, answered as forsooth not knowing, and
said, 'Who is this King of Glory?' The angels of the Lord said, 'The
Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle.' And immediately at
that word the brazen gates were broken and the iron bars were crushed,
and all the dead that were bound were loosed from their bonds, and we
with them. And the King of Glory entered as a man, and all the dark
places of Hades were lighted up. Hades straightway cried, 'We are
conquered, woe unto us.' ..... Then the King of Glory seized the chief
ruler Satan by the head, and delivered him to the angels, and said,
'Bind with irons his hands and feet and neck and mouth.' Then he
delivered him to Hades, and said 'Take him and keep him safely until my
second coming.' Then Hades took Satan and said to him, 'Beelzebub,
inheritor of fire and punishment, enemy of the saints, by what necessity
hast thou contrived that the King of Glory should be crucified, that he
should come hither and spoil us? Turn and see that none of the dead is
left in me; but all that thou didst gain by the tree of knowledge, thou
hast lost it all by the cross.'"

<span class="small"></span>

\[10. For this curious phrase conf. Burnouf, *Introd*., p. 263, and
Childer's *Pâli Dict*. s.v. *sakkâya*.\]

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

   Christ then blesses all the fathers, beginning with Adam, and rises
with them in triumphal procession to paradise, where he delivers them to
the archangel Michael.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   Is the resemblance of the two legends accidental, or is it possible
that, in the Buddhist account, we have one of those faint reflections of
Christian influence (derived perhaps from Persian Christians settled in
western and southern India) which Professor Weber has endeavoured to
trace in the doctrine of faith as taught in the *Bhagavad Gîta*, and
some of the mediæval schools of the Vedânta? Much must depend on the
date of the *Apocryphal Gospel of Nicodemus*. Maury and Cowper would
place it as low as the fifth century, but Tischendorf with greater
probability would refer it to the second.<sup><span
class="small">\[11\]</span></sup> Even if the present form in which we
have the legend is interpolated, much of it must surely be of an earlier
date, and we find direct allusion to events described there, in the
pseudo-Epiphanius' homily in *Sepulchrum Christi*, and in the fifteenth
sermon of Eusebius of Alexandria.<sup><span
class="small">\[11\]</span></sup> At the same time we have no reason to
suppose that the Buddhist legend was connected with the earliest worship
of Avalôkitešwara. It is not alluded to by the Chinese travellers in
India, and the date of the *Kâra.n.da-vyûha* can only be so far fixed,
that it seems to have been translated into Tibetan in the ninth
century.<sup><span class="small">\[13\]</span></sup>--From *The Journal
of Philology*, vol. VI. (1876), pp. 222-231.

<span class="small"></span>

\[11. Quæ omnia conjuncta ejusmodi sunt ut libellum nostrum ex
antiquissimo scripto apocrypho secundi sæculi haustum vel transcriptum
putem. *Evang. Apocr*. p. 73.

12\. The phrase in Athanasius' third sermon *in Arios* reminds one of
the legend, though it may be only a rhetorical phrase,--{Greek: *all'
oudè ðémis pálin eipein deilian tòn Kúrion òn oi pulwroì tou Adou
pthksantes eksafhkan tòn Adhn*}.

13\. In Csomo Körösi's paper (*Asiat. Res.* vol XX. p. 530) it is said
to have been translated by Šâkya-prabhâ and Ratnarakshita; the former is
associated in p. 516 and p. 530 with Bandê-yê-shêsdê, one of the well
known Tibetan translators of the 9th cetury (p. 527).\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Journals](../index) [Buddhist Articles](../../bud/etc/index)
