[Intangible Textual
Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index) [Buddhist
Articles](../../bud/etc/index)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# THE AVALAMBANA SÛTRA

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##### THE

# INDIAN ANTIQUARY,

### A JOURNAL OF ORIENTAL RESEARCH

##### IN

##### ARCHÆOLOGY, HISTORY, LITERATURE, LANGUAGES, PHILOSOPHY, RELIGION, FOLKLORE, &c., &c., &c.

 

##### EDITED BY

#### JAS. BURGESS, M.R.A.S., F.R.G.S.

 

#### VOL. IX.--1880

###### \[Bombay, Education Society's Press\]

###### {Scanned and edited by Christopher M. Weimer, April 2002}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

AVALAMBANA.

BY REV. S. BEAL, B.A.

   Mr. Eitel, in his very useful *Handbook for the Student of Chinese
Buddhism*, arranges under the heading *Ulamba* the particulars which
relate to the "sacrifice for the dead" common among Buddhists, at least
in China and Japan, (and in Ceylon also, according to Spence Hardy;
*Manual of Buddhism* p. 59), made on the 15th day of the 7th month. This
title *Ulamba* should doubtless be restored to *Avalambana*, as Julien
gives it in his *Méthode* (1315), and as the Encyclopoodia
*Yi-tsi-kîng-yin-i* fully explains (*Kiwen* xiv., fol. 25). This title
*Avalambana* seems to be derived from the idea of the suspension, head
downwards, of the unhappy occupants of the *Limbus patrum*. This idea is
not a new one in Hindu fancy. We all know how the "Baital" or "Vetal,"
in the tale is suspended head downwards from a tree, and how Vikram
repeatedly cuts him loose and carries him away on his back. We may
remember also in the *Mahâbhârata* (*Vana Parvan*) how Agastya sees his
ancestors suspended by their heels in a pit, and was told by them that
they could only be extricated by his begetting a son (*Theatre of the
Indus*, vol. I., p. 322 n.). These instances are sufficient to show that
the term *Avalambana* is intended to signify literally the condition of
those unredeemed souls who suffer in purgatory (we have no other word)
by being suspended head downwards, till the sacrifice made by their
offspring on earth compensates to rescue them from their sufferings. How
nearly this idea of the Buddhists approaches to that of the condition of
souls in Limbus and their rescue by the offerings or sacrifices of their
friends on earth is too plain to need comment. Mr. Eitel, however, would
assign the origin of this custom of "sacrificing for the dead" among the
Buddhists to the time of the Yogachâra school, introduced into China
about A.D. 733. But we have, in fact, a *Sûtra* translated into Chinese
in the time of the Western Tsin <span id="page_86">p. 86</span> dynasty
(*i.e.* circ. 265 A.D.), by the famous priest Dharmaraksha, relating to
this very subject. It occurs in the 5th chapter of the collection called
*King-tsong-yo-shwo*, and is called *Fo-shwo-u-lam-pwan-king*, *i.e.*
the *Sûtra Avalambana* spoken by Buddha. We shall proceed to give a
translation of this short sermon, and so leave the matter in the hands
of the student.

 

The Avalambana Sûtra.

   Thus have I heard. Buddha at one time was residing in the country of
Šrâvasti, in the garden of Jeta the friend of the orphans. At this time
Mugalan having begun to acquire the six supernatural powers (irrdhi),
desiring above all things, from a motive of piety, to deliver his father
and mother, forthwith called into use his power of supernatural sight,
and looking throughout the world he beheld his unhappy mother existing
without food or drink in the world of *Prêtas* (hungry ghosts) nothing
but skin and bone. Mugalan, moved with filial pity, immediatety
presented to her his alms-bowl filled with rice. His mother, then taking
the bowl in her left hand, endeavoured with her right to convey the rice
to her mouth, but before it came near to her lips, lo! the rice was
converted into fiery ashes, so that she could not eat thereof. At the
sight of this, Mugalan uttered a piteous cry, and wept many tears as he
bent his way to the place where Buddha was located. Arrived there, he
explained what had happened, and awaited Buddha's instruction. On this
the master opened his mouth, and said, "The sin which binds your mother
to this unhappy fate is a very grievous one; from it you can never by
your own strength rescue her, no! nor yet all the powers of earth or
heaven, men or divine beings: not all these are equal to the task of
deliverance. But by assembling the priests of the ten quarters, through
their spiritual energy deliverance may be had. I will now recount to you
the method of rescue from this and all similar calamities." Then Buddha
continued:--"On the 15th day of the 7th month the priests of the ten
quarters being gathered together ought to present an offering for the
rescue of ancestors during seven generations past, as well as those of
the present generation, every kind of choice food and drink, as well as
sleeping materials and beds. These should be offered up by the assembled
priesthood as though the ancestors themselves were present, by which
they shall obtain deliverance from the pains, and be born at once in a
condition of happiness in Heaven." And, moreover, the World-honoured One
taught his followers certain words to be repeated at the offering of the
sacrifices, by which the virtue thereof would be certainly secured.

   On this Mugalan with joy accepted the instruction, and by means of
this institution rescued his mother from her sufferings.

   And so for all future time this means of deliverance shall be
effectual for the purpose designed, as year by year the offerings are
presented according to the form delivered by Buddha.

   Having heard these words, Mugalan and the rest departed to their
several places, with joyous hearts and glad thoughts.<sup><span
class="small">\[1\]</span></sup>

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. From *The Oriental*, Nov. 6, 1875.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Journals](../index) [Buddhist Articles](../../bud/etc/index)
