[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index) [Hindu
Articles](../../hin/etc/index)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# CHAITANYA AND THE VAISHNAVA POETS OF BENGAL

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##### THE

# INDIAN ANTIQUARY,

### A JOURNAL OF ORIENTAL RESEARCH

##### IN

##### ARCHÆOLOGY, HISTORY, LITERATURE, LANGUAGES, PHILOSOPHY, RELIGION, FOLKLORE, &c., &c., &c.

 

##### EDITED BY

#### JAS. BURGESS, M.R.A.S., F.R.G.S.

 

#### VOL. II.--1873

###### \[Bombay, Education Society's Press\]

###### {Scanned and edited by Christopher M. Weimer, May 2002}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

## CHAITANYA AND THE VAISHNAVA POETS OF BENGAL.

STUDIES IN BENGALI POETRY OF THE FIFTEENTH AND SIXTEENTH CENTURIES.

BY JOHN BEAMES, J.C.S., M.R.A.S. &c.

   THE PADKALPATARU, or 'wish-granting tree of song,' may be considered
as the scriptures of the Vaish.nava sect in Bengal. In form it is a
collection of songs written by various poets in various ages, so
arranged as to exhibit a complete series of poems on the topics and
tenets which constitute the religious views of the sect. The book has
been put together in recent times, and takes the reader through the
preliminary consecration, invocations and introductory ceremonies, the
rise and progress of the mutual love of Râdhâ and K.rish.na, and winds
up with the usual closing and valedictory hymns.

   Before beginning an analysis of this collection so remarkable from
many points of view, it will probably be of some assistance even to
those who have studied the history of Vaish.navism, if I state briefly
the leading points in the life of Chaitanya, and the principal features
of the religion which he developed, rather than actually founded.

   Bisambhar (Vishvambhara) Mišr was the youngest son of Jagannâth Mišr,
a Brahman, native of the district of Sylhet in Eastern Bengal, who had
emigrated before the birth of his son to Nadiya (Nabadwîpa), the capital
of Bengal.<span id="page_1_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_1_note_*) His mother
was Sachi Debi, daughter of Nilámbar Chakravarti. She bore to Jagannâth
eight daughters who all died young; her first-born child, however, was a
son named Biswarúp, who afterwards under the name of Nityânand became
the chief disciple of his more famous brother. Bisambhar was born at
Nadiya in the evening of the *Purnima* or day of the full moon of
Phâlgun 1407 Sakábda, corresponding to the latter part of February or
beginning of March A.D. 1486. It is noted that there was an eclipse of
the moon on that day. By the aid of these indications those who care to
do so can find out the exact day.<span
id="page_1_fr_†"></span>[†](#page_1_note_†) The passages in the original
are:--

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Šrî K.rish.na the Visible became incarnate in Nabadwip,<br />
For forty-eight years visibly he sported;<br />
The exact (date) of his birth (is) Šaka 1407,<br />
In 1455 he returned to heaven.<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

And again--

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>On the full moon of Phâlgun at even was the lord's birth<br />
<span id="page_2">p. 2</span><br />
At that time by divine provision there was an eclipse of the moon.<br />
   --<em>Ch</em>. I. xiii. 38.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   In accordance with the usual Bengali superstition that if a man's
real name be known he may be bewitched or subject to the influence of
the evil eye, the real name given at birth is not made known at the
time, but another name is given by which the individual is usually
called. No one but the father and mother and priest know the real name.
Bisambhar's usual name in childhood was Nimâi, and by this he was
generally known to his neighbours.

   In person, if the description of him in the Chaitanyacharitâmrita
(Bk. I. iii.) is to be considered as historical, he was handsome, tall
(six feet), with long arms, in colour a light brown, with expressive
eyes, a sonorous voice, and very sweet and winning manners. He is
frequently called "Gaurang" or "Gaurchandra," *i.e.*, the pale, or the
pale moon, in contrast to the Krishna of the Bhagvat who is represented
as very black.

   The name Chaitanya literally means 'soul, intellect,' but in the
special and technical sense in which the teacher himself adopted it, it
appears to mean perceptible, or appreciable by the senses. He took the
name Šrî K.rish.na Chaitanya to intimate that he was himself an
incarnation of the god, in other words, K.rish.na made visible to the
senses of mankind.

   The Charitâmrita being composed by one of his disciples, is written
throughout on this supposition. Chaitanya is always spoken of as an
incarnation of K.rish.na, and his brother Nityânand as a re-appearance
of Balarâm. In order to keep up the resemblance to K.rish.na, the
Charitâmrita treats us to a long series of stories about Chaitanya's
childish sports among the young Hindu women of the village. They are not
worth relating, and are probably purely fictitious; the Bengalis of
to-day must be very different from what their ancestors were, if such
pranks as are related in the Charitâmrita were quietly permitted to go
on. Chaitanya, however, seems to have been eccentric even as a youth;
wonderful stories are told of his powers of intellect and memory, how,
for instance, he defeated in argument the most learned Pandits. A great
deal is said about his hallucinations and trances throughout his life,
and we may perhaps conclude that he was more or less insane at all
times, or rather he was one of those strange enthusiasts who wield such
deep and irresistible influence over the masses by virtue of that very
condition of mind which borders on madness.

   When he was about eighteen his father died, and he soon afterwards
married Lachhmi Debi, daughter of Balabhadra Achârjya, and entered on
the career of a *grihastha* or householder, taking in pupils whom he
instructed in ordinary secular learning. He does not appear, however, to
have kept to this quiet life for long; he went off on a wandering tour
all over Eastern Bengal, begging and singing, and is said to have
collected a great deal of money and made a considerable name for
himself. On his return he found his first wife had died in his absence,
and he married again one Bishnupriyâ, concerning whom nothing further is
said. Soon after he went to Gayâ to offer the usual pi.n.da to the
*manes* of his ancestors.

   It was on his return from Gayâ, when he was about 23 years of age,
that he began seriously to start his new creed. "It was now," writes
Babu Jagadishnath, "that he openly condemned the Hindu ritualistic
system of ceremonies as being a body without a soul, disowned the
institution of caste as being abhorrent to a loving god all whose
creatures were one in his eyes, preached the efficacy of adoration and
love and extolled the excellence and sanctity of *the* name, and the
uttering and singing of *the* name of god as infinitely superior to
barren system without faith." Chaitanya, however, as the Babu points
out, was not the originator of this theory, but appears to have borrowed
it from his neighbour Adwaita Achârjya, whose custom it was, after
performing his daily ritual, to go to the banks of the Ganges and call
aloud for the coming of the god who should substitute love and faith for
mere rites and ceremonies. This custom is still adhered to by
Vaish.navas. The Charitâmrita veils the priority of Adwaita adroitly by
stating that it was he who by his austerities hastened the coming of
K.rish.na in the avatar of Chaitanya.

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>I praise that revered teacher Adwaita of wonderful actions,<br />
By whose favour even the ignorant may perceive the (divinity) personified.<br />
   --Ch. I. vi.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Thus in Sanskrit verses at the head of that chapter which sings the
virtues of Adwaita: by in the Bengali portion of the same chapter it is
asserted that Adwaita was himself an incarnation of a part of the
divinity, *e.g.*--

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

The teacher Adwaita is a special portion of god.

   And the author goes on to say that Adwaita was first the teacher then
the pupil of Chaitanya. The probability is that Adwaita, like the
majority of his countrymen, was more addicted to meditation than to
action. The idea which in his mind gave rise to nothing more than
indefinite longings when transfused into the earnest fiery nature of
Chaitanya, expanded into a faith which moved and led captive the souls
of thousands.

   His brother Nityânand was now assumed to be an incarnation of
Balarâm, and took his place as second-in-command in consequence. The
practice of meeting for worship and to celebrate "Sankîrtans" was now
instituted; the meetings took place in the house of a disciple Sribâs,
and were quite private. The new religionists met with some opposition,
and a good deal of mockery. One night on leaving their rendezvous, they
found on the door-step red flowers and goats' blood, emblems of the
worship of Durgâ, and abominations in the eyes of a Vaish.nava. These
were put there by a Brahman named Gopal. Chaitanya cursed him for his
practical joke, and we are told that he became a leper in consequence.
The opposition was to a great extent, however, provoked by the
Vaish.navas, who seem to have been very eccentric and extravagant in
their conduct. Every thing that K.rish.na had done Chaitanya must do
too, thus we read of his dancing on the shoulders of Murari Gupta, one
of his adherents; and his followers, like himself, had fits, foamed at
the mouth, and went off into convulsions, much after the fashion of some
revivalists of modern times. The young students at the Sanskrit schools
in Nadiya naturally found all this very amusing, and cracked jokes to
their hearts' content on the crazy enthusiasts.

   In January 1510, Chaitanya suddenly took it into his head to become a
Sanyasi or ascetic, and received initiation at the hands of Keshab
Bhârati of Katwa. Some say he did this to gain respect and credit as a
religious preacher, others say it was done in consequence of a curse
laid on him by a Brahman whom he had offended. Be this as it may, his
craziness seems now to have reached its height. He wandered off from his
home, in the first instance, to Purî to see the shrine of Jagannâth.
Thence for six years he roamed all over India preaching Vaish.navism,
and returned at last to Purî, where he passed the remaining eighteen
years of his life and where at length he died in the 48th year of his
age in 1534 A.D. His Bengali followers visited him for four months in
every year and some of them always kept watch over him, for he was now
quite mad. He had starved and preached and sung and raved himself quite
out of his senses. On one occasion he imagined that a post in his
veranda was Râdhâ, and embraced it so hard as nearly to smash his nose,
and to cover himself with blood from scraping all the skin off his
forehead; on another he walked into the sea in a fit of abstraction, and
was fished up half dead in a net by a fisherman. His friends took it in
turns to watch by his side all night lest he should do himself some
injury.

   The leading principle that underlies the whole of Chaitanya's system
is *Bhakti* or devotion; and the principle is exemplified and
illustrated by the mutual loves of Râdhâ and K.rish.na. In adopting this
illustration of his principle, Chaitanya followed the example of the
Bhagavad Gîtâ and the Bhâgavat Purâ.na, and he was probably also
influenced in the sensual tone he gave to the whole by the poems of
Jayadeva. The Bhakta or devotee passes through five successive stages,
*Sânta* or resigned contemplation of the deity is the first, and from it
he passes into *Dâsya* or the practice of worship and service, whence to
*Sákhya* or friendship, which warms into *Bâtsalya*, filial affection,
and lastly rises to *Mádhurya* or earnest, all-engrossing love.

   Vaish.navism is singularly like Sufiism, the resemblance has often
been noticed, and need here only be briefly traced.<span
id="page_3_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_3_note_*) With the latter the first
degree is *nâsût* or 'humanity' in which man is subject to the law
*shara*, the second *tarîkat*, 'the way' of spiritualism, the third
*´arûf* or 'knowledge,' and the fourth *hakîkat* or 'the truth.' Some
writers give a longer series of grades, thus--*talab*, 'seeking after
god;' *´ishk*, 'love;' *m´arifat*, 'insight;' *istighnâh*,
'satisfaction;' *tauhîd*, 'unity;' *hairat*, 'ecstacy;' and lastly
*fanâ*, 'absorption.' Dealing as it does with God and Man as two factors
of a problem, Vaish.navism necessarily ignores the distinctions of
caste, and Chaitanya was perfectly consistent in <span id="page_4">p.
4</span> this respect, admitting men of all castes, including
Muhammadans, to his sect. Since his time, however, that strange love of
caste-distinctions, which seems so ineradicable from the soil of India,
has begun again to creep into Vaish.navism, and will probably end by
establishing its power as firmly in this sect as in any other.

   Although the institution of love towards the divine nature, and the
doctrine that this love was reciprocated, were certainly a great
improvement on the morbid gloom of Šiva-worship, the colourless
negativeness of Buddhism, and the childish intricacy of ceremonies which
formed the religion of the mass of ordinary Hindus, still we cannot find
much to admire in it. There seems to be something almost contradictory
in representing the highest and purest emotions of the mind by images
drawn from the lowest and most animal passions.

"Ut matrona meretrici dispar erit atque discolor."

So must also Vaish.navism differ from true religion, the flesh from the
spirit, the impure from the pure. The singing of hymns about Râdhâ and
K.rish.na is much older than Chaitanya's age. Not to mention Jayadeva
and his beautiful, though sensual, Gîtagovinda.<span
id="page_4_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_4_note_*) Bidyapati, the earliest of
Bengali poets, and Cha.n.di Dâs both preceded Chaitanya, and he himself
is stated to have been fond of singing their verses. There was therefore
a considerable mass of hymns ready to his hand, and his contemporaries
and followers added largely to the number; the poems of the
*Padakalpataru* in consequence are of all ages from the fifteenth
century downwards; moreover, as Vaish.navism aspires to be a religion
for the masses, the aim of its supporters has always been to write in
the vulgar tongue, a fortunate circumstance which renders this vast body
of literature extremely valuable to the philologist, since it can be
relied on as representing the spoken language of its day more accurately
than those pretentious works whose authors despised everything but
Sanskrit.

   The *Padakalpataru*, to keep up the metaphor of its name throughout,
is divided into 4 *šakhas* or 'branches,' and each of these into 8 or 10
*pallabas* or smaller branches, 'boughs.' It should be explained that
the kîrtans are celebrated with considerable ceremony. There is first a
consecration both of the performers and instruments with flowers,
incense, and sweetmeats. This is called the *adhibás*. The principal
performer then sings one song after another, the others playing the drum
and cymbals in time, and joining in the chorus; as the performance goes
on many of them get excited and wildly frantic, and roll about on the
ground. When the performance is over the drum is respectfully sprinkled
with *chandana* or sandalwood paste, and hung up. Several performances
go on for days till a whole Šakhâ has been sung through, and I believe
it is always customary to go through at least one Pallab at a sitting,
however long it may be. The Bengali Kîrtan in fact resembles very much
the Bhajans and Kathâs common in the Marâ.tha country, and each poem in
length, and often in subject, is similar to the Abhangas of Tukarâm and
others in that province.

   The first Pallab contains 27 hymns, of these 8 are by Gobind Dâs, 8
by Baishnab Dâs, 3 by Brindâban Dâs, the rest by minor masters.
Brindâban Dâs and Parameshwar Dâs were contemporaries of Chaitanya, the
others--including Gobind Dâs, who is perhaps the most voluminous writer
of all--are subsequent to him. Of the hymns themselves the first five
are invocations of Chaitanya and Nityânand, and one is in praise of the
ceremony of Kîrtan. There is nothing very remarkable in any of them.
Number 5 may be taken as a specimen, as it is perhaps the best of the
batch.

   "Nand's son, lover of the Gopîs, lord of Râdhâ, the playful Syâm:

   *Is* he, Sachi's son, the Indra of Nadiya, the heart-charming
dwelling of gods and saints; victory to him who is love embodied to his
own <span id="page_5">p. 5</span> beloved, hail! hail to him who is the
joy of the existence of his well-beloved! hail to the delight of the
eyes of his comrades in Braj! hail to the charm of the sight of the
women of Nadiya! hail! hail to Sridam, Sudam, Subal, and Arjun,<span
id="page_5_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_5_note_*) bound by love to him whose
form is as a new cloud! hail to Râm and the rest, beautiful and dear
companions! hail to the charmer, the incomparable Gora (Chaitanya)! hail
to the mighty younger brother of Balarâm! hail! hail to Nityânand (who
is) joy (personified)! Hail to him who destroys the fear of good men,
the object of the hope of Gobind Dâs!"

   I would call attention here, once for all, to what is one of the
principal charms of Vaish.nava hymns, the exquisitely musical rhythm and
cadence. They seem made to be sung, and trip off the tongue with a lilt
and grace which are irresistible.

   This hymn is interesting as shewing how completely Chaitanya is by
his followers invested with the attributes of, and identified with,
K.rîsh.na; it has no other special merits; nor anything specially
interesting from a philological point of view as it is nearly all
Sansk.rit.

   The next six are in praise of the sect itself, of Adwaita, and the
principal disciples. That on Adwaita by his contemporary Brindaban Dâs
gives a lively picture of the old Brahman, then follow seven in praise
of the Kîrtanias or the old master-singers--Bidyapati, Jayadeva,
Cha.n.di Dâs; then four on K.rish.na and Râdhâ, containing only a
succession of epithets linked together by jay! jay!

   The twenty-third begins the adhibâs or consecration, and is curious
less for its language than for the description it gives of the
ceremonies practised. It is by the old masters Parameshwar and
Brindaban, with the concluding portion by a younger master Bansi. The
poem is in four parts and takes the form of a story how Chaitanya held
his feast. It runs thus:--

23\. *Atha sankirtanasya adhibâsa*.

   "One day coming and smiling, sitting in Adwaita's house, spake the
son of Sachî, having Nityânand with him and Adwaita, sitting in
enjoyment, he planned a great festivity. Hearing this, smiling with joy,
Sîtâ Thâkurânî coming spoke a sweet word: hearing that with joyful mind
the son of Sachî spoke somewhat in regard to arranging the festival.
'Listen, Thâkurânî Sîtâ,<span
id="page_5_fr_†"></span>[†](#page_5_note_†) bring the Baishnabs here;
making pressing invitation to them: whoso can sing, whoso can play,
invite them separately, man by man.' Thus Gora Rai speaking gave orders
for an assembly: 'Invite the Baishnabs! Bring out the cymbal and drum,
set out full pots painted with aloes and sandal-paste: plant plantains,
hang on them garlands of flowers, for the Kîrtan place joyfully. With
garlands, sandal, and betelnut, ghee, honey, and curds consecrate the
drum at evening-tide.' Hearing the lord's word, in loving manner she
made accordingly various offerings with fragrant perfumes: all cried
'Hari, Hari!' thus they consecrate the drum; Parameshwar Dâs floats in
enjoyment."

   Of the remainder of the adhibâs I give merely a paraphrase ommiting
the numerous repetitions.

   2. Having prepared the entertainment she invites them, "kindly visit
us, to you and Vaish.navas, this is my petition, come and see and
complete the feast;" thus entreating she brought the honoured guests,
they consecrate the feast. Joyfully the Vaish.navas came to the feast:
"to-morrow will be the joy of the great festivity, there will be the
enjoyment of the singing Šrî K.rish.na's sports, all will be filled with
delight." The merits of the assembly of the devotees <span
id="page_6">p. 6</span> of Šrî K.rish.na Chaitanya singeth Brindaban
Dâs.

   3. First set up the plantains, array the full pots, adorned with
twigs of the mango; the Brahman chants the Vedas, the women shout jay!
jay! and all cry Hari! Hari! Making the consecration with curds and
*ghi*, all display their joy; bringing in the Vaish.navas, giving them
garlands and sandal-paste, for the celebration of the *Kîrtan*; joy is
in the hearts of all, hither come the Vaish.navas, to-morrow will be
Chaitanya's kîrtan; the virtue of Šrî K.rish.na Chaitanya's name, and
the indwelling of Šrî Nityânand singeth Dâs Brindaban.<span
id="page_6_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_6_note_*)

   4. Jay! jay! in Nawadwip; by Gorang's order Adwaita goes to prepare
the consecration of the drum. Bringing all the Vaish.navas with sound of
"Hari bol," he initiates the great feast. He himself giving garlands and
sandal-paste, converses with his beloved Vaish.navas, Gobind taking the
drum plays ta-ta-tum tum, Adwaita lightly clashes the cymbals. Hari Dâs
begins the song, Sribâs keeps time, Gorang dances at the kîrtan
celebration. On all sides the Vaish.navas crowding echo "Hari bol,"
to-morrow will be the great feast. To-day consecrate the drum and hang
it up, joyfully saith Bansi sound victory! victory!!

   Having thus concluded the initiatory ceremonies in the lst Pallab,
the 2nd Pallab begins the real "Kîrtan." It contains 26 hymns by masters
who are mostly of comparatively recent date. Of the old masters Gobind
Dâs and Cha.n.di Dâs alone appear in this Pallab. We now commence the
long and minutely described series of emotions and flirtations (if so
lowly a word may be used) between Râdhâ and K.rish.na, and this Pallab
and in fact the whole of the first Sâkhâ is on that phase called
"pûrbarâga" or first symptoms of love. In No. 2, Cha.n.di Dâs represents
two of Râdhâ's Sakhis, or girl-friends, whispering together as they
watch her from a distance (the punctuation {*i.e.* colon (:)} refers to
the cæsura, not to the sense):

   "She stands outside the house, a hundred times restlessly she comes
and goes: depressed in mind, *with* frequent sighs, she looks towards
the kadamba jungle. Why has Rai (Radhikâ) become thus? serious is her
error, she has no fear of men, where are her senses, or what god has
possessed her? Constantly restless, she does not cover herself with the
corner of her robe: she sits still for a while, then rises with a start,
her ornaments fall with a clang. Youthful in age, of royal descent, and
a chaste maiden to boot: what does she desire, (why) does her longing
increase? I cannot understand her motives: from her conduct, this I
conceive, she has raised her hand to the moon<span
id="page_6_fr_‡"></span>[‡](#page_6_note_‡): Cha.n.di Dâs says with
respect she has fallen into the snare of the black one (K.rish.na)."

   This poem vividly expresses the first symptoms of love dawning in the
girl's heart, and from a religious point of view the first awakenings of
consciousness of divine love in the soul. It is difficult for the
European mind, trained to draw a broad distinction between the love of
God and love for another human being, to enter into a state of feeling
in which the earthly and sensual is made a type of the heavenly and
spiritual, but a large-souled charity may be perhaps able to admit that
by this process, strange though it be to its own habits and experiences,
there may have been some improvement wrought in the inner life of men
brought up in other schools of thought; and my own experience, now of
fourteen years standing, enables me to say that Vaish.navism does, in
spite of, or perhaps in virtue of, <span id="page_7">p. 7</span> its
peculiar *modus operandi*, work a change for the better on those who
come under its influence.

   Two more hymns on the same subject follow, and in No. 5 Râdhâ herself
breaks silence.

   "In the kadamba grove what man is (that) standing? What sort of word
coming is this: the plough of whose meaning has penetrated startlingly
the path of hearing? With a hint of union, with its manner of
penetrating making one well-nigh mad: My mind is agitated, it cannot be
still, streams flow from my eyes: I know not what manner of man it is
who utters such words: I see him not, my heart is perturbed, I cannot
stay in the house: My soul rests not, it flutters to and fro in hope of
seeing him: When she sees him, she will find her soul, quoth Urdbab
Dâs."

   I have left myself no space to finish this Pallab, or to make remarks
on the peculiarities of the language, which in the older masters would
more properly be called old Maithila than Bengali. It is nearly
identical with the language still spoken in Tirhut, the ancient Mithili,
and in Munger and Bhâgalpur, the ancient Magadha, than modern Bengali.
As the Aryan race grew and multiplied it naturally poured out its
surplus population in Bengal, and it is not only philologically obvious
that Bengali is nothing more than a further, and very modern development
of the extreme eastern dialect of Hindi. All these considerations,
however, I hope still further to develop at some future time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Journals](../index) [Hindu Articles](../../hin/etc/index)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_1">p. 1</span>

<span id="page_1_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_1_fr_*) The facts which here
follow are taken from the "Chaitanyacharitâmrita," a metrical life of
Chaitanya, the greater part of which was probably written by a
contemporary of the teacher himself. The style has unfortunately been
much modernized, but even so, the book is one of the oldest extant works
in Bengali. My esteemed friend Babu Jagadishnath Ray has kindly gone
through the book, a task for which I had not leisure, and marked some of
the salient points for me.

<span id="page_1_note_†"></span>[†](#page_1_fr_†) There was an eclipse
of the moon before midnight Feb. 18, O.S. 1486.

<span id="footnotes_page_3">p. 3</span>

<span id="page_3_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_3_fr_*) Conf. Capt. J. W.
Graham's paper 'On Sufiism,' *Bombay Literary Soc. Trans.* Vol. I. pp.
89 et seqq.; Râjendralâla Mittra's valuable introduction to the
*Chaitanya Chandrodaya* (Biblioth. Ind.), pp. ii-iv and xv; also Jones'
'Mystical Poetry of the Persians and Hindus,' *Asiat. Res.* Vol. III.
pp. 165-207; and Leyden, 'On the Rosheniah Sect, &c.,' *As. Res.* Vol.
XI. pp. 363-428.--ED.

<span id="footnotes_page_4">p. 4</span>

<span id="page_4_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_4_fr_*) It is many years now
since I read Gitagovinda as a text-book at college, but the impression I
still retain is that it was in many parts far too warm for European
tastes.

<span id="footnotes_page_5">p. 5</span>

<span id="page_5_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_5_fr_*) Names of Chaitanya's
disciples.

<span id="page_5_note_†"></span>[†](#page_5_fr_†) Sîta was the wife of
Adwaita.

<span id="footnotes_page_6">p. 6</span>

<span id="page_6_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_6_fr_*) The poet's name is
inverted to make a rhyme for Kîrtan in the preceding line.

<span id="page_6_note_‡"></span>[‡](#page_6_fr_‡) She has formed some
extravagant desire.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
