[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index.md) [Hindu
Articles](../../hin/etc/index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# THE HASTÂMALAKA

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##### THE

# INDIAN ANTIQUARY,

### A JOURNAL OF ORIENTAL RESEARCH

##### IN

##### ARCHÆOLOGY, HISTORY, LITERATURE, LANGUAGES, PHILOSOPHY, RELIGION, FOLKLORE, &c., &c., &c.

 

##### EDITED BY

#### JAS. BURGESS, M.R.A.S., F.R.G.S.

 

#### VOL. IX.--1880.

###### \[Bombay, Education Society's Press\]

###### {Scanned and edited by Christopher M. Weimer, April 2002}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

## THE HASTÂMALAKA.

BY PROF. E. B. COWELL, M.A., CAMBRIDGE.

   The poem, of which I give the text and translation below, is one
which is very well known in India, but has never been printed in Europe.
Most educated natives know it by heart, and it is universally considered
as one of the best summaries of the Vedânta doctrines. Its authorship is
uncertain; but there are two commentaries upon it, each of which
curiously enough is ascribed to Šankara Âchârya, the celebrated
Vedantist teacher of the eighth or ninth century. Dr. Hall in his
*Bibliographical Index* ascribes the poem to Hastâmalaka. The twelfth
stanza is quoted in the *Vedânta-sâra* (the only quotation which I have
noticed from the work), and Hastâmalaka is mentioned as the author in
the *Vidwan-manoranjinî* Commentary on the *Vedânta-sâra* by
Râmatîrtha-yati. Hastâmalaka is celebrated as one of Šankara's earliest
disciples; and he is afterwards said to have founded a modified form of
Vedântism recognizing Vishnu as the supreme Brahma. It is probable,
however, that the title of the poem has no reference to any author, as
*hastâmalaka* may simply mean 'a myrobalan in the hand,' and thus be
used metaphorically to signify something very plain and obvious, as the
round fruit on the open palm. The phrase is thus used in the *Vajrašuchi
Upanishad* (Weber's ed. p. 213, 10), where the true Brâhman is described
as the 'contented man, free from desires and passions, who sees
everything as visibly before him as a myrobalan on the palm of his hand'
(*karatalâmalakam iva*)<span id="page_25_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_25_note_1.md); and this is the
interpretation which one of my Pa.n.dits in Calcutta gave to the title.

   The ultimate identity of the individual and the supreme soul is the
great tenet of the Vedânta. 'That art thou' (*tat twam asi*) is the
first lesson of the neophyte, and the last vision of the perfected
mystic. The one supreme soul alone exists; all the separate
consciousnesses of individuals are but the reflection of the one soul on
the multitudinous 'internal organs' which are the creation of
'ignorance' or illusion. To reach reality we must strip off the
successive veils--the waking world first (where the soul is disguised by
the gross effects) and the world of dreams next (where it is disguised
by the subtle effects), till we reach that of sound sleep. Here for the
time the individual soul does attain its real nature, but its inherent
delusion remains latent, and is still capable of being called out into
actuality. Only the knowledge of the highest truth, as taught in the
Vedânta, can abolish ignorance, and so destroy personality in its
germ.<span id="page_25_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_25_note_2.md)

   The soul's real nature, as identical with Brahma, is always described
as 'essentially existent, intelligence, and joy'; but though defined as
essentially intelligence, this intelligence is not exercised on any
object, as all objects, as well as the internal organ or 'mind' which
cognizes transient perceptions, are produced by 'ignorance' and
therefore unreal. There is a striking verse of the *Yoga-vâšish.ta*<span
id="page_25_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_25_note_3.md):--

   "As would be the pure nature of light if all that is illumined by it,
as space, earth, and ether, were annihilated, such is the loneliness of
the pure-essenced spectator (soul), when all objects, as I, thou, and
the three worlds, have passed into non-existence."

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

 

   1. 'Who art thou, my child, and whose, and whither goest thou? What
is thy name, and whence art thou come? Tell me all this clearly to
gladden me,--thou fillest my heart with gladness.'

   2. 'I am not a man nor a god nor a demi-god, no Brâhman, Kshatriya,
Vaišya, nor Šûdra; no student, nor householder, nor anchorite, nor
religious mendicant; innate Knowledge am I.

   3. 'That which is the cause of the action of mind, eye, and the rest,
as the sun is the cause of the movements of living beings, but which
itself is void of all conditioning disguises, like the infinite
ether,--that Soul, essentially eternal perception, am I.

   4. 'That which being itself one, unchangeable, and essentially
eternal knowledge (as fire is essentially heat), is the substratum which
bears, as they act, the mind, eye, and the rest,--which are mere
Ignorance<span id="page_26_fr_6"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">6</span></sup>](#page_26_note_6.md),--that Soul, essentially
eternal perception, am I.

   5. 'The reflection of the face seen in the mirror is nothing in
itself as separated from the face, so is the personal soul in itself
nothing, the reflection of Intelligence on the internal organ,--that
Soul, essentially eternal perception, am I.

   6. 'As the reflection vanishes when the mirror is not, and the face
remains alone, apart from all delusion, so that Soul which remains
without a reflection when the understanding is not,--that Soul,
essentially eternal perception, am I.

   7. 'That which abiding aloof from mind, eye, and the rest, is itself
mind, eye, and the rest to mind, eye, and the rest, and whose nature
mind, eye, and the rest cannot reach,--that Soul, essentially eternal
perception, am I.

   8. 'That which, being one, shines forth self-manifested, possessing
pure intelligence, and itself essential Iight, and which yet appears as
though variously modified in various internal organs, as the one sun
shines reflected in the water of different vessels--that Soul,
essentially eternal perception, am I.

   9. 'As the sun, illumining countless eyes, illumines at the Same
moment the object to each, so that Soul, the one intelligence, which
illumines countless internal organs,--that Soul, essentially eternal
perception, am I.

   10. 'As the bodily sense illumined by the sun grasps the form of the
object, but when unillumined grasps it not, so that by which the one sun
must be itself illumined to illumine the sense,--that Soul, essentially
eternal perception, am I.

   11. 'As the one sun seems many in the agitated waters, and even when
reflected in still waters must be yet recognized as really separate, so
that which, though really one, <span id="page_27">p. 27</span> seems
many in the restless internal organs,--that Soul, essentially eternal
perception, am I.

   12. 'As he whose eye is covered with a cloud thinks in his delusion
that the sun is clouded and has lost its light, so that soul which seems
bound to him whose mind's eye is blind,--that Soul, essentially eternal
perception, am I.

   13 'That which being in itself one, is strung through all things and
with which nothing ever yet comes in contact, and which, like the ether,
is always pure and uncontaminated<span
id="page_27_fr_7"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">7</span></sup>](#page_27_note_7.md) in its nature,--that
Soul, essentially eternal perception, am I.

   14. 'As the pure crystals appear different by the presence of a
disguiser,<span id="page_27_fr_8"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">8</span></sup>](#page_27_note_8.md) so thou too appearest
different by the diversity of individual minds; as the moonbeams appear
to be tremulous in the water, so thou too, O Vish.nu, appearest to
flicker in our world!'

   Of the two different commentaries on the *Hastâmalaka*, ascribed to
Šankara Âchârya, one was printed at the end of the Calcutta edition of
the *Vedânta-sâra*, in 1853; there is a MS. of the other in the India
Office Library, belonging to the Gaikwâ.d collection, and copied Samvat
1563 (A.D. 1506). Both profess to claim Šankara Âchârya as their author,
but both, especially the latter, are far too diffuse to vindicate their
claim to have been written by the greatest philosophical author that
India has produced. As a specimen of each I subjoin the introductory
passage, in which each professes to explain the origin and object of the
poem. Neither gloss comments on the first two stanzas, as found in our
present text; both begin their explanations with the third.

   The commentary in the E. I. Library (MS. 2532) thus opens: "a certain
student, who had attained supreme knowledge, and who had assumed the
last body before absolute emancipation, having been ejected from home by
his relations because he seemed obstinately dumb, was pointed out by his
father, and accordingly asked by the author of the commentary (on the
*Vedânta-Sûtras*; *i.e.* Šankara), 'who art thou?' Desiring that others
also might have a dignity like his own. he proceeded accordingly to
describe his own pre-eminence, and to declare himself in the following
stanzas (*i.e.* beginning with the third)"

   The other Commentary opens with the following introduction:

   "All beings here have an instinctive desire to obtain happiness and
to escape pain; now a certain person, possessed of a pre-eminent amount
of merit, and considering worldly happiness as only so much pain from
its inseparable connection with pain and from its transitoriness,
becomes thoroughly disgusted with all mundane existence, and in his
disgust he strives to escape from its bonds; and his teacher, telling
him that the ignorance of the soul's nature is the cause of all mundane
existence, and the knowledge thereof the cause of its abolition,
instructs him accordingly in the knowledge of the individual soul."

   Neither of these opening paragraphs gives any hints as to the author
or the real circumstances of the composition of the poem. A Bengali
translation inserts a curious legend, that Šankara, in the course of his
wanderings as a religious reformer, met one day in the road a certain
beautiful youth, whom he addreased in the words of the first verse, and
who repeated the remainder of the poem as his reply; but there seems no
authority for this story.

   There is a curious parallel to the Hastâmalaka in an ode of the great
Persian mystic Shamsi Tabrîz, quoted by Erskine in the first volume (p.
108) of the *Bombay Literary Society's Transactions*:--

   "What advice, O Musalmâns, as I do not know myself;  
   I am neither Christian nor Jew, nor am I a fire-worshipper nor
Musulmân.  
   I am not from the East nor the West, nor am I of land or fire,  
   I am not from the country of 'Îrâk, nor am I from the land of
Khurâsân.  
   I am neither of water nor air, nor am I of fire or earth;  
   I am not of Adam or Eve, nor am I of the inhabitants of paradise.  
   My place is no place, my sign is without sign:  
   I have neither body nor soul,--what is there then? I am the soul of
my beloved."<span id="page_27_fr_10"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">10</span></sup>](#page_27_note_10.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Journals](../index) [Hindu Articles](../../hin/etc/index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_25"></span>p. 25

<span id="page_25_note_1"></span>[1](#page_25_fr_1.md). Cf. also
Vijnâna-bhikshu, *Comm. on Sânkhya Sûtra*, p. 96, 2 infr.

<span id="page_25_note_2"></span>[2](#page_25_fr_2.md). There is a
remarkable passage in Hippolytus' *Philosophumena* I. p. 29.--{Greek:
*touto dè tò fws ó fasi lógon tòn ðeòn, autòus mónous eidénai Braxmanas
légousi, dià tò aporripsai mónous thn kenodoksían, ó esti xitwn ths
psuxhs ésxatos*}.

<span id="page_25_note_3"></span>[3](#page_25_fr_3.md). Quoted in
Vijnâna-bhiksu's *Comm. on Sânkhya Sûtra*, p. 97.

<span id="footnotes_page_26"></span>p. 26

<span id="page_26_note_6"></span>[6](#page_26_fr_6.md). The MS. Comm. takes
it differently:--"that which being itself one, unchangeable, and
essentially eternal knowledge, is the substratum which bears as they
act, the mind, eye and the rest; which are mere ignorance,--as the fire
is the substratum that bears the heat,--that Soul; essentially, &c.

<span id="footnotes_page_27"></span>p. 27

<span id="page_27_note_7"></span>[7](#page_27_fr_7.md). The printed Comm.
explains *achchha* as *amûrtta*, the MS. as *samsargarahita*.

<span id="page_27_note_8"></span>[8](#page_27_fr_8.md). As the China rose
reflected in it.

<span id="page_27_note_10"></span>[10](#page_27_fr_10.md). From *The
Journal of Philology*, Vol. VI. (1876) pp. 161-169.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
