[Intangible Textual
Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index.md) [Buddhist
Articles](../../bud/etc/index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# THE *NGAN-SHIH-NIU* SÛTRA

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##### THE

# INDIAN ANTIQUARY,

### A JOURNAL OF ORIENTAL RESEARCH

##### IN

##### ARCHÆOLOGY, HISTORY, LITERATURE, LANGUAGES, PHILOSOPHY, RELIGION, FOLKLORE, &c., &c., &c.

 

##### EDITED BY

#### JAS. BURGESS, M.R.A.S., F.R.G.S.

 

#### VOL. IX.--1880

###### \[Bombay, Education Society's Press\]

###### {Scanned and edited by Christopher M. Weimer, April 2002. Errata printed in the journal have been corrected.}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

## THE SÛTRA CALLED *NGAN-SHIH-NIU*, *i.e.* "SILVER-WHITE WOMAN."<sup><span class="small">\[1\]</span></sup>

\[*Translated from the Chinese, the second part of the Volume indicated
by* \#\#\# (*Buddhist Tripitaka*). 1*st Sutra*.\]

BY REV. S. BEAL, B.A.

   THUS have I heard. On a certain occasion Bhagava was residing in the
country of She-wei (Šrâvasti) in the garden of Jeta, the friend of the
orphan, with 1250 great Bhikshus.

   At this time the world-honoured one addressed the Bhikshus in these
words:--"Oh Bhikshus! if men only knew the merit (*religious merit*) of
giving their goods or property in charity, and the reward (*phalam*) of
so doing as I know the matter--so that at the time of eating, whether it
be the first or the last mouthful taken, this feeling of charity were
always uppermost, and if not present so as to make men ready to give all
away, then no food were to be taken at all, \[--*then there would be
great profit*--\]. At which time the world-honoured one uttered the
following verses:--

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>"If only men of every kind<br />
Acted in accord with Buddha's words,<br />
And kept back somewhat from their food for charity,<br />
Then the result would be a great reward.<br />
But whether at the first mouthful<br />
Or at the last mouthful<br />
If charity be not uppermost in the mind,<br />
Then a man should not eat at all!"<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   At this time the world-honoured one having uttered these stanzas,
addressed the Bhikshus, and said:--Oh Bhikshus! at a certain time
innumerable ages (*kalpas*) ago there was a certain Royal capital: the
king of which was called Padma: there was a woman of that city called
"Silver-colour," who having all she required at home, went forth to
visit other houses to see how the occupants thereof were faring. Now
this woman was exceedingly beautiful, with all the distinguishing marks
of loveliness, and her body of a most dazzling whiteness \[*and hence
her name*\]. At this time, approaching a certain residence, she entered
it, and having done so, she found within it a woman just delivered of
her first-born child; this child was very fair to look upon, and of a
colour surpassingly beautiful. And now she saw this newly-delivered
woman seize the child in her hand with a view to devour it. At this time
the woman called "Silver-colour" in haste addressed the mother, and
said: "Sister! what are you going to do"? She replied "I am famished! I
have no life left in me! I have not what to eat! I must devour my
child!" Then Silver-colour asked her, saying, "Sister! stop a while,
this thing is impossible! Sister! is there not in all the house a morsel
of any food fit for you to eat?" She replied at once: "Sister! I had at
one time stores of food which I kept hoarded up with niggard care! and
therefore am I now left without a morsel to eat." Then Silver-colour
said: "Sister! stop a while, I will run to my house and bring you some
food." She replied: "Sister! my ribs are breaking, my back is rending in
twain, my heart is palpitating without a moment's rest, the world seems
all dark about me, before my sister reaches her home I shall be dead!"
Then Silver-colour thought thus with herself: "If I take the child and
go, then this poor woman will perish; if I do not take it when I leave,
she will devour it--what expedient is there then by which I can save
these two lives?" She asked therefore: "Sister! is there a knife in the
house I can use?" She answered "There is," and taking a knife she gave
it to Silver-colour: whilst she on her part, holding the knife with her
own hand, cut off her two breasts for the woman to eat; then addressing
her, she said: "Here--eat these two breasts of mine:" and when she had
eaten them, Silver-colour again enquired--"Sister! are you now
satisfied?" she replied "I am," Then Silver-colour continued: "Sister!
now this child redeemed with my own flesh is mine! I will take it, and
keep it as my own; and in my own house feed it and nourish it as it
requires." Saying these words, the blood flowing down over her person,
and leaving its traces along the ground, she departed and came to her
house. Then her relations and friends beholding her thus, flocked
around, and asked her saying, "Who has done this?" Silver-colour:
replied "I with my own hand have done it." Then they asked

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. Silver-White, or Silver-colour, is probably a corruption or
supposed derivation from Šivi, and this Sûtra is therefore the Northern
form of the *Šivi Jâtaka*. The derivation would be from the last root
\#\#\# to shine, from which comes \#\#\# "white."\]

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span> again, "And why have you acted thus?"
Then Silver-colour replied, and said: "I have resolved to cultivate a
heart full of compassion, and never to give it up, for thus I seek to
arrive at perfection (*anuttara samyuk sambodhi*)." Then all her
relatives answered, and said: "Though you give your body thus in
charity, and afterwards repent of what you have done, all this will not
tend to the completion of the *Paramita* you desire to accomplish (viz.,
of *dâna*)." And they asked her again: "When you thus mutilated
yourself, had you inward satisfaction, or did you do it with regret?"
Then Silver-colour said: "When I had resolved and vowed to cut off my
breasts, there was no feeling of regret in my mind, my mind wavered not
for a moment"--and then in proof she said: "and now in virtue of my vow
let my breasts be restored as they were at first." Having made this vow,
lo! her breasts were restored again as at first.<sup><span
class="small">\[2\]</span></sup> At this time all the Yakshas and so on,
in the city of Padma raised a great cry, and said: "The lady
Silver-colour has now with her own hands cut off her breasts!" Then the
earth-Devas (*gods*) hearing this cry took it up, and repeated it in the
air. The Devas hearing the cry repeated it in the higher worlds, till
the news spread even to the Brahma lokas. At this time the Divine Sâkra
râja reflected thus: "This indeed is an unprecedented event, that this
woman Silver-colour from her pity to all flesh should thus with her own
hands cut off her breasts. I will go now, and enquire of herself
respecting it." So he immediately changed himself into the form of a
Brâhman, holding in his left hand a golden pitcher, and bearing a golden
begging dish in his right hand, and provided with a golden staff, he
went thus to the Royal City of Padma. Having arrived, he gradually
approached the house in which Silver-colour dwelt, and taking his stand
without the door he sang the wonted words of those who begged for food.
Then Silver-colour having heard the chant of one who begged for food
outside the gate, immediately took a dish, and filling it up with food
she went forth. At this time the Brâhman addressed her, and said:
"Sister (lady): stop a while, I need no food;" on which she
replied--"Why not?" The Brâhman then said, "I am the Divine Sâkra, and I
have some doubt in my mind about your conduct. I have come therefore to
enquire further of you, answer me then, I pray you." Silver-colour
replied in these words: "Great Brâhman! you need but ask as you think
best, and I will answer you truly." Then the Brâhman asked her and said,
"Lady! is it true that you cut off your breasts to give as an act of
charity to another?" She replied--"It is true, great Brâhman!" The
Brâhman then said: "And what led you to do it?" Silver-colour
answered--"My great compassion, and my aim to accomplish the condition
of perfect wisdom." The Brâhman replied, "This is a very difficult
matter, this so-called perfection--for if there be the least vestige of
regret mixed up with the deed, then it can never lead to the (completion
of the) *Paramita* (*of charity*). Tell me, then, when you performed the
act, did your heart feel happy or not, and when you felt the anguish
consequent on the infliction of the wounds, had you no desire to change
your purpose?" Silver-colour replied: "Kausika! I swear that I have
never faltered a moment in my purpose to obtain the condition I have
named, in order that I may save the world, nor did I falter either when
I cut off my breasts, and in proof that I felt no particle of regret,
let me now, if what I say be true, be changed from a woman to a man."
Then Silver-colour having made this oath, was changed forthwith into a
man, and her heart was filled with joy unutterable and delight without
measure.<sup><span class="small">\[3\]</span></sup>

   And now as in this changed form he wandered forth from place to
place--he came to a certain tree, and sitting under it he fell asleep.
Now at this time the king of Padma died, and as he was childless, there
was great distress in the country. Then the great ministers went from
tree to tree, from village to village, from town to town, from capital
to capital, everywhere seeking one possessed of royal marks whom they
might choose as their king. And whilst thus in search they said: "How
shall we ever obtain a proper king to reign over us?" At this time there
was a certain powerful minister, who, being worn out with the excessive
heat, entered a tank covered with flowers to bathe, and whilst thus
occupied he saw there beneath a tree a man asleep of surpassing beauty,
and distinguished by all the necessary signs of Royalty,

<span class="small"></span>

\[2. Vide *Sacha Karîyo, Eastern Monachism*, p. 273.

3\. *Vide* as before, an explanation of the Sacha Karîya. Hardy. *East.
Mon.* p. 273.\]

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span> and he observed that although the sun
was declining fast, that the shadow of the tree still remained
protecting him. Then the great minister in a moment caused him to wake,
and when he woke he took him to the "Royal City" (Râjagriha, *i.e.* the
capital), and performing the accustomed tonsure, he clothed him in the
kingly vesture, and put on his head the jewelled crown, and accosted him
thus:--"Now you are a king, act and govern us accordingly!" To whom he
answered: "I am indeed unable to act as your king." The minister
answered: "But indeed you must;" to which he replied: "If indeed you
take me to reign over you, then on your parts you must take on
yourselves the ten religious (*virtuous*) vows (*acts*)--to which when
they agreed, he undertook to govern them as a king in righteousness
(*religion*), and he was called again "Silver-colour." Now at this time
the age of the people reached to 70,000 *nahutas* of years, so that the
king having reigned thus for hundreds and countless thousands of years,
at length came to die--and when about to die he repeated these words:--

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>"All things that exist are transitory,<br />
They must of necessity perish and disappear,<br />
Though joined together, there must be separation,<br />
Where there is life, there must be death,<br />
All depends on <em>conduct</em>,<br />
Whether good, or whether bad,<br />
All things born,<br />
Are unstable and inconstant."</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   Now, after that king's death he returned again to be born in the same
kingdom, the Royal capital of which was Padma. He was born as a
nobleman's child, very beautiful and fair. At eight years of age with
500 other youths he entered school; whilst there he enquired of those
elder ones who had already finished their school course, why they had
gone to school, and, on their replying they had gone to learn their
letters, he said "What profit is there in learning letters, only one
thing is necessary, and that is to aim at the unequalled and unsurpassed
condition of heart known as *Anuttara-samyak-sambhodi*." And what is the
meaning of that condition, they said. To which he replied, "you must
above all things aim at the accomplishment of the six *Paramitas*." And
what are the six:--"the *paramita* of charity (*dâna*), of moral conduct
(*šîla*),of patience (*kshânti*), of perseverance (*virya*), of
contemplation (*jñâna*), and of wisdom (*prajña*)." Then having heard
this they said, we will aim at this. Thus that child having led his
companions into this condition he reflected thus, "Now I desire to do
some small act of charity, whether it be for man (*biped*) or beast
(*quadruped*)." Having so thought he repaired to a public place of
burial (*sîtavana* or *šîtavana*), and forthwith taking a pocket knife
(*li-lih*, "*a knife for use*") be began to cut his body till the blood
gushed out, and then smeared himself all over with the blood and dust,
and lying down in the midst of the cemetery, he sang out the following
words: "Come now from far and near, ye two-footed and four-footed
creatures all, come here and eat! oh come and eat my flesh from my
body." Now among the birds that frequented that place there was one
whose name was *yeou-sheu* ("having a hand"), this one coming to the
hermit perched above his forehead and pecked at his right eye, and
havirng pecked at it, he let it go again. Then the hermit said: "Why do
you peck at my right eye, and then let it go!" The bird replied "of all
parts of a man's body I think the eye most beautiful (*to the taste
?*)." Then the hermit addressed the bird, and said: "Though a thousand
times over you pecked at my right eye and still let it go, yet should I
feel no anger or resentment in my heart." Then that bird pecked out both
his eyes, and the rest of the birds, all assembling in the cemetery,
came and devoured bit by bit the hermit's flesh, till naught but the
bleached bones were left.

   Having quitted this body he immediately came back, and was reborn in
that Royal city of Padma as the child of a Brâhman, very beautiful to
behold,and incomparable for grace. Having completed 20 years of age, his
parents addressed him, and said: "My son (*Mânava*), you must now get a
home of your own." Then the young man answered his father and mother,
and said: "What reason is there for me to have a house of my own, I have
no desire for a family residence, my only wish is to be allowed to enter
the deep mountains as a recluse." His parents having given their
consent, he left his home, and found a home amidst the mountains and the
forests; whilst wandering thus he saw amid the mountain woods two aged
Brâhmans, who were .Rishis; coming to them, he asked what they did
dwelling there; to which they <span id="page_148">p. 148</span>
answered--"Mânava! we dwell here in order to benefit living creatures,
practising all kinds of austerities." He then enquired further: "I also
with the same desire to benefit all living creatures am come here to
reside and to suffer all kinds of painful austerities." Then that youth
passed on to different places amid the forest glades, making the earth
his dwelling place (*living in holes ?*) and whilst thus practising
himself in religious austerities, he obtained, in virtue of his
meritorious conduct, the eyes of a Deva (*heavenly sight*). Then looking
round about on the place and its neighbourhood, not far off he saw a
tigress who dwelt there, and just about to bring forth her young. Then
the youth having observed this, began to think thus with himself: "this
tigress not long hence will bring forth her young, and having done so,
then perhaps she will die of hunger, or in her famished state desire to
eat her young." Having thought thus he then returned and asked the two
Brâhmans, and said, "Which of you will divide his body, and give it in
food to this tigress?" They answered him: "Neither of us is ready to
divide his body for food to give the tigress." Having received this
reply, after seven days the tigress was delivered, and having brought
forth her young she carried them in her mouth to the den, and again came
out. The youth having observed this proceeding forthwith went to the
place where the two .Rishis dwelt, and addressed them thus: "Great
.Rishis, the tigress has brought forth her young: if now ye indeed seek
to benefit all that lives, and for this purpose are suffering
austerities--now is your opportunity--ye may now cut up your body, and
give your flesh to the tiger-mother to eat." On this those two Brâhman
.Rishis immediately went to the place where the tigress was, and having
come they began to think thus--"who can patiently endure such pain as
this in practising charity? Who can cut off the flesh from his body that
he loves to give to a starving tiger?" Having reflected thus, that newly
delivered tiger-mother began to follow them at a distance, seeing which
they were filled with fear, and mounting into the air, flew away.

   At this time the Mânava youth looking around him spoke to those
Brâhmans, and said: "Is this your vow and your oath?" Having said this
he forthwith vowed, and said: "I now give my body to feed this tiger--oh
would that in consequence of this sacrifce I may obtain the unsurpassed
and perfect condition of being." Having made this vow, he took a knife,
and himself cut flesh from his body, and gave it in charity to the tiger
mother! "And now, Oh Bhikshus, entertain no doubt in your minds, it is
from compassion to you that I declare this--look no further, but accept
my words--it was I who was born in Padma as that Silver-colour who cut
off her breasts to rescue and save that child who was no other than
Rahula. It was I who gave my body in that *Sîtavana* to feed the birds.
It was I who cut off my flesh to feed that hungry tiger, whilst you were
the Brâhmans, and because of my self-denying charity in bearing sorrow
for others, I have now attained Perfection of Being."

   The Bhikshus hearing these words were filled with great joy and
exulted mightily.<sup><span class="small">\[4\]</span></sup>

<span class="small"></span>

\[4. The *Šivi Jâtaka* is pictured in Cave XVI. at Aja.n.tâ, and perhaps
another version also in Cave IX.; they are much injured in both cases,
but appear to agree more closely with the Sinhalese form of the
*Jâtaka*, than the Chinese. The latter however may throw light on these
and perhaps other wall-paintings at Aja.n.tâ.--ED.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Journals](../index) [Buddhist Articles](../../bud/etc/index.md)
