[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wfl03)  [Next](wfl05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Chapter IV  
Mountain Fairies

The Gwyllion--The Old Woman of the Mountain--The Black Mountain
Gwyll--Exorcism by Knife--Occult Intellectual Powers of Welsh Goats--The
Legend of Cadwaladr's Goat

I.

THE Gwyllion are female fairies of frightful characteristics, who haunt
lonely roads in the Welsh mountains, and lead night-wanderers astray.
They partake somewhat of the aspect of the Hecate of Greek mythology,
who rode on the storm, and was a hag of horrid guise. The Welsh word
gwyll is variously used to signify gloom, shade, duskiness, a hag, a
witch, a fairy, and a goblin but its special application is to these
mountain fames of gloomy and harmful habits, as distinct from the
Ellyllon of the forest glades and dingles, which are more often
beneficent. The Gwyllion take on a more distinct individuality under
another name-as the Ellyllon do in mischievous Puck--and the Old Woman
of the Mountain typifies all her kind. She is very carefully described
by the Prophet Jones in the guise in which she haunted Lanhyddel
Mountain in Monmouthshire. This was the semblance of a poor old woman,
with an oblong four-cornered hat, ash-coloured clothes, her apron thrown
across her shoulder, with a pot or wooden can in her hand, such as poor
people carry to fetch milk with, always going before the spectator, and
sometimes crying 'Wow up!' This is an English form of a Welsh cry of
distress) ' Wwb!' or 'Ww-bwb! \[Pronounced Wooboob\]. Those who saw this
apparition, whether by night or on a misty day, would be sure to lose
their way, though they might be perfectly familiar with the road.
Sometimes they heard her cry, 'Wow up!' when they did not see her.
Sometimes when they went out by night, to fetch coal, water, etc., the
dwellers near that mountain would hear the cry very close to them, and
immediately after they would hear it afar off, as if it were on the
opposite mountain, in the parish of Aberystruth. The popular tradition
in that district was that the Old Woman of the Mountain was the spirit
of one Juan White, who lived time out of mind in those parts, and was
thought to be a witch; because the mountains were not haunted in this
manner until after Juan White's death. \['Juan (Shui) White is an old
acquaintance of my boyhood,' writes to me a friend who was born some
thirty years ago in Monmouthshire. ' A ruined cottage on the Lasgarn
hill near Pontypool was understood by us boys to have been her house,
and there she appeared at 12 p.m., carrying her head under her arm.'\]
When people first lost their way, and saw her before them, they used to
hurry forward and try to catch her, supposing her to be a
flesh-and-blood woman, who could set them right; but they never could
overtake her, and she on her part never looked back; so that no man ever
saw her face. She has also been seen in the Black Mountain in
Breconshire. Robert Williams, of Langattock, Crickhowel, 'a substantial
man and of undoubted veracity,' tells this tale As he was travelling one
night over part of the Black Mountain, he saw the Old Woman, and at the
same time found he had lost his way. Not knowing her to be a spectre he
hallooed to her to stay for him, but receiving no answer thought she was
deaf. He then hastened his steps, thinking to over take her, but the
faster he ran the further he found himself behind her, at which he
wondered very much, not knowing the reason of it. He presently found
himself stumbling in a marsh, at which discovery his vexation increased
and then he heard the Old Woman laughing at him with a weird, uncanny
crackling old laugh. This set him to thinking she might he a gwyll; and
when he happened to draw out his knife for some purpose, and the Old
Woman vanished, then he was sure of it; for Welsh ghosts and fairies are
afraid of a knife.

II\.

Another account relates that John ap John, of Cwm Celyn, set out one
morning before daybreak to walk to Caerleon Fair. As he ascended Milfre
Mountain he heard a shouting behind him as if it were on Bryn Mawr,
which is a part of the Black Mountain in Breconshire. Soon after he
heard the shouting on his left hand, at Bwlch y Llwyn, nearer to him,
whereupon he was seized with a great fright, and began to suspect it was
no human voice. He had already been wondering, indeed, what any one
could be doing at that hour in the morning, shouting on the mountain
side. Still going on, he came up higher on the mountain, when he heard
the shouting Just before him, at Gilfach fields, to the right-and now he
was sure it was the Old Woman of the Mountain, who purposed leading him
astray. Presently he heard behind him the noise of a coach, and with it
the special cry of the Old Woman of the Mountain, viz., 'Wow up!'
Knowing very well that no coach could go that way, and still hearing its
noise approaching nearer and nearer, he became thoroughly terrified, and
running out of the road threw himself down upon the ground and buried
his face in the heath, waiting for the phantom to pass. When it was gone
out of hearing, he arose; and hearing the birds singing as the day began
to break, also seeing some sheep before him, his fear went quite off*.*
And this, says the Prophet Jones, was 'no profane, immoral man,' but 'an
honest,,peaceable, knowing man, and a very comely person more-over.

III\.

The exorcism by knife appears to be a Welsh notion; though there is an
old superstition of wide prevalence in Europe that to give to or receive
from a friend a knife or a pair of scissors cuts friendship. I have even
encountered this superstition in America; once an editorial friend at
Indianapolis gave me a very handsome pocket-knife, which he refused to
part with except at the price of one cent, lawful coin of the realm,
asserting that we should become enemies without this precaution. In
China, too, special charms are associated with knives, and a knife which
has slain a fellow-being is an invaluable possession. In Wales,
according to Jones, the Gwyllion often came into the houses of the
people at Aberystruth, especially in stormy weather, and the inmates
made them welcome--not through any love they bore them, but through fear
of the hurts the Gwyllion. might inflict if offended--by providing clean
water for them, and taking especial care that no knife, or other cutting
tool, should be in the corner near the fire, where the fairies would go
to sit. 'For want of which care many were hurt by them.' While it was
desirable to exorcise them when in the open air, it was not deemed
prudent to display an inhospitable spirit towards any member of the
fairy world. The cases of successful exorcism by knife are many, and
nothing in the realm of faerie is better authenticated. There was Evan
Thomas, who, travelling by night over Bedwellty Mountain, towards the
valley of Ebwy Fawr, where his house and estate were, saw the Gwyllion
on each side of him, some of them dancing around him in fantastic
fashion. He also heard the sound of a bugle-horn winding in the air, and
there seemed to be invisible hunters riding by. He then began to be
afraid, but recollected his having heard that any person seeing Gwyllion
may drive them away by drawing out a knife. So he drew out his knife,
and the fairies vanished directly. Now Evan Thomas was 'an old gentleman
of such strict veracity that he' on one occasion 'did confess a truth
against himself,' when he was 'like to suffer loss' thereby, and
notwithstanding he 'was persuaded by some not to do it, yet he would
persist in telling the truth, to his own hurt.' Should we find, in
tracing these notions back to their source that they are connected with
Arthur's sword Excalibur? If so, there again we touch the primeval
world. Jones says that the Old Woman of the Mountain has, since about
1800, (at least in South Wales,) been driven into close quarters by the
light of the Gospel-in fact, that she now haunts mines-or in the
preacher's formal words, 'the coal-pits and holes of the earth.'

IV\.

Among the traditions of the origin of the Gwyllion one which associates
them with goats. Goats are in Wales held in peculiar esteem for their
supposed occult intellectual powers. They are believed to be on very
good terms with the Tylwyth Teg, and possessed of more knowledge than
their appearance indicates. It is one of the peculiarities of the
Tylwyth Teg that every Friday night they comb the goats' beards to make
them decent for Sunday. Their association with the Gwyllion is related
in the legend of Cadwaladr's goat: Cadwaladr owned a very handsome goat,
named Jenny, of which he was extremely fond; and which seemed equally
fond of him; but one day, as if the very diawi possessed her, she ran
away into the hills, with Cadwaladr tearing after her, half mad with
anger and affright. At last his Welsh blood got so hot, as the goat
eluded him again and again, that he flung a stone at her, which knocked
her over a precipice, and she fell bleating to her doom. Cadwaladr made
his way to the foot of the crag; the goat was dying, but not dead, and
licked his hand--which so affected the poor man that he burst into
tears, and sitting on the ground took the goat's head on his arm. The
moon rose, and still he sat there. Presently he found that the goat had
become transformed to a beautiful young woman, whose brown eyes, as her
head lay on his arm, looked into his in a very disturbing way. 'Ah,
Cadwaladr,' said she, 'have I at last found you?' Now Cadwaladr had a
wife at home, and was much discomfited by this singular circumstance;
but when the goat--yn awr maiden--arose, and putting her black slipper
on the end of a moonbeam, held out her hand to him, he put his hand in
hers and went with her. As for the hand, though it looked so fair, it
felt just like a hoof. They were soon on the top of the highest mountain
in Wales, and surrounded by a vapoury company of goats with shadowy
horns. These raised a most unearthly bleating about his ears. One, which
seemed to be the king, had a voice that sounded above the din as the
castle bells of Carmarthen used to do long ago above all the other bells
in the town. This one rushed at Cadwaladr and butting him in the stomach
sent him toppling over a crag as he had sent his poor nannygoat. When he
came to himself, after his fall, the morning sun was shining on him and
the birds were singing over his head. But he saw no more of either his
goat or the fairy she had turned into, from that time to his death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V: Changelings](wfl05)
