[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](atom06)  [Next](atom08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Atom-Smashing Power of Mind*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1949\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  The Day of Judgment Chapter V 

AS WE COME to a realization of an entirely different consciousness new
relations are set up that it is sometimes difficult to explain to one
who believes in time and space.

In the Bible description of the "day of judgment" the Son of man has
always been represented as Jesus Christ, who is to be surrounded by
angels and sit on a throne passing judgment after death upon the just
and the unjust. But we understand the Son of man to be the spiritual
man, that which is ideal, unlimited, and divine. We come into entirely
different relations when we affirm, "I am a divine being." When we
affirm this we begin to pass judgment. We are the same man, but divine
ideas (angels) must come into our consciousness. Then we begin to judge
and know that our everyday thoughts are different from our divine, ideal
thoughts. We judge between our good thoughts and our evil thoughts, our
unlimited and our limited thoughts.

It is said we are to be judged after death according to deeds done in
the body, which are kept on record like books that are balanced; and if
the balance is found to be in our favor we go up, and if against us we
go down. But if we are spiritual now--divine--this spiritual part has
dominion, and we begin to exercise this dominion. The moment we

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

catch sight of this we begin to judge. We begin to put the thoughts that
are good on the right and the others on the left. All our ideas of the
attributes of our divine self we put on the right hand of power, while
the thoughts of disease, death, limitation and lack we put on the
left--denied, cut off.

This is not to occur after death. It is to begin right now!

We don't say that all is evil; that would be mental suicide. We just say
it is a "goat thought." We do not kill it but transform it.

After separating our innocent sheep thoughts, we begin to have fine,
high, discriminating judgment.

Then the Son of man has come in His glory, surrounded by His angels
(ideas). We know that He is limitless. "I am now a son of God," we say.
"I am divine." These angels (ideas) take their places on the throne with
the Son of man and judgment begins immediately.

Then today is the day of judgment!

We may have the perception and may see the angels (ideas) but we have
not passed judgment. We do not judge until we begin to deny and affirm.
Judgment commences the moment you accept the truth of your divine
sonship.

"Then shall the King say to them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of
my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of
the world."

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

Who is the king? The center of consciousness, the I AM, and the I AM has
power to just the extent you have the courage to assert your power. We
must all step forth and assert, "All authority hath been given unto me
in heaven and on earth." If the central spark is like the divine, then
we have all power.

We are here as the king, and we say to our true thoughts (angels), "Come
. . . inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
world." Then all is ours. There is no limit. We ask what we will and it
is done unto us. All good that we can conceive of is now ours. Is there
evidence of the oak in the acorn? No! But there is a pattern of an oak
there, and this pattern or image is what makes the tree. The image in
mind makes the condition.

Now is the time to plant the seed thought of the conditions we desire by
saying, "Come my good thoughts, let us inherit our kingdom."

We do not fear anything, for we have separated our sheep from the goats;
we have set our true thoughts on the right and have denied our error
thoughts any power whatever.

"I was hungry, and ye gave me to eat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me
drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me in; naked, and ye clothed me; I
was sick, and ye visited me; I was in prison, and ye came unto me."

We understand that our good thoughts always

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

minister to us in days of despondency and discouragement. We rest in the
thought that we have done a good deed in such and such an instance or
that we have been good at such and such a time. These are the thoughts
that minister to us. These thoughts are not conscious; but they are
laying the foundation for the coming of the Lord, so they say: "When saw
we thee hungry, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink? When saw
we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee? Or
when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee?"

Every thought of goodness makes a place, a form, and sets up a friendly
habit in the mind that is permanent and that in your time of need
ministers to you. You are glad to accept this ministry, for you have
done good because the Spirit of good is working through you. Thus you
reap the benefit of all the good you have ever done or thought. Your
thoughts give back results of the same nature as themselves. If in the
silence you have earnestly held to the pure and good you have built in
you a place for the pure and good. Every true thought has made a place
in your mind and when you are about to judge you will recognize it,
although you did not realize it at the time you sent it forth.

We are carried along by these thoughts until we reach the consciousness
of our I AM power. We do not know we are building ourselves, our
environment, our world, until we reach this consciousness.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

Then judgment of our world begins and is passed on our thought
creations. Suppose we have tried to cast the beam out of our eye so that
we might help our brother. This act will answer in our judgment day, "I
was that 'least' one."

Come into the kingdom of mind. Here everything that is in Principle is
yours.

These error thoughts and misconceptions of Truth are only age-lasting,
not everlasting.

Everything, all good, is to be gathered up, and everything is good at
its center. The essence of your body is good and of true substance. When
you sift your consciousness of all but the real and true, the body
becomes full of light.

The diamond owes its brilliance to the perfect arrangement of the
innumerable little prisms within it, each of which refracts the light of
the other. Man's body is made up of centers of consciousness--of
light--and if arranged so they radiate the light within you, you will
shine like the diamond. All things are in the consciousness and you have
to learn to separate the erroneous from the true, darkness from light.
The I AM must separate the sheep from the goats. This sifting begins
right now and goes on until the perfect child of God is manifest and you
are fully rounded out in all your Godlike attributes.

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](atom08)
