[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](atom19)  [Next](atom21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Atom-Smashing Power of Mind*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1949\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  Transfiguration Chapter XVIII 

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind.  
</span>

</div>

TRANSFIGURATION is always preceded by a change of mind. Our ideas must
be lifted from the material, the physical, to the spiritual. But first
we need to realize that it is possible for us to be transfigured as well
as to understand the law by which transfiguration is brought about.

The meaning of the Transfiguration has never been understood by those
who read the Scriptures as history. The transfiguration of Jesus has
always been considered a historical event, and its allegorical meaning
overlooked. To get the real meaning of the Transfiguration, we must
regard the experience of Jesus on the mount as typical of what often
takes place in those who are growing in spiritual consciousness.

We have evidences every day of the power of thought to transfigure the
countenance. We know that it is possible for a person to be transformed
in a degree by the thoughts that flit through his mind from moment to
moment, but we do not know his capacity for transfiguration, which is
unlimited, nor the part it plays in his attainment of the Christ
consciousness and the Christ body.

The real object of existence is to bring forth the

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

perfect man and attain eternal life. Eternal life must be earned. It is
usually assumed that man does not die, and this is true of the I AM; but
how about the consciousness, the soul? "The soul that sinneth, it shall
die" is the testimony of the Scriptures. That only lives which conforms
to the principle of eternal life.

Spirit exists eternally in God-Mind, of which we must become conscious.
This consciousness is soul and is the tangible part of soul. God-Mind
gives us the opportunity to incorporate into our consciousness His
attributes. These attributes are spiritual life, love, wisdom, strength,
power, in fact the essence of all good, which we realize first in mind,
then in body and affairs. Thus God gives us the spiritual perfection
that we are to manifest and retain eternally in consciousness. This is
His Son or Christ.

Jesus taught that we must attain the consciousness of eternal life, that
we have no life in us until we have attained this consciousness. Until
we demonstrate over death, the death of the body, we are in a transitory
state of existence.

Then the real object of existence is to attain the consciousness of
eternal life and to manifest all that is potentially involved in us by
our Creator. The Spirit--I AM or ego in man is eternal, but there must
be a consciousness of this quality of eternity; there must be a
consciousness of the image-and-likeness

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

man. There must be in every one of us a realization of that Spirit which
has in it--involved in its being--all that exists in the universal. If
we do not realize this, if we do not make it ours, we must eventually go
back to the universal. Jesus was the great way-shower to the attainment
of this realization of Spirit, and we shall miss "the prize of the high
calling" if we do not enter the path that He trod and that He pointed
out in many parables, illustrations, and experiences.

Then this overcoming or lifting up of man is a process through which we
are all passing if we have been converted to the Christ way of life.
Transfiguration plays a part and an important part in this evolution of
the soul. When we see the parallel between our experiences and the
transfiguration of Jesus we gain confidence to go forward.

In our study and application of the Christian life we all have times
when we are spiritually uplifted. Such a time is marked by a form of
spiritual enthusiasm, which is brought about by statements of Truth made
by ourselves or others--prayers, words of praise, songs,
meditations--any statement of Truth that exalts the spiritual realms of
the mind. Jesus was lifted up by Peter, James, and John (faith,
judgment, and love). Whenever we dwell on these virtues and try to live
up to them, they are exalted in consciousness, and they go up with us to
the mount of Transfiguration. You may not always realize

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

this. You may think that the uplifting was just a passing exaltation,
but it stamps itself on your soul and body and marks the planting of a
new idea in the upward trend of the whole man.

What is your attitude toward these times when you feel the mighty uplift
of Spirit? Do you give them their due importance; or when you again come
down into the valley, do you groan and question and wonder why you do
not abide in your exaltation, why there seems a falling away of the mind
from it?

Right here we must be wise and understand the relation of the higher
principles of man and their action in the redemption of soul and body.
Do not lose sight of the fact that the whole man must be spiritualized.
Some people get into the habit of going up in spirit to the mount of
Transfiguration, and they find it so enticing that they refuse to
descend to the valley again. Then soul and body are left to go their own
way, and a separation ensues. Such persons dwell continually on the
heights and ignore the essential unity of Spirit, soul, and body. Many
delusions arise among Christians because they lack understanding of the
law of the idea and its manifestations. All things, all actions, all
principles, are working toward the unity of God, man, and the universe.
But there must be a readjustment and a cleansing of the whole mass. If
there are things, whether mental or physical, that are not up to the
high standard of Spirit, they must die. Jesus on the

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

mount spoke of His death that was to follow. This death is of the
material perception of substance and life, which is reflected in man's
body of flesh. This must perish. The limited concept of matter and of a
material body must be transformed so that the true spiritual body may
appear.

We find that at every upward step we take in our evolution there is a
sloughing off of, a doing away with, some parts of consciousness that do
not accord with the higher principles. Jesus referred to it as the
planting of a seed in the ground and its dying before it can bring forth
the new life. The real life chit in the seed does not die. It lives and
multiplies when rid of its husk of bondage. In the refinement of metals
the fire, which is life, fuses the whole mass. Then the molten elements
form a new base; the precious metals go by themselves and the dross goes
by itself. The dross is poured off and thrown away, the precious metals
are saved.

Much the same thing takes place in the action of Spirit, soul, and body
when a person goes into the high consciousness and is transfigured. Some
persons call it conversion, some illumination, some the lifting-up power
of Spirit. Whatever you call it, it is the same thing. When the white
heat of God life comes upon man, there is exaltation and transfusion of
elements. The result of soul exaltation is a finer soul essence forming
the base of a new body substance. The passing away of the dross of
materiality

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

is a form of death.

You have doubtless wondered: "Why is it that, after I have had an
uplift, after I have had a high realization, or a strong treatment, I
have to meet so many errors? It seems to me that the negative side piles
in on me the next day or the next few weeks stronger than ever."

The cause of this is a gathering together of the evil and the good; the
day of judgment has arrived, and you are the judge. You may even be
buried for "three days" in that material consciousness which has not yet
come to the full light. But when you know the law that Spirit is always
with you you have nothing to fear, if you hold steadily to the Christ
presence that you realized in the mount of Transfiguration.

Having once seen Truth, having once had the illumination, you find that
the next step is to demonstrate it and not to be cast down or
discouraged by the opposite. When the crucifixion comes and you are
suffering the pangs of dying error, you may cry out, "My God, my God,
why hast thou forsaken me?" forgetting for the time the promises in the
mount of Transfiguration. This is when you need to realize that you are
passing through a transforming process that will be followed by a
resurrection of all that is worth saving.

Transfiguration is an essential step in every forward movement of men
and nations. All philosophers

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

have observed it in its various phases. Carlyle says: "Once risen into
this divine white heat of temper, were it only for a season and not
again, it is henceforth considerable through all its remaining history.
And no nation that has not had such divine paroxysms at any time is apt
to come to much."

Paul saw it in its work in man, when he wrote, "For our citizenship is
in heaven; whence also we wait for a Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ: who
shall fashion anew the body of our humiliation, that it may be conformed
to the body of his glory." "Then shall the righteous shine forth as the
sun in the kingdom of their Father." "We know that, if he shall be
manifested, we shall be like him; for we shall see him even as he is."
"As we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image
of the heavenly."

It is quite essential that those who are striving for "the prize of the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus" cling to their ideal as real. It
should not be regarded in the light of a past event or of a future
achievement, but as fulfillment here and now. This is illustrated in the
communion of Moses and Elijah with Jesus on the mount, Moses
representing the law, Elijah its fulfillment. Jesus is the I AM, in
which both the past and the future are joined. But Peter, not
understanding the lesson, wanted to make three tabernacles, representing
the tendency of man to separate and localize that which is spiritual and

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

universal.

When the voice of Principle proclaimed the spiritual man's
presence--"This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye
him"--there were no promises of the past or the future. Time has no
power over one who dwells in the mind of God. There is no time to the
mind of one who realizes omnipresence. Nothing will transfigure the race
and renew the body so rapidly as the denial of both past and future.
Persons get childish because they let their thoughts dwell upon the
past. Fear of the future weakens the virile life, and the feet stumble.
The Son of God is vigorous with the increasing life that is perpetually
flowing forth from the Father. When man realizes the omnipresent life
his whole organism is vitalized, and the soul is glorified. When man is
in spiritual consciousness his soul shines with an energy that
electrifies the outer clothing. Those little points of magnetic light,
which we have all observed upon removing our clothing at night, are weak
manifestations of the aura of the soul, which can be magnified until the
whole body is ablaze with it.

Some Christians teach the saving of the soul and the perishing of the
body. Jesus taught the saving of both soul and body. It is true that
this mortal body must be transfigured; it is but a picture or symbol of
the real, the spiritual body, which is the "Lord's body." The "Lord's
body" is the body

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

of Spirit, the divine idea of a perfect human body. When one realizes
this new body, the cells of the present body will form on new planes of
consciousness, they will aggregate around new centers, and the "Lord's
body" will appear.

"But we all, with unveiled face beholding as in a mirror the glory of
our Lord, are transformed into the same image from glory to glory, even
as from the Lord the Spirit."

When the body is devitalized by excessive labor, dissipation, or any
loss of vital force, its aura shrinks away and a consciousness akin to
that of being unclothed is evident. To dream of being naked or partly
clothed is a warning by Spirit that the reserve vital force has been
dissipated and the natural clothing of the body removed. Continuous
disregard of the law of conservation of vital force is followed by
various diseases and finally death. During sleep the system, under
natural law, seeks to equalize the vital forces, and it does so if the
intellectual concentration has not been too great. A dream of falling
means that this force, which has been piled up in the head, is falling
down into the lower channels of the body, and is restoring equilibrium
at the expense of harmonious reaction. When the mind is adjusted to the
divine law, all the vital forces flow harmoniously and the aura glows
about the body as a beautiful white light, protecting it from all
discord from without and purifying it continually from within.

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

This is the state of the perfected man described in Revelation 1:14-16.

"And his head and his hair were white as white wool, white as snow; and
his eyes were as a flame of fire; and his feet like unto burnished brass
. . . and his voice as the voice of many waters. . . . and his
countenance was as the sun shineth in his strength."

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](atom21)
