[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](atom02)  [Next](atom04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Atom-Smashing Power of Mind*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1949\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  The Atomic Age Chapter I 

THE MAJORITY of people have crude or distorted ideas about the character
and the location of Spirit. They think that Spirit plays no part in
mundane affairs and can be known by a person only after his death.

"But Jesus said, 'God is Spirit'; He also said, 'The kingdom of God is
within you.' Science tells us that there is a universal life that
animates and sustains all the forms and shapes of the universe. Science
has broken into the atom and revealed it to be charged with tremendous
energy that may be released and be made to give the inhabitants of the
earth powers beyond expression, when its law of expression is
discovered.

"Jesus evidently knew about this hidden energy in matter and used His
knowledge to perform so-called miracles.

"Our modern scientists say that a single drop of water contains enough
latent energy to blow up a ten-story building. This energy, existence of
which has been discovered by modern scientists, is the same kind of
spiritual energy that was known to Elijah, Elisha, and Jesus, and used
by them to perform miracles.

"By the power of his thought Elijah penetrated the atoms and
precipitated an abundance of rain. By

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

the same law he increased the widow's oil and meal. This was not a
miracle--that is, it was not a divine intervention supplanting natural
law--but the exploitation of a law not ordinarily understood. Jesus used
the same dynamic power of thought to break the bonds of the atoms
composing the few loaves and fishes of a little lad's lunch--and five
thousand people were fed.

"Science is discovering the miracle-working dynamics of religion, but
science has not yet comprehended the dynamic directive power of man's
thought. All so-called miracle workers claim that they do not of
themselves produce the marvelous results; that they are only the
instruments of a superior entity. It is written in I Kings, 'The jar of
meal wasted not, neither did the cruse of oil fail, according to the
word of Jehovah, which he spake by Elijah.' Jesus called Jehovah Father.
He said, 'The works that I do in my Father's name, these bear witness of
me.'

"Jesus did not claim to have the exclusive supernatural power that is
usually credited to Him. He had explored the ether energy, which He
called the 'kingdom of the heavens'; His understanding was beyond that
of the average man, but He knew that other men could do what He did if
they would only try. He encouraged His followers to take Him as a center
of faith and use the power of thought and word. 'He that believeth on
me, the works that I do

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

shall he do also; and greater works than these shall he do.'

"The great modern revival of divine healing is due to the application of
the same law that Jesus used. He demanded faith on the part of those
whom He healed, and with that faith as the point of mental and spiritual
contact He released the latent energy in the atomic structure of His
patients and they were restored to life and health.

"Have faith in the power of your mind to penetrate and release the
energy that is pent up in the atoms of your body, and you will be
astounded at the response. Paralyzed functions anywhere in the body can
be restored to action by one's speaking to the spiritual intelligence
and life within them. Jesus raised His dead bodies in this way, and Paul
says that we can raise our body in the same manner if we have the same
spiritual contact.

"What have thought concentration and discovery of the dynamic character
of the atom to do with prayer? They have everything to do with prayer,
because prayer is the opening of communication between the mind of man
and the mind of God. Prayer is the exercise of faith in the presence and
power of the unseen God. Supplication, faith, meditation, silence,
concentration, are mental attitudes that enter into and form part of
prayer. When one understands the spiritual character of God and adjusts
himself mentally to the omnipresent God-Mind, he has begun

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

to pray aright.

"Audible prayers are often answered but the most potent are silently
uttered in the secret recesses of the soul. Jesus warned against wordy
prayers--prayer uttered to be heard of men. He told His disciples not to
be like those who pray on the housetop. 'When thou prayest, enter into
thine inner chamber, and having shut thy door, pray to thy Father who is
in secret, and thy Father who seeth in secret shall recompense thee.'

"The times are ripe for great changes in our estimate of the abiding
place and the character of God. The six-day creation of the universe
(including man) is described in Genesis is a symbolic story of the work
of the higher realms of mind under divine law. It is the privilege of
everyone to use his mind abilities in the superrealms, and thereby carry
out the prayer formula of Jesus: 'Seek ye first his kingdom, and his
righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you.'"

The foregoing extract is from the "Health and Prosperity" column in
Unity for May, 1927. These comments are peculiarly applicable to the
present and also to a subject that has been agitating the public mind
for some time, the atomic bomb.

Of all the comments on or discussions of the indescribable power of the
invisible force released by the atomic bomb none that we have seen
mentions its spiritual or mental character. All commentators have

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

written about it as a force external to man to be controlled by
mechanical means, with no hint that it is the primal life that animates
and interrelates man's mind and body.

The next great achievement of science will be the understanding of the
mental and spiritual abilities latent in man through which to develop
and release these tremendous electrons, protons, and neutrons secreted
in the trillions of cells in the physical organism. Here is involved the
secret, as Paul says, "hid for ages and generations . . . which is
Christ \[superman\] in you, the hope of glory." It is through release of
these hidden life forces in his organism that man is to achieve immortal
life, and in no other way. When we finally understand the facts of life
and rid our minds of the delusion that we shall find immortal life after
we die, then we shall seek more diligently to awaken the spiritual man
within us and strengthen and build up the spiritual domain of our being
until, like Jesus, we shall be able to control the atomic energy in our
bodies and perform so-called miracles.

The fact is that all life is based upon the interaction between the
various electrical units of the universe. Science tells us about these
activities in terms of matter and no one understands them, because they
are spiritual entities and their realities can only be understood and
used wisely by the spiritually developed man. Electricians do not know
what electricity is, although they use it constantly. The Christian

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

uses faith and gets marvelous results, the electrician uses electricity
and also gets marvelous results, and neither of them knows the real
nature of the agent he uses so freely.

The man who called electricity faith doubtless thought that he was
making a striking comparison when in fact he was telling a truth, that
faith is of the mind and it is the match that starts the fire in the
electrons and protons of innate Spirit forces. Faith has its degrees of
voltage; the faith of the child and the faith of the most powerful
spiritual adept are far apart in their intensity and results. When the
trillions of cells in one's body are roused to expectancy by spiritual
faith, a positive spiritual contact results and marvelous
transformations take place. When Jesus asked His patients, "Believe ye
that I am able to do this?" He was making such a contact. Also when He
told those to whom He ministered, "Thy faith hath made thee whole," He
used the same law. When He turned water into wine and fed five thousand
by multiplying a few loaves and fishes, He performed in a masterly and
beneficial way what our scientists made possible in a destructive way by
releasing through the atomic bomb the pent-up forces of Spirit.

Scientists have invented a machine that records the forces of thought.
Every thought expressed by the mind radiates an energy as it passes
through the brain cells, and this machine measures the force of

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

these radiations. Sir James Jeans, the eminent British scientist, gives
a prophecy of this in one of his books. He says in substance that it may
be that the gods determining our fate are our own minds working on our
brain cells and through them on the world about us. This will eventually
be found to be true, and the discovery of the law of release of the
electronic vitality wrapped up in matter will be the greatest revelation
of all time.

When we awake to the fact that every breath we draw is releasing this
all-potent electronic energy and it is shaping our lives for good or
ill, according to our faith, then we shall begin to search for the law
that will guide us aright in the use of power.

People the world over were amazed and terrified when they read of the
destruction wrought on the cities and people of Japan by two atomic
bombs. But do we realize that millions of people are killed every year
by atomic force? Doctors tell us that it is the toxin generated in our
own bodies that kills us. What produces this destructive force? It must
be our own minds, and the remedy must also be in a change in mind. Paul
expressed this when he said, "Be ye transformed by the renewing of your
mind."

All persons who have dismissed the idea of miracle in the marvelous
works of Jesus and His followers, have looked forward to a time when the
law they used would be explained, but nearly all expected

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

it to come through spiritual means. But now science has opened up a
kingdom having all the possibilities of the kingdom of heaven taught by
Jesus. However Jesus said this kingdom is within us and would be
exercised constructively through our minds under divine law. The latest
discovery of science shows that through the development of the atom a
power will be cast right into our midst that will in its physical aspect
make the earth equal to our wildest dreams of heaven. Broadcasting
stations sending out on the ether light, heat, power, will be
established the world over, and every householder will have receiving
sets which he can turn on or off at will. The cost will be negligible.
Lighter-than-air forms of building material will be discovered and our
dwellings will float in the air and be transported from place to place
like airplanes. Even the climate of the whole planet may be transformed,
destructive forces no longer possible, and peace reign forever. Labor as
we now have it will disappear, production will become so easy that a man
will in a week raise enough food to last him a year. Everybody will
produce abundantly. Everybody will have everything he wants, and no one
will slave for wages. Art, science, religion, music, and the finer
things of life will be for all the people and those who do not expand
their minds to enjoy the finer things of life will be out of step with
the times.

Our men of science have found the key that unlocks

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

the door to the physical realm in the kingdom of the heavens, but the
spiritual domains are yet to be found and their doors unlocked by the
multitude.

There must be a change of mind by the people of the earth before the
tremendous uplift to be wrought by atomic energy can become beneficial
and permanent. Greed and selfishness will find a way to exploit it to
boost their ambition unless they are taught the truth. We should
therefore redouble our efforts to show man that the power that rules the
world is within him. "Greater is he that is in you than he that is in
the world."

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](atom04)
