[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bfd02)  [Next](bfd04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402152167/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Book of Filial Duty*, by Ivan Chen, \[1908\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

### INTRODUCTION

#### I. <span class="smallcaps">The Origin of the Book</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> *Hsiao Ching,* or *Book of Filial
Duty,* is generally held to be the work of an unknown pupil of Tsêng
Ts‘an, the disciple of Confucius, to whom is attributed the famous
Confucian classic known as *The Greater Learning.* Certainly it can be
traced back as far as 400 B.C., within a century from the death of
Confucius. The preservation of the text in its present form is due to
the Emperor Ming Huang (A.D. 685-762), one of the most fascinating
characters in Chinese history, who had it engraved, together with eleven
other of the Confucian writings, on tablets of stone and set up in his
capital of Chang-an. He afterwards added a commentary of his own, which
is still extant, and has proved invaluable to all commentators of a
later period. *The Book of Filial Duty* is often found in China bound up
with another treatise called the *Hsiao Hsüeh,* or *Teaching for the
Young,* of which the

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

following is a specimen: "The way to become a student is with meekness
and humility, receiving with confidence every word spoken by the master.
The pupil, when he sees men of virtue, should try to follow in their
steps; when he hears wise sayings, he should try to conform to them. He
must not harbour evil designs, but always act honourably. Whether at
home or abroad, he must have a fixed abode, and resort with those who
are well disposed, regulating his demeanour with care, and curbing the
passions."

Few books have enjoyed greater popularity amongst all classes in China
than *The Book of Filial Duty.* It may be called *The Book of Emperors,*
from the fact that so many Emperors, both before and after Ming Huang,
have commentated upon it. Equally it is *The Book of Youth,* being the
first treatise of importance placed in the hands of children, after the
horn books of elementary instruction. The reason for its survival after
so many centuries is not hard to seek. Family life has always been, from
time immemorial, the foundation-stone of the Chinese Empire, and filial
piety is the foundation-stone of family life. Nor does this duty of son
to father merely extend to the living. The living head of the family
pays due reverence to the countless ancestors who have preceded him. A
witty Chinese writer once remarked that in the West family life only
began after death—

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

in the family vault. Here, at any rate, after years of separation and
divided interests, the members met to enjoy a common oblivion. I cannot
but think that there is some exaggeration in this; yet not even the
greatest apologist of Western methods will venture to deny that the
Chinese and indeed most Oriental ideals of family life are superior to
his own. Whilst living, only the calls of Empire, or the demands of
their profession, may keep relations apart; but the interests of the
family are always greater than the interests of the individual, and no
exile is without hope of return to the home of his fathers. The dead
will not be forgotten, for it will be the duty of their sons to offer
sacrifice to their shades. The death-days of two generations of parents
are kept sacred with solemn festival, and the nameless and unnumbered
dead have their special days of ceremony and remembrance in the spring
and autumn. Every house has its family shrine, every village its hall of
ancestors. Thus the filial piety of the survivors honours those who have
gone.

As regards the living, respect is the great essential of daily
intercourse. The subject respects his emperor, the son his father, the
wife her husband, and the younger brother his elder brother. But respect
is not only for those older than ourselves, or of superior station. The
wisdom of Confucius is nowhere more clearly

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

shown than in his utterance concerning the respect to be paid to youth:
"A youth is to be regarded with respect. How do we know that his future
will not be equal to our present? If he reach the age of forty or fifty,
and has not made himself heard of, then he will indeed not be worthy of
respect."

*Maxima debetur pueris reverentia!*

The Chinese national spirit is a spirit of continuity; the spirit of the
Confucian philosophy is a spirit of harmony with the environment of
daily life. "Confucius," says Tzŭ-ssŭ, "possessed, as if by hereditary
transmission, the virtues of Yao and Shun (Emperors of the Golden Age),
and modelled himself on Wên and Wu (first King of the Chou dynasty, 1133
B.C.) as his exemplars. Above all, he kept in unison with the seasons of
the sky; below, he conformed to the water and the land.

"We may liken him unto the sky and earth in respect of the universality
with which they uphold and sustain things, the universality with which
they overspread and enfold things. We may liken him unto the four
seasons in respect of their varied march; unto the sun and moon in
respect of their alternate shining.

"All things are kept in train together without their injuring one
another; their ways go on together without interfering one with another:
the smaller forces in river streams, the greater

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

forces in ample transformations. It is this that makes the sky and earth
so great." <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

The first environment of the human soul is that of the family. Before we
can become good subjects, before we can aspire to study nature and mould
ourselves upon the laws of heaven and earth, we must first of all learn
to become good sons, to complete the unity of family life. All things
will be added in their due course. To the Chinese mind the successful
policy in life is a policy of adjustment. This policy runs from highest
to lowest, and back again from lowest to highest. The Emperor adjusts
himself to the requirements of his great Ministers, they in their turn
to the provincial governors, they in their turn to the local
magistrates, and so on down the scale of social order. So this policy of
adjustment works equally upwards from the youngest son of the meanest
family to the Emperor himself, who adjusts his methods to those employed
by his August Father. As *The Book of Odes says:*

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

That great and noble Prince displayed  
The sense of right in all he wrought;  
Adjusting justly, grade by grade,  
The spirit of his wisdom swayed  
Peasant and peer; the crowd, the court.

</div>

It is for this reason that *The Book of Filial*

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Duty* commences
with a chapter on "Filial Piety in the Son of Heaven." The Emperor is,
the Emperor always has been, the father of the greatest family on
earth—the Chinese nation.

#### II. <span class="smallcaps">The Twenty-four Examples of Filial Duty</span>

Instead of the *Hsiao Hsüeh,* or *Teaching for the Young,* which is
usually grouped with *The Book of Filial Duty,* I have chosen *The
Twenty-four Examples of Filial Duty* by way of illustration to the
*Hsiao Ching.* They are naïve and terse, and yet not without their
simple charm. Even where they lend: themselves to exaggeration, as in
the story of the old gentleman who dressed himself in gay garments and
frisked in front of his very venerable parents, they are not meaningless
nor devoid of humanity. The lesson to be drawn is that our duty towards
our parents is the first obligation in life, and that we should go, if
necessary, to all lengths to fulfil it. Nothing is known of the
authorship of these stories, or the time in which they are written. Each
story is accompanied by its commentary, and probably the stories
themselves originated during the Ming dynasty (A.D. 1368-1644), the
commentaries belonging mostly to the latter years of that dynasty. The
period dealt with in these tales is a very wide one, and ranges from the
time of the great Emperor Shun (*circa* 2300 B.C.) down to the Sung

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

dynasty (A.D. 900-1200). There have been many editions of *The
Twenty-four Examples* in Chinese, mostly embellished with quaint and
original woodcuts, of which the figure on the cover of the present
volume, kindly supplied by Mrs. Lionel Giles, is an example.

#### III. <span class="smallcaps">Filial Duty and Parental Love</span>

In conclusion, I hope none of my readers will imagine, from these
examples and the treatise that precedes them, that Chinese family life
is cold and repellent, and devoid of mutual love. The moment a tiny life
enters the circle it is guarded by the triple walls of kinship. In the
children our parents return to us; in the children we survive. All
through Chinese history the exile longs for return to wife and children.
All through Chinese literature you will find allusion to the love of
little ones which has been the heritage of the Chinese from time
unknown. *The Book of Odes,* quoted in Mr. Ku Hung-ming's eloquent
translation of the *Chung Yung,* or *Conduct of Life,* for this Series,
says:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

When wives and children and their sires are one,  
’Tis like the harp and lute in unison.  
When brothers live in concord and in peace,  
The strains of harmony shall never cease.  
The lamp of happy union lights the home,  
*And bright days follow when the children come.*

</div>

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

With the Chinese the natural joys of life have always been the most
sought after. Home, family, friendship, landscape, and flowers—these are
the pleasures which they delight in. The religion of Confucius is the
religion of daily life. On the side of the parent there is
responsibility; on the side of the child, obedience, but not a blind
one. Of the responsibility of parents there is no question. Confucius
himself laid down the law when he sentenced a father, who had brought an
accusation against his son, to be imprisoned with him. On being
remonstrated with, he made this memorable reply: "Am I to punish for a
breach of filial piety one who has never been taught to be filially
minded? Is not he who neglects to teach his son his duties equally
guilty with the son who fails in them? Crime is not inherent in human
nature, and therefore the father in the family and the government in the
State are responsible for the crimes committed against filial piety and
the public laws."

On the other hand, the obedient son must be able to discriminate and not
follow blindly, when the father is at fault. In the *Li Chi,* or *Book
of Rites*, it is written: "When his parents are in error, the son must
remonstrate with them with respect and gently. If they do not receive
his reproof, he must strive more and more to be dutiful and respectful
towards them till they are pleased, and then he must again point out
their fault."

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

The Chinese give respect to the living, and also reverence the dead. It
is from the past that they have tried to learn, and the past is a
pathway which the feet of spirits have trodden and made luminous. And,
moreover, no man can escape from his ancestors, even if he go to the
uttermost parts of the earth and dwell among strangers. Over the heads
of the family the politician, ancient and modern, looks to the State.
But China, from the shelter and security of her myriad bulwarks, has
watched the sun of many empires rise and set.

#### NOTE

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> preparing this little book for the
press, I am indebted to Mr. Lionel Giles and Mr. L. Cranmer-Byng for
their kind assistance. Mr. Giles has revised the English spelling of
Chinese names according to the system almost universally adopted by
sinologues to-day; while Mr. Cranmer-Byng has made himself responsible
for the Introduction. As regards *The Twenty-four Examples of Filial
Duty,* due acknowledgment must be made to Vol. VI. of *The Chinese
Repository,* which contains the only complete translation of these
stories, and has been extensively drawn upon for the present work.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[11:1](bfd03.htm#fr_0) Translated by John Carey
Hall in *Chinese Civilisation,* by Pierre Laffitte.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Doctrine of Filial Duty: Chapter I: The Meaning of Filial
Duty](bfd04)
