[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bfd20)  [Next](bfd22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402152167/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Book of Filial Duty*, by Ivan Chen, \[1908\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### CHAPTER XVIII

<span class="small">MOURNING FOR ONE'S PARENTS</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Confucius</span> said: "When a filial son loses
his parent, he, of course, cannot help crying piteously. He cannot feel
happy when he hears music. He will have no appetite for food, however
tempting a savoury. He will greet no visitor, have no regard for
elegance of speech, and will put on a mourning-dress instead of a
beautiful one. All these tell us the extent of his sorrow for his lost

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

parent. What is meant by the saying that he must try to eat something
after three days from the death of his parent, though he has no appetite
for it? It teaches us that although we have to show great sorrow for the
dead, yet we must not sacrifice ourselves on their account, and that we
must not carry self-mortification so far as to destroy our life. This is
the doctrine laid down by good men of old. That mourning only extends to
the period of three years shows that there is a limit for our sorrow.

"For the corpse we make a coffin and some clothes. We set forth the
sacrificial vessels, and at the sight of them grief breaks forth afresh.
The women beat their breasts, the men stamp their feet, and with weeping
and wailing escort the coffin to its resting-place. For its burial we
buy a well-drained ground. In memory of our deceased parent we build a
shrine. For the purpose of showing our remembrance we offer sacrifices
every spring and autumn.

"When our parents are alive, we should treat them with love and respect.
When they are dead, we should have sorrow for them. By doing so we shall
have performed the duty of mankind, and have done what ought to be done
by a filial son, and by the living to the dead.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Twenty-Four Examples: No. I: The Filial Piety that influenced
Heaven](bfd22)
