[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bfd21)  [Next](bfd23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402152167/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Book of Filial Duty*, by Ivan Chen, \[1908\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

### THE TWENTY-FOUR EXAMPLES

#### No. I

*The Filial Piety that influenced Heaven*

<span class="smallcaps">Yü Shun</span>, the son of Ku Sou, had an
exceedingly filial disposition; his father, however, was stupid, his
mother perverse, and his younger brother, Hsiang, very conceited. His
actions are related in the *Shang Shu,* in the *Chung Yung,* and in the
works of Mencius. Those who speak of him say that Shun cultivated the
hills of Li (in the province of Shansi), where he had elephants to
plough his fields and birds to weed the grain. So widespread was the
renown of his virtue that the Emperor Yao heard of him, and sent his
nine sons to serve him, and gave to him two of his daughters in
marriage, and afterwards resigned to him the imperial dignity.

Of all those whose virtue and filial duty deserve to be illustrated,
Shun is pre-eminent; and his example, in obeying his parents, is worthy
of being handed down to posterity, through myriads of ages. Once he was
in great danger in a well, into which he was commanded by his father to
descend, and his brother cast down

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

stones upon him; again, he was in a granary, when it was set on fire;
but from these, as well as from many other dangers, he escaped unhurt.
He fished, burned pottery, ploughed and sowed, with great toil on the
hills of Li. He laboriously performed all these duties, but his parents
were not affected, while his brother Hsiang became more insolent and
overbearing. His parents alleged crimes against him, but Shun could not
find that he had done wrong; he loved and revered them, though they did
not requite him with affection. His feelings were grieved at these
manifold troubles, and with strong crying and tears he invoked Heaven.

His perfect sincerity was effectual to renovate his family; his parents
became pleasant, and his brother more conciliatory and virtuous. Heaven
also considered his excellency to be great, and regarded him as truly
good, thus establishing his reputation so firmly that it was perpetuated
to, and influenced, succeeding ages. Even Confucius is regarded as
elevated but a little above Shun, and I would praise and extol them both
to coming generations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. II: Affection shown in tasting Soups and Medicines](bfd23)
