[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](isb16)  [Next](isb18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From Galway to Ballinahinch.

 

The Clifden car, which carries the Dublin letters into the heart of
Connemara, conducts the passenger over one of the most wild and
beautiful districts that it is ever the fortune of a traveller to
examine; and I could not help thinking, as we passed through it, at how
much pains and expense honest English cockneys are to go and look after
natural beauties far inferior, in countries which, though more distant,
are not a whit more strange than this one. No doubt, ere long, when
people know how easy the task is, the rush of London tourism will come
this way: and I shall be very happy if these pages shall be able to
awaken in one bosom beating in Tooley Street or the Temple the desire to
travel towards Ireland next year.

After leaving the quaint old town behind us, and ascending one or two
small eminences to the north-westward, the traveller, from the car, gets
a view of the wide sheet of Lough Corrib shining in the sun, as we saw
it, with its low dark banks stretching round it. If the view is gloomy,
at least it is characteristic: nor are we delayed by it very long; for
though the lake stretches northwards into the very midst of the Joyce
country, (and is there in the close neighbourhood of another huge lake,
Lough Mask, which again is near to another sheet of water,) yet from
this road henceforth, after keeping company with it for some five miles,
we only get occasional views of it, passing over hills and through
trees, by many rivers and smaller lakes, which are dependent upon that
of Corrib. Gentlemen's seats, on the road from Galway to Moycullen, are
scattered in great profusion. Perhaps there is grass growing on the
gravel-walk, and the iron gates of the tumble-down old lodges are rather
rickety, but, for all that, the places look comfortable, hospitable, and
spacious. As for the shabbiness and want of finish here and there, the
English eye grows quite accustomed to it in a month; and I find the bad
condition of the Galway houses by no means so painful as that of the
places near Dublin. At some of the lodges, as we pass, the mail-carman,
with a warning shout, flings a bag of letters. I saw a little party
looking at one which lay there in the road crying, "Come take me!" but
nobody cares to steal a bag of letters in this country, I suppose, and
the car-man drove on without any alarm. Two days afterwards a gentleman
with whom I was in company left on a rock his book of fishing-flies; and
I can assure you there was a very different feeling expressed about he
safety of *that*.

In the first part of the journey, the neighbourhood of the road seemed
to be as populous as in other parts of the country: troops of
red-petticoated peasantry peering from their stone-cabins; yelling
children following the car, and crying, "Lash, lash!" It was Sunday, and
you would see many a white chapel among the green bare plains to the
right of the road, the courtyard blackened with a swarm of cloaks. The
service seems to continue (on the part of the people) all day. Troops of
people issuing from the chapel met us at Moycullen; and ten miles
further on, at Oughterard, their devotions did not yet seem to be
concluded.

A more beautiful village can scarcely be seen than this. It stands upon
Lough Corrib, the banks of which are here, for once-at least,
picturesque and romantic and a pretty river, the Feogh, comes rushing
over rocks and by woods until it passes the town and meets the lake.
Some pretty buildings in the village stand on each bank of this stream:
a Roman Catholic chapel with a curate's neat lodge; a little church on
one side of it, a fine court-house of gray stone on the other. And here
it is that we get into the famous district of Connemara so celebrated in
Irish stories, so mysterious to the London tourist "It presents itself,"
says the Guide book "under every possible combination of heathy moor,
bog, lake, and mountain, extensive mossy plains and wild pastoral
valleys lie embosomed among the mountains, and support numerous herds of
cattle and horses, for which the district has been long celebrated.
Those wild solitudes, which occupy by far the greater part of the centre
of the country, are held by a hardy and ancient race of grazing farmers,
who live in a very primitive state, and, generally speaking, till little
beyond what supplies their immediate wants. For the first ten miles the
country is comparatively open, and the mountains on the left, which are
not of great elevation, can be distinctly traced as they rise along the
edge of the heathy plain.

"Our road continues along the Feogh river, which expands itself into
several considerable lakes, and at five miles from Oughterard we reach
Lough Bofin, which the road also skirts. Passing in succession
Lough-a-Preaghan, the lakes of Anderran and Shindella, at ten miles from
Oughterard we reach Slyme and Lynn's Inn, or Half-way House, which is
near the shore of Loughonard. Now, as we advance towards the group of
Bina-bola, or the Twelve Pins, the most gigantic scenery is displayed."

But the best guide-book that ever was written cannot set the view before
the mind's eye of the reader, and I won't at tempt to pile up big words
in place of these wild mountains, over which the clouds as they passed,
or the sunshine as it went and came, cast every variety of tint, light,
and shadow; nor can it be expected that long, level sentences, however
smooth and shining, can be made to pass as representations of those calm
lakes by which we took our way. All one can do is to lay down the pen
and ruminate, and cry, "Beautiful!" once more; and to the reader say,
"Come and see!"

Wild and wide as the prospect around us is, it has somehow a kindly,
friendly look; differing in this from the fierce loneliness of some
similar scenes in Wales that I have viewed. Ragged women and children
come out of rude stone-huts to see the car as it passes. But it is
impossible for the pencil to give due raggedness to the rags, or to
convey a certain picturesque mellowness of colour that the garments
assume. The sexes, with regard to raiment, do not seem to be particular.
There were many boys on the road in the national red petticoat, having
no other covering for their lean brown legs. As for shoes, the women
eschew them almost entirely; and I saw a peasant trudging from mass in a
handsome scarlet cloak, a fine blue-cloth gown, turned up to show a new
lining of the, same colour, and a petticoat quite white and neat--in a
dress of which the cost must have been at least 10*l*.; and her husband
walked in front carrying her shoes and stockings.

The road had conducted us' for miles through the vast property of the
gentleman to whose house I was bound, Mr. Martin, the Member for the
county and the last and prettiest part of the journey was round the Lake
of Ballinahinch, with tall mountains rising immediately above us on the
right, pleasant woody hills on the opposite side of the lake, with the
roof of the houses rising above the trees; and in an island in the midst
of the water a ruined old castle cast a long white reflection into the
blue waters where it lay. A land-pirate used to live in that castle, one
of the peasants told me, in the time of "Oliver Cromwell." And a fine
fastness it was for a robber, truly; for there was no road through these
wild countries in his time--nay, only thirty years since this lake was
at three days' distance of Galway. Then comes the question, What, in a
country where there were no roads and no travellers, and where the
inhabitants have been wretchedly poor from time immemorial,--what was
there for the land-pirate to rob? But let us not be too curious about
times so early as those of Oliver Cromwell. I have heard the name many
times from the Irish peasant, who still has an awe of the grim resolute
Protector.

<span id="img_34"></span> ![](img/34.jpg)

The builder of Ballinahinch House has placed it to command a view of a
pretty melancholy river that runs by it, through many green flats and
picturesque rocky grounds; but from the lake it is scarcely visible. And
so, in like manner, I fear it must remain invisible to the reader too,
with all its kind inmates, and frank, cordial hospitality; unless he may
take a fancy to visit Galway himself, when, as I can vouch, a very small
pretext will make him enjoy both.

It will, however, be only a small breach of confidence to say that the
major-domo of the establishment (who has adopted accurately the voice
and manner of his master, with a severe dignity of his own which is
quite original,) ordered me on going to bed "not to move in the morning
till he called me," at the same time expressing a hearty hope that I
should "want nothing more that evening." Who would dare, after such
peremptory orders, not to fall asleep immediately, and in this way
disturb the repose of Mr. J--n M-ll-y?

There may be many comparisons drawn between English and Irish
gentlemen's houses but perhaps the most striking point of difference
between the two is the immense following of the Irish house, such as
would make an English housekeeper crazy almost. Three comfortable,
well-clothed, good-humoured fellows walked down with me from the car,
persisting in carrying one a bag, another a sketching stool, and so on.
Walking about the premises in the morning, sundry others were visible in
the court-yard and near the kitchen-door. In the grounds a gentleman, by
name Mr. Marcus C-rr, began discoursing to me regarding the place, the
planting, the fish, the grouse, and the Master; being himself,
doubtless, one of the irregulars of the house. As for maids, there were
half a score of them skurrying about the house; and I am not ashamed to
confess that some of them were exceedingly good-looking. And if I might
venture to say a word more, it would be respecting Connemara breakfasts;
but this would be an entire and flagrant breach of confidence: and, to
be sure, the dinners were just as good.

One of the days of my three days' visit was to be devoted to the lakes;
and as a party had been arranged for the second day after my arrival, I
was glad to take advantage of the society of a gentleman staying in the
house, and ride with him to the neighbouring town of Clifden.

The ride thither from Ballinahinch is surprisingly beautiful; and as you
ascend the high ground from the two or three rude stone-huts which face
the entrance-gates of the house, there are views of the lakes and the
surrounding country which the best parts of Killarney do not surpass, I
think; although the Connemara lakes do not possess the advantage of wood
which belongs to the famous Kerry landscape.

But the cultivation of the country is only in its infancy as yet, and it
is easy to see how vast its resources are, and what capital and
cultivation may do for it. In the green patches among the rocks, and on
the mountain-sides, wherever crops were grown, they flourished; plenty
of natural wood is springing up in various places; and there is no end
to what the planter may do, and to what time and care may effect. The
carriage-road to Clifden is but ten years old as it has brought the
means of communication into the country, the commerce will doubtless
follow it; and in fact, in going through the whole kingdom, one can't
but be struck with the idea that not one hundredth part of its
capabilities are yet brought into action, or even known perhaps, and
that, by the easy and certain progress of time, Ireland will be poor
Ireland no longer.

For instance, we rode by a vast green plain, skirting a lake and river,
which is now useless almost for pasture, and which a little draining
will convert into thousands of acres of rich productive land. Streams
and falls of water dash by everywhere-they have only to utilise this
water-power for mills and factories-and hard by are some of the finest
bays in the world, where ships can deliver and receive foreign and home
produce. At Roundstone especially, where a little town has been erected,
the bay is said to be unexampled for size, depth, and shelter; and the
Government is now, through the rocks and hills on their wild shore,
cutting a coast-road to Bunown, the most westerly part of Connemara,
whence fliere is another good road to Clifden. Among the charges which
the "Repealers" bring against the Union, they should include at least
this; they would never have had these roads but for the Union: roads
which are as much at the charge of the London tax-payer as of the most
ill-used Milesian in Connaught.

A string of small lakes follow the road to Clifden, with mountains on
the right of the traveller for the chief part of the way. A few figures
at work in the bog-lands, and a red petticoat passing here and there, a
goat or two browsing among the stones, or a troop of ragged whitey-brown
children who came to gaze at the car, form the chief society on the
road. The first house at the entrance to Clifden is a gigantic
poor-house--tall, large, ugly, comfortable; it commands the town, and
looks almost as big as every one of the houses therein. The town itself
is but of a few years' date, and seems to thrive in its small way.
Clifden Castle is a fine chateau in the neighbourhood, and belongs to
another owner of immense lands in Galway--Mr. D'Arcy.

Here a drive was proposed along the coast to Bunown, and I was glad to
see some more of the country, and its character. Nothing can be wilder.
We passed little fake after lake, lying a few furlongs inwards from the
shore, There were rocks everywhere, some patches of cultivated land here
and there, nor was there any want of inhabitants along this savage
coast. There were numerous cottages, if cottages they may be called, and
women, and above all, children in plenty. One of the former is drawn
below--her attitude as she stood gazing at the car. To depict the
multiplicity of her rags would rquire a month's study.

<span id="img_35"></span> ![](img/35.jpg)

At length we came in sight of a half-built edifice which is approached
by a rocky, dismal, grey road, guarded by two or three broken gates,
against which rocks and stones were piled, which had to be removed to
give an entrance to our car. The gates were closed so laboriously, I
presume, to prevent the egress of a single black consumptive pig, far
gone in the family-way--a teeming skeleton--that was cropping the thin
dry grass that grew upon a round hill which rises behind this most
dismal castle of Bunown.

If the traveller only seeks for strange sights, this place will repay
his curiosity. Such a dismal house is not to be seen in all England: or,
perhaps, such a dismal situation. The sea lies before and behind; and on
each side, likewise, are rocks and copper-coloured meadows, by which a
few trees have made an attempt to grow. The owner of the house had,
however, begun to add to it; and there, unfinished, is a whole apparatus
of turrets, and staring raw stone and mortar, and fresh ruinous
carpenters' work. And then the court-yard! -tumbled-down out-houses,
staring empty pointed windows, and new-smeared plaster cracking from the
walls-a black heap of turf, a mouldy pump, a wretched old coal-skuttle,
emptily sunning itself in the midst of this cheerful scene! There was an
old Gorgon who kept the place, and who was in perfect unison with it:
Venus herself would become bearded, blear-eyed, and haggard, if left to
be the housekeeper of this dreary place.

In the house was a comfortable parlour, inhabited by the priest who has
the painful charge of the district. Here were his books and his
breviaries, his reading-desk with the cross engraved upon it, and his
portrait of Daniel O'Connell the Liberator to grace the walls of his
lonely cell. There was a dead crane hanging at the door on a gaff: his
red fish-like eyes were staring open, and his eager grinning bill. A
rifle-ball had passed through his body. And this was doubtless the only
game about the place; for we saw the sportsman who had killed the bird
hunting vainly up the round hill for other food for powder. This
gentleman had had good sport, he said, shooting seals upon a
neighbouring island, four of which animals he had slain,

Mounting up the round hill, we had a view of the Sline Lights--the most
westerly point in Ireland.

Here too was a ruined sort of summer-house, dedicated "Deo Hiberniae
Liberatori." When these lights were put up, I am told the proprietor of
Bunown was recommended to apply for compensation to Parliament, inasmuch
as there would be no more *wrecks* on the coast: from which branch of
commerce the inhabitants of the district used formerly to derive a
considerable profit. Between these Sline Lights and America nothing lies
but the Atlantic. It was beautifully blue and bright on this day, and
the sky almost cloudless; but I think the brightness only made the scene
more dismal, it being of that order of beauties which cannot bear the
full light, but require a cloud or a curtain to set them off to
advantage. A pretty story was told me by the gentleman who had killed
the seals. The place where he had been staying for sport was almost as
lonely as this Bunown, and inhabited by a priest too--a young, lively
well-educated man. "When I came here first," the pnest said, "*I cried
for two days;"* but afterwards he grew to like the place exceedingly,
his whole heart being directed towards it, his chapel and his cure. Who
would not honour such missionaries--the virtues they silently practise,
and the doctrines they preach? After hearing that story, I think Bunown
looked not quite so dismal, as it is inhabited, they say, by such
another character. What a pity it is that John Tuam, in the next county
of Mayo could not find such another hermitage to learn modesty in, and
forget his Graceship, his Lordship, and the sham titles by which he sets
such store.

A moon as round and bright as any moon that ever shone, and riding in a
sky perfectly cloudless, gave us a good promise of a fine day for the
morrow which was to be devoted to the lakes in the neighbourhood of
Ballinahinch: one of which, Lough Ina, is said to be of exceeding
beauty. But no man can speculate upon Irish weather. I have seen a day
beginning with torrents of rain that looked as if a deluge was at hand,
clear up in a few minutes, without any reason, and against the
prognostications of the glass and all other weather-prophets. So in like
manner, after the astonishingly fine night, there came a villainous dark
day: which however did not set in fairly for rain, until we were an hour
on our journey, with a couple of stout boatmen rowing us over
Ballinahinch Lake. Being, however, thus fairly started, the water began
to come down, not in torrents certainly, but in that steady, creeping,
insinuating mist, of which we scarce know the luxury in England; and
which, I am bound to say, will wet a man's jacket as satisfactorily as a
cataract would do.

It was just such another day as that of the famous stag-hunt at
Killarney, in a word and as in the first instance, we went to see the
deer killed and saw nothing thereof, so in the second case, we went to
see the landscape with precisely the same good-fortune. The mountains
covered their modest beauties in impenetrable veils of clouds; and the
only consolation to the boat's crew was that it was a remarkably good
day for trout-fishing--which amusement some people are said to prefer to
the examination of landscapes, however beautiful.

O you who laboriously throw flies in English rivers, and catch at the
expiration of a hard day's walking, casting, and wading, two or three
feeble little brown trouts of two or three ounces in weight, how would
you rejoice to have but an hour's sport in Derryclear or Ballinahinch;
where you have but to cast, and lo! a big trout springs at your fly,
and, after making a vain struggling, splashing, and plunging for a
while, is infallibly landed in the net and thence into the boat. The
single rod in the boat caught enough fish in an hour to feast the crew,
consisting of five persons, and the family of a herd of Mr. Martin's,
who has a pretty cottage on Derryclear Lake, inhabited by a cow and its
calf, a score of fowls, and I don't know how many sons and daughters.

Having caught enough trout to satisfy any moderate appetite, like true
sportsmen the gentlemen on board our boat became eager to hook a salmon.
Had they hooked a fewsal mon, no doubt they would have trolled for
whales, or for a mermaid; one of which finny beauties the waterman swore
he had seen on the shore of Derryclear--he with Jim Mullen being above
on a rock, the mermaid on the shore directly beneath them, visible to
the middle, and as usual "racking her hair." It was fair hair, the
boatman said; and he appeared as convinced of the existence of the
mermaid as he was of the trout just landed in the boat.

In regard of mermaids, there is a gentleman living near Killala Bay,
whose name was mentioned to me, and who declares solemnly that one day,
shooting on the sands there, he saw a mermaid, and determined to try her
with a shot. So he drew the small charge from his gun and loaded it with
ball-that he always had by him for seal-shooting--fired, and hit the
mermaid through the breast. The screams and moans of the creature-whose
person he describes most accurately--were the most horrible,
heart-rending noises that he ever, he said, heard; and not only were
they heard by him, but by the fishermen along the coast, who were
furiously angry against Mr. A---n, because, they said, the injury done
to the mermaid would cause her to drive all the fish away from the bay
for years to come.

But we did not, to my disappointment, catch a glimpse of one of these
interesting beings, nor of the great sea-horse which is said to inhabit
these waters, nor of any fairies (of whom the stroke-oar, Mr. Marcus,
told us not to speak, for they didn't like bein' spoken of); nor even of
a salmon, though the fishermen produced the most tempting flies. The
only animal of any size that was visible we saw while lying by a swift
black river that comes jumping with innumerable little waves into
Derryclear, and where the salmon are especially suffered to "stand:"
this animal was an eagle--a real wild eagle, with grey wings and a white
head and belly: it swept round us, within gun-shot reach, once or twice,
through the leaden sky, and then settled on a gray rock and began to
scream its shrill, ghastly aquiline note.

The attempts on the salmon having failed, the rain continuing to fall
steadily, the herd's cottage before named was resorted to: when Marcus,
the boatman, commenced forthwith to gut the fish, and taking down some
charred turf-ashes from the blazing fire, on which about a hundredweight
of potatoes were boiling, he--Marcus--proceeded to grill on the floor
some of the trout, which we afterwards ate with immeasurable
satisfaction. They were such trouts as, when once tasted, remain forever
in the recollection of a commonly grateful mind--rich, flaky, creamy,
full of flavour. A Parisian *gourmand* would have paid ten francs for
the smallest *cooleen* among them; and, when transported to his capital,
how different in flavour would they have been--how inferior to what they
were as we devoured them, fresh from the fresh waters of the lake, and
jerked as it were from the water to the gridiron! The world had not had
time to spoil those innocent beings before they were gobbled up with
pepper and salt, and missed, no doubt, by their friends. I should like
to know more of their *"set."* But enough of this: my feelings overpower
me--suffice it to say, they were red or salmon trouts--none of your
white-fleshed brown-skinned river fellows.

When the gentlemen had finished their repast, the boatmen and the family
set to work upon the ton of potatoes, a number of the remaining fish,
and a store of other good things; then we all sat round the turf-fire in
the dark cottage, the rain coming down steadily outside and veiling
everything except the shrubs and verdure immediately about the cottage.
The herd, the herd's wife, and a nondescript female friend, two healthy
young herdsmen in corduroy rags, the herdsman's daughter paddling about
with bare feet, a stout black-eyed wench with her gown over her head and
a red petticoat not quite so good as new, the two boatmen, a badger just
killed and turned inside out, the gentlemen, some hens cackling and
flapping about among the rafters, a calf in a corner cropping green meat
and occasionally visited by the cow her mamma, formed the society of the
place. It was rather a strange picture; but as for about two hours we
sat there, and maintained an almost unbroken silence, and as there was
no other amusement but to look at the rain, I began, after the
enthusiasm of the first half-hour, to think that after all London was a
bearable place, and that for want of a turf-fire and a bench in
Connemara, one *might* put up with a sofa and a newspaper in Pall Mall.

This, however, is according to tastes; and I must say that Mr. Marcus
betrayed a most bitter contempt for all cockney tastes, awkwardness, and
ignorance: and very right too. The night, on our return home, all of a
sudden cleared; but though the fishermen, much to my disgust--at the
expression of which, however, the rascals only laughed--persisted in
making more casts for trout, and trying back in the dark upon the spots
which we had visited in the morning, it appeared the fish had been
frightened off by the rain; and the sportsmen met with such indifferent
success that at about ten o'clock we found ourselves at Ballinahinch.
Dinner was served at eleven; and, I believe, there was some
whiskey-punch afterwards, recommended medicinally and to prevent the ill
effects of the wetting: but that is neither here nor there.

The next day the petty sessions were to be held at Roundstone, a little
town which has lately sprung up near the noble bay of that name. I was
glad to see some specimens of Connemara litigation, as also to behold at
least one thousand beautiful views that lie on the five miles of road
between the town and Ballinahinch. Rivers and rocks, mountains and sea,
green plains and bright skies, how (for the hundred-and-fiftieth time)
can pen and ink set you down? But if Berghem could have seen those blue
mountains, and Karel Dujardin could have copied some of these green,
airy plains, with their brilliant little coloured groups of peasants,
beggars, horsemen, many an Englishman would know Connemara upon canvas
as he does Italy or Flanders now.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Roundstone Petty Sessions](isb18)
