[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](isb21)  [Next](isb23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From Westport to Ballinasloe

 

The mail-coach took us next day by Castlebar and Tuam to Ballinasloe, a
journey of near eighty miles. The country is interspersed with
innumerable seats belonging to the Blakes, the Browns, and the Lynches;
and we passed many large domains belonging to bankrupt lords and
fugitive squires, with fine lodges adorned with moss and battered
windows, and parks where, if the grass was growing on the roads, on the
other hand the trees had been weeded out of the grass. About these seats
and their owners the guard--an honest, shrewd fellow--had all the gossip
to tell. The jolly guard himself was a ruin, it turned out: he told me
his grandfather was a man of large property; his father, he said, kept a
pack of hounds, and had spent everything by the time he, the guard, was
sixteen: so the lad made interest to get a mail-car to drive, whence he
had been promoted to the guard's seat, and now for forty years has
occupied it, travelling eighty miles, and earning seven-and-twopence
every day of his life. He had been once ill, he said, for three days;
and if a man may be judged by ten hours' talk with him, there were few
more shrewd, resolute, simple-minded men to be found on the outside of
any coaches or the inside of any houses in Ireland.

During the first five-and-twenty miles of the journey,--for the day was
very sunny and bright,--Croaghpatrick kept us company; and, seated with
your back to the horses, you could see, "on the left, that vast
aggregation of mountains which stretches southwards to the Bay of
Galway; on the right, that gigantic assemblage which sweeps in circular
outline northward to Killule." Somewhere amongst those hills the great
John Tuam was born, whose mansion and cathedral are to be seen in Tuam
town, but whose fame is spread everywhere. To arrive at Castlebar, we go
over the undulating valley which lies between the mountains of Joyce
country and Erris; and the first object which you see on entering the
town is a stately Gothic castle that stands at a short distance from it.

On the gate of the stately Gothic castle was written an inscription not
very hospitable: "Without Beware, Within Amend;"--just beneath which is
an iron crane of neat construction. The castle is the county jail, and
the iron crane is the gallows of the district. The town seems neat and
lively: there is a fine church, a grand barracks (celebrated as the
residence of the young fellow with the bird's eye neckcloth), a club,
and a Whig and Tory newspaper. The road hence to Tuam is very pretty and
lively, from the number of country seats along the way giving
comfortable shelter to more Blakes, Browns, and Lynches.

<span id="img_43"></span> ![](img/43.jpg)

In the cottages, the inhabitants looked healthy and rosy in their rags,
and the cots themselves in the sunshine almost comfortable. After a
couple of months in the country, the stranger's eye grows somewhat
accustomed to the rags: they do not frighten him as at first; the people
who wear them look for the most part healthy enough: especially the
small children--those who can scarcely totter, and are sitting shading
their eyes at the door, and leaving the unfinished dirt-pie to shout as
the coach passes by--are as healthy a looking race as one will often
see. Nor can any one pass through the land without being touched by the
extreme love of children among the people: they swarm everywhere, and
the whole country rings with cries of affection towards the children,
with the songs of young ragged nurses dandling babies on their knees,
and warnings of mothers to Patsey to come out of the mud, or Norey to
get off the pig's back.

At Tuam the coach stopped exactly for fourteen minutes and a half,
during which time those who wished might dine: but instead, I had the
pleasure of inspecting a very mouldy, dirty town, and made my way to the
Catholic cathedral--a very handsome edifice indeed; handsome without and
within, and of the Gothic sort. Over the door is a huge coat of arms
surmounted by a cardinal's hat-the arms of the see, no doubt, quartered
with John Tuam's own patrimonial coat; and that was a frieze coat, from
all accounts, passably ragged at the elbows. Well; he must be a poor wag
who could sneer at an old coat, because it was old and poor; but if a
man changes it for a tawdy gimcrack suit bedizened with twopenny tinsel,
and struts about calling himself his grace and my lord, when may we
laugh if not then? There is something simple in the way in which these
good people belord their clergymen, and respect titles real or sham.
Take any Dublin paper,--a couple of columns of it are sure to be filled
with movements of the small great men of the world. Accounts from
Derrynane state that the "Right Honorable the Lord Mayor is in good
health--his lordship went out with his beagles yesterday;" or "his Grace
the Most Reverend the Lord Archbishop of Ballywhack, assisted by the
Light Reverend the Lord Bishops of Trimcomalee and Hippopotamus,
assisted," &c.; or "Colonel Tims, of Castle Tims, and lady, have quitted
the 'Shelburne Hotel,' with a party for Kilballybathershins, where the
*august* \[This epithet is applied to the party of a Colonel somebody,
in a Dublin paper.\] party propose to enjoy a few days'
shrimp\~fishing,"--and so on. Our people are not witty and keen of
perceiving the ridiculous, like the Irish; but the bluntness and honesty
of the English have wellnigh kicked the fashionable humbug down; and
except perhaps among footmen and about Baker Street, his curiosity about
the aristocracy is wearing fast away. Have the Irish so much reason to
respect their lords that they should so chronicle all their movements;
and not only admire real lords, but make sham ones of their own to
admire

them?

There is no object of special mark upon the road from Tuam to
Ballinasloe--the country being flat for the most part, and the noble
Galway and Mayo mountains having disappeared at length--until you come
to a glimpse of Old England in the pretty village of Ahascragh. An old
oak-tree grows in the neat street, the houses are as trim and white as
eye can desire, and about the church and the town are handsome
plantations, forming on the whole such a picture of comfort and plenty
as is rarely to be seen in the part of Ireland I have traversed. All
these wonders have been wrought by the activity of an excellent resident
agent. There was a countryman on the coach deploring that, through
family circumstances, this gentleman should have been dispossessed of
his agency, and declaring that the village had already begun to
deteriorate in consequence. The marks of such decay were not, however,
visible--at least to a new-comer; and, being reminded of it, I indulged
in many patriotic longings for England: as every Englishman does when he
is travelling out of the country which he is always so willing to quit.

That a place should instantly begin to deteriorate because a certain
individual was removed from it--that cottagers should become thriftless,
and houses dirty, and house windows cracked,--all these are points which
public economists may ruminate over, and can't fail to give the
carlessest traveller much matter for painful reflection. How is it that
the presence of one man more or less should affect a set of people come
to years of manhood, and knowing that they have their duty to do? Why
should a man at Ahascragh let his home go to ruin, and stuff his windows
with ragged breeches instead of glass, because Mr. Smith is agent in
place of Mr. Jones? Is he a child, that won't work unless the
schoolmaster be at Land? or are we to suppose, with the "Repealers,"
that the cause of all this degradation and misery is the intolerable
tyranny of the sister country, and the pain which poor Ireland has been
made to endure? This is very well at the Corn Exchange, and among
patriots after dinner; but, after all, granting the grievance of the
franchise (though it may not be unfair to presume that a man who has not
strength of mind enough to mend his own breeches or his own windows will
always be the tool of one party or another), there is no Inquisition set
up in the country: the law tries to defend the people as much as they
will allow; the odious tithe has even been whisked off from their
shoulders to the landlords'; they may live pretty much as they like. Is
it not too monstrous to howl about English tyranny and suffering
Ireland, and, call for a Stephen's Green Parliament to make the country
quiet and the people industrious? The people are not politically worse
treated than their neighbours in England. The priests and the landlords,
if they chose to co-operate, might do more for the country now than any
kings or laws could. What you want here is not a Catholic or Protestant
party, but an Irish party.

In the midst of these reflections, and by what the reader will doubtless
think a blessed interruption, we came in sight of the town of
Ballinasloe and its "gash-lamps," which a fellow-passenger did not fail
to point out with admiration. The road menders, however, did not appear
to think that light was by any means necessary: for, having been
occupied, in the morning, in digging a fine hole upon the highway,
previous to some alterations to be effected there, they had left their
work at sun down, without any lamp to warn coming travellers of the hole
which we only escaped by a wonder. The papers have much such another
story. In the Galway and Ballinasloe coach a horse on the road suddenly
fell down and died; the coachman drove his coach unicorn-fashion into
town; and, as for the dead horse, of course he left it on the road at
the place where it fell, and where another coach coming up was upset
over it, bones broken, passengers maimed, coach smashed. By heavens! the
tyranny of England is unendurable; and I have no doubt it had a hand in
upsetting that coach.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ballinasloe to Dublin](isb23)
