[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](isb30)  [Next](isb32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Templemoyle--Derry

 

From Newtown Limavaddy to Derry the traveller has many wild and noble
prospects of Lough Foyle and the plains and mountains round it, and of
scenes which may possibly in this country be still more agreeable to
him--of smiling cultivation, and comfortable well built villages, such
as are only too rare in Ireland. Of a great part of this district the
London Companies are landlords--the best of landlord, too, according to
the report I could gather; and their good stewardship shows itself
especially in the neat villages of Muff and Ballielly, through both of
which I passed. In Ballikelly, besides numerous simple, stout,
brick-built dwellings for the peasantry, with their shining windows and
trim garden plots, is a Presbyterian meeting-house, so well built
substantial, and handsome, so different from the lean, pretentious, sham
Gothic ecclesiastical edifices which have been erected of late years in
Ireland, that it can t fail to strike the tourist who has made
architecture his study or his pleasure. The gentlemen's seats in the
district are numerous and handsome, and the whole movement along the
road betokened cheerfulness and prosperous activity.

As the carman had no other passengers but myself, he made no objection
to carry me a couple of miles out of his way, through the village of
Muff, belonging to the Grocers of London (and so handsomely and
comfortably built by them as to cause all Cockneys to exclaim, "Well
done our side!") and thence to a very interesting institution, which was
established some fifteen years since in the neighbourhood--the
Agricultural Seminary of Templemoyle. It lies on a wooded hill in a
pretty wooded country, and is most curiously secluded from the world by
the tortuousness of the road which approaches it.

Of course it is not my business to report upon the agricultural system
practised there or to discourse on the state of the land or the crops;
the best testimony on this subject is the fact, that the Institution
hired, at a small rental, a tract of land, which was reclaimed and
farmed, and that of this farm the landlord has now taken possession,
leaving the young farmers to labour on a new tract of land, for which
they pay five times as much rent as for their former holding. But though
a person versed in agriculture could give a far more satisfactory,
account of the place than one to whom such pursuits are quite
unfamiliar, there is a great deal about the establishment which any
citizen can remark on; and he must be a very difficult Cockney indeed
who won't be pleased here.

After winding in and out and up and down, and round about the eminence
on which the house stands, we at last found an entrance to it, by a
court-yard, neat, well-built and spacious, where are the stables and
numerous offices of' the farm. The scholars were at dinner off a
comfortable meal of boiled beef, potatoes, and cabbages, when I arrived;
a master was reading a book of history to them; and silence, it appears,
is preserved during the dinner. Seventy scholars were here assembled,
some young, and some expanded into six feet and whiskers--all, however,
are made to maintain exactly the same discipline, whether whiskered or
not.

The "head farmer" of the school, Mr. Campbell, a very intelligent Scotch
gentleman, was good enough to conduct me over the place and the farm,
and to give a history of the establishment and the course pursued there.
The Seminary was founded in 1827, by the North-west of Ireland Society,
by members of which and others about £3,000 were subscribed, and the
buildings of the school erected. These are spacious, simple, and
comfortable; there is a good stone house, with airy dormitories,
school-rooms, &c., and large and convenient offices. The establishment
had, at first, some difficulties to contend with, and for some time did
not number more than 30 pupils. At present, there are 70 scholars,
paying *ten pounds* a year, with which sum, and the labor of the pupils
on the farm, and the produce of it, the school is entirely supported.
The reader will, perhaps, like to see an extract from the Report of the
school, which contains more details regarding it.

"On Tuesday B commences work in the morning and A at school, and so on
alternate days.

"Each class is again subdivided into three divisions, over each of which
is placed a monitor, selected from the steadiest and best-informed boys;
he receives the Head Farmer's directions as to the work to be done, and
superintends his party while performing it.

"In winter the time of labour is shortened according to the length of
the day, and the hours at school increased.

"In wet days, when the boys cannot work out, all are required to attend
school.

<span id="img_62"></span> ![](img/62.jpg)

"Rules of the Templemoyle School

"1. The pupils are required to say their prayers in the morning before
leaving the dormitory, and at night, before retiring to rest, each
separately, and after the manner to which he has been habituated.

"2. The pupils are requested to wash their hands and faces before the
commencement of business in the morning, on returning from agricultural
labour, and after dinner.

"3. The pupils are required to pay the strictest attention to their
instructors, both during the hours of agricultural and literary
occupation.

"4. Strife, disobedience, inattention, or any description of riotous or
disorderly conduct, is punishable by extra labour or confinement, as
directed by the Committee, according to circumstances.

"5. Diligent and respectable behaviour, continued for a considerable
time, will be rewarded by occasional permission for the pupil so
distinguished to visit his home.

"6. No pupil, on obtaining leave of absence, shall presume to continue
it for a longer period than that prescribed to him on leaving the
Seminary.

"7. During their rural labour, the pupils are to consider themselves
amenable to the authority of their Agricultural Instructor alone, and
during their attendance in the school-room, to that of their Literary
Instructor alone.

"8. Non-attendance during any part of the times allotted either for
literary or agricultural employment, will be punished as a serious
offence.

"9. During the hours of recreation the pupils are to be under the
superintendence of their Instructors, and not suffered to pass beyond
the limits of the farm, except under their guidance, or with a written
permission from one of them.

"10. The pupils are required to make up their beds, and keep those
clothes not in immediate use neatly folded up in their trunks, and to be
particular in never suffering any garment, book, implement, or other
article belonging to or used by them, to lie about in a slovenly or
disorderly manner.

"11. Respect to superior, and gentleness of demeanor, both among the
pupils themselves and towards the servants and laborers of the
establishment, are particularly insisted upon, and will be considered a
prominent ground of approbation and reqward.

"12. On Sundays, the pupils are required to attend their respective
places of worship, accompanied by their Instructors or Monitors; and it
is earnestly recommended to them to employ a part of the remainder of
the day in sincerely reading the Word of God, and in such other
devotional exercises as their respective ministers may point out.

\*

At certain periods of the year, when all hands are required, such as
harvest, &c., the literary labours of the scholars are stopped, and they
are all in the field. On the present occasion we followed them into a
potato-field, where an army of them were employed digging out the
potatoes; while another regiment were trenching in elsewhere for the
winter: the boys were leading the carts to and fro. To reach the
potatoes we had to pass a field, part of which was newly ploughed: the
ploughing was the work of the boys, too; one of them being left with an
experienced ploughman for a fortnight at a time in which space the lad
can acquire some practice in the art.

Amongst the potatoes and the boys digging them, I observed a number of
girls, taking them up as dug and removing the soil from the roots. Such
a society for 70 young men would, in any other country in the world, be
not a little dangerous; but Mr. Campbell said that no instance of harm
had ever occurred in consequence, and I believe his statement may be
fully relied on: the whole country bears testimony to this noble purity
of morals. Is there any "other in Europe which in this point can compare
with it?

In winter the farm works do not occupy the pupils so much, and they give
more time to their literary studies. They get a good English education;
they are grounded in arithmetic and mathematics; and I saw a good map of
an adjacent farm, made from actual survey by one of the pupils. Some of
them are good draughtsmen likewise, but of their performances I could
see no specimen, the artists being abroad, occupied wisely in digging
the potatoes.

<span id="img_63"></span> ![](img/63.jpg)

And here apropos, not of the school but of potatoes, let me tell a
potato story, which is, I think, to the purpose, wherever it is told. In
the county of Mayo a gentleman by the name of Crofton is a landed
proprietor, in whose neighbourhood great distress prevailed among the
peasantry during the spring and summer, when the potatoes of the last
year were consumed, and before those of the present season were up. Mr.
Crofton, by liberal donations on his own part, and by a subscription
which was set on foot among his friends in England as well as in
Ireland, was enabled to collect a sum of money sufficient to purchase
meal for the people, which was given to them, or sold at very low
prices, until the pressure of want was withdrawn, and the blessed
potato-crop came in. Some time in October, a smart night's frost made
Mr. Crofton think that it was time to take in and pit his own potatoes,
and he told his steward to get laborers accordingly.

Next day, on going to the potato-grounds, he found the whole fields
swarming with people; the whole crop was out of the ground, and again
under it, pitted and covered, and the people gone, in a few hours. It
was as if the fairies that we read of in the Irish legends, as coming to
the aid of good people and helping them in their labours, had taken a
liking to this good landlord, and taken in his harvest for him. Mr.
Crofton, who knew who his helpers had been, sent the steward to pay them
their day's wages, and to thank them at the same time for having come to
help him at a time when their labour was so useful to him. One and all
refused a penny; and their spokesman said, "They wished they could do
more for the likes of him or his family." I have heard of many
conspiracies in this country; is not this one as worthy to be told as
any of them?

Round the house of Templemoyle is a pretty garden, which the pupils take
pleasure in cultivating, filled not with fruit (for this, though there
are 70 gardeners, the superintendent said somehow seldom reached a ripe
state), but with kitchen herbs, and a few beds of pretty flowers, such
as are best suited to cottage horticulture. Such simple carpenters' and
masons' work as the young men can do is likewise confided to them; and
though the dietary may appear to the Englishman as rather a scanty one,
and though the English lads certainly make at first very wry faces at
the stirabout porridge (as they naturally will when first put in the
presence of that abominable mixture), yet after a time, strange to say,
they begin to find it actually palatable; and the best proof of the
excellence of the diet is that nobody is ever ill in the institution:
colds and fevers and the ailments of lazy, gluttonous gentility, are
unknown; and the doctor's bill for the last year, for 70 pupils,
amounted to 35 shillings. *O beati agricoliculae! * You do not know what
it is to feel a little uneasy after half a crown's worth of
raspberry-tarts, as lads do at the best public schools; you don't know
in what majestic polished hexameters the Roman poet has described your
pursuits; you are not fagged and flogged into Latin and Greek at the
cost of £200 a year. Let these be the privileges of your youthful
betters; meanwhile content yourselves with thinking that you *are*
preparing for a profession, while they are *not;* that you are learning
something useful, while they, for the most part, are not: for after all
as a man grows old in the world, old and fat, cricket is discovered not
to be any longer very advantageous to him--even to have pulled in the
Trinity boat does not in old age amount to a substantial advantage; and
though to read a Greek play be an immense pleasure, yet it must be
confessed few enjoy it. In the first place, of the race of Etonians, and
Harrovians and Carthusians that one meets in the world, very few *can*
read the Greek; of those few--there are not, as I believe, any
considerable majority of poets. Stout men in the bow windows of clubs
(for such young Etonians by time become) are not generally remarkable
for a taste for Aeschylus \[And then, how much Latin and Greek does the
public school boy know? Also does he know anything else, and what? Is it
history, or geography, or mathematics or divinity?\] You do not hear
much poetry in Westminster Hall, or I believe at the bar tables
afterwards; and if occasionally, in the House of Commons, Sir Robert
Peel lets off a quotation--a pocket-pistol wadded with a leaf torn out
of Horace--depend on it it is only to astonish the country gentlemen who
don't understand him: and it is my firm conviction that Sir Robert no
more cares for poetry than you or I do.

Such thoughts would suggest themselves to a man who has a had the
benefit of what is called an education at a public school in England,
when he sees 70 lads from all parts of the empire learning what his
Latin poets and philosophers have informed him is the best of all
pursuits,--finds them educated at one-twentieth part of the cost which
has been bestowed on his own precious person; orderly without the
necessity of submitting to degrading personal punishment; young, and
full of health and blood, though vice is unknown among them; brought up
decently and honestly to know the things which it is good for them in
their profession to know. So it is, however; all the world is improving
except the gentlemen. There are at this present writing 500 boys at
Eton, kicked, and licked, and bullied, by another hundred--scrubbing
shoes, running errands, making false concords, and (as if that were a
natural consequence!) putting their posteriors on a block for Dr.
Hawtrey to lash at; and still calling it education. They are proud of
it--good heavens--absolutely vain of it; as what dull barbarians are not
proud of their dullness and barbarism? They call it the good old English
system: nothing like classics, says Sir John, to give a boy a taste, you
know, and a habit of reading--(Sir John, who reads the "Racing
Calendar," and belongs to a race of men of all the world the least given
to reading,)--it's the good old English system: every boy fights for
himself--hardens 'em, eh, Jack? Jack grins, and helps himself to another
glass of claret, and presently tells you how Tibbs and Miller fought for
an hour and twenty minutes "like good uns." \* \* \* Let us come to an
end, however, of this moralising; the car-driver has brought the old
raw-shouldered horse out of the stable, and says it is time to be off
again.

Before quitting Templemoyle, one thing more may be said in its favour.
It is one of the very few public establishments in Ireland where pupils
of the two religious denominations are received, and where no religious
disputes have taken place. The pupils are called upon, morning and
evening, to say their prayers privately. On Sunday, each division,
Presbyterian, Roman Catholic, and Episcopalian, is marched to its proper
place of worship. The pastors of each sect may visit their young flock
when so inclined; and the lads devote the Sabbath evening to reading the
books pointed out to them by their clergymen.

Would not the Agricultural Society of Ireland, of the success of whose
peaceful labours for the national prosperity every Irish newspaper I
read brings some new indication, do welt to show some mark of its
sympathy for this excellent institution of Templemoyle? A silver medal
given by the Society to the most deserving pupil of the year, would be a
great object of emulation amongst the young men educated at the place,
and would be almost a certain passport for the winner in seeking for a
situation in after life. I do not know if similar seminaries exist in
England. Other seminaries of a like nature have been tried in this
country, and have failed: but English country gentlemen cannot, I should
think, find a better object of their attention than this school; and our
farmers would surely find such establishments of great benefit to them:
where their children might procure a sound literary education at a small
charge, and at the same time be made acquainted with the latest
improvements in their profession. I can't help saying here, once more,
what I have said apropos of the excellent school at Dundalk, and begging
the English middle classes to think of the subject. If Government will
not act (upon what never can be effectual, perhaps, until it become a
national measure), let small communities act for themselves, and
tradesmen and the middle classes set up Cheap Proprietary Schools. Will
country newspaper editors, into whose hands this book may fall, be kind
enough to speak upon this hint, and extract the tables of the
Templemoyle and Dundalk establishments, to show how, and with what small
means, boys may be well, soundly, and humanely educated--not brutally,
as some of us have been, under the bitter fagging and the shameful rod.
It is no plea for the barbarity that use has made us accustomed to it;
and in seeing these institutions for humble lads, where the system
taught is at once useful, manly, and kindly, and thinking of what I had
undergone in my own youth,--of the frivolous monkish trifling in which
it was wasted, of the brutal tyranny to which it was subjected,--I could
look at the lads but with a sort of envy: please God, their lot will be
shared by thousands of their equals and their betters before long!

It was a proud day for Dundalk, Mr. Thackeray well said, when, at the
end of one of the vacations there, 14 English boys, and an Englishman
with his little son in his hand, landed from the Liverpool packet, and,
walking through the streets of the town, went into the school-house
quite happy. That was a proud day in truth for a distant Irish town, and
I can't help saying that I grudge them the cause of their pride
somewhat.

Why should there not be schools in England as good, and as cheap, and as
happy?

With this, shaking Mr. Campbell gratefully by the hand, and begging all
English tourists to go and visit his establishment, we trotted off for
Londonderry, leaving at about a mile's distance from the town, and at
the pretty lodge of Saint Columb's, a letter, which was the cause of
much delightful hospitality.

Saint Columb's Chapel, the walls of which still stand picturesquely in
Sir George Hill's park, and from which that gentleman's seat takes its
name, was here since the sixth century. It is but fair to give
precedence to the mention of the old abbey, which was the father, as it
would seem, of the town The approach to the latter from three quarters,
certainly, by which various avenues I had occasion to see it, is always
noble. We had seen the spire of the cathedral peering over the hills for
four miles on our way; it stands, a stalwart and handsome building, upon
an eminence, round which the old-fashioned stout red houses of the town
cluster, girt in with the ramparts and walls that kept out James's
soldiers of old. Quays, factories, huge red warehouses, have grown round
this famous old barrier, and now stretch along the river. A couple of
large steamers and other craft lay within the bridge; and, as we passed
over that stout wooden edifice, stretching eleven hundred feet across
the noble expanse of the Foyle, we heard along the quays a great
thundering and clattering of iron-work in an enormous steam frigate
which has been built in Derry, and seems to lie alongside a whole street
of houses. The suburb, too, through which we passed was bustling and
comfortable; and the view was not only pleasing from its natural
beauties, but has a manly, thriving, honest air of prosperity, which is
no bad feature, surely, for a landscape.

Nor does the town itself, as one enters it, belie, as many other Irish
towns do, its first flourishing look. It is not splendid, but
comfortable; a brisk movement in the streets: good downright shops,
without particularly grand titles; few beggars. Nor have the common
people, as they address you, that eager smile,--that manner of compound
fawning and swaggering, which an Englishman finds in the townspeople of
the West and South. As in the North of England, too, when compared with
other districts, the people are greatly more familiar, though by no
means disrespectful to the stranger.

On the other hand, after such a commerce as a traveller has with the
race of waiters, postboys, porters, and the like (and it may be that the
vast race of postboys, &c., whom I did not see in the North, are quite
unlike those unlucky specimens with whom I came in contact), I was
struck by their excessive greediness after the traveller's gratuities,
and their fierce dissatisfaction if not sufficiently rewarded. To the
gentleman who brushed my clothes at the comfortable hotel at Belfast,
and carried my bags to the coach, I tendered the sum of two shillings,
which seemed to me quite a sufficient reward for his services: he
battled and brawled with me for more, and got it too; for a
street-dispute with a porter calls together a number of delighted
bystanders, whose remarks and company are by no means agreeable to a
solitary gentleman. Then, again, there was the famous case of Boots of
Ballycastle, which, being upon the subject, I may as well mention here;
Boots of Ballycastle, that romantic little village near the Giant's
Causeway, had cleaned a pair of shoes for me certainly, but declined
either to brush my clothes, or to carry down my two carpetbags to the
car; leaving me to perform those offices for myself, which I did: and
indeed they were not very difficult. But immediately I was seated on the
car, Mr. Boots stepped forward and wrapped a mackintosh very
considerately round me, and begged me at the same time to "remember
him."

There was an old beggar-woman standing by, to whom I had a desire to
present a penny; and having no coin of that value, I begged Mr. Boots,
out of a sixpence which I tendered to him, to subtract a penny, and
present it to the old lady in question. Mr. Boots took the money, looked
at me, and his countenance, not naturally good-humoured, assumed an
expression of the most indignant contempt and hatred as he said, "I'm
thinking I've no call to give my money away. Sixpence is my right for
what I've done."

"Sir" says I, "you must remember that you did but black one pair of
shoes, and that you blacked them very badly too."

"Sixpence is my right," says Boots; "a *gentleman * would give me
sixpence!" and though I represented to him that a pair of shoes might be
blacked in a minute--that fivepence a minute was not usual wages in the
country--that many gentlemen, half-pay officers, briefless barristers,
unfortunate literary gentlemen, would gladly black 12 pairs of shoes per
diem if rewarded with five shillings for so doing, there was no means of
convincing Mr. Boots. I then demanded back the sixpence, which proposal,
however, he declined, saying, after a struggle, he would give the money,
but a gentleman would have given sixpence; and so left me with furious
rage and contempt.

As for the city of Derry, a carman who drove me one mile out to dinner
at a gentleman's house, where he himself was provided with a comfortable
meal, was dissatisfied with eighteenpence, vowing that a "dinner job"
was always paid half a crown, and not only asserted this, but continued
to assert it for a quarter of an hour with the most noble though
unsuccessful perseverance. A second car-boy, to whom I gave a shilling
for a drive of two miles altogether, attacked me because I gave the
other boy eighteenpence; and the porter who brought my bags 50 yards
from the coach, entertained me with a dialogue that lasted at least a
couple of minutes, and said, "I should have had sixpence for carrying
one of 'em.

For the car which carried me two miles the landlord of the inn made me
pay the sum of five shillings. He is a godly landlord, has Bibles in the
coffee-room, the drawing-room, and every bedroom in the house, with this
inscription-

Ut Migraturus Habita.  
  
The Travellers True Refuge  
  
Jones's Hotel, Londonderry.

This pious double or triple entendre, the reader will, no doubt,
admire--the first simile establishing the resemblance between this life
and an inn; the second allegory showing that the inn and the Bible are
both the traveller's refuge.

In life we are in death--the hotel in question is about as gay as a
family vault: a severe figure of a landlord, in seedy black, is
occasionally seen in the dark passages or on the creaking old stairs of
the black inn. He does not bow to you--very few landlords in Ireland
condescend to acknowledge their guests--he only warns you--a silent
solemn gentleman who looks to be something between a clergyman and a
sexton--"ut migraturus habita!"--the "migraturus" was a vast comfort in
the clause.

It must, however, be said, for the consolation of future travellers,
that when at evening, in the old lonely parlour of the inn, the great
gaunt fireplace is filled with coals, two dreary funereal candles and
sticks glimmering upon the old-fashioned round table, the rain pattering
fiercely without, the wind roaring and thumping in the streets, this
worthy gentleman can produce a pint of port-wine for the use of his
migratory guest, which causes the latter to be almost reconciled to the
cemetery in which he is resting himself, and he finds himself to his
surprise, almost cheerful. There is a mouldy-looking old kitchen, too,
which, strange to say, sends out an excellent comfortable dinner, so
that the sensation of fear gradually wears off.

As in Chester, the ramparts of the town form a pleasant promenade; and
the barriers, with which the stout 'prentice boys of Derry beat off King
James in '88. The guns bear the names of the London Companies--venerable
Cockney titles! It is pleasant for a Londoner to read, and see how, at a
pinch, the sturdy citizens can do their work.

The public buildings of Derry are, I think, among the best I have seen
in Ireland; and the Lunatic Asylum, especially is to be pointed out as a
model of neatness and comfort. When will the middle classes be allowed
to send their own afflicted relatives to public institutions of this
excellent kind, where violence is never practised--where it is never to
the interest of the keeper of the asylum to exaggerate his patient's
malady, or to retain him in durance, for the sake of the enormous sums
which the sufferer's relatives are made to pay! The gentry of three
countries which contribute to the Asylum have no such resources for
members of their own body, should any be so afflicted--the condition of
entering this admirable asylum is that the patient must be a pauper, and
on this account he is supplied with every comfort and the best curative
means, and his relations are in perfect security. Are the rich in any
way so lucky?--and if not, why not?

The rest of the occurrences at Derry belong, unhappily, to the domain of
private life, and though very pleasant to recall are not honestly to be
printed. Otherwise, what popular descriptions might be written of the
hospitalities of St. Columb's of the jovialities of the mess of the -th
Regiment, of the speeches made and the songs sung, and the devilled
turkey at twelve o'clock, and the headache afterwards; all which events
could be described in an exceedingly facetious manner. But these
amusements are to be met with in every other part of her Majesty's
dominions; and the only point which may be mentioned here as peculiar to
this part of Ireland is the difference of the manner of the gentry to
that in the South. The Northern manner is far more *English * than that
of the other provinces of Ireland--whether it is *better* for being
English is a question of taste, of which an Englishman can scarcely be a
fair judge.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Dublin At Last](isb32)
