[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sor08)  [Next](sor10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCMUG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Sorceress*, by Jules Michelet, \[1939\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

### 7

### *KING of the DEAD*

AT first she was not greatly touched by these promises of future
greatness. A hermitage without God, torturing memories that assail her
in the deep solitude, the losses she had borne and the insults she had
endured, her sudden, cruel widowhood, her husband who had left her alone
to her shame and humiliation, all this saddened and overwhelmed her. A
plaything of destiny, she saw herself like the wretched weeds of the
waste, without root, beaten and buffeted by the north wind, tormented,
cruelly battered this way and that; she seemed a poor fragment of coral,
dull, grey, and angular, that possesses only coherence enough to be the
better shattered. Children stamp on it, and men in mockery call it "The
wind's wife."

She laughs wildly and bitterly, as she likens herself to these things.
But from the recesses of the darkling cave comes a voice, "Ignorant and
foolish, you know not what you are saying. . . . This weed that thus
goes fluttering down the wind has good right to scorn all the fat,
common herbs of the field. It has no abiding place or root, but ’tis
complete, sufficient to itself, bearing everything, flower and seed
within itself. Be you like it; be your own root, and in the very face of
the whirlwind, you shall yet blossom and bear flowers, our own flowers,
such as spring from the dust of tombs and the ashes of volcanoes.

"The first flower of Satan, I give it you this day, that you know my
earliest name, the token of my antique might. I was, I am *the King of
the Dead*. . . . How have I been traduced! . . . ’Tis I alone (an
infinite boon that should have won me altars of

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

thanksgiving), I alone, that bring the Lost Ones back to earth. . . ."

 

To penetrate the future, to call up the past, to anticipate or to
resuscitate the days that fly so fast, to enlarge the present by what
has been or what will be, two things these sternly proscribed in the
Middle Ages. In vain; in this Nature is irresistible and prohibition
unavailing. To offend against such law is to be a man. He would be none,
who should stay for ever bound to his furrow, with downcast eyes and
gaze confined to the next pace he takes behind his plodding oxen. No! we
men must always, as we go, be looking inquiringly higher, and farther,
and deeper. This earth, yes! we measure it painfully and meticulously,
but we spurn it too and cry constantly, "What have you in your bowels?
What secrets? What mysteries? You give us back duly the grain we
entrusted to you; but you never return us that human harvest, the dead
loved ones we have lent you. Shall they not germinate too, our friends,
our lovers, that we have planted there? If only for one hour, one
instant, they might come back to us!"

Ourselves too shall soon be of that *terra incognita*, whither they have
already gone. But shall we see them again? Shall we be with them? Where
are they? What is their life yonder?—They must indeed, my dead dear
ones, be close captives not to vouchsafe even a sign! And what shall I
do to make them hear? My father, whose only joy *I* was and who loved me
so exceedingly, why, why does he never come to me? . . . On this side
and on that, only sore constraint, and bitter captivity and mutual
ignorance! A gloomy night where we look for one ray of light in
vain! <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31)

These never-ceasing ponderings of human nature, which in Antiquity were
merely sad, became in the Middle Ages cruel, bitter, demoralising,
making men's hearts to grow faint within

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

them. It would seem as though the world had set itself deliberately to
degrade the soul and render it "cribbed, cabined, and confined" to the
measure of a coffin. The servile mode of burial between four planks of
deal is well adapted to accomplish this, suggesting as it does an uneasy
sense of suffocation. The dear one who has been coffined thus, if he
comes back in dreams, is now no light, radiant shadow, centred in the
aureole of a better and lighter place, but a tortured slave, the unhappy
prey of a horrid, clawed hell-cat,—*bestiis*, the text itself says, *Ne
tradus bestiis*, etc. ("Deliver us not to the *beasts*"). Hateful and
impious thought, that my father, so good and so lovable; my mother, so
looked up to by all, should be the playthings of this horror! . . . You
laugh at this to-day. But for a thousand years it was no laughing
matter, but one for bitter burning tears. To this day one cannot write
of these blasphemies without the heart swelling, and the very pen and
paper grating a protest of fierce indignation!

 

Another truly cruel innovation was to have displaced the Feast of the
Dead from Spring-time, to which Antiquity assigned it, to fix it in
November. In May, where it stood originally, the dead were buried in
flowers. In March, where it was put later, it marked, with the
commencement of ploughing, the first awaking of the lark; the dead man
and the living seed were put in the earth simultaneously, with the same
hope of revivification. But, alas! in November, when all field work is
ended for the year, the weather overclouded and gloomy for months to
come, when mourners returned to the house, and a man sat down by his
fireside and saw the place opposite for ever empty . . . what an
aggravation of sadness was here! . . . Plainly by choosing this period
already mournful enough in itself, this period of the obsequies of dying
nature, the fear was that else man would not have grief enough of his
own to make him properly mournful! . . .

The calmest of us, the busiest, however much distracted by

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

the activities and anxieties of life, have strange moments at times. In
the twilight of dark winter mornings, at nightfall, coming down so fast
to engulf us in its gloom, ten years, twenty years afterwards, feeble,
mysterious voices sound in your heart of hearts, "Greeting, dear one;
’tis we! . . . So you are still living and working on, as always. . . .
It is well! You are not bowed down with the grief of losing us; you can
do well without us. . . . But we, we can never forget you. . . . The
ranks are closed up again, the vacant place obliterated. The house that
was ours is full of life, and we bless its prosperity. All goes
well,—better than in those far-off days when your father carried you in
his arms, when your little girl in her turn asked you, 'Carry me,
father, carry me!' . . . But there, you are weeping. . . .
Enough,—farewell to meet again."

Woe is me! they are gone, after uttering this gentle, heartbreaking
plaint. But is it a just one? Not so! a thousand times rather would I
forget myself than forget them! And yet, cost what it may to say it, we
must allow that certain characteristics escape us, are already less
perceptible; certain features of the dear face are, not effaced indeed,
but darkened, faded. A hard thing, a bitter and a humiliating, to feel
oneself so fugitive and feeble, as quick to lose impressions as the
unremembering waters; to realise that at long last we are losing that
treasured grief it was our hope to keep intact for ever! Give it back,
give it back, I implore; I value so fondly that gracious source of
tears. . . . Restore, I beseech you, those cherished images. . . . If
nothing else, make me at least dream of them by night!

 

Many a one says so in drear November. . . . And, while the bells are
tolling, and the dead leaves raining down, they disperse from the church
door, whispering low to each other, "Do you know this, neighbour? There
lives up yonder on the moors a woman they speak both good and ill of.
For my own part, I dare not say; but she has strange powers over the
under-world. She calls up the dead, and they answer her summons. Ah! if
only she

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

could (innocently, mind you, without offending God), if only she could
bring back my loved ones that are dead! . . . I am all alone, you know;
I have lost all I had to live for in this world. But who is this woman?
Who knows her? Whence she is, from heaven or from hell? I will never
visit her,"—yet all the while he is dying to go. "I will never risk my
immortal soul by going near her. Those woods, besides, are haunted; many
a time men have seen in the heath things that were not there to see. . .
. Remember poor Jacqueline, who wandered there one night to search for a
strayed sheep of hers. She came back a mad woman. I will never go."

Nevertheless, hiding the fact one from the other, many of the men do go.
Scarce as yet do the women dare to confront the risk. They think of the
dangerous road, ask many questions of such as have been there already.
The pythoness is not like the Witch of Endor, who called up Samuel at
Saul's bidding; she shows no shadowy forms, but she gives the cabalistic
words and beverages of might that will compel the dead to come back once
more in dreams. How many sorrows come to her. Even the old grandmother
of eighty, frail and tottering, would fain see her little grandson once
again. By a supreme effort, not without remorse for committing such a
sin when so near the tomb, she drags herself to the witch's hut. The
savage-looking place, rough with its yews and briars, the bold, dark
beauty of the implacable Proserpine she finds there, all frightens her.
Prostrate and trembling on the earth, the poor old woman weeps and
prays. No answer is vouchsafed; but when at length she dare raise her
head a little, she sees hell itself has been weeping in sympathy.

 

This simple impulse of pure natural feeling set poor Proserpine
blushing. Indignant at her own weakness, "Degenerate creature, weakling
soul," she ejaculates, "you that came hither in the fixed design of
working ill and only ill. . . . Is *this* the result of your master's
teaching? Ah! how he will laugh me to scorn!"

"Nay, not so. Am I not the great shepherd of shades, to bid

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

them come and go, to open them the gate of dreams? Your Dante, when he
paints my portrait, forgets my true attributes. Adding a grotesque and
superfluous tail, he never sees how I hold in very deed the shepherd's
rod of Osiris, and have inherited his caduceus from Mercury. They
thought to build an impassable wall to block absolutely the road from
one world to the other; but my feet are winged, and I flew lightly over
the obstacle. Vilely calumniated, called a ruthless monster, I have yet
felt the prick of pity, succoured the afflicted, and consoled sorrowing
lovers and mothers bereaved of their little ones. Spirit of evil, I have
yet felt compassion and pitiful revolt against the harshness of the new
God."

The Middle Ages and its chroniclers, Churchmen to a man, have been
careful not to avow the hidden, but profound, changes taking place in
popular sentiment. It is plain that Pity now appears ranged on the side
of Satan. Even the Virgin, the ideal of grace, makes no appeal to this
need of every feeling heart, nor the Church either. Evocation of the
Dead is indeed expressly forbidden. While all the books go on dilating
glibly either of the swinish Satan of the earliest conceptions or else
of the clawed demon, king of torments, of a later age, the Devil has
taken quite another aspect for the unlearned, who write no books. He has
something of the classical Pluto, but pale and majestic, by no means
deaf to prayers, granting to the dead return and to the living to see
their dead once more, he approximates closer and closer to his sire or
grandsire, Osiris, the shepherd of souls.

This change involves many others. Men confess with their lips the
official hell of the Churches, the fiery furnaces and boiling cauldrons;
but in their hearts do they really believe it all? Is it possible to
reconcile a hell thus complacent towards sorrowing hearts with the awful
traditions of a place of torment? One conception neutralises the other,
without entirely obliterating it, the resultant being a compound
picture, vague and shadowy, destined to assimilate more and more nearly
to the Virgilian idea

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

of the infernal regions. An incalculable relief this to the overburdened
spirit; above all a sweet alleviation for unhappy women, whom this
terrible dogma of the torture of their loved ones kept for ever weeping
and uncomforted, their whole life one long-drawn moan of horror.

 

The Sibyl was pondering the master's words when a small, light step
makes itself heard. The day is barely dawning yet,—after Christmas Day,
getting on for the New Year. Tripping over the crackling, frosty grass,
a small woman, with fair face and yellow hair, draws near with trembling
limbs; reaching the door, she sinks fainting on the threshold, scarce
able to breathe. Her black dress proclaims plainly enough she is a
widow. Medea's piercing look strikes her nerveless and speechless; yet
is her story manifest, no mystery left unrevealed in all her shrinking
form. Then the Sorceress in confident tones, "Dumb, little one? Yet,
what need to speak,—and you would never find words to tell. I will say
it for you. . . . Well, then, you are dying for love!" Recovering some
little presence of mind, clasping her hands, all but falling to her
knees, she makes her confession, avowing everything. She had suffered
and wept and prayed,—and all without a word. But those Christmas
merry-makings, those family reunions at the festive season, the
ill-concealed satisfaction of happy wives pitilessly flaunting a
sanctioned love, brought back the old cruel smart to her heart. . . .
Alack! what should she do? . . . If only he could come back to comfort
her for an instant! "I would give my life for the boon . . . let me die,
if I may but see him once again!"

"Go back to your house, and shut the door close. Draw the shutter too
against prying neighbours. Quit your mourning weeds and put on your
wedding dress. Lay his place at table; yet he will not come. Sing the
song he made for you, and sang so often; yet he will not come. Draw from
the chest the coat he wore last and kiss it, and say, 'The worse for
you, the worse for you, if you

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

refuse to come!' And without an instant's tarrying, drink this wine
(’tis bitter, but a sovran sleeping-draught) and lay you down in the
bridal bed. Then, have no fear, he will come."

She would not have been a woman, if she had not next morning, glowing
with soft happiness, whispered the miracle softly in the ear of her
bosom friend. "Not a word of it to any, I beseech you. . . . But he told
me himself, if I wear this dress, and sleep without once waking, every
Sunday night he will come back to me."

A happiness not without sore risk! What would happen the venturesome
woman, if the Church found out she was a widow no longer? that, raised
up by love, the spirit of her mate comes back to comfort his forlorn
wife?

A most unusual thing, the secret is well kept! The word goes round among
her friends and neighbours never to betray a mystery so tender. Indeed,
it concerns them one and all; for who is there has not suffered, who is
there has not wept tears of bereavement? Who but sees with joy
unspeakable this bridge built to connect the two worlds of life and
death?

"Oh, good, kind Sorceress! . . . Good Spirit of the Depths! blessings,
blessings on you both!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_31"></span>[62:1](sor09.htm#fr_31) This ray does shine to
some extent in the *Immortalité* and the *Foi Nouvelle* of Dumesnil;
*Ciel et Terre* by Reynaud, Henri Martin, and others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 8. Prince of Nature](sor10)
