[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Yoga](../../hin/yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ryo06) 
[Next](ryo08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B000FCG7RS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Raja Yoga*, by Yogi Ramacharaka (William Walker Atkinson), \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

### THE FIFTH LESSON.

#### THE CULTIVATION OF ATTENTION.

In our last lesson we called your attention to the fact that the Yogis
devote considerable time and practice to the acquirement of
Concentration. And we also had something to say regarding the relation
of Attention to the subject of Concentration. In this lesson we shall
have more to say on the subject of Attention, for it is one of the
important things relating to the practice of *Raja Yoga*, and the Yogis
insist upon their students practicing systematically to develop and
cultivate the faculty. Attention lies at the base of Will-power, and the
cultivation of one makes easy the exercise of the other.

To explain why we lay so much importance to the cultivation of
Attention, would necessitate our anticipating future lessons of this
series, which we do not deem advisable at this time. And so we must ask
our students to take our word for it, that all that we have to say
regarding the importance of the cultivation of Attention, is occasioned
by the relation of that subject to the use of the mind in certain
directions as will appear fully later on.

In order to let you know that we are not advancing some peculiar theory
of the Yogis, which may not be in harmony with modern Western Science,
we give you in this article a number of quotations, from Western

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

writers and thinkers, touching upon this important faculty of the mind,
so that you may see that the West and East agree upon this main point,
however different may be their explanations of the fact, or their use of
the power gained by the cultivation of Attention.

As we said in our last lesson, the word Attention is derived from two
Latin words "*ad tendere*," meaning "to stretch toward," which is really
what Attention is. The "I" wills that the mind be focused on some
particular object or thing, and the mind obeys and "stretches toward"
that object or thing, focusing its entire energy upon it, observing
every detail, dissecting, analyzing, consciously and sub-consciously,
drawing to itself every possible bit of information regarding it, both
from within and from without. We cannot lay too much stress upon the
acquirement of this great faculty, or rather, the development of it, for
it is necessary for the intelligent study of *Raja Yoga*.

In order to bring out the importance of the subject, suppose we start in
by actually giving our Attention to the subject of Attention, and see
how much more there is in it than we had thought. We shall be well
repaid for the amount of time and trouble expended upon it.

Attention has been defined as a focusing of consciousness, or, if one
prefers the form of expression, as "detention in consciousness." In the
first case, we may liken it to the action of the sun-glass through

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

which the sun's rays are concentrated upon an object, the result being
that the heat is gathered together at a small given point, the intensity
of the same being raised many degrees until the heat is sufficient to
burn a piece of wood, or evaporate water. If the rays were not focused,
the same rays and heat would have been scattered over a large surface,
and the effect and power lessened. And so it is with the mind. If it is
allowed to scatter itself over the entire field of a subject, it will
exert but little power and the results will be weak. But if it is passed
through the sun-glass of attention, and focused first over one part, and
then over another, and so on, the matter may be mastered in detail, and
a result accomplished that will seem little less than marvelous to those
who do not know the secret.

*Thompson* has said: "The experiences most permanently impressed upon
consciousness, are those upon which the greatest amount of attention has
been fixed."

Another writer upon the subject has said that "Attention is so
essentially necessary to understanding, that without some degree of it
the ideas and perceptions that pass through the mind seem to leave ne
trace behind them."

*Hamilton* has said: "An act of attention, that is, an act of
concentration, seems thus necessary to every exertion of consciousness,
as a certain contraction of the pupil is requisite to every exertion of
vision. Attention then is to consciousness what the contraction

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

of the pupil is to sight, or, to the eye of the mind what the microscope
or telescope is to the bodily eye. It constitutes the better half of all
intellectual power."

And *Brodie* adds, quite forcibly: "It is Attention, much more than any
difference in the abstract power of reasoning, which constitutes the
vast difference which exists between minds of different individuals."

*Butler* gives us this important testimony: "The most important
intellectual habit I know of is the habit of attending exclusively to
the matter in hand. It is commonly said that genius cannot be infused by
education, yet this power of concentrated attention, which belongs as a
part of his gift to every great discoverer, is unquestionably capable of
almost indefinite augmentation by resolute practice."

And, concluding this review of opinions, and endorsements of that which
the Yogis have so much to say, and to which they attach so much
importance, let us listen to the words of *Beattie*, who says: "The
force wherewith anything strikes the mind, is generally in proportion to
the degree of attention bestowed upon it. Moreover, the great art of
memory is attention, and inattentive people always have bad memories."

There are two general kinds of Attention. The first is the Attention
directed within the mind upon mental objects and concepts. The other is
the Attention directed outward upon objects external to ourselves. The
same general rules and laws apply to both equally.

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

Likewise there may be drawn another distinction and division of
attention into two classes, *viz*., Attention attracted by some
impression coming into consciousness without any conscious effort of the
Will—this is called Involuntary Attention, for the Attention and
Interest is caught by the attractiveness or novelty of the object.
Attention directed to some object by an effort of the Will, is called
Voluntary Attention. Involuntary Attention is quite common, and requires
no special training. In fact, the lower animals, and young children seem
to have a greater share of it than do adult men. A great percentage of
men and women never get beyond this stage to any marked degree. On the
other hand, Voluntary Attention requires effort, will, and
determination—a certain mental training, that is beyond the majority of
people, for they will not "take the trouble" to direct their attention
in this way. Voluntary Attention is the mark of the student and other
thoughtful men. They focus their minds on objects that do not yield
immediate interest or pleasure, in order that they may learn and
accomplish. The careless person will not thus fasten his Attention, at
least not more than a moment or so, for his Involuntary Attention is
soon attracted by some passing object of no matter how trifling a
nature, and the Voluntary Attention disappears and is forgotten.
Voluntary Attention is developed by practice and perseverance, and is
well worth the trouble, for nothing in the mental world is accomplished
without its use.

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

The Attention does not readily fasten itself to uninteresting objects,
and, unless interest can be created, it requires a considerable degree
of Voluntary Attention in order that the mind may be fastened upon such
an object. And, more than this, even if the ordinary attention is
attracted it will soon waver, unless there is some interesting change in
the aspect of the object, that will give the attention a fresh hold of
interest, or unless some new quality, characteristic or property
manifests itself in the object. This fact occurs because the mind
mechanism has not been trained to bear prolonged Voluntary Attention,
and, in fact, the physical brain is not accustomed to the task, although
it may be so trained by patient practice.

It has been noticed by investigators that the Attention may be rested
and freshened, either by withdrawing the Voluntary Attention from the
object, and allowing the Attention to manifest along Involuntary lines
toward passing objects, etc.; or, on the other hand, by directing the
Voluntary Attention into a new field of observation—toward some new
object. Sometimes one plan will seem to give the best results, and again
the other will seem preferable.

We have called your attention to the fact that Interest develops
Attention, and holds it fixed, while an uninteresting object or subject
requires a much greater effort and application. This fact is apparent to
anyone. A common illustration may be found in the matter of reading a
book. Nearly everyone will give his undivided attention to some bright,
thrilling story,

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

while but few are able to use sufficient Voluntary Attention to master
the pages of some scientific work, But, right here, we wish to call your
attention to the other side of the case, which is another example of the
fact that Truth is composed of paradoxes.

Just as Interest develops Attention, so it is a truth that Attention
develops Interest. If one will take the trouble to give a little
Voluntary Attention to an object, he will soon find that a little
perseverance will bring to light points of Interest in the object.
Things before unseen and unsuspected, are quickly brought to light. And
many new phases, and aspects of the subject or object are seen, each one
of which, in turn, becomes an object of Interest. This is a fact not so
generally known, and one that it will be well for you to remember, and
to use in practice. *Look* for the interesting features of an
uninteresting thing, and they will appear to your view, and before long
the uninteresting object will have changed into a thing having
many-sided interests.

Voluntary Attention is one of the signs of a developed Will. That is, of
a mind that has been well trained by the Will, for the Will is always
strong, and it is the mind that has to be trained, not the Will. And on
the other hand, one of the best ways to train the mind by the Will, is
by practice in Voluntary Attention. So you see how the rule works both
ways. Some Western psychologists have even advanced theories that the
Voluntary Attention is the *only* power of the Will, and that that power
is sufficient, for if the

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Attention be
firmly fixed, and held upon an object the mind will "do the rest." We do
not agree with this school of philosophers, but merely mention the fact
as an illustration of the importance attributed by psychologists to this
matter of Voluntary Attention.

A man of a strongly developed Attention often accomplishes far more than
some much brighter man who lacks it. Voluntary Attention and Application
is a very good substitute for Genius, and often accomplishes far more in
the long run.

Voluntary Attention is the fixing of the mind earnestly and intently
upon some particular object, at the same time shutting out from
consciousness other objects pressing for entrance. *Hamilton* has
defined it as "consciousness voluntarily applied under its law of
limitations to some determinate object." The same writer goes on to
state that "the greater the number of objects to which our consciousness
is simultaneously extended, the smaller is the intensity with which it
is able to consider each, and consequently the less vivid and distinct
will be the information it contains of the several objects. When our
interest in any particular object is excited, and when we wish to obtain
all the knowledge concerning it in our power, it behooves us to limit
our consideration to that object to the exclusion of others."

The human mind has the power of attending to only one object at a time,
although it is able to pass from one object to another with a marvelous
degree of speed, so rapidly, in fact, that some have held that it

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

could grasp several things at once. But the best authorities, Eastern
and Western, hold to the "single idea" theory as being correct. On this
point we may quote a few authorities.

*Jouffroy* says that "It is established by experience that we cannot
give our attention to two different objects at the same time." And
*Holland* states that "Two thoughts, however closely related to one
another, cannot be presumed to exist at the same time." And *Lewes* has
told us that "The nature of our organism prevents our having more than
one aspect of an object at each instant presented to consciousness."
*Whateley* says: "The best philosophers are agreed that the mind cannot
actually attend to more than one thing at a time, but, when it appears
to be doing so it is really shifting with prodigious rapidity backward
and forward from one to the other."

By giving a concentrated Voluntary Attention to an object, we not only
are able to see and think about it with the greatest possible degree of
clearness, but the mind has a tendency, under such circumstances, to
bring into the field of consciousness all the different ideas associated
in our memory with that object or subject, and to build around the
object or subject a mass of associated facts and information. And at the
same time the Attention given the subject makes more vivid and clear all
that we learn about the thing at the time, and, in fact, all that we may
afterwards learn about it. It seems to cut a channel, through which
knowledge flows.

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

Attention magnifies and increases the powers of perception, and greatly
aids the exercise of the perceptive faculties. By "paying attention" to
something seen or heard, one is enabled to observe the details of the
thing seen or heard, and where the inattentive mind acquires say three
impressions the attentive mind absorbs three times three, or perhaps
three times "three times three," or twenty-seven. And, as we have just
said, Attention brings into play the powers of association, and gives us
the "loose end" of an almost infinite chain of associated facts, stored
away in our memory, forming new combinations of facts which we had never
grouped together before, and bring out into the field of consciousness
all the many scraps of information regarding the thing to which we are
giving attention. The proof of this is within the experience of
everyone. Where is the one who does not remember sitting down to some
writing, painting, reading, etc., with interest and attention, and
finding, much to his surprise, what a flow of facts regarding the matter
in hand was passing through his mind. Attention seems to focus all the
knowledge of a thing that you possess, and by bringing it to a point
enables you to combine, associate, classify, etc., and thus create new
knowledge. *Gibbon* tells us that after he gave a brief glance and
consideration to a new subject, he suspended further work upon it, and
allowed his mind (under concentrated attention) to bring forth all his
associated knowledge regarding the subject, after which he renewed the
task with increased power and efficiency.

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

The more one's attention is fixed upon a subject under consideration,
the deeper is the impression which the subject leaves upon the mind. And
the easier will it be for him to afterwards pursue the same train of
thought and work.

Attention is a prerequisite of good memory, and in fact there can be no
memory at all unless some degree of attention is given. The degree of
memory depends upon the degree of attention and interest. And when it is
considered that the work of today is made efficient by the memory of
things learned yesterday, the day before yesterday, and so on, it is
seen that the degree of attention given today regulates the quality of
the work of tomorrow.

Some authorities have described Genius as the result of great powers of
attention, or, at least, that the two seem to run together. Some writer
has said that "possibly the best definition of genius is the power of
concentrating upon some one given subject until its possibilities are
exhausted and absorbed." *Simpson* has said that "The power and habit of
thinking closely and continuously upon the subject at hand, to the
exclusion, for the time, of all other subjects, is one of the principal,
if, indeed, not the principal, means of success." *Sir Isaac Newton* has
told us his plan of absorbing information and knowledge. He has stated
that he would keep the subject under consideration before him
continually, and then would wait till the first dawning of perception
gradually brightened into a clear light, little by little. A mental
sunrise, in fact.

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

That sage observer, *Dr. Abercrombie*, has written that he considered
that he knew of no more important rule for rising to eminence in any
profession or occupation than the ability to do one thing at a time,
avoiding all distracting and diverting objects or subjects, and keeping
the leading matter continually before the mind. And others have added
that such a course will enable one to observe relations between the
subject and other things that will not be apparent to the careless
observer or student.

The degree of Attention cultivated by a man is the degree of his
capacity for intellectual work. As we have said, the "great" men of all
walks of life have developed this faculty to a wonderful degree, and
many of them seem to get results "intuitively," whereas, in truth, they
obtain them by reason of their concentrated power of Attention, which
enables them to see right into the center of a subject or
proposition—and all around it, back and front, and all sides, in a space
of time incredible to the man who has not cultivated this mighty power.
Men who have devoted much attention to some special line of work or
research, are able to act almost as if they possessed "second sight,"
providing the subject is within their favorite field of endeavor.
Attention quickens every one of the faculties—the reasoning
faculties—the senses—the deciding qualities—the analytical faculties,
and so on, each being given a "fine edge" by their use under a
concentrated Attention.

And, on the other hand, there is no surer indication

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

if a weak mind than the deficiency in Attention. This weakness may arise
from illness or physical weakness reacting upon the brain, in which case
the trouble is but temporary. Or it may arise from a lack of mental
development. Imbeciles and idiots have little or no Attention. The great
French psychologist, *Luys*, speaking of this fact, says "Imbeciles and
idiots see badly, hear badly, feel badly, and their sensorium is, in
consequence, in a similar condition of sensitive poverty. Its
impressionability for the things of the external world is at a minimum,
its sensibility weak, and consequently, it is difficult to provoke the
physiological condition necessary for the absorption of the external
impression."

In old age the Attention is the first faculty to show signs of decay.
Some authorities have held that the Memory was the first faculty to be
affected by the approach of old age, but this is incorrect, for it is a
matter of common experience that the aged manifest a wonderfully clear
memory of events occurring in the far past. The reason that their memory
of recent events is so poor is because their failing powers of Attention
has prevented them from receiving strong, clear mental impressions, and
as is the impression so is the memory. Their early impressions having
been clear and strong, are easily recalled, while their later ones,
being weak, are recalled with difficulty. If the Memory were at fault,
it would be difficult for them to recall any impression, recent or far
distant in time.

But we must stop quoting examples and authorities,

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

and urging upon you the importance of the faculty of Attention. If you
do not now realize it, it is because you have not given the subject the
Attention that you should have exercised, and further repetition would
not remedy matters.

Admitting the importance of Attention, from the psychological point of
view, not to speak of the occult side of the subject, is it not a matter
of importance for you to start in to cultivate that faculty? We think
so. And the only way to cultivate any mental or physical part or faculty
is to Exercise it. Exercise "uses up" a muscle, or mental faculty, but
the organism makes haste to rush to the scene additional
material—cell-stuff, nerve force, etc., to repair the waste, and it
always sends a little more than is needed. And this "little more,"
continually accruing and increasing, is what increases the muscles and
brain centers. And improved and strengthened brain centers give the mind
better instruments with which to work.

One of the first things to do in the cultivation of Attention is to
learn to think of, and do, one thing at a time. Acquiring the "knack" or
habit of attending closely to the things before us, and then passing on
to the next and treating it in the same way, is most conducive to
success, and its practice is the best exercise for the cultivation of
the faculty of Attention. And on the contrary, there is nothing more
harmful from the point of view of successful performance—and nothing
that will do more to destroy the power of giving Attention—than the
habit of trying to do one

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

thing while thinking of another. The thinking part of the mind, and the
acting part should work together, not in opposition.

*Dr. Beattie*, speaking of this subject, tells us "It is a matter of no
small importance that we acquire the habit of doing only one thing at a
time; by which I mean that while attending to any one object, our
thoughts ought not to wander to another." And *Granville* adds, "A
frequent cause of failure in the faculty of Attention is striving to
think of more than one thing at a time." And *Kay* quotes, approvingly,
a writer who says: "She did things easily, because she attended to them
in the doing. When she made bread, she thought of the bread, and not of
the fashion of her next dress, or of her partner at the last dance."
*Lord Chesterfield* said, "There is time enough for everything in the
course of the day, if you do but one thing at a time; but there is not
time enough in the year if you try to do two things at a time."

To attain the best results one should practice concentrating upon the
task before him, shutting out, so far as possible, every other idea or
thought. One should even forget self—personality—in such cases, as there
is nothing more destructive of good thinking than to allow morbid
self-consciousness to intrude. One does best when he "forgets himself"
in his work, and sinks his personality in the creative work. The
"earnest" man or woman is the one who sinks personality in the desired
result, or performance of the task undertaken. The actor, or preacher,
or orator,

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

or writer, must lose sight of himself to get the best results. Keep the
Attention fixed on the thing before you, and let the self take care of
itself.

In connection with the above, we may relate an anecdote of *Whateley*
that may be interesting in connection with the consideration of this
subject of "losing one's self" in the task. He was asked for a recipe
for "bashfulness," and replied that the person was bashful simply
because he was thinking of himself and the impression he was making. His
recipe was that the young man should think of others—of the pleasure he
could give them—and in that way he would forget all about himself. The
prescription is said to have effected the cure. The same authority has
written, "Let both the extemporary speaker, and the reader of his own
compositions, study to avoid as far as possible all thoughts of self,
earnestly fixing the mind on the matter of what is delivered; and they
will feel less that embarrassment which arises from the thought of what
opinion the hearers will form of them."

The same writer, *Whateley*, seems to have made quite a study of
Attention and has given us some interesting information on its details.
The following may be read with interest, and if properly understood may
be employed to advantage. He says, "It is a fact, and a very curious
one, that many people find that they can best attend to any serious
matter when they are occupied with something else which requires a
little, and but a little, attention, such as working with the needle,
cutting open paper leaves, or. for want of some

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

such employment, fiddling anyhow with the fingers." He does not give the
reason for this, and at first sight it might seem like a contradiction
of the "one thing at a time" idea. But a closer examination will show us
that the minor work (the cutting leaves, etc.) is in the nature of an
involuntary or automatic movement, inasmuch as it requires little or no
voluntary attention, and seems to "do itself." It does not take off the
Attention from the main subject, but perhaps acts to catch the "waste
Attention" that often tries to divide the Attention from some voluntary
act to another. The habit mind may be doing one thing, while the
Attention is fixed on another. For instance, one may be writing with his
attention firmly fixed upon the thought he wishes to express, while at
the time his hand is doing the writing, apparently with no attention
being given it. But, let a boy, or person unaccustomed to writing, try
to express his thoughts in this way, and you will find that he is
hampered in the flow of his thoughts by the fact that he has to give
much attention to the mechanical act of writing. In the same way, the
beginner on the typewriter finds it difficult to compose to the machine,
while the experienced typist finds the mechanical movements no hindrance
whatever to the flow of thought and focusing of Attention; in fact, many
find that they can compose much better while using the typewriter than
they can by dictating to a stenographer. We think you will see the
principle.

And now for a little Mental Drill in Attention, that

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

you may be started on the road to cultivate this important faculty.

#### MENTAL DRILL IN ATTENTION.

*Exercise I*. Begin by taking some familiar object and placing it before
you, try to get as many impressions regarding it as is possible for you.
Study its shape, its color, its size, and the thousand and one little
peculiarities about it that present themselves to your attention. In
doing this, reduce the thing to its simplest parts—analyze it as far as
is possible—dissect it, mentally, and study its parts in detail. The
more simple and small the part to be considered, the more clearly will
the impression be received, and the more vividly will it be recalled.
Reduce the thing to the smallest possible proportions, and then examine
each portion, and mastering that, then pass on to the next part, and so
on, until you have covered the entire field. Then, when you have
exhausted the object, take a pencil and paper and put down as nearly as
possible all the things or details of the object examined. When you have
done this, compare the written description with the object itself, and
see how many things you have failed to note.

The next day take up the same object, and after re-examining it, write
down the details and you will find that you will have stored away a
greater number of impressions regarding it, and, moreover, you will have
discovered many new details during your second examination. This
exercise strengthens the memory

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

as well as the Attention, for the two are closely connected, the memory
depending largely upon the clearness and strength of the impressions
received, while the impressions depend upon the amount of attention
given to the thing observed. Do not tire yourself with this exercise,
for a tired Attention is a poor Attention. Better try it by degrees,
increasing the task a little each time you try it. Make a game of it if
you like, and you will find it quite interesting to notice the steady
but gradual improvement.

It will be interesting to practice this in connection with some friend,
varying the exercise by both examining the object, and writing down
their impressions, separately, and then comparing results. This adds
interest to the task, and you will be surprised to see how rapidly both
of you increase in your powers of observation, which powers, of course,
result from Attention.

*Exercise II*. This exercise is but a variation of the first one. It
consists in entering a room, and taking a hasty glance around, and then
walking out, and afterward writing down the number of things that you
have observed, with a description of each. You will be surprised to
observe how many things you have missed at first sight, and how you will
improve in observation by a little practice. This exercise, also, may be
improved by the assistance of a friend, as related in our last exercise.
It is astonishing how many details one may observe and remember, after a
little practice. It is related of Houdin (*Jean Eugène
Robert-Houdin—JBH*), the French

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

conjurer, that he improved and developed his faculty of Attention and
Memory by playing this game with a young relative. They would pass by a
shop window, taking a hasty, attentive glance at its contents. Then they
would go around the corner and compare notes. At first they could
remember only a few prominent articles—that is, their Attention could
grasp only a few. But as they developed by practice, they found that
they could observe and remember a vast number of things and objects in
the window. And, at last, it is related that Houdin could pass rapidly
before any large shop window, bestowing upon it but one hasty glance,
and then tell the names of, and closely describe, nearly every object in
plain sight in the window. The feat was accomplished by the fact that
the cultivated Attention enabled Houdin to fasten upon his mind a vivid
mental image of the window and its contents, and then he was able to
describe the articles one by one from the picture in his mind.

Houdin taught his son to develop Attention by a simple exercise which
may be interesting and of value to you. He would lay down a domino
before the boy—a five-four, for example. He would require the boy to
tell him the combined number at once, without allowing him to stop to
count the spots, one by one. "Nine" the boy would answer after a
moment's hesitation. Then another domino, a three-four, would be added.
"That makes sixteen," cried the boy. Two dominoes at a time was the
second day's task. The next day, three was the standard. The next day,
four,

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

and so on, until the boy was able to handle twelve dominoes—that is to
say, give instantaneously the total number of spots on twelve dominoes,
after a single glance. This was Attention, in earnest, and shows what
practice will do to develop a faculty. The result was shown by the
wonderful powers of observation, memory and attention, together with
instantaneous mental action, that the boy developed. Not only was he
able to add dominoes instantaneously, but he had powers of observation,
etc., that seemed little short of miraculous. And yet it is related that
he had poor attention, and deficient memory to begin with.

If this seems incredible, let us remember how old whist players note and
remember every card in the pack, and can tell whether they have been
played or not, and all the circumstances attending upon them. The same
is true of chess players, who observe every move and can relate the
whole game in detail long after it has been played. And remember, also,
how one woman may pass another woman on the street, and without seeming
to give her more than a careless glance, may be able to relate in detail
every feature of the other woman's apparel, including its color,
texture, style of fashioning, probable price of the material, etc., etc.
And a mere man would have noticed scarcely anything about it—because he
would not have given it any attention. But how soon would that man learn
to equal his sister in attention and observation of women's wearing
apparel, if his business success depended upon it, or if his speculative
instinct was called into play

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

by a wager with some friend as to who could remember the most about a
woman's clothing, seen in a passing glance? You see it is all a matter
of Interest and Attention.

But we forget that the Attention may be developed and cultivated, and we
complain that we "cannot remember things," or that we do not seem to be
able to "take notice." A little practice will do wonders in this
direction.

Now, while the above exercises will develop your memory and powers of
observation, still that is not the main reason that we have given them
to you. We have an ulterior object, that will appear in time. We aim to
develop your Will-power, and we know that Attention stands at the gate
of Will-power. In order to be able to use your Will, you must be able to
focus the Attention forcibly and distinctly. And these childish
exercises will help you to develop the mental muscles of the Attention.
If you could but realize the childish games the young Yogi students are
required to play, in order to develop the mental faculties, you would
change your minds about the Yogi Adepts whom you have been thinking
about as mere dreamers, far removed from the practical. These men, and
their students, are intensely practical. They have gained the mastery of
the Mind, and its faculties, and are able to use them as sharp edged
tools, while the untrained man finds that he has but a dull, unsharpened
blade that will do nothing but hack and hew roughly, instead of being
able to produce the finished product.

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The Yogi believes
in giving the "I" good tools with which to work, and he spends much time
in tempering and sharpening these tools. Oh, no, the Yogi are not idle
dreamers. Their grasp of "practical things" would surprise many a
practical, matter-of-fact Western business man, if he could but observe
it.

And so, we ask you to practice "observing things." The two exercises we
have given are but indications of the general line. We could give you
thousands, but you can prepare them yourselves as well as could we. The
little Hindu boy is taught Attention by being asked to note and remember
the number, color, character and other details of a number of colored
stones, jewelry, etc., shown for an instant in an open palm, the hand
being closed the moment after. He is taught to note and describe passing
travelers, and their equipages—houses he sees on his journeys—and
thousands of other everyday objects. The results are almost marvelous.
In this way he is prepared as a *chela* or student, and he brings to his
*guru* or teacher a brain well developed—a mind thoroughly trained to
obey the Will of the "I"—and with faculties quickened to perceive
instantly that which others would fail to see in a fortnight. It is true
that he does not turn these faculties to "business" or other so-called
"practical" pursuits, but prefers to devote them to abstract studies and
pursuits outside of that which the Western man considers to be the end
and aim of life. But remember that the two civilizations are quite
different—following different ideals—having different economic

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

conditions—living in different worlds, as it were. But that is all a
matter of taste and ideals—the faculty for the "practical life" of the
West is possessed by the *chela*, if he saw fit to use it. But all Hindu
youths are not *chelas*, remember—nor are all Western youths "captains
of industry," or Edisons.

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

# MANTRAM (AFFIRMATION).

I am using my Attention to develop my mental faculties, so as to give
the "I" a perfect instrument with which to work. The mind is *My*
instrument and I am bringing it to a state of capacity for perfect work.

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

# MANTRAM (OR AFFIRMATION).

There is but One Life—One Life Underlying. This Life is manifesting
through ME, and through every other shape, form, and thing. I am resting
on the bosom of the Great Ocean of Life, and it is supporting me, and
will carry me safely, though the waves rise and fall—though the storms
rage and the tempests roar. I am safe on the Ocean of Life, and rejoice
as I feel the sway of its motion. Nothing can harm me—though changes may
come and go, I am Safe. I am One with the All Life, and its Power,
Knowledge, and Peace are behind, underneath, and within Me. O! One Life!
express Thyself through me—carry me now on the crest of the wave, now
deep down in the trough of the ocean—supported always by Thee—all is
good to me, as I feel Thy life moving in and through me. I am Alive,
through thy life, and I open myself to thy full manifestation and
inflow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lesson VI. Cultivation of Perception](ryo08)
