<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Symbolism](../index) 
[Astrology](../../astro/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bot03) 
[Next](bot05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564594610/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0030IM7KK/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems*, by William Thomas
and Kate Pavitt, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span> <span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

# PART I

## AMULETS AND TALISMANS

### CHAPTER I

<span class="small">Introduction.—The Psychic and Magnetic Influence of
Talismans and Gems.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">From</span> remotest times, back even to the
birth of humanity, Precious Stones and Talismans have been held in high
estimation by all nations; the former, primarily because of their
beauty, and the latter on account of their virtues, as transmitters of
good luck and to avert misfortune. The association of Gems with power,
civil and religious, has ever been noticeable; and to the fascination of
antiquity may be added the allurement of mystery. Moreover, of the many
and varied signs of wealth and luxury, jewels have played a most
important part in the lives of the great, not only on account of their
beauty but because they contained in a small compass the equivalent to a
large sum of money and in times of danger could easily be concealed and
carried from place to place.

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

As tokens or symbols they conveyed joy and confidence to their owners,
and were thought to give warning of coming events, inspiring courage and
faith in the fearful, and the romances and tragedies in which they have
played a part, together with their marked influence on the lives of
individuals and nations, intensifies our interest in them so that it is
little wonder that faith in the mysterious properties ascribed to them
should have survived the growth of ages and still find so many believers
in all countries. The philosophers of thousands of years ago,
understanding their suitability as a medium for the transmission of
astral forces and vibrations, invested them with much importance,
attributing to them spiritual as well as material powers, special
characteristics and medicinal and curative qualities.

In all probability gems had their origin in the very remote period of
the Earth's history when it was still in a molten state subject to
deluge and fire, before its solidification made it possible for
vegetation to appear, and the translucent lustre of certain gems is due
to the action of the floods which preceded the fiery volcanic period.
The colouring which forms their greatest fascination is due to various
metallic oxides in combination with oxygen which in varying quantities
gives red,

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

blue, yellow, or green colourings, as shown by the Ruby, Sapphire,
Emerald, Topaz, and Amethyst.

It is most difficult to determine with any certainty in what country
Precious Stones were first worn as ornaments, but the consensus of
opinion seems to point to India, as far as recognised history is
concerned, as their birthplace, for every rare and beautiful production
of Nature, Gems and Pearls are associated with the East.

The earliest records of humanity do not, however, stop with known
histories, for traces of man's love for gems are found in the
discoveries of travellers and the traditions of South America, evidence
proving an inheritance from past civilisations of great antiquity. There
is an innate attraction to the marvellous in mankind, the imagination
leading us to endow the rare and precious with peculiar qualities,
particularly when the source of its beauty and rarity is not readily
perceptible. It is akin to the extraordinary magnetic influence which
one person may exercise over another without any tangible evidence of
super-physical powers, or the mysterious attraction which the Magnet
exercises over Iron, and establishes the inference that other minerals
may be similarly endowed with properties at present unrecognised by our
ordinary physical senses.

Modern research confirms the old teaching that

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

the Universe was created from the four elements, Fire, Air, Water,
Earth, in the order given, each growing as it were from its predecessor
and all animated in turn by the Word breathed upon them at the Creation;
this force, or energy, permeates all existing things from man, who is
the highest of apparent physical manifestations down through the animal
and vegetable kingdoms to the mineral, in which this energy, by reason
of its very slow atomic changes, is least obvious. This Force manifests
in the form of vibrations moving in waves through every composite part
of the physical world, and, according to the condition of its medium,
helping and giving power when in harmony, and thwarting or nullifying
action when under unfavourable conditions. To this Force, or Etheric
influence, is due the law of Evolution, or progress, which operates in
every department of the Universe, not being confined to any one kingdom,
but harmonising each with the other, being naturally most powerful in
man whose evolution is the highest, and forms the medium through which
man can act on the lower kingdoms and receive desired vibrations from
them. We may thus interpret Plato's statement "that gems owe their
origins to the stars" as an etheric influence acting on the auriferous
matter which forms their composition.

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

Evidence of undoubted authenticity of wonderful occult powers and
experiences has within recent years become readily accessible to all.
Psychometry \[the art of sensing past happenings to individuals from the
handling of something belonging to them, such as a glove or jewel\] may
be said to be established as a fact; and that this power is not confined
to human affairs but permeates also the lower kingdoms is aptly
illustrated by a personal experience which occurred during the summer of
1912. Mr. J. Wedgewood of the Theosophical Society, who is much
interested in sensing colours from the touch of Precious Stones, and
with whom I have frequently experimented in this direction, called one
day at my office with a lady friend, Mrs. Russak, also of the
Theosophical Society, and a well-known occultist. In the course of
conversation Mr. Wedgewood said, "If you want to know anything about any
of your stones, this lady can tell you," and, being desirous of getting
a real test, I selected two new stones that I knew had never been used,
as will be seen by what follows:—I handed one to Mrs. Russak which she
held in the palm of her hand for a moment or so, and then gave me what
was, as far as I could judge, a description of the processes of its
formation; then, holding it out to me, went on to say, "I am sorry I
cannot give you any events connected

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

with this stone, but within the last month you have changed its centre
of gravity." The stone was a Jargoon that I had only just received back
from the lapidary with whom I had left it in the rough to be cut; it was
a very decided oval in shape whilst in its rough state, and the lapidary
had advised me to have practically half of it cut away, leaving the
stone quite circular and only about half its original size, although
much more valuable and finer in colour than it would have been had it
been cut as an oval twice the size.

The second stone was a piece of Lapis Lazuli, and after holding this for
a while the Seer said, "I only get warm friendly vibrations from this
stone, and as far as I can tell it has had no history as a finished
stone; but it must have come into your possession under very kindly
conditions." The stone in question had been cut from a large piece of
Lapis Lazuli given to me in its natural rough uncut form by a client, in
recognition of quite a slight service I had rendered her, but which had
played a rather important part in her life.

This ability to gauge and come into touch with the soul of things is
unfortunately at present only confined to the few, although innate in
every human being, and must be regarded as a latent sense which will be
common to coming generations,

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

opening up realms hitherto undreamt of and making a decided forward step
in human evolution.

Confusion and doubt have arisen as to the exact stones mentioned by the
early writers, owing to their elastic methods of describing all red
stones as Rubies, all green stones as Emeralds, and all blue stones as
Sapphires; this confusion has not been lessened by reason of the
complexity of the many languages of the East, to say nothing of the
artistic liberties taken by modern poets and authors, (who, probably
unaware of the necessity for astronomical or astrological knowledge as a
basis for the Zodiacal placing of the stones,) have taken our calendar
as it stands for the Month stones with such embellishments as their
fancy dictated.

The Precious Stones ascribed to the twelve months of the year were those
worn in the breastplate of the High Priest, and it was believed that the
Divine revelations obtained by the shining or dullness of the stones in
the Urim and Thummim, due to some virtue inherent in them, were
indicative as to whether the atonement had been accepted or not. These
twelve stones, engraved with twelve anagrams of the name of God, had a
mystic power over the Zodiac, harmonising the twelve Angels and good
Spirits who had affinity with the twelve tribes of Israel.

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

The origin of Talismans and Amulets is lost in the obscurity of the
ages, but as far back as we can trace human records they are to be
found; the terms *Talisman* and *Amulet* have become from indiscriminate
use to be considered synonymous, but in his notes to the *Archæological
Journal*, the Rev. C. W. King says:—

"The meaning of these two words is entirely distinct. Talisman being the
conception in the Arabic tongue of the Greek, meaning the influence of a
planet, or the Zodiac, upon the person born under the same. A Talisman
in olden times was, therefore, by its very nature a sigil, or symbolic
figure, whether engraved in stone or metal, or drawn upon parchment or
paper, and was worn both to procure love and to avert danger from its
possessor. The latter purpose alone was the object of the Amulet, its
Latin signification being to do away with, or baffle, its root being
*Amalior*. Pliny cites the word as the country-folk name for the
Cyclamen which ought to be planted in every human home, because where it
is grown poisonous drugs have no power to harm, on which account they
call it the flower, Amuletum."

The belief in them is by no means so universal as in olden times, and to
the thoughtful person many of the attributes claimed for them cannot be
admitted; at the same time, with the growing

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

knowledge of finer forces opening up new powers to mankind and to which
we are slowly coming into touch, many people are prepared to admit that
there may be some active power in a thought made concrete in the form of
a Talisman or Amulet which may be made for some specific purpose, or for
particular wear, becoming to the wearer a continual reminder of its
purpose and undoubtedly strengthening him in his aims and desires.

Symbols, frequently of a religious nature, have formed the basis of
Talismans and Charms from earliest times, holding a very important place
in the affairs of humanity, for symbolism was a power before
civilisation was evolved, and by its recognition of a certain order in
physical affairs it was undoubtedly a great factor in the establishment
of human laws. In modern religions this law is recognised by the use of
each symbol in accordance with the character of ceremonial worship,
colour also playing a very important part in the service.

Too frequently one hears a religion condemned as idolatrous because its
God or Gods were typified in human or animal form. That it was the
virtue the figure represented, and not the figure itself that was
venerated, is ignored; but Christians would be indignant if the use of
the Lamb and Eagle as symbols in their

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

services caused them to be accused of idolatrous worship of these
emblems!

The force of the Spirit behind the symbol is very apparent with regard
to the Cross, as may be understood when we think of the martyrs who have
endured unflinchingly the most excruciating tortures human brain could
devise, holding fast to their faith by this symbol.

The savage had his Totem, which he believed gave him certain virtues,
and helped him to success in his combats and in his struggle for
existence.

Those of our readers who have any knowledge of Astrology and Planetary
influences will readily understand the sympathy between any metal, or
stone, ruled by any particular planet, and any person coming under the
influence of that planet.

In the writing of the philosophers and Alchemists of the Middle Ages
directions are given that these Talismans should be made, or commenced,
under favourable aspects, so that the Work may receive the vitalising
rays proceeding from the planet represented.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](bot05)

</div>
