<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Symbolism](../index) 
[Astrology](../../astro/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bot23) 
[Next](bot25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564594610/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0030IM7KK/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems*, by William Thomas
and Kate Pavitt, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

### CHAPTER IX

#### SAGITTARIUS—THE HOUSE OF THE ARCHER

<span class="small">Period—The Constellation—The Bow in the
Cloud—Mythology—Characteristics of the Type—Appropriateness of the
Symbol—Fresh Air a Necessity—Professions—Ailments—Marriage Relations—Gem
of the House—The Topaz—Nain-Ratan—Pliny and the Topaz—Discovery of the
Stone—The Emperor Hadrian and his Ring—Appropriateness of the Stone to
the Type—The Stone of Strength—As a Talisman against Asthma—Marbodus and
the Topaz—Chrysolite also Favourable.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> Sun enters the Zodiacal House of
Sagittarius the Archer on November 23rd and remains until December 21st
approximately.

This House is symbolised by a Centaur armed with a bow ready to
discharge an arrow (as shown in Illustration No. 9 of the coloured
[Frontispiece](bot00.htm#img_front)), and is ruled by the planet
Jupiter.

Sagittarius the Archer forms one of the constellations of the Southern
Hemisphere, situated between Scorpio the Scorpion and Capricornus the
Goat. The bow of the Archer in the constellation contains three of the
largest stars in this group, so that its form can be followed without
much difficulty, affording a further illustration of Biblical

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

history depicted in the heavens, as mentioned by Mr. R. A. Proctor the
Astronomer. It will be remembered that in the previous chapter we noted
that Libra was at one time symbolised by an altar, and Mr. Proctor says,
describing this constellation:

"Next after the Altar (built by Noah after leaving the Ark), and in fact
in the smoke from the Altar, is the bow of Sagittarius, and
corresponding with this we read that God, after the savour of the Altar
had reached him, said: 'I do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall come
to pass when I bring a cloud over the earth that bow shall be seen in
the cloud.' Close by the ship Argo (the Ark) again, is the raven,
perched on Hydra (the great sea serpent), represented in the old
sculptures immersed in the waves of ocean on which the Ark was
floating."

The Greeks also adopted the Centaur as the symbol of this constellation,
but according to their mythology the Centaur was Chiron the son of
Saturn, who whilst living in the woods studied the medicinal virtues of
herbs to such good effect that he became supreme as a physician. He was
also famous for his skill in astronomy and proficiency in scientific
knowledge, because of which he became in turn the instructor of
Achilles, Hercules, and Æsculapius. In handling the

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

arrows of Hercules, which had been poisoned by being dipped in the
Hydra's blood, he accidentally let one fall upon his foot, inflicting a
wound which in spite of his great skill in medicine he was unable to
cure. Being born of immortal parents he could not die, so that to
release him from his excruciating pains the gods translated him to the
heavens to form this constellation.

<div style="margin-left: 32px; margin-right: 32px;">

<span class="small">"Midst golden stars he stands refulgent now  
 And thrusts the Scorpion with his bended bow."</span>

</div>

One of the most noticeable characteristics of those born under the
influence of Sagittarius is their acuteness of perception and accuracy
in sensing the weak spots in the characters of those about them,
resembling the Archer, who stands ready to shoot the arrow which seldom
fails in hitting the mark. Sagittarians have a decisive way of
expressing their opinion, which can never be mistaken as it exactly fits
the case; behind their words is the intuition which gives them the power
of inspiration. They are progressive, enterprising, and prophetic. With
a clear knowledge and perception of what they wish to achieve, and their
thoughts concentrated upon the goal which they are destined to reach,
circumstances do not overcome them. They solve the many problems of life
and get through the worst troubles with the least difficulty of any
type.

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

Being lovers of freedom they will generally be found their own masters,
or if in employment, in such position as gives them a maximum of liberty
and independence, and they are seldom without money or the means of
getting it. Their sense of justice and the fitness of things is very
keen, and possessing great pride of family, any ill-treatment or
harshness to those they are fond of amounts with them to almost personal
affront, and in spite of the fact that as a rule they mind their own
business, as regards outsiders, their sympathetic and loyal nature makes
them quick to notice and resent any slight or interference on behalf of
their families or the few they are attached to. The brain is clear and
quick at assimilating new ideas and new modes of life, and the
disposition naturally frank and honest, yet curiously enough there is at
the same time a certain watchfulness and distrust of strangers which
leads to deception, whilst disliking and trying to avoid it, for they
are haters of secrecy and dissimulation. Their aspirations are lofty,
exalted, and refined, and being hopeful, joyous, and youthful even in
advanced years, they are generally popular and successful, although they
seldom excel as students or in literary professions.

The manners of this type are usually affable and courteous, and the
temper generally even,

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

although apt to fly off unexpectedly at the smallest provocation when
acting on the spur of the moment. Having an advantage over the
slower-minded types, they aim in their anger at some vulnerable point,
getting home every time, for when personal they are very personal,
although never willingly malicious, often in this way saying more than
they really mean or intended, and although quickly recovering from their
petulant moods, the effects of their temper when roused are
long-lasting.

When their environment and occupation is such as to enable them to lead
healthy lives they make splendid characters, open air being most
necessary to enable them to draw into themselves the vitality and energy
they need. Otherwise they are apt to become restless, faultfinding,
rebellious, exacting, domineering, and difficult to get on with, and
should always be allowed to make changes in their professions without
hindrance or objections, restraint of any kind being disastrous to their
development, causing them to degenerate into uninteresting, weak, and
undecided characters. Generally speaking, they have a clear conception
of what they wish to achieve, and being naturally fond of sport and
out-of-door exercise of all kinds, they are the less liable to weakness.
Having ability and foresight above the average, forewarned is forearmed,

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

and as children this type is frequently clairaudient as well as
clairvoyant. They are lovers of hygiene, and having the greatest
antipathy to cramped surroundings they naturally choose professions in
which they can enjoy freedom of speech and action, with plenty of space,
light, and air. They excel as Judges, Presidents, Generals, Commanders,
Directors, Inspectors of Schools, Factories, and Workshops, also as
Sanitary Inspectors, Managers, and Superintendents, etc., hating all
subordinate positions.

These subjects are also fond of animals, so that it is not surprising
that horses and dogs are their constant companions, and seem to respond
readily to their wishes and desires with very little training; many keen
sportsmen are found under this sign, who delight in tramping over long
stretches of country, or find their most congenial recreations on breezy
downs and hilltops. They are also frequently found as dog-fanciers,
veterinary surgeons, horse-dealers, pigeon-fanciers, and other callings
bringing them into touch with animals and an out-of-door life, and in
consequence of this seem more liable than the other types to accidents
in connection with horses.

The chief ailments to which these subjects are liable are bronchial and
lung trouble, rheumatism, accidents to the thighs and hips (which are

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

ruled by this sign), bruises, sprains, fractures, and diseases affecting
the arterial system, apoplexy, and complaints which originate through a
plethoric habit and corrupt the blood.

In married life they are not always fortunate, their demand for
individuality and freedom of thought and action with an intense family
pride frequently causing misunderstandings, and even jealousy. Being
morbidly sensitive to coldness or indifference, slights fancied or real
are keenly felt. Giving of their best they demand the best in return,
and if once deceived seldom entirely forgive, although when unhappily
mated they make the best of it as a rule to the outside world, shrinking
from any publicity of their domestic differences, faults, or failings.
They will be found to harmonise best with those of the Aries, Leo,
Aquarius, and Libran types, and will find the Pisces and Virgo subjects
the least sympathetic.

The gem best suited and universally accepted as most favourable for this
type is the Topaz; and the Chrysolite is also fortunate for them.

<span class="smallcaps">The Topaz</span>.—The Topaz is found in various
colours—white, yellow, pink, green, and black; but it is in the first
three colours that they are familiar in general use as gems.

The best stones come from Brazil and Mexico, but they are also found in
Siberia, India, and many

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

parts of Europe and Great Britain. The most valuable is the pink
variety, which is found naturally in South America; but it has been
discovered that some of the yellow species can be artificially changed
to this colour under a special treatment of heat.

The white topaz of Brazil is found in pebble form, free from flaws, and
is a very hard bright stone capable of receiving a very high polish. It
is sometimes taken for a diamond, and is known in its native country as
the Slave's Diamond, although it is not equal to the diamond in
brilliancy and iridescence.

A saffron-yellow variety found in Ceylon, known as the Indian Topaz, has
always been popular throughout India as a Talisman, being worn for
health, caution, sagacity, and the prevention of sudden death. Because
of these same qualities its favour is equally strong throughout Burmah,
and it is always included in the <span
class="smallcaps">Nan-Ratan</span>, the sacred nine-stone jewel, which
forms the most important ornament in the Burmese regalia, as may be seen
in the jewels which are now on exhibition at the Indian Museum, South
Kensington.

According to Pliny, the Topaz derives its name from the Island of
Topazos in the Red Sea, where it was first found, and he says Topazein,
in the

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Troglodyte tongue,
means "to seek after," the island being so often lost amidst fogs. Some
pirates who were weatherbound on this island and hard-pressed by famine,
in tearing up roots for food accidentally discovered the stone. From the
descriptions which have been handed down to us it is believed that the
Chrysolite was frequently used in mistake for the Topaz, and as the
Zodiacal Houses the two stones represent are in harmony with each other,
the Chrysolite will also be a favourable stone for the subjects of
Sagittarius.

Gabelschoverus mentions that the Emperor Hadrian, whose reign was one of
the most prosperous and peaceful in Roman history, and who was most
ardent in spreading Christianity, even writing an address to his soul on
his death-bed (which inspired Pope's poem, "The Dying Christian to his
Soul"), used as a Talisman an antique ring set with a Topaz which was
engraved in Roman letters with the words <span
class="smallcaps">NATURA—DEFICIT,—FORTUNA—MUTATUR,—DEUS—OMNIA—CERNIT</span>,
an expression of faith in the Almighty to overrule Nature and Fortune
most appropriate to the owner of the ring.

Fresh air was as much a necessity to the ancient as to the modern
subjects of Sagittarius, as is shown from the fact that the Romans wore
this gem as a preservative from pestilential atmosphere, also to protect
its wearer against perils and dangers

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

in travelling, injuries from burns and scalds, and to avert all
complaints of the chest and bowels.

The Topaz was called by Pliny "The Stone of Strength," and he describes
as the most valuable, stones that have a predominating tint of orange in
their colouring. Albertus Magnus recommends it as a cure for gout, and
Camillus Leonardus as a charm against hæmorrhoids; lunacy, and sudden
death; also to bring riches to its wearers, and the favours of princes.

During the Middle Ages it was believed to dispel enchantments if set in
gold and bound on the left arm or hung round the neck. It preserved from
sensuality, calmed anger and frenzy, strengthened the intellect,
brightened the wit, gave joyousness and contentment, and drove away
broodings and apprehensions. It was also worn as a cure for asthma, and
as a specific against insomnia, being sometimes powdered and taken in
wine.

Marbodus renders its virtues in verse, translated by the Rev. C. W.
King, as follows:

<div style="margin-left: 32px; margin-right: 32px;">

<span class="small">"The Topaz is a jewel rare  
 And therefore must be bought full dear.  
 Made up of hues of golden light,  
 And with Celestial lustre bright,  
 Here see the man on study bent,  
 A life in contemplation spent."</span>

</div>

The Topaz will not, however, be fortunate for the subjects born during
the Pisces and Virgo periods.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Capricorn—The Goat](bot25)

</div>
