[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) [Buddhist
Articles](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](5j3) [Next](5j5)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

### II, 4, 9. THE SÍ<u>H</u>ACAMMA-BIRTH.

   "That is not the roar of a lion". This the Master related, while
living at Jetavana, concerning Kokálika. The latter was, namely, at that
time desirous of reciting the sarabhañña. The Master having heard this
incident, related a tale:

   In times past, while Brahmadatta reigned in Báráṇasí, Bodhisatta
having been born in an agricultor's family, when grown up gained his
livelihood by tilling the ground.

   At this time a merchant wanders about trafficking by the help of an
ass. In every place he comes to, having taken his merchandise from the
back of the ass, he clothes him in a lion's skin and lets him loose into
the rice and barley fields. The watchers of the field, on seeing him and
believing him to be a lion, dare not approach.

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

   One day, then, this merchant having taken his stand at the entrance
of a town, while causing his breakfast to be prepared, lets loose the
ass into a barley field, having previously clothed him in the lion's
skin. The watchers of the field believing him to be a lion and not
daring to approach him, went home and told the matter. The inhabitants
of the whole town, after seizing their weapons, while blowing the conchs
and sounding the drums, drew near to the field, and shouted aloud.
Terrified with the fear of death, the ass brayed like an ass. Knowing
him then to be an ass, Bodhisatta pronounced the first stanza:

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd" data-valign="top">
<td>1.</td>
<td>"That is not the roar of a lion,<br />
nor a tiger, nor a panther;<br />
clothed in a lion's skin<br />
a wretched ass roars".</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

The inhabitants of the town, also knowing him to be an ass, killed him
by breaking his bones, and went away, carrying with them the lion's
skin. The merchant then, having come and seen the unfortunate ass,
pronounced the second stanza:

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd" data-valign="top">
<td>2.</td>
<td>"For a long time, indeed, the ass did eat<br />
that green barley,<br />
clothed in a lions skin;<br />
but when roaring he committed himself."</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   While he said this, the ass died there.

   The Master having given this moral instruction, he summed up the
Játaka thus: "At that time the ass was Kokálika, but the wise agricultor
I." The Sí<u>h</u>acamma-Birth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](5j5)
