[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Sacred texts](../../index)  [Thelema](../index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# **The Cry of the 1st Aethyr, Which is Called LIL**[**1**](#1)

First, let praise and worship and honour and glory and great thank be
given unto the Holy One, who hath permitted us to come thus far, who
hath revealed unto us the ineffable mysteries, that they might be
disclosed before men. And we humbly beseech His infinite goodness that
he will be pleased to manifest unto us even the Mystery of the First
Aethyr.

(Here followeth the Call of the Aethyr.)[**2**](#2)

The veil of the Aethyr is like the veil of night, dark azure, full of
countless stars. And because the veil is infinite, at first one seeth
not the winged globe of the sun that burneth in the centre thereof.
Profound peace filleth me, --- beyond ecstasy, beyond thought, beyond
being itself, IAIDA. (This word means "I am", but in a sense entirely
beyond being.)

(*Note*. --- In Hebrew letters it adds to 26. In Hebrew letters the name
of the Aethyr is 70, ayin; but by turning the Yetziratic attributions of
the letters into Hebrew, it gives 66[**3**](#3), is the sum of the
numbers from 0 to 11.)

Yes; there is peace. There is no *tendency* of any sort, much less any
observation or feeling or impression. There is only a faint
consciousness, like the scent of jasmine.

The body of the Seer is rested in a waking sleep that is deeper than
sleep, and his mind is still; he seems like a well in the desert, shaded
by windless palms.

And it is night; and because the night is the whole night of space, and
not the partial night of earth, there is no thought of dawn. For the
light of the Sun maketh illusion, blinding man's eyes to the glory of
the stars. And unless he be in the shadow of the earth, he cannot see
the stars. So, also, unless he be hidden from the light of life, he
cannot behold Nuit. Here, then, do I abide in unalterable midnight,
utterly at peace.

I have forgotten where I am, and who I am. I am hanging in nothing.

Now the veil opens of itself. (To Scribe. Come nearer; I don't want to
have to speak so loudly.)

It is a little child covered with lilies and roses. He is supported by
countless myriads of Archangels. The Archangels are all the same
colourless brilliance, and every one of them is blind. Below the
Archangels again are many, many other legions, and so on far below, so
far that the eye cannot pierce. And on his forehead, and on his heart,
and in his hand, is the secret sigil of the Beast.[**4**](#4) And of all
this the glory is so great that all the spiritual senses fail, and their
reflections in the body fail.

It is very strange. In my heart is rapture, holy and ineffable,
absolutely beyond emotion; beyond even that bliss called Ananda,
infinitely calm and pure. Yet at the gates of mine eyes stand tears,
like warriors upon the watch, that lean on their spears,
listening[**5**](#5).

The great and terrible Angel keeps on looking at me, as if to bar me
from the vision. There is another forcing my head down in sleep.

(It's very difficult to talk at all, because an impression takes such an
immense time to travel from the will to the muscles. Naturally, I've no
idea of time.)

I have gone up again to the child, led by two Angels, abasing my head.

This child seems to be the child that one attempted to describe in "The
Garden of Janus".[**6**](#6)

Every volition is inhibited. I have tried to say a lot, but it has
always got lost on the way.

Holy art thou, O more beautiful than all the stars of the Night!

There has never been such peace, such silence. But these are *positive*
things. Singing praises of things eternal amid the flames of first
glory, and every note of every song is a fresh flower in the garland of
peace.

This child danceth not, but it is because he is the soul of the two
dances, --- the right hand and the left hand, and in him they are one
dance, the dance without motion.

There is dew on all the fire. Every drop is the quintessence of the
ecstasy of stars.

Yet a third time am I led to him, prostrating myself seven times at
every step. There is a perfume in the air, reflected down even to the
body of the seer. That perfume thrills his body with an ecstasy that is
like love, like sleep.

And this is the song:

I am the child of all who am the father of all, for from me come forth
all things, that I might be. I am the fountain in the snows, and I am
the eternal sea. I am the lover, and I am the beloved, and I am the
first- fruits of their love. I am the first faint shuddering of the
Light, and I am the loom wherein night weaveth her impenetrable veil.

I am the captain of the hosts of eternity; of the swordsmen and the
spearmen and the bowmen and the charioteers. I have led the armies of
the east against the armies of the west, and the armies of the west
against the armies of the east. For I am Peace.

My groves of olive were planted by an harlot, and my horses were bred by
a thief. I have trained my vines upon the spears of the Most High, and
with my laughter have I slain a thousand men.

With the wine in my cup have I mixed the lightnings, and I have carved
my bread with a sharp sword.

With my folly have I undone the wisdom of the Magus, even as with my
judgments I have overwhelmed the universe. I have eaten the pomegranate
in the House of Wrath, and I have crushed out the blood of my mother
between mill-stones to make bread.

There is nothing that I have not trampled beneath my feet. There is
nothing that I have not set a garland on my brow. I have wound all
things about my waist as a girdle. I have hidden all things in the cave
of my heart. I have slain all things because I am Innocence. I have lain
with all things because I am Untouched Virginity. I have given birth to
all things because I am Death.

Stainless are my lips, for they are redder than the purple of the vine,
and of the blood wherewith I am intoxicated. Stainless is my forehead,
for it is whiter than the wind and the dew that cooleth it.

I am light, and I am night, and I am that which is beyond them.

I am speech, and I am silence, and I am that which is beyond them.

I am life, and I am death, and I am that which is beyond them.

I am war, and I am peace, and I am that which is beyond them.

I am weakness, and I am strength, and I am that which is beyond them.

Yet by none of these can man reach up to me. Yet by each of them must
man reach up to me.

Thou shalt laugh at the folly of the fool. Thou shalt learn the wisdom
of the Wise. And thou shalt be initiate in holy things. And thou shalt
be learned in the things of love. And thou shalt be mighty in the things
of war. And thou shalt be adept in things occult. And thou shalt
interpret the oracles. And thou shalt drive all these before thee in thy
car, and though by none of these canst thou reach up to me, yet by each
of these must thou attain to me. And thou must have the strength of the
lion, and the secrecy of the hermit. And thou must turn the wheel of
life. And thou must hold the balances of Truth. Thou must pass through
the great Waters, a Redeemer. Thou must have the tail of the scorpion,
and the poisoned arrows of the Archer, and the dreadful horns of the
Goat. And so shalt thou break down the fortress that guardeth the Palace
of the King my son. And thou must work by the light of the Star and of
the Moon and of the Sun, and by the dreadful light of judgment that is
the birth of the Holy Spirit within thee. When these shall have
destroyed the universe, then mayest thou enter the palace of the Queen
my daughter[**7**](#7).

Blessed, blessed, blessed; yea, blessed; thrice and four times blessed
is he that hath attained to look upon thy face. For I will hurl thee
forth from my presence as a whirling thunderbolt to guard the ways, and
whom thou smitest shall be smitten indeed. And whom thou lovest shall be
loved indeed. And whether by smiting or by love thou workest, each one
shall see my face, a glimmer through a thousand veils. And they shall
rise up from love's sleep or death's, and gird themselves with a girdle
of snake-skin for wisdom, and they shall wear the white tunic of purity,
and the apron of flaming orange for will, and over their shoulders shall
they cast the panther's skin of courage. And they shall wear the nemyss
of secrecy and the ateph crown of truth. And on their feet shall they
put sandals made of the skin of breasts, that they may trample upon all
they were, yet also that its toughness shall support them, and protect
their feet, as they pass upon the mystical way that lieth through the
pylons. And upon their breasts shall be the Rose and Cross of light and
life, and in their hands the hermit's staff and lamp. Thus shall they
set out upon the never-ending journey, each step of which is an
unutterable reward[**8**](#8).

Holy, Holy, Holy, Holy; yea, thrice and four times holy art thou,
because thou hast attained to look upon my face; not by my favour only,
not by thy magick only, may this be won. Yet it is written: "Unto the
persevering mortal the blessed Immortals are swift."

Mighty, mighty, mighty, mighty; yea, thrice and four times mighty art
thou. He that riseth up against thee shall be thrown down, though thou
raise not so much as thy little finger against him. And he that speaketh
evil against thee shall be put to shame, though thy lips utter not the
littlest syllable against him. And he that thinketh evil concerning thee
shall be confounded in his thought, although in thy mind arise not the
least thought of him[**9**](#9). And they shall be brought unto
subjection unto thee, and serve thee, though thou willest it not. And it
shall be unto them a grace and a sacrament, and ye shall all sit down
together at the supernal banquet, and ye shall feast upon the honey of
the gods, and be drunk upon the dew of immortality --- FOR I AM HORUS,
THE CROWNED AND CONQUERING CHILD, WHOM THOU KNEWEST NOT!

Pass thou on, therefore, O thou Prophet of the Gods, unto the Cubical
Altar of the Universe; there shalt thou receive every tribe and kingdom
and nation into the mighty Order that reacheth from the frontier
fortresses that guard the Uttermost Abyss unto My Throne.

This is the formula of the Aeon, and with that the voice of LIL, that is
the Lamp of the Invisible Light, is ended. Amen.

Biskra, Algeria.  
December 19, 1909. 1:30 - 3:30 p.m.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.  <span id="1"></span>LIL = {Cancer}{Aquarius}{Cancer} = 76 =
    {HEB:Nun- final}{HEB:Vau} {HEB:Yod}{HEB:Bet}{HEB:Chet} = Secret, a
    refuge; {HEB:Chet}{HEB:Chet} {HEB:Yod}{HEB:Nun} rest, peace; and
    {HEB:Dalet}{HEB:Bet}{HEB:Ayin}, a Servant (in the noble sense). In
    Hebrew LIL would be 70, the eye of Horus, {HEB:Ayin}. But see a
    previous note on the twelvefold table, 15th Aethyr, where these
    letters rule the Universe. (scil. that of the present Aeon.)
2.  <span id="2"></span>The Seer was only too well aware that,
    considering the dire straits to which he was put to obtain the
    Second Aire, he was surely incapable of penetrating the First. In
    fact, only a full Magus could pierce the Second properly, and for
    the First, none but an Ipsissimus would be competent. This
    apprehension was in fact justified. Only now and then was he able to
    live at the level of LIL; much of the Vision and the Voice here
    printed is but a pale reflection in Rauch (and even that at the cost
    of infinite effort) of the Word of the Angel of the Aethyr. These
    "Ersatz-words" are indicated in the present edition by square
    brackets.
3.  <span id="3"></span>i.e. by taking L as Luna. In the note in the
    title, we have taken it as {Cancer}, experience having shewn that
    this mode is more accurate. L is {Moon} in her decrease, and
    {Cancer} her house. But the Enochian alphabet is referred to the
    Zodiac and the Elements; only indirectly to the planets; and it is
    imprudent to make any exception.
4.  <span id="4"></span>Sun and moon conjoined
5.  <span id="5"></span>There are long intervals between many of these
    paragraphs, the Seer having been lost to Being. The reader will note
    that "The Great and Terrible Angel" has not been mentioned, but
    comes in suddenly. This was because the Seer's speech was inaudible,
    or never occurred. This angel was the "Higher Genius" of the Seer.
6.  <span id="6"></span>See the *Winged Beetle* and *Eqx*. I, No. 3,
    where this poem is given at length.
7.  <span id="7"></span>This passage is quite spurious, a vague and
    false reflection of the true voice, which was a lyrical sequence of
    the Atus of Thoth{WEH Note: In this Word lurks a Pun that is Key to
    all the Work.}
8.  <span id="9"></span>This passage is not wholly wrong; it is the poor
    expression, which is to be deplored.
9.  <span id="10"></span>This prophecy has proved true in many cases,
    often in the most strange and unexpected ways.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

> [**Back to Liber 418**](418)
