[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Sacred texts](../../index)  [Thelema](../index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**The Cry of the 11th Aethyr,  
Which is Called IKH**[**1**](#1)

There appears in the stone immediately the Kamea[**2**](#2) of the Moon.
And it is rolled up; and behind it there appeareth a great Host of
Angels. Their backs are turned towards me, but I can see how tremendous
are their arms, which are swords and spears. They have wings upon their
helmets and their heels: they are clad in complete armour, and the least
of their swords is like the breaking forth of a tremendous storm of
lightning. The least of their spears is like a great water-spout. On
their shields are the eyes of Tetragrammaton, winged with flame, ---
white, red, black, yellow and blue. On their flanks are vast squadrons
of elephants, and behind them is their meteor-artillery. They that sit
upon the elephants are armed with the thunderbolt of Zeus.

Now in all that host there is no motion. Yet they are not resting upon
their arms, but tense and vigilant. And between them and me is the God
Shu, whom before I did not see, because his force filleth the whole
Aethyr[**3**](#3). And indeed he is not visible in his form. Nor does he
come to the seer through any of the senses; he is understood, rather
than expressed.

I perceive that all this army is defended by fortresses, nine mighty
towers[**4**](#4) of iron upon the frontier of the Aethyr. Each tower is
filled with warriors in silver armour[**5**](#5). It is impossible to
describe the feeling of tension; they are like oarsmen waiting for the
gun.

I perceive that an Angel is standing on either side of me; nay, I am in
the midst of a company of armed angels, and their captain is standing in
front of me. He too is clad in silver armour; and about him, closely
wrapped to his body, is a whirling wind[**6**](#6), so swift that any
blow struck against him would be broken.

And he speaketh unto me these words:

Behold, a mighty guard against the terror of things, the fastness of the
Most High, the legions of eternal vigilance; these are they that keep
watch and ward day and night throughout the aeons. Set in them is all
force of the Mighty One, yet there stirreth not one plume of the wings
of their helmets.

Behold, the foundation of the Holy City, the towers and the bastions
thereof! Behold the armies of light that are set against the outermost
Abyss, against the horror of emptiness, and the malice of Choronzon.
Behold how worshipful is the wisdom of the Master, that he hath set his
stability in the all-wandering Air and in the changeful Moon[**7**](#7).
In the purple flashes of lightning hath He written the word Eternity,
and in the wings of the swallow hath He appointed rest.

By three and by three and by three hath He made firm the foundation
against the earthquake that is three. For in the number nine is the
changefulness of the numbers brought to naught. For with whatsoever
number thou wilt cover it, it appeareth unchanged[**8**](#8).

These things are spoken unto him that understandeth, that is a
breastplate unto the elephants, or a corselet unto the angels, or a
scale upon the towers of iron; yet is this mighty host set only for a
defense, and whoso passeth beyond their lines hath no help in them.

Yet must he that understandeth go forth unto the outermost Abyss, and
there must he speak with him that is set above the four-fold terror, the
Princes of Evil, even with Choronzon, the mighty devil that inhabiteth
the outermost Abyss. And none may speak with him, or understand him, but
the servants of Babylon, that understand, and they that are without
understanding, his servants.

Behold! it entereth not into the heart, nor into the mind of man to
conceive this matter; for the sickness of the body is death, and the
sickness of the heart is despair, and the sickness of the mind is
madness. But in the outermost Abyss is sickness of the aspiration, and
sickness of the will, and sickness of the essence of all, and there is
neither word nor thought wherein the image of its image is reflected.

And whoso passeth into the outermost Abyss, except he be of them that
understand, holdeth out his hands, and boweth his neck, unto the chains
of Choronzon. And as a devil he walketh about the earth, immortal, and
be blasteth the flowers of the earth, and he corrupteth the fresh air,
and he maketh poisonous the water; and the fire that is the friend of
man, and the pledge of his aspiration, seeing that it mounteth ever
upward as a pyramid, and seeing that man stole it in a hollow tube from
Heaven, even that fire he turneth unto ruin, and madness, and fever, and
destruction. And thou, that art an heap of dry dust in the city of the
pyramids, must understand these things.

And now a thing happens, which is unfortunately sheer nonsense; for the
Aethyr that is the foundation of the universe was attacked by the
Outermost Abyss, and the only way that I can express it is by saying
that the universe was shaken. But the universe was *not* shaken. And
that is the exact truth; so that the rational mind which is interpreting
these spiritual things is offended; but, being trained to obey, it
setteth down that which it doth not understand. For the rational mind
indeed reasoneth, but never attaineth unto Understanding; but the Seer
is of them that understand.

And the Angel saith:

Behold, He hath established His mercy and His might, and unto His might
is added victory, and unto his Mercy is added splendour[**9**](#9). And
all these things hath He ordered in beauty, and He hath set them firmly
upon the Eternal Rock, and therefrom He hath suspended His kingdom as
one pearl[**10**](#10) that is set in a jewel of threescore pearls and
twelve[**11**](#11). And He hath garnished it with the Four Holy Living
Creatures for Guardians, and He hath graven therein the seal of
righteousness[**12**](#12), and He hath burnished it with the fire of
His Angel, and the blush of His loveliness informeth it, and with
delight and with wit hath He made it merry at the heart, and the core
thereof is the Secret of His being, and therein is His name Generation.
And this His stability had the number 80, for that the price thereof is
War[**13**](#13).

Beware, therefore, O thou who art appointed to understand the secret of
the Outermost Abyss, for in every Abyss thou must assume the mask and
form of the Angel thereof. Hadst thou a name, thou wert irrevocably
lost. Search, therefore, if there be yet one drop of blood that is not
gathered into the cup of Babylon the Beautiful, for in that little pile
of dust, if there could be one drop of blood, it should be utterly
corrupt; it should breed scorpions and vipers, and the cat of
slime[**14**](#14).

And I said unto the Angel:

Is there not one appointed as a warden?

And he said:

Eloi, Eloi, lama sabacthani.

Such an ecstasy of anguish racks me that I cannot give it voice, yet I
know it is but as the anguish of Gethsemane. And that is the last word
of the Aethyr. The outposts are passed, and before the seer extends the
outermost Abyss.

I am returned.

Bou-Sada.  
December 5, 1909. 10:10-11:35 p.m.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.  <span id="1"></span>IKH = {Sagittarius}{Dee}{Air} =
    {HEB:Samekh}{HEB:Shin}{HEB:Aleph}, the Supernal Triad, the Hexagon
    and Malkuth, the arrangement of the Tree of Life. Also 361 Adonai
    ha-Aretz. For it is the formulation of the Sephiroth which is a
    barrier of organic structure against the confusion of matter.
2.  <span id="2"></span>Kamea --- "magic square" containing the letters
    corresponding to the numbers (in this case from 1 to 81) - so
    arranged that each line, vertical or horizontal, shall add to the
    same total.
3.  <span id="3"></span>Shu is in Jesod, as the supporter of the Tree of
    Life, and he is Zeus, the Lord of Air. But also Zeus is the orderer
    of all things.
4.  <span id="4"></span>Jesod = 9
5.  <span id="5"></span>Silver for the moon of Jesod.
6.  <span id="6"></span>Jesod is Air.
7.  <span id="7"></span>Both {Air} and {Moon} are in Jesod, Stability.
8.  <span id="8"></span>e.g 9 x 7 = 63. 6 plus 3 = 9. 9 x 127 = 1143. 1
    plus 1 plus 4 plus 3 = 9.
9.  <span id="9"></span>"For they cross with the currents reflected."
10. <span id="10"></span>Malkuth.
11. <span id="11"></span>The 72 pearls are the quinaries of the Zodiac.
    They appear in the XXIst Atu. See Liber CCXXXI (*Equinox* I,
    vii), v. 21.
12. <span id="12"></span>Full title of Jesod is Tzedeq Jesod Olahm, "The
    Righteous is the Foundation of the World."
13. <span id="13"></span>I.S.V.D., Jesod = 80, the number of p, the
    letter of Mars.
14. <span id="14"></span>This is the danger which threatens all
    aspirants to the Grade of Magister Templi. Woe to those who accept
    it lightly, or without the fullest preparation. {WEH Note: a "cat of
    slime" is a slug or shell-less snail.}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

> [**Back to Liber 418**](418)
