<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](doth42)  [Next](doth44) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Duties of the Heart*, by Rabbi Bachye, tr. by Edwin Collins,
\[1909\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### (<span class="smallcaps">From the Gate of Repentance.</span> <span id="fr_16"></span>[\*](#fn_15))

### <span class="smallcaps">What is Repentance?</span>

<span class="smallcaps">What</span> is meant by repentance is when a man
sets himself to the service of the Creator, after he has departed from
that service or sinned in it, and restores that which has been lost
therefrom, whether by reason of that man's stupidity in reference to God
and the things that constitute His service, or because of his

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

passions having prevailed over his reason, or blinded him to his duties,
or because evil companions have led him to sin, or to whatever cause his
sins may be due.

  .     .     .     .     .     .     .

If his departure from the service of the Creator has consisted only in
neglect of what is commanded, the manner of his repentance requires him
to occupy himself diligently with the good works he has left undone, and
with activities that tend to form both habits harmonious with the
fulfilment of those commands and a character to which such conduct comes
naturally. If his departure from the service of the Creator consisted in
doing things against which the Creator has warned him \[disobedience to
the prohibitions of the Pentateuch or of divinely guided human reason\],
his repentance must be shown in his carefully guarding himself against
all return to conduct at all similar to that wherein he has sinned.

  .     .     .     .     .     .     .

It is as if a man who has become ill from taking insufficient food of a
nourishing kind, or through eating improper food, wishes to restore his
health.

He will have to eat abundantly—perhaps almost to excess—of nourishing
food suitable to his constitution, and carefully avoid all food of a
similar nature to that which has proved hurtful, until his health is
fully restored.

Then he may resume an ordinary, wholesome diet, between the two
extremes. . . .

Repentance, however, is of three kinds.

First, that of him who repents because he is out of the way of sin and
temptation; but as soon as he is in the way of temptation his
inclination prevails over

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

his reason, and he does not refrain from sin, and only then, when he has
finished his sinful action, sees the shameful nature of his conduct, and
regrets his transgression. Such a one has repented with his lips and not
with his heart; with his tongue and not with his deeds, and deserves the
condemnation of the Creator; and of him it is written (Jer. vii. 9),
"Will ye steal and murder and commit adultery and swear falsely? etc. Is
this house, which is called by My name, become a den of robbers in your
eyes?"

The second kind of repentance is that of him who repents in his heart
and in his physical and material conduct, and makes a firm stand with
his reason against his passions, and so orders his conduct and his
habits of life as to compel his soul <span
id="fr_17"></span>[\*](#fn_16) to fight with her desires until he is
victorious and is able to refrain from what is hateful to the Creator;
but his soul <span id="fr_18"></span>[\*](#fn_16) still has pleasure in
turning continually towards what is contrary to the service of the
Creator, and thirsts after transgression, and he strives earnestly to
subdue his soul <span id="fr_19"></span>[\*](#fn_16) and his passions;
and sometimes he prevails and sometimes they. Such a man is not perfect
in his repentance, and the duty of making atonement is still incumbent
upon him until he shall depart altogether from transgressions.

The third kind of repentance is when a man fulfils

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

the conditions of repentance <span id="fr_20"></span>[\*](#fn_17) and
causes his intellect to prevail over his desires, and accustoms himself
continually to enter into reckoning with his soul, <span
id="fr_21"></span>[†](#fn_18) and fears his Creator, and is ashamed
before Him, and lays to heart the greatness of his sins, and fully
recognises the greatness of Him against whom he has sinned and whose
word he has transgressed, and sets his iniquities before his eyes, and
is continually full of remorse for them, and seeks forgiveness for them
all the days of his life, until its end. Such a one is, in the sight of
the Creator, fit to be saved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_15"></span>[51:\*](doth43.htm#fr_16) The only Hebrew word
for repentance is *teshubah*, from *shub*, to return.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[53:\*](doth43.htm#fr_19) The word that I have
here translated soul is *nefesh*, a word generally so rendered in the
English Bible; but it is used of the life principle, and sometimes
merely as a synonym for self. The Hebrew word for soul in the purely
spiritual sense of that word is *neshamah*; while yet a third, *ruach*,
is an exact equivalent for our word *spirit*, both in the primary sense
of breath and in its higher secondary significance.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[54:\*](doth43.htm#fr_20) Bachye devotes a long
chapter to describing these conditions.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[54:†](doth43.htm#fr_21) See footnote, [p.
53](#page_53).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Motives to Repentance](doth44)

</div>
