<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](doth26)  [Next](doth28) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Duties of the Heart*, by Rabbi Bachye, tr. by Edwin Collins,
\[1909\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">Humility, True and False</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Humility</span> is lowliness of the soul; and it
is a quality of the soul that, when established there, allows its signs
to be evident in the bodily members. The voice, for instance, is
softened, and so is the language it utters; and one is subdued in times
of anger, and vengeance is withheld when one has the power to avenge.

But there are three kinds of humility. One kind of humility is shared by
man and by very many species of dumb animals; this is poverty of spirit
and the sufferance of injuries that one has the power to avert. And this
kind of humility is found in fools among the sons of men, and in low and
ignorant people, on account of their want of knowledge and the weakness
of their understanding. We are accustomed to call this humility, but it
is, in truth, merely poverty of the soul and blind stupidity. But real
humility is that which follows the exaltation of the soul after it has
raised itself above sharing with the cattle their more shameful
attributes. Then only, when humility and lowliness of soul are joined to
such elevation, are they praiseworthy qualities.

The second variety of humility is humility towards men; either on
account of their having dominion over us, or on account of our being in
need of their services. This is submission in the right direction. But
although it is proper, it is not a lasting quality;

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

for it does not comprehend all reasonable beings, nor is such humility
proper at all times and in all places.

But the third kind of humility is humility before the Creator, blessed
be He, and its obligation embraces all reasonable beings, <span
id="fr_9"></span>[\*](#fn_8) and it is incumbent upon them at every time
and in every place. This is the special kind of humility that I have in
view. And all the Scriptural passages that speak of "the humble," "the
meek," "the modest," "the brokenhearted," "the contrite," etc., etc.,
are written with reference to this third kind of humility—which is the
most exalted degree of humility. Moreover, he that has acquired it is
not far from the way that leads him near to God; and he will be
favourably accepted by the Creator.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[34:\*](doth27.htm#fr_9) *Kol hammedaberim*, a
phrase often used by our author, means, literally, all who speak or
arrange words in order, or are capable of logic.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Signs and Consequences of True Humility](doth28)

</div>
