<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](doth41)  [Next](doth43.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Duties of the Heart*, by Rabbi Bachye, tr. by Edwin Collins,
\[1909\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### (<span class="smallcaps">From the Second Gate, the Gate of Investigation and Contemplation—Chap. II.</span>)

### <span class="smallcaps">The Right Study of Nature Leads to Nature's God.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">That</span> investigation and careful study of
all created beings and things is a duty binding upon us, so that we may
bring out from such contemplation proofs of the wisdom of the Creator
(blessed be He), is taught

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

by reason, by Scripture, and by the tradition handed down through the
Sages of the Talmud.

Reason tells us that the superiority of the human being <span
id="fr_13"></span>[\*](#fn_12.md) over the dumb creature <span
id="fr_14"></span>[†](#fn_13.md) consists in his superior recognition and
perception, enabling him to understand, with all their subtle
differences, <span id="fr_15"></span>[‡](#fn_14.md) the secrets of the
Divine wisdom and of natural science; that are manifested in the facts
of the universe, and in his superior power of receiving fruitful
knowledge from these perceptions. . . . And when a man thinks, meditates
and intelligently studies, and tests the signs of this wisdom, his
superiority over cattle will be great in proportion to his understanding
\[of these things\]. And if he hides himself from these things he
becomes similar to the cattle, or even lower than they; as Scripture
says (Isa. i. 3), "The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master's
crib, Israel hath not known," etc.; and it is written (Isa. xl. 26),
"Lift up your eyes and see, who hath created these things"; and it is
written (Ps. viii.), "When I see the heavens, the work of Thy fingers,
the moon and the stars which Thou hast formed," etc. . . . And from
tradition we learn the same thing. Our Sages of blessed memory have said
(Talmud, Sabbath 75), "Whoever understands how to calculate the course
and movements of the heavenly bodies, and does not make these
calculations, to him the words of Scripture apply; (Isa. v. 12), 'The
harp and the viol, the tabret, and

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

pipe, and wine are at their feasts: but they look not at the work of the
Eternal, neither consider the operation of His hands.'" And they have
said, "Whence do we learn that a man is bound by the Mosaic Law to study
astronomy? From the words (Deut. iv. 6, 7), 'And you shall observe them
and do them, for this is your wisdom and your understanding in the eyes
of the peoples, who will hear and say, surely this is a wise and
understanding nation, etc. . . .' And what is the kind of science and
intelligence that would have such value in the eyes of the peoples of
the world? Surely it is the calculation of the movements of the heavenly
bodies. . . ." And they have said (Talmud, Erubin 8), "If the *Torah*
(revelation, especially the Pentateuch) had not been given to Israel, we
should yet have been able to learn the will of God and His laws from a
study of nature, learning the different virtues from different
creatures, as, for instance, modesty from the cat, the marriage laws and
sexual purity from the dove, honesty from the ant, and so forth."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_12"></span>[50:\*](doth42.htm#fr_13.md) *Hammedabbayr*, the
being who can put words in order, the speaking and reasoning being.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[50:†](doth42.htm#fr_14.md) *Sheäyno medabbayer*,
who cannot put words in order.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[50:‡](doth42.htm#fr_15.md) This is the meaning,
*beenah*, understanding; compare *bayn*, between.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: What is Repentance?](doth43.md)

</div>
