<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](doth44)  [Next](doth46) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Duties of the Heart*, by Rabbi Bachye, tr. by Edwin Collins,
\[1909\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">On the Possibility of Repentance.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> question may be asked, "Is it
possible to make atonement by repentance <span
id="fr_23"></span>[\*](#fn_20) for every kind of sin?" I would reply
that iniquities are of two kinds: (1) Sins that affect the relations
between man and God alone, such as denial of God, evil thoughts, and
those hidden sins that are included in the prohibitions of the duties of
the heart and mind; <span id="fr_24"></span>[†](#fn_21) and (2) Sins
between a man and his fellow men, such as those in which the sinner has
done violence to them either in their persons, or their property, or
their name and reputation. . . . The sins against God only are not so
difficult of atonement as those in which the sin against God has
consisted in a sin against our fellow men. For the repentance consists
in returning from the evil ways whether in thought or

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

deed. But in the case of sins against our fellow men there are many
circumstances that make repentance difficult. Restitution is a necessary
preliminary to repentance, and the injured person may not be able to be
found, or may be a long way off; or the oppressor may have lost the
wealth that he obtained from the oppressed, and so be unable to restore
it; and it may be that the injured one is unwilling to forgive the one
who has injured him, for some bodily injury, or for some slander spoken
about him; or it may be that the sinner is unable to recognise those
entitled to restitution, as, for instance, when he has oppressed or
defrauded the people of a town or district. . . . Another cause of
difficulty is that the habit of evil conduct often becomes a second
nature which it is not easy to change. . . . There are also sins whose
consequences, physical and moral, immediate and remote, no human power
can avert or undo. . . .

But if the repentant one is truly repentant, and does all that is at all
possible to repair his fault, and in everything—spiritual and
material—shows all the signs, and fulfils all the conditions, of true
repentance with his whole strength of body, mind, and possessions; then
the Creator will lighten his task and help him in his return, and will
even remove the consequences of his moral sins; give him wealth to
restore what he has robbed others of; bring him into contact with those
at a distance against whom he has sinned, so that he may humble himself
to them and obtain their pardon, so overrule the course of his business
or his benefactions that those whom he has defrauded may be among those
who derive the greatest profit and advantage from his

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

investments or his public works and charities, and so forth.

Repentance and atonement are only withheld from the sinner when his
inward, secret thoughts and feelings, and his heart are deceptive. But
if he truly wishes to draw near to God, the gate of repentance will not
be closed to him, and no hindrance, however great, can hinder his
approach to Him. For God Himself opens to him the gate of righteousness,
and with His kindness and His beneficence points out to him the good
way, as it is written (Ps. xxv. 8), "Good and upright is the Eternal;
therefore He will guide sinners in the way," and (Deut. iv. 29, etc.),
"And when ye seek the Lord from thence, ye shall find Him," etc.

  .     .     .     .     .     .     .

But know this, that repentance is only capable of fulfilment in
deeds:—in works, and not at all in words.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_20"></span>[55:\*](doth45.htm#fr_23) Literally, to return
from.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[55:†](doth45.htm#fr_24) See [p.
18](doth06.htm#page_18), last paragraph, and top of [p.
19](doth07.htm#page_19).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Habits of those that love God](doth46)

</div>
