<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](doth06)  [Next](doth08) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Duties of the Heart*, by Rabbi Bachye, tr. by Edwin Collins,
\[1909\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">Examples of Duties of the Heart</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Among</span> commands relating to duties of the
heart and mind are the following:—To believe that the world has a
Creator, who created it from nothing, and that there is none other like
Him. To accept His Unity and worship Him in our hearts. To devote
intelligent thought to the wonders of His Creation, so that they may be
to us a sign concerning Him. To trust in Him, and humble ourselves
before Him; to fear Him, to tremble at the thought that He looks at
us—at all that is revealed and all that is hidden about us; to desire to
do His will; and to concentrate all our efforts upon good deeds that are
absolutely disinterested and only motived by love of God. Further, that
we should love Him and those that love Him, and hate those that hate
Him.

Also, that we should not covet, and not avenge, or bear a grudge.
(Compare Levit. xix.) They also forbid us to think sinful thoughts, or
to have sinful desires, and even to contemplate the commission

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

of any transgression, and other similar things which are hidden from man
and none but God, alone, can see.

Thus the duties of the heart involve the formation of ideals of conduct,
love of man, faith, etc.; the cultivation of right beliefs based upon
Reason; the conscious effort of the mind to realise the wonders of
creation, so that we may come to know, of God, truths which human
language, that can only accurately tell of things material, can never
adequately express. That trust in God which makes right conduct
possible, even at the cost of personal risk and loss; the banishing of
hatred, envy, scorn, all longing for revenge, and all desire for sin,
are also obligations of the heart. And they include all nuances of
virtue, such as these that have their being in the heart alone, and are
not manifested in material life, save only by their influence; and
yearning, till the yearning one turns pale with longing, <span
id="fr_4"></span>[\*](#fn_3) to realise, in thought and mind and deed,
the will of God. And chief among them is the attuning of the soul into
such perfect harmony with God, that all right conduct and right thought
must follow without effort on our part, because our will is one with
His, through love.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[19:\*](doth07.htm#fr_4) This is the literal
translation of *nichsof*; comp. *keseph*, silver.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Duties of the Heart are more Important than any
others](doth08)

</div>
