<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](doth23)  [Next](doth25.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Duties of the Heart*, by Rabbi Bachye, tr. by Edwin Collins,
\[1909\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">The Whole of Human Conduct Belongs to the Domain of Ethics</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> whole of human conduct may be divided
into acts that are commanded and acts that are prohibited, and acts that
are necessary to the maintenance of physical existence and that are just
sufficient for human needs, such as eating, drinking, sufficient speech
for the conduct of worldly affairs, and so forth. For every act that
passes the boundary line of what is just sufficient, either tending to
superfluity or to insufficiency, cannot escape from inclusion among acts
commanded by Reason or by Scripture, if its intention be for the sake of
God; or among prohibited acts, if its passing of the border line be not
for the sake of God. <span id="fr_8"></span>[\*](#fn_7.md) When, however,
we examine more closely the kind of actions described as being neither
commanded nor forbidden, but merely necessary to human life and the
order of the world, we discover that it belongs to the category of
things commanded from the very beginning of creation (here again

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Scripture and
Reason—Ethics, properly so-called—are in agreement), for in Genesis we
find:—"And God blessed them and said, be fruitful and multiply, and fill
the earth and subdue it; and later on, "Thus behold I have given unto
you every herb bearing seed which is upon the face of the earth for
food." Thus the eating of sufficient food is also commanded in the Law,
and since this is so, it is clear that every possible \[intentional\]
action of the sons of men is either commanded or forbidden, and that he
who does anything commanded (by Reason or Scripture) is performing a
good deed, and if he leaves it undone, he has failed in his duty. And,
in like manner, to do anything that Reason or Scripture forbids is
sinful, and to refrain from doing it, if he refrain from doing it from
reverence for the Eternal One, it is righteous. And to do things that
are not prohibited in an even and proper way, is righteous.

Behold, then, all the actions of mankind are, without exception, either
good or bad: and the intelligent man is he who weighs all his actions,
before he does them, in this balance, and tests them with his best
thought and the whole strength of his intellect, and chooses the best of
them and forsakes all others. The sage (Ecclesiastes xii.) classifies
all works as either good or bad. "For all works God will bring into
judgment, over every hidden thing whether good or bad."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[30:\*](doth24.htm#fr_8.md) Note that not the act
but its motive determines its ethical significance.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Danger of Pride and Self-Righteousness](doth25.md)

</div>
