[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kymf10)  [Next](kymf12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0787309923/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Know Your Magnetic Field*, by William E. Gray, \[1947\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

### CHAPTER TEN

#### FLUID ACCUMULATION

A professor with an extremely painful foot asked this person if he could
help him. After a few treatments, I went along, too, as I was anxious to
see the foot.

"I had what I believed to be a callous on the bottom of my left foot,"
the professor began, "which, from time to time, I carefully trimmed.
About three years ago I cut too deeply and started an infection. My
doctor treated it but it was a long, slow process; it would drain, heal
for a while and be better, then open up and drain again. The swelling
would go away and then return.

"About a year and a half ago it grew rapidly worse. I was put to bed
and, I assure you, all this time the foot and leg were most painful.
After quite a period in bed I was allowed to sit up with my foot on a
chair. I might still be sitting there if I had not insisted I was going
back to work.

"I have seen many doctors since then and have had many diagnoses from
'Plantar’s Wart' to 'I don't know'; and they had me in an unhappy state
of confusion with their contradictions. The last doctor, for a fee of
six dollars, named it 'papilloma.' I stopped there. Papilloma, I felt,
was more suitable to a scholar and a gentleman. So papilloma it has
remained as far as I am concerned.

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

"But what's in a name? The foot and leg remained crippling and
torturing. A diagnosis did no good without a cure and they all failed
there. You may call it anything you choose—just go ahead with your work
and get me well. I have work to do."

With a wave of his hand, he settled back into the chair, closed his eyes
and sank into profound meditation or complete relaxation. I could not be
sure which.

This person then explained to me:

"The appearance of the foot at first looked as though it were an
infection from the old wound on the bottom, but the wound was closed at
the time and there was no drainage. The foot and ankle were all out of
shape and the swelling reached to about two inches below the knee cap.
From the toes, over the instep including the ankle, it was terrifically
swollen. The skin was stretched tight. It was fiery red and glistening,
and heat was radiating from it."

"I know," I said. "I've seen swelling like that, so hot you could warm
your hands over it."

The professor roused, opened his eyes and gave me an amused pitying
look, "My dear young woman, you could have lit your cigarette from my
foot!"

This person resumed, "The pressure from my fingers caused deep imprints
to remain in the flesh. Wouldn't you surmise that that was an indication
of fluid accumulation, not all infection? It coincided with his
appearance, pasty skin and puffiness all over his body. His vibrations
indicated a depleted magnetic field and a heavy fluid accumulation
throughout the body. My intuition told me to steady his heart, build the
magnetic field and not bother with the foot now.

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

"By generating the energy into his heart nerves they were slowed down
and cushioned. The energy released the spasms from the magnetic field
and strengthened it so that it could draw the necessary energy through
the lungs to feed the nervous system including the kidneys. For good
measure, a charge of energy current was sent through the foot nerves."

The professor became animated again. "For that, you have my blessing,"
he said. "The constant and severe pain I had left me immediately and has
not returned. For some of the other things, I withhold my blessings; for
instance, what you did to my kidneys."

This person shook with laughter. "Do you mind repeating what you told
me?"

"Not at all," the professor replied with mock seriousness. "I had three
treatments in one week, at the end of which time my dignity was
completely demoralized and I was transported back to my childhood. The
nerves to the bladder woke up. I was quite conscious of them and their
increasing frequent demands. I had to retire from all public life and
was reduced to the state of a dancing child, loudly telling his mother
his urgent need.

"To add to my indignities, I began to perspire. Let me correct that, I
sweat! My nights were turned into hideous hours of toil; I was mopping,
mopping, constantly. I changed pajamas twice a night and shifted bed
linen until, by morning, there was nothing dry left in the room. I was a
busy, unhappy man, but the most outrageous part was the terrible odor I
had to put up with. I shall never cease to be grateful that I remained a
bachelor; if not I am sure I would have

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

lost my wife in the ordeal I went through for a week."

When we had finished laughing this person finally managed, "Sorry, but
these descriptions are always funny. When the patients come back in they
are all furious. The way people describe their reactions amuses me. 'You
are ruining me; I won't have anything more to do with you!' But they
always come back for more."

Then continuing more seriously, "When the magnetic field is strengthened
so that the nerves can receive their proper energy, the kidneys begin to
do their work and the whole system starts to eliminate the poisons. As
the toxins eliminate, the patient starts to improve."

At the end of three weeks the professor was well on the road to
recovery. His skin had regained a healthy, pink tone and all puffiness
of the tissues had disappeared.

For the better part of a year he had lost his sense of taste. All foods
seemed alike and he had no appetite. Now he was eating well and enjoying
his meals with no after distress. There was a general allover
improvement and feeling of well-being. The heart rate was slower and
more normal, breathing much easier and his disposition had returned to
normal. In the beginning of the nerve building almost everyone reacts in
disposition and temperament and the professor was no exception. We were
amused, knowing it to be only a brief phase of the recovery.

At the end of the second week of treatment work was started on the foot
itself, in addition to the continued building. At the end of the third
week the foot was one-third less in size, the swelling and puffiness

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

in the leg almost all gone, the redness and heat faded entirely. The
foot had some discoloration, comparable to a fading bruise.
Sensitiveness and nerve sensations were increasing. The old wound which
had opened during the time the fluids were being eliminated from the
body was now closed and had started to fill in.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Eleven. Rheumatic Fever Nerves](kymf12)
