[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kymf09)  [Next](kymf11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0787309923/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Know Your Magnetic Field*, by William E. Gray, \[1947\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

### CHAPTER NINE

#### SLEEPING SICKNESS

It was interesting to me to see what this person would do when he
received his first sleeping sickness case. The patient's wife
accompanied him for his first treatment to interpret because his speech
was too difficult to understand. When he was stricken it was diagnosed
as sleeping sickness and he was hospitalized, attended by two doctors—a
general medical man and nerve specialist.

"I questioned, "How sick were you?"

"I was very sick. I had a fever of 102° and my throat was very swollen.
Swallowing was difficult and speaking was almost impossible. I had a
very hard time forming words and when I got them out, no one could
understand them. Breathing was a great effort. I could not breathe
deeply and I still cannot.

"They gave me penicillin, one dose every day for ten days, which helped.
I left the hospital on the tenth day. I am a little better now and have
not seen a doctor for six months."

"Were you terribly drowsy and did you sleep a lot?" I questioned.

"Yes, there were periods of sleeping and periods of extreme
restlessness."

This person, with a very surprised look on his face and disappointment
in his voice, said, "Is that what sleeping sickness is like? It seemed
to me that sleeping

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

sickness would be pleasant. While you were sick you just slept it off.
You could sleep all you wanted to and wake up well."

When our laughter subsided, he said, "Now let me listen to your
vibrations."

There was spasm of the magnetic field, tension in the cords to the neck
and tongue, a jumpy and labored heart beat and nerve depletion.

Let me give you a picture of Mr. R. as he sat there. A tall man in his
early forties and, quite obviously, not well. His eyes were dull; his
skin was putty white, dry and lifeless; the cords of his neck were
prominent and noticeably under tension. His breathing was labored and
shallow. When he spoke it was with much hesitation and considerable
effort. Most words were indistinguishable and he had marked difficulty
with the sounds "s" and "th."

At the end of five minutes of the energy current into the magnetic
field, the spasm completely relaxed. A transformation had taken place
before our eyes; color had slowly crept back to his face until all the
skin was glowing and vital. Light came back into his eyes, increasing to
a brilliant shine. He took long, deep breaths, filling his lungs
hungrily.

This person placed his finger tips on the cords of Mr. R.'s neck. After
a few moments he said: "Now, say something; talk to me."

Slowly, but quite clearly, and with only slight hesitation, he replied,
"I feel very much better; I can breathe deeper and swallow more easily."

From the first treatment he has not lost his color and healthy normal
appearance. Breathing has continued

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

to be easier and swallowing, without effort. After his third treatment
he was asked:

"As a business man, what would you say is the percentage of improvement
that has taken place in your condition?"

"Before your treatments," he answered carefully, "my speech was
completely blocked every evening; I could not talk at all. I would say
my speech has improved fifty per cent, the swallowing one hundred per
cent, and in general over all improvement, thirty-three per cent after
each treatment."

When we discussed it later this person said, "It was interesting to me
to know that he had had sleeping sickness, not having come in contact
with it before. What do they say causes sleeping sickness?"

I told him that I didn't know much about it; that it was supposed to
come from an insect bite, that you didn't catch it from another person.

He said that that seemed strange, that in listening to the vibrations
there didn't seem to be any infection. They denoted magnetic field
depletion, causing some facial paralysis and spasm of the neck cords.

He continued, "After the energy was sent into the magnetic field with
the right frequency, the magnetic field was able to draw the energy
through the lungs thus strengthening the nervous system. This enabled me
to release the tension in his neck and the paralysis in his face. As you
see, this was done in five minutes. If all other cases of this type are
like this one, don't you think it would be easy to help them?"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Ten. Fluid Accumulation.](kymf11.md)
