[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kymf11)  [Next](kymf13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0787309923/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Know Your Magnetic Field*, by William E. Gray, \[1947\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

### CHAPTER ELEVEN

#### RHEUMATIC FEVER NERVES

Rheumatic fever and this person's results in working with it interested
me greatly.

"You have observed that little boy from the time he was first brought
here," he said, speaking of a child who had just left. "He was lacking
in energy and was feverish, especially in his joints. You felt his pulse
at the start, pounding, irregular and under strain. It sounded like a
valve leak in his heart. That was what they tell me is a typical
rheumatic heart.

"Many children have been brought to me with similar symptoms which
revert back to a weak magnetic field from birth, resulting in tension
throughout the nervous system including the nerves which control the
heart valves and the heart.

"As you see, when the spasm is relieved from the magnetic field the
heart equalizes itself, due to the increased flow of energy through the
nervous system, and a charge of energy through the heart valve nerves
eliminates the blowing sound. Then the natural flow of energy to these
parts keeps the machinery running.

"It is difficult for me to understand how this could develop from an
infection. There was no infection that the family knew of—he had been
weak and ailing from birth.

"Those children usually are the result of a magnetic field depletion in
the parents and, as a general

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

rule, the mother is in extreme tension all during her pregnancy and
especially at delivery. The spasm and tension should be relieved from
the magnetic field by the generation of human energy before delivery,
thus causing an easy birth.

"Another similar case was that of a child whose brother was spastic from
a birth injury. While his mother was carrying the second baby she told
me that she was frantic for fear that it might be another spastic. Her
fear created tension in her magnetic field causing the baby's magnetic
field in turn to be in tension or spasm at birth. Now she is two years
old and all these symptoms are showing up, as you see. These symptoms
are fever, nerve spasms and heart strain, with a valve starting to
weaken. The doctors referred to this case as rheumatic fever to the
mother."

This baby had an over-abundance of nervous activity; it was impossible
to keep her still. She was just two years old and as tiny and perfect as
a Dresden figure. When I saw her, she wore a miniature blue coat and
bonnet and was as darting and as restless as the bluebird she resembled.

Her mother was alarmed about her and brought her in for treatment. The
baby had had a fever of 105° three times in two months. Under doctor's
orders she had three series of sulfa drugs. The fever had finally
broken, only to return a short time later. The apparent cause was
enlarged tonsils, and tonsillectomy was recommended. She was advised to
keep her quiet because her heart rate was much too fast, but that had
proved an impossibility. The mother is a graduate nurse and was fully
aware of the hazards

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

involved. She brought the baby in before she decided on the
tonsillectomy.

In three treatments most of the baby's artificial pep was gone and her
heart rate was slower. She was quieter, relieved of tension, and more
willing to play quietly and submit to an afternoon nap. Her fever had
subsided and her mother was elated with the results.

"Don't you think," this person added, "that it would be an advantage to
an expectant mother to know whether her magnetic field was supplying the
proper energy to the nervous system, thus relieving bloated pressure
while carrying, and eliminating considerable stress, excess tension and
pain at delivery?"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Twelve. Conclusion](kymf13.md)
