[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kymf07)  [Next](kymf09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0787309923/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Know Your Magnetic Field*, by William E. Gray, \[1947\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

### CHAPTER SEVEN

#### STROKE

A stroke has its origin in the magnetic field. One or more of the main
feeders is put into spasm from a variety of causes. This spasm continues
without relief to the point where the nerve or nerves cannot take it any
longer. One violent seizure occurs and the nerves are paralyzed.

The spasm in the pelvis, the magnetic field, creates a terrific nerve
tension, causing pressure. The nerves can stand only so much pressure.
When they reach capacity they will short out. The electric nerve lines
from the magnetic field to the subsidiary brain are overloaded from the
pressure and the weakest spot on those lines is the subsidiary brain
nerves. When the pressure becomes too great, a fuse blows out. Just as
an ordinary light fuse severs the lead by melting, so the brain accident
occurs. The fuse in the brain tissue ruptures and severs the nerve line,
disrupting the circuit. A degree of paralysis is the result.

The degree of paralysis indicates the quantity of the nerve supply
involved. If there is movement or motion of the affected part, some of
the subsidiary nerve supply is still functioning. Sufficient amounts of
the energy current are passing over the small branches to allow motion.
If paralysis is severe, or the paralyzed part is completely dormant,
only enough of the

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

energy current is seeping through to keep the nerves alive.

I had never before seen the amount of restoration of the affected parts
after a paralyzing stroke or strokes until I saw this person restore
them. His explanation uncovered many mysteries. All his work is
seemingly incredible but the results are before the eyes. Repairing an
electric line sounds simple, but realizing this person is doing it to
human bodies, I find it most inspiring. This is how he told me he
releases a stroke.

First the magnetic field must be relieved from spasm so that it can draw
the energy to feed the nerve wires to their normal capacity. The energy
is then increased in an attempt to make it jump the space that has been
disrupted. If the circuit isn't completed, he tries to make contact with
the magnetic field by generating the energy in the paralyzed section,
reversing the charge.

But the troubles all start in the magnetic field. The tension builds up
in the pelvis and immediately registers on the heart. It can be heard in
the heart vibrations and, by tension, starts the spasm, causing pressure
similar to that of an over-loaded line. When the small nerves in the
subsidiary brain exceed their capacity in tension, and spasm—then it
happens—the same as blowing a fuse on an electric line—making a portion
of that line dormant and causing a specific area to have a degree of
paralyzation.

"Don't you think," he concluded, "that these strokes could be prevented
by releasing pressure or spasm in the magnetic field through feeding
human energy current to that area, or properly blending their compatible

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

waves so that the magnetic field would remain relaxed?"

One of his patients was in the final stages of recovery from a stroke.
His entire left side had been affected. He had regained almost full use
of his arm and hand, speech had cleared, his mind was clear and alert,
and his left leg seemed normal except for a slight drag of the foot. As
he walked the foot was relaxed from the ankle but the right outer edge
of the sole was dragged along the floor.

After a treatment he was asked to get up and walk across the room. The
drag remained. We directed him, "Pick it up, put it down, bend it, step
forward from the ball of the foot."

Slowly he did it perfectly; with normal gait he dragged it again.

"That foot is open," this person said. "All the nerves are working
right."

"You know what it looks like to me," I said. "As if he had forgotten how
to use it, forgotten how to step on it correctly."

"Oh," he said, light breaking. "Come here, that can be fixed."

He put his fingers on the side of the patient's head for several
seconds.

"Now walk across the room, pick your foot up and step forward on it."

The patient did as directed and left the office that day with a normal
stride. The correct functioning thought was sent into the magnetic field
with the energy current and carried to the minor brain. When this person
placed his fingers on the patient's head, he regulated the nerve balance
in the brain. The controlling

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

centers to the foot and leg picked up the message, carried the impulse
downward and the foot responded. The circuit was re-established from the
magnetic field, the major brain.

Mrs. T. had received results from this form of treatment. As her
arthritic condition improved, her cousin, Captain D., watched her
progress with interest and acknowledged that she was getting better. But
if she believed that she was getting better because a man told her he
was relaying energy current to her through his fingers, she was as mad
as he was. Hokum, that's what it was.

Then the Captain had two strokes. Mrs. T. waited a while then insisted
that the Captain begin the treatments. But let me tell it as the Captain
told it to me.

"I was going to sea on my own ship with the Merchant Marine until 1942
when I went ashore to a desk job. I had had a bad heart for years. I
don't know what it was except that the doctors said it was fast and
skipped beats. I doctored all the time but it didn't change any. The
following summer I developed asthma and the next year I had to lay off
work and retire. The asthma kept getting worse and then I developed
dropsy.

"The doc put me to bed and kept me there. I was fighting for breath. I
had to sit up all the time to be able to breathe, to get any air at all.
He put me on digitalis, one pill four times a day. Four days later I had
my strokes. The first one came at noon and the second that night. My
whole left side was paralyzed. I was foggy and slow mentally, my vision
was blurred and the left side of my face and mouth were completely
paralyzed. My left arm and leg were dead; to

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

move my left arm I had to pick it up with my right hand.

"The doctor filled me with hop to keep me quiet at first. After that he
said there was nothing to do for a stroke but to keep very quiet. I was
still fighting for breath and still had the dropsy. My legs and ankles
were swollen big with fluid. The doc gave me pills for my kidneys and I
was put on a diet. I had one quart of milk and one pound of fruit a day.
I was weak from lack of food and that did nothing for my dropsy.

"I was in bed a month and when I began to get up I had to have help
because I fell all over myself. I took some pretty bad falls but I
wouldn't give up. I dragged my left leg and had a hard time keeping my
balance—I was top-heavy. My mouth was drawn all out of shape. I couldn't
get my dentures in so finally had to have them remade. I saw the doctor
twice a month but didn't improve.

"My cousin was receiving remarkable relief from a long standing chronic
case of arthritis by taking treatments from this person. He had also
worked on my wife and helped her hearing—but I doubted whether he could
do anything for me. Finally I consented to a treatment. He limbered the
left leg and arm and that gave me more strength and control. He worked
on my kidneys which caused large and more frequent eliminations.

"The next morning I was able to make the trip to his office although my
wife had to go with me. He treated my heart and kidneys first and built
me up so that I could commute daily. Eight days later I was

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

much stronger and I told my wife that she could stay home. I walked two
blocks alone without help and took the train across the bridge. I had
quite a bit of confidence by then and handled myself very well.

"I was still taking the digitalis but it was bothering me. It just
didn't agree with me so I spoke to this person and he told me to ask my
doctor about it. I didn't see the doctor. I just tapered it down one
pill at a time. After a few weeks I discontinued taking it entirely.

"I had a treatment every morning and at the end of six weeks I was
generally better but he still hadn't gone to work on my arm or leg. He
continued to build my heart and kidneys and I was getting rid of the
dropsy. I was eliminating large quantities of fluid all the time from
the kidneys and from perspiring. My legs were going down in size. I
forgot to tell you that my left hand, the paralyzed one, had been
terribly swollen with fluid. The back of it stood up at least an inch
higher than the other one. Now all the fluid had gone out of it. It was
normal looking again.

"My breathing was much better by then. I had only been able to get air
down a short way in my chest but now it seemed that I could breathe way
down to my pelvis. My chest soon cleared up entirely.

"By spring my kidneys had gone back to normal, all the fluid had gone
from my legs and ankles and they were normal in size and have stayed
that way. Then he began to work on my arm and leg. I took several
treatments before I could get my arm up over my head, but at the end of
a month I could use my arm and fingers. I could dress myself alone and I
could

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

put my shoes on, cross one leg over the other and tie my shoe lace.

"I was sleeping well every night, six or seven hours without waking.
There was steady improvement. I postponed my treatments and took a trip
north for three weeks. When I came back I began with three treatments a
week. I was having more use of my arm and hand and I was no longer
dragging my foot when I walked. In June I was having just one treatment
a week and was doing very well. During the last week of July I drove my
car for the first time since September of the year before. Before I
drove it, though, I overhauled the engine. I was able to handle the
tools and control my hands very well.

"This person went on a two-month vacation at the end of July and I was
fine for a while. A couple of weeks before he came back I had a
set-back. I got short of breath, couldn't sleep and my chest filled up.
I had to take it easy. When he got back he gave me a treatment. I let
down right away; I can breathe better and really sleep now. I'm feeling
like myself again. My heart doesn't bother me any more and my chest is
clear. There is also an improvement in my eyes. Just before the strokes
I had new reading glasses and they were pretty strong. After the strokes
I had a hard time seeing out of them. Now I can't see out of them at
all, they are too strong. My eyes are still changing and getting
stronger."

The Captain got too ambitious, causing the setback. He overtaxed his
energy, setting up a tension in his magnetic field affecting the flow of
energy to his heart. His heart is smooth and steady but it will take

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

a while longer to make it secure. There is still a nerve tension in his
arm and leg but that will automatically release after his magnetic field
is strengthened so that it can draw sufficient energy to feed those
nerves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Eight. Arthritis](kymf09.md)
