[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc26002)  [Next](cc26004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 26: Hosea*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv"></span>

<span id="iv-p1"></span>JOHN CALVIN

<span id="iv-p2"></span>TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, HEALTH

<span id="iv-p3"></span>Since I can truly and justly say and prove by
competent witnesses, that the writings, which I have hitherto sent forth
to the public, and which might have been finished with more care and
attention, have been almost extorted from me by importunity, it is
evident that these Annotations, which I thought might bear a hearing,
but were unworthy of being read, would have never through me been
brought forth to the light. For if, by many watchings, I can hardly
succeed in rendering even a small benefit to the Church by my
meditations, how foolish were it in me to claim a place for my sermons
among the works which are published? Besides, if, with regard to those
compositions which I write or dictate privately at home, when there is
more leisure for meditation, and when a finished brevity is attained by
care and diligence, my industry is yet made a crime by the malignant and
the envious, how can I escape the charge of presumption, if I now force
upon the whole world the reading of those thoughts which I freely poured
forth for the present edification of my hearers? But since to suppress
them was not in my power, and their publication could not be otherwise
prevented by me than by undertaking the labor (which my circumstances
allowed not) of writing the whole anew, and many friends, thinking me to
be too scrupulous a judge of my own labors, cried out, that I was doing
an injury to the Church, I chose to allow this volume, as it *is,* taken
from my lips, to go forth to the public, rather than by prohibition to
impose on myself the necessity of writing; which I was forced to do as
to The Psalms, before I found out, by that long and difficult work, how
unequal I am to so much writing.  <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1)

<span id="iv-p5"></span>Let, then, these explanations on Hosea go forth,
which it is not in my power to keep from the public. But how they have
been taken down, it is needful to declare, not only that the diligence,
industry, and skill of those who have performed this labor for the
Church, may not be deprived of their commendation, but also that readers
may be fully persuaded, that there are here no additions, and that the
writers did not allow themselves to change a single word for a better
one. How they assisted one another, one of their number, my best friend,
and through his virtues, dear to all good men, Mr. John Budaeus, will,
as I expect, more fully explain.

<span id="iv-p6"></span>But it would have been incredible to me, had I
not clearly seen, when the day after they read the whole to me, that
what they had written differed nothing from my discourse. It would have
perhaps been better had more liberty been taken to cut off redundancies,
to bring the arrangement into better order, and to use, in some
instances, more distinct or graceful language: but I do not interpose my
judgment; this only I wish to witness with my own hand, That they have
taken down what they have heard from my lips with so much fidelity, that
I perceive no change. Farewell, Christian reader, whoever thou be, who
desirest with me to make progress in celestial truth.

<span id="iv-p7"></span>Geneva, February 13, 1557.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc26003.htm#fr_1) <span id="iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv-p4"></span> He was at this time engaged in writing his
Comments on The Psalms; and they were published the following July. —
*Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Budaeus' To the Reader](cc26004)
