[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc26016)  [Next](cc26018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 26: Hosea*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii"></span>

<span id="xviii-p1"></span>Chapter 11

<span id="xviii.i"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p1"></span><span id="xviii.i-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#001)<span id="xviii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p2"></span>**1.** When Israel *was* a child, then I
loved him, and called my son out of Egypt.

<span id="xviii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Quia puer Israel, et dilexi eum
(*hoc est*, Quando adhuc puer erat Israel; <span
id="xviii.i-p3.1"></span>כי *non accipitur hic causaliter, sed adverbium
est temporis:* Quum *ergo* puer erat Israel, tunc dilexi eum;) et ex
Egypto vocavi filium meum (*ad verbum est,* clamavi ad filium meum.)

<span id="xviii.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.i-p5"></span><span id="xviii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p6"></span>God here expostulates with the people of
Israel for their ingratitude. The obligation of the people was twofold;
for God had embraced them from the very first beginning, and when there
was no merit or worthiness in them. What else, indeed, was the condition
of the people when emancipated from their servile works in Egypt? They
doubtless seemed then like a man half-dead or a putrid carcass; for they
had no vigour remaining in them. The Lord then stretched forth his hand
to the people when in so hopeless a state, drew them out, as it were,
from the grave, and restored them from death into life. But the people
did not acknowledge this so wonderful a favour of God, but soon after
petulantly turned their back on him. What baseness was this, and how
shameful the wickedness, to make such a return to the author of their
life and salvation? The Prophet therefore enhances the sin and baseness
of the people by this circumstance, that the Lord had loved them even
from childhood; *when yet,* he says, *Israel was a child, I loved him*
The nativity of the people was their coming out of Egypt. The Lord had
indeed made his covenant with Abraham four hundred years before; and, as
we know, the patriarchs were also regarded by him as his children: but
God wished his Church to be, as it were, extinguished, when he redeemed
it. Hence the Scripture, when it speaks of the liberation of the people,
often refers to that favour of God in the same way as of one born into
the world. It is not therefore without reason that the Prophet here
reminds the people that they had been loved when in childhood. The proof
of this love was, that they had been brought out of Egypt. Love had
preceded, as the cause is always before the effect.

<span id="xviii.i-p7"></span>But the Prophet enlarges on the subject: *I
loved Israel, even while he was yet a child; I called him out of Egypt;*
that is, “I not only loved him when a child, but before he was born I
began to love him; for the liberation from Egypt was the nativity, and
my love preceded that. It then appears, that the people had been loved
by me, before they came forth to the light; for Egypt was like a grave
without any spark of life; and the condition this miserable people was
in was worse than thousand deaths. Then by calling my people from Egypt,
I sufficiently proved that my love was gratuitous before they were
born.” The people were hence less excusable when they returned such an
unworthy recompense to God, since he had previously bestowed his free
favour upon them. We now understand the meaning of the Prophet.

<span id="xviii.i-p8"></span>But here arises a difficult question; for
Matthew, accommodates this passage to the person of Christ.  <span
id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72) They who have not been well versed in
Scripture have confidently applied to Christ this place; yet the context
is opposed to this. Hence it has happened, that scoffers have attempted
to disturb the whole religion of Christ, as though the Evangelist had
misapplied the declaration of the Prophet. They give a more suitable
answer, who say that there is in this case only a comparison: as when a
passage from Jeremiah is quoted in another place, when the cruelty of
Herod is mentioned, who raged against all the infants of his dominion,
who were under two years of age,

<span id="xviii.i-p10"></span>‘Rachel, bewailing her children, would not
receive consolation, because they were not,’ (<span
id="xviii.i-p10.1"></span>[Jer
31:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#015)<span
id="xviii.i-p10.1"></span>.)

<span id="xviii.i-p11"></span>The Evangelist says that this prophecy was
fulfilled, (<span id="xviii.i-p11.1"></span>[Mt
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#018)<span id="xviii.i-p11.1"></span>.)
But it is certain that the object of Jeremiah was another; but nothing
prevents that declaration should not be applied to what Matthew relates.
So they understand this place. But I think that Matthew had more deeply
considered the purpose of God in having Christ led into Egypt, and in
his return afterwards into Judea. In the first place, it must be
remembered that Christ cannot be separated from his Church, as the body
will be mutilated and imperfect without a head. Whatever then happened
formerly in the Church, ought at length to be fulfilled by the head.
This is one thing. Then also there is no doubt, but that God in his
wonderful providence intended that his Son should come forth from Egypt,
that he might be a redeemer to the faithful; and thus he shows that a
true, real, and perfect deliverance was at length effected, when the
promised Redeemer appeared. It was then the full nativity of the Church,
when Christ came forth from Egypt to redeem his Church. So in my view
that comment is too frigid, which embraces the idea, that Matthew made
only a comparison. For it behaves us to consider this, that God, when he
formerly redeemed his people from Egypt, only showed by a certain
prelude the redemption which he deferred till the coming of Christ.
Hence, as the body was then brought forth from Egypt into Judea, so at
length the head also came forth from Egypt: and then God fully showed
him to be the true deliverer of his people. This then is the meaning.
Matthew therefore most fitly accommodates this passage to Christ, that
God loved his Son from his first childhood and called him from Egypt. We
know at the same time that Christ is called the Son of God in a respect
different from the people of Israel; for adoption made the children of
Abraham the children of God, but Christ is by nature the only-begotten
Son of God. But his own dignity must remain to the head, that the body
may continue in its inferior state. There is then in this nothing
inconsistent. But as to the charge of ingratitude, that so great a
favour of God was not acknowledged, this cannot apply to the person of
Christ, as we well know; nor is it necessary in this respect to refer to
him; for we see from other places that every thing does not apply to
Christ, which is said of David, or of the high priest, or of the
posterity of David; though they were types of Christ. But there is ever
a great difference between the reality and its symbols. Let us now
proceed —

<span id="xviii.ii"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xviii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#002)<span id="xviii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p2"></span>**2.** *As* they called them, so they went
from them: they sacrificed unto Baalim, and burned incense to graven
images.

<span id="xviii.ii-p3"></span>**2.** Vocarunt illos (*vel*, clamaverunt
ad illos:) sic ambulaverunt a facie illorum: Baalim sacrificia
obtulerunt, et sculptilibus suffitum fecerunt.

<span id="xviii.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.ii-p5"></span><span id="xviii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p6"></span>The Prophet now repeats the ingratitude of
the people in neglecting to keep in mind their redemption. The word,
“called,” is here to be taken in a different sense. For God effectually
called, as they say, the people, or his Son, from Egypt: he has again
called by the outward voice or teaching through his Prophets. Hence,
when he said before that he called his Son from Egypt, it ought to be
understood, as they say, of actual liberation: but now when he says,
*They have called them,* it is to be understood of teaching. The name of
the Prophets is not expressed; but that they are intended is plain. And
the Prophet seems designedly to have said in an indefinite manner, that
the people had been called, that the indignity might appear more
evident, as they had been called so often and by so many, and yet had
refused. Hence *they have called them* When he thus speaks, he is not to
be understood as referring to one or two men, or to a few, but as
including a great number of men, doing this everywhere. Even thus now
have they called them; that is, this people have been called, not once
or twice, but constantly; and God has not only sent one messenger or
preacher to call them, but there have been many Prophets, one after the
other, often thus employed, and yet without any benefit. We now perceive
what the Prophet meant.

<span id="xviii.ii-p7"></span>*They have called them,* he says, *so they
went away from their presence*  <span id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73) The
particle *so,* <span id="xviii.ii-p8.2"></span>כן, *can*, is introduced
here to enliven the description; for the Prophet points out, as by the
fingers how wickedly they conspired to execute their own counsels, as if
they wished purposely to show in an open manner their contempt. *So they
went away;* when the Prophets called them to one course, they proceeded
in an opposite one. We then see, that to point out thus their conduct
was not superfluous, when he says, that they in this manner went away:
and then he says, *from their face* Here he shows that the people sought
hiding-places and shunned the light. We may indeed conclude from these
words, that so great was the perverseness of the people, that they not
only wished to be alienated from God, but also that they would have
nothing to do with the Prophets. It is indeed a proof of extreme
wickedness, when instruction itself is a weariness, and ministers cannot
be endured; and no doubt the Prophet meant to set forth this sin of the
people.

<span id="xviii.ii-p9"></span>He afterwards says, that they *sacrificed
unto Baalim, and burnt incense to graven images* In the former clause,
he shows the contumacy of the Israelites, that they deigned not to give
ear to God’s servants. He now adds, that *they made incense to graven
images,* and also offered worship to their idols. By Baalim, as it has
been already stated, the Prophet means the inferior gods. For no such
stupidity prevailed among the people as not to think that there is some
chief deity; nay, even profane Gentiles confessed that there is some
supreme God. But they called their advocates (<span
id="xviii.ii-p9.1"></span>*patronos*) Baalim, as we see to be the case
at this day under the Papacy, this same office is transferred to the
dead; they are to procure for men the favour of God. The Papists then
have no grounds for seeking an evasion by words; for the very same
superstition prevails at this time among them, as prevailed formerly
among Gentiles and the people of Israel. Here the Prophet enhances the
wickedness of the people; for they not only contemptuously neglected
every instruction in religion, but also openly perverted the whole
worship of God, and abandoned themselves to all abominations, so as to
burn incense to their own idols. Let us go on —

<span id="xviii.iii"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xviii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#003)<span id="xviii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p2"></span>**3.** I taught Ephraim also to go,
taking them by their arms; but they knew not that I healed them.

<span id="xviii.iii-p3"></span>**3.** Et ego ad pedes deduxi eum (*vel*,
ad pedes deducto mea) ad Ephraim attollendum (*vel*, sustulit) supra
brachia sua,  <span id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74) et non cognoverunt
quod sanaverim eos.

<span id="xviii.iii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xviii.iii-p6"></span><span id="xviii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p7"></span>Here again God amplifies the sin of the
people, by saying, that by no kindness, even for a long time, could they
be allured, or turned, or reformed, or reduced to a sound mind. It was
surely enough that the people of Israeli who had been brought by the
hand of God from the grave to the light of life, should have repudiated
every instruction; it was a great and an atrocious sin; but now God goes
on farther, and says, that he had not ceased to show his love to them,
and yet had attained nothing by his perseverance; for the wickedness and
depravity of the people were incurable. Hence he says, *I have led
Ephraim on foot*  <span id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75) Some are of
opinion that it is a noun, from <span id="xviii.iii-p8.4"></span>רגל,
*regel*, foot, and it seems the most suitable. For otherwise there will
be a change of a letter, which grammarians do not allow in the beginning
of a word; for <span id="xviii.iii-p8.5"></span>ת, *tau*, in this case
would be put instead of <span id="xviii.iii-p8.6"></span>ה, *he*; and
put so as if it was of frequent occurrence in Hebrew; but no such
instance can be adduced. So they who are skilful in the language think
that for this reason it is a noun, and with them I agree. They, however,
who regard it as a verb, give this view, — “I have led him on foot,
<span id="xviii.iii-p8.7"></span>תרגלתי, *teregelti*; that is, as a
child who cannot yet walk with a firm foot, is by degrees accustomed to
do so, and the nurse, or the father, or the mother, who lead him, have a
regard for his infancy; so also have I led Israel, as much as his feet
could bear. But the other version is less obscure, and that is, *My
walking on foot was for him*; that is, I humbled myself as mothers are
wont to do; and hence he says, that he had carried the people on his
shoulders; and we shall presently see the same comparison used. And
Moses says in Deuteronomy,  <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76) that
the people had been carried on God’s wings, or that God had expanded his
wings like the eagle who flies over her young ones. With regard to the
matter itself the meaning of the Prophet is not obscure; for he means,
that this people had been treated by God in a paternal and indulgent
manner; and also, that the perseverance of the Lord in continuing to
bestow his blessings on them had been without any fruit.

<span id="xviii.iii-p10"></span>He afterwards adds, *To carry on his
arms* Some render the expression, <span id="xviii.iii-p10.1"></span>קחם,
*kochem*, “He carried them,” as if the verb were in the past tense; and
they consider the word, Moses, to be understood. But it is God who
speaks here. Some think it to be an infinitive — “To carry,” as when one
carries another on his shoulders; and this seems to be the most suitable
exposition. There is in the sense no ambiguity; for the design of the
Prophet is what I have already stated, which is to show that this people
were most wicked in not obeying God, since they had been so kindly
treated by Him. For what could they have expected more than what God had
done for them? As he also says by Isaiah,  <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) ‘What, my vine, ought I to have done more
than what I have done?’ So also in this place, *My walking has been on
foot with Ephraim;* and for this end, *to carry them,* as when one
carries another in his arms. ‘They yet,’ he says, ‘did not know that I
healed them;’ that is, “Neither the beginning of my goodness, nor its
continued exercise, avails anything with them. When I brought them forth
from Egypt, I restored the dead to life; this kindness has been blotted
out. Again, in the desert I testified, in various ways, that I was their
best and most indulgent Father: I have in this instance also lost all my
labour.” How so? “Because my favour has been in no way acknowledged by
this perverse and foolish people.” We now then see what the Prophet
meant: and he continues the same subject in the next verse.

<span id="xviii.iv"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xviii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#004)<span id="xviii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p2"></span>**4.** I drew them with cords of a man,
with bands of love: and I was to them as they that take off the yoke on
their jaws, and I laid meat unto them.

<span id="xviii.iv-p3"></span>**4.** In funibus hominum traham eos (*hoc
est,* traxi eos) in vinculis amoris: et fui illis sicuti qui attollunt
jugum super maxillas: et attuli super eos cibum (*vel*, feci eos
comedere) quiete. (*Dicemus postea de utroque sensu.*)

<span id="xviii.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.iv-p5"></span><span id="xviii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p6"></span>The Prophet states, first, that this
people had not been severely dealt with, as either slaves, or oxen, or
asses, are wont to be treated. He had said before, that the people of
Israel were like a heifer, which shakes off the yoke, and in wantonness
loves only the treading of corn. But though the perverseness of the
people was so great, yet God shows here that he had not used extreme
rigour: *I have drawn him,* he says, *with human cords and lovely bands*
By the cords of man, he means humane government. “I have not,” he says,
“treated you as slaves, but dealt with you as with children; and I have
not regarded you as cattle, I have not driven you into a stall; but I
have only drawn you with lovely bands.” The sum of the whole is, that
the government which God had laid on the people was a certain and
singular token of his paternal favour, so that the people could not
complain of too much rigour, as if God had considered their disposition,
and had used a hard wedge (as the common proverb is) for a hard knot;
for if God had dealt thus with the people, they could have objected, and
said, that they had not been kindly drawn by him, and that it was no
wonder if they did not obey, since they had been so roughly treated.
“But there is no ground for them,” the Lord says, “to allege that I have
used severity: for I could not have dealt more kindly with them, *I have
drawn them with human cords;* I have not otherwise governed them than as
a father his own children; I have been bountiful towards them. I indeed
wished to do them good, and, as it was right, required obedience from
them. I have at the same time laid on them a yoke, not servile, nor such
as is wont to be laid on brute animals; but I was content with paternal
discipline.” Since then such kindness had no influence over them, is it
not right to conclude that their wickedness is irreclaimable and
extreme?

<span id="xviii.iv-p7"></span>He then adds *I have been to them like
those who raise up the yoke upon the cheeks*  <span
id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78) “I have not laden you,” he says, “with
too heavy burdens, as oxen and other beasts are wont to be burdened; but
I have raised up the yoke upon the cheeks. I have chosen rather to bear
the yoke myself, and to ease these ungodly and wicked men of their
burden.” And God does not in vain allege this, for we know that when he
uses his power, and vindicates his authority, he does this not to burden
the people, as earthly kings are wont to do; but he bears the burden
which he lays on men. It is no wonder then that he says now, that he had
*lifted the yoke upon the cheeks* of his people, like one who wishes not
to burden his ox, but bears up the yoke himself with his own hands, lest
the ox should faint through weariness.

<span id="xviii.iv-p9"></span>He afterwards adds, *And I have made them
to eat in quietness,* or, “I have brought meat to them.” Some think the
verb <span id="xviii.iv-p9.1"></span>אוכיל, *aukil* to be in the future
tense, and that <span id="xviii.iv-p9.2"></span>אוכיל, *aukil* is put
for <span id="xviii.iv-p9.3"></span>אאכיל, *aakil*; that is, I will
cause them to eat; and that the future is to be resolved into the past:
and it is certain that the word <span id="xviii.iv-p9.4"></span>אט,
*ath,* means tranquil sometimes. Then it will be, “I have caused them
quietly to eat.” But another exposition is more commonly received; as
the word <span id="xviii.iv-p9.5"></span>אט, *ath,* is derived from
<span id="xviii.iv-p9.6"></span>נטה, *nathe*, to raise, it is the same
as though the Prophet had said, that meat had been brought to them.

<span id="xviii.iv-p10"></span>God then does here in various ways
enhance the ingratitude and wickedness of the people, because they had
not acknowledged his paternal kindness, when he had himself so kindly
set forth his favour before their eyes; *I have,* he says, *extended
meat to them;* that is, “I have not thrown it on the ground, nor placed
it too high for them; they have not toiled in getting it; but I have, as
it were, brought it with mine own hand and set it before them, that they
might eat without any trouble.” In short, God declares that he had tried
in every way to find out, whether there was any meekness or docility in
the people of Israel, and that he had ill bestowed all his blessings;
for this people were blind to favours so kind, to such as clearly
proved, that God had in every way showed himself to be a Father. It
follows —

<span id="xviii.v"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p1"></span><span id="xviii.v-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#005)<span id="xviii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p2"></span>**5.** He shall not return into the land of
Egypt, but the Assyrian shall be his king, because they refused to
return.

<span id="xviii.v-p3"></span>**5.** Non revertetur in terram AEgypti;
Assur dominabitur ipsis, quia noluerunt converti (renuerunt ad
convertendum.)

<span id="xviii.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.v-p5"></span><span id="xviii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p6"></span>Here the Prophet denounces a new
punishment, that the people in vain hoped that Egypt would be a place of
refuge or an asylum to them; for the Lord would draw them away to
another quarter. For the Israelites had cherished this hope, that if by
any chance the Assyrians should be too powerful for them, there would
yet be a suitable refuge for them in Egypt among their friends, with
whom they had made a treaty. Since, then, they promised themselves a
hospitable exile in Egypt, the Prophet here exposes their vain
confidence: “This their expectation,” he says, “that they shall find a
way open to Egypt, shall disappoint the people: it is shut up,” he says,
*They shall not return to the land of Egypt, but the Assyrian shall be
their king.* By saying, that the Assyrian shall rule over them, he means
that the people would become exiles under the Assyrians, which indeed
happened. He then anticipates here all the vain hopes by which the
people deceived themselves, and by which they hardened themselves
against all the threatening of God. “There is no reason for them,” he
says, “to look towards Egypt; for the Lord will not allow them to go
there; for he will draw them to Assyria.”

<span id="xviii.v-p7"></span>He afterwards gives the reason, *Because
they have been unwilling,* he says, *to return* This “return” is to be
taken in another sense: but there is here a striking similarity in the
words. They thought that there would be to them a free passage into
Egypt; and yet they had been unwilling to pass over unto God, when he
had so often called them. The Prophet therefore says that a return into
Egypt was now denied them, inasmuch as they had been unwilling to return
to God. The import of what is said is, that when men perversely resist
God, they in vain hope for any free movements either to this or that
quarter; for the Lord will hold them tied and bound. As it is wont to be
done to wild beasts, who, when they show too much ferocity, are shut up
in cages or bound with chains, or as it is usually done to frantic men,
who are bound with strong bands; so also the Lord does with obstinate
men; he binds them fast, so that they cannot move a finger. This, then,
is the meaning of the Prophet.

<span id="xviii.v-p8"></span>There is, at the same time, to be
understood, an implied comparison between the former bondage they
endured in Egypt, and the new bondage which awaited them. They had known
of what sort was the hospitality of Egypt, and yet so great a blindness
possessed their minds, that they wished to return there. Their fathers
had been kindly enough received; but their posterity were grievously
burdened; nay, they were not far from being entirely destroyed. What
madness was this, to wish of themselves to return to Egypt, when they
knew how great was the ferociousness and cruelty of the Egyptians? But
as I have said, something more grievous awaited them; they were not
worthy to return to Egypt. To return there would have been indeed a
dreadful calamity; but the Lord would not, however open a way for them
to go there; for he would force them to pass to another country; yea,
they were to be by force dragged away by their conquerors into Assyria.
The drift of the whole is, that though the people had been cruelly
treated in Egypt, there was now drawing nigh a more grievous tyranny;
for the Assyrians would double the injuries, and the violence, and all
kinds of wrongs and reproaches, which had been exercised against this
people.

<span id="xviii.v-p9"></span>Some think that it was added for
consolation, that God, though greatly provoked by the people, was yet
unwilling to lead them again into Egypt, lest the former redemption
should be made void; but that a middle course was prepared by which he
would chastise the ungrateful and yet retain them as his peculiar
possession. But I have already shown what I mostly approve. At the same
time, whichever view is taken, we see how grievous and severe was the
denunciation of the Prophet.

<span id="xviii.vi"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="xviii.vi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast
deigned to choose us before the foundations of the world were laid, and
included us in thy free adoption when we were the children of wrath and
doomed to utter ruin, and afterwards embraced us even from the womb, and
hast at length favoured us with a clearer proof of thy love, in calling
us by thy gospel into a union and communion with thy only-begotten Son,
— O grant, that we may not be unmindful of so many and so singular
benefits, but respond to thy holy calling, and labour to devote
ourselves wholly to thee, and labour, not for one day, but for the whole
time designed for us here, both to live and to die according to thy good
pleasure, so that we may glorify thee to the end, through our Lord Jesus
Christ. Amen.

<span id="xviii.vi-p3"></span> 

<span id="xviii.vii"></span>

<span id="xviii.vii-p1"></span>Lecture Thirtieth

<span id="xviii.viii"></span>

<span id="xviii.viii-p1"></span><span id="xviii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#006)<span id="xviii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.viii-p2"></span>**6.** And the sword shall abide on his
cities, and shall consume his branches, and devour *them*, because of
their own counsels.

<span id="xviii.viii-p3"></span>**6.** Et cadet gladius in urbes ejus,
et consumet vectes ejus (*alii vertunt,* ramos, *vel,* membra) et
vorabit, propter consilia eorum.

<span id="xviii.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.viii-p5"></span><span id="xviii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.viii-p6"></span>As it was difficult to persuade proud
people that the overthrow was at hand, which Hosea had foretold, seeing,
as they did, that they were furnished with many defences, it is
therefore now added, that their fortified cities would not prevent the
enemy to break through, and to devastate the whole country, and to lead
away the people captive. We now understand how this verse is connected
with the last. The Prophet had threatened exile; but as the Israelites
thought themselves safe in their nests, he adds, that there was no
reason for them to trust in their fortresses, for the Lord could by the
sword destroy all their cities.

<span id="xviii.viii-p7"></span>He therefore says, *The sword shall
fall* on their cities. The verb <span id="xviii.viii-p7.1"></span>חול,
*chul,* means to abide, and to encamp, and sometimes to fall or rush
upon: and this second sense is more suitable to this place. Some,
however, render it, The sword shall *abide* on the cities until it
consume them. But as to the meaning, there is not much difference. I
will, however, briefly state what I deem the right view. *The sword*
then *shall fall,* or *rush*, *upon his cities;* and further*, it shall
consume his bars* The Hebrews often call bars or bolts <span
id="xviii.viii-p7.2"></span> בדים“*badim*”, still oftener, branches, or
members, — the branches of a tree, or the members of man. Hence some
take the word metaphorically, as meaning towns and villages; for they
are, as it were, the branches or members of cities. Others, however,
explain it as signifying sons, who grow from their parents as branches
from the tree: but this seems too far-fetched. I do not disapprove of
the opinion, that the Prophet refers here to towns and villages, which
are, as it were, the appendages of cities, as branches spread out here
and there from the tree. The sense then is not amiss, that the sword
will consume and devour towns and villages, when it shall fall on the
cities. But what I have already said of bolts seems more suitable to the
design of the Prophet. We must at the same time consider the word <span
id="xviii.viii-p7.3"></span>בדים, *bedim,* as including a part for the
whole; for bolts were only a part of the fortifications; but the gates,
being closed and fastened, render the cities strong. So this place, by
taking a part for the whole, may be thus expounded, that the sword, when
it fell on cities, would consume and destroy whatever strength and
defence they possessed.

<span id="xviii.viii-p8"></span>He at the same time mentions the cause,
*Because,* he says, *of their own counsels* No doubt, he added this
expression, because the Israelites thought themselves wise; for ungodly
men arrogate to themselves much prudence; and this they do, that they
may, as it were, from their height look down on God, and laugh at every
instruction. Since then they who despise God seem to themselves to be
very wise, and to be fortified by their good counsels, the Prophet shows
that the cause of ruin to the Israelites would be, that they were
swollen with this diabolical prudence, and would not condescend to obey
the word of the Lord.

<span id="xviii.ix"></span>

<span id="xviii.ix-p1"></span><span id="xviii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#007)<span id="xviii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ix-p2"></span>**7.** And my people are bent to
backsliding from me: though they called them to the most High, none at
all would exalt *him*

<span id="xviii.ix-p3"></span>**7.** Et populus meus suspensi ad
aversionem (*alii vertunt*, conversionem) et ad excelsum vocabunt (*id
est,* vocant) simul non extollet (*id est,* nemo extollit.)

<span id="xviii.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.ix-p5"></span><span id="xviii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ix-p6"></span>This verse is variously rendered. Some
explain the word <span id="xviii.ix-p6.1"></span>תלואים, *teluaim,* as
signifying “perplexed;” as though the Prophet had said, that the people
would suffer a just punishment through being anxious and looking around
them, and yet finding no comfort; for this would be the reward of their
defection or apostasy. Hence he says, *My people are in suspense;* that
is, there is no wonder that the Israelites are now tormented with great
anxiety, and find no end to their evils; for they who have rebelled
against the Lord are worthy of being thus bound fast by him. It is the
fruit of their defection that they are now so full of sorrow, and also
of despair. This is one exposition. Others say that God here complains
of the wickedness of the people, as of those who deliberated whether
they ought to repent. They then take suspense for doubt, *My people are
in suspense;* that is, they debate on the subject as on a doubtful
matter, when I exhort them to repent, and they cannot at once decide
what to do, but alternate between divers opinions, and now incline to
one thing and then to another; as if truly the subject itself made it
necessary for them to deliberate. Doubtless what is right is in no way
hid from them: but as they are unwilling, they seek for themselves, by
evasions, some excuses for doubting; for the Prophets cry to them, and
no one extols them. This is the second exposition.

<span id="xviii.ix-p7"></span>It must at the same time be observed, that
the word <span id="xviii.ix-p7.1"></span>משובת, *meshubat,* is variously
taken; for the first render it, “turning away,” and the “*jod*” that is
affixed must then be expounded passively, and must mean their turning
away from God, because the Israelites had fallen away from him; as in
Isaiah chapter 56  <span id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79) he calls that
the house of his prayer in which the people were wont to pray. Then the
turning away from God, according to them, is to be taken passively,
because the people were alienated from him. Others render it,
“conversion.” But the Hebrew doctors will have this word to be ever
taken in a bad sense, and affirm that there is no place where it
signifies any thing but rebellion or apostasy. Since it is so, I am
inclined to consider it to be turning away; and thus the second sense,
that the people deliberated whether they ought to hear the admonitions
of the Prophets, will not stand.

<span id="xviii.ix-p9"></span>The Prophet also seems to me to mean what
is different from what I have referred to in the first place, as the
opinion of those who say, *My people are in suspense;* that is, they
anxiously torment themselves on account of their defection, because I
punish them for their apostasy; through which it has happened, that,
forsaking me, they have wandered after their own inventions. But I take
the passage otherwise, as I have already said, *My people are fastened;*
that is, my people have not only once departed from me, but they are, as
it were, fastened in their defection. He says, that they were fastened,
not that they were sorrowful and endured great tortures, and found their
affairs perplexed; but that they were fastened, because they remained
obstinate; as when one says, that a man is fastened to a thing, when he
cannot be moved. This being fastened, is indeed nothing else but the
obstinacy of the people. They were then *fastened to defection.*

<span id="xviii.ix-p10"></span>He afterwards adds, *To him on high they
call them; none at all rises up* What an indefinite sentence signifies
we stated yesterday. The Prophet means that instruction had been given
the people, and that many witnesses or preachers had been sent by the
Lord, but that all this had been wholly useless. Hence he says, *They
call them to him on high, no one raises up himself.* Some indeed
consider the word, God, to be understood; and this is the commonly
received opinion; but in my judgement they are mistaken; for the
Prophet, speaking of the Israelites, doubtless means that they remained
in the same state, and were not moved by any instruction to make any
progress, or to show any sign of repentance. Hence, *no one rises up.*
He uses the singular number, and puts down the particle <span
id="xviii.ix-p10.2"></span>יחד, *ichad,* as though he said, “There is no
one, from the first to the last, who is touched with grief, for they
continue obstinate in their wickedness.” And when he says, *No one
raises up himself,* he seems to allude to the word, *fastened.* They are
then fastened to their defection; and when the Prophets cry and
diligently exhort them to repent, they do not rise up; that is, they do
not aspire to God; and this indeed they neglect with one consent, as if
they all alike blindly united in one and the same wickedness.

<span id="xviii.ix-p11"></span>In this verse then the Prophet brings
again to view the sins of the people, that it might more fully appear
that God threatened them so dreadfully not without a cause; for they who
were so perversely rebellious against God were worthy of the most
grievous punishment. This is the sum of the whole. Let us now proceed —

<span id="xviii.x"></span>

<span id="xviii.x-p1"></span><span id="xviii.x-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
11:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#008)<span id="xviii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.x-p2"></span>**8.** How shall I give thee up, Ephraim?
*how* shall I deliver thee, Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah?
*how* shall I set thee as Zeboim? mine heart is turned within me, my
repentings are kindled together.

<span id="xviii.x-p3"></span>**8.** Qumodo ponam te Ephraim? Tradam te
Israel? Quomodo ponam te sicut Sodomam? Statuam te sicut Zxeboim?
Inversum est in me cor meum, simul revolutae sunt (*alii*, incaluerunt;
*nam* <span id="xviii.x-p3.1"></span>כמר *illud significat,* simul
*ergo* revolutae sunt) poenitudines meae.

<span id="xviii.x-p4"></span>**9.** I will not execute the fierceness of
mine anger, I will not return to destroy Ephraim: for I *am* God, and
not man; the Holy One in the midst of thee: and I will not enter into
the city.

<span id="xviii.x-p5"></span>**9.** Non faciam (id est, non exequar)
furorem irae meae, non revertar ad perdendum Ephraim: quia Deus ego, et
non homo, in medio tui sanctus; et non ingrediar urbem.

<span id="xviii.x-p6"></span> 

<span id="xviii.x-p7"></span><span id="xviii.x-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.x-p8"></span>Here God consults what he would do with the
people: and first, indeed, he shows that it was his purpose to execute
vengeance, such as the Israelites deserved, even wholly to destroy them:
but yet he assumes the character of one deliberating, that none might
think that he hastily fell into anger, or that, being soon excited by
excessive fury, he devoted to ruin those who had lightly sinned, or were
guilty of no great crimes. That no one then might assign to God an anger
too fervid, he says here, *How shall I set thee aside, Ephraim? How
shall I deliver thee up, Israel? How shall I set thee as Sodom?* By
these expressions God shows what the Israelites deserved, and that he
was now inclined to inflict the punishment of which they were worthy and
yet not without repentance, or at least not without hesitation. He
afterwards adds in the next clause, *This I will not do; my heart is
within me changed;* I now alter my purpose, *and my repenting are
brought back again;* that is it was in my mind to destroy you all, but
now a repenting, which reverses that design, lays hold on me. We now
apprehend what the Prophet means.

<span id="xviii.x-p9"></span>As to this mode of speaking, it appears
indeed at the first glance to be strange that God should make himself
like mortals in changing his purposes and in exhibiting himself as
wavering. God, we know, is subject to no passions; and we know that no
change takes place in him. What then do these expressions mean, by which
he appears to be changeable? Doubtless he accommodates himself to our
ignorances whenever he puts on a character foreign to himself. And this
consideration exposes the folly as well as the impiety of those who
bring forward single words to show that God is, as it were like mortals;
as those unreasonable men do who at this day seek to overturn the
eternal providence of God, and to blot out that election by which he
makes a difference between men. “O!” they say, “God is sincere, and he
has said that he willeth not the death of a sinner, but rather that he
should be converted and live.” God must then in this case remain as it
were uncertain, and depend on the free-will of every one: it is hence in
the power of man either to procure destruction to himself, or to come to
salvation. God must in the meantime wait quietly as to what men will do,
and can determine nothing except through their free-will. While these
insane men thus trifle, they think themselves to be supported by this
invincible reason, that God’s will is one and simple. But if the will of
God be one, it does not hence follow that he does not accommodate
himself to men, and put on a character foreign to himself, as much as a
regard for our salvation will bear or require. So it is in this place.
God does not in vain introduce himself as being uncertain; for we hence
learn that he is not carried away too suddenly to inflict punishment,
even when men in various ways provoke his vengeance. This then is what
God shows by this mode of speaking. At the same time, we know that what
he will do is certain, and that his decree depends not on the free-will
of men; for he is not ignorant of what we shall do. God then does not
deliberate as to himself, but with reference to men. This is one thing.

<span id="xviii.x-p10"></span>But we must also bear in mind what I have
already said, that the Prophet here strikes with terror proud and
profane despisers by setting before their eyes their own destruction,
and by showing how little short they were of the lot of Gomorra and
other cities. “For what remains,” the Lord says, “but that *I should
set* you as Sodom and Zeboim? This condition and this recompense awaits
you, if I execute the judgement which has been already as it were
decreed.” Not that God would immediately do this; but he only reminds
the Israelites of what they deserved, and of what would happen to them,
except the Lord dealt mercifully with them. Thus much of the first part
of the verse.

<span id="xviii.x-p11"></span>But when he says that his *heart was
changed,* and that his *repentings were brought back again,* the same
mode of speaking after the manner of men is adopted; for we know that
these feelings belong not to God; he cannot be touched with repentance,
and his heart cannot undergo changes. To imagine such a thing would be
impiety. But the design is to show, that if he dealt with the people of
Israel as they deserved, they would now be made like Sodom and Gomorra.
But as God was merciful, and embraced his people with paternal
affection, he could not forget that he was a Father, but would be
willing to grant pardon; as is the case with a father, who, on seeing
his son’s wicked disposition, suddenly feels a strong displeasure, and
then, being seized with relenting, is inclined to spare him. God then
declares that he would thus deal with his people.

<span id="xviii.x-p12"></span><span id="xviii.x-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.x-p13"></span>Then follows an explanation of this
sentence, *I will not execute the fury of my wrath:* by which figurative
mode of speaking he sets forth the punishment which was suitable to the
sins of men. For it must ever be remembered, that God is exempt from
every passion. But if no anger is to be supposed by us to be in God,
what does he mean by the fury of his wrath? Even the relation between
his nature and our innate or natural sins. But why does Scripture say
that God is angry? Even because we imagine him to be so according to the
perception of the flesh; for we do not apprehend God’s indignation,
except as far as our sins provoke him to anger, and kindle his vengeance
against us. Then God, with regard to our perception, calls the fury of
his wrath the heavy judgement, which is equal to, or meet for, our sins.
*I will not execute,* he says, that is, “I will not repay the reward
which you have deserved.”

<span id="xviii.x-p14"></span>What then? *I will not return to destroy
Ephraim* The verb <span id="xviii.x-p14.1"></span>אשוב, *ashub,* seems
to have been introduced for this reason, because God had in part laid
waste the kingdom of Israel: he therefore says, that the second
overthrow, which he would presently bring, would not be such as would
destroy the whole of Israel, or wholly consume them. *I will not* then
*return to destroy Ephraim;* that is, “Though I shall again gird myself
to punish the sins of the people, I shall yet restrain myself so that my
vengeance shall not proceed to the destruction of the whole people.” The
reason is subjoined, *For I am God, and not man.*

<span id="xviii.x-p15"></span>As he intended in this place to leave to
the godly some hope of salvation, he adds what may confirm this hope;
for we know that when God denounces wrath, with what difficulty
trembling consciences are restored to hope. Ungodly men laugh to scorn
all threatening; but those in whom there is any seed of piety dread the
vengeance of God, and whenever terror seizes them, they are tormented
with marvellous disquietude, and cannot be easily pacified. This then is
the reason why the Prophet now confirms the doctrine which he had laid
down: *I am God,* he says, *and not man;* as though he had said, that he
would be propitious to his people, for he was not implacable as men are;
and they are very wrong who judge of him, or measure him, by men.

<span id="xviii.x-p16"></span>We must here first remember, that the
Prophet directs not his discourse promiscuously to all the Israelites,
but only to the faithful, who were a remnant among that corrupt people.
For God, at no time, suffered all the children of Abraham to become
alienated, but some few at least remained, as it is said in another
place, (<span id="xviii.x-p16.1"></span>[1Ki
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#018)<span
id="xviii.x-p16.1"></span>.) These the Prophet now addresses; and to
administer consolation, he moderates what he had said before of the
dreadful vengeance of God. This saying then was not to relieve the
sorrow of hypocrites; for the Prophet regarded only the miserable, who
had been so smitten with the feeling of God’s wrath, that despair would
have almost swallowed them up, had not their grief been mitigated. This
is one thing. But further, when he says that *he is God, and not man,*
this truth ought to come to our minds, that we may taste of God’s
gratuitous promises, whenever we vacillate as to his promises, or
whenever terror possesses our minds. What! Do you doubt when you have to
do with God? But whence is it, that we with so much difficulty rely on
the promises of God, except that we imagine him to be like ourselves?
Inasmuch then, as it is our habit thus to transform him, let this truth
be a remedy to this fault; and whenever God promises pardon to us, from
which proceeds the hope of salvation, how much soever he may have
previously terrified us by his judgements, let this come to our mind,
that as he is God, he is not to be judged of by what we are. We ought
then to recumb simply on his promises. “But then we are unworthy to be
pardoned; besides, so great is the atrocity of our sins, that there can
be no hope of reconciliation.” Here we must take instant hold on this
shield, we must learn to fortify ourselves with this declaration of the
Prophet, *He is God, and not man:* let this shield be ever taken to
repel every kind of diffidence.

<span id="xviii.x-p17"></span>But here a question may be raised, “Was He
not God, when he destroyed Sodom and the neighbouring cities?” That
judgement did not take away from the Lord his glory, nor was his majesty
thereby diminished. But these two sentences are to be read together; *I
am God, and not man, holy in the midst of thee.* When any one reads
these sentences apart, he does wrong to the meaning of the Prophet. God,
then, does not only affirm here that he is not like men, but he also
adds, that he is holy in the midst of Israel. It is one view of God’s
nature that is here given us, and what is set forth is the immense
distance between him and men, as we find it written by Isaiah the
Prophet,

<span id="xviii.x-p18"></span>‘My thoughts are not as yours: as much as
the heaven is distant from the earth, so distant are my thoughts from
your thoughts,’ (<span id="xviii.x-p18.1"></span>[Isa
55:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#008)<span id="xviii.x-p18.1"></span>.)

<span id="xviii.x-p19"></span>So also in this place, the Prophet shows
what God is, and how much his nature differs from the dispositions of
men. He afterwards refers to the covenant which God made with his
people: and what was the purport of that covenant? Even that God would
punish his people; yet so as ever to leave some seed remaining.

<span id="xviii.x-p20"></span>‘I will chastise them,’ he says, ‘with the
rod of men;  
I will not yet take away from them my mercy,’  
(<span id="xviii.x-p20.3"></span>[2 Sam.
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#015)<span id="xviii.x-p20.3"></span>.)

<span id="xviii.x-p21"></span>Since God then had promised some
mitigation or some alleviation in all his punishments, he now reminds
us, that he will not have his Church wholly demolished in the world, for
he would thus be inconsistent with himself: hence he says, *I am God,
and not man, holy in the midst of thee;* and since I have chosen thee to
myself to be my peculiar possession and inheritance, and promised also
to be for ever thy God, I will now moderate my vengeance, so that some
Church may ever remain.”

<span id="xviii.x-p22"></span>For this reason he also says *I will not
enter into the city* Some say, “I will not enter another city but
Jerusalem.” But this does not suit the passage; for the Prophet speaks
here of the ten tribes and not of the tribe of Judah. Others imagine an
opposite meaning, “I will not enter the city,” as though he said, that
he would indeed act kindly towards the people in not wholly destroying
them; but that they should hereafter be without civil order, regular
government, and other tokens of God’s favour: ‘I will not enter the
city;’ that is, “I will not restore you, so that there may be a city and
a kingdom, and an united body of people.” But this exposition is too
forced; nay, it is a mere refinement, which of itself vanishes.  <span
id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80) There is no doubt but that the similitude
is taken from a warlike practice. For when a conqueror enters a city
with an armed force, slaughter is not restrained but blood is
indiscriminately shed. But when a city surrenders, the conqueror indeed
may enter, yet not with a sudden and violent attack, but on certain
conditions; and then he waits, it may be for two days, or for some time,
that the rage of his soldiers may be allayed. Then he comes, not as to
enemies, but as to his own subjects. This is what the Prophet means when
he says, ‘I will not enter the city;’ that is, “I will make war on you
and subdue your and force you to surrenders and that with great loss;
but when the gates shall be opened, and the wall demolished, I will then
restrain myself, for I am unwilling wholly to destroy you.”

<span id="xviii.x-p27"></span>If one objects and says, that this
statement militates against many others which we have observed, the
answer is easy, and the solution has already been adduced in another
place, and I shall now only touch on it briefly. When God distinctly
denounces ruin on the people, the body of the people is had in view; and
in this body there was then no integrity. Inasmuch, then, as all the
Israelites had become corrupt, had departed from the worship and fear of
God, and from all piety and righteousness, and had abandoned themselves
to all kinds of wickedness, the Prophet declares that they were to
perish without any exception. But when he confines the vengeance of God,
or moderates it, he has respect to a very small number; for, as it has
been already stated, corruption had never so prevailed among the people,
but that some seed remained. Hence, when the Prophet has in view the
elect of God, he applies then these consolations, by which he mitigates
their terror, that they might understand that God, even in his extreme
rigour, would be propitious to them. Such is the way to account for this
passage. With regard to the body of the people, the Prophet has already
shown, that their cities were devoted to the fire, and that the whole
nation was doomed to suffer the wrath of God; that every thing was given
up to the fire and the sword. But now he says, “I will not enter;” that
is, with regard to those whom the Lord intended to spare. And it must
also be observed, that punishment was mitigated, not only with regard to
the elect, but also with regard to the reprobate, who were led into
captivity. We must yet remember, that when God spared them for a time,
he chiefly consulted the good of his elect; for the temporary suspension
of vengeance increased his judgement on the reprobate; for whosoever
repented not in exile doubled, as it is evident, the wrath of God
against themselves. The Lord, however, spared his people for a time; for
among them was included his Church, in the same way as the wheat is
preserved in the chaff, and is carried from the field with the straw.
Why so? Even that the wheat may be separated. So also the Lord preserves
much chaff with the wheat; but he will afterwards, in due time, divide
the wheat from the chaff. We now understand the whole meaning of the
Prophet, and also the application of his doctrine. It follows —

<span id="xviii.xi"></span>

<span id="xviii.xi-p1"></span><span id="xviii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
11:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#010)<span
id="xviii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xi-p2"></span>**10.** They shall walk after the Lord: he
shall roar like a lion: when he shall roar, then the children shall
tremble from the west.

<span id="xviii.xi-p3"></span>**10.** Post Jehovam ambulabunt, et quasi
leo ruget: quum ipse ruget, tunc pavebunt filii a mari (*vel,*
occidente; *mare enim vocatur occidentalis regio, respectu ipsius
Judeae.*)

<span id="xviii.xi-p4"></span>**11.** They shall tremble as a bird out
of Egypt, and as a dove out of the land of Assyria: and I will place
them in their houses, saith the Lord.

<span id="xviii.xi-p5"></span>**11.** Pavebunt quasi passer (*vel*,
avis; *tam species est quam genus*) ab Aegypto; et quasi columba a terra
Assur (*hoc est,* ab Assyriis) et habitare eos faciam in dominibus suis,
dicit Jehova.

<span id="xviii.xi-p6"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xi-p7"></span><span id="xviii.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xi-p8"></span>When the Prophet says, that *they shall
walk after Jehovah,* he proceeds farther than before; for here he refers
not to the mitigation of punishment, but promises restoration. He had
said before, that though the Lord would deal severely with his people,
there would yet be some moderation in his wrath, so that he would not
destroy the whole people. Now, it follows, that God, after having thus
restrained himself, will extend his favour even to the restoration of
the people, and bring to life those who seemed to have been dead. We now
then perceive what the Prophet means.

<span id="xviii.xi-p9"></span>But to expound this, — *they shall walk
after Jehovah,* of the obedience of the people, as it is done by
interpreters, does not seem right to me. It is indeed certain that no
people can be restored except they repent; yea, it is the main beginning
of God’s favour, when he chastises men and heals them of their
wickedness. But here the Prophet handles another thing, even that the
Lord will show himself a leader to his people, who had been for a time
dispersed. As long as the people were scattered in Assyria and in other
distant lands, they were without any head, as a mutilated body. But when
the ripened time of restoration came, the Lord revolved to deliver them,
and proclaimed himself the leader of his people; and in this manner the
people were gathered to God. This is what the Prophet now means when he
says, *after Jehovah:* that is, for a time, indeed, God will forsake
them, that they may languish in their dispersion; but at length he will
gather them, and show himself as their leader in their journey, that he
may restore them to their country. *They shall* then, he says, *follow
Jehovah, and he shall roar as a lion:* when he shall roar, then children
from the sea shall tremble”; that is, God will be formidable to enemies
so that none will hinder the return of his people. Many, indeed, will be
the enemies, many will labour to set up opposition: but the people shall
nevertheless come forth free. How so? For the Lord will fill all with
dread, and restrain all the efforts of their enemies; so that they shall
be constrained to withdraw from the Assyrians, as well as from the
Egyptians. Though, on one side, the Egyptians may resist, and, on the
other, the Assyrians, they shall not yet impede the return of the
people. Why? Because the Lord will put them to flight, and he will be to
them as a lions and fill them all with terror. But the rest we shall
defer.

<span id="xviii.xii"></span>

<span id="xviii.xii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="xviii.xii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since we are
too secure and torpid in our sins, thy dread majesty may come to our
minds, to humble us, and to remove our fear, that we may learn anxiously
to seek reconciliation through Christ, and so abhor ourselves for our
sins, that thou mayest then be prepared to receive us: and that unbelief
may not shut the door against us, enable us to regard thee to be such as
thou hast revealed thyself, and to acknowledge that thou art not like
us, but the fountain of all mercy, that we may thus be led to entertain
a firm hope of salvation, and that, relying on the Mediator, thy
only-begotten Son, we may know him as the throne of grace, full of
compassion and mercy. O grant, that we may thus come to thee, that
through him we may certainly know that thou art our Father, so that the
covenant thou hast made with us may never fail through our fault, even
this, that we are thy people, because thou hast once adopted us in thy
only-begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

<span id="xviii.xii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xiii"></span>

<span id="xviii.xiii-p1"></span>Lecture Thirty-first

<span id="xviii.xiii-p2"></span><span id="xviii.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xiii-p3"></span>In the last lecture, we began to explain
what the Prophet means by saying, that *the Israelites shall come after
the Lord:* that is, that when the time of the exile shall be completed,
God will be the leader of his people in their journey, that they might
return safe to their country. And for this reason, he also subjoins,
that the Egyptians as well as the Assyrians would be timid; and hence he
compares them to doves and sparrows, or birds; for when the nations
should attempt to hinder the return of the people, and strive against
them with great forces and great efforts, God would break down their
courage. For as God had determined to redeem his people, his decree
could not have been nullified, no, not by the whole world. Whatever
then, the Assyrians, and also the Egyptians, might attempt to do, though
powerful in forces, it would yet avail nothing; nay, God would strike
into both such fear and dread, that they should not make any stir when
the Lord restored his people. There is a similar mode of speaking in
Joel,  <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81) except that he does not
introduce the similitudes that they would be like birds and doves. But
he speaks of the roaring of God, as though he said, that the power of
God would be terrible and invincible, so that he would defend and
protect his people, and no one would dare to rise up against him; and
that if one should dare, he would be constrained instantly to succumb.
Let us now proceed —

<span id="xviii.xiv"></span>

<span id="xviii.xiv-p1"></span><span id="xviii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#012)<span id="xviii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xiv-p2"></span>**12.** Ephraim compasseth me about with
lies, and the house of Israel with deceit: but Judah yet ruleth with
God, and is faithful with the saints.

<span id="xviii.xiv-p3"></span>**12.** Circumdedit me mendacio Ephraim,
et fraude domus Israel: Judah autem adhuc dominatur (*vel*, principatum
tenet) cum Deo, et cum sanctis fidelis est.

<span id="xviii.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xiv-p5"></span><span id="xviii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xiv-p6"></span>I shall not stay now to recite the
opinions of others; nor does it seem necessary. I might have indeed
referred in the last verse to what some say respecting the roaring of
God, — that his voice will roar through the Gospel: but as this and the
like are refinements of which I think the Prophet never thought, it is
enough to understand the simple meaning of the Prophet, and not to
accumulate the sentiments of others. I indeed know that this makes a
great display, and there are some who are delighted with a mass of
opinions; but I regard what is more useful.

<span id="xviii.xiv-p7"></span>I come now to the last verse, in which
the Lord complains, *that he had been compassed with the falsehood and
fraud of the people* By these words he means that he had in every thing
found the multiplied perfidy of the Israelites; for this is the import
of the word, “compassed”. We now then perceive that the Prophet means
that the Israelites, not only in one way, or in one thing, acted
unfaithfully towards God, and used frauds: but that it was the same, as
when one besieges an enemy with a great army; so that they were thus
full of innumerable frauds, with which on every side they surrounded
God. And this is what hypocrites are wont to do; for not only in one
thing do they endeavour to deceive God, but they transform themselves in
various ways, and ever seek some new subterfuges. When they are caught
in one sin, they pass into another; so that there is no end to their
deceit. This subject the Prophet now takes up, that is, that the
Israelites never ceased to act deceitfully towards God.

<span id="xviii.xiv-p8"></span>And he speaks of *frauds and falsehood;*
for they thought that they escaped, provided they covered themselves
with some disguise whenever the Prophets reproved them. But God here
testifies, that they gained nothing by their craftiness, as though he
said, “Ye think indeed that your coverings will avail with me, but they
are vain. I indeed see myself as it were encompassed by your falsehoods,
for on every side ye attempt to cover your sins; but they are false
coverings.” In short, the Prophet reprobates those specious excuses, by
which people think that they are absolved before God, so as to elude
through this confidence all the threatening and reproofs of the
Prophets. “I see,” the Lord says, “what the Israelites bring forward for
themselves; but they are only falsehoods and frauds.” This passage then
teaches, that men in vain make excuses before God; for when they
contrive pretences to deceive God, they are themselves greatly deceived;
for he clearly perceives their guiles and falsehoods.

<span id="xviii.xiv-p9"></span>He afterwards subjoins, that *Judah still
ruled,* or, *held sovereignty, with God, and was faithful with the
saints* By saying that he held sovereignty with God, he declares, I
doubt not, that the kingdom of Judah was legitimate, because it was
connected with a pure and lawful priesthood. For whence did arise the
corruptions in the other kingdom, but because the people had revolted
from the family of David? Hence it was that the new king changed both
the law and the worship of God, and erected new temples. Israel then did
not rule with God, for the kingdom was spurious, and the beginning of
the dispersion, so that the people forsook God. But of Judah the Prophet
speaks much otherwise, that *he still ruled with God,* because the
posterity of David, though we know that they laboured under many vices,
had not yet changed the worship prescribed by the law, except that Ahab
had erected an altar like one at Damascus, as the sacred history
relates, (<span id="xviii.xiv-p9.2"></span>[2 Kings
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#012)<span id="xviii.xiv-p9.2"></span>;)
but yet pure religion always prevailed at Jerusalem. But the Prophet
speaks comparatively, as it will be presently seen: for he does not
wholly excuse the Jews, but says that in comparison with Israel they yet
ruled with God; for the kingdom and the priesthood, as we have said,
were joined together in Judah, and both had been divinely instituted.

<span id="xviii.xiv-p10"></span>He says further, that he *was faithful
with the saints* By saints some understand God. The word <span
id="xviii.xiv-p10.1"></span>קדושים, *kodushim*, we know, is plurals and
sometimes an epithet of the singular number is joined to it, though not
often. In the last chapter of Joshua  <span
id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) we have these words, <span
id="xviii.xiv-p11.2"></span>קדושים הרא, *kodushim eva,* *holy is he* But
as I have said, these examples are rare. And here I know not whether or
not the Prophet means God. I would rather refer this word to the holy
fathers or to the whole Church; so that the Prophet calls here <span
id="xviii.xiv-p11.3"></span>קדושים, *kodushim*, saints, Abraham and
others who justly deserved to be counted among the children of God; and
I am inclined to include the angels. But of the sanctuary we do not find
this word anywhere used; when the Scripture refers to the sanctuary, the
letter <span id="xviii.xiv-p11.4"></span>מ, *mem,* is added. He uses
indeed the plural number, though one may suppose that both the sanctuary
and its worship are here intended. But as this application would be
strained, and without example, I am satisfied with this plain meaning —
that Judah was *faithful with the saints;* that is, that he retained
faith in God together with the fathers, and departed not from the pure
worship which had been delivered to him, according to which God had made
his covenant with Abraham and his seed.

<span id="xviii.xiv-p12"></span>But the Prophet here praises the tribe
of Judah, not because he wished to flatter them; but, as it has been
stated in a former place, he had regard to the office deputed to him.
When we at this day cry against our domestic evils, when we say that
things are better ordered elsewhere, under what supposition is this
done? We take it as granted, that others have their own teachers by whom
they are reproved and if there be any vices prevailing, there are those
who are to apply the remedy. This consideration then ought often to be
remembered by us, that we may, by way of reproach, bring forward the
conduct of others, when we wish deeply to wound those, the care of whom
has been committed to us by God. Even so our Prophet did: at the same
time, those who then taught at Jerusalem did not spare the Jews; they
cried boldly and vehemently against their vices. But Hosea, as we have
said, does here attend to his own vocation; and hence he exposes the sin
of the ten tribes in having departed from the legitimate worship of God,
when they had at the same time a well-known and memorable example in the
tribe of Judah, who had continued in obedience to the law. This is the
meaning. Let us now go on —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](cc26017.htm#fr_72) <span
id="xviii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p9"></span> <span id="xviii.i-p9.1"></span>[Mt
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#015)<span id="xviii.i-p9.1"></span>. —
*fj.*

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](cc26017.htm#fr_73) <span
id="xviii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p8"></span> *Horsley, Newcome,* and others, have
unnecessarily divided here the compounded word, <span
id="xviii.ii-p8.1"></span>מפניהם, “from their presence,” and have
thereby destroyed the force of the passage, as it appears from
subsequent remarks. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75](cc26017.htm#fr_74) <span
id="xviii.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p4"></span> One MS. and the earlier versions have
“*my* arms,” and this reading is adopted by *Newcome.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_75"></span>[76](cc26017.htm#fr_75) <span
id="xviii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p8"></span> The word occurs no where in Scripture
but here. *Gesenius* in his Lexicon gives it as a quadriliteral verb,
and says that it means “to teach to go,” or, “to guide the steps.” But
*Parkhurst* is of the same opinion with *Calvin*, and renders it “a
footing,” or, “going on foot,” and translates this passage thus: — “And
as for me, my footing was for Ephraim;” *q.d.*, “I footed after him, I
attended him pn foot, as a nurse does a child.” *Buxtorf* considers that
<span id="xviii.iii-p8.1"></span>ת is put for <span
id="xviii.iii-p8.2"></span>ה, and regards it as a Hiphil of the verb
<span id="xviii.iii-p8.3"></span>רגל, “I have footed,” or, “taught
Ephraim how to foot or walk.” *Newcome* is of the same opinion. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_76"></span>[77](cc26017.htm#fr_76) <span
id="xviii.iii-p8.8"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p9"></span> <span id="xviii.iii-p9.1"></span>[De
32:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#010)<span
id="xviii.iii-p9.1"></span>. — *fj.*

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc26017.htm#fr_77) <span
id="xviii.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p11"></span> <span id="xviii.iii-p11.1"></span>[Isa
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#004)<span id="xviii.iii-p11.1"></span>.
— *fj.*

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc26017.htm#fr_78) <span
id="xviii.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p8"></span> “It is very probably that the words refer
to the custom of raising the yoke forward to cool the neck of the
laboring beast.” — *Newcome.*

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc26017.htm#fr_79) <span
id="xviii.ix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.ix-p8"></span> <span id="xviii.ix-p8.1"></span>[Isa
56:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#007)<span id="xviii.ix-p8.1"></span>.
— *fj.*

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc26017.htm#fr_80) <span
id="xviii.x-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.x-p23"></span> There is another exposition, which Calvin
probably did not think it worth his while to mention. It is an old one
of *Jerome*, revived by *Castallio*, adopted by *Lowth* and *Newcome*,
and highly praised by *Horsley*: and yet it seems to have neither point
nor meaning, and certainly comports not with this place. The proposed
rendering is this—

<span id="xviii.x-p24"></span>“Although I am no frequenter of cities.”

<span id="xviii.x-p25"></span>God is not a frequenter of cities!! How
odd and meaningless is this when compared with the view given by Calvin
of the passage?

<span id="xviii.x-p26"></span>There is another explanation approved of
by *Dathe*, which, as to the meaning, agrees with that of Calvin. He
takes <span id="xviii.x-p26.1"></span>עיר, rendered “city,” to mean
“anger,” and then the version would be, “I will not come in anger.” The
Septuagint is, literally, “I will not come into the city.”

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc26017.htm#fr_81) <span
id="xviii.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xiii-p4"></span> <span id="xviii.xiii-p4.1"></span>[Joe
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#016)<span
id="xviii.xiii-p4.1"></span>. — *fj.*

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc26017.htm#fr_82) <span
id="xviii.xiv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.xiv-p11"></span> <span id="xviii.xiv-p11.1"></span>[Jos
24:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#019)<span
id="xviii.xiv-p11.1"></span>. — *fj.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](cc26018)
