[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hby09)  [Next](hby11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

# Science of Breathing

THE Science of Yoga with its various branches justly claims, as we have
already seen, to unravel the mysteries of life and death. Some of the
advanced thinkers in Western countries are beginning to understand the
importance of this noble science and to explain the problems of
existence by it; but modern physiologists, anatomists, biologists, and
medical practitioners are still uncertain as to the proper solution of
these problems; the more they investigate, the more doubts arise in
their minds. Within the last fifty years the various researches in the
different departments of science, such as physics, chemistry,
physiology,

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

and biology, have apparently ended in the conclusion that life is
nothing but the result of physical and chemical actions in the organic
structure, that there is no such thing as vital force distinct and
separate from the physical and chemical forces which have been
discovered in the scientist's laboratory.

Some of the students of science are even anxiously waiting in the vain
expectation that some day they will hear of the discovery of a
substance, artificially produced in the laboratory, which will live,
move, grow, multiply, and die like a particle of living matter. The
majority of modern thinkers, in fact, hold that vitality is merely the
result of the mechanical activity of the organs; that life comes
directly from dead matter, and obeys physical, chemical, and mechanical
laws; that a living animal is nothing but a machine; and that all of his

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

actions whether of body or mind are purely mechanical. They say that a
living protoplasm is only a combination of certain chemical elements,
subject to ordinary chemical laws; that living and non-living are one;
and that the living comes directly from the non-living. According to
these scientists a human being is no more than a mechanical resultant of
certain chemical changes governed by the laws of physical nature. If,
however, we ask them what force it is that determines these physical and
mechanical modifications, what is the power that causes all these
chemical changes in such numberless varieties, they answer that they do
not know.

Are we really like machines, subject to mechanical laws and nothing
more? Is our growth entirely due to the process of accretion and
aggregation of matter in the non-living world? Are we merely some

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

accidental precipitation, deposition, or crystallization of atoms and
molecules which are governed by no power higher than the
chemico-physical forces? Students of physiology now learn in their
text-books this physico-chemical theory of the origin of life. They
laugh at those who use such expressions as "vital energy," "vital
force," "vitality," or "life force," in the sense of some power separate
and distinct from the physico-chemical forces of nature. In fact, when
they study physiology they throw aside all ideas of vitality or life
force; they believe in a nature devoid of vitality or life, and try to
explain the formation of brain cells, nerves, tissues, and the
construction of the various organs of a living animal without
recognizing the existence of a vital agency. A reaction, however, has
taken place recently in Europe, and a class of scientific thinkers

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

has appeared, Dr. Lionel S. Beale being the most prominent, who, having
found no satisfactory explanation of life through these theories, have,
after closer observation and experiment, come to the conclusion that
there is a vital force entirely distinct from mechanical or
physico-chemical forces, and which manifests itself through living
particles of matter.

It is true that the human body is a machine, but not like any machine
made by man. It is a self-moving, self-regulating, and self-adjusting,
vital machine governed by will-power and intelligence. It was produced
by a germ of life which possessed vitality, and which had the capability
of becoming conscious, of willing, thinking, and producing psychic
activity, in which are included all emotions and thoughts belonging to a
human being. By a germ of life is meant that germ of

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

matter or substance which contains the potentiality of life and mind.
Although the manifestation of this vital force depends upon organic
structure, still it is not the same as any of the familiar forces known
to us; it is not like heat, electricity, magnetism, or molecular
attraction. On the contrary, it is a force which governs and directs all
these grosser physical forces. It is the director of the telegraphic
current which notifies the energy of the muscle when and how to exert
itself. It coordinates all automatic movements, controls the system as a
whole as well as in detail, and is itself the principle of purely animal
life. The special organ through which it functions chiefly, and which
has been constructed to differentiate it from other energies, to give it
a form and a purpose, and to afford it a vehicle of expression, is the
spinal nerve of the vertebrate

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

and the equivalent organ in other animals.

This mysterious and invisible vital energy or vital force is called in
Sanskrit "Prâna." That branch of the Science of Yoga which treats of
this mysterious force, describing its origin and nature, and teaching
how it can be controlled and utilized to produce wonderful results, is
known as the Science of Prâna. Ordinarily it is translated into English
by the word "Breath," and called the "Science of Breath"; but Prâna is
not simple breath. In the Upanishads it is defined as the cause of all
motion and life in both the organic and inorganic worlds. Wherever there
is the slightest expression of motion, life, or mind, from the smallest
atom, or animalcule, or amœba, or bioplasm, up to the largest solar
system and the highest man, it is the manifestation of the all-pervading
force called Prâna. It is one, yet appears

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

as manifold through its divers expressions. It is the mother of all
forces, psychical, chemical, and physical. Vedânta Philosophy describes
it as the ultimate generalization of the multiple forces of nature. It
is indestructible; the death of the form through which it manifests
cannot destroy it; but it must not be confounded with molecular
attraction for it is much finer; it cannot be seen, touched, weighed,
measured, or captured by any means.

According to Vedânta, before the beginning of creation the unconditioned
causal state of the universe contained potential Prâna; Vedânta does not
make the absurd statement that life has come from non-life. It does not
admit that vital energy is the result of mechanical forces, but, on the
contrary, tells us that it is a force which operates simultaneously with
physico-chemical forces. They are all, in fact, expressions

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

of the one living energy of Prâna. Although some of the modern
scientific monists acknowledge that all matter and force spring from a
common source, or from one eternal energy, still at the same time they
deny the existence of life or vitality in that energy and declare that
it is not living. They try to prove that life is the product of some
kind of motion of dead matter; while Vedânta teaches that all the
phenomena of the universe have evolved out of the one eternal substance
which possesses Prâna or cosmic vital force, cosmic mind, cosmic
intelligence, and consciousness. These may be interdependent, but as
they all exist in a human being, so the infinite variety of forces exist
in that one eternal living Being whose body is the universe.

The Science of Yoga claims that this Prâna is the final cause of all the
manifested

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

forces of nature. Why does an atom move and vibrate? A scientist does
not know, but a Yogi says because of Prâna. That force which produces
vibration in an atom or a molecule is one of the expressions of the
energy of Prâna or the cosmic Life-principle. The same Prâna appears as
that power by which a germ of life works on the physical plane, arouses
motion in the molecules of its cells and builds up a suitable structure,
repairs injuries and reproduces its kind. It causes activity in a
protoplasm, in a bioplasm or an amœba, as well as in the highest man. It
is closely related to the mind, which includes all the psychic
activities and intelligence displayed by that germ in the different
grades of its evolution. Vital power and mind are, indeed, two aspects
of one Prâna. A germ of life possesses mentality as well as vitality,
and the phenomena of

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

these two aspects are most intimately connected with one another. In the
science of Yoga the relation between mind and Prâna is described as that
of a horse and a rider, Prâna being the horse which the individual mind
rides. The body moves like an automobile carriage when it is propelled
from within by the force of Prâna and guided by the driver of the
intelligent mind. The activity of the mechanism of the body stops if
Prâna or vital force ceases to vibrate. Again, when the vibration of
Prâna is arrested, the mind no longer operates on the physical plane. It
is for this reason that vital force or Prâna is called the medium
through which the mind expresses its powers on the physical plane.

The animal organism is nothing but a mechanism for the manifestation of
the powers of the soul. When the soul wishes to express certain powers
on

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

the material plane it creates through Prâna some suitable organism to
fulfill its desire. If the mental activities of any living creature
change, the organic structure of the nerves and cells will also change.
Various experiments have been made by different scientists which clearly
show that mental effort underlies all physiological conditions and
organic functions. An abnormal activity of the mind will invariably give
rise to certain pathological conditions, because it will affect the
vital action; and when the vital power, which gives life to every cell
of the body, is influenced, the cells will begin to vibrate in a
different manner; and the result will be abnormal activity in the cells
of the organs, which in turn will produce various diseases. Conversely,
when the vital activity is normal, the psychic function is also natural.
The mind is just as much affected

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

by a diseased body as the physical system is disturbed by a diseased
mind. He who can regulate his mentalities knows how to preserve his
vitality and keep a healthy body; while he who has control over his
vital functions understands the secret of keeping a healthy mind. The
man who is thus able to dominate both body and mind is the master of
himself, the king in his own conscious domain. But he who is not the
master of himself lives like a slave to passion, to sense-objects, to
wealth, property, ambition, and all earthly desires. Those who do not
know how to regulate their vital forces are always unhappy, for they
constantly suffer either mentally or physically.

Every irregular activity of the mind will produce chemical and
physiological change in the nerve centers, in the organs, and eventually
in the whole body. This can be

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

shown by analyzing the chemical properties of the secretions of
different organs, and especially by analyzing the breath. If we analyze
the breath of a person who is strongly moved by anger or any other
violent passion, we shall find that his whole system is poisoned for the
time being. By letting his breath pass through a certain solution in a
glass tube, we shall readily see that distinct changes are produced in
the solution. These variations, furthermore, are only the outward signs
of the internal modifications that have taken place in the entire
nervous system. It is, in fact, these organic changes that modify the
breath; but in a normal, healthy state of mind and body the chemical
solution will remain perfectly unchanged. The breathing is then regular,
deep, and strong. Every impulse of passion that takes possession of the
mind, causes a corresponding

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

variation in the respiratory functions; anger, hatred, or jealousy for
instance, are marked by short, quick breath, while thoughts of peace, of
true happiness, and of divine love produce long, deep breath.

There are various ways of learning the relation that exists between
vital activity and mentality. A Yogi says that all abnormal and diseased
conditions of the body are caused directly by imperfect or weak
expression of the vital energy, and indirectly by improper mental
activity. The curing of a disease, therefore, means the removing of the
obstacles which prevent the Prâna from working in an absolutely normal
way. This can be done either by physical processes or by regulating the
mental functions. A Yogi heals disease in himself by increasing the
vital action; by rousing the latent powers of the Prâna, which is the
source of all life force. He

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

knows how to fill his whole body, nay, every cell, with increased
vitality. By regulating the polarity of the cells through the higher
vibrations of Prâna he generates a strong current of vibratory Prâna,
directs its course through the disordered cells of his organs, and
changes the structure of these cells by creating a rapid circulation of
the blood charged with the healing power of Prâna, and sending it to the
parts affected. In this way the cells are restored to their normal
condition and the disease is cured. The Yogi does this consciously and
in the most scientific manner with the help of breathing exercises
accompanied by concentration. According to the Science of Yoga all
nervous currents and all molecular motion in the brain cells and nerve
centers are caused by this Prâna. If the molecules of the cells be
filled with a new and strong current of Prâna or vital

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

force, their vibration will be enormously increased; and this will
enable them to throw off the impure matter that retarded their natural
activity, and recover their normal healthy condition.

The same Prâna is also the propelling power in circulation. A Yogi says
that the vital energy is stored up in the nerve centers of the spinal
cord. It is the cause of the motion of the lungs, which in turn produces
respiration; and respiration is the cause of the circulation of the
blood and of all other organic activity. Modern physiology tells us that
every portion of our body, every tissue and cell breathes; that the lung
is nothing more than an instrument in the respiratory process, the
chemical operation, which is the essential part of this function,
occurring elsewhere in the cells and tissues themselves. The lung is
only the door through which

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

oxygen enters the system. The physiologists of the eighteenth century
held quite different views; even the father of modern chemistry,
Lavoisier himself (1743-1794), supposed that the main act of respiration
took place in the lungs. What really happens is that oxygen, introduced
into the lungs, filters through the thin walls of the pulmonary
capillaries, where it finds in the red corpuscles of the blood a
substance called hemoglobin, with which it unites to form a compound
known as oxy-hemoglobin. And a very unstable compound it is, for
throughout the tissues, in the capillary vessels of the whole body,
oxygen is allowed to escape freely and to effect its work upon the
cells. The blood, therefore, is merely a vehicle. The "organic
combustions" do not occur in the lungs, their seat being in the cells
and tissues throughout the whole system.

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

Physiological chemistry tells us that all things mineral, vegetable, and
animal, are mainly composed of four principal elements--oxygen,
hydrogen, carbon, and nitrogen. Of these oxygen is of the greatest
importance, since it is the most widely diffused, constituting by weight
one-fifth of the atmosphere, eight-ninths of the ocean and all water,
nearly one-half of solid rock and of every solid substance, and more
than one-half of all vegetables and animals. If a man weighs one hundred
and fifty pounds, one hundred and ten of his weight is oxygen. It is the
chief cause of all activity in mechanical, chemical, muscular, and
mental forces. The amount of energy or activity of an animal is
determined by the amount of oxygen he respires; and the degree of force
manifested in the human organism is in proportion to the rate at which
oxygen is introduced into

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

the system. It is the first requisite of vital action. Without it all
other materials of life will be of little avail; and the respiratory
organs are the medium through which it enters the system. The blood
which has been once used in our bodies would be of no further service if
it were not purified by the lungs. Ordinarily air when inhaled, contains
21 per cent oxygen, and when exhaled, 12 per cent, having lost 9 per
cent. In a healthy adult man the average pulsation is 75 in a minute and
about two ounces of blood are driven by each pulsation from the heart to
the lungs, or nine pounds and six ounces in a minute. The quantity of
blood in the human body is considered to be about one-fifth of the
weight of the entire body, or twenty-eight pounds in a man weighing one
hundred and forty pounds. The full quantity of blood in the system will,
therefore, flow

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

through the lungs in the short period of three minutes; in other words,
the vast amount of thirteen thousand five hundred pounds in every
twenty-four hours.

It is well known now that as a rule only one-sixth of the full capacity
of the lungs is used; if the remaining five-sixths were properly brought
into play who can say what marvellous results might not follow? Nature
has not given capacity to any organ without a purpose; and we are sure
that, if every one were to use the full capacity of his lungs, weak or
diseased lungs would be a thing of the past. If we understand the
science of breathing, we can develop our lung power to its utmost
capacity; then by well-regulated breathing exercises we can purify every
particle of matter in the cells of the organs, and with the help of the
current of Prâna can ultimately drive out all physical weakness.

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

Faith-healers, mental-healers, and Christian Scientists cure disease
without giving drugs; the Yogis of India do the same, but in a more
scientific manner. Faith-healers and Christian Scientists ask us to
believe in a certain thing and to declare that we are not suffering. A
Yogi says that we can get better and surer results if through breathing
exercises we can control the Prâna, increase the vital current, and fill
the whole system with the healing power of Prâna. By polarizing the
activity of the cells, and removing the obstacles that prevent the
proper manifestation of the vital current in those cells, we shall get
rid of the disease. If mental-healers and faith-healers knew the secret
of controlling the Prâna, they would have been undoubtedly more
successful in their attempts. Some among them are now beginning to take
up breathing exercises, and perhaps in time

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

they will learn the truths contained in the wonderful science of
breathing.

Generally people who know nothing of this science think that it teaches
merely the mechanical process of breathing in and out; but its province
is much more extended, for it likewise shows how to control the Prâna,
how to increase the vitality of the system by generating new nerve
currents of a higher order, how to polarize the vibration of the cells,
and how to awaken those powers which lie dormant on the sub-conscious
plane as well as in the nerve centers of the spine. It also tells us
that when the powers begin to manifest, we rise above the influences and
changes to which ordinary mortals are subject. India is the only country
where from ancient times this science of breathing has been carefully
studied in all its aspects by the Yogis. Through centuries of
investigation

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

they discovered different methods of regulating the breath, following
which marvellous results, both mental and physical, could be obtained.
Out of these various discoveries grew up the science of breathing,
which, besides the control of the breath, also explains what relation
the process of respiration bears to Prâna, and how, by harmonizing the
vibrations of nerve cells with the higher laws of life force, one gains
mastery over Prâna. This control of Prâna brings complete subjugation of
all the forces which govern the mind and body.

The aim of a Yogi is to establish absolute harmony between his vital
actions and his mental functions, to transcend all laws, to rise above
the influence of all environmental conditions, and to be the supreme
ruler of the mind and of the entire system. According to the Yogi, this
perfect self-mastery

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

and consequent freedom do not come to one who [has](errata.htm#0.md) not
learned the secret of regulating the vital energy, and who has not
acquired the power to direct it wherever it is needed. Before anyone can
control this invisible vital force, he must know its principal seat in
the body; he must learn where this unseen king of physical activities is
enthroned, who are his attendants, and how lie governs his kingdom.

A Yogi says that the king or Prâna resides with his attendants in the
nerve centers of the spinal column. These centers are the main stations
where this vital force is stored. There are many centers in the spinal
cord out of which proceed the motor and sensory nerves which cover the
whole body, including its organs. All sensations and motions of the
limbs depend upon these nerve centers in the spinal column

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

and the brain. There are two currents which flow in and out of the brain
through the spinal column and nerves; they are called afferent and
efferent currents--in Sanskrit, "Idâ" and "Pingalâ." They run through
the anterior and posterior channels of the spinal cord, and these
furnish the two paths over which the currents of Prâna travel. The
nervous energy itself being scattered throughout the system, the only
means of regulating it is by controlling the principal centers or
stations in the spinal column. If, therefore, any one wishes to control
the Prâna, he must first learn to govern the chief stations through
which it works. After studying the relation of these different centers
the Yogis found that there were six of primary importance. Those who
wish to know their names can refer to the volume on "Râja Yoga" by the
Swâmi Vivekananda.

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

According to the science of breath, the King of these six leading nerve
centers in the spinal cord is enthroned in the center opposite the
thorax; it is the respiratory center and in Sanskrit bears the name
"Anâhata." It moves the lungs, causes respiration, and gives activity to
all the other centers, which are dependent on it. If the royal center is
disturbed or vibrates abnormally, those which are subject to it, and
through them the whole system will act in a corresponding manner; and
the result will be disease, organic trouble, or continued ill-health. So
long, however, as the royal center is in a normal condition, the
movement of the lungs which causes inspiration and expiration will be
regular. Therefore the Yogi who desires to subjugate the nerve centers
first strives to gain control over the respiratory center. The science
of breathing teaches that, by

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

regulating the breath, the motion of the lungs and the functions of the
whole nervous system can be regulated. It also says that, by controlling
the nerve centers in the spinal column, mastery over the currents
flowing throughout the system, and ultimately over the mind itself, with
its various dormant powers, can be easily gained. If the mental powers
that are now latent on the subconscious plane can be aroused, all the
experiences of past incarnations, and the impressions gathered during
previous lives, will come up on the conscious plane and we shall
remember them all.

The Yogis say that the great majority of people breathe irregularly and
that there are differences in the breathings of men and women. The
causes of this irregular breathing are many--food, drink, fear,
sickness, sorrow, nervous excitement, passion,

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

anxiety. These do not affect the breath directly, but they do influence
it indirectly by producing abnormal activity of Prâna, first in the
nerve centers, then in the movement of the lungs, which expresses
outwardly as irregular breathing. Hence irregularity of the breath is
the external sign of abnormal action of the respiratory center in the
spine.

A Yogi whose respiratory center functions regularly and is under perfect
control is free from weakness, ill-health, and all disease. As, by
controlling the activity of Prâna in the nerve centers, the movement of
the lungs and the respiration are regulated, so, conversely, by
regulating the breath, the lungs and nerve centers will be controlled,
for they work simultaneously. Those who are suffering from ill-health
should devote especial attention to the study of the science of
breathing, as it is

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

absolutely necessary to the building up of a healthy mind and a healthy
body.

The chief aim of a Yogi is to observe his own nature closely and to
learn clearly what forces are operating in his system, and what relation
they bear to one another; for by gaining a complete knowledge of his own
nature he will gain correct knowledge of the whole universe, since the
laws that govern the human body are universal. All these laws are
nothing but the modes in which Prâna operates in nature. Therefore a
Yogi seeks first to understand the individual Prâna and the vital laws
which govern his own system.

In India this fact was recognized and the science of breathing was
carefully studied by the sages, who had no other ambition or purpose in
life than to acquire knowledge for its own sake. They explained this
science, practiced breathing exercises

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (noting the results), and instructed their
pupils, but not to make a profession of it, or to earn money, or to gain
fame in society. On the contrary, they refused to teach those who came
to learn for professional ends; and it is because of this
disinterestedness on their part that the knowledge of the Yogis is so
pure and unadulterated by ambition or selfish motives. They also
realized the dangers which might arise from ignorant practice of these
exercises. Those who are studying under inexperienced teachers should be
on their guard, for there is great risk in letting the nerve currents
flow in a wrong direction. It may produce abnormal results and may even
end in mental disorder. Right breathing, on the contrary, brings the
greatest benefits to mankind when properly practiced; but if it is
abused it must do a corresponding amount of harm, just

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

as any medicine will when improperly applied. As by studying Materia
Medica a man cannot cure himself without the aid of a trained physician,
so the mere study of Yoga cannot bring about truly good results unless
it is carried on under the guidance of an experienced Yogi. It should be
remembered, furthermore, that in a written book everything is not given,
that each constitution is different from every other, and that that
which is helpful to one may not be so to another.

Anyone who practices faithfully, according to the instructions of an
experienced living teacher, will surely gain highly beneficial results
both in mind and body. He will learn how to manufacture vital force and
to increase the vitality of his whole organism. He will be able to
remove all impurities from his system and to overcome all abnormal and
diseased conditions,

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

that is, where decomposition and disorganization have not advanced too
far. He will likewise no longer be a victim to cold, chills, Grip,
fever, rheumatism, stiffness of the joints or muscles, paralysis, and
other ills; for he knows how he can remove them by increasing the
vibrations of Prâna and thus giving new life to the cells of the organs.

Every individual, whether old or young, man or woman, is bound to get
some result if the breathing exercises be practiced faithfully for six
months. By breathing exercises, however, is not meant here merely deep
breathing, such as is taught by teachers of music, Delsarte, or physical
culture. Deep breathing is very good for drawing a full supply or oxygen
into the system, and undoubtedly has its value, especially for women who
wear tight dresses. Many of the diseases from which they

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

suffer are directly traceable to a lack of the adequate quantity of
oxygen necessary for organic combustion and for the maintenance of the
activity of the organs. The organs of many people in this country are
undeveloped, or abnormally developed, because of the unnatural clothes
worn; and for all such deep breathing will be exceedingly beneficial.
But too much of it is injurious, as it inflates and strains the lungs,
and, if continued, the increased development of the tissues will after a
time decay and produce various troubles. Those who are taking lessons in
deep breathing from inexperienced teachers should stop to consider this.
By breathing exercises we mean that process by which control over the
motion of the lungs and of the nerve centers, as also, in the end, over
the Prâna or vital energy can be acquired.

A Yogi declares that the practice of

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

breathing will bring whatever result is desired, whether physical,
psychical, or spiritual. He who has gained perfect control over his
breath can suspend it for hours, and through this generate a power in
the system which will levitate the body, even counteracting the
tremendous force of gravitation. A Yogi conquers death by the control of
Prâna. There are many Yogis in India who can tell the exact moment when
they will leave their bodies. They say, "I am going to depart on such a
day at such an hour," and at the appointed time consciously give up
their bodies in the presence of many. There are some again who can
prolong life indefinitely, and can subsist for long periods without
taking any kind of solid or liquid food.

When so much can be accomplished through the control of the vital energy
of

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Prâna, it is not strange that these Masters say
to the world:

"Oh, ye mortals, study the science of breathing; learn the secret of
controlling Prâna or the vital energy; strive diligently to regulate the
breath; for the control of Prâna will bring all happiness, earthly and
spiritual, and through it will come perfect health, mastery of the body,
and that Supreme Bliss which is eternal and everlasting.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Was Christ a Yogi?](hby11.md)
