[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](woe08)  [Next](woe10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

# CHAPTER VII

### THE VISION OF HERMES <span id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51.md)

ONE day, Hermes, after reflecting on the origin of things, fell asleep.
A dull torpor took possession of his body; but in proportion as the
latter grew benumbed, his spirit ascended into space. Then an immense
being, of indeterminate form, seemed to call him by name.

"Who art thou?" said the terrified Hermes.

"I am Osiris, the sovereign Intelligence who is able to unveil all
things. What desirest thou?"

"To behold the source of beings, O divine Osiris, and to know God."

"Thou shalt be satisfied."

Immediately Hermes felt himself plunged in a delicious light. In its
pellucid billows passed the ravishing forms of all beings. Suddenly, a
terrifying encircling darkness descended upon him.

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Hermes was in a humid chaos, filled with smoke
and with a heavy, rumbling sound. Then a voice rose from the abyss, the
*cry of light*. At once a quick-leaping flame darted forth from the
humid depths, reaching to the ethereal heights. Hermes ascended with it,
and found himself again in the expanse of space. Order began to clear up
chaos in the abyss; choruses of constellations spread above his head and
*the voice of light* filled infinity.

"Dost thou understand what thou hast seen?" said Osiris to Hermes, bound
down in his dream and suspended between earth and sky.

"No," said Hermes.

"Thou wilt now learn. Thou hast just seen what exists from all eternity.
The light thou didst first see is the divine intelligence which contains
all things in potentiality, enclosing the models of all beings. The
darkness in which thou wast afterwards plunged is the material world on
which the men of earth live. But the fire thou didst behold shooting
forth from the depths, is the divine Word. God is the Father, the Word
is the son, and their union is Life."

"What marvellous sense has opened out to me?" asked Hermes. "I no longer
see with the eyes of

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

the body, but with those of the spirit. How has that come to pass?"

"Child of dust," replied Osiris, "it is because the Word is in thee.
That in thee which hears, sees, and acts is the Word itself, the sacred
fire, the creative utterance!"

"Since things are so," said Hermes, "grant that I may see the light of
the worlds; the path of souls from which man comes and to which he
returns."

"Be it done according to thy desire."

Hermes became heavier than a stone and fell through space like a
meteorite. Finally he reached the summit of a mountain. It was night,
the earth was gloomy and deserted, and his limbs seemed as heavy as
iron.

"Raise thine eyes and look!" said the voice of Osiris.

Then Hermes saw a wonderful sight. The starry heavens, stretching
through infinite space, enveloped him with seven luminous spheres. In
one glance, Hermes saw the seven heavens stretching above his head, tier
upon tier, like seven transparent and concentric globes, the sidereal
centre of which he now occupied. The milky way formed the girdle of the
last. In each sphere there rolled a planet

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

accompanied by a genius of different form, sign and light. Whilst
Hermes, dazzled by the sight, was contemplating their wide-spread
efflorescence and majestic movements, the voice said to him:

"Look, listen, and understand. Thou seest the seven spheres of all life.
Through them is accomplished the fall and ascent of souls. The seven
genii are the seven rays of the word-light. Each of them commands one
sphere of the spirit, one phase of the life of souls. The one nearest to
thee is the Genius of the Moon, with his disquieting smile and crown of
silver sickle. He presides over births and deaths, sets free souls from
bodies and draws them into his ray. Above him, pale Mercury points out
the path to ascending or descending souls with his caduceus, which
contains all knowledge. Higher still, shining Venus holds the mirror of
love, in which souls forget and recognize them in turn. Above her, the
Genius of the Sun raises the triumphal torch of eternal beauty. At a yet
loftier height, Mars brandishes the sword of justice. Enthroned on the
azure sphere, Jupiter holds the sceptre of supreme power, which is
divine intelligence. At the boundaries of the world, beneath the

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

signs of the Zodiac, Saturn bears the globe of universal wisdom. <span
id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_52.md)

"I see," said Hermes, "the seven regions which comprise the visible and
invisible world; I see the seven rays of the word-light, of the one God
who traverses them and governs them by these rays. Still, O master, how
does mankind journey through all these worlds?"

"Dost thou see," said Osiris, "a luminous seed fall from the regions of
the milky way into the seventh sphere? These are germs of souls. They
live like faint vapors in the region of Saturn, gay and free from care,
knowing not their own happiness. On falling from sphere to sphere,
however, they put on increasingly heavier envelopes. In each incarnation
they acquire a new corporeal sense, in harmony with the surroundings in
which they are living. Their vital energy increases, but in proportion
as they enter into denser bodies they lose the memory of their celestial
origin. Thus is effected the fall of souls which come from the divine
ether. Ever more and more captivated by matter

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

and intoxicated by life, they fling themselves like a rain of fire, with
quiverings of voluptuous delight, through the regions of grief, love,
and death, right into their earthly prison where thou thyself lamentest,
held down by the fiery centre of the earth, and where divine life
appears to thee nothing more than an empty dream."

"*Can souls die*?" asked Hermes.

"Yes," replied the voice of Osiris, "many perish in the fatal descent.
The soul is the daughter of heaven, and its journey is a test. If it
loses the memory of its origin, in its unbridled love of matter, the
divine spark which was in it and which might have become more brilliant
than a star, returns to the ethereal region, a lifeless atom, and the
soul disaggregates in the vortex of gross elements."

Hermes shuddered at these words, for a raging tempest enveloped him in a
black mist. The seven spheres disappeared beneath dense vapors. In them
he saw human spectres uttering strange cries, carried off and torn by
phantoms of monsters and animals, amidst nameless groans and
blasphemies.

"Such is the destiny," said Osiris, "of souls irremediably base and
evil. Their torture finishes only with their destruction, which includes
the loss

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

of all consciousness. The vapors are now dispersing, the seven spheres
reappear beneath the firmament. Look on this side. Do you see this swarm
of souls trying to mount once more to the lunar regions? Some are beaten
back to earth like eddies of birds beneath the might of the tempest. The
rest with mighty wings reach the upper sphere, which draws them with it
as it rotates. Once they have come to this sphere, they recover their
vision of divine things. This time, however, they are not content to
reflect them in the dream of a powerless happiness; they become
impregnated thereby with the lucidity of a grief-enlightened
consciousness, the energy of a will acquired through struggle and
strife. They become luminous, for they possess the divine in themselves
and radiate it in their acts. Strengthen therefore thy soul, O Hermes!
calm thy darkened mind by contemplating these distant flights of souls
which mount the seven spheres and are scattered about therein like
sheaves of sparks. Thou also canst follow them, but a strong will it
needs to rise. Look how they swarm and form into divine choruses. Each
places itself beneath its favorite genius. The most beautiful dwell in
the solar region; the most powerful rise to Saturn. Some ascend to the
Father, powers themselves

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

amidst powers. For where everything ends, everything eternally begins;
and the seven spheres say together: 'Wisdom! Love! Justice! Beauty!
Splendor! Knowledge! Immortality!'"

"This," said the hierophant, "is what ancient Hermes saw and what his
successors have handed down to us. The words of the wise are like the
seven notes of the lyre which contains all music, along with the numbers
and the laws of the universe, The vision of Hermes resembles the starry
heaven, whose unfathomable depths are strewn with constellations. For
the child this is nothing more than a gold-studded vault, for the sage
it is boundless space in which worlds revolve, with their wonderful
rhythms and cadences. The vision contains the eternal numbers, evoking
signs and magic keys. The more thou learnest to contemplate and
understand it, the farther thou shalt see its limits extend, for the
same organic law governs all worlds."

The prophet of the temple commented on the sacred text. He explained
that the doctrine of the word-light represents divinity *in the static
condition*, in its perfect balance. He showed its triple nature, which
is at once intelligence, force, and matter; spirit, soul, and body;
light, word, and life. Essence, manifestation, and substance are three

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

terms which take each other for granted. Their union constitutes the
divine and intellectual principle *par excellence*, the law of the
ternary unity which governs creation from above downwards.

Having thus led his disciple to the ideal centre of the universe, the
generating principle of Being, the master spread him abroad in time and
space in a multiple efflorescence. For a second part of the vision
represents divinity *in the dynamic condition*, *i.e.*, in active
evolution; in other terms, the visible and invisible universe, the
living heavens. The seven spheres attached to the seven planets
symbolise seven principles, seven different states of matter and spirit,
seven different worlds which each man and each humanity are forced to
pass through in their evolution across a solar system. The seven genii
or the seven cosmogonic gods signify the superior, directing spirits of
all spheres, the off spring themselves of inevitable evolution. To an
initiate of old, therefore, each great god was the symbol and patron of
legions of spirits which reproduced his type in a thousand varieties,
and which, from their own sphere, could exercise their action over
mankind and terrestrial things. The seven genii of the vision of Hermes
are the seven Devas of India, the seven Amshapands of Persia, the seven

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

great Angels of Chaldæa, the seven Sephiroths of the Kabbala, the seven
Archangels of the Christian Apocalypse. The great septenary which
enfolds the universe does not vibrate in the seven colors of the rainbow
and the seven notes of the scale, only; it also manifests itself in the
constitution of man, which is triple in essence, but sevenfold in its
evolution.

"Thus," said the hierophant in conclusion, "thou hast reached the very
threshold of the great arcanum. The divine life has appeared to thee
beneath the phantoms of reality. Hermes has unfolded to thee the
invisible heavens, the light of Osiris, the hidden God of the universe
who breathes in millions of souls and animates thereby the wandering
globes and working bodies. It is now thine to direct thy path and choose
the road leading to the pure spirit. Henceforth dost thou belong *to
those who have been brought back from death to life*. REMEMBER THAT
THERE ARE TWO MAIN KEYS TO KNOWLEDGE. This is the first: 'The without is
like the within of things; the small is like the large; there is only
one law and he who works is One. In the divine economy, there is nothing
either great or small.' And this is the second: 'Men are mortal gods and
gods are immortal men.' Happy

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

the man who understands these words, for he holds the key to all things.
Remember that the law of mystery veils the great truth. Total knowledge
can be revealed only to our brethren who have gone through the same
trials as ourselves. Truth must be measured according to intelligence;
it must be veiled from the feeble, whom it would madden, and concealed
from the wicked, who are capable of seizing only its fragments, which
they would turn into weapons of destruction. Keep it in thy heart and
let it speak through thy work. Knowledge will be thy might, faith thy
sword, and silence thy armor that cannot be broken."

The revelations of the prophet of Amon-Râ, which opened out to the new
initiate such vast horizons over himself and over the universe,
doubtless produced a profound impression, when uttered from the
observatory of a Theban temple, in the clear calm of an Egyptian night.
The pylons, the white roofs, and terraces of the temples lay asleep at
his feet between the dark clusters of nopals and tamarind trees. Away in
the distance were large monolithic shrines, colossal statues of the
gods, seated like incorruptible judges on their silent lake. Three
pyramids, geometrical figures of the tetragram and of the sacred
septenary, could be dimly

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

seen on the horizon, their triangles clearly outlined in the light grey
air. The unfathomable firmament was studded with stars. With what a
strange gaze he looked at those constellations which were depicted to
him as future dwellings! When finally the gold-tipped barque of the moon
rose above the dark mirror of the Nile which died away on the horizon,
like a long bluish serpent, the neophyte believed he saw the barque of
Isis floating over the river of souls which it carries off towards the
sun of Osiris. He remembered the *Book of the Dead*, and the meaning of
all the symbols was now unveiled to his mind after what he had seen and
learned; he might believe himself to be in the crepuscular kingdom of
the Amenti, the mysterious interregnum between the earthly and the
heavenly life, where the departed, who are at first without eyes and
power of utterance, by degrees regain sight and voice. He, too, was
about to undertake the great journey, the journey of the infinite,
through worlds and existences. Hermes had already absolved him and
judged him to be worthy. He had given him the explanation of the great
enigma "One only soul, the great soul of the All, by dividing itself
out, has given birth to all the souls that struggle throughout the
universe." Armed

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

with the mighty secret, he entered the barque of Isis. Rising aloft into
the ether, it floated in the interstellar regions. The broad rays of a
far-spreading dawn were already piercing the azure veils of the
celestial horizons, and the choir of the glorious spirits, the
Akhimou-Sekou, who have attained to eternal repose, was chanting: "Rise,
Râ Hermakouti, sun of spirits! Those in thy barque are in exaltation.
They raise exclamations in *the barque of millions of years*. The great
divine cycle overflows with joy when glorifying the mighty sacred
barque. Rejoicing is taking place in the mysterious chapel. Rise,
Ammon-Râ Hermakouti, thou self-creating sun!" And the initiate replied
proudly: "I have attained the country of truth and justification. I rise
from the dead as a living god, and shine forth in the choir of the gods
who dwell in heaven, for I belong to their race."

Such audacious thoughts and hopes might haunt the spirit of the adept
during the night following the mystic ceremony of resurrection. The
following morning, in the avenues of the temple, beneath the blinding
light, that night seemed to him no more than a dream . . . though how
impossible to forget . . . that first voyage into the intangible and
invisible! Once again he read the inscription

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

on the statue of Isis: "My veil no mortal hand hath raised." All the
same a corner of the veil was raised, but only to fall back again, and
he woke up on the earth of tombs. Ah, how far he was from the goal he
had dreamed of! For the voyage on *the barque of millions of years* is a
long one! But at least he had caught a faint glimpse of his final
destination. Even though his vision of the other world were only a
dream, a childish outline of his imagination, still obscured by the
mists of earth, could he doubt that other consciousness he had felt
being born in him, that mysterious *double*, that celestial ego which
had appeared to him in his astral beauty like a living form and spoken
to him in his sleep? Was this a sister-soul, was it his genius, or only
a reflection of his inmost spirit, a vision of his future being dimly
foreshadowed? A wonder and a mystery! Surely it was a reality, and if
that soul was only his own, it was the true one. What would he not do to
recover it? Were he to live millions of years he would never forget that
divine hour in which he had seen his other self, so pure and
radiant. <span id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_53.md)

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

The initiation was at an end, and the adept consecrated as priest of
Osiris. If he was an Egyptian, he remained attached to the temple; if a
foreigner, he was permitted, from time to time, to return to his own
country, therein to establish the worship of Isis or to accomplish a
mission.

Before leaving, however, he swore a formidable oath that he would
maintain absolute silence regarding the secrets of the temple. Never
would he betray to a single person what he had seen or heard, never
would he reveal the doctrine of Osiris except under the triple veil of
the mythological symbols or of the mysteries. Were he to violate this
oath, sudden death would come to him, sooner or later, however far away
he might be. Silence, however, had become the buckler of his might.

On returning to the shores of Ionia, to the turbulent town in which he
formerly lived, amidst that multitude of men, a prey to mad passions,
who exist like fools in their ignorance of themselves, his thoughts
often flew back to Egypt and the pyramids to the temple of Amon-Râ. Then
the dream of the crypt came back to memory. And just as the lotus, in
that distant land, spreads out its petals on the waves of the Nile, so
this white

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

vision floated above the slimy, turbulent stream of this life.

At chosen hours, he would hear *its* voice, and it was the voice of
light. Arousing throughout his being the strains of an inner music, it
said to him: "The soul is a veiled light. When neglected, it flickers
and dies out, but when it is fed with the holy oil of love, it shines
forth like an immortal lamp."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_51"></span>[263:1](woe09.htm#fr_51.md) *The Vision of Hermes*
is found at the beginning of the books of *Hermes Trismegistus*, under
the name of *Poimandres*. The ancient Egyptian tradition has come down
to us only in a slightly changed Alexandrian form. It has been attempted
here to constitute this important fragment of Hermetic doctrine in the
sense of the lofty initiation and esoteric synthesis it represents.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[267:1](woe09.htm#fr_52.md) It is unnecessary to
state that these gods bore other names in the Egyptian tongue. The seven
cosmogonic gods, however, correspond with one another in all
mythologies, in meaning and attributes. They have their common root in
the ancient esoteric tradition. As the western tradition has adopted the
Latin names, we keep them for greater clearness.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[276:1](woe09.htm#fr_53.md) In the Egyptian
teachings, man was considered in this life to have consciousness only of
the animal and the rational soul, called *hati* and *bai*. The higher
part of his being, the spiritual soul and the divine being, *cheybi* and
*kou*, exist in him as unconscious.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII: The Story of the Book of Thoth](woe10.md)
