[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](woe04)  [Next](woe06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

# CHAPTER III

### THE PTAH-HOTEP AND THE KE'GEMNI: THE OLDEST BOOKS IN THE WORLD

THE Instructions of Ptah-hotep and of Ke'gemni possess, apart from the
curious nature of their contents, a feature of the greatest interest,
and an adequate claim on the notice of all persons interested in
literature and its history. For if the datings and ascriptions in them
be accepted as trustworthy--there is no reason why they should not be
accepted--they were composed about four thousand years before Christ,
and three thousand five hundred and fifty years before Christ,
respectively. And the significance of those remote dates is, that they
are the oldest books in the world, the earliest extant specimens of the
literary art. They stand on the extreme horizon of all that ocean of
paper and ink that has become to us as an atmosphere, a fifth element,
an essential of life.

Books of many kinds had of course been written for centuries before
Ptah-hotep of Memphis summarised, for the benefit of future generations,
the

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

leading principles of morality current in his day; even before the
Vizier, five hundred years earlier, gave to his children the scroll
which they prized above all things on earth; <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3) but those have perished and these remain.
There are lists of titles which have a large sound, and prayers to the
gods for all good things, on the tombs and monuments of kings and
magnates long before the time Ke'gemni; but those are not books in any
sense of that word. Even the long, strange chants and spells engraven in
the royal pyramids over against Memphis are later than the time of
Ptah-hotep, and cannot be called books in their present form, although
some of them apparently originated before the First Dynasty. <span
id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4)

Nor do the oldest books of any other country approach these two in
antiquity. To draw comparisons between them let us, in imagination,
place ourselves at the period at which Ptah-hotep lived, that is about
B.C. 3550, "under King Isosi, living forever," and take a glance at
futurity.

The Babylonians are doubtless exercising their

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

literary talents; but they will leave nothing worthy the name of book to
the far posterity of fifty-four centuries hence. Thirteen centuries
shall pass before Hammurabi, King of Babylon, drafts the code of laws
that will be found at that time. Only after two thousand years shall
Moses write on the origin of things, and the Vedas be arranged in their
present form. It will be two-and-a-half thousand years before the Great
King of Jerusalem will set in order many proverbs and write books so
much resembling, in form and style, that of Ptah-hotep; before the
source and summit of European literature will write his world epics. For
the space of years between Solomon and ourselves, great though it seem,
is not so great as that between Solomon and Ptah-hotep.

Nothing definite is known concerning these two nobles beyond what is
said of them in their works. A fine tomb of a certain Ke'gemni exists at
Memphis; his titles, so far as can be ascertained, are: Judge of the
High Court; Governor of the Land unto its Limit, South and North;
Director of every Command. He has sometimes been supposed to be
identical with our Ke'gemni; but I am assured by those most competent to
judge that this tomb cannot be earlier than the fifth dynasty,--a good
three

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

hundred years from the date assigned to the moralist,--so that the
theory that they are one person may be dismissed as highly improbable.
No other person of the name is known.

The position is much the same with Ptah-hotep. There are near Memphis
the tombs of several nobles of this name, of whom two lived in the reign
of Isosi; and in this case, again, it has been assumed that one of these
two must be the writer of the Instruction. But in neither instance do
the titles coincide with or include those assigned to him. The highest
title which he bears, *Eldest Son of the King*, does not anywhere appear
in these tombs. It is true that one of these contemporaries was
*hereditary chief*; but we know that Ptah-hotep was a common name at
this time, and in the absence of more certain proof it will be well to
abstain from the identification of like names upon insufficient grounds.

### THE INSTRUCTION OF PTAH-HOTEP (THE GOD PTAH IS SATISFIED)

The Instruction of the Governor of his City, the Vizier, Ptah-hotep, in
the Reign of King of Upper and Lower Egypt, Isosi, living forever, to
the end of Time.

A. The Governor of his City, the Vizier, Ptah-hotep,

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

he said: "O Prince my Lord, the end of life is at hand; old age
descendeth--upon me--; feebleness cometh, and childishness is renewed.
He--that is old--lieth down in misery every day. The eyes are small; the
ears are deaf. Energy is diminished, the heart hath no rest. The mouth
is silent, and he speaketh no word; the heart stoppeth, and he
remembereth not yesterday. The bones are painful throughout the body;
good turneth into evil. All taste departeth. These things doeth old age
for mankind, being evil in all things. The nose is stopped, and he
breatheth not for weakness (?), whether standing or sitting.

"Command thy servant, therefore, to make over my, princely authority--to
my son--. Let me speak unto him the words of them that hearken to the
counsel of the men of old time; those that once hearkened unto the gods.
I pray thee, let this thing be done, that sin may be banished from among
persons of understanding, that thou may enlighten the lands."

Said the Majesty of this God: <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5)
"Instruct him, then, in the words of old time; may he be a wonder unto
the children of princes, that they may enter and hearken with him. Make
straight all their

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

hearts; and discourse with him, without causing weariness."

B. Here begin the proverbs of fair speech, spoken by the Hereditary
Chief, the Holy Father, Beloved of the God, the Eldest Son of the King,
of his body, the Governor of his City, the Vizier, Ptah-hotep, when
instructing the ignorant in the knowledge of exactness in fair speaking;
the glory of him that obeyeth, the shame of him that transgresseth them.
He said unto his son:

1\. Be not proud because thou art learned; but discourse with the
ignorant man, as with the sage. For no limit can be set to skill,
neither is there any craftsman that possesseth full advantages. Fair
speech is more rare than the emerald that is found by slave-maidens on
the pebbles.

2\. If thou find an arguer talking, one that is well disposed and wiser
than thou, let thine arms fall, bend thy back, <span
id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6) be not angry with him if he agree (?) not
with thee. Refrain from speaking evilly; oppose him not at any time when
he speaketh. If he address thee as one ignorant of the matter, thine
humbleness shall bear away his contentions.

3\. If thou find an arguer talking, thy fellow,

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

one that is within thy reach, keep not silence when he saith aught that
is evil; so shalt thou be wiser than he. Great will be the applause on
the part of the listeners, and thy name shall be good in the knowledge
of princes.

4\. If thou find an arguer talking, a poor man, that is to say not thine
equal, be not scornful toward him because he is lowly. Let him alone;
then shall he confound himself. Question him not to please thine heart,
neither pour out thy wrath upon him that is before thee; it is shameful
to confuse a mean mind. If thou be about to do that which is in thine
heart, overcome it as a thing rejected of princes.

5\. If thou be a leader, as one directing the conduct of the multitude,
endeavor always to be gracious, that thine own conduct be without
defect. Great is Truth, appointing a straight path; never hath it been
overthrown since the reign of Osiris. <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7)
One that oversteppeth the laws shall be punished. Overstepping is by the
covetous man; but degradations (?) bear off his riches. Never hath
evil-doing, brought its venture safe to port. For he saith, "I will
obtain by myself for myself," and saith not, "I will obtain because I am
allowed." But the

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

limits of justice are steadfast; it is that which a man repeateth from
his father.

6\. Cause not fear among men; for--this--the God punisheth likewise. For
there is a man that saith, "Therein is life"; and he is bereft of the
bread of his mouth. There is a man that saith, "Power--is therein"; and
he saith, "I seize for myself that which I perceive." Thus a man
speaketh, and he is smitten down. It is another that attaineth by giving
unto him that hath not. Never hath that which men have prepared for come
to pass; for what the God hath commanded, even that thing cometh to
pass. Live, therefore, in the house of kindliness, and men shall come
and give gifts of themselves.

7\. If thou be among the guests of a man that is greater than thou,
accept that which he giveth thee, putting it to thy lips. If thou look
at him that is before thee--thine host--pierce him not with many
glances. It is abhorred of the soul <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8) to
stare at him. Speak not until he address thee; one knoweth not what may
be evil in his opinion. Speak when he questioneth thee; so shall thy
speech be good in his opinion. The noble who sitteth before food
divideth it as his soul moveth him; he giveth unto

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

him that he would favour--it is the custom of the evening meal. It is
his soul that guideth his hand. It is the noble that bestoweth, not the
underling that attaineth. Thus the eating of bread is under the
providence of the God; he is an ignorant man that disputeth it.

8\. If thou be an emissary sent from one noble to another, be exact
after the manner of him that sent thee, give his message even as he hath
said it. Beware of making enmity by thy words, setting one noble against
the other by perverting truth. Overstep it not, neither repeat that
which any man, be he prince or peasant, saith in opening the heart; it
is abhorrent to the soul.

9\. If thou have ploughed, gather thine harvest in the field, and the
God shall make it great under thine hand. Fill not thy mouth at any
neighbor's table . . . <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9) If a crafty man
be the possessor of wealth, he stealeth like a crocodile from the
priests.

Let not a man be envious that hath no children; let him be neither
downcast nor quarrelsome on account of it. For a father, though great,
may be grieved; as to the mother of children, she hath less peace than
another. Verily, each man is created--

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

to his destiny--by the God, who is the chief of a tribe, trustful in
following him.

10\. If thou be lowly, serve a wise man, that all thine actions may be
good before the God. If thou have known a man of none account that hath
been advanced in rank, be not haughty toward him on account of that
which thou knowest concerning him; but honour him that hath been
advanced, according to that which he hath become.

Behold, riches come not of themselves; it is their rule for him that
desireth them. If he bestir him and collect them himself, the God shall
make him prosperous; but He shall punish him, if he be slothful.

11\. Follow thine heart during thy lifetime; do not more than is
commanded thee. Diminish not the time of following the heart; it is
abhorred of the soul, that its time--of ease--be taken away. Shorten not
the daytime more than is needful to maintain thy house. When riches are
gained, follow the heart; for riches are of no avail if one be weary.

12\. If thou wouldest be a wise man, beget a son for the pleasing of the
God. If he make straight his course after thine example, if he arrange
thine affairs in due order, do unto him all that is good,

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

for thy son is he, begotten of thine own soul. Sunder not thine heart
from him, or thine own begotten shall curse--thee--. If he be heedless
and trespass thy rules of conduct, and is violent; if every speech that
cometh from his mouth be a vile word; then beat thou him, that his talk
may be fitting. Keep him from those that make light of that which is
commanded, for it is they that make him rebellious. And they that are
guided go not astray, but they that lose their bearings cannot find a
straight course.

13\. If thou be in the chamber of council, act always according to the
steps enjoined on thee at the beginning of the day. Be not absent, or
thou shalt be expelled; but be ready in entering and making report.
Wide <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10) is the seat of one that hath
made address. The council chamber acteth by strict rule; and all its
plans are in accordance with method. It is the God that advanceth one to
a seat therein; the like is not done for elbowers.

14\. If thou be among people, make for thyself love, the beginning and
end of the heart. One that knoweth not his course shall say in
himself--seeing thee--, "He that ordereth himself duly becometh the
owner of wealth; I shall copy his conduct."

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Thy name shall be good, though thou speak not;
thy body shall be fed; thy face shall be--seen--among thy neighbors;
thou shalt be provided with what thou lackest. As to the man whose heart
obeyeth his belly, he causeth disgust in place of love. His heart is
wretched (?), his body is gross (?), he is insolent toward those endowed
of the God. He that obeyeth his belly hath an enemy. <span
id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11)

15\. Report thine actions without concealment; discover thy conduct when
in council with thine overlord. It is not evil for the envoy that his
report be not answered. "Yea, I know it," by the prince; for that which
he knoweth includeth not--this. If he--the prince--think that he will
oppose him on account of it,--he thinketh--"He will be silent because I
have spoken." <span id="fr_12"></span>[2](#fn_12)

16\. If thou be a leader, cause that the rules that thou hast enjoined
be carried out; and do all things as one that remembereth the days
coming after, when speech availeth not. Be not lavish of favours; it
leadeth to servility (?), producing slackness.

17\. If thou be a leader, be gracious when thou hearkenest unto the
speech of a suppliant. Let

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

him not hesitate to deliver himself of that which he hath thought to
tell thee; but be desirous of removing his injury. Let him speak freely,
that the thing for which he hath come to thee may be done. If he
[hesitate](errata.htm#4) to open his heart, it is said, "Is it because
he--the judge--doeth the wrong that no entreaties are made to him
concerning it by those to whom it happeneth?" But a well taught heart
hearkeneth readily.

18\. If thou desire to continue friendship in any abode wherein thou
interest, be it as master, as brother, or as friend; wheresoever thou
goest, beware of consorting with women. No place prospereth wherein that
is done. Nor is it prudent to take part in it; a thousand men have been
ruined for the pleasure of a little time short as a dream. Even death is
reached thereby; it is a wretched thing. As for the evil liver, one
leaveth him for what he doeth, he is avoided. If his desires be not
gratified, he regardeth (?) no laws.

19\. If thou desire that thine actions may be good, save thyself from
all malice, and beware of the quality of covetousness, which is a
grievous inner (?) Malady. Let it not chance that thou fall thereinto.
It setteth at variance fathers-in-law and the kinsmen of the
daughter-in-law; it sundereth

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

the wife and the husband. It gathereth unto itself all evils; it is the
girdle of all wickedness. <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13) But the
man that is just flourisheth; truth goes in his footsteps, and he maketh
habitations therein, not in the dwelling of covetousness.

20\. Be not covetous as touching shares, in seizing that which is not
thine own property. Be not covetous toward thy neighbors; for with a
gentleman praise availeth more than might. He--that is covetous--cometh
empty from among his neighbours, being void of the persuasion of speech.
One hath remorse for even a little covetousness when his belly cooleth.

21\. If thou wouldest be wise, provide for thine house, and love thy
wife that is in thine arms. Fill her stomach, clothe her back; oil is
the remedy of her limbs. Gladden her heart during thy lifetime, for she
is an estate profitable unto its lord. Be not harsh, for gentleness
mastereth her more than strength. Give (?) to her that for which she
sigheth and that toward which her eye looketh; so shall thou keep her in
thy house. . . .

22\. Satisfy thine hired servants out of such things as thou hast; it is
the duty of one that hath been favoured of the God. In sooth, it is hard
to

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

satisfy hired servants. For one <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14)
saith, 'He is a lavish person; one knoweth not that which may come--from
him." But on the morrow he thinketh, 'We is a person of
exactitude--parsimony--content therein." And when favours have been
shown unto servants, they say, "We go." Peace dwelleth not in that town
wherein dwell servants that are wretched.

23\. Repeat not extravagant speech, neither listen thereto; for it is
the utterance of a body heated by wrath. When such speech is repeated to
thee, hearken not thereto, look to the ground. Speak not regarding it,
that he that is before thee may know wisdom. If thou be commanded to do
a theft, bring it to pass that the command be taken off thee, for it is
a thing hateful according to law. That which destroyeth a vision is the
veil over it.

24\. If thou wouldest be a wise man, and one sitting in council with his
overlord, apply thine heart unto perfection. Silence is more profitable
unto thee than abundance of speech. Consider how thou may be opposed by
an expert that speaketh in council. It is a foolish thing to speak on
every kind of work, for he that disputeth thy words shall put them unto
proof.

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

25\. If thou be powerful, make thyself to be honoured for knowledge and
for gentleness. Speak with authority, that is, not as if following
injunctions, for he that is humble--when highly placed--falleth into
errors. Exalt not thine heart, that it be not brought low. Be not
silent, but beware of interruption and of answering words with heat. Put
it far from thee; control thyself. The wrathful heart speaketh fiery
words; it darteth out at the man of peace that approacheth, stopping his
path.

One that reckoneth accounts all the day passeth not an happy moment. One
that gladdeneth his heart all the day provideth not for his house. The
bowman hitteth the mark, as the steersman reacheth land, by diversity of
aim. He that obeyeth his heart shall command. <span
id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15)

26\. Let not a prince be hindered when he is occupied; neither oppress
the heart of him that is already laden. For he shall be hostile toward
one that delayeth him, but shall bare his soul unto one that loveth him.
The disposal of souls is with the God, and that which He loveth is His
creation. Set out, therefore, after a violent quarrel; be at

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

peace with him that is hostile unto--thee--his opponent. It is such
souls that make love to grow.

27\. Instruct a noble in such things as be profitable unto him; cause
that he be received among men. Let his satisfaction fall on his master,
for thy provision dependeth upon his will. By reason of it thy belly
shall be satisfied; thy back will be clothed thereby. Let him receive
thine heart, that thine house may flourish and thine honour--if thou
wish it to flourish--thereby. He shall extend thee a kindly hand.
Further, he shall implant the love of thee in the bodies of thy friends.
Forsooth, it is a soul loving to hearken. <span
id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16)

28\. If thou be the son of a man of the priesthood, and an envoy to
conciliate the multitude. . . . <span id="fr_17"></span>[2](#fn_17)
speak thou without favouring one side. Let it not be said: "His conduct
is that of the nobles, favouring one side in his speech." Turn thine aim
toward exact judgments.

29\. If thou have been gracious at a former time, having forgiven a man
to guide him aright, shun him, remind him not after the first day that
he hath been silent to thee---concerning it.

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

30\. If thou be great, after being of none account, and hast gotten
riches after squalour, being foremost in these in the city, and hast
knowledge concerning useful matters, so that promotion is come unto
thee; then swathe not thine heart in thine hoard, for thou art become
the steward of the endowments of the God. Thou art not the last; another
shall be thine equal, and to him shall come the like-fortune and
station.

31\. Bend thy back unto thy chief, thine overseer in the King's palace,
for thine house dependeth upon his wealth, and thy wages in their
season. How foolish is one that quarrelleth with his chief, for one
liveth only while he is gracious. . . .

Plunder not the houses of tenants; neither steal the things of a friend,
lest he accuse thee in thine bearing, which thrusteth back the
heart. <span id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18) If he know of it, he will do
thee an injury. Quarrelling in place of friendship is a foolish thing.

32\. --Concerning unnatural sin.

33\. If thou wouldest seek out the nature of a friend, ask it not of any
companion of his; but pass a time with him alone, that thou injure not
his affairs. Debate with him after a season; test his

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

heart in an occasion of speech. When he hath told thee his past life, he
hath made an opportunity that thou may either be ashamed for him or be
familiar with him. Be not reserved with him when he openeth speech,
neither answer him after a scornful manner. Withdraw not thyself from
him, neither interrupt (?) him whose matter is not yet ended, whom it is
possible to benefit.

34\. Let thy face be bright what time thou livest. That which goeth into
the storehouse must come out therefrom; and bread is to be shared. He
that is grasping in entertainment shall himself have an empty belly; he
that causeth strife cometh himself to sorrow. Take not such an one for
thy companion. It is a man's kindly acts that are remembered of him in
the years after his life. <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19)

35\. Know well thy merchants; for when thine affairs are in evil case,
thy good repute among thy friends is a channel (?) which is filled. It
is more important than the dignities of a man; and the wealth of one
passeth to another. The good repute of a man's son is a glory unto him;
and a good character is for remembrance.

36\. Correct chiefly; instruct conformably--therewith. Vice must be
drawn out that virtue

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

may remain. Nor is this a matter of misfortune, for one that is a
gainsayer becometh a strifemaker.

37\. If thou make a woman to be ashamed, wanton of heart, not known by
her townfolk, to be falsely placed, be kind unto her for a space, send
her not away, give her to eat. The wantonness of her heart shall esteem
thy guidance.

C. If thou obey these things that I have said unto thee, all thy
demeanour shall be of the best; for verily, the quality of truth is
among their excellences. Set the memory of them in the mouths of the
people; for their proverbs are good. Nor shall any word that hath here
been set down cease out of this land for ever, but shall be made a
pattern whereby princes shall speak well. They--my words--shall instruct
a man how he shall speak, after he hath heard them; yea, he shall become
as one skillful in obeying, excellent in speaking, after he hath heard
them. Good fortune shall befall him, for he shall be of the highest
rank. He shall be gracious to the end of his life; he shall be contented
always. His knowledge shall be his guide (?) into a place of security,
wherein he shall prosper while on earth. The scholar <span
id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20) shall be content in his knowledge. As to
the prince, in his turn,

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

forsooth, his heart shall be happy, his tongue made straight. And--in
these proverbs--his lips shall speak, his eyes shall see, and his ears
shall hear, that which is profitable for his son, so that he deal
justly, void of deceit.

38\. A splendid thing is the obedience of an obedient son; he cometh in
and listeneth obediently.

Excellent in hearing, excellent in speaking, is every man that obeyeth
what is noble, and the obedience of an obeyer is a noble thing.

Obedience is better than all things that are; it maketh good-will.

How good it is that a son should take that from his father by which he
hath reached old age--obedience.

That which is desired by the God is obedience; disobedience is abhorred
of the God.

Verily, it is the heart that maketh its master to obey or to disobey;
for the safe and sound life of a man are his heart.

It is the obedient man that obeyeth what is said; he that loveth to
obey, the same shall carry out commands.

He that obeyeth becometh one obeyed.

It is good indeed when a son obeyeth his father; and he-his father-that
hath spoken hath great

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

joy of it. Such a son shall be mild as a master, and he that heareth him
shall obey him that hath spoken. He shall be comely in body and honoured
by his father. His memory shall be in the mouths of the living, those
upon earth, as long as they exist. <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21)

39\. Let a son receive the word of his father, not being heedless of any
rule of his. Instruct thy son--thus;--for the obedient man is one that
is perfect in the opinion of princes. If he direct his mouth by what
hath been enjoined him. watchful and obedient, thy son shall be wise,
and his going seemly. Heedlessness leadeth into disobedience on the
morrow; but understanding shall establish him. As for the fool, he shall
be crushed.

40\. As for the fool, devoid of obedience, he doeth nothing. Knowledge
he regardeth as ignorance. profitable things are hurtful things. He
doeth all kinds of errors, so that he is rebuked therefor every day. He
liveth in death therewith; it is his food. At chattering speech he
marvelleth, as at the wisdom of princes, living in death every

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

day. He is shunned because of his misfortunes, by reason of the
multitude of afflictions that cometh upon \]him every day.

41\. A son that hearkeneth is as a Follower of Horus. <span
id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22) He is good after he hearkeneth; he groweth
old, he reacheth honour and reverence. He repeated in like manner to his
sons and daughters, so renewing the instruction of his father. Each man
instructeth as did his begetter, repeating it unto his children. Let
them--in turn--speak with their sons and daughters, that they may be
famous in their deeds. Let that which thou speaketh implant true things
and just in the life of thy children. Then the highest authority shall
arrive, and sins depart--from them. And such men as see these things
shall say, "Surely that man hath spoken to good purpose," and they shall
do likewise; or, "But surely that man was experienced." And all people
shall declare, "It is they that shall direct the multitude; dignities
are not complete without them."

Take not my word away, neither add one; set

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

not one in the place of another. Beware of opening . . . <span
id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23) in thyself.

Be wary of speech when a learned man hearkeneth unto thee; desire to be
established for good in the mouth of those that hear thee speaking. If
thou have entered as an expert, speak with exact (?) lips, that thy
conduct may be seemly.

42\. Be thine heart overflowing; but refrain thy mouth. Let thy conduct
be exact while amongst nobles, and seemly before thy lord, doing that
which he hath commanded. Such a son shall speak unto them that hearken
to him; moreover, his begetter shall be favoured. Apply thine heart,
what time thou speakest, to saying things such that the nobles who
listen declare, "How excellent is that which cometh out of his mouth!"

43\. Carry out the behest of thy lord to thee. How good is the teaching
of a man's father, for he hath come from him, who hath spoken of his son
while he was yet unborn; and that which is done for him--the son--is
more than that which is commanded him. Forsooth, a good son is of the
gift of the God; he doeth more than is enjoined on

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

him, he doeth right, and putteth his heart into all his goings.

D. If now thou attain thy position, the body shall flourish, the King
shall be content in all that thou doest, and thou shalt gather years of
life not fewer than I have passed upon earth. I have gathered even
fivescore and ten years of life, for the King hath bestowed upon me
favours more than upon my forefathers; this because I wrought truth and
justice for the King unto mine old age.

              It Is Finished  
From Its Beginning To Its End  
Even As Found In Writing.

 

### THE INSTRUCTION OF KE'GEMNI (KE'GEMNI--I HAVE FOUND A SOUL)

1\. The cautious man flourisheth, the exact one is praised; the
innermost chamber openeth unto the man of silence. Wide <span
id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24) is the seat of the man gentle of speech;
but knives are prepared against one that forceth a path, that he advance
not, save in due season.

2\. If thou sit with a company of people, desire not the bread that thou
likest; short is the time of restraining the heart, and gluttony is an
abomination;

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

therein is the quality of a beast. A handful of water quencheth the
thirst, and a mouthful of melon supporteth the heart. A good thing
standeth for goodness, but some small thing standeth for plenty. <span
id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25) A base man is he that is governed by his
belly; he departeth only when he is no longer able to fill full his
belly in men's houses.

3\. If thou sit with a glutton, eat with him, then depart (?).

If thou drink with a drunkard, accept--drink--and his heart shall be
satisfied.

Refuse not meat when with a greedy man. Take that which he giveth thee;
set it not on one side, thinking that it will be a courteous thing.

4\. If a man be lacking in good fellowship, no speech hath any influence
over him. He is sour of face toward the glad-hearted that are kindly to
him; he is a grief unto his mother and his friends; and all men--cry--,
"Let thy name be known; thou art silent in thy mouth when thou art
addressed!"

5\. Be not haughty because of thy might in the

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

midst of thy young soldiers. Beware of making strife, for one knoweth
not the things that the God will do when He punisheth.

The Vizier caused his sons and daughters to be summoned, when he had
finished the rules of the conduct of men. And they marvelled when they
came to him. Then he said unto them, "Hearken unto everything that is in
writing in this book, even as I have said it in adding unto profitable
sayings." And they cast themselves on their bellies, and they read it,
even as it was in writing. And it was better in their opinion than
anything in this land unto its limits.

Now they were living when His Majesty, the King of upper and lower
Egypt, *Heuni*, departed, and His Majesty, the King of upper and lower
Egypt, *Senforu*, was enthroned as a gracious king over the whole of
this land.

Then was Ke'gemni made Governor of his city and Vizier.

### THE INSTRUCTIONS OF AMENEMHE'ET (THE GOD AMON IS FIRST)

Beginneth here the Instruction made by the majesty of the King of upper
and lower Egypt, Sehotep'eb-Re, son of the Sun, *Amenemhe'et*, the

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

Justified. <span id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26) He speaketh thus in
discovering words of truth unto his son, the Lord of the World:

1\. Shine forth, he saith, even as the God. Hearken to that which I say
unto thee; that thou may reign over the land, that thou may govern the
world, that thou may excel in goodness.

2\. Let one withdraw himself from his subordinates entirely. It
befalleth that mankind give their hearts unto one that causeth them
fear. Mix not among them alone; fill not thine heart with a brother;
know not a trusted friend; make for thyself no familiar dependents; in
these things is no satisfaction.

3\. When thou liest down have a care for thy  <span
id="fr_27"></span>[2](#fn_27) very life, since friends exist not for a
man in the day of misfortunes. I gave to the beggar, and caused the
orphan to live; I made him that had not to attain, even as he that had.

4\. But it was the eater of my food that made insurrection against me;
to whom I gave mine hands, he created disturbance thereby; they that
arrayed them in my fine linen regarded me as a

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

shadow; and it was they that anointed themselves with my spices that
entered my harem.

5\. My images are among the living; and my achievements are among men.
But I have made an heroic story that hath not been heard; a great feat
of arms that hath not been seen. Surely one fighteth for a lassoed ox
that forgetteth yesterday; <span id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28) and good
fortune is of no avail unto one that cannot perceive it.

6\. It was after the evening meal, and night was come. I took for myself
an hour of ease. I lay down upon my bed, for I was weary. My heart began
to wander (?). I slept. And lo! weapons were brandished, and there was
conference concerning me. I acted as the serpent of the desert. <span
id="fr_29"></span>[2](#fn_29)

7\. I awoke to fight; I was alone. I found one struck down, it was the
captain of the guard. Had I received quickly the arms from his hand, I
had driven back the dastards by smiting around. But he was not a brave
man on that night, nor could I fight alone; an occasion of prowess
cometh not to one surprised. Thus was I.

8\. Behold, then, vile things came to pass, for

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

\[paragraph continues\] I was without thee; the courtiers knew not that
I had passed on to thee--my power. I sat not with thee on the
throne. <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30) Let me then, make my plans.
Because I awed them not I was not unmindful of them; but mine heart
bringeth not to remembrance the slackness of servants.

9\. Have ever women gathered together assailants? Are assassins reared
within my palace? Was the opening done by cutting through the ground?
The underlings were deceived as to what they did. <span
id="fr_31"></span>[2](#fn_31) But misfortunes have not come in my train
since my birth; nor hath there existed the equal of me as a doer of
valiance.

10\. I forced my way up to Elephantine, I went down unto the
coast-lakes; <span id="fr_32"></span>[3](#fn_32) I have stood upon the
boundaries of the land, and I have seen its centre. I have set the
limits of might by my might in my deeds.

11\. I raised corn, I loved Nopi; <span id="fr_33"></span>[4](#fn_33)
the Nile begged of me every valley. In my reign none hungered; none
thirsted therein. They were contented in that which I did, saying
concerning me, "Every commandment is meet."

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

12\. I overcame lions; I carried off crocodiles. I cast the Nubians
under my feet; I carried off the southern Nubians; I caused the Asiatics
to flee, even as hounds.

13\. I have made me an house, adorned with gold, its ceilings with lapis
lazuli, its walls having deep foundations. Its doors are of copper,
their bolts are of bronze. It is made for everlasting; eternity is in
awe of it. I know every dimension thereof, O Lord of the World!

14\. There are divers devices in buildings. I know the pronouncements of
men when inquiring into its beauties; but they know not that it was
without thee, O my Son, Senwesert; life, safe and sound, be to thee--by
thy feet do I walk; thou art after mine own heart; by thine eyes do I
see; born in an hour of delight; with spirits <span
id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34) that rendered thee praise.

15\. Behold, that which I have done at the [beginning](errata.htm#5),
let me set it in order for thee at the end; let me be the landing-place
of that which is in thine heart. All men together set the White Crown on
the Offspring of the God. fixing it unto its due place. I shall begin
thy praises when in the Boat of Ra. Thy kingdom hath been from primeval

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

time; not by my doing, who have done valiant things. Raise up monuments,
make beautiful thy tomb. I have fought against him whom thou knowest;
for I desire not that he should be beside thy Majesty. Life safe and
sound, be to thee.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[94:1](woe05.htm#fr_3) The monuments leave no
doubt of this. Pen and ink were used in the First Dynasty, and speech
had been reduced to visible signs before that.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[94:2](woe05.htm#fr_4) About B.C. 4770. In all
Egyptian dates given in this book I follow Professor Petrie's
chronology.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[97:1](woe05.htm#fr_5) The King.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[98:1](woe05.htm#fr_6) The customary attitude of
a submissive inferior at that time.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[99:1](woe05.htm#fr_7) The god Osiris was
believed to have reigned on earth many thousand years before
[Menes](errata.htm#3), the first historical king.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[100:1](woe05.htm#fr_8) soul--Ka'.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[101:1](woe05.htm#fr_9) An obscure or corrupt
phrase here follows, which does not admit of satisfactory translation.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[103:1](woe05.htm#fr_10) I.e., comfortable.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[104:1](woe05.htm#fr_11) His belly, presumably.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[104:2](woe05.htm#fr_12) The above translation
is not satisfactory; the text may be corrupt. No intelligible
translation of it has yet been made.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[106:1](woe05.htm#fr_13) I.e.., all wickedness
is contained therein.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[107:1](woe05.htm#fr_14) A servant.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[108:1](woe05.htm#fr_15) So also in life, by
diversity of aim, alternating work and play, happiness is secured.
Tacking is evidently meant in the case of the steersman.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[109:1](woe05.htm#fr_16) This section refers to
the relations between the son of a nobleman and his tutor, dwelling on
the benefits from former pupils in high places, if their school days
have been pleasant.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[109:2](woe05.htm#fr_17) An obscure phrase.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[110:1](woe05.htm#fr_18) Literally, "It is that
which preventeth the heart from advancing (?)" A curious phrase.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[111:1](woe05.htm#fr_19) Literally, after his
stick or sceptre.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[112:1](woe05.htm#fr_20) Who knows them.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[114:1](woe05.htm#fr_21) The greater part of
this section is a play upon the root sodem, which in its meaning
includes our hear--listen--and obey. This tiresome torture of words is
frequent in Egyptian, especially in old religious texts.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[115:1](woe05.htm#fr_22) The "Followers of
Horns" are a legendary dynasty of demigods, believed by the Egyptians to
have ruled for about 13,400 years after the reign of Horus, and before
that of Menes. There is also an order of spirits by this name.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[116:1](woe05.htm#fr_23) A word of unknown
meaning; apparently some kind of plant. Such a word seems out of place
here, and may be idiomatic, like our "flowery language." But the
preceding line obviously refers to this book.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[117:1](woe05.htm#fr_24) Comfortable.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[118:1](woe05.htm#fr_25) This is a rather dark
saying, but apparently the author means that although the duly
instructed guest may only partake moderately of the abundance before
him, what he cats is as good as the rest. His portion will be equal to
the whole as regards quality, though inferior as regards quantity.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[120:1](woe05.htm#fr_26) A ceremonial title
applied to deceased persons, analogous to our "the late." "Justified" is
not an exact rendering, but it is usual, and will serve.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[120:2](woe05.htm#fr_27) Literally, heart.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[121:1](woe05.htm#fr_28) An allusion to the
people of Egypt, whom he had freed from the foreign oppressors.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[121:2](woe05.htm#fr_29) He remained quiet but
watchful.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[122:1](woe05.htm#fr_30) Referring to the
co-regency with his son.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[122:2](woe05.htm#fr_31) Referring to the
attempted assassination.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[122:3](woe05.htm#fr_32) The limits, south and
north, of his Kingdom.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[122:4](woe05.htm#fr_33) The god of corn.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[123:1](woe05.htm#fr_34) Or, unborn souls.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV: The Book of the Dead](woe06)
