[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](woe00)  [Next](woe02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

# INTRODUCTION

IN ancient times the land that is now called Egypt was called by the
people, then inhabiting that part of Africa, "Kam," a word that means
"black" or "dark-colored" and referred to the dark color of the muddy
soil in their land. To the Hebrews this name was known as "Khám" or
"Ham" and in the Bible the Egyptians are referred to as "Sons of Ham" or
"Children of Ham."

These people had a God called "Ptah" to whom they raised a temple--the
temple was called "He-Ka-ptah" or House of "Ka"--of "Ptah." This name,
that was in the beginning confined to "Memphis," gradually spread to
other parts of the Nile Valley, and by degrees the whole country became
known as "HeKapath," to other people with whom these people had contact.

The Greeks changed the name into "Aiguptos" and the Romans changed it
into "Aegyptus," so from these names we get the name in its present
form--"Egypt,"

To what race do the Egyptians belong? On this

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

subject Prof. James Breasted in his "History of Egypt" writes the
following:

"On the now bare and windswept desert plateau, through which the Nile
has hollowed its channel, there once dwelt a race of men. Plenteous
rains, now no longer known there, rendered it a fertile and productive
region. The geological changes which have since made the country almost
rainless, denuded it of vegetation and soil, and made it for the most
part uninhabitable, took place many thousands of years before the
beginning of the Egyptian civilization, which we are to study; but the
prehistoric race, who before these changes peopled the plateau, left
behind them as the sole memorial of their existence vast numbers of rude
flint implements, now lying scattered about the surface of the present
desert exposed by denudation.

"These men of the paleolithic age were the first inhabitants of whom we
have any knowledge in Egypt. They cannot be connected in any way with
the historic or prehistoric civilization of the Egyptians and they fall
exclusively within the province of the geologist and anthropologist. The
forefathers of the people with whom we shall have to deal were related
to the Libyans or North Africans on the one hand, and on the other to
the peoples

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

of eastern Africa, now known as the Galla, Somali, Bega and other
tribes.

"An invasion of the Nile Valley by Semitic Nomads of Asia, stamped its
essential character unmistakably upon the language of the African people
there. The earliest strata of the language accessible to us, betray
clearly this composite origin. While still colored by its African
antecedents, the language is in structure Semitic. It is moreover a
completed product as observable in our earliest preserved examples of
it; but the fusion of the Libyans and East Africans with the Nile Valley
peoples continued far into historic times, and in the case of the
Libyans may be traced in ancient historical documents for three thousand
years or more.

"The Semitic immigration from Asia, examples of which are also
observable in the historic age, occurred in an epoch that lies far below
our remotest historical horizon. We shall never be able to determine
when, nor with certainty through what channels, it took place, although
the most probable route is that along which we may observe a similar
influx from the deserts of Arabia in historic times, the isthmus of
Suez, by which the Mohammedan invasion entered the country.

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

"While the Semitic language which they brought with them left its
indelible impress upon the old Nile Valley people, the nomadic life of
the desert which the invaders left behind them, evidently was not so
persistent, and the religion of Egypt, that element of life which always
receives the stamp of its environment, shows no trace of the desert
life. The affinities observable in the language are confirmed in case of
the Libyans, by the surviving products of archaic civilization in the
Nile Valley such as some of the early pottery, which closely resembles
that still made by the Libyan Kabyles. Again the representations of the
early Puntites, or Somali people, on the Egyptian monuments, show
striking resemblances to the Egyptians themselves. The examination of
the bodies exhumed from archaic burials in the Nile Valley, which we had
hoped might bring further evidence f or the settlement of the problem,
has, however, produced such diversity of opinion among the physical
anthropologists, as to render it impossible for the historian to obtain
decisive results from their researches. The conclusion once maintained
by some historians, that the Egyptian was of African negro origin is now
refuted; and evidently indicated that at most he may have been slightly
tinctured with negro

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

blood, in addition to other ethnic elements already mentioned."

### THE EGYPTIAN RELIGION

If we were called upon to characterize the Egyptian religion in a few
words, we should call it, both as a system and as a cult, an almost
monarchical polytheism in a theocratic form. The Egyptian polytheism was
not purely monarchical, for there were several divine monarchies; and
only by the somewhat arbitrary doctrine that all the chief gods were in
reality the same under different names, could the semblance of monarchy
be maintained. But this religion was undoubtedly theocratic in the
strictest sense of the word. The divinity himself reigned through his
son, the absolute king, his incarnation and representative on earth. The
priesthood of Amon, strengthened by its victory over the heretic, and by
the measureless wealth which the munificence of successful conquerors
poured into its lap, had attained the most tremendous power in the
state; and when, after a long time, its members had reduced the king to
weak tools in their hands, and succeeded at last in usurping the throne
itself, the theocracy was altered in form only, but not in its essence.
The place of the king

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

highpriest was taken by the highpriest-king. But even this change was of
short duration. Against another power no less favored by the kings of
the new empire, the power of the army (composed for the greater part of
hired foreign troops), the priestly princes proved unable to keep their
ground. They had to leave the country, and in Ethiopia they founded a
new sacerdotal kingdom. Still the rule of the kings, who sprang from
this military revolution, was purely theocratic.

But this only characterizes the form of the Egyptian religion. If we
search for the leading thought, contained in all its myths and symbols,
and in all its institutions and ceremonies, it may best be comprised in
the word "life." The sign of life (ankh) is the holiest and the most
commonly used of all the symbols. The gods bear it in their hands, hold
it to the lips of their worshippers, and pour it out in streams over the
heads of their favorites. For they actually give life, now by the light
which they continually cause to triumph over the powers of darkness,
again by the regular recurrence of the fructifying waters, or by
mysterious operations in the centre of the earth. And hence they set
such store on the possession of the lawful king. He, the son of the sun,
was the living pledge that these

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

blessings should not cease. His coronation was an agricultural festival,
the beginning of the harvest; his greatest care was to spread the waters
of the Nile through canals as far as possible over the fields. From this
arose also their great fear of death and eternal darkness, and the
efforts and sacrifices which they made to secure an eternal existence,
either in the fertile land of Osiris, or as a follower of the god of
light, and, as it is put, "to obtain the crown of life."

Entirely swayed by these ideas, the Egyptian, although his religious
thinking did not stand still, clung to the existing state of things; he
did not relinquish what was old. He may have connected different ideas
with it; but the holy texts which he muttered during the Ptolemean era
were often the same as those his ancestors had uttered at the altars and
the tombs more than thirty centuries ago. The nature of the land which
bore and fed him had imprinted a peculiar stamp on his religion.
Moreover, his religion became to him more and more the only thing of
supreme value. Treasures, the fruits of his industry, and all the skill
which was the product of his remarkable civilization, he spent on the
building and the decorating of his tombs and temples. Those of Amon at
Thebes gradually

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

became the largest in the world. His whole literature, even that which
was not destined for a religious purpose, is, with a few exceptions,
saturated by a religious spirit.

Many of the virtues which we are apt to suppose a monopoly of Christian
culture appear as the ideal of these old Egyptians. Brugsch says a
thousand voices from the tombs of Egypt declare this. One inscription in
upper Egypt says: "He loved his father, he honored his mother, he loved
his brethren, and never went from his home in bad-temper. He never
preferred the great man to the low one." Another says: "I was a wise
man, my soul loved God. I was a brother to the great men and a father to
the humble ones, and never was a mischief-maker." An inscription at
Sais, on a priest who lived in the sad days of Camybses, says, "I
honored my father, I esteemed my mother, I loved my brothers. I found
graves for the unburied dead. I instructed little children. I took care
of orphans as though they were my own children. For great misfortunes
were on Egypt in my time, and on this city of Sais."

In speaking of the ancient books of Egyptian wisdom--the "Ptah-Hotep"
and the "Ke-Gemni," Dr. Battiscombe Gunn says: "Nor do the oldest

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

books of any other country approach these two in antiquity. To draw
comparisons between them let us, in imagination, place ourselves at the
period at which Ptah-hotep lived, that is, about B.C. 3550, under King
Isôsi, and take a glance at futurity.

"The Babylonians are doubtless exercising their literary talents; but
they will leave nothing worthy the name of book to the far posterity of
fifty-four centuries hence. Thirteen centuries shall pass before
Hammurabi, king of Babylon, drafts the code of laws that will be found
at that time. Only after two thousand years shall Moses write on the
origin of things, and the Vedas be arranged in their present form. It
will be two-and-a-half thousand years before the great king of Jerusalem
will set in order many proverbs and write books so much resembling, in
form and style, that of Ptah-hotep; before the source and summit of
European literature will write his world epics. For the space of years
between Solomon and ourselves, great though it seem, is not so great as
that between Solomon and Ptah-hotep."

Dr. Wallis Budge sums up the Egyptian character thus: "A good general
idea of the average Egyptian can be derived from the monuments and
writings that have come down to us. In the first

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

place he was a very religious man. He worshipped God and his deified
ancestors, offered sacrifices and offerings to the dead, and prayed at
least twice daily, i.e., morning and evening. He believed in the
resurrection of the dead through Osiris, and in the life everlasting,
and was from first to last confident that those who had led righteous
lives on earth were rewarded with happiness and lived with Osiris in
heaven, and that the wicked on earth were punished with annihilation in
the next world. His deep-seated interest in religion had a very
practical object, namely, the resurrection of his spirit-body and his
soul's future happiness in heaven. His conscience was well developed and
made him obey religious, moral, and civil laws without question; a
breach of any of these he atoned for, not by repentance, for which there
is no word in his language, but by the making of offerings. In all
religious matters he was strongly conservative, and his conservatism led
him to hold at the same time beliefs that were not only inconsistent
with each other, but sometimes flatly contradictory. In reality his
religious books are filled with obsolete beliefs, many of which were
contradicted by his religious observances. He had a keen sense of humor
and was easily pleased. He loved eating and drinking,

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

music and dancing, festivals and processions, and display of all sorts
and kinds, and he enjoyed himself whenever an opportunity offered. Over
and over again the living are exhorted to eat and drink and enjoy
themselves. His morality was of the highest kind, and he thoroughly
understood his duty towards his neighbor. He was kindly and humane, he
fed the hungry, gave drink to the thirsty, lent a boat to the
shipwrecked man, protected the widows and orphans, and fed the starving
animals of the desert. He loved his village and his home and rejoiced
when he was 'loved by his father, praised by his mother, and beloved by
his brothers and sisters.' He was a hard worker, as the taxes wrung from
him by tax-gatherers and priests in all periods testify. He was
intensely superstitious, and was easily duped by the magician and
medicine man, who provided him with spells and incantations and amulets
of all kinds. He was slow to anger and disliked military service and
war. His idea of heaven was the possession of a homestead in a fertile
district, with streams of water and luxuriant crops of wheat, barley,
fruit, etc., wherein he would live a life of leisure surrounded by all
those whom he had known and loved upon earth. He had no wish to enlarge
the borders of Egypt, except for

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

the loot which raids brought in; he never sought to bestow the blessings
of Egyptian civilization upon other lands, and he never indulged in
missionary enterprises of any kind. His religious toleration was great.
He was content to serve God and Pharaoh, and he wished above all things
to be allowed to till his land and do his own business in his own way in
peace.

"The influence of his beliefs and religion, and literature, and arts and
crafts on the civilization of other nations can hardly be overestimated.
In one of the least known periods of the world's history he proclaimed
the deathlessness of the human soul, and his country has rightly been
named the 'land of immortality."'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](woe02)
