[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m15007.md) 
[Next](m15009.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION VIII

"Yudhishthira said, 'O lord of Earth, I shall do as thou biddest me. O
foremost of kings, I should be further instructed by thee. Bhishma has

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

ascended to Heaven. The slayer of Madhu has departed (for Dwaraka).
Vidura and Sanjaya also will accompany thee to the forest. Who else,
therefore, than thee will teach me? Those instructions which thou
imparted today, desirous of doing good to me, I shall certainly follow,
O lord of Earth. Be thou assured of this, O king.'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus addressed by king Yudhishthira the just,
of great intelligence, the royal sage, Dhritarashtra, O chief of the
Bharatas, wished to obtain the king's permission (about his retirement
to the forest). And he said, 'Cease, O son, great has been my toil.'
Having said these words, the old king entered the apartments of
Gandhari. Unto that husband of hers who resembled a second Lord of all
creatures, while resting on a seat, Gandhari of righteous conduct,
conversant with the opportuneness of everything, said these words, the
hour being suited to them,--'Thou hast obtained the permission of that
great Rishi, *viz.*, Vyasa himself. When, however, wilt thou go to the
forest, with the permission of Yudhishthira?'

"Dhritarashtra said, 'O Gandhari, I have received the permission of my
high-souled sire. With the permission of Yudhishthira (next obtained), I
shall soon retire into the woods. I desire, however, to give away some
wealth capable of following the status of *Preta*, in respect of all
those sons of mine who were addicted to calamitous dice. Verily, I
desire to make those gifts, inviting all the people to my
mansion.' <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25.md)

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Having said so (to Gandhari), Dhritarashtra
sent for Yudhishthira. The latter, at his uncle's command, brought all
the articles necessary. Many Brahmanas residing in Kuru-jangala, and
many Kshatriyas, many Vaisyas, and many Sudras also, came to
Dhritarashtra's mansion, with gratified hearts. The old king, coming out
of the inner apartments, beheld them all, as also his subjects assembled
together. Beholding all those assembled citizens and inhabitants of the
provinces, and his well-wishers also thus gathered together, and the
large number of Brahmanas arrived from diverge realms, king
Dhritarashtra of great intelligence, O monarch, said these words,--'Ye
all and the Kurus have lived together for many long years, well-wishers
of each other, and each employed in doing good to the other. What I
shall now say in view of the opportunity that has come, should be
accomplished by you all even as disciples accomplish the biddings of
their preceptors. I have set my heart upon retiring into the woods,
along with Gandhari as my companion. Vyasa has approved of this, as also
the son of Kunti. Let me have your permission too. Do not hesitate in
this. That goodwill, which has always existed between you and us, is not
to be seen, I believe, in other realms between the rulers and the ruled.
I am worn out with this load of years on my head. I am destitute of
children. Ye sinless ones, I am emaciated with fasts, along with
Gandhari. The kingdom having passed

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

to Yudhishthira, I have enjoyed great happiness. Ye foremost of men, I
think that happiness has been greater than what I could expect from
Duryodhana's sovereignty. What other refuge can I have, old as I am and
destitute of children, save the woods? Ye highly blessed ones, it
behoves you to grant me the permission I seek. Hearing these words of
his, all these residents of Kurujangala, uttered loud lamentations, O
best of the Bharatas, with voices choked with tears. Desirous of telling
those grief-stricken people something more, Dhritarashtra of great
energy, once more addressed them and said as follows.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_22"></span>[15:1](m15007.htm#fr_22.md) A *sakata* array was an
array after the form of a car. It is described in Sukraniti fully, and
occurs in the *Drona Parva*, *ante*. The *Padma* is a circular array
with angular projections. It is the same with what is now called the
starry with angular projections. It is the same what is now called the
starry array, many modern forts being constructed on this plan. The
*Vajra* is a wedge-like array. It penetrates into the enemy's divisions
like a wedge and goes out, routing the foe. It is otherwise called
*suchivyuha*.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[15:2](m15007.htm#fr_23.md) *i.e.*, meet the foe
whether within his own kingdom or invade the foe's realm and thus oblige
the foe to fall back for resisting him there.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[15:3](m15007.htm#fr_24.md) *i.e.*, for obtaining
fame here and felicity hereafter.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[16:1](m15008.htm#fr_25.md) Those who die become at
first what is called Preta. They remain so for one year, till the
*Sapindikarana Sraddha* is performed. They then become united with the
*Pitris*. The gifts made in the first Sraddha as also in the monthly
ones, have the virtue of rescuing the *Preta* or bringing him an
accession of merit. The gifts in annual Sraddhas also have the same
efficacy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section IX](m15009.md)
