[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hlov07)  [Next](hlov09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# III

### PELE AND THE OWL GHOST-GOD

MANY, many years after Pele's angry sister Na-maka-o-ka-hai had driven
her from the island Kauai and after the land had many dwellers therein,
a quarrel arose between two of the highest chiefs of the island. They
were named Koa and Kau. It did not become an open conflict immediately,
but Koa was filled with such deep hatred that he was ready to employ any
means to destroy his enemy.

There was a mighty Kupua, or dragon of the Pii family, at that time on
Kauai. These dragons had come, according to the legends, to the Hawaiian
Islands from the far-away lands of Kuai-he-lani, as attendants on the
first young chief Kahanai-a-ke-Akua (The-boy-brought-up-by-the-gods).
These dragons had the *mana*, or magic power of appearing as men or as
dragons according to their desire.

This dragon was named Pii-ka-lalau, or Pii,

{p. 15}

the one dwelling at Ka-lalau. He was supposed to be semi-divine. His
home was on the crest of an almost inaccessible precipice up which he
would rush with incredible speed. Koa, the angry chief, came to this
precipice and called Pii to come to him. There they plotted the death of
Kau, the enemy. Assuming the appearance of a splendidly formed young
man, Pii went down among the natives with Koa to watch for an
opportunity to seize Kau.

After a time Kau was lured to go at night to a house far from his own
home. As he entered the door he received a heavy blow which smashed the
bones of one shoulder and laid him prostrate. A great giant leaped out,
thrusting an enormous spear at him. Kau was one of the most skilful of
all chiefs in what was known as "spear practice." He avoided the thrusts
and leaped to his feet. He had a wooden dagger as his only weapon, but
could not get near enough to the giant to use it.

Just as he was becoming too weary to move, his wife, who had followed
him, hurled rocks, striking the giant's face, then seizing her husband
fled with him homeward.

There followed a great battle in which Pii attacked all the warriors
belonging to the wounded chief. The legends say that "this giant was
twelve feet high, he had eyes as large

{p. 16}

as a man's fist, and an immense mouth full of tusks like those of a wild
hog. His legs were as large- as trees, and his weight was such that
wherever he stepped there were great holes in the ground."

The warriors fled as this mighty giant charged upon them. Suddenly they
stopped and rushed back. Their chief's wife had caught an ikoi, a heavy
piece of wood fastened to a long, stout cord. This she hurled so that it
twisted around him and bound his arms to his sides. Stones and spears
beat upon him, but he broke the coco-fibre cords of the ikoi and again
drove the warriors before him, trying to gain the house where the
wounded chief Kau was lying.

There was an old prophetess who had rushed to the side of her master
when he was brought to his home. She was one of the worshippers of Pele,
the fire-goddess of the island Hawaii. Powerful were her prayers and
incantations.

Soon out of the clear sky above the conflict appeared Pele hurling a
fierce bolt of lightning at the giant. It struck the ground at his feet,
almost overthrowing him. A second flash of lightning blinded and stunned
him.

It was a curious element of old Hawaiian belief, but they did believe
that demi-gods and supernatural beings had au-makuas, or ghost-gods, the
spirits of their ancestors, to whom

{p. 17}

they prayed and offered sacrifice as if they were common people and
needed ghost-gods to take care of them.

Pii, smitten by this new danger, called for Pueo, his most mighty
ghost-god. Pele's fire-darts were falling upon him and he was near
death. Then came Pueo flying down from the steep places of the mountain.
Pueo was a great owl in which dwelt one of the most powerful of Pii's
ancestors.

Pueo hovered over the head of Pii facing Pele. Whenever Pele hurled her
fiery darts, the owl swiftly thrust his head from side to side, catching
them in his beak, and with a shake of the head tossing them off to the
ground.

Then came the warriors in a great body around the giant and his
ghost-god. Thickly flew their spears and darts. Great clouds of stones
were hurled, and both Pii and his owl-god were grievously wounded.
Pele's flashes of lightning were coming with great rapidity.

The giant called to his au-makua to fly to the mountains, and then,
suddenly changing himself into his dragon form, he dashed up the
precipice toward his home.

The warriors were so surprised at the wonderful change that they forgot
to fight, and only realized that this dragon was their enemy when they
saw him far out of the reach of their best

{p. 18}

weapons. They could see that dragon leaping from stone to stone, and
swiftly gliding up the steep precipice. He escaped to his home in the
mountain recesses and nevermore troubled the chief by the sea. His
employer was killed in a later battle. Pele returned to her home in the
volcano Kilauea.

{p. 19}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. The Hills of Pele](hlov09)
