[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tsg00)  [Next](tsg02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE91S/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Syrian Goddess*, by Lucian, tr. by Herbert A. Strong and John
Garstang, \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

# EDITOR'S PREFACE

To the student of oriental religions the *Dea Syria* is brimful of
interest. It describes the cult and worship of the goddess of Northern
Syria, Atargatis, at her sacred city, Hierapolis, now Mumbij. The time
when Lucian wrote would be the middle of the second century B.C. We do
not see any reason to reject the traditional authorship of the treatise:
on the contrary, the work seems to reveal the famous satirist at home,
taking a natural interest in local memories and institutions, while
making, doubtless, mental notes that were to prove of use in the works
for which he is best known.

Of the many writers who refer to the *Dea Syria*, no one dwells upon the
fundamental character of the cult at Hierapolis, nor deals with the
problem of its historical origins. It is this aspect of inquiry,
therefore, with which we chiefly deal in the Introduction and the foot
notes. Lucian's description, amplified by the later account of
Macrobius, and further illustrated by the local coinage of Hierapolis,
reveals the central cult as that of a divine pair. The male god, a form
of Hadad, is symbolised by the bull, and is hence both "Lord of Heaven"
and "Creator." The female deity is shown by her very name, "Atargatis,"
to be a form of Ishtar or

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Astarte. Being
mated with the god, whom Lucian calls "Zeus," she is called by him
"Hera": but she wears a mural crown, and is symbolised by the lion; and
Lucian recognises in her traces of Kybele, Aphrodite, Artemis, and other
aspects of the Mother Goddess. An examination of the materials which
modern research has made available, shows this cult to be attributable
historically to the Hittites, the earliest known masters of the soil.
The argument is developed in our Introduction.

If some of our notes to Lucian's narrative appear elementary and
superfluous—they were originally prepared for lecture purposes—it may be
urged as an excuse for retaining them, that the eastern horizon of many
of the classical students in our universities is still bounded, like
that of Homer, by the Halys River. The life-work of Ramsay, Sayce,
Winckler and others, in developing our knowledge of the interior of Asia
Minor, is passed over in a casual or cursory fashion; and their results
are relegated with vague mistrust and misgiving to the orientalist. If
anyone should be tempted, however, to pursue his studies in this wider
field, he will find in these notes many references to the writings and
discussions of authorities like the late Robertson-Smith, Ed. Meyer,
Professor Frazer, Mr. Farnell, Messieurs Cumont, Dussaud and others,
that will at once introduce him to a fuller bibliography of the various
aspects of Anthropology and Comparative Religions towards which this
treatise naturally leads. He would do well, however, to prepare for such
a study, by making himself familiar

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

with the broad principles of these subjects, explained in Tylor's
*Primitive Culture* and his *Anthropology*, and Jevon's *Introduction to
the History of Religion*. Otherwise he will be likely to have his mind
perplexed by seemingly irreconcilable differences of opinion and
interpretation.

We are indebted for assistance, suggestion and facilities, freely and
generously given, to Mr. Hill and Mr. King, of the British Museum; Mr.
Hogarth, Keeper of the Ashmolean Museum; M. Babélon, of the Bibliothèque
Nationale; Professor Kubilschek, of Vienna; and to our colleagues,
Professor Lehmann-Haupt, Professor Bosanquet, Professor Newberry and Dr.
Pinches.

J. G.

<span class="small">INSTITUTE OF ARCHÆOLOGY,  
    UNIVERSITY OF LIVERPOOL,  
       *November*, 1912.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Summary of Contents](tsg02)
