[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tsg10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE91S/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Syrian Goddess*, by Lucian, tr. by Herbert A. Strong and John
Garstang, \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span> <span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

The following advertisement appeared at the end of *The Syrian Goddess*.
It is included for completeness.—JBH

# The Land of the Hittites.

BY PROFESSOR J. GARSTANG, D.Sc.

With Photographs, Maps, Plans and a Bibliography.

(**12/6** net.)

\[This\] "work will be the standard authority on the subject for a long
while to come."—Prof. Sayce, in the Introduction.

"Professor Garstang's book will be of great value to students of Near
Eastern antiquity, and must supersede all predecessors written with a
like purpose. . . With great skill, acuteness, and patience, the author
has laid not only the Boghaz-Keui tablets, the records of
Tell-el-Amarna, and others longer known, in hieroglyphic and cuneiform
under contribution, but also the archæological evidence from various
sites, many of which he has himself visited and studied with the eyes of
a trained excavator."—*The Times* (*Literacy Supplement*).

"It is a great book. For the subject is a greater one than some have
realised yet, and Professor Garstang rises to the height of
it."—*Expository Times*.

"The book is the work of a scholar, quietly written, the fruit of
thought, study and personal exploration. It stands as a contribution to
learning."—*Cambridge Review*.

"The last 75 pages contain a valuable attempt to piece together the
history of the Hittite States from the scanty and often perplexing data
now available in Egyptian and cuneiform documents."—*Manchester
Guardian*.

"It is no small achievement to have recovered some pages from the
history of three thousand years ago, and this valuable and interesting
piece of synthetical work will take its place among the growing store of
books which are giving us an insight into the realities of that distant
past, and slowly but inevitably forcing a reconsideration of the usual
ideas of the Bible lands."—*Guardian*.

"The book is a noteworthy work of British archæological
scholarship."—*The Scotsman*.

"The scheme which Professor Garstang has followed in these pages
resembles the method he has adopted in his work of research; everything
is carefully recorded and classified in such a way as to bring it
clearly and in its proper order before the reader, while the
Bibliography and Appendices help to consolidate and buttress the
whole."—*Glasgow Herald*.

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

"Its references are many and excellent; it is well written, and is
packed with photographs and maps. An Appendix, among other things,
contains a Hittite bibliography, of very great use to every
student."—*Bookman*.

"Nowhere will the reader be able to find a more careful and trustworthy
account of the successive stages in the history of this famous and
forgotten people than in Professor Garstang's pages."—*New York City*.

"Professor Garstang, who has conducted two expeditions from Liverpool,
has done yeoman's service in presenting in popular form a historical,
descriptive and critical account of the recovered monuments and their
significance."—*Educational Times*.

"An able and informing hook on recent archæological exploration and
discoveries in Asia Minor."—*Nature*.

"The book is admirably illustrated, not only with reproductions of the
monuments of the Hittite race, but also, in fulfilment of the promise of
the title, with views of Anatolia and North Syria which bring before the
reader the land which was their home. . . . A valuable contribution to
Biblical archaeology."—*Churchman*.

"A notable feature of the book is the numerous illustrations, which,
apart from views of purely Hittite monuments, give an excellent idea of
the country and its present population."—*Illustrated London News*.

"The story of the resurrection of the Hittite race and empire from the
ghostly realm of legend to which they had been consigned by many hasty
historians is part of the romance of history."—*Liverpool Courier*.

"Illustrated with maps and plans, and just upon too photographs, the
work will, as we have said, prove fascinating to all readers possessed
of any taste for learning of the distant, misty past which history is
patiently clearing."—*Daily Telegraph*.

"Students of history and Scripture are deeply indebted to Professor
Garstang for this well written, well illustrated and well indexed
volume."—*Christian World*.

"Very much in advance of any hitherto published account of the Hittite
greatness."—*The Spectator*.

"A learned, interesting, and beautifully illustrated volume."—*Catholic
Times*.

"In learning the history of this most interesting people under his
guidance we have the advantage of receiving our information from one
whose deductions and judgments have hitherto been singularly
justified."—*Liverpool Post*.
