[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Navajo](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](itb05) [Next](itb07)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## WHITE BEAD WOMAN

 The Sun said to the two War Twins. “Go to your mother and get her to go
to the west to the ocean. This is so I can see my wife. White Bead
Woman, from now on.” The Sun had asked her himself, but White Bead Woman
had said, “I will be lonesome there all by myself, and I will become
homesick.” This is why the Sun said to the Twins, “I will give all my
things, all you want, all my possessions, if you get her to go there. I
have done many things for you; now repay me for my kindness. Go tell
your mother to go to the west.”

 This is what the Sun said to his sons. The Sun had many wives besides
her, but White Bead Woman was jealous. That is why she did not want to
go. The Sun was not coming to see every day, but only once a week. The
Twins went to see their mother, but still White Bead Woman did not want
to go to the west, even then. All of the rest of the gods tried to help
the Twins have their mother go to the west. Still she refused to go.

 There was one man that did not know all of this excitement was taking
place. This god was very strong so everyone decided to let him try to
make White Bead Woman go west. The gods said, “We will have him try.”
This god was xaśč’éšžiní, the Black, Flint or Fire God. None <span
id="page_86">p. 86</span> of the people had fire, only this xaśč’éšžiní,
for he was the Fire God. He would rub a stick that had been rubbed in
some rocks and make fire. This was a type of a match and this was the
first time and place matches were made. The idea came from here for
people to make matches today. All around the home of Black God was coal
burning, instead of firewood.

 The old man was told to go and tell White Bead Woman to go west. He
went to her and said, “How come all of your children tell you to go west
to your husband, but you still don’t want to go? Why?” He tried his best
to try and make her go, but she still would not leave her home. At last
he got desperate and said, “If you don’t want to go to the west, all of
the earth and gods shall be burned up.” He got angrier and angrier and
finally took his weapon out to start the fire (it was a rock torch).
This fire was to start all over the world and would be so bad that even
the water would catch on fire. Black God struck the two rocks together,
or rather ground them, and they began to smoke. After he had done this
only twice, the woman stopped him.

 If he had done this for four times, everything on earth would have
burned up. After this she started to cry and put her arms around the old
man and said she would go to the west forever. White Bead Woman gathered
all of her property in a white bead basket and prayed to Supreme Sacred
Wind for all of the animals and seed plants. The seeds and plants prayed
for fell into the basket and the animals gathered outside of her hogan.

 At this time White Bead Woman received another name,
Receive-Things-in-her-Hand, xāēlắ kă eyā́ gī’, because of this. Some of
the animals she put into her basket and some who were left over had to
walk. The cattle had been made out of Mirage Quartz Rock by White Bead
Woman. She took Mirage Quartz Rock powder and water and molded them into
the right shape and size. When she placed them in water they became
alive.

 They were told, “You will be dangerous and even your voices will be
danger, but you will be used for good. You are to be used by the Earth
People.” She had it in her mind to do things this way. The Supreme
Sacred Wind did not tell her to do this. These cattle were placed in
baskets of white shell. When White Bead Woman traveled west, she took
out a male and female cattle and put them in the spring at Fierce Water
Spring at Pasture Canyon. No others, not her sons or the Sun or Frog Man
had any cattle. These cattle were for all the Earth People.

 Besides the animals in the basket she placed inside seeds, nuts, <span
id="page_87">p. 87</span> berries and roots. Her basket was made out of
shell and had a finish on top of it, just like the marriage basket.
These baskets of all five colors are still in the ocean where they were
left by White Bead Woman. Some of the animals were left over and could
not be carried in the basket, so they followed her to the west. As she
started to the west there was an earthquake. The earth at this time was
still just like water underneath. When she started from her New Mexican
home, White Bead Woman spent a night at Red Mesa, near where Tuba City,
Arizona, is now.

 While she was spending the night there with her animals, they moved
around in a circle and would not settle down. White Bead Woman made
three posts out of black rock. These are the rocks that are found near
where Tuba City is now called Black Butte, another near Navaho Mountain
called Wildcat Butte and one in Colorado called Black Post Butte. The
mountain by the Gap, Arizona, was beautiful and in one long piece at
this time. The animals were so numerous that they wore this mountain
down by going over it so many times and that is why it looks like that
today. Another part of it, to the southwest of Navaho Mountain, was worn
down by their crossing over it so many times, too. The animals were thus
enclosed by these mountains and the Little and Big Colorado Rivers.

 After the animals became calm during the night, she went to the canyon
where the water meets from the two great rivers. It was here at the
junction of the Colorado Rivers that Salt Woman was created. She was
created from the water washing back and forth against the rock or soil
of a mountain. From the salty foam she was created—as if it were
intercourse. Salt Woman was created long before White Bead Woman, and
they were not related even by clan.

 There is a story about Salt Woman at the junction of the Colorado
Rivers where she was created. Near there is a hill which is of rocks
shaped like a hogan. In the center of this is a hole which has water
inside. This water never overflows the hole and two ladders reach up
from this water to within three feet of the top. If this hole looks
black there will be lots of rain. There were gods that came up with Salt
Woman in a cane like the other gods in New Mexico. There is a salt trail
which has a marker to show where it is. Here is the hole which the Hopi
claim as theirs. (The hole referred to is perhaps the one visited by the
Hopi in their quest for salt. Intercourse is simulated with the hole and
gifts left for the Salt Woman. Reference to this is found in Simmons,
1942. pp. 235-236.)

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

 There is a jackass hoof print made by some of the Salt Woman’s animals
as she drove them out of the hole to the west side of Shadow Mountain.
She became warm and threw the sweat from her forehead, and it made the
soil salty there. She continued up the Little Colorado Canyon and left a
finger mark there upon the wall. When everything is good upon the earth,
the mark is new; if it is old, then things are evil in the world. It was
there at the junction of the rivers that Salt Woman and White Bead Woman
met. Salt Woman drove on to Shadow Mountain while White Bead Woman later
drove on to the west.

 Salt Woman went on to Winslow, Holbrook, Salt or‘áš̨ih, Arizona. There
is a lake or reservoir that people can get salt from. Salt Woman now
lives there. After you get salt from the junction or the Salt Lake,
should you look back or jiggle the load or try to adjust the pack, it
will become heavier and heavier. It will also become heavier as you
continue to walk on.

 White Bead Woman sat there by the bank and then stepped back from the
water. She then made a fire and prepared to stay the night. There is a
gap down in the canyon where this happened. As she sat there, there
appeared a fine young man out of the water called Sea Horse. This man
looked like a horse, yet was a man. She spent a night with this man upon
ground which was solid or hard. The next morning White Bead Woman had
blood coming from her vagina, and this was the first period or
menstruation in the world. The animals outside of her basket were later
lost because of this infidelity. She left there as a gift to this man,
salt, shell, turquoise, jet, white bead, oyster shell and red shell.
These things are still there to this day. These gifts were all for this
man.

 After she had done this, she urinated into the Little Colorado and that
is why it is now red as it runs into the Big Colorado. The next morning
she went back to the top of the mountain where she had left all of her
animals. As she got to the top of the mountain, she found all of her
animals gone. On the west of Cedar Ridge is a mountain that was
originally the escaped wild sheep from the herds of White Bead Woman.
All of the wild sheep and most of the animals who escaped later turned
into mountains. All of these animals that did not turn into mountains
went into the Kaibab Forest and are still there. That is the reason
there are so many game animals there now.

 Near the joining of the two rivers is another gap where White Bead
Woman went across with the few animals left in the basket. (There were
still left the deer, antelope, all of the meat animals, turquoise,
berries, <span id="page_89">p. 89</span> corn, squash, etc.) She ate
some of the corn seeds for her lunch on the way to the west. She went on
to Mesa Verde and to ch·ōsgī́. There is a pattern of the Sun there—a sand
painting. It is still there and people pray to this Sun and no one can
go there unless he has the right prayer.

 It is important because White Bead Woman made the Sun pattern. It was
made on a rock and planted near there was a plant called Black Medicine,
’aze·’łižin, and a plant called Big or Large Medicine, ’aze·’coh. These
two medicines are used in many ways and for many things. She brought the
plants with her from the east. If anything goes wrong on the earth, the
pattern looks old, and if everything is well, the pattern looks new. The
location of the pattern is not known. She planted oak trees further on.
Near these she piled some rocks for a marker to tell the trail which she
called Pile-of-Rocks.

 White Bead Woman continued on to Hopi Towers and on to Gray Mountain
and on to the south side of Grand Canyon. She went right on until she
arrived at the sea near the highest mountain in California, Mount
Whitney. All of the people gathered around her when she arrived. All of
the gods living near this area gathered and some even came from the home
of White Bead Woman to the east. On top of this mountain was a hogan. If
you look there now, it is still there. If you should look at this hogan
when things are going bad, then it will look old. If it looks new, then
affairs in the world are going to be good.

 There are many things on the top of this mountain such as turquoise,
flints, black shining dirt, pollen, white bead, horses of stone and many
other things. All things that the medicine men made use of then and now
can be found there. One of the gods picked up a boy and girl when they
came from the east. He took them so that these children could be taught
all the songs of the gods before they left the earth. White Bead Woman
knew all of the songs which the rest of the gods did not. These children
were to learn everything from her.

 The gods did not have soapweed in the west where they were, so they had
a talk to decide what to use for soap in the ceremonies. The War Twins,
meanwhile, did not know there was going to be a sing for these children
in order to teach them all of the sacred things the White Bead Woman
knew. In fact they did not even know that the children had been taken to
the west. The gods finally decided to bury jet, flint, white bead,
oyster shell and turquoise so that a plant of soap would grow. They
planted these things in the evening and the sing was held over the boy
and girl all during the night.

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

 The sing was held because these children had learned all from the White
Bead Woman. They now could instruct the rest of the people while White
Bead Woman was gone to the west. The dance was held now and the gods
danced over the side of these seed materials. These seeds soon began to
grow. In the morning they dug up the yucca and were now ready to make
soap. During the ceremony they put plants underneath a basket which were
pinyon, cedar, evergreen, fir, spruce and kinds of plants, but no pine.
The basket was made of white bead like before and was about the size of
a marriage basket.

 At the time of the sing over the children the War Twins did not know
that it was taking place, but they heard a rumor about it. The First
Twin started off with a friend, God-Water-Carrier. The First Twin had
gone to this friend and told him to go on a journey with him. This
friend lived at White-Water-Fall. As they left on their trip it started
to rain. They were in this rain all the way down to California. When
they got there, the rain went on past the hogan and they went inside.

 Inside the hogan, the First Twin asked his mother. “Why didn’t you tell
me you were here and that this ceremony was going on? Am I the wrong
kind of a god? Why didn’t you notify me? Aren’t I entitled to be
notified?” White Bead Woman answered her son saying, “I know you have
nothing to do or say about what is going on out here. That is why we did
not notify you.”

 Then the Twin said. “Have these children learned all the power that
they are going to learn?” These children were still Earth People and not
yet gods. “Is there any more for them to learn?” White Bead Woman said,
“No, this is why we have picked these children. The people did not learn
all of my power. I am going away with all the power, but now all of your
Earth People will know everything.” The Twins were gods and there were
also many gods all over the world. The War Gods and the other gods at
times were bad, disobedient, and not right. That is why she was “so
stingy” with her knowledge. No one knew as much as she did about the
ways of the world.

 After White Bead Woman had answered her son, he said, “It is fine that
these children know all and have all the power.” He asked another
question, “Did they learn the Good Way Song? Did they learn all the
songs of the Five Night Sings? Did they learn the War Songs? Did they
learn the Yeibache Songs? Did they learn all the other songs?” She
answered saying, “It is all complete. All of these things have been
learned. Now I do not have to worry about anything.” They had all the
power <span id="page_91">p. 91</span> gained from knowing these things
for they were not gods, but humans. That night the people finished the
singing. In the morning the gods decided to send the children back with
the Navaho—after they were to create them.

 White Bead Woman in the morning took dirt from her chest and made the
figures of two people. From her back she took more dirt and molded two
more figures. From her right palm she molded two more figures. From the
left palm she took dirt and once again molded two small figures. From
the right foot dirt was taken and from the left more dirt and molded
into figures. At last there were twelve small figures of humans—half of
the figures women and half men. Each time White Bead Woman made the
figures, she took her fingernail paring and the grease from her body
along with the dirt to mold them. That is the reason we get so dirty. If
she had not made Navahos from fingernail paring, this would not have
happened. This is the reason why the Navaho get so dirty, in particular.

 It is the belief of the Navaho that dirt comes from the food which we
eat. As we eat dirty things or salty foods especially, this dirt comes
from the inside of the body from the things we eat. Because of this, the
Navaho take sweat baths to make these wastes come from the pores. This
is the reason the Navaho use the sweat bath so much, in order to get rid
of the body wastes. When other people take a hot bath, if not a Navaho,
it is for the same purpose.

 The people who were created were Navaho. The dirt had been taken and
molded into figures like us, but very tiny. All of them were laid on the
ground with a Never-Been-Shot-Buckskin put over the top and with one on
the bottom. These figures were prayed and sung over by the White Bead
Woman, Talking God and all of the other gods. After this was done, these
small figures came to life and grew to full size. These people were to
be called Created-Navaho, diné ’alya·ígí. These twelve people were then
sent along with the two children to the east where the gods had been in
the beginning.

 After all this had happened, White Bead Woman continued to the west.
From here are two stories—one to the west and one coming back to the
east. We shall now follow the story to the west. White Bead Woman
started off, and the gods went to places where they were to stay
forever. Some of the gods went into the earth, some into the heavens,
some into the mountains and some into the water. These gods became
settled and said, “From now on no person shall see us again.”

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

 On the other side of the Gap there is a wall where there is a picture
of a Yeibache with a white face and feathers. It if shows up good to the
eye and is easily seen, there will be rain. If not, then there will be
no rain. This represents the Talking God, Yeibache. He has twelve
feathers on his head. When there is a Yeibache Dance, the others in the
dance will have two feathers, and the last dancer has twelve turkey
feathers and is Calling God. This last man is the clown of the dance and
picks up anything that falls from the other dancers. He can do this for
he is the funny man. Calling God is a clown while Talking God is always
taking care of everyone.

 The gods made the promise that they would never be seen or talked to by
the Earth People. People were never to see the gods or angels again.
“You will see us, but we will be flowers, grass, plants, trees, rocks,
earth, lightning and everything upon the earth. These will show you that
we are still with you.” All the Navaho, therefore, pray to all of these
for they *represent* the gods themselves *and are not the gods*. This
was told to the people at this time. When it rains and there is nothing
showing on the ground, plants and flowers appear. These are the gods
themselves. Anything that grows represents the gods. Birds, stars,
clouds, rain are all gods.

 Some of the gods went back to Black Belt Mountain, sísnajĭni, and some
went to the mountain by Crown Point Mountain, some to the other six
mountains, and still lesser gods into the other mountains of the earth.
Any place where there are black stripes on the earth is found represents
Talking God. Water running out of the earth also represents him. Some of
the gods went into all kinds of trees. (F. G. would not tell the names
of the gods and where they went for he felt he would lose his power as a
medicine man. A man who was not a medicine man would have no power to
lose and thus could tell.) These trees move and act as if they were
alive. After all this had happened, all of the gods left and said. “We
will never see each other again.”

 After the Twin had finished talking to his mother, he did not stay for
the sing. He went back to his home at Reversible Mountain and he and his
brother went towards Williams, over where Prescott Copper Mine is now,
to change into rocks. There are two rocks that look like the Twins at
this place now. The souls (spirits) of the Twins are still in these
rocks. They have all their power there, and can hear the prayers of the
Earth People. If the world changes, they will come back to life and
destroy all the evil—like before. The Twins got their power from the Sun
and will keep it until more troubles come upon the earth.

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

 Should the world change, the Twins, White Bead Woman and all of the
other gods will return to earth. All of the gods taught the Twin certain
powers to kill all of the evil upon the earth. The gods had equal power,
but all in different ways. White Bead Woman was taught in the same way
as the Twins were later. The reason the War Twins won the wars with
their enemies is the same reason the United States always wins their
wars—the War Twins are on the good side. If the Navaho were with the
Russians or Germans, they would have been the ones who would win the
wars. The Navaho speech was used in the Pacific and the people learned
the Navaho had the power, and that is why they were used to help the
allies.

 White Bead Woman went out to the Sun’s house that was in the sea. Some
medicine men say she traveled on foot to the west, but she is a god and
does not travel in this way. The house of the Sun was sitting on the
ocean, but was not an island. Sometimes people see it, but not all of
the time. It was made of turquoise, white bead, jet and oyster shell.
White Bead Woman looked at the house and blew a rainbow spectrum to the
house. She got on it and rode to the house on the ocean. Nowadays we
have boats like this house according to what the house of the Sun did.
Ships have rooms, beds and all the things that the house of the Sun had.
The Sun’s house is like a submarine and sinks sometimes into the sea and
that is why you cannot see it. White Bead Woman reached the Sun’s house
in the evening.

 The Sun was glad to see her and he laughed and kissed her because of
his happiness. Everything was in the house that she needed. The house
was made as follows: The floor of the middle room was made of oyster
shell polished like marble. The walls were also of oyster shell. To the
east room the floor and walls were of polished white bead. To the south
were floors and walls of turquoise. To the west there was again a room
of oyster shell. In the last room, to the north, were black jet walls
and floor. This house was like the Sun’s house to the east.

 This house also had clouds on all of the walls. In the middle room was
a white male and female cloud on the wall. To the south was a blue male
and female cloud. To the west was a yellow male and female cloud. Upon
the north wall was a black male and female cloud. In this house were
also seen the mortar and pestle in the floor and the many flints on the
walls. After White Bead Woman had been there four days, she began
getting old age (about 400 years old). If White Bead Woman had not
gotten old at this time, it would not have been possible for old age to
come about now.

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

 After these four days had passed, she went into the east room, and when
she came out, she was younger. After going into each of the rooms and
finally coming out of the last one to the north, she was again a young
girl. Even today she gets very old every four years, and she has to go
through this procedure. Because of the four rooms, she will get young
every four years, too. First Man and First Woman live at the east in the
Sun’s house, and they, too, get old every four years. They, too must do
the same as the White Bead Woman.

 All the other gods became old every twelve years, and when this
happens, they all come together. There is a meeting place which is at
another Black Mountain on the other side of Holbrook called Woodruff
Buttes or tˣo·žį’xʷi·zo. These gods have a meeting there every night to
talk matters over. Anyone who wants to can hear these gods. These gods,
unlike the others talked about, become young every twelve years. They,
too, have a house so that when they get old they can go through it and
become young again.

 The Sun also gets old like the other gods and has to go through his
house so that he will get young again. White Bead Woman spent most of
her time in the middle or center room. It was at this time that she got
the name of Changing Woman, or Woman-Who-Changes. The house to the east
is made the same as the one to the west. The Sun’s other wife lives
there.

 The story now continues on to the east from Mount Whitney with the
fourteen people. The people came out towards their ancient lands with
the male and female bear, male and female big snake, male and female
thunder bird, male and female wind, male and female mountain lion and
the male and female wolf. The job of these animals was to protect the
people from any evil or harm. They were pets to the people. These people
were trying to make pets or dogs out of the wolves as they traveled
along.

 When they came to Williams, they met some Arrow People in human form.
They fought with these Arrow People and when the fourteen people were
about to be beaten, they turned to the bears and asked for help from
them. The bears began to fight and to kill all of the enemy. Victorious,
the people continued on to the west of San Francisco Peaks. There they
found a spring where there are two mountains together. This place was
called Where-They-Spent-a-Night-with-the-Bears.

 There are two stories here which come out from this story. One <span
id="page_95">p. 95</span> goes to the Leupp and the other goes through
Tuba City, Arizona. The one that goes along the Loop is a male story and
the one through Tuba is a female story. There is a different version of
each story according to the direction. There is a flat mountain on the
end of San Francisco Peaks. This mountain is Chipped Off Mountain or ził
k’élkal. The lions were always behind, and the people finally left them
there. The two mountain lions wore out their paws and they were told,
“That is where you are going to stay from this time on. You will be used
in the future times by the Earth People. Your skin will be quivers, your
claws shall become necklaces and your fat shall be used for medicine.”

 The people continued along the top of the mountains and one person was
carrying the big snake. The man got tired and let the big snake go on
the ground. This snake escaped and it is still living in the lava rock,
but no one has seen it. “Sometimes he will be seen in the future time,”
it was said. The people also told the male big snake he would be used in
the future. It was the male snake that was left there and the female was
carried on. If people do not have corn pollen, it can be shaken off of a
big snake (or bear, thunder, tornado or wind). This was to be the
purpose of big snake and this pollen was to be used in the future time.
Some medicine men use this type of pollen for certain rites. The claws
of the wolf and mountain lion are used in the same ways.

 The travelers went on and crossed at Tuba Wash, near the Colorado River
and went across Cameron. Lava Rock by Cameron shows the place they
crossed the Colorado River. The people got a drink at the spring, Black
Spring, on the other side of Cameron and went on to Shadow Mountain.
Long ago there used to be tiny dogs barking in that spring. (F. G. does
not know why.) All the people decided to spend a night at Shadow
Mountain. They had come to Willow Springs after Shadow Mountain. At the
game corral at Shadow Mountain there is a spring called
Hard-Ground-Around-the-Spring or tˣóbe·xʷi·sgáń.

 They went to Willow Springs to the north side of Tuba City and then on
to the northeast of the Hopi Reservation at Moenkopi. They followed
along where the highway to Tuba is now towards White Mesa. From White
Mesa they went to a spring on the east side called Covered-up-Spring or
tˣók’i·šže’é. They continued on to Red Lake and then to Cow Springs and
towards Shonto.

 While they were going towards Cow Springs, two captured Arrow children
began playing. The children were eating wild onions and plants as they
went through this country, and this is why they were behind. At <span
id="page_96">p. 96</span> Shonto the wanderers waited for the two
children to catch up with them. The travelers said. “We will wait. We
have two children to come.” One person went back to get the two
children. He could not find them and came back and told the people they
were gone. He looked for tracks and found some leading towards Red Lake.

 At the road to Red Lake there is a hump along a flat area. When the man
went around this hump, he saw two children going to Red Lake and so he
ran after them. He came around the point of the hill and got into the
open and saw the children going into the rocks. These two children
became the Elephant’s Feet. The first one was the boy and the next one
was the girl. The boy was from the Water-Coming-Together-Clan. The girl
was of the Edge-Water-Clan. All of the leaders or heads of the clans
carried canes as they walked along.

 There is another story which also tells of the travels of the fourteen.
The White Bead Woman made the different clans when the people were first
made. They were given their names by her. The first two people to be
made were called Along-the-Mountain-Clan. Their pet was to be the male
and female mountain lion. This is the reason why the Navahos of this
clan are heavy set and have stub noses. This clan had a turquoise cane
which they carried with them.

 The people created from the back of White Bead Woman were called the
Mud Clan, having as a mascot a male and female bear with the leader
carrying a white bead cane. The people created from the left hand of
White Bead Woman became the Near-the-Water-Clan, having a pet male and
female big snake and carrying a cane made out of dark oyster shell. The
people from the right hand of White Bead Woman were called the
Bitter-Water-Clan with a pet of a male and female thunder bird and
carrying a jet cane. The people from the left foot were called
Many-Goats-Clan with a pet male and female wind god and carrying a cane
out of red stone, céłčí·’ (The informant’s first statement was that
these people of the left foot carried *no* cane. On later discussion the
sentence was changed as above. The reasoning behind this is not known
for certain, but in all the available versions of the Creation Myths,
there are twelve people created, with but *four* leaders and *four*
canes.)

 The people created from White Bead Woman’s right foot were called the
Black-Sheep-Clan having a pet male and female wolf. These people had a
cane of different kind of oyster shell called very white oyster shell.
On the way back to the original land of the Navaho there was much water
found along the way. As the different people set out from the White Bead
Woman they took along their pets with them.

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

 They met and captured some Arrow People, ka·’ dine’é, as has been
explained before, and killed the rest. The clan that did this was the
Bitter-Water-Clan. The two posts or Elephant’s Feet were a boy and a
girl from the Arrow People. It was not the boy or girl who had received
all of the power that got lost, but these captured Arrow People that
turned into rocks. The boy and girl were trying to escape and go back
home to their own people. The home of some of the gods was at Shadow
Mountain. They were to have had a Fire Dance when they arrived at night.

 There are two stories here; one is as correct as the other. One goes
like this: Near this mountain there is a gully with rocks all around it
for it was an antelope corral. Later it changed into a mountain. This is
where the gods caught antelope for meat. There were four ways to get
into the corral from the four directions. The other story is that this
mountain is a hogan. Gods now have their home in Shadow Mountain.

 There are trees on top of Shadow Mountain where the gods dried meat.
There is also a flat rock to dry meat upon at Shadow Mountain, so the
story goes. There are, then, the two stories: One which tells about the
hogan and the Fire Dance, and the other about the catching of the
antelope by these people. There is also a rope that changed into a rock
there. The head man sat inside of the hogan gathering power to round the
antelope up. When the people went hunting the heads of the deer and the
buckskins were put on the people, and they were thus disguised and were
able to kill the animals. The power is lost to man to gather antelope
and deer now as it was done in the old days.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](itb07)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
