[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Navajo](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](itb03) [Next](itb05)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## THE BATTLE AT BLUE HOUSE

 This story took place at Tough-Flint or Hard-Flint-Place where the Old
Lady (Bat Woman) took her grandchildren. This story is about the Bat
Woman who took the Twin down from Shiprock. This story is used in time
of war, for if a person knows this story, he has the power to be
successful in war. The War Twins were trying to get in a war with
another tribe. the No-Bone-Enemy People, ’ana·’ bic’in’ádini·. These
people lived on the other side of Mount Taylor, tsṓdzĭł, which is to the
south of this place above Farmington.

 At this place there were two rivers that come together at Blue House
and Pointed Rock or which is called Rock-in-the-Middle-of-the-River. All
of these names were called for this place. In this general area was
where <span id="page_78">p. 78</span> the enemy tribe lived. The First
War Twin and his companions gathered before the war started. He had
enlisted anyone who was in good condition and who would go to the
battlefield. All his companions went over to the place with three names
and fought.

 The First Twin lost the battle and lost all of his companions. If this
had not happened then we would lose no men on the battlefield now. He
once again went out and gathered many men, and this time they were
numbered by the hundreds. Again the Twin started out to fight. He went
over there four times to battle at Blue House. Each time the battle took
place at Blue House and each time the men were destroyed. Then First
Twin went out and recruited more men.

 Before the fifth battle the Twin got help from the Bat Woman. He got
help from the Hard Flint People and the headquarters for the Bat Woman
was at the Tough or Hard-Flint-Clan. Between the two entrances, where
the rivers come together, were fought four mighty battles. The friends
of the Twins were insects, birds, animals or any people that wanted to
fight. They were still people, but they had these animals’
characteristics. Later they turned into the insects, birds or animals
which they represented. The First War Twin sent out a message to the Bat
Lady and told her he needed help. The reason the Twins went to the Bat
Woman was because they were more friendly to Bat Woman than to the
enemy—like England is to us. If she had not been friendly, she would not
have helped the Twin off of the rock.

 The Old Lady had some warriors, and she told them to go to war over at
Rock-in-the-Middle-of-the-River to help the First Twin. All had a
meeting about the war before they left to get instructions at the Twin’s
headquarters. One turtle was sitting on the left side (south side of the
hogan entrance) and a frog was on the right (or north side) during the
meeting. The turtle was like we are, yet having clothes of shell for
protection like a turtle does now.

 The frog was still human, but with a fat stomach, fat throat and narrow
bulging eyes. The final meeting, before the war, was in the hogan. All
of the warriors, who were like us, and not yet animals, were there.
Everyone was quiet and gave the War Twin his chance to speak. The War
Twin’s party and Bat Woman’s party both had a meeting. Although in
separate groups, a decision was made to go on the warpath.

 The frog said, “You should have told us before there was a war. Talk
about it and while it is being settled we will be going on ahead. We are
very slow, and we will start traveling towards the enemy. We will do
<span id="page_79">p. 79</span> this while the other side is getting
ready.” Bat Woman’s children were the Flint Boys of the Flint Clan. Frog
and turtle were asked what they were waiting for before they went on the
warpath. The frog said. “This is what I Iike to hear. We will walk. We
are not very fast runners. We will go ahead, taking our time to the
war.”

 The frog and turtle were on the side of the War Twin. The frog and
turtle were really fast travelers and they just said this for fun. They
traveled on a rainbow spectrum to the enemy’s camp. The frog and turtle
started in the evening so as to not be left behind. The Bat Woman’s
people were the Hard-Flint-Boys and they were preparing for this war.
The War Twin and his men were at Reversible Mountain. The turtle and
frog were at the Twin’s hogan.

 The two friends, frog and turtle, started in the evening and soon came
to a large pit of water where the enemy got their water. The turtle and
frog had gotten ready for battle before they left the Twin’s hogan. The
turtle had put on hard shell and hard clothing. That is why people
nowadays wear steel helmets and armour plates. This is where they got
the design.

 At the bottom of the pit or hole was a well. To get to this well was a
trail going around and around the side of the pit. The two friends
climbed down the trail and got into the water and began to swim around.
In the morning, as it became light, two unmarried girls came down into
the pit with cups to get water. They dipped their cups into the water
twice. Suddenly the frog and turtle grabbed the girls and then smiled.

 The turtle said, “Get inside my shell,” to one of the girls. Then the
frog said. “Get under my arms,” to the other girl. After the two had
grabbed the girls and told them to get under their clothes, the girls
smiled. All four of them then went into the water. Later the enemy
wondered about the girls, and one of the enemy warriors came around to
find where they were.

 When the warrior got down to the well, he only found the jugs the girls
had carried. He yelled for the other warriors to come and help him. That
is why the Hopi, when something goes wrong, holler for help now. These
enemy were Cliff Dwellers or ’anásází. When many warriors arrived, they
moved towards the well. They searched, but could not find the girls.
They decided that the girls had to be here somewhere, and so they
decided to empty the well.

 The warriors stood in a line, some in the water and some on the bank.
They passed the girls’ jugs out full of water. When all of the water
<span id="page_80">p. 80</span> was emptied out of the well, they found
only two men and no girls. The enemy leaders said, “Get those two men
out of the bottom, and we will kill them. They must be the ones who
killed the girls.” Some of the men laid a woven blanket out at the
bottom of the well and pushed the men on top of it. Twelve unmarried men
stood on the one side of the blanket and twelve unmarried women on the
other side, the left, and pulled the two men out of the hole. The leader
spoke again, “Kill those two men.”

 The enemy had axes and the frog said to his friend, the turtle, “I am
afraid I am going to be killed.” In reply the turtle said, “I am not
afraid of what is going to happen.” Meanwhile the other two groups of
the army of Twin and the army of the Bat Woman’s Clan were moving in on
the enemy.

 When the enemy grabbed for their axes, the turtle said to his friend,
“Get under my shell.” When the frog got inside the turtle’s shell, the
turtle began to move his body as the enemy chopped at him. The axes
slipped off of his shell and the men cut off their own legs and arms.
They were having a tough time trying to kill those two. The enemy was
using a loose axe which was a stone axe and was not tied very strong.
This continued on all day long until sundown. All were still fighting
one another at the enemy’s camp.

 Meanwhile the Twin’s and Bat Woman’s people were moving in slowly, for
the distance was great. They were also afraid and that is why they went
slow. In the enemy camp the leaders said at last, “We cannot do anything
about the turtle. Let us put him in a pot and boil him.” By now the
friends of the frog and turtle were just a little distance away. The
enemy put water to boil all night. Towards morning when the Morning Star
came out, the frog said, “I am getting worried again.” The turtle once
again answered, “I am not worried about what is going to happen.” When
the two were placed inside the container the pot split into pieces.

 While all this was taking place, the Dawn began to break. The enemy did
not know what to do and they finally said, “We will have to take them
back to our House-in-the-Middle-of-the-River. This was near the
Rock-in-the-Middle-of-the-River. They lived where the ground was in the
open. There they held dances. The enemy took frog and turtle inside the
village. When they arrived they said, “Let us build a big hole and make
a fire. We will make it big and then we will throw frog and turtle
inside.” The turtle was put under a lot of wood and the fire was
started. The fire was started at <span id="page_81">p. 81</span> the
four directions. Once again the friends were afraid, but this time
turtle said, “I am really afraid I am going to be killed.” Frog Man
said, “I am not afraid of what is going to happen.”

 While this was going on, the Twin’s group was moving quietly, but the
others, belonging to Bat Woman’s Clan, were making a lot of noise. As
the Flint Clan moved along they hit each other and made sparks. Lots of
noise came from their armour! The Twin argued with them and tried to
keep them quiet. As the two groups moved closer towards the enemy, the
noise became greater and greater. There was only the First Twin here,
for the other was home with the prayer stick and White Bead Woman.

 The Twin, his army, and his allies were camped about one and one-half
miles from each other. The Flint People enjoyed the outing they were
having, but the Twin got mad because of the noise they were making. The
War Twin became more and more angry because of the war. The next morning
the armies of the allies met. The headman of the Flint Boys was talked
to by the War Twin who said, “Why make so much noise when we go to war?”
When the Flint headman came forth, he became very angry. All of the clan
gathered around making sparks by hitting each other and making lights as
if they were tracers or rockets.

 The Flint headman said, “If you are such a hero why do you ask for help
and go so quietly to war?” The War Twin replied angrily, “Shut up and
stay quiet,” but could do nothing with them. The Bat Woman was proud of
her clan making so much noise. She was proud of her Flint Grandsons
showing their courage and power.

 In the enemy camp all the wood that was left was gathered and a fire
was built. After the fire was started the two animals were put into it.
From the Twin’s camp could be seen the fire. From this time, it was
said, when you see a fire at night, it foretells evil, sickness and
disease. In the morning the Twin’s army was divided into groups and all
started out to find the enemy in all four directions. All watched the
fire to tell the direction to go. At the camp the enemy left for they
thought the frog and turtle would be dead by morning. They went away
that day, and in the morning when they came back there was water all
over and ashes were floating on top of the water. This time the enemy
really got mad and said, “We will build a fire all day.”

 The friends of the two animals were still moving in. The Twin did not
move forward when he saw the fire going that night again, but left the
next morning. Once again all the warriors got together and were ready to
move in.

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

 After the fire had been going all day, the enemy was ready once again
to try and cook the frog and turtle—and unknown to them, the two girls.
It was evening and the Flint’s and the Twin’s groups were moving in
together towards the enemy, but very slowly. This is the same during the
war when they move very carefully and not quickly to the enemy. So this
is the reason why armies move slowly now. The friends were now camping
together and the Flint people were having fun hitting each other and
making sparks. The Twin said nothing, but just took out his tobacco and
started smoking to control himself.

 Back in the enemy camp frog and turtle were put inside of a hole with
wood and rock put on top of the hole so they could not get out. Again a
fire was lighted underneath the two friends. The turtle said. “I am
afraid of what is going to happen.” After the fire had started, the
enemy went away and said, “They will burn up now.” The next morning they
came back and the whole place was soaked all over with lots of water.
The rock that had been on top of the two strangers was floating, and the
frog and turtle were underneath in the water. When the people saw this,
they became very angry again and said, “We will throw them off the
highest cliff and that will certainly kill them.”

 By now the Flint People and the Twin’s People were moving in a file as
small groups. The frog and turtle were once again taken on the woven rug
and taken to a high cliff near Pointed Rock. Beneath the cliff stood a
small body of water. The whole camp started to go with the warriors to
see the frog and turtle finally doomed. The enemy were singing and
pounding on a drum as they traveled along. The plan was that the frog
and the turtle were to be pushed off of the cliff and hit their heads
below and break them open.

 The men and women got hold of the rug and swung it four times. and the
frog said, “I am really afraid I am going to be killed.” The turtle once
again said, “I am not afraid of what is going to happen.” He then told
the frog what he was supposed to do. The frog went underneath the shell
of the turtle. Just as the frog did this, they were thrown over the
cliff by the men and women holding the rug. They went down the cliff
with the turtle’s shell whistling as the wind went through it.

 Just as they were to hit the ground, the turtle floated off like a
feather and barely missed hitting the rocks. He floated on and away and
went towards the water. The turtle floated in the air until he dropped
into the water. The frog got out of the shell and the two swam back to
the shore of the small body of water, away from the cliff. When they got
<span id="page_83">p. 83</span> to the shore, the turtle took out the
girl he had under his shell and said, “Here are your girls, whoever you
are.” Covering her body were white bead earrings, bracelets, beads and
decorations.

 The frog did the same to the girl he had hidden and said, “Here are
your girls, whoever you are.” The two said this to whomever those two
girls had belonged to. The reason the girls had been able to be hidden
in such a small space as they had been was because the gods had made
them this size by their power. The girl that the frog had hidden had
turquoise all over her. Her hair hung clear down to the ground. The
turtle said, “This is the last time you are going to see these girls.”
All four of them got on a rainbow spectrum and went to where the Twin
and his armies were.

 When they got to the lines of the Flint’s and Twin’s army, the enemy
became very angry because of their escape. They were also unhappy
because of the loss of the girls. In between the army of the allies came
the enemy, angry because of the insults given to them. This began the
mighty battle. All of the enemy were killed except the headman who was
captured. According to what happened then, enemies are now captured in
battle. The girls were kept as was promised by the frog and turtle, and
the victors went back to their homes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](itb05)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
