[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Celtic Folklore](../celt/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](oss04)  [Next](oss06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

DISSERTATION

CONCERNING THE POEMS OF OSSIAN.

THE history of those nations who originally possessed the north of
Europe, is less known than their manners. Destitute of the use of
letters, they them. selves had not the means of transmitting their great
actions to remote posterity. Foreign writers saw them only at a
distance, and described them as they found them. The vanity of the
Romans induced them to consider the nations beyond the pale of their
empire as barbarians; and, consequently, their history unworthy of being
investigated. Their manners and singular character were matters of
curiosity, as they committed them to record. Some men otherwise of great
merit, among ourselves, give into confined ideas on this subject. Having
early imbibed their idea of exalted manners from the Greek and Roman
writers, they scarcely ever afterward have the fortitude to allow any
dignity of character to any nation destitute of the use of letters.

Without derogating from the fame of Greece and Rome, we may consider
antiquity beyond the pale of their empire worthy of some attention. The
nobler

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

passions of the mind never shoot forth more free and unrestrained than
in the times we call barbarous. That irregular manner of life, and those
manly pursuits, from which barbarity takes it name, are highly favorable
to a strength of mind unknown in polished times. In advanced society,
the characters of men are more uniform and disguised. The human passions
lie in some degree concealed behind forms and artificial manners; and
the powers of the soul, without an opportunity of exerting them, lose
their vigor. The times of regular government, and polished manners, are
therefore to be wished for by the feeble and weak in mind. An unsettled
state, and those convulsions which attend it, is the proper field for an
exalted character, and the exertion of great parts. Merit there rises
always superior; no fortuitous event can raise the timid and mean into
power. To those who look upon antiquity in this light, it is an
agreeable prospect; and they alone can have real pleasure in tracing
nations to their source. The establishment of the Celtic states, in the
north of Europe, is beyond the reach of written annals. The traditions
and songs to which they trusted their history, were lost, or altogether
corrupted, in their revolutions and migrations, which were so frequent
and universal, that no kingdom in Europe is now possessed by its
original inhabitants. Societies were formed, and kingdoms erected, from
a mixture of nations, who, in process of time, lost all knowledge of
their own origin. If tradition could be depended upon, it is only among
a people, from all time, free from intermixture with foreigners. We are
to look for these among the mountains and inaccessible parts of a
country: places, on account of their barrenness, uninviting to an enemy,
or whose natural strength enabled the natives to repel invasions. Such
are the inhabitants of the mountains of Scotland. We, accordingly find
that they differ

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

materially from those who possess the low and more fertile parts of, the
kingdom. Their language is pure and original, and their manners are
those of an ancient and unmixed race of men. Conscious of their own
antiquity, they long despised others, as a new and mixed people. As they
lived in a country only fit for pasture, they were free from that toil
and business which engross the attention of a commercial people. Their
amusement consisted in hearing or repeating their songs and traditions,
and these entirely turned on the antiquity of their nation, and the
exploits of their forefathers. It is no wonder, therefore, that there
are more remains among them, than among any other people in Europe.
Traditions, however, concerning remote periods are only to be regarded,
in so far as they coincide with contemporary writers of undoubted credit
and veracity.

No writers began their accounts for a more early period than the
historians of the Scots nation. Without records, or even tradition
itself, they gave a long list of ancient kings, and a detail of their
transactions, with a scrupulous exactness. One might naturally suppose,
that when they had no authentic annals, they should, at least, have
recourse to the traditions of their country, and have reduced them into
a regular system of history. Of both they seem to have been equally
destitute. Born in the low country, and strangers to the ancient
language of their nation, they contented themselves with copying from
one another, and retailing the same fictions in a new color and dress.

John Fordun was the first who collected those fragments of the Scots
history which had escaped the brutal policy of Edward I., and reduced
them into order. His accounts, in so far as they concerned recent
transactions, deserved credit: beyond a certain period, they were
fabulous and unsatisfactory. Sometime before

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Fordun wrote, the king of England, in a letter
to the pope, had run up the antiquity of his nation to a very remote
æra. Fordun, possessed of all the national prejudice of the age, was
unwilling that his country should yield, in point of antiquity, to a
people then its rivals and enemies. Destitute of annals in Scotland, he
had recourse to Ireland, which, according to the vulgar error of the
times, was reckoned the first habitation of the Scots. He found there,
that the Irish bards had carried their pretensions to antiquity as high,
if not beyond any nation in Europe. It was from them he took those
improbable fictions which form the first part of his history.

The writers that succeeded Fordun implicitly followed his system, though
they sometimes varied from him in their relations of particular
transactions and the order of succession of their kings. As they had no
new lights, and were equally with him unacquainted with the traditions
of their country, their histories contain little information concerning
the origin of the Scots. Even Buchanan himself, except the elegance and
vigor of his style, has very little to recommend him. Blinded with
political prejudices, he seemed more anxious to turn the fictions of his
predecessors to his own purposes, than to detect their
misrepresentations, or investigate truth amidst the darkness which they
had thrown round it. It therefore appears, that little can be collected
from their own historians concerning the first migrations of the Scots
into Britain.

That this island was peopled from Gaul admits of no doubt. Whether
colonies came afterward from the north of Europe, is a matter of mere
speculation. When South Britain yielded to the power of the Romans, the
unconquered nations to the north of the province were distinguished by
the name of Caledonians. From their very name, it appears that they

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

were of those Gauls who possessed themselves originally of Britain. It
is compounded of two Celtic words, *Cael* signifying Celts, or Gauls,
and *Dun* or *Don*, a hill; so that Caeldon, or Caledonians, is as much
as to say, the "Celts of the hill country." The Highlanders, to this
day, call themselves Cael, and their language Caelic, or Galic, and
their country Caeldock, which the Romans softened into Caledonia. This,
of itself, is sufficient to demonstrate that they are the genuine
descendants of the ancient Caledonians, and not a pretended colony of
Scots, who settled first in the north, in the third or fourth century.

From the double meaning of' the word Cael, which signifies "strangers,"
as well as Gauls, or Celts, some have imagined, that the ancestors of
the Caledonians were of a different race from the rest of the Britons,
and that they received their name upon that account. This opinion, say
they, is supported by Tacitus, who, from several circumstances,
concludes that the Caledonians were of German extraction. A discussion
of a point so intricate, at this distance of time, could neither be
satisfactory nor important.

Towards the later end of the third, and beginning of the fourth century,
we find the Scots in the north. Porphirius makes the first mention of
them about that time. As the Scots were not heard of before that period,
most writers supposed them to have been a colony, newly come to Britain,
and that the Picts were the only genuine descendants of the ancient
Caledonians. This mistake is easily removed. The Caledonians, in process
of time, became naturally divided into two distinct nations, as
possessing parts of the country entirely different in their nature and
soil. The western coast of Scotland is hilly and barren; towards the
east, the country is plain, and fit for tillage. The inhabitants of the
mountains, a roving and uncontrolled

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

race of men, lived by feeding of cattle, and what they killed in
hunting. Their employment did not fix them to one place. They removed
from one heath to another, as suited best with their convenience or
inclination. They were not, therefore, improperly called, by their
neighbors, Scuite, or "the wandering nation;" which is evidently the
origin of the Roman name of Scoti.

On the other hand, the Caledonians, who possessed the east coast of
Scotland, as this division of the country was plain and fertile, applied
themselves to agriculture, and raising of corn. It was from this that
the Galic name of the Picts proceeded; for they are called in that
language, Cruithnich, i. e. "the wheat or corn eaters." As the Picts
lived in a country so different in its nature from that possessed by the
Scots so their national character suffered a material change.
Unobstructed by mountains or lakes, their communication with one another
was free and frequent. Society, therefore, became sooner established
among them than among the Scots, and, consequently, they were much
sooner governed by civil magistrates and laws. This, at last, produced
so great a difference in the manners of the two nations, that they began
to forget their common origin, and almost continual quarrels and
animosities subsisted between them. These animosities, after some ages,
ended in the subversion of the Pictish kingdom, but not in the total
extirpation of the nation according to most of the Scots writers, who
seem to think it more for the honor of their countrymen to annihilate
than reduce a rival people under their obedience. It is certain,
however, that the very name of the Picts was lost, and that those that
remained were so completely incorporated with their conquerors, that
they soon lost all memory of their own origin.

The end of the Pictish government is placed so near

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

that period to which authentic annals reach, that it is matter of wonder
that we have no monuments of their language or history remaining. This
favors the system I have laid down. Had they originally been of a
different race from the Scots, their language of course would be
different. The contrary is the case. The names of places in the Pictish
dominions, and the very names of their kings, which are handed down to
us, are of Galic original, which is a convincing proof that the two
nations were, of old, one and the same, and only divided into two
governments by the effect which their situation had upon the genius of
the people.

The name of Picts is said to have been given by the Romans to the
Caledonians who possessed the east coast of Scotland from their painting
their bodies. The story is silly, and the argument absurd. But let us
revere antiquity in her very follies. This circumstance made some
imagine, that the Picts were of British extract, and a different race of
men from the Scots. That more of the Britons, who fled northward from
the tyranny of the Romans, settled in the low country of Scotland, than
among the Scots of the mountains, may be easily imagined, from the very
nature of the country. It was they who introduced painting among the
Picts. From this circumstance, affirm some antiquaries, proceeded the
name of the latter, to distinguish them from the Scots, who never had
that art among them, and from the Britons, who discontinued it after the
Roman conquest.

The Caledonians, most certainly, acquired a considerable knowledge in
navigation by their living on a coast intersected with many arms of the
sea, and in islands, divided one from another by wide and dangerous
firths. It is, therefore, highly probable, that they very early found
their way to the north of Ireland, which is within sight of their own
country. That Ireland

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

was first peopled from Britain, is, at length, a matter that admits of
no doubt. The vicinity of the two islands; the exact correspondence of
the ancient inhabitants of both, in point of manners and language, are
sufficient proofs, even if we had not the testimonies of authors of
undoubted veracity to confirm it. The abettors of the most romantic
systems of Irish antiquities allow it; but they place the colony from
Britain in an improbable and remote æra. I shall easily admit that the
colony of the Firbolg, confessedly the Belgæ of Britain, settled in the
south of Ireland, before the Cael, or Caledonians discovered the north;
but it is not at all likely that the migration of the Firbolg to Ireland
happened many centuries before the Christian æra.

The poem of Temora throws considerable light on this subject. The
accounts given in it agree so well with what the ancients have delivered
concerning the first population and inhabitants of Ireland, that every
unbiased person will confess them more probable than the legends handed
down, by tradition, in that country. It appears that, in the days of
Trathal, grandfather to Fingal, Ireland was possessed by two nations;
the Firbolg or Belgæ of Britain, who inhabited the south, and the Cael,
who passed over from Caledonia and the Hebrides to Ulster. The two
nations, as is usual among an unpolished and lately settled people, were
divided into small dynasties, subject to petty kings or chiefs,
independent of one another. In this situation, it is probable, they
continued long, without any material revolution in the state of the
island, until Crothar, lord of Atha, a country in Connaught, the most
potent chief of the Firbolg, carried away Conlama, the daughter of
Cathmin, a chief of the Cael, who possessed Ulster.

Conlama had been betrothed, some time before, to Turloch, a chief of
their own nation. Turloch resented

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

the affront offered him by Crothar, made an irruption. into Connaught,
and killed Cormul, the brother of Crothar, who came to oppose his
progress. Crothar himself then took arms, and either killed or expelled
Turloch. The war, upon this, became general between the two nations, and
the Cael were reduced to the last extremity. In this situation, they
applied for aid to Trathal, king of Morven, who sent his brother Conar,
already famous for his great exploits, to their relief.

Conar, upon his arrival in Ulster, was chosen king by the unanimous
consent of the Caledonian tribes who possessed that country. The war was
renewed with vigor and success; but the Firbolg appear to have been
rather repelled than subdued. In succeeding reigns, we learn, from
episodes in the same poem, that the chiefs of Atha made several efforts
to become monarchs of Ireland, and to expel the race of Conar.

To Conar succeeded his son Cormac, who appears to have reigned long. In
his latter days he seems to have been driven to the last extremity by an
insurrection of the Firbolg, who supported the pretensions of the chiefs
of Atha to the Irish throne. Fingal, who was then very young, came to
the aid of Cormac, totally defeated Colculla, chief of Atha, and
re-established Cormac in the sole possession of all Ireland. It was then
he fell in love with, and took to wife, Roscrana, the daughter of
Cormac, who was the mother of Ossian.

Cormac was succeeded in the Irish throne by his son Cairbre; Cairbre by
Artho, his son, who was the father of that Cormac, in whose minority the
invasion of Swaran happened, which is the subject of the poem of Fingal.
The family of Atha, who had not relinquished their pretensions to the
Irish throne, rebelled in the minority of Cormac, defeated his
adherents, and murdered him in the palace of Ternora. Cairbar, lord of

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

of Atha, upon this mounted the throne. His usurpation soon ended with
his life; for Fingal made an expedition into Ireland, and restored,
after various vicissitudes of fortune, the family of Conar to the
possession of the kingdom. This war is the subject of Temora; the
events, though certainly heightened and embellished by poetry, seem,
notwithstanding, to have their foundation in true history.

Temora contains not only the history of the first migration of the
Caledonians into Ireland; it also preserves some important facts
concerning the first settlement of the Firbolg, or Belgæ of Britain, in
that kingdom, under their leader Larthon, who was ancestor to Cairbar
and Cathmor, who successively mounted the Irish throne, after the death
of Cormac, the son of Artho. I forbear to transcribe the passage on
account of its length. It is the song of Fonar, the bard; towards the
latter end of the seventh book of Temora. As the generations from
Larthon to Cathmor, to whom the episode is addressed, are not marked, as
are those of the family of Conar, the first king of Ireland, we can form
no judgment of the time of the settlement of the Firbolg. It is,
however, probable it was some time before the Cael, or Caledonians,
settled in Ulster. One important fact may, be gathered from this
history, that the Irish had no king before the latter end of the first
century. Fingal lived, it is supposed, in the third century; so Conar,
the first monarch of the Irish, who was his grand-uncle, cannot be
placed farther back than the close of the first, To establish this fact,
is to lay, at once, aside the pretended antiquities of the Scots and
Irish, and to get quit of the long list of kings which the latter give
us for a millenium before.

Of the affairs of Scotland, it is certain, nothing can be depended upon
prior to the reign of Fergus, the son of Erc, who lived in the fifth
century. The true history

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

of Ireland begins somewhat later than that period. Sir James Ware, who
was indefatigable in his researches after the antiquities of his
country, rejects, as mere fiction and idle romance, all that is related
of the ancient Irish before the time of St. Patrick, and the reign of
Leogaire. It is from this consideration that he begins his history at
the introduction of Christianity, remarking, that all that is delivered
down concerning the times of paganism were tales of late invention,
strangely mixed with anachronisms and inconsistencies. Such being the
opinion of Ware, who had collected, with uncommon industry and zeal, all
the real and pretundedly ancient manuscripts concerning the history of
his country, we may, on his authority, reject the improbable and
self-condemned tales of Keating and O'Flaherty. Credulous and puerile to
the last degree, they have disgraced the antiquities they meant to
establish. It is to be wished that some able Irishman, who understands
the language and records of his country, may redeem, ere too late, the
genuine and antiquities of Ireland from the hands of these idle
fabulists.

By comparing the history in these poems with the legends of the Scots
and Irish writers, and by afterward examining both by the test of the
Roman authors, it is easy to discover which is the most probable.
Probability is all that can be established on the authority of
tradition, ever dubious and uncertain. But when it favors the hypothesis
laid down by contemporary writers of undoubted veracity, and, as it
were, finishes which they only drew the outlines, it ought, in the
judgment of sober reason, to be preferred to accounts framed in dark and
distant periods, with little judgement, and upon no authority.

Concerning the period of more than a century which intervenes between
Fingal and the reign of Fergus, the sons of Erc or Arcath, tradition is
dark and contradictory.

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Some trace up the family of Fergus to a son of
Fingal of that name, who makes a considerable figure in Ossian's Poems.
The three elder sons of Fingal, Ossian, Fillan, and Ryno, dying without
issue, the succession, of course, devolved upon Fergus, the fourth son,
and his posterity. This Fergus, say some traditions, was the father of
Congal, whose son was Arcath, the father of Fergus, properly called the
first king of Scots, as it was in his time the Cael, who possessed the
western coast of Scotland, began to be distinguished by foreigners by
the name of Scots. From thenceforward, the Scots and Picts, as distinct
nations, became objects of attention to the historians of other
countries. The internal state of the two Caledonian kingdoms has always
continued, and ever must remain, in obscurity and fable.

It is in this epoch we must fix the beginning of the decay of that
species of heroism which subsisted in the days of Fingal. There are
three stages in human society. The first is the result of consanguinity,
and the natural affection of the members of a family to one another. The
second begins when property is established, and men enter into
associations for mutual defence, against the invasions and injustice of
neighbors. Mankind submit, in the third, to certain laws and
subordinations of government, to which they trust the safety of their
persons and property. As the first is formed on nature, so, of course,
it is the most disinterested and noble. Men, in the last, have leisure
to cultivate the mind, and to restore it, with reflection, to a primeval
dignity of sentiment. The middle state is the region of complete
barbarism and ignorance. About the beginning of the fifth century, the
Scots and Picts were advanced into the second stage, and consequently,
into those circumscribed sentiments which always distinguish barbarity.
The events which soon

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

after happened did not at all contribute to enlarge their ideas, or mend
their national character.

About the year 426, the Romans, on account of domestic commotions,
entirely forsook Britain, finding it impossible to defend so distant a
frontier. The Picts and Scots, seizing this favorable opportunity, made
incursions into the deserted province. The Britons, enervated by the
slavery of several centuries, and those vices which are inseparable from
an advanced state of civility, were not able to withstand the impetuous,
though irregular, attacks of a barbarous enemy. In the utmost distress,
they applied to their old masters, the Romans, and (after the
unfortunate state of the empire could not spare aid) to the Saxons, a
nation equally barbarous and brave with the enemies of whom they were so
much afraid. Though the bravery of the Saxons repelled the Caledonian
nations for a time, yet the latter found means to extend themselves
considerably towards the south. It is in this period we must place the
origin of the arts of civil life among the Scots. The seat of government
was removed from the mountains to the plain and more fertile provinces
of the south, to be near the common enemy in case of sudden incursions.
Instead of roving through unfrequented wilds in search of subsistence by
means of hunting, men applied to agriculture, and raising of corn. This
manner of life was the first means of changing the national character.
The next thing which contributed to it was their mixture with strangers.

In the countries which the Scots had conquered from the Britons, it is
probable that most of the old inhabitants remained. These incorporating
with the conquerors, taught them agriculture and other arts which they
themselves had received from the Romans. The however, in number as well
as power, being the

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

most predominant, retained still their language, and as many of the
customs of their ancestors as suited-with the nature of the country they
possessed. Even the union of the two Caledonian kingdoms did not much
affect the national character. Being originally descended from the same
stock, the manners of the Picts and Scots were as similar as the
different natures of the countries they possessed permitted.

What brought about a total change in the genius of the Scots nation was
their wars and other transactions with the Saxons. Several counties in
the south of Scotland were alternately possessed by the two nations.
They were ceded, in the ninth age, to the Scots, and it is probable that
most of the Saxon inhabitants remained in possession of their lands.
During the several conquests and revolutions in England, many fled for
refuge into Scotland, to avoid the oppression of foreigners, or the
tyranny of domestic usurpers; insomuch, that the Saxon race formed,
perhaps, near one half of the Scottish kingdom. The Saxon manners and
language daily gained ground on the tongue and customs of the ancient
Caledonians, till, at last, the latter were entirely relegated to the
inhabitants of the mountains, who were still unmixed with strangers.

It was after the accession of territory which the Scots received upon
the retreat of the Romans from Britain, that the inhabitants of the
Highlands were divided into clans. The king, when he kept his court in
the mountains, was considered by the whole nation as the chief of their
blood. The small number, as well as the presence of their prince,
prevented those divisions which, afterward, sprung forth into so many
separate tribes. When the seat of [government](errata.htm#2) was removed
to the south, those who remained in the Highlands were, of course,
neglected. They naturally formed themselves into small societies
independent of

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

one another. Each society had its own regulus, who either was, or, in
the succession of a few generations, was regarded as chief of their
blood. The nature of the country favored an institution of this sort. A
few valleys, divided from one another by extensive heaths and impassable
mountains, form the face of the Highlands. In those valleys the chiefs
fixed their residence. Round them, and almost within sight of their
dwellings, were the habitations of their relations and dependants.

The seats of the Highland chiefs were neither disagreeable nor
inconvenient. Surrounded with mountains and hanging woods, they were
covered from the inclemency of the weather. Near them generally ran a
pretty large river, which, discharging itself not far off into an arm of
the sea or extensive lake, swarmed with variety of fish. The woods were
stocked with wild-fowl; and the heaths and mountains behind them were
the natural seat of the red-deer and roe. If we make allowance for the
backward state of agriculture, the valleys were not unfertile;
affording, if not all the conveniences, at least the necessaries of
life. Here the chief lived, the supreme judge and lawgiver of his own
people; but his sway was neither severe nor unjust. As the populace
regarded him as the chief of their blood, so he, in return, considered
them as members of his family. His commands, therefore, though absolute
and decisive, partook more of the authority of a father than of the
rigor of a judge. Though the whole territory of the tribe was considered
as the property of the thief, yet his vassals made him no other
consideration for their lands than services, neither burdensome nor
frequent. As he seldom went from home, he was at no expense. His table
was supplied by his own herds and what his numerous attendants killed in
hunting.

In this rural kind of magnificence the Highland chiefs lived for many
ages. At a distance from the

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

seat of government, and secured by the inaccessibleness of their
country, they were free and independent. As they had little
communication with strangers, the customs of their ancestors remained
among them, and their language retained its original purity, Naturally
fond of military fame, and remarkably attached to the memory of their
ancestors, they delighted in traditions and songs concerning the
exploits of their nation, and especially of their own particular
families. A succession of bards was retained in every clan to hand down
the memorable actions of their forefathers. As Fingal and his chiefs
were the most renowned names in tradition, the bards took care to place
them in the genealogy of every great family. They became famous among
the people, and an object of fiction and poetry to the bard.

The bards erected their immediate patrons into heroes and celebrated
them in their songs. As the circle of their knowledge was narrow, their
ideas were confined in proportion. A few happy expressions, and the
manners they represent, may please those who understand the language;
their obscurity and inaccuracy would disgust in a translation. It was
chiefly for this reason that I have rejected wholly the works of the
bards in my publications. Ossian acted in a more extensive sphere, and
his ideas ought to be more noble and universal; neither gives he, I
presume, so many of their peculiarities, which are only understood in a
certain period or country. The other bards have their beauties, but not
in this species of composition. Their rhymes, only calculated to kindle
a martial spirit among the vulgar, afford very little pleasure to
genuine taste. This observation only regards their poems of the heroic
kind; in every inferior species of poetry they are more successful. They
express the tender melancholy of desponding love with simplicity and
nature.

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

\[paragraph continues\] So well adapted are the sounds of the words to
the sentiments, that, even without any [knowledge](errata.htm#3) of the
language, they pierce and dissolve the heart. Successful love is
expressed with peculiar tenderness and elegance. In all their
compositions, except the heroic, which was solely calculated to animate
the vulgar, they gave us the genuine language of the heart, without any
of those affected ornaments of phraseology, which, though intended to
beautify sentiments, divest them of their natural force. The ideas, it
is confessed, are too local to be admired in another language; to those
who are acquainted with the manners they represent, and the scenes they
describe, they must afford pleasure and satisfaction.

It was the locality of their description and sentiment that, probably,
has kept them in the obscurity of an almost lost language. The ideas of
an unpolished period are so contrary to the present advanced state of
society, that more than a common mediocrity of taste is required to
relish them as they deserve. Those who alone are capable of transferring
ancient poetry into a modern language, might be better employed in
giving originals of their own, were it not for that wretched envy and
meanness which affects to despise contemporary genius. My first
publication was merely accidental; had I then met with less approbation
my after pursuits would have been more profitable; at least, I might
have continued to be stupid without being branded with dulness.

These poems may furnish light to antiquaries, as well as some pleasure
to the lovers of poetry. The first population of Ireland, its first
kings, and several circumstances, which regard its connection of old
with the south and north of Britain, am presented in several episodes.
The subject and catastrophe of the poem are founded upon facts which
regarded the first peopling of that country, and the contests between
the two

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

\[paragraph continues\] British nations, who originally inhabited that
island. In a preceding part of this dissertation I have shown how
superior the probability of this system is to the undigested fictions of
the Irish bards, and the more recent and regular legends of both Irish
and Scottish historians. I mean not to give offence to the abettors of
the high antiquities of the two nations, though I have all along
expressed my doubts concerning the veracity and abilities of those who
deliver down their ancient history. For my own part, I prefer the
national fame arising from a few certain facts, to the legendary and
uncertain annals of ages of remote and obscure antiquity. No kingdom now
established in Europe can pretend to equal antiquity with that of the
Scots, inconsiderable as it may appear in other respects, even according
to my system; so that it is altogether needless to fix its origin a
fictitious millenium before.

Since the first publication of these poems, many insinuations have been
made, and doubts arisen, concerning their authenticity. Whether these
suspicions are suggested by prejudice, or are only the effects of
malice, I neither know nor care. Those who have doubted my veracity have
paid a compliment to my genius; and were even the allegation true, my
self-denial might have atoned for my fault. Without vanity I say it, I
think I could write tolerable poetry, and I assume my antagonists, that
I should not translate what I could not imitate.

As prejudice is the effect of ignorance, I am not surprised at its being
general. An age that produces few marks of genius ought to be sparing of
admiration. The truth is, the bulk of mankind have ever been led by
reputation more than taste, in articles of literature. If all the Romans
who admired Virgil understood his beauties, he would have scarce
deserved to have come down to us through so many centuries. Unless
genius

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

were in fashion, Homer himself might have written in vain. He that
wishes to come with weight on the superficial, must skim the surface, in
their own shallow way. Were my aim to gain the many, I would write a
madrigal sooner than an heroic poem. Laberius himself would be always
sure of more followers than Sophocles.

Some who doubt the authenticity of this work, with peculiar acuteness
appropriate them to the Irish nation. Though it is not easy to conceive
how these poems can belong to Ireland and to me at once, I shall examine
the subject without farther animadversion on the blunder.

Of all the nations descended from the ancient Celtæ, the Scots and Irish
are the most similar in language, customs, and manners. This argues a
more intimate connection between them than a remote descent from the
great Celtic stock. It is evident, in short, that, at some period or
other, they formed one society, were subject to the same government, and
were, in all respects, one and the same people. How they became divided,
which the colony, or which the mother-nation, I have in another work
amply discussed. The first circumstance that induced me to disregard the
vulgarly. received opinion of the Hibernian extraction of the Scottish
nation was my observations on their ancient language. The dialect of the
Celtic tongue, spoken in the north of Scotland, is much more pure, more
agreeable to its mother-language, and more abounding with primitives,
than that now spoken, or even that which has been written for some
centuries back, amongst the most unmixed part of the Irish nation. A
Scotchman, tolerably conversant in his own language, understands an
Irish composition from that derivative analogy which it has to the
Gaelic of North Britain. An Irishman, on the other hand, without the

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

aid of study, can never understand a composition in the Gaelic tongue.
This affords a proof that the Scotch Gaelic is the most original, and,
consequently, the language of a more ancient and unmixed people. The
Irish, however backward they may be to allow any thing to the prejudice
of their antiquity, seem inadvertently to acknowledge it, by the very
appellation they give to the dialect they speak. They call their own
language *Caelic Eirinarch*, i. e. Caledonian Irish, when, on the
contrary, they call the dialect of North Britain *a Chaelic*, or the
Caledonian tongue, emphatically. As circumstance of this nature tends
more to decide which is the most ancient nation than the united
testimonies of a whole legion of ignorant bards and senachies, who,
perhaps, never dreamed of bringing the Scots from Spain to Ireland, till
some one of them, more learned than the rest, discovered that the Romans
called the first Iberia, and the latter Hibernia. On such a slight
foundation were probably built the romantic fictions concerning the
Milesians of Ireland.

From internal proofs it sufficiently appears that the poems published
under the name of Ossian are not of Irish composition. The favorite
chimera, that Ireland is the mother-country of the Scots, is totally
subverted and ruined. The fictions concerning the antiquities of that
country, which were formed for ages, and growing as they came down on
the hands of successive senachies and fileas, are found, at last, to be
the spurious brood of modern and ignorant ages, To those who know how
tenacious the Irish are of their pretended Iberian descent, this alone
is proof sufficient, that poems, so subversive of their system, could
never be produced by an Hibernian bard. But when we look to the
language, it is so different from the Irish dialect, that it would be as
ridiculous to think that Milton's Paradise Lost could be wrote by a
Scottish peasant, as

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

to suppose that the poems ascribed to Ossian were writ in Ireland.

The pretensions of Ireland to Ossian proceed from another quarter. There
are handed down in that country traditional poems concerning the Fiona,
or the heroes of Fion Mae Comnal. This Fion, say the Irish annalists,
was general of the militia of Ireland in the reign of Cormac, in the
third century. Where Keating and O'Flaherty learned that Ireland had an
embodied militia so early, is not so easy for me to determine. Their
information certainly did not come from the Irish poems concerning Fion.
I have just now in my hands all that remain of those compositions; but,
unluckily for the antiquities of Ireland, they appear to be the work of
a very modern period. Every stanza, nay, almost every line, affords
striking proofs that they cannot be three centuries old. Their allusions
to the manners and customs of the fifteenth century are so many, that it
is a matter of wonder to me how any one could dream of their antiquity.
They are entirely writ in that romantic taste which prevailed two ages
ago. Giants, enchanted castles, dwarfs, palfreys, witches, and
magicians, form the whole circle of the poet's invention. The celebrated
Fion could scarcely move from one hillock to another without
encountering a giant, or being entangled in the circles of a magician.
Witches, on broomsticks, were continually hovering round him like crows;
and he had freed enchanted virgins in every valley in Ireland. In short,
Fion, great as he was, passed a disagreeable life. Not only had he to
engage all the mischiefs in his own country, foreign armies invaded him,
assisted by magicians and witches, and headed by kings as tall as the
mainmast of a first-rate. It must be owned, however, that Fion was not
inferior to them in height.

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

A chos air Cromleach, draim-ard,  
Chos eile air Crom-meal dubh,  
Thoga Fion le lamh mhoir  
An d'uisge o Lubhair na fruth.

With one foot on Cromleach his brow,  
The other on Crommal the dark  
Fion took with his large hand  
The water from Lubar of the streams.

Cromleach and Crommal were two mountains in the neighborhood of one
another, in Ulster, and the river of Lubar ran through the intermediate
valley. The property of such a monster as this Fion I should never have
disputed with any nation; but the bard himself, in the poem from which
the above quotation is taken, cedes him to Scotland:

Fion o Albin, siol nan laoich!  
Fion from Albion, race of heroes!

Were it allowable to contradict the authority of a bard, at this
distance of time, I should have given as my opinion, that this enormous
Fion was of the race of the Hibernian giants, of Ruanus, or some other
celebrated name, rather than a native of Caledonia, whose inhabitants,
now at least, are not remarkable for their stature. As for the poetry, I
leave it to the reader.

If Fion was so remarkable for his stature, his heroes had also other
extraordinary properties. "In weight all the sons of strangers yielded
to the celebrated Toniosal; and for hardness of skull, and, perhaps, for
thickness too, the valiant Oscar stood 'unrivalled and alone.'" Ossian
himself had many singular and less delicate qualifications than playing
on the harp; and the brave Cuthullin was of so diminutive a size, as to
be taken for a child of two years of age by the gigantic Swaran. To
illustrate this subject, I shall here lay before the reader the history
of some of the Irish poems concerning Fion Mae Comnal. A translation of
these pieces, if well executed, might afford satisfaction, in an

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

uncommon way, to the public. But this ought to be the work of a native
of Ireland. To draw forth from obscurity the poems of my own country has
wasted all the time I had allotted for the Muses; besides, I am too
diffident of my own abilities to undertake such a work. A gentleman in
Dublin accused me to the public of committing blunders and absurdities
in translating the language of my own country, and that before any
translation of mine appeared. How the gentleman came to see my blunders
before I committed them, is not easy to determine, if he did not
conclude that, as a Scotsman, and, of course, descended of the Milesian
race, I might have committed some of those oversights, which, perhaps
very unjustly, are said to be peculiar to them.

From the whole tenor of the Irish poems concerning the Fiona, it appears
that Fion Mae Comnal flourished in the reign of Cormac, which is placed,
by the universal consent of the senachies, in the third century. They
even fix the death of Fingal in the year 268, yet his son Ossian is made
contemporary with St. Patrick, who preached the gospel in Ireland about
the middle of the fifth age. Ossian, though at that time he must have
been two hundred and fifty years of age, had a daughter young enough to
become wife to the Saint. On account of this family connection, "Patrick
of the Psalms," for so the apostle of Ireland is emphatically called in
the poems, took great delight in the company of Ossian, and in hearing
the great actions of his family. The saint sometimes threw off the
austerity of his profession, drank freely, and had his soul properly
warmed with wine, to receive with becoming enthusiasm the poems of his
father-in-law. One of the poems begins with this useful piece of
information:

Lo don rabh Padric us mhúr,  
Gun Sailm air uidh, ach a gol,  
Ghluais è thigh Ossian mhic Fhion,  
O san leis bhinn a ghloir.

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The title of this poem is "Teantach mor na
Fioia." It appears to have been founded on the same story with the
"Battle of Lora." The circumstances and catastrophe in both are much the
same: but the Irish Ossian discovers the age in which he lived by an
unlucky anachronism. After describing the total rout of Erragon, he very
gravely concludes with this remarkable anecdote, that none of the foe
escaped, but a few, who were permitted to go on a pilgrimage to the Holy
Land. This circumstance fixes the date of the composition of the piece
some centuries after the famous croisade: for it is evident that the
poet thought the time of the croisade so ancient, that he confounds it
with the age of Fingal. Erragon, in the course of this poem, is often
called,

Rhoigh Lochlin an do shloigh,  
King of Denmark of two nations--

which alludes to the union of the kingdom of Norway and Denmark, a
circumstance which happened under Margaret de Waldemar, in the close of
the fourteenth age. Modern, however, as this pretended Ossian was, it is
certain he lived before the Irish had dreamed of appropriating Fion, or
Fingal, to themselves. He concludes the poem with this reflection:

Na fagha se comhthróm nan n arm,  
Erragon Mac Annir nan lann glas  
'San n'Albin ni n' abairtair Triath  
Agus ghlaoite an n'Fhiona as.

"Had Erragon, son of Annir of gleaming swords, avoided the equal contest
of arms, (single combat,) no chief should have afterward been numbered
in Albion, and the heroes of Fion should no more be named."

The next poem that falls Under our observation is "Cath-cabhra," or "The
Death of Oscar." This piece is founded on the same story which we have
in the first book of Temora. So little thought the author

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

of Cath-cabhra of making Oscar his countryman, that in the course of two
hundred lines, of which the poem consists, he puts the following
expression thrice in the mouth of the hero:

Albin an sa d'roina m'arch.--  
Albion, where I was born and bred.

The poem contains almost all the incidents in the first book of Temora.
In one circumstance the bard differs materially from Ossian. Oscar,
after he was mortally wounded by Cairbar, was carried by his people to a
neighboring hill which commanded a prospect of the sea. A fleet appeared
at a distance, and the hero exclaims with joy,

Loingeas mo shean-athair at' an  
'S iad a tiächd le cabhair chugain,  
O Albin na n'ioma stuagh.

"It is the fleet of my grandfather coming with aid to our field, from
Albion of many waves!" The testimony of this bard is sufficient to
confute the idle fictions of Keating and O'Flaherty, for, though he is
far from being ancient, it is probable he flourished a full century
before these historians. He appears, however, to have been a much better
Christian than chronologer; for Fion, though he is placed two centuries
before St. Patrick, very devoutly recommends the soul of his grandson to
his Redeemer.

"Duan a Gharibh Mac-Starn" is another Irish poem in great repute. The
grandeur of its images, and its propriety of sentiment, might have
induced me to give a translation of it, had I not some expectations,
which are now over, of seeing it in the collection of the Irish Ossian's
Poems, promised twelve years since to the public. The author descends
sometimes from the region of the sublime to low and indecent
description; the last of which, the Irish translator, no doubt, will
choose to leave in the obscurity of the original. In

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

this piece Cuthullin is used with very little ceremony, for he is oft
called the "dog of Tara," in the county of Meath. This severe title of
the redoubtable Cuthullin, the most renowned of Irish champions,
proceeded from the poet's ignorance of etymology. *Cu*, "voice" or
commander, signifies also a dog. The poet chose the last, as. the most
noble appellation for his hero.

The subject of the poem is the same with that of the epic poem of
Fingal. Caribh Mac-Starn is the same with Ossian's Swaran, the son of
Starno. His single combats with, and his victory over, all the heroes of
Ireland, excepting the "celebrated dog of Tara," *i. e.* Cuthullin,
afford matter for two hundred lines of [tolerable](errata.htm#4) poetry.
Cribh's progress in search of Cuthullin, and his intrigue with the
gigantic Emir-bragal, that hero's wife, enables the poet to extend his
piece to four hundred lines. This author, it is true, makes Cuthullin a
native of Ireland: the gigantic Emir-bragal he calls the "guiding-star
of the women of Ireland." The property of this enormous lady I shall not
dispute, with him or any other. But as he speaks with great tenderness
of the "daughters of the convent," and throws out some hints against the
English nation, it is probable he lived in too modern a period to be
intimately acquainted with the genealogy of Cuthullin.

Another Irish Ossian, for there were many, as appears from their
difference in language and sentiment, speaks very dogmatically of Fion
Mac Comnal, as an Irishman. Little can be said for the judgment of this
poet, and less for his delicacy of sentiment. The history of one of his
episodes may, at once, stand as a specimen of his want of both. Ireland,
in the days of Fion, happened to be threatened with an invasion by three
great potentates, the kings of Lochlin, Sweden, and France. It is
needless to insist upon the impropriety

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

of a French invasion of Ireland; it is sufficient to me to be faithful
to the language of my author. Fion, upon receiving intelligence of the
intended invasion, sent Ca-olt, Ossian, and Oscar, to watch the bay in
which it was apprehended the enemy was to land. Oscar was the worst
choice of a scout that could be made; for, brave as he was, he had the
bad property of very often falling asleep on his post, nor was it
possible to awake him, without cutting off one of his fingers, or
dashing a large stone against his head. When the enemy appeared, Oscar,
very unfortunately, was asleep. Ossian and Ca-olt consulted about the
method of wakening him, and they at last fixed on the stone as the less
dangerous expedient--

Gun thog Caoilte a chlach, nach gan,  
Agus a n' aighai' chiean gun bhuail;  
Tri mil an tulloch gun chri', &c.

"Ca-olt took up a heavy stone, and struck it against the hero's head.
The hill shook for three miles, as the stone rebounded and rolled away."
Oscar rose in wrath, and his father gravely desired him to spend his
rage on his enemies, which he did to so good purpose, that he singly
routed a whole wing of their army. The confederate kings advanced,
notwithstanding, till they came to a narrow pass possessed by the
celebrated Ton-iosal. This name is very significant of the singular
property of the hero who bore it. Toniosal, though brave, was so heavy
and unwieldy, that when he sat down it took the whole force of a hundred
men to set him upright on his feet again. Luckily for the preservation
of Ireland, the hero happened to be standing when the enemy appeared,
and he gave so good an amount of them, that Fion, upon his arrival,
found little to do but to divide the spoil among his soldiers.

All these extraordinary heroes, Fion, Ossian, Oscar, and Ca-olt, says
the poet, were

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

Siol Erin na gorm lánn.  
The sons of Erin of blue steel.

Neither shall I much dispute the matter with him; he has my consent also
to appropriate to Ireland the celebrated Ton-iosal. I shall only say
that they are different persons from those of the same name in the Scots
Poems; and that, though the stupendous valor of the first is so
remarkable, they have not been equally lucky with the latter, in their
poet. It is somewhat extraordinary that Fion, who lived some ages before
St. Patrick, swears like a very good Christian.

Air an Dia do chum gach case.  
By God who shaped every caw.

It is worthy of being remarked, that, in the line quoted, Ossian, who
lived in St. Patrick's days, seems to have understood something of the
English, a language not then subsisting. A person more sanguine for the
honor of his country than I am, might argue from this circumstance, that
this pretendedly Irish Ossian was a native of Scotland; for my
countrymen are universally allowed to have an exclusive right to the
second sight.

From the instances given, the reader may form a complete idea of the
Irish compositions concerning the Fiona. The greatest part of them make
the heroes of Fion,

Siol Albin a n'nioma caoile.  
The race of Albion of many firths.

The rest make them natives of Ireland. But the truth is, that their
authority is of little consequence on either side. From the instances I
have given, they appear to have been the work of a very modern period.
The pious ejaculations they contain, their allusions to the manners of
the times, fix them to the fifteenth century. Had even the authors of
these pieces avoided all allusions to their own times, it is impossible
that the

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

poems could pass for ancient in the eyes of any person tolerably
conversant with the Irish tongue. The idiom is so corrupted, and so many
words borrowed from the English, that the language must have made
considerable progress in Ireland before the poems were written.

It remains now to show how the Irish bards began to appropriate the
Scottish Ossian and his heroes, to their own country. After the English
conquest, many of the natives of Ireland, averse to a foreign yoke,
either actually were in a state of hostility with the conquerors, or, at
least, paid little regard to government. The Scots, in those ages, were
often in open war, and never in cordial friendship, with the English.
The similarity of manners and language, the traditions concerning their
common origin, and, above all, their having to do with the same enemy,
created a free and friendly intercourse between the Scottish and Irish
nations. As the custom of retaining bards and senachies was common to
both, so each, no doubt, had formed a system of history, it matters not
how much soever fabulous, concerning their respective origin. It was the
natural policy of the times to reconcile the traditions of both nations
together, and, if possible, to deduce them from the same original stock.

The Saxon manners and language had, at that time, made great progress in
the south of Scotland. The ancient language, and the traditional history
of the nation, became confined entirely to the inhabitants of the
Highlands, then falling, from several concurring circumstances, into the
last degree of ignorance and barbarism. The Irish, who, for some ages
before the conquest, had possessed a competent share of that kind of
learning which then prevailed in Europe, found it no difficult matter to
impose their own fictions on the ignorant Highland senachies. By
flattering the vanity of the Highlanders with their long list of
Hermonian

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

kings and heroes, they, without contradiction, assumed to themselves the
character of being the mother-nation of the Scots of Britain. At this
time, certainly, was established that Hibernian system of the original
of the Scots, which afterward, for want of any other, was universally
received. The Scots of the low country, who, by losing, the language of
their ancestors, lost, together with it, their national traditions..
received implicitly the history of their country from Irish refugees, or
from Highland senachies, persuaded over into the Hibernian system.

These circumstances are far from being ideal. We have remaining many
particular traditions which bear testimony to a fact of itself
abundantly probable. What makes the matter incontestible is, that the
ancient traditional accounts of the genuine origin of the Scots, have
been handed down without interruption. Though a few ignorant senachies
might be persuaded out of their own opinion by the smoothness of an
Irish tale, it was impossible to eradicate, from among the bulk of the
people, their own national traditions. These traditions afterward so
much prevailed, that the Highlanders continue totally unacquainted with
the pretended Hibernian extract of the Scotch nation. Ignorant chronicle
writers, strangers to the ancient language of their country, preserved
only from failing to the ground so improbable a story.

This subject, perhaps, is pursued farther than it de. serves; but a
discussion of the pretensions of Ireland was become in some measure
necessary. If the Irish poems concerning the Fiona should appear
ridiculous, it is but justice to observe, that they are scarcely more so
than the poems of other nations at that period. On other subjects, the
bards of Ireland have displayed a [genius](errata.htm#5) for poetry. It
was alone in matters of antiquity that they were monstrous in their
fables. Their love-sonnets,

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

and their elegies on the death of persons worthy or renowned, abound
with simplicity, and a wild harmony of numbers. They became more than an
atonement for their errors in every other species of poetry. But the
beauty of these species depends so much on a certain *curiosa filicitas*
of expression m the original, that they must appear much to disadvantage
in another language.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Critical Dissertation...](oss06)
