[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Celtic Folklore](../celt/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](oss18)  [Next](oss20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

# THE WAR OF CAROS.

### ARGUMENT.

Caros is probably the noted usurper Carausius, by birth a Menapian, who
assumed the purple in the year 284; and, seizing on Britain, defeated
the emperor Maximinian Herculius in several naval engagements, which
gives propriety to his being called in this poem "the king of ships." He
repaired Agricola's wall, in order to obstruct the incursions of the
Caledonians, and when he was employed in that work, it appears he was
attacked by a party under the command of Oscar the son of' Ossian. This
battle is the foundation of the present poem, which is addressed to
Malvina, the daughter of Toscar.

Bring, daughter of Toscar, bring the harp! the light of the song rises
in Ossian's soul! It is like the field, when darkness covers the hills
around, and the shadow grows slowly on the plain of the sun. I behold my
son, O Malvina! near the mossy rock of Crona. But it is the mist of the
desert, tinged with the beam of the west! Lovely is the mist that
assumes the form of Oscar! turn from it, ye winds, when ye roar on the
side of Ardven!

Who comes towards my son, with the murmur of a song? His staff is in his
hand, his gray hair loose on the wind. Surly joy lightens his face. He
often looks back to Caros. It is Ryno of songs, he that went to view the
foe. "What does Caros, king of ships?" said the son of the now mournful
Ossian: "spreads he the wings  <span id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55) of
his pride, bard of the times of old?" "He spreads them, Oscar," replied
the bard," but it is behind his gathered heap. <span
id="fr_56"></span>[2](#fn_56) He looks over his stones

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

with fear. He beholds thee terrible, as the ghost of night, that rolls
the waves to his ships!"

"Go, thou first of my bards!" says Oscar, "take the spear of Fingal. Fix
a flame on its point. Shake it to the winds of heaven. Bid him in songs,
to advance, and leave the rolling of his wave. Tell to Caros that I long
for battle; that my bow is weary of the chase of Cona. Tell him the
mighty are not here; and that my arm is young."

He went with the murmur of songs. Oscar reared his voice on high. It
reached his heroes on Ardven, like the noise of a cave, when the sea of
Togorma rolls before it, and its trees meet the roaring winds. They
gather round my son like the streams of the hill; when, after rain, they
roll in the pride of their course. Ryno came to the mighty Caros. He
struck his flaming spear. Come to the battle of Oscar. O thou that
sittest on the rolling waves! Fingal is distant far; he hears the songs
of bards in Morven: the wind of his hall is in his hair. His terrible
spear is at his side; his shield that is like the darkened moon Come to
the battle of Oscar; the hero is alone.

He came not over the streamy Carun. The bard returned with his song.
Gray night grows dim on Crona. The feast of shells is spread. A hundred
oaks burn to the wind; faint light gleams over the heath. The ghosts of
Ardven pass through the beam, and show their dim and distant forms.
Comala  <span id="fr_57"></span>[3](#fn_57) is half unseen on her
meteor; Hidallan is sullen and dim, like the darkened moon behind the
mist of night.

"Why art thou sad?" said Ryno; for he alone beheld the chief. "Why art
thou sad, Hidallan! hast thou not received thy fame? The songs of Ossian
have

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

been heard, thy ghost has brightened in wind, when thou didst bend from
thy cloud to hear the song of Morven's bard!"---"And do thine eyes,"
said Oscar, "behold the chief, like the dim meteor of night? Say, Ryno,
say, how fell Hidallan, the renowned in the days of my fathers! His name
remains on the rocks of Cona. I have often seen the streams of his
hills!"

Fingal, replied the bard, drove Hidallan from his wars. The king's soul
was sad for Comala, and his eyes could not behold the chief. Lonely,
sad, along the heath he slowly moved, with silent steps. His arms hung
disordered on his side. His hair flies loose from his brow. The tear is
in his downcast eyes; a sigh half silent in his breast! Three days he
strayed unseen, alone, before he came to Lamor's halls: the mossy halls
of his fathers, at the stream of Balva. There Lamor sat alone beneath a
tree; for he had sent his people with Hidallan to war. The stream ran at
his feet; his gray head rested on his staff. Sightless are his aged
eyes. He hums the song of other times. The noise of Hidallan's feet came
to his ear: he knew the tread of his son.

"Is the son of Lamor returned; or is it the sound of his ghost? Hast
thou fallen on the banks of Carun, son of the aged Lamor? Or, if I hear
the sound of Hidallan's feet, where are the mighty in the war? where are
my people, Hidallan! that were wont to return with their echoing
shields? Have they fallen on the banks of Carun?"

"No," replied the sighing youth, "the people of Lamor live. They are
renowned in war, my father! but Hidallan is renowned no more. I must sit
alone on the banks of Balva, when the roar of the battle grows."

"But thy fathers never sat alone," replied the rising pride of Lamor.
"They never sat alone on the banks

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

of Balva, when the roar of battle rose. Dost thou not behold that tomb?
My eyes discern it not; there rests the noble Garmállon, who never fled
from war! Come, thou renowned in battle, he says, come to thy father's
tomb. How am I renowned, Garmállon? my son has fled from war!"

"King of the streamy Balva!" said Hidallan with a sigh, "why dost thou
torment my soul? Lamor, I never fled. Fingal was sad for Comala; he
denied his wars to Hidallan. Go to the gray streams of thy land, he
said; moulder like a leafless oak, which the winds have bent over Balva,
never more to grow."

"And must I hear," Lamor replied, "the lonely tread of Hidallan's feet?
When thousands are renowned in battle, shall he bend over my gray
streams? Spirit of the noble Garmállon! carry Lamor to his place; his
eyes are dark, his soul is sad, his son has lost his fame."

"Where," said the youth, "shall I search for fame, to gladden the soul
of Lamor? From whence shall return with renown, that the sound of my
arms may be pleasant in his ear? If I go to the chase of hinds, my name
will not be heard. Lamor will not feel my dogs with his hands, glad at
my arrival from the hill. He will not inquire of his mountains, or of
the dark-brown deer of his deserts!"

"I must fall," said Lamor, "like a leafless oak: it grew on a rock! it
was overturned by the winds! My ghost will be seen on my hills, mournful
for my young Hidallan. Will not ye, ye mists, as ye rise, hide him from
my sight! My son, go to Lamor's ball: there the arms of our fathers
hang. Bring the sword of Garmállon: he took it from a foe!"

He went and brought the sword with all its studded thongs. He gave it to
his father. The gray-haired hero felt the point with his hand.

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

"My son, lead me to Garmállon's tomb: it rises beside that rustling
tree. The long grass is withered; I hear the breezes whistling there. A
little fountain murmurs near, and sends its waters to Balva. There let
me rest; it is noon: the sun is on our fields!"

He led him to Garmállon's tomb. Lamor pierced the side of his son. They
sleep together: their ancient halls moulder away. Ghosts are seen there
at noon: the valley is silent, and the people shun the place of Lamor.

"Mournful is thy tale," said Oscar, "son of the times of old! My soul
sighs for Hidallan; he fell in the days of his youth. He flies on the
blast of the desert: his wandering is in a foreign land. Sons of the
echoing Morven! draw near to the foes of Fingal. Send the night away in
songs; watch the strength of Caros. Oscar goes to the people of other
times; to the shades of silent Ardven, where his fathers sit dim in
their clouds, and behold the future war. And art thou there, Hidallan,
like a half-extinguished meteor? Come to my sight, in thy sorrow, chief
of the winding Balva!"

The heroes move with their songs. Oscar slowly ascends the hill. The
meteors of night set on the heath before him. A distant torrent faintly
roars. Unfrequent blasts rush through aged oaks. The half enlightened
moon sinks dim and red behind her hill. Feeble Voices are heard on the
heath. Oscar drew his sword! "Come," said the hero, "O ye ghosts of my
fathers! ye that fought against the kings of the world! Tell the deeds
of future times; and your converse in our caves, when you talk together,
and behold your sons in the fields of the brave!"

Trenmor came from his hill at the voice of his

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

mighty son. A cloud, like the steed of the stranger, supported his airy
limbs. His robe is of the mist of Lano, that brings death to the people.
His sword is a green meteor, half-extinguished. His face is without
form, and dark. He sighed thrice over the hero; thrice the winds of
night roared around! Many were his words to Oscar; but they only came by
halves to our ears; they were dark as the tales of other times, before
the light of the song arose. He slowly vanished, like a mist that melts
on the sunny hill. it was then, O daughter of Toscar! my son began first
to be sad. He foresaw the fall of his race. At times he was thoughtful
and dark, like the sun when he carries a cloud on his face, but again he
looks forth from his darkness on the green hills of Cona.

Oscar passed the night among his fathers: gray morning met him on
Carun's banks. A green vale surrounded a tomb which arose in the times
of old. Little hills lift their heads at a distance, and stretch their
old trees to the wind. The warriors of Caros sat there, for they had
passed the stream by night. They appeared like the trunks of aged pines,
to the pale light of the morning. Oscar stood at the tomb, and raised
thrice his terrible voice. The rocking hills echoed around; the starting
roes bounded away: and the trembling ghosts of the dead fled, shrieking
on their clouds. So terrible was the voice of my son, when he called his
friends!

A thousand spears arose around; the people of Caros rose. Why, daughter
of Toscar, why that tear? My son, though alone, is brave. Oscar is like
a beam of the sky; he turns around, and the people fall. his hand is the
arm of a ghost, when he stretches it from a cloud; the rest of his thin
form is unseen; but the people die in the vale! My son beheld the
approach of the foe; he stood in the silent darkness of his

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

strength. "Am I alone," said Oscar, "in the midst of a thousand foes?
Many a spear is there! many a darkly-rolling eye. Shall I fly to Ardven?
But did my fathers ever fly? The mark of their arm is in a thousand
battles. Oscar too shall be renowned. Come, ye dim ghosts of my fathers,
and behold my deeds in war! I may fall; but I will be renowned like the
race of the echoing Morven." He stood, growing in his place, like a
flood in a narrow vale! The battle came, but they fell: bloody was the
sword of Oscar!

The noise reached his people at Crona; they came like a hundred streams.
The warriors of Caros fled; Oscar remained like a rock left by the
ebbing sea. Now dark and deep, with all his steeds, Caros rolled his
might along: the little streams are lost in his course: the earth is
rocking round. Battle spreads from wing to wing; ten thousand swords
gleam at once in the sky. But why should Ossian sing of battles? For
never more shall my steel shine in war. I remember the days of my youth
with grief, when I feel the weakness of my arm. Happy are they who fell
in their youth, in the midst of their renown! They have not beheld the
tombs of their friends, or failed to bend the bow of their strength.
Happy art thou, O Oscar, in the midst of thy rushing blast! Thou often
goest to the fields of thy fame, where Caros fled from thy lifted sword!

Darkness comes on my soul, O fair daughter of Toscar! I behold not the
form of my son at Carun, nor the figure of Oscar on Crona. The rustling
winds have carried him far away, and the heart of his father is sad. But
lead me, O Malvina! to the sound of my woods, to the roar of my mountain
streams. Let the chase be heard on Cona: let me think on the days of
other years. And bring me the harp, O maid! that

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

\[paragraph continues\] I may touch it when the light of my soul shall
arise. Be thou near to learn the song; future times shall hear of me!
The sons of the feeble hereafter will lift the voice of Cona; and
looking up to the rocks, say, "Here Ossian dwelt." They shall admire the
chiefs of old, the race that are no more, while we ride on our clouds,
Malvina! on the wings of the roaring winds. Our voices shall be heard at
times in the desert; we shall sing on the breeze of the rock!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_55"></span>[261:1](oss19.htm#fr_55) The Roman eagle.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[261:2](oss19.htm#fr_56) Agricola's wall, which
Carausius repaired.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[262:3](oss19.htm#fr_57) This is the scene of
Comala's death, which is the subject of the dramatic poem.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Cathlin of Clutha](oss20)
