[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Celtic Folklore](../celt/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](oss12)  [Next](oss14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

# CARTHON.

### ARGUMENT.

This poem is complete, and the subject of it, as of most of Ossian's
compositions, tragical. In the time of Comhal, the son of Trathal, and
father of the celebrated Fingal, Clessámmor, the son of Thaddu, and
brother of Morna, Fingal's mother, was driven by a storm into the river
Clyde, on the banks of which stood Balclutha, a town belonging to the
Britons, between the walls. He was hospitably received by Reuthámir, the
principal man in the place, who gave him Moina, his only daughter, in
marriage. Reudo, the son of Cormo, a Briton, who was in love with Moina,
came to Reuthámir's house, and behaved haughtily towards Clessámmor. A
quarrel ensued, in which Reudo was killed; the Britons who attended him,
pressed so hard on Clessámmor, that he was obliged to throw himself into
the Clyde and swim to his ship. He hoisted sail, and the wind being
favorable, bore him out to sea. He often endeavored to return, and carry
off his beloved Moina by night; but the wind continuing contrary, he was
forced to desist.

Moina, who had been left with child by her husband, brought forth a son,
and died soon after. Reuthámir named the child Carthon, i. e., "the
murmur of waves," from the storm which carried off Clessámmor his
father, who was supposed to have been cast away. When Carthon was three
years old, Comhal, the father of Fingal, in one of his expeditions
against the Britons, took and burnt Balclutha. Reuthámir was killed in
the attack; and Carthon was carried safe away by his nurse, who fled
farther into the country of the Britons. Carthon, coming to man's
estate, was resolved to revenge the fall of Balclutha on Comhal's
posterity. He set sail from the Clyde, and falling on the coast of
Morven, defeated two of Fingal's heroes, who came to oppose his
progress. He was, at last, unwittingly killed by his father Clessámmor,
in a single combat. This story is the foundation of the present poem,
which opens on the night preceding the death of Carthon, so that what
passed before is introduced by way of episode. The poem is addressed to
Malvina, the daughter of Toscar.

A TALE of the times of old! The deeds of days of other years.

The murmur of thy streams, O Lora! brings back the memory of the past.
The sound of thy woods, Garmaller, is lovely in mine ear. Dost thou not
behold

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

Malvina, a rock with its head of heath! Three aged pines bend from its
face; green is the narrow plain at its feet; there the flower of the
mountain grows, and shakes its white head in the breeze. The thistle is
there alone, shedding its aged beard. Two stones, half sunk in the
ground, show their heads of moss. The deer of the mountain avoids the
place, for he beholds a dim ghost standing there. The mighty lie, O
Malvina! in the narrow plain of the rock.

A tale of the times of old! The deeds of days of other years!

Who comes from the land of strangers, with his thousands around him? The
sunbeam pours its bright stream before him; his hair meets the wind of
his hills. His face is settled from war. He is calm as the evening beam
that looks from the cloud of the west, on Cona's silent vale. Who is it
but Comhal's son, the king of mighty deeds! He beholds the hills with
joy, he bids a thousand voices rise. "Ye have fled over your fields, ye
sons of the distant land! The king of the world sits in his hall, and
hears of his people's flight. He lifts his red eye of pride; he takes
his father's sword. Ye have fled over your fields, sons of the distant
land!

Such were the words of the bards, when they came to Selma's halls. A
thousand lights from the stranger's land rose in the midst of his
people. The feast is spread around; the night passed away in joy. Where
is the noble Clessámmor? said the fair-haired Fingal. Where is the
brother of Morna, in the hour of my joy? Sullen and dark, he passes his
days in the vale of echoing Lora: but, behold, he comes from the hill,
like a steed in his strength, who finds his companions in the breeze,
and tosses his bright mane in the wind. Blest be the soul of Clessámmor,
why so long from Selma?

Returns the chief, said Clessámmor, in the midst of

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

his fame? Such was the renown of Comhal in the battles of his youth.
Often did we pass over Carun to the land of the strangers: our swords
returned, not unstained with blood: nor did the kings of the world
rejoice. Why do I remember the times of our war? My hair is mixed with
gray. My hand forgets to bend the bow: I lift a lighter spear. O that my
joy would return, as when I first beheld the maid; the white bosomed
daughter of strangers, Moina, with the dark-blue eyes!

Tell, said the mighty Fingal, the tale of thy youthful days. Sorrow,
like a cloud on the sun, shades the soul of Clessámmor. Mournful are thy
thoughts, alone, on the banks of the roaring Lora. Let us hear the
sorrow of thy youth and the darkness of thy days!

"It was in the days of peace," replied the great Clessámmor, "I came in
my bounding ship to Balclutha's walls of towers. The winds had roared
behind my sails, and Clutha's streams received my dark-bosomed ship.
Three days I remained in Reuthámir's halls, and saw his daughter, that
beam of light. The joy of the shell went round, and the aged hero gave
the fair. Her breasts were like foam on the waves, and her eyes like
stars of light; her hair was dark as the raven's wing: her soul was
generous and mild. My love for Moina was great; my heart poured forth in
joy.

"The son of a stranger came; a chief who loved the white-bosomed Moina.
His words were mighty in the hall; he often half-unsheathed his sword.
'Where,' said he, 'is the mighty Comhal, the restless wanderer of the
heath? Comes he, with his host, to Balclutha, since Clessámmor is so
bold?' My soul, I replied, O warrior! burns in a light of its own. I
stand without fear in the midst of thousands, though the valiant are
distant far. Stranger! thy words are mighty, for Clessámmor is alone.
But my sword trembles by my side,

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

and longs to glitter in my hand. Speak no more of Comhal, son of the
winding Clutha!

"The strength of his pride arose. We fought: he fell beneath my sword.
The banks of Clutha heard his fall; a thousand spears glittered around.
I fought: the strangers prevailed: I plunged into the stream of Clutha.
My white sails rose over the waves, and I bounded on the dark-blue sea.
Moina came to the shore, and rolled the red eye of her tears; her loose
hair flew on the wind; and I heard her mournful, distant cries. Often
did I turn my ship; but the winds of the east prevailed. Nor Clutha ever
since have I seen, nor Moina of the dark-brown hair. She fell in
Balclutha, for I have seen her ghost. I knew her as she came through the
dusky night, along the murmur of Lora: she was like the new moon, seen
through the gathered mist; when the sky pours down its flaky snow, and
the world is silent and dark."

Raise, ye bards, said the mighty Fingal, the praise of unhappy Moina.
Call her ghost, with your songs, to our hills, that she may rest with
the fair of Morven, the sunbeams of other days, the delight of heroes of
old. I have seen the walls of Balclutha, but they were desolate. The
fire had resounded in the halls: and the voice of the people is heard no
more. The stream of Clutha was removed from its place by the fall of the
walls. The thistle shook there its lonely head: the moss whistled to the
wind. The fox looked out from the windows, the rank grass of the wall
waved round its head. Desolate is the dwelling of Moina, silence is in
the house of her fathers. Raise the song of mourning, O bards, over the
land of strangers. They have but fallen before us: for one day we must
fall. Why dost thou build the hall, son of the winged days? Thou lookest
from thy towers to-day: yet a few years, and the blast of the desert
comes; it howls in thy empty

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

court, and whistles round thy half-worn shield. And let the blast of the
desert come! we shall be renowned in our day! The mark of my arm shall
be in battle; my name in the song of bards. Raise the song, send round
the shell: let joy be heard in my hall. When thou, sun of heaven! shalt
fail; if thou shalt fail, thou mighty light! if thy brightness is for a
season, like Fingal; our fame shall survive thy beams.

Such was the song of Fingal in the day of his joy. His thousand bards
leaned forward from their seats, to hear the voice of the king. It was
like the music of harps on the gale of the spring. Lovely were thy
thoughts, O Fingal! why had not Ossian the strength of thy soul? But
thou standest alone, my father! who can equal the king of Selma?

The night passed away in song; morning returned in joy. The mountains
showed their gray heads; the blue face of ocean smiled. The white wave
is seen tumbling round the distant rock; a mist rose slowly from the
lake. It came, in the figure of an aged man, along the silent plain. Its
large limbs did not move in steps, for a ghost supported it in mid air.
It came towards Selma's hall, and dissolved in a shower of blood.

The king alone beheld the sight; he foresaw the death of the people. He
came in silence to his hall, and took his father's spear. The mail
rattled on his breast. The heroes rose around. They looked in silence on
each other, marking the eyes of Fingal. They saw battle in his face; the
death of armies on his spear. A thousand shields at once are placed on
their arms; they drew a thousand swords. The hall of Selma brightened
around. The clang of arms ascends. The gray dogs howl in their place. No
word is among the mighty chiefs. Each marked the eyes of the king and
half-assumed his spear.

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

Sons of Morven, began the king, this is no time to fill the shell; the
battle darkens near us, death hovers over the land. Some ghost, the
friend of Fingal, has forewarned us of the foe. The sons of the stranger
come from the darkly rolling sea; for from the water came the sign of
Morven's gloomy danger. Let each assume his heavy spear, each gird on
his father's sword. Let the dark helmet rise on every head; the mail
pour its lightning from every side. The battle gathers like a storm;
soon shall ye hear the roar of death.

The hero moved on before his host, like a cloud before a ridge of green
fire, when it pours on the sky of night, and mariners foresee a storm.
On Cona's rising heath they stood: the white-bosomed maids beheld them
above like a grove; they foresaw the death of the youth, and looked
towards the sea with fear. The white wave deceived them for distant
sails; the tear is on their cheek! The sun rose on the sea, and we
beheld a distant fleet. Like the mist of ocean they came and poured
their youth upon the coast. The chief was among them, like the stag in
the midst of the herd. His shield is studded with gold; stately strode
the king of spears. He moved towards Selma; his thousands moved behind.

Go, with a song of peace, said Fingal: go, Ullin, to the king of swords.
Tell him that we are mighty in war; that the ghosts of our foes are
many. But renowned are they who have feasted in my halls; show the arms
of my fathers in a foreign land; the Sons of the strangers wonder, and
bless the friends of Morven's race; for our names have been heard afar:
the kings of the world shook in the midst of their host.

Ullin went with his song. Fingal rested on his spear: he saw the mighty
foe in his armor: he blest the stranger's son. "How stately art thou,
son of

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

the sea!" said the king of woody Morven. "Thy sword is a beam of fire by
thy side; thy spear is a pine that defies the storm. The varied face of
the moon is not broader than thy shield. Ruddy is thy face of youth!
soft the ringlets of thy hair! But this tree may fall, and his memory be
forgot! The daughter of the stranger will be sad, looking to the rolling
sea: the children will say, 'We see a ship; perhaps it is the king of
Balclutha.' The tear starts from their mother's eye: her thoughts are of
him who sleeps in Morven!"

Such were the words of the king when Ullin came to the mighty Carthon:
he threw down the spear before him, he raised the song of peace. "Come
to the feast of Fingal, Carthon, from the rolling sea! partake of the
feast of the king, or lift the spear of war! The ghosts of our foes are
many: but renowned are the friends of Morven! Behold that field, O
Carthon! many a green hill rises there, with mossy stones and rustling
grass; these are the tombs of Fingal's foes, the Sons of the rolling
sea!"

"Dost thou speak to the weak in arms!" said Carthon, "bard of the woody
Morven? Is my face pale for fear, son of the peaceful song? Why then
dost thou think to darken my soul with the tales of those who fell? My
arm has fought in battle, my renown is known afar. Go to the feeble in
arms, bid them yield to Fingal. Have not I seen the fallen Balclutha?
And shall I feast with Comhal's son? Comhal, who threw his fire in the
midst of my father's hall? I was young, and knew not the cause why the
virgins wept. The columns of smoke pleased mine eye, when they rose
above my walls! I often looked back with gladness when my friends flew
along the hill. But when the years of my youth came on, I beheld the
moss of my fallen walls. My sigh arose with the morning, and my tears
descended with night. Shall I not fight, I said to my soul, against the
children

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

of my foes? And I will fight, O bard! I feel the strength of my soul!"

His people gathered around the hero, and drew at once their shining
swords. He stands in the midst, like a pillar of fire, the tear
half-starting from his eye, for he thought of the fallen Balclutha. The
crowded pride of his soul arose. Sidelong he looked up to the hill,
where our heroes shone in arms: the spear trembled in his hand. Bending
forward, he seemed to threaten the king.

Shall I, said Fingal to his soul, meet at once the youth? Shall I stop
him in the midst of his course before his fame shall arise! But the bard
hereafter may say, when he sees the tomb of Carthon, Fingal took his
thousands to battle, before the noble Carthon fell. No: bard of the
times to come! thou shalt not lessen Fingal's fame! my heroes will fight
the youth, and Fingal behold the war. If he overcomes, I rush, in my
strength, like the roaring stream of Cona. Who of my chiefs will meet
the son of the rolling sea? Many are his warriors on the coast, and
strong is his ashen spear!

Cathul rose in his strength, the son of the mighty Lormar: three hundred
youths attend the chief, the race of his native streams. Feeble was his
arm against Carthon: he fell, and his heroes fled. Connal resumed the
battle, but he broke his heavy spear: he lay bound on the field: Carthon
pursued his people.

Clessámmor, said the king of Morven, where is the spear of thy strength.
Wilt thou behold Connal bound: thy friend at the stream of Lora? Rise,
in the light of thy steel, companion of valiant Comhal! let the youth of
Balclutha feel the strength of Morven's race. He rose in the strength of
his steel, shaking his grisly locks. He fitted the steel to his side; he
rushed in the pride of valor.

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

Carthon stood on a rock: he saw the hero rushing on. He loved the
dreadful joy of his face: his strength in the locks of age! "Shall I
lift that spear," he said, "that never strikes but once a foe? Or shall
I, with the words of peace, preserve the warrior's life? Stately are his
steps of age! lovely the remnant of his years! Perhaps it is the husband
of Moina, the father of car-borne Carthon. Often have I heard that he
dwelt at the echoing stream of Lora."

Such were his words when Clessámmor came, and lifted high his spear. The
youth received it on his shield, and spoke the words of peace. "Warrior
of the aged locks! is there no youth to lift the spear? Hast thou no son
to raise the shield before his father to meet the arm of youth? Is the
spouse of thy love no more? or weeps she over the tombs of thy sons? Art
thou of the kings of men? What will be the fame of my sword shouldst
thou fall?"

It will be great, thou son of pride! begun the tall Clessámmor. I have
been renowned in battle, but I never told my name to a foe.  <span
id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49.md) Yield to me, son of the wave, then shalt
thou know that the mark of my sword is in many a field. "I never
yielded, king of spears!" replied the noble pride of Carthon: "I have
also fought in war, I behold my future fame. Despise me not, thou chief
of men! my arm, my spear is strong. Retire among thy friends; let
younger heroes fight." Why dost thou wound my soul? replied Clessámmor,
with a tear. Age does not tremble on my hand. I still can lift the
sword. Shall I fly in Fingal's sight, in the

 

<span id="img_23000"></span> ![](img/23000.jpg)  
But thou shalt not die unknown replied the king of woody Morven

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

sight of him I love? Son of the sea! I never fled: exalt thy pointed
spear.

They fought like two contending winds, that strive to roil the wave.
Calthon bade his spear to err: he still thought that the foe was the
spouse of Moina. He broke Clessámmor's beamy spear in twain: he seized
his shining sword. But as Carthon was binding the chief, the chief drew
the dagger of his fathers. He saw the foe's uncovered side, and opened
there a wound.

Fingal saw Clessámmor low: he moved in the sound of his steel. The host
stood silent in his presence: they turned their eyes to the king. He
came like the sullen noise of a storm before the winds arise: the hunter
hears it in the vale, and retires to the cave of the rock. Carthon stood
in his place, the blood is rushing down his side: he saw the coming down
of the king, his hopes of fame arose, but pale was his cheek: his hair
flew loose, his helmet shook on high: the force of Carthon failed, but
his sword was strong.

Fingal beheld the hero's blood; he stopt the uplifted spear. "Yield,
king of swords!" said Comhal's son, "I behold thy blood; thou hast been
mighty in battle, and thy fame shall never fade." Art thou the king so
far renowned? replied the car-borne Carthon: art thou that light of
death, that frightens the kings of the world? But why should Carthon
ask? for he is like the stream of his hills, strong as a river in his
course, swift as the eagle of heaven. O that I had fought with the king,
that my fame might be great in song! that the hunter, beholding my tomb,
might say, he fought with the mighty Fingal. But Carthon dies unknown:
he has poured out his force on the weak.

"But thou shalt not die unknown, replied the king of woody Morven: my
bards are many, O Carthon! their songs descend to future times. The
children of years

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

to come shall hear the fame of Carthon, when they sit round the burning
oak, and the night is spent in songs of old. The hunter, sitting in the
heath, shall hear the rustling blast, and raising his eyes, behold the
rock where Carthon fell. He shall turn to his son, and show the place
where the mighty fought: There the king of Balclutha fought, like the
strength of a thousand streams."

Joy rose in Carthon's face; he lifted his heavy eyes. He gave his sword
to Fingal, to lie within his hall, that the memory of Balclutha's king
might remain in Morven. The battle ceased along the field, the bard had
sung the song of peace. The chiefs gathered round the falling Carthon;
they heard his words with sighs. Silent they leaned on their spears,
while Balclutha's hero spoke. His hair sighed in the wind, and his voice
was sad and low.

"King of Morven," Carthon said, "I fall in the midst of my course. A
foreign tomb receives, in youth, the last of Reuthámir's race. Darkness
dwells in Balclutha; the shadows of grief in Crathmo. But raise my
remembrance on the banks of Lora, where my fathers dwelt. Perhaps the
husband of Moina will mourn over his fallen Carthon." His words reached
the heart of Clessámmor: he fell in silence on his son. The host stood
darkened around: no voice is on the plain. Night came: the moon, from
the east, looked on the mournful field; but still they stood, like a
silent grove that lifts its head on Gormal, when the loud winds are
laid, and dark autumn is on the plain.

Three days they mourned above Carthon; on the fourth his father died. In
the narrow plain of the rock they lie; a dim ghost defends their tomb.
There lovely Moina is often seen, when the sunbeam darts on the rock,
and all around is dark. There she is seen, Malvina; but not like the
daughters of the hill. Her

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

robes are from the stranger's land, and she is still alone!

Fingal was sad for Carthon; he commanded his bards to mark the day when
shadowy autumn returned; and often did they mark the day, and sing the
hero's praise. "Who comes so dark from ocean's roar, like autumn's
shadowy cloud? Death is trembling in his hand! his eyes are flames of
fire! Who roars along dark Lora's heath? Who but Carthon, king of
swords! The people fall! see how he strides like the sullen ghost of
Morven! But there he lies, a goodly oak which sudden blasts overturned!
When shalt thou rise, Balclutha's joy? When, Carthon, shalt thou arise?
Who comes so dark from ocean's roar, like autumn's shadowy cloud?" Such
were the words of the bards in the day of their mourning; Ossian often
joined their voice, and added to their song. My soul has been mournful
for Carthon: he fell in the days of his youth; and thou, O Clessámmor!
where is thy dwelling in the wind? Has the youth forgot his wound? Flies
he on clouds with thee? I feel the sun, O Malvina! leave me to my rest.
Perhaps they may come to my dreams: I think I hear a feeble voice! The
beam of heaven delights to shine on the grave of Carthon: I feel it warm
around.

O thou that rollest above, round as the shield of my fathers! Whence are
thy beams, O sun! thy everlasting light! Thou comest forth in thy awful
beauty; the stars hide themselves in the sky; the moon, cold and pale,
sinks in the western wave; but thou thyself movest alone. Who can be a
companion of thy course? The oaks of the mountains fall; the mountains
themselves decay with years; the ocean shrinks and grows again; the moon
herself is lost in heaven: but thou art forever the same, rejoicing in
the brightness of thy course. When the world is dark with tempests, when
thunder rolls and lightning flies, thou lookest in thy

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

beauty from the clouds, and laughest at the storm. But to Ossian thou
lookest in vain, for he beholds thy beams no more: whether thy yellow
hair flows on the eastern clouds, or thou tremblest at the gates of the
west. But thou art, perhaps, like me, for a season; thy years will have
an end. Thou shalt sleep in thy clouds, careless of the voice of the
morning. Exult then, O sun, in the strength of thy youth! age is dark
and unlovely; it is like the glimmering light of the moon, when it
shines through broken clouds, and the mist is on the hills: the blast of
the north is on the plain, the traveller shrinks in the midst of his
journey.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_49"></span>[230:1](oss13.htm#fr_49.md) To tell one's name to
an enemy, was reckoned, in those days of heroism, a manifest evasion of
fighting him; for if it was once known that friendship subsisted of old,
between the ancestors of the combatants. the battle immediately ceased,
and the ancient amity of their forefathers was renewed. "A man who tells
his name to his enemy," was of old an ignominious term for a coward.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Oina-morul](oss14.md)
