[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Celtic Folklore](../celt/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](oss17)  [Next](oss19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

# CALTHON AND COLMAL.

### ARGUMENT.

This piece, as many more of Ossian's compositions, is addressed to one
of the first Christian missionaries. The story of the poem is handed
down by tradition thus:--In the country of the Britons, between the
walls, two chiefs lived in the days of Fingal, Dunthalmo, Lord of
Teutha, supposed to be the Tweed; and Rathmor, who dwelt at Clutha, well
known to be the river Clyde. Rathmor was not more renowned for his
generosity and hospitality, than Dunthalmo was infamous for his cruelty
and ambition. Dunthalmo, through envy, or on account of some private
feuds, which subsisted between the families, murdered Rathmor at a
feast; but being afterward touched with remorse, he educated the two
sons of Rathmor, Calthon and Colmar, in his own house. They growing up
to man's estate, dropped some hints that they intended to revenge the
death of their father, upon which Dunthalmo shut them up in two caves,
on the banks of Teutha, intending to take them off privately. Colmal,
the daughter of Dunthalmo, who was secretly in love with Calthon, helped
him to make his escape from prison, and hied with him to Fingal,
disguised in the habit of a young warrior, and implored his aid against
Dunthalmo. Fingal sent Ossian with three hundred men to Colmar's relief.
Dunthalmo, having previously murdered Colmar, came to a battle with
Ossian, but he was killed by that hero, and his army totally defeated.

Calthon married Colmal his deliverer; and Ossian returned to Morven.

Pleasant is the voice of thy song, thou lonely dweller of the rock! It
comes on the sound of the stream, along the narrow vale. My soul awakes,
O stranger, in the midst of my hall. I stretch my hand to the spear, as
in the days of other years. I stretch my hand, but it is feeble: and the
sigh of my bosom grows. Wilt thou not listen, son of the rock! to the
song of Ossian? My soul is full of other times; the joy of my youth
returns. Thus the sun appears in the west, after the steps of his
brightness have moved behind a storm: the green hills lift their dewy
heads: the blue streams rejoice

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

in the vale. The aged hero comes forth on his stair; his gray hair
glitters in the beam. Dost thou not behold, son of the rock! a shield in
Ossian's hall? It is marked with the strokes of battle; and the
brightness of its bosses has failed. That shield the great Dunthalmo
bore, the chief of streamy Teutha. Dunthalmo bore it in battle before he
fell by Ossian's spear. Listen, son of the rock! to the tale of other
years.

Rathmor was a chief of Clutha. The feeble dwelt in his ball. The gates
of Rathmor were never shut: his feast was always spread. The sons of the
stranger came. They blessed the generous chief of Clutha. Bards raised
the song, and touched the harp: joy brightened on the face of the sad!
Dunthalmo came, in his pride, and rushed into the combat of Rathmor. The
chief of Clutha overcame: the rage of Dunthalmo rose. He came, by night,
with his warriors; the mighty Rathmor fell. He fell in his halls, where
his feast was often spread for strangers.

Colmar and Calthon were young, the sons of car-borne Rathmor. They came,
in the joy of youth, into their father's hall. They behold him in his
blood; their bursting tears descend. The soul of Dunthalmo melted, when
he saw the children of youth. He brought them to Alteutha's walls; they
grew in the house of their foe. They bent the bow in his presence: and
came forth to his wars. They saw the fallen walls of their fathers; they
saw the green thorn in the hall. Their tears rushed forth in secret. At
times their faces were sad. Dunthalmo beheld their grief; his darkening
soul designed their death. He closed them in two caves, on the echoing
banks of Teutha. The sun did not come there with his beams; nor the moon
of heaven by night. The sons of Rathmor remained in darkness, and
foresaw their death.

The daughter of Dunthalmo wept in silence, the fair-haired

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

blue-eyed Colmal. Her eye had rolled in secret on Calthon; his
loveliness swelled in her soul. She trembled for her warrior; but what
could Colmal do? Her arm could not lift the spear; nor was the sword
formed for her side. Her white breast never rose beneath a mail. Neither
was her eye the terror of heroes. What canst thou do, O Colmal!! for the
falling chief? Her steps are unequal; her hair is loose; her eye looks
wildly through her tears. She came, by night, to the hall. She armed her
lovely form in steel; the steel of a young warrior, who fell in the
first of his battles. She came to the cave of Calthon, and loosed the
thong from his hands.

"Arise, son of Rathmor," she said, "arise, the night is dark! Let us fly
to the king of Selma, chief of fallen Clutha! I am the son of Lamgal,
who dwelt in thy father's hall. I heard of thy dark dwelling in the
cave, and my soul arose. Arise, son of Rathmor! arise, the night is
dark!"--"Blest voice!" replied the chief, "comest thou from the clouds
to Calthon? The ghosts of his fathers have often descended in his
dreams, since the sun has retired from his eyes, and darkness has dwelt
around him. Or art thou the son of Lamgal, the chief I often saw in
Clutha? But shall I fly to Fingal, and Colmar my brother low? Will I fly
to Morven, and the hero closed in night? No; give me that spear, son of
Lamgal; Calthon will defend his brother!"

"A thousand warriors," replied the maid, "stretch their spears round
car-borne Colmar. What can Calthon do against a host so great? Let us
fly to the king of Morven, he will come with war. His arm is stretched
forth to the unhappy; the lightning of his sword is round the weak.
Arise, thou son of Rathmor; the shadows will fly away. Arise, or thy
steps may be seen, and thou must fall in youth."

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

The sighing hero rose; his tears descend for car-borne Colmar. He came
with the maid to Selma's hall: but he knew not that it was Colmal. The
helmet covered her lovely face. Her bosom heaved beneath the steel.
Fingal returned from the chase, and found the lovely strangers. They
were like two beams of light, in the midst of the hall of shells. The
king heard the tale of grief, and turned his eyes around. A thousand
heroes half rose before him; claiming the war of Teutha. I came with my
spear from the hill; the joy of battle rose in my breast: for the king
spoke to Ossian in the midst of a thousand chiefs.

"Son of my strength," began the king, "take thou the spear of Fingal. Go
to Teutha's rushing stream, and save the car-borne Colmar. Let thy fame
return before thee like a pleasant gale; that my soul may rejoice over
my son, who renews the renown of fathers. Ossian! be thou a storm in
war; but mild when the foe is low! it was thus my fame arose, O my son!
be thou like Selma's chief. When the haughty come to my halls, my eyes
behold them not. But my arm is stretched forth to the unhappy. My sword
defends the weak."

I rejoiced in the words of the king. I took my rattling arms. Diaran
rose at my side, and Dargo, king of spears. Three hundred youths
followed our steps; the lovely strangers were at my side. Dunthalmo
heard the sound of our approach. He gathered the strength of Teutha. He
stood on a hill with his host. They were like rocks broken with thunder,
when their bent trees are singed and bare, and the streams of their
chinks have failed. The stream of Teutha rolled in its pride, before the
gloomy foe. I sent a bard to Dunthalmo, to offer the combat on the
plain; but he smiled in the darkness of his pride. His unsettled host
moved on the hill; like the mountain

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

cloud, when the blast has entered its womb, and scatters the curling
gloom on every side.

They brought Colmar to Teutha's bank, bound with a thousand thongs. The
chief is sad, but stately. His eye is on his friends; for we stood in
our arms, whilst Teutha's waters rolled between. Dunthalmo came with his
spear, and pierced the hero's side: he rolled on the bank in his blood.
We heard his broken sighs. Calthon rushed into the stream: I bounded
forward on my spear. Teutha's race fell before us. Night came rolling
down. Dunthalmo rested on a rock, amidst an aged wood. The rage of his
bosom burned against the car-borne Calthon. But Calthon stood in grief;
he mourned the fallen Colmar; Colmar slain in youth before his fame
arose!

I bade the song of wo to rise, to soothe the mournful chief; but he
stood beneath a tree, and often threw his spear on the earth. The humid
eye of Colmar rolled near in a secret tear: she foresaw the fall of
Dunthalmo, or of Clutha's warlike chief. Now half the night had passed
away. Silence and darkness were on the field. Sleep rested on the eyes
of the heroes: Calthon's settling soul was still. His eyes were half
closed; but the murmur of Teutha had not yet failed in his ear. Pale,
and showing his wounds, the ghost of Colmar came: he bent his head over
the hero, and raised his feeble voice!

"Sleeps the son of Rathmor in his night, and his brother low? Did we not
rise to the chase together? Pursued we not the dark-brown hinds? Colmar
was not forgot till he fell, till death had blasted his youth I lie pale
beneath the rock of Lona. O let Calthon rise! the morning comes with its
beams; Dunthalmo will dishonor the fallen." He passed away in his blast
The rising Calthon saw the steps of his departure. He rushed in the
sound of his steel. Unhappy Colmal rose.

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

\[paragraph continues\] She followed her hero through night, and dragged
her spear behind. But when Calthon came to Lona's rock, he found his
fallen brother. The rage of his bosom rose; he rushed among the foe. The
groans of death ascend. They close around the chief. He is bound in the
midst, and brought to gloomy Dunthalmo. The shout of joy arose; and the
hills of night replied.

I started at the sound; and took my father's spear. Diaran rose at my
side; and the youthful strength of Dargo. We missed the chief of Clutha,
and our souls were sad. I dreaded the departure of my fame. The pride of
my valor rose. "Sons of Morven," I said, "it is not thus our fathers
fought. They rested not on the field of strangers, when the foe was not
fallen before them. Their strength was like the eagles of heaven; their
renown is in the song. But our people fall by degrees. Our fame begins
to depart. What shall the king of Morven say, if Ossian conquers not at
Teutha? Rise in your steel, ye warriors, follow the sound of Ossian's
course. He will not return, but renowned, to the echoing walls of
Selma."

Morning rose on the blue waters of Teutha. Colmal stood before me in
tears. She told of the chief of Clutha: thrice the spear fell from her
hand. My wrath turned against the stranger; for my soul trembled for
Calthon. '"Son of the feeble hand!" I said, "do Teutha's warriors fight
with tears? The battle is not won with grief; nor dwells the sigh in the
soul of war. Go to the deer of Carmun, to the lowing herds of Teutha.
But leave these arms, thou son of fear! A warrior may lift them in
fight."

I tore the mail from her shoulders. Her snowy breast appeared. She bent
her blushing face to the ground. I looked in silence to the chiefs. The
spear fell from my hand; the sigh of my bosom rose! But when I heard the
name of the maid, my crowding tears

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

rushed down. I blessed the lovely beam of youth, and bade the battle
move!

Why, son of the rock, should Ossian tell how warriors died? They are now
forgot in their land; their tombs are not found on the heath. Years came
on with their storms. The green mounds are mouldered away. Scarce is the
grave of Dunthalmo seen, or the place where he fell by the spear of
Ossian. Some gray warrior, half blind with age, sitting by night at the
flaming oak of the hall, tells now my deeds to his sons, and the fall of
the dark Dunthalmo. The faces of youth bend sidelong towards his voice.
Surprise and joy burn in their eyes! I found Calthon bound to an oak; my
sword cut the thongs from his hands. I gave him the white-bosomed
Colmal. They dwelt in the halls of Teutha.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The War of Caros](oss19.md)
