[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Celtic Folklore](../celt/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](oss22)  [Next](oss24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

# THE SONGS OF SELMA.

### ARGUMENT.

Address to the evening star. Apostrophe to Fingal and his times. Minona
sings before the king the song of the unfortunate Colma, and the bards
exhibit other specimens of their poetical talents according to an annual
custom established by the monarchs of the ancient Caledonians.

STAR of descending night! fair is thy light in the west! thou that
liftest thy unshorn head from thy cloud: thy steps are stately on thy
hill. What dost thou behold in the plain? The stormy winds are laid. The
murmur of the torrent comes from afar. Roaring waves climb the distant
rock. The flies of evening are on their feeble wings: the hum of their
course is in the field. What dost thou behold, fair light? But thou dost
smile and depart. The waves come with joy around thee: they bathe thy
lovely hair. Farewell, thou silent beam! Let the light of Ossian's soul
arise!

And it does arise in its strength! I behold my departed friends. Their
gathering is on Lora, as in the days of other years. Fingal comes like a
watery column of mist! his heroes are around: and see the bards of song,
gray-haired Ullin! Stately Ryno! Alpin with the tuneful voice! the soft
complaint of Minona! How are ye changed, my friends, since the days of
Selma's feast! when we contended, like gales of spring, as they fly
along the hill, and bend by turns the feebly whistling grass.

Minona came forth in her beauty: with downcast look and tearful eye. Her
hair flew slowly on the blast, that rushed unfrequent from the hill. The
souls

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

of the heroes were sad when she raised the tuneful voice. Often had they
seen the grave of Salgar, the dark dwelling of white-bosomed Colma.
Colma left alone on the hill, with all her voice of song! Salgar
promised to come: but the night descended around. Hear the voice of
Colma, when she sat alone on the hill.

Colma. It is night, I am alone, forlorn on the hill of storms. The wind
is heard on the mountain. The torrent pours down the rock. No hut
receives me from the rain; forlorn on the hill of winds!

Rise, moon! from behind thy clouds. Stars of the night, arise! Lead me,
some light, to the place where my love rests from the chase alone! his
bow near him, unstrung: his dogs panting around him. But here I must sit
alone, by the rock of the mossy stream. The stream and the wind roar
aloud. I hear not the voice of my love! Why delays my Salgar, why the
chief of the hill, his promise? here is the rock, and here the tree!
here is the roaring stream! Thou didst promise with night to be here.
Ah! whither is my Salgar gone? With thee, I would fly from my father;
with thee, from my brother of pride. Our race have long been foes; we
are not foes, O Salgar!

Cease a little while, O wind! stream, be thou silent awhile! let my
voice be heard around. Let my wanderer hear me! Salgar! it is Colma who
calls. Here is the tree, and the rock. Salgar, my love! I am here. Why
delayest thou thy coming? Lo! the calm moon comes forth. The flood is
bright in the vale. The rocks are gray on the steep, I see him not on
the brow. His dogs come not before him, with tidings of his near
approach. Here I must sit alone!

Who lie on the heath beside me? Are they my love and my brother? Speak
to me, O my friends! To Colma they give no reply. Speak to me; I am
alone!

\[paragraph continues\] My soul is tormented with fears! Ah! they are
dead! Their swords are red from the fight. O my brother! my brother! why
hast thou slain my Salgar? why, O Salgar! hast thou slain my brother?
Dear were ye both to me! what shalt I say in your praise? Thou wert fair
on the hill among thousands! he was terrible in fight. Speak to me; hear
my voice; hear me, song of my love! They are silent; silent for ever!
Cold, cold, are their breasts of clay! Oh! from the rock on the hill,
from the top of the windy steep, speak, ye ghosts of the dead! speak, I
will not be afraid! Whither are ye gone to rest? In what cave of the
hill shall I find the departed? No feeble voice is on the gale: no
answer half-drowned in the storm!

I sit in my grief; I wait for morning in my tears! Rear the tomb, ye
friends of the dead. Close it not till Colma come. My life flies away
like a dream: why should I stay behind? Here shall I rest with my
friends, by the stream of the sounding rock. When night comes on the
hilt; when the loud winds arise; my ghost shall stand in the blast, and
mourn the death of my friends. The hunter shall hear from his booth. he
shall fear but love my voice! For sweet shall my voice be for my
friends: pleasant were her friends to Colma!

Such was thy song, Minona, softly-blushing daughter of Torman. Our tears
descended for Colma, and our souls were sad! Ullin came with his harp!
he gave the song of Alpin. The voice of Alpin was pleasant: the soul of
Ryno was a beam of fire! But they had rested in the narrow house: their
voice had ceased in Selma. Ullin had returned, one day, from the chase,
before the heroes fell. He heard their strife on the hilt; their song
was soft but sad! They mourned the fall of Morar, first of mortal men!
His soul was like the soul of Fingal: his sword like the sword of Oscar.
But he

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

fell, and his father mourned: his sister's eyes were full of tears.
Minona's eyes were full of tears, the sister of car-borne Morar. She
retired from the song of Ullin, like the moon in the west, when she
foresees the shower, and hides her fair head in a cloud. I touched the
harp with Ullin; the song of mourning rose!

Ryno. The wind and the rain are past; calm is the noon of day. The
clouds are divided in heaven. Over the green hills flies the inconstant
sun. Red through the stony vale comes down the stream of the hill. Sweet
are thy murmurs, O stream! but more sweet is the voice I hear. It is the
voice of Alpin, the son of song, mourning for the dead! Bent is his head
of age; red his tearful eye. Alpin, thou son of song, why alone on the
silent hill? why complainest thou, as a blast in the wood; as a wave on
the lonely shore?

Alpin. My tears, O Ryno! are for the dead; my voice for those that have
passed away. Tall thou art on the hill; fair among the sons of the vale.
But thou shalt fall like Morar; the mourner shall sit on thy tomb. The
hills shall know thee no more; thy bow shall in thy hall unstrung.

Thou wert swift, O Morar! as a roe on the desert; terrible as a meteor
of fire. Thy wrath was as the storm. Thy sword in battle, as lightning
in the field. Thy voice was a stream after rain; like thunder on distant
hills. Many fell by thy arm; they were consumed in the flames of thy
wrath. But when thou didst return from war, how peaceful was thy brow!
Thy face was like the sun after rain; like the moon in the silence of
night; calm as the breast of the lake when the loud wind is laid.

Narrow is thy dwelling now! Dark the place of thine abode! With three
steps I compass thy grave. O thou who wast so great before! Four stones,
with their heads of moss, are the only memorial of thee. A

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

tree with scarce a leaf, long grass, which whistles in the wind, mark to
the hunter's eye the grave of the mighty Morar. Morar! thou art low
indeed. Thou hast no mother to mourn thee; no maid with her tears of
love. Dead is she that brought thee forth. Fallen is the daughter of
Morglan.

Who on his staff is this? who is this whose head is white with age;
whose eyes are red with tears? who quakes at every step? It is thy
father, O Morar! the father of no son but thee. He heard of thy fame in
war; he heard of foes dispersed. He heard of Morar's renown; why did he
not hear of his wound? Weep, thou father of Morar! weep; but thy son
heareth thee not. Deep is the sleep of the dead; low their pillow of
dust. No more shall he hear thy voice; no more awake at thy call. When
shall it be morn in the grave, to bid the slumberer awake Farewell, thou
bravest of men! thou conqueror in the field! but the field shall see
thee no more; nor the dark wood be lightened with the splendor of thy
steel. Thou hast left no son. The song shall preserve thy name. Future
times shall hear of thee; they shall hear of the fallen Morar.

The grief of all arose, but most the bursting sigh of Armin. He
remembers the death of his son, who fell in the days of his youth.
Carmor was near the hero, the chief of the echoing Galmal. Why burst the
sigh of Armin? he said. Is there a cause to mourn? The song comes, with
its music, to melt and please the soul. It is like soft mist, that,
rising from a lake, pours on the silent vale; the green flowers are
filled with dew, but the sun returns in his strength, and the mist is
gone. Why art thou sad, O Armin, chief of sea-surrounded Gorma?

Sad I am! nor small is my cause of wo. Carmor, thou hast lost no son;
thou hast lost no daughter of beauty. Colgar the valiant lives; and
Annira, fairest

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

maid. The boughs of thy house ascend, O Carmor! but Armin is the last of
his race. Dark is thy bed, O Daura! deep thy sleep in the tomb! When
shalt thou awake with thy songs? with all thy voice of music?

Arise, winds of autumn, arise; blow along the heath! streams of the
mountains, roar! roar, tempests, in the groves of my oaks! walk through
broken clouds, O moon! show thy pale face, at intervals! bring to my
mind the night, when all my children fell; when Arindal the mighty fell!
when Daura the lovely failed! Daura, my daughter! thou wert fair; fair
as the moon on Fura, white as the driven snow; sweet as the breathing
gale. Arindal, thy bow was strong. Thy spear was swift on the field. Thy
look was like mist on the wave: thy shield, a red cloud in a storm.
Armar, renowned in war, came, and sought Daura's love. He was not long
refused: fair was the hope of their friends!

Erath, son of Odgal, repined: his brother had been slain by Armar. He
came disguised like a son of the sea: fair was his skiff on the wave;
white his locks of age; calm his serious brow. Fairest of women, he
said, lovely daughter of Armin! a rock not distant in the sea bears a
tree on its side: red shines the fruit afar! There Armar waits for
Daura. I come to carry his love! She went; she called on Armar. Nought
answered, but the son of the rock.  <span id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66.md)
Armar, my love! my love! why tormentest thou me with fear! hear, son of
Arnart, hear: it is Daura who calleth thee! Erath the traitor fled
laughing to the land. She lifted up her voice; she called for her
brother and for her father. Arindal! Armin! none to relieve your Daura!

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

Her voice came over the sea. Arindal my son descended from the hill;
rough in the spoils of the chase. His arrows rattled by his side; his
bow was in his hand; five dark-gray dogs attended his steps. He saw
fierce Erath on the shore: he seized and bound him to an oak. Thick wind
the thongs of the hide around his limbs: he loads the winds with his
groans . Arindal ascends the deep in his boat, to bring Daura to land.
Armar came in his wrath, and let fly the gray-feathered shaft. It sunk,
it sunk in thy heart, O Arindal, my son! for Erath the traitor thou
diest. The oar is stopped at once; he panted on the rock and expired.
What is thy grief, O Daura, when round thy feet is poured thy brother's
blood! The boat is broke in twain. Armar plunges into the sea, to rescue
his Daura, or die. Sudden a blast from a hill came over the waves. He
sunk, and he rose no more.

Alone on the sea-beat rock, my daughter was heard to complain. Frequent
and loud were her cries. What could her father do? All night I stood on
the shore. I saw her by the faint beam of the moon. All night I heard
her cries. Loud was the wind; the rain beat hard on the hill. Before
morning appeared her voice was weak. it died away, like the evening
breeze among the grass of the rocks. Spent with grief, she expired; and
left thee, Armin, alone. Gone is my strength in war! fallen my pride
among women! When the storms aloft arise; when the north lifts the wave
on high! I sit by the sounding shore, and look on the fatal rock. Often
by the setting moon, I see the ghosts of my children. Half viewless,
they walk in mournful conference together. Will none of you speak in
pity. They do not regard their father. I am sad, O Carmor, nor small is
my cause of wo.

Such were the words of the bards in the days of song: when the king
heard the music of harps, the

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

tales of other times! The chiefs gathered from all their hills, and
heard the lovely sound. They praised the voice of Cona;  <span
id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_67.md) the first among a thousand bards! But age
is now on my tongue; my soul has failed: I hear, at times, the ghosts of
bards, and learn their pleasant Song. But memory fails on my mind. I
hear the call of years; they say, as they pass along, Why does Ossian
sing? Soon shall he lie in the narrow house, and no bard shall raise his
fame! Roll on, ye dark-brown years; ye bring no joy on your course! Let
the tomb open to Ossian, for his strength has failed. The sons of song
are gone to rest. My voice remains, like a blast, that roars, lonely, on
a sea-surrounded rock, after the winds are laid. The dark moss whistles
there; the distant mariner sees the waving trees!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_66"></span>[290:1](oss23.htm#fr_66.md) By "the son of the
rock," the poet means the echoing back of the human voice from a rock.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[292:1](oss23.htm#fr_67.md) Ossian is sometimes
poetically called "the voice of Cona".

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book I](oss24.md)
