[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Celtic Folklore](../celt/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](oss31)  [Next](oss33.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

# THE DEATH OF CUTHULLIN.

### ARGUMENT.

Cuthullin, after the arms of Fingal had expelled Swaran from Ireland,
continued to manage the affairs of that kingdom as the guardian of
Cormac the young king. In the third year of Cuthullin's administration,
Torlath, the son of Cantela, rebelled in Connaught: and advanced to
Temora to dethrone Cormac. Cuthullin marched against him, came up with
him at the lake of Lego, and totally defeated his forces. Torlath fell
in battle by Cuthullin's hand; but as he too eagerly pressed on the
enemy, he was mortally wounded. The affairs of Cormac, though for some
time supported by Nathos, as mentioned in the preceding poem, fell into
confusion at the death of Cuthullin. Cormac himself was slain by the
rebel Cairbar; and the re-establishment of the royal family of Ireland,
by Fingal, furnishes the subject of the epic poem of Temora.

Is the wind on the shield of Fingal? Or is the voice of past times in my
hall? Sing on, sweet voice! for thou art pleasant. Thou carriest away my
night with joy. Sing on, O Bragéla, daughter of car-borne Sorglan!

"It is the white wave of the rock, and not Cuthullin's sails. Often do
the mists deceive me for the ship of my love! when they rise round some
ghost, and spread their gray skirts on the wind. Why dost thou delay thy
coming, son of the generous Semo? Four times has autumn returned with
its winds, and raised the seas of Togorma,  <span
id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_89.md) since thou hast been in the roar of
battles, and Bragéla distant far! Hills of the isle of mist! when will
ye answer to his hounds? But ye are dark in your clouds. Sad Bragéla
calls in vain! Night comes rolling down. The face of ocean falls. The
heath-cock's head is beneath his wing. The hind

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

sleeps with the hart of the desert. They shall rise with morning's
light, and feed by the mossy stream. But my tears return with the sun.
My sighs come on with the night. When wilt thou come in thine arms, O
chief of Erin's wars?"

Pleasant is thy voice in Ossian's ear, daughter of car-borne Sorglan!
But retire to the hall of shells, to the beam of the burning oak. Attend
to the murmur of the sea: it rolls at Dunscäi's walls: let sleep descend
on thy blue eyes. Let the hero arise in thy dreams!

Cuthullin sits at Lego's lake, at the dark rolling of waters. Night is
around the hero. His thousands spread on the heath. A hundred oaks burn
in the midst. The feast of shells is smoking wide. Carril strikes the
harp beneath a tree. His gray locks glitter in the beam. The rustling
blast of night is near, and lifts his aged hair. His song is of the blue
Togorma, and of its chief, Cuthullin's friend! "Why art thou absent,
Connal, in the days of the gloomy storm? The chiefs of the south have
convened against the car-borne Cormac. The winds detain thy sails. Thy
blue waters roll around thee. But Cormac is not alone. The son of Semo
fights his wars! Semo's son his battles fights! the terror of the
stranger! He that is like the vapor of death, slowly borne by sultry
winds. The sun reddens in its presence; the people fall around."

Such was the song of Carril, when a son of the foe appeared. He threw
down his pointless spear. He spoke the words of Torlath; Torlath chief
of heroes, from Lego's sable surge! He that led his thousands to battle,
against car-borne Cormac. Cormac, who was distant far, in Temora's
echoing halls: he learned to bend the bow of his fathers; and to lift
the spear. Nor long didst thou lift the spear, mildly-shining

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

 

<span id="img_38500"></span> ![](img/38500.jpg)  
Night is around the hero. This thousands spread on the heath.

 

beam of youth! death stands dim behind thee, like the darkened half of
the moon behind its growing light. Cuthullin rose before the bard, that
came from generous Torlath. He offered him the shell of joy. He honored
the son of songs. "Sweet voice of Lego!" he said, "what are the words of
Torlath? Comes he to our feast or battle, the car-borne son of Cantela?"

"He comes to thy battle," replied the bard, "to the sounding strife of
spears. When morning is gray on Lego, Torlath will fight on the plain.
Wilt thou meet him, in thine arms, king of the isle of mist? Terrible is
the spear of Torlath! it is a meteor of night. He lifts it, and the
people fall! death sits in the lightning of his sword!"--"Do I fear,"
replied Cuthullin, "the spear of car-borne Torlath? He is brave as a
thousand heroes: but my soul delights in war! The sword rests not by the
side of Cuthullin, bard of the times of old! Morning shall meet me on
the plain, and gleam on the blue arms of Semo's son. But sit thou on the
heath, O bard, and let us hear thy voice. Partake of the joyful shell:
and hear the songs of Temora!"

"This is no time," replied the bard, "to hear the song of joy: when the
mighty are to meet in battle, like the strength of the waves of Lego.
Why art thou so dark, Slimora! with all thy silent woods? No star
trembles on thy top. No moonbeam on thy side. But the meteors of death
are there: the gray watery forms of ghosts. Why art thou dark, Slimora!
why thy silent woods?" He retired, in the sound of his song. Carril
joined his voice. The music was like the memory of joys that are past,
pleasant and mournful to the soul. The ghosts of departed bards heard on
Slimora's side. Soft sounds spread along the wood. The silent valleys of
night rejoice. So when he sits in the silence

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

of the day, in the valley of his breeze, the humming of the mountain bee
comes to Ossian's ear: the gale drowns it in its course: but the
pleasant sound returns again! Slant looks the sun on the field! gradual
grows the shade of the hill!

"Raise," said Cuthullin to his hundred bards, "the song of the noble
Fingal: that song which he hears at night, when the dreams of his rest
descend; when the bards strike the distant harp, and the faint light
gleams on Selma's walls. Or let the grief of Lara rise: the sighs of the
mother of Calmar, when he was sought, in vain, on his hills; when she
beheld his bow in the hall. Carril, place the shield of Caithbat on that
branch. Let the spear of Cuthullin be near; that the sound of my battle
may rise, with the gray beam of the east."

The hero leaned on his father's shield: the song of Lara rose! The
hundred bards were distant far: Carril alone is near the chief. The
words of the song were his: the sound of his harp was mournful.

"Alcletha with the aged locks! mother of car-borne Calmar! why dost thou
look towards the desert, to behold the return of thy son? These are not
his heroes, dark on the heath: nor is that the voice of Calmar. It is
but the distant grove, Alcletha! but the roar of the
mountain-wind-- <span id="fr_90"></span>[1](#fn_90.md)'Who bounds over
Lara's stream, sister of the noble Calmar? Does not Alcletha behold his
spear? But her eyes are dim! Is it not the son of Matha, daughter of my
love?'

"'It is but an aged oak, Alcletha!' replied the lovely weeping Alona.
'It is but an oak, Alcletha, bent over Lara's stream. But who comes
along the plain? sorrow is in his speed. He lifts high the spear of
Calmar. Alcletha, it is covered with blood!'--

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

"' <span id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_91.md)But it is covered with the blood
of foes, sister of car-borne Calmar! His spear never returned unstained
with blood: nor his bow from the strife of the mighty. The battle is
consumed in his presence: he is a flame of death, Alona!--Youth of the
mournful speed! where is the son of Alcletha! Does he return with his
fame, in the midst of his echoing shields? Thou art dark and silent!
Calmar is then no more! Tell me not, warrior, how he fell. I must not
hear of his wound!' Why dost thou look towards the desert, mother of
low-laid Calmar?"

Such was the song of Carril, when Cuthullin lay on his shield. The bards
rested on their harps. Sleep fell softly around. The son of Semo was
awake alone. His soul fixed on war. The burning oaks began to decay.
Faint red light is spread around. A feeble voice is heard! The ghost of
Calmar came! He stalked dimly along the beam. Dark is the wound in his
side. His hair is disordered and loose. Joy sits pale on his face. He
seems to invite Cuthullin to his cave.

"Son of the cloudy night!" said the rising chief of Erin; "why dost thou
bend thy dark eyes on me, ghost of the noble Calmar? wouldst thou
frighten me, O Matha's son! from the battles of Cormac? Thy hand was not
feeble in war: neither was thy voice for peace. How art thou changed,
chief of Lara! if thou now dost advise to fly! But, Calmar, I never
fled. I never feared the ghosts of night. Small is their knowledge, weak
their hands; their dwelling is in the wind. But my soul grows in danger,
and rejoices in the noise of steel. Retire thou to thy cave. Thou art
not Calmar's ghost. He delighted in battle. His arm was like the thunder
of heaven! He retired in his blast with joy, for he had heard the voice
of his praise."

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

The faint beam of the morning rose. The sound of Caithbat's buckler
spread. Green Erin's warriors convened, like the roar of many streams.
The horn of war is heard over Lego. The mighty Torlath came! "Why dost
thou come with thy thousands, Cuthullin," said the chief of Lego." I
know the strength of thy arm. Thy soul is an unextinguished fire. Why
fight we not on the plain, and let our hosts behold our deeds? Let them
behold us like roaring waves, that tumble round a rock; the mariners
hasten away, and look on their strife with fear."

"Thou risest like the sun, on my soul, replied the son of Semo. Thine
arm is mighty, O Torlath! and worthy of my wrath. Retire, ye men of
Ullin, to Slimora's shady side. Behold the chief of Erin, in the day of
his fame. Carril, tell to mighty Connal, if Cuthullin must fall, tell
him I accused the winds, which roar on Togorma's waves. Never was he
absent in battle, when the strife of my fame arose. Let his sword be
before Cormac, like the beam of heaven. Let his counsel sound in Temora,
in the day of danger!"

He rushed, in the sound of his arms, like the terrible spirit of Loda,
when he comes, in the roar of a thousand storms, and scatters battles
from his eyes. He sits on a cloud over Lochlin's seas. His mighty hand
is on his sword. Winds lift his flaming locks! The waning moon half
lights his dreadful face. His features blended in darkness arise to
view. So terrible was Cuthullin in the day of his fame. Torlath fell by
his hand. Lego's heroes mourned. They gather around the chief, like the
clouds of the desert. A thousand swords rose at once; a thousand arrows
flew; but he stood like a rock in the midst of a roaring sea. They fell
around. He strode in blood. Dark Slimora echoed wide. The sons of Ullin
came on. The battle

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

spread over Lego. The chief of Erin overcame. He returned over the field
with his fame. But pale he returned! The joy of his face was dark. He
rolled his eyes in silence. The sword hung, unsheathed, in his hand. His
spear bent at every step!

"Carril," said the chief in secret, "the strength of Cuthullin fails. My
days are with the years that are past. No morning of mine shall arise.
They shall seek me at Temora, but I shall not be found. Cormac will weep
in his hall, and say, Where is Erin's chief? But my name is renowned! my
fame in the song of bards. The youth will say, in secret, O let me die
as Cuthullin died! Renown clothed him like a robe. The light of his fame
is great.--Draw the arrow from my side. Lay Cuthullin beneath that oak.
Place the shield of Caithbat near, that they may behold me amidst the
arms of my fathers!"

"And is the son of Semo fallen?" said Carril with a sigh." Mournful are
Tura's walls. Sorrow dwells at Dunscäi. Thy spouse is left alone in her
youth. The son of thy love is alone! He shall come to Bragéla and ask
her why she weeps! He shalt lift his eyes to the wall, and see his
father's sword. Whose sword is that? he will say. The soul of his mother
is sad. Who is that, like the hart of the desert, in the murmur of his
course? His eyes look wildly round in search of his friend. Connal, son
of Colgar, where hast thou been, when the mighty fell? Did the seas of
Togorma roll around thee? Was the wind of the south in thy sails? The
mighty have fallen in battle, and thou wast not there. Let none tell it
in Selma, nor in Morven's woody land. Fingal will be sad, and the sons
of the desert mourn!"

By the dark-rolling waves of Lego they raised the hero's tomb. Luath, at
a distance, lies. The song of bards rose over the dead.

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

" <span id="fr_92"></span>[1](#fn_92.md) Blest be thy soul, son of Semo!
Thou wert mighty in battle. Thy strength was like the strength of a
stream; thy speed like the eagle's wing. Thy path in battle was
terrible: the steps of death were behind thy sword. Blest be thy soul,
son of Semo, car-borne chief of Dunscäi! Thou hast not fallen by the
sword of the mighty, neither was thy blood on the spear of the brave.
The arrow came, like the sting of death in a blast: nor did the feeble
hand, which drew the bow, perceive it. Peace to thy soul, in thy cave,
chief of the isle of mist!

"The mighty are dispersed at Temora; there is none in Cormac's hall. The
king mourns in his youth. He does not behold thy return. The sound of
thy shield is ceased: his foes are gathering round. Soft be thy rest in
thy cave, chief of Erin's wars! Bragéla will not hope for thy return, or
see thy sails in ocean's foam. Her steps are not on the shore: nor her
ear open to the voice of thy rowers. She sits in the hall of shells. She
sees the arms of him that is no more. Thine eyes are full of tears,
daughter of car-borne Sorglan! Blest be thy soul in death, O chief of
shady Tura!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_89"></span>[383:1](oss32.htm#fr_89.md) Togorma, i. e. "the
island of blue waves," one of the Hebrides.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[386:1](oss32.htm#fr_90.md) Alcletha speaks

<span id="fn_91"></span>[387:1](oss32.htm#fr_91.md) Alcletha speaks.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[390:1](oss32.htm#fr_92.md) This is the song of the
bards over Cuthullin's tomb.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Battle of Lora](oss33.md)
