[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Celtic Folklore](../celt/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](oss42.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_483">p. 483</span>

# BERRATHON.

### ARGUMENT.

Fingal, in his voyage to Lochlin, whither he had been invited by Starno,
the father of Agandecca, touched at Berrathon an island of Scandinavia,
where he was kindly entertained by Larthmor, the petty king of the
place, who was a vassal of the supreme kings of Lochlin. The hospitality
of Larthmor gained him Fingal's friendship, which that hero manifested,
after the imprisonment of Larthmor by his own son, by sending Ossian and
Toscar, the father of Malvina, so often mentioned, to rescue Larthmor,
and to punish the unnatural behavior of Uthal. Uthal was handsome, and,
by the ladies, much admired. Nina-thoma, the beautiful daughter of
Tor-thoma, a neighboring prince, fell in love and fled with him. He
proved inconstant; for another lady, whose name is not mentioned,
gaining his affections, he confined Nina-thoma to a desert island, near
the coast of Berrathon. She was relieved by Ossian, who, in company with
Toscar, landing on Berrathon, defeated the forces of Uthal, and killed
him in single combat. Nina-thoma, whose love not all the bad behavior of
Uthal could erase, hearing of his death, died of grief. In the mean time
Larthmor is restored, and Ossian and Toscar return in triumph to Fingal.

The poem opens with an elegy on the death of Malvina, the daughter of
Toscar, and closes with the presages of Ossian's death.

BEND thy blue course, O stream! round the narrow plain of Lutha. Let the
green woods hang over it, from their hills; the sun look on it at noon.
The thistle is there on its rock, and shakes its beard to the wind. The
flower hangs its heavy head, waving, at times, to the gale. "Why dost
thou awake me, O gale?" it seems to say: "I am covered with the drops of
heaven. The time of my fading is near, the blast that shall scatter my
leaves. To-morrow shall the traveller come; he that saw me in my beauty
shall come. His eyes will search the field, but they will not find me."
So shall they search in vain for the voice of Cona, after it has failed
in the field. The

<span id="page_484">p. 484</span>

hunter shall come forth in the morning, and thee vote a of my harp shall
not be heard. "Where is the son of car-borne Fingal?" The tear will be
on his cheek! Then come thou, O Malvina! with all thy music, come! Lay
Ossian in the plain of Lutha: let his tomb rise in the lovely field.

Malvina! where art thou, with thy songs; with the soft sound of thy
steps? Son of Alpin, art thou near? where is the daughter of Toscar? "I
passed, O son of Fingal, by Torlutha's mossy walls. The smoke of the
hall was ceased. Silence was among the trees of the hill. The voice of
the chase was over. I saw the daughters of the bow. I asked about
Malvina, but they answered not. They turned their faces away: thin
darkness covered their beauty. They were like stars, on a rainy hill, by
night, each looking faintly through the mist!"

Pleasant be thy rest, O lovely beam! soon hast thou set on our hills!
The steps of thy departure were stately, like the moon, on the
blue-trembling wave. But thou hast left us in darkness, first of the
maids of Lutha! We sit, at the rock, and there is no voice; no light but
the meteor of fire! Soon hast thou set, O Malvina, daughter of generous
Toscar! But thou risest, like the beam of the east, among the spirits of
thy friends, where they sit, in their stormy halls, the chambers of the
thunder! A cloud hovers over Cona. Its blue curling sides are high. The
winds are beneath it, with their wings. Within it is the dwelling of
Fingal. There the hero sits in darkness. His airy spear is in his hand.
His shield, half covered with clouds, is like the darkened moon; when
one half still remains in the wave, and the other looks sickly on the
field!

His friends sit round the king, on mist! They hear the songs of Ullin;
he strikes the half-viewless harp. He raises the feeble voice. The
lesser heroes, with a

<span id="page_485">p. 485</span>

thousand meteors, light the airy hall. Malvina rises in the midst: a
blush is on her cheek. She beholds the unknown faces of her fathers. She
turns aside her humid eyes. "An thou come so soon," said Fingal,
"daughter of generous Toscar! Sadness dwells in the halls of Lutha. My
aged son is sad! I hear the breeze of Cona, that was wont to lift thy
heavy locks. It comes to the hall, but thou art not there. Its voice is
mournful among the arms of thy fathers! Go, with thy rustling wing, O
breeze! sigh on Malvina's tomb. It rises yonder beneath the rock, at the
blue stream of Lutha. The maids  <span id="fr_114"></span>[1](#fn_114.md)
are departed to their place. Thou alone, O breeze, mournest there!"

But who comes from the dusky west, supported on a cloud? A smile is on
his gray, watery face. His locks of mist fly on wind. He bends forward
on his airy spear. It is thy father, Malvina! "Why shinest thou, so
soon, on our clouds," he says, "O lovely light of Lutha? But thou wert
sad, my daughter. Thy friends had passed away. The sons of little men
were in the hail. None remained of the heroes, but Ossian, king of
spears!"

And dost thou remember Ossian, car-borne Toscar, son of Conloch? The
battles of our youth were many. Our swords went together to the field.
They saw us coming like two falling rocks. The sons of the stranger
fled. "There come the warriors of Cona!" they said. "Their steps are in
the paths of the flying!" Draw near, son of Alpin, to the song of the
aged. The deeds of other times are in my soul. My memory beams on the
days that are past: on the days of mighty Toscar, when our path was in
the deep. Draw near, son of Alpin, to the last sound of the voice of
Cona!

The king of Morven commanded. I raised my sails

<span id="page_486">p. 486</span>

to the wind. Toscar, chief of Lutha, stood at my side: I rose on the
dark-blue wave. Our course was to sea-surrounded Berrathon, the isle of
many storms. There dwelt, with his locks of age, the stately strength of
Larthmor. Larthmor, who spread the feast of shells to Fingal, when he
went to Starno's halls, in the days of Agandecca. But when the chief was
old, the pride of his son arose; the pride of fair-haired Uthal, the
love of a thousand maids. He bound the aged Larthmor, and dwelt in his
sounding halls!

Long pined the king in his cave, beside his rolling sea. Day did not
come to his dwelling: nor the burning oak by night. But the wind of
ocean was there, and the parting beam of the moon. The red star looked
on the king, when it trembled on the western wave. Snitho came to
Selma's hall; Snitho, the friend of Larthmor's youth. He told of the
king of Berrathon: the wrath of Fingal arose. Thrice he assumed the
spear, resolved to stretch his hand to Uthal. But the memory of his
deeds rose before the king. He sent his son and Toscar. Our joy was
great on the rolling sea. We often half unsheathed our swords. For never
before had we fought alone, in battles of the spear.

Night came down on the ocean. The winds departed on their wings. Cold
and pale is the moon. The red stars lift their heads on high. Our course
is slow along the coast of Berrathon. The white waves tumble on the
rocks. "What voice is that," said Toscar, "which comes between the
sounds of the waves? It is soft hut mournful, like the voice of departed
bards. But I behold a maid. She sits on the rock alone. Her head bends
on her arms of snow. Her dark hair is in the wind. Hear, son of Fingal,
her song; it is smooth as the gliding stream. We came to the silent bay,
and heard the maid of night.

<span id="page_487">p. 487</span>

"How long will ye roll round me, blue-tumbling waters of ocean? My
dwelling was not always in caves, nor beneath the whistling tree. The
feast was spread in Tor-thoma's hall. My father delighted in my voice.
The youths beheld me in the steps of my loveliness. They blessed the
dark-haired Nina-thoma. It was then thou didst come, O Uthal! like the
sun of heaven! The souls of the virgins are thine, son of generous
Larthmor! But why dost thou leave me alone, in the midst of roaring
waters? Was my soul dark with thy death? Did my while hand lift the
sword? Why then hast thou left me alone, king of high Fin-thormo?"

The tear started from my eye, when I heard the voice of the maid. I
stood before her in my arms. I spoke the words of peace! "Lovely dweller
of the cave! what sigh is in thy breast? Shall Ossian lift his sword in
thy presence, the destruction of thy foes? Daughter of Tor-thoma, rise!
I have heard the words of thy grief. The race of Morven are around thee,
who never injured the weak. Come to our dark bosomed ship, thou brighter
than the setting moon! Our course is to the rocky Berrathon, to the
echoing walls of Fin-thormo." She came in her beauty; she came with all
her lovely steps. Silent joy brightened in her face; as when the shadows
fly from the field of spring; the blue stream is rolling in brightness,
and the green bush bends over its course!

The morning rose with its beams. We came to Rothma's bay. A boar rushed
from the wood: my spear pierced his side, and he fell. I rejoiced over
the blood. I foresaw my growing fame. But now the sound of Uthal's train
came, from the high Fin-thormo. They spread over the heath to the chase
of the boar. Himself comes slowly on, in the pride of his strength. He
lifts two pointed spears. On his side is the hero's

<span id="page_488">p. 488</span>

sword. Three youths carry his polished bows. The bounding of five dogs
is before him. His heroes move on, at a distance, admiring the steps of
the king. Stately was the son of Larthmor! but his soul was dark! Dark
as the troubled face of the moon, when it foretells the storms.

We rose on the heath before the king. He stopped in the midst of his
course. His heroes gathered around. A gray-haired bard advanced. "Whence
are the sons of the strangers?" began the bard of song. "The children of
the unhappy come to Berrathon: to the sword of car-borne Uthal. He
spreads no feast in his hall. The blood of strangers is on his streams.
If from Selma's walls ye come, from the mossy walls of Fingal, choose
three youths to go to your king to tell of the fall of his people.
Perhaps the hero may come and pour his blood on Uthal's sword. So shall
the fame of Fin-thormo arise; like the growing tree of the vale!"

"Never, will it rise, O bard!" I said, in the pride of my wrath. "He
would shrink from the presence of Fingal, whose eyes are the flames of
death. The son of Comhal comes, and kings vanish before him. They are
rolled together, like mist, by the breath of his rage. Shall three tell
to Fingal, that his people fell? Yes! they may tell it, bard! but his
people shall fall with fame!"

I stood in the darkness of my strength. Toscar drew his sword at my
side. The foe came on like a stream. The mingled sound of death arose.
Man took man; shield met shield; steel mixed its beams with steel. Darts
hiss through air. Spears ring on mails. Swords on broken bucklers bound.
All the noise of an aged grove beneath the roaring wind, when a thousand
ghosts break the trees by night, such was the din of arms! But Uthal
fell beneath my sword.

<span id="page_489">p. 489</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The sons of Berrathon fled. It was then I saw
him in his beauty, and the tear hung in my eye! "Thou art fallen, young
tree, I said, with all thy beauty round thee. Thou art fallen on thy
plains, and the field is bare. The winds come from the desert! there is
no sound in thy leaves! Lovely art thou in death, son of car-borne
Larthmor"

Nina-thoma sat on the shore. She heard the sound of battle. She turned
her red eyes on Lethmal, the gray-haired bard of Selma. He alone had
remained on the coast with the daughter of Tor-thoma. "Son of the times
of old!" she said, "I hear the noise of death. Thy friends have met with
Uthal, and the chief is low! O that I had remained on the rock, enclosed
with the tumbling waves? Then would my soul be sad, but his death would
not reach my ear. Art thou fallen on the heath, O son of high
Fin-thormo? Thou didst leave me on a rock, but my soul was full of thee.
Son of high Fin-thormo! art thou fallen on thy heath?"

She rose pale in her tears. She saw the bloody shield of Uthal. She saw
it in Ossian's hand. Her steps were distracted on the heath. She flew.
She found him. She fell. Her soul came forth in a sigh. Her hair is
spread on her face. My bursting tears descend. A tomb arose on the
unhappy. My song of wo was heard. "Rest, hapless children of youth! Rest
at the noise of that mossy stream! The virgins will see your tomb, at
the chase, and turn away their weeping eyes. Your fame will be in song.
The voice of the harp will be heard in your praise. The daughters of
Selma shall hear it: your renown shall be in other lands. Rest, children
of youth, at the noise of the mossy stream!"

Two days we remained on the coast. The heroes of Berrathon convened. We
brought Larthmor to his halls. The feast of shells is spread. The joy of
the

<span id="page_490">p. 490</span>

aged was great. He looked to the arms of his fathers; the arms which he
left in his hall, when the pride of Uthal rose. We were renowned before
Larthmor. He blessed the chiefs of Morven. He knew not that his son was
low, the stately strength of Uthal! They had told, that he had retired
to the woods, with the tears of grief. They had told it, but he was
silent in the tomb of Rothma's heath.

On the fourth day we raised our sails, to the roar of the northern wind.
Larthmor came to the coast. His bards exalted the song. The joy of the
king was great; he looked to Rothma's gloomy heath. He saw the tomb of
his son. The memory of Uthal rose. "Who of my heroes," he said, "lies
there? he seems to have been of the kings of men. Was he renowned in my
halls before the pride of Uthal rose? Ye are silent, sons of Berrathon!
is the king of heroes low? My heart melts for thee, O Uthal! though thy
hand was against thy father. O that I had remained in the cave! that my
son had dwelt in Fin-thormo! I might have heard the tread of his feet,
when he went to the chase of the boar. I might have heard his voice on
the blast of my cave. Then would my soul be glad; but now darkness
dwells in my halls."

Such were my deeds, son of Alpin, when the arm of my youth was strong.
Such the actions of Toscar, the car-borne son of Conloch. But Toscar is
on his flying cloud. I am alone at Lutha. My voice is like the last
sound of the wind, when it forsakes the woods. But Ossian shall not be
long alone. He sees the mist that shall receive his ghost. He beholds
the mist that shall form his robe, when he appears on his hills. The
Sons of feeble men shall behold me, and admire the stature of the chiefs
of old. They shall creep to their caves. They shall look to the sky with
fear: for my steps shall be in the clouds. Darkness shall roll on my
side.

<span id="page_491">p. 491</span>

Lead, son of Alpin, lead the aged to his woods. The winds begin to rise.
The dark wave of the lake resounds. Bends there not a tree from Mora
with its branches bare? It bends, son of Alpin, in the rustling blast.
My harp hangs on a blasted branch. The sound of its strings is mournful.
Does the wind touch thee, O harp, or is it some passing ghost? It is the
hand of Malvina! Bring me the harp, son of Alpin. Another song shall
rise. My soul shall depart in the sound. My fathers shall hear it in
their airy hail. Their dim faces shall hang, with joy, from their
clouds; and their hands receive their son. The aged oak bends over the
stream. It sighs with all its moss. The withered fern whistles near, and
mixes, as it waves, with Ossian's hair.

"Strike the harp, and raise the song: be near, with all your wings, ye
winds. Bear the mournful sound away to Fingal's airy hail. Bear it to
Fingal's hall, that he may hear the voice of his son: the voice of him
that praised the mighty!

"The blast of north opens thy gates, O king! I behold thee sitting on
mist dimly gleaming in all thine arms. Thy form now is not the terror of
the valiant. It is like a watery cloud, when we see the stars behind it
with their weeping eyes. Thy shield is the aged moon: thy sword a vapor
half kindled with fire. Dim and feeble is the chief who travelled in
brightness be fore! But thy steps are on the winds of the desert. The
storms are darkening in thy hand. Thou takest the sun in thy wrath, and
hidest him in thy clouds. The sons of little men are afraid. A thousand
showers descend. But when thou comest forth in thy mildness, the gale of
the morning is near thy course. The sun laughs in his blue fields. The
gray stream winds in its vale. The bushes shake their green heads in the
wind. The roes bound towards the desert.

"There is a murmur in the heath! the stormy winds

<span id="page_492">p. 492</span>

abate! I hear the voice of Fingal. Long has it been absent from mine
ear! 'Come, Ossian, come away, he says. Fingal has received his fame. We
passed away, like flames that have shone for a season. Our departure was
in renown. Though the plains of our battles are dark and silent; our
fame is in the four gray stones. The voice of Ossian has been heard. The
harp has been strung in Selma. 'Come, Ossian, come away,' he says;
'come, fly with thy fathers on clouds.' I come, I come, thou king of
men! The life of Ossian fails. I begin to vanish on Cona. My steps are
not seen in Selma. Beside the stone of Mora I shall fall asleep. The
winds whistling in my gray hair, shall not awaken me. Depart on thy
wings, O wind, thou canst not disturb the rest of the bard. The night is
long, but his eyes are heavy. Depart, thou rustling blast.

"But why art thou sad, son of Fingal? Why grows the cloud of thy soul?
The chiefs of other times are departed. They have gone without their
fame. The sons of future years shall pass away. Another race shall
arise. The people are like the waves of ocean; like the leaves of woody
Morven, they pass away in the rustling blast, and other leaves lift
their green heads on high.

"Did thy beauty last, O Ryno? Stood the strength of car-borne Oscar!
Fingal himself departed! The hails of his fathers forgot his steps.
Shalt thou then remain, thou aged bard? when the mighty have failed? But
my fame shall remain, and grow like the oak of Morven; which lifts its
broad head to the storm, and rejoices in the course of the wind?"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_114"></span>[485:1](oss43.htm#fr_114.md) The maids: that is,
the young virgins who sung the funeral elegy over her tomb.
