[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Yoga](../yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gsoy08) 
[Next](gsoy10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1425482597/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Great Systems of Yoga*, by Ernest Wood, \[1954\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

# THE OCCULT PATH OF BUDDHA

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span> <span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

### CHAPTER SEVEN

#### THE OCCULT PATH OF BUDDHA

ALWAYS the Buddha spoke of two ways of life—one being the ordinary
thoughtless course in which people seek happiness through various
pleasures, always hoping that they can obtain conditions which will give
them satisfaction, the other being called the Path (as distinguished
from the former, which is wandering about), a progressive determination
to cease such seeking for pleasure in material things. There is no
travelling on this Path, it is stated, for one is not going from one
place to another, or even from one mental condition to another. The goal
on this path is most occult, hidden from both sense and mind, but is
revealed when there is cessation of the ordinary manner of life, which
could well be called the way of error and sorrow. The goal is indeed
called a ceasing, not a gaining; it is a ceasing of the

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

error or ignorance of desiring and seeking—lo here, lo there. This is
called *nibbanna* or *nirvāna*.

Before describing the Path we must see what Buddha's great discovery
was. It was the discovery that great indescribable joy comes to the man
who realizes the universality of sorrow. It comes because he is thereby
released from the sense of dependence upon material things and the
craving for them. You are clinging to sorrow and suffering. In your
ignorance you hug and kiss the spokes of this wheel of agony.

This doctrine was formulated as Four Noble Truths: The Universality of
Sorrow or Suffering; The Cause of Sorrow; The Ceasing of Sorrow; and The
Way of the Ceasing of Sorrow. We are a little handicapped in using the
English language to express the central idea of this doctrine, for we
have not one single word, as Buddha had, to express both bodily and
psychological suffering, both pain and sorrow. Perhaps suffering will be
the best word to use. Perhaps we shall see, if we examine our heart's
desire closely, that if we had it fulfilled there would still be
suffering. Some may say that they will accept suffering if they can have
some pleasure as well. Shelley said that man looks before and after, and
longs for what is not, and Shakespeare went further and pointed out that
even if man has what he wants, the thought of time with its changes and
uncertainties

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

destroys his happiness. And Robert Burns mentioned that in one respect
the life of a mouse was happier than that of a man—the present only
troubles it. It is here that the revelation of Buddha came in—the
assertion that from his own experience there is the incredible joy of
nirvāna for those who put aside this error of seeking or expecting
happiness from circumstances.

Buddha did not leave people to grope their way out of error and craving.
His fourth Truth is called a Path—the Noble Eightfold Path. This means
that there are eight things to do which, if successfully done, are ways
of living without sorrow. We have now to examine this path, remembering
always that there can be no cheating, that this path cannot be used for
the purpose of attaining something that is within the wheel of sorrow,
whether an object of the body or a quality of the mind.

In the naming of the eight requirements of the Path there is a
reiteration of the word "correct" or "proper" at the beginning of each.
The first four answer the question, "How does the pilgrim comport
himself in thought, speech and action on all occasions?" The second four
point to special efforts he must make in his life. The first four are as
follows:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. Correct understanding, views, outlook, appraisal, judgment.

</div>

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

2\. Correct aims, motives, plans, considerations, decision.

3\. Correct use of speech.

4\. Correct behavior, conduct or actions.

</div>

Analyzing these and other modes of living in my book
*Character-Building* many years ago, I reduced all the defects of human
nature to three: laziness, selfishness and thoughtlessness, and all
virtues to three, action, goodwill and thoughtfulness. These three
touchstones are implied in the word "correct" in each of the four
requirements. No. I implies that one has at the outset adopted the
outlook described by Buddha, what is called the *dhamma* (*dharma*),
law, rule, or proper way of life. *Dharma* means maintenance—the
maintenance on all occasions, in all matters of life, small or great, of
the resolution to put an end to pain, which is the basis of the three
virtues of action, goodwill and thoughtfulness. These three are to be
followed regardless of pain or trouble. Much stress is laid on speech
for it is in this that dissipation of life most commonly occurs—idle
chatter, cruel gossip and talk without information.

The second group of four requirements assigns the tasks:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

5\. Correct mode of livelihood—the fulfilling of a definite role in
life, which shall be unselfish, sensible, useful.

</div>

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

6\. Correct effort—some work of doing good.

7\. Correct intellectual activity—some study.

8\. Correct contemplation—the expectant poise of the mind which allows
intuition and insight to begin.

</div>

All these eight have to do with daily life and the use of personal
abilities and energies in the world. They may be pursued with less or
greater determination and constancy; as Edwin Arnold puts it in his
beautiful poem *The Light of Asia*:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Strong limbs may dare the rugged road which storms,  
  Soaring and perilous, the mountain's breast;  
The weak must wind from slower ledge to ledge,  
  With many a place of rest.

So is the Eightfold Path which brings to peace;  
  By lower or by upper heights it goes.  
The firm soul hastes, the feeble tarries. All  
  Will reach the sunlit snows.

</div>

Now we have to look at the inner or esoteric aspect of all this, and
answer the question: "What is happening to the pilgrim himself?" For
this purpose Buddha gave the four stages of the Path, and showed what
are the defects or "fetters" which bind the ordinary man, and how they
are to be thrown off one after the other. The first result of practicing
the eightfold way is the weakening and disappearance of the error that
the body is itself important. All the

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

eight efforts lead one to be intent upon the life-side of living. It is
not a mere intellectual discovery or piece of psychic science which is
proposed here. The man will instinctively stop placing bodily interest
first in his thoughts. Pleasures and pride in body and personal
qualities will be replaced by the eight general life interests. The
*second* fetter to go is uncertainty or doubt about this path. The life
proves its value as it goes along and great confidence or faith arises
from this knowledge and experience. *Third* comes the cessation of
dependence upon outward forms or rules or ceremonies. It is the *life*
that will speak in this man on all occasions. On life he will depend,
and to life he will respond with life. His action will then face the
problems which arise, and will be full of both love and thought. Outer
rules and forms are for those who are not on this path.

Then fade away the two terrible "fetters" which hold back the ordinary
man from almost any semblance of true living: ignorant likes and
dislikes—one should say more than this, passionately ignorant likes and
dislikes, producing an inflexibility of mind and living which in most
cases borders on the psychopathic. Doctors are acquainted with the fact
that many people go about in wheel chairs; not because of inability to
walk, but inability to think they can; here we have masses of
inabilities and dependencies

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

among mankind, including negativeness and fears. But the grip of fixed
likings and dislikings loosens its hold on those who are treading the
Noble Eightfold Path, and they become ready to meet everything
appreciatively according to its nature. All their troubles are then real
or material ones; they have ceased making psychological ones in
addition—psychological troubles such as discontent, envy, jealousy,
resentment, malice, anxiety, worry, impatience, irritability, etc.,
which do no good, and only hinder the use of the powers of the life in
their dealing with the real troubles.

When these five fetters lie in the dust, as the poet puts it, there are
still five more. This situation marks the half-way house of the upward
Path. The man is now called an Arhat, a word which means "ready" or
"qualified." He now knows what he wants and he is competent to go after
it. In a secondary meaning he is worthy, admirable, deserving. The five
remaining fetters are:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

6\. Desire for life in form.

7\. Desire for formless life.

8\. Pride.

9\. Self-love.

10\. Ignorance.

</div>

It would not be fitting here to attempt to say what this final ignorance
is, except negatively—it is the

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

conception of oneself as anything conceivable. Perhaps we had better
leave it at that, for it is fundamental in Buddha's thought, as in that
of Krishna, Shankarāchārya, Jesus and all great *gurus* or teachers,
that our final union is with something Beyond—beyond the limitations of
mind, thought, feelings and the will, all these, as well as bodily
things, being limitations. Buddha more than all others impressed this
thought constantly upon his hearers, and emphasized the use of the word
*nirvāna*—which means "to extinguish" as, for example, the blowing out
of a candle. But this includes even the extinction of extinction. In
Edwin Arnold's words:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

       Seeking nothing, he gains all;  
  Foregoing self, the Universe grows "I";  
If any teach Nirvāna is to cease,  
  Say unto such they lie.

If any teach Nirvāna is to live,  
  Say unto such they err; not knowing this,  
Nor what light shines beyond their broken lamps,  
  Nor lifeless, timeless, bliss.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Eight. The Chinese Yoga](gsoy10)
