[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Yoga](../yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gsoy04) 
[Next](gsoy06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1425482597/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Great Systems of Yoga*, by Ernest Wood, \[1954\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span> <span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span> <span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

### CHAPTER THREE

#### SHRI KRISHNA'S GITA-YOGA

WE HAVE used the new term Gītā-Yoga here because it sums up the titles
of all the eighteen chapters of the *Bhagavad Gītā*, each of which is
called a yoga, such as "The Yoga of Knowledge," "The Yoga of Action,"
etc.

*Gītā* means song, and the whole title means the song of Shrī Krishna,
who is referred to as the Bhagavān—the most illustrious being. Shrī
Krishna is regarded as the most perfect of all Teachers—so much so that
he could speak about everything from the divine standpoint and with
divine knowledge of the reality beyond mind, so that when saying "I" he
spoke as an incarnation of the Divine Being. He is considered to have
lived about 5050 years ago, and the *Bhagavad Gītā* is regarded as a
record of what he said or sang to his devoted friend and disciple
Arjuna, who was in

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

a state of despondency because he could not solve a problem of "right or
wrong" in which his emotions were very much involved. The problem was
whether to fight or not in a certain battle which was about to begin.
Arjuna's particular problem does not concern us now. The yoga-teaching
it called forth from Shrī Krishna is read and meditated upon by millions
of people every day.

Shrī Krishna's teaching is more a yoga for the emotions than the mind,
although he does explain the necessity for mind-control and uses the
same two words—practice (*abhyāsa*) and uncoloredness (*vairāgya*) for
describing the means to its attainment as Patanjali does when starting
his teaching. Shrī Krishna tells Arjuna that though his heart is in the
right place his unhappy emotional state is due to ignorance. The first
point of the Teacher's instruction is—do not judge right and wrong from
the standpoint of bodily appearances, but only from what is of value to
the immortal soul, taking into account that actions, emotions, thoughts
and decisions all have some effect, some tending downwards or away from
self-realization and others tending upwards or toward self-realization.
Downwards there is bondage and sorrow; upwards there is joy and freedom
or the divine state of being, so let this first point be firmly
understood at the beginning. Shrī Krishna said: "You have sorrowed for

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

those who need no sorrow, yet you speak words of wisdom. Those who know
do not grieve for the living, nor for the dead. Certainly never at any
time was I not, nor you, nor these lords of men, nor shall we ever cease
to be hereafter. As there is for the owner of the body childhood, youth
and old age in this body, so there comes another body; the intelligent
man is not confused by that. Just as a man, having cast off his worn-out
clothes, obtains others which are new, so the owner of the body, having
thrown away old bodies goes to new ones. Weapons do not cut him; fire
does not burn him; waters do not wet him; the wind does not dry him away
. . ." <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30)

This point being clear the Teacher goes on to the next. He says in verse
ii 39 that what he has given is knowledge, based upon his own
supersensuous experience as well as that of ancient Teachers, but now he
wants Arjuna to take up something more than mere knowledge-yoga—he wants
him to take up *buddhi-yoga*. *Buddhi* is wisdom, which comes from doing
all things for the benefit of souls, not bodies primarily. It is
*buddhi* or wisdom to revalue everything from that standpoint.

It is easy to see that the heart of wisdom is love for the co-souls,
which Krishna calls indestructible *jīvabhūtas*, that is, living beings,
as distinguished from

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

temporary states and conditions, which are called *bhāvas*. Thus the
human personalities, in all their varieties are *bhāvas*, or existent
conditions, but the real men who are owners of the personalities are
immortal beings. The lesson that the heart of wisdom is love—goodwill,
brotherhood—is driven home by Shrī Krishna in his third discourse or
chapter, in which he states that the interdependence of all the living
beings in the world is universal, and as this is so one should
co-operate heartily, not merely mentally but with love, for the very
simple reason that the man who loves cannot abstain from activity. He is
in a vigorous state, for love is the great energy of the soul. He is
like the typical gentleman of Confucius, who was defined as never
neutral, but always impartial.

The man of love looks out upon the world, and feels that he must do what
he can, however small the opportunity, for the welfare of mankind. This
important fact was also soon placed before Arjuna by his Teacher. After
pointing out how all the living beings in the world are related to one
another in service, how everywhere there is interdependence, he then
declared that the man who on earth does not follow the wheel thus
revolving lives in vain. Said Shrī Krishna: "The man who performs
actions without personal attachment reaches the 'beyond'; therefore
always do work which ought to be done, without

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

personal attachment. Janaka and others attained perfection through work,
so, having regard to the welfare of the world, it is proper for you to
work." <span id="fr_31"></span>[2](#fn_31) There is great significance
in the words which have been translated "the welfare of the world." They
are *loka-sangraha*, *loka* means the inhabitants; *sangraha* means
their holding or combining together, their living in harmony. This means
love, and if there must be fighting, it is a regrettable necessity, and
is to be done still with love in the heart.

It is in this activity that work and love are brought together. What is
called *karma-yoga* thus comes into being. Mere work or karma is not
yoga, but when that work is energized by love for mankind, it becomes a
yoga, that is, a method for the realization of the unity of life. So
*karma-yoga* is one branch of Krishna's great teaching of love. The
*karma-yogī* "goes about doing good."

And yet that *karma-yoga* is also devotion to God. Among Krishna's
devotees, as among those of Christ, there are two distinct kinds. There
are those who admire the teacher because he was the great lover of
mankind; and there are those who fall down in admiration and devotion
before the greatness and goodness of the teacher, and then learn from
his example and precept to spread some of his love around them,

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

among their fellow-men. Some love man first and God afterwards; others
love God first and man afterwards. The first are the *karma-yogīs*; the
second the *bhakti-yogīs*.

God himself is depicted in the *Gītā* as the greatest karma yogī, the
pattern for all who would follow that path. He says: "There is nothing
in the three worlds, O Pārtha, that I ought to do, and nothing
attainable unattained, yet I engage in work. Certainly if I did not
always engage in work without laziness, people on all sides would follow
my path. These worlds would become lost if I did not work; I would be
the maker of confusion, and would ruin these creatures." <span
id="fr_32"></span>[3](#fn_32) No reason can be given why he should thus
work, except that he loves the world.

But let no man be discouraged in this work because he himself is small.
Let not his vision of great things and devotion to great beings cause
him to sink down disconsolate, thinking, "There is nothing that I can do
that is big enough to be worth the doing." Let him remember that
spiritual things are not measured by quantity but their greatness
consists in the purity of their motive. It is the love that counts—not
the action. It is one of the greatest glories of this universe that the
common and inconspicuous life of ordinary men contains a thousand daily
opportunities of spiritual

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

splendor. Says Shrī Krishna: "Men reach perfection, each being engaged
in his own *karma*. Better is one's own *dharma* though inglorious, than
the well-performed *dharma* of another. He who does the duty determined
by his own state incurs no fault. By worshipping in his own *karma*
(work) him from whom all beings come, him by whom all this is spread
out, a man attains perfection." <span id="fr_33"></span>[4](#fn_33)

The words *dharma* and *karma* here require explanation. *Dharma* means
where you stand. Each man has to some extent unfolded the flower of his
possibility. He stands in a definite position, or holds definite powers
of character. It is better that he should recognize his position and be
content with it, true to the best he knows, than that he should try to
stand in the position of another, or waste his powers in mere envious
admiration. To use his powers in the kind of work he can do, upon and
with the material that his past karma has provided for him in the
present is not only the height of practical wisdom—it is worship of God
as well. All life lived in this way is worship; ploughing and reaping,
selling and buying—whatever it may be. Conventional forms of kneeling
and prostration are not the sole or even the necessary constituents of
worship, but every act of the *karma-yogī* and of the *bhakti-yogī* is
that. The word bhakti does in

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

fact contain more of the meaning of service than of feeling.

The Lord does not ask from his devotees great gifts. Says Shrī Krishna:
"When anyone offers to me with devotion a leaf, a flower, a fruit or a
little water, I accept that, which is brought with devotion by the
striving soul. When you do anything, eat anything, sacrifice anything,
give anything or make an effort, do it as an offering to me. Thus shall
you be released from the bonds of karma, having their good and bad
results, and being free and united through *sannyāsa* (renunciation) you
will come to me. I am alike to all beings; none is disliked by me, and
none is favorite; but those who worship me with devotion are in me and I
also am in them. Even if a great evildoer worships me, not devoted to
anything else, he must be considered good, for he has determined well.
Quickly he becomes a man of *dharma* and attains constant peace." <span
id="fr_34"></span>[5](#fn_34) It is clear, then, that this yoga is a way
of thinking, and acting, inspired by love, which releases a man from
bondage to his own personality.

As there is community of work between God and man, so is there community
of interest, and indeed, community of feeling. "All this is threaded on
me," says the Divine, "like a collection of pearls on a

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

string." <span id="fr_35"></span>[6](#fn_35) And the reward of the path
of yoga is the full realization of this unity: "At the end of many lives
the man having wisdom approaches me. By devotion he understands me,
according to what I really am; then, having truly known me, he enters
that (state) immediately. Although always doing work, having me for
goal, through my grace he obtains the eternal indestructible
goal." <span id="fr_36"></span>[7](#fn_36)

The love of man for God is more than reciprocated; "He who has no
dislike for any being, but is friendly and kind, without greed or
egotism, the same in pleasure and pain, forgiving, always content,
harmonious, self-controlled and resolute, with thought and affection
intent upon me, he, my devotee, is dear to me. He from whom people are
not repelled, and who does not avoid the world, free from the agitations
of delight, impatience and fear, is dear to me. Those devotees who are
intent upon this deathless way of life, thus declared, full of faith,
with me as (their) supreme—they are above all dear to me." <span
id="fr_37"></span>[8](#fn_37)

Some of the devotional verses suggest a great absence of self-reliance
*if* they are taken out of their general context, as, for instance:
"Giving up all *dharmas* come only to me as your refuge. Do not sorrow;

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I will release you
from all sins." This "I" to whom reference is so often made, is the one
Self, the one life, and therefore it advocates the giving up of
selfishness and taking interest in the welfare of all. There is in all
this no suggestion anywhere that man should lean upon an external God,
an entity. This devotion is required to the "me" which is *all* life,
and not a portion of life in some external form, however grand. Shrī
Krishna speaks for that one life "equally present in all." <span
id="fr_38"></span>[9](#fn_38)

The objective side of this is by no means ignored in this teaching of
the importance of the soul, indeed, of all souls. While the souls bring
themselves more and more into harmony through the power of love or
wisdom or *buddhi*, certain material standards are recognized. The
material side, consisting of all the *bhāvas* or conditions, must be
brought into a state of orderliness and appropriateness called *sattwa*.
In the teaching of this part of the subject Shrī Krishna says that
everything in Nature can be classed under one of three heads—it is
*tāmasic*, that is, material and sluggish, or *rājasic*, that is, active
and restless, or *sāttwic*, orderly and harmonious. This is in agreement
with both ancient and modern thought.

Modern science recognizes three properties in Nature, or three essential
constituents in the objectivity

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

of the external world. One of these is materiality, or the ability of
something to occupy space and resist the intrusion of another body into
the same space. The second is natural energy or force, and the third is
natural law and order. There is no object to be found anywhere, be it
large or small, which does not show something of all these three, as it
occupies space, shows internal or external energy, and "obeys" (or
operates) at least some of Nature's laws. These three qualities of
Nature were also well known to the ancient Hindus under the names of
*tamas*, *rajas* and *sattwa*, and they held that things differed from
one another according to the varied proportions of these three ultimate
ingredients. Thus an object in which materiality predominated would be
described as *tāmasic*, and one in which energy was most prominent would
be spoken of as *rājasic*.

The same adjectives are applied very fully in the *Gītā* to the
personalities of men. <span id="fr_39"></span>[10](#fn_39) In the early
stages of human awakening we have the very material or *tāmasic* man,
who is sluggish and scarcely cares to move, unless he is stirred by a
strong stimulus from the outside. Next comes the man in whom *rajas* has
developed, who is now eager for excitement and full of energy. Perhaps
the bulk of people in the modern world are in this condition, or
beginning to come into

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

it. *Rajas* sends them forth into great activity with every kind of
greed, from the lowest lust of the body to the highest forms of ambition
for wealth and fame and power. Men of this kind cannot restrain
themselves—to want is to act.

Thirdly come the people who recognize that there is such a thing as
natural law, who realize, for example, that it does not pay to eat and
drink just what they like and as much as they like, but that there are
certain regulations, about kind and quantity and time, which pertain to
eating and drinking, and that violation of these regulations leads to
pain. In time that pain draws attention to what is wrong and the man
begins to use his intelligence, first to try to thwart the pain and
avert the law, but later on to understand the law, and obey. And then,
in that obedience he learns that life is far richer than ever he thought
it to be before, that there is in it a sweet strong rhythm unknown to
the man of passion, and that alliance with the law can strengthen and
enhance human life beyond all the hopes of the impassioned imagination.
All good, thoughtful people are in this third stage, obedient and
orderly, and they deserve the name of *sāttwic* people.

The disciple has to see that his material and personal life or *bhāva*
is kept in the *sāttwic* condition, as regards body, emotions and
thoughts. This is a great

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

yoga undertaking. In this there is plenty to do resembling Patanjali's
first five steps. At the same time the disciple must go further than the
ordinary good man; he must hold himself above all the qualities of
Nature (*tamas*, *rajas* and *sattwa*), *using* the *bhāva*, not being
immersed and lost in it. "Be thou above the three attributes of Nature,
O Arjuna," says the Teacher, "without the pairs of opposites (such as
heat and cold, praise and blame, riches and poverty), always steadfast
in *sattwa*, careless of possessions, having the (real) self." <span
id="fr_40"></span>[11](#fn_40)

These laws work out in a multitude of ways in life, but there are three
main principles behind them all—principles of the evolution of
consciousness. They express themselves in the powers of will, love and
thought, creative in the world, and self-creative in the man. There are
only three things that the man must now not do. He must never cease to
use his will in work. In that work he must never break the law of love.
And in that work of love he must never act; without using his
intelligence. These are *principles*—greater than all rules and
regulations, because they are the living law of the true self; and not
much consideration is required to see that he who follows this law must
necessarily show in his practical life all the virtues that are admired
by good men of every

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

religion. Indeed, we can adopt from the Greeks the three eternal
valuables—goodness, truth and beauty—and say that a man is truly a man
only when he is operating these.

These teachings condense down to three practical exercises, which
convert experience into soul-knowledge. Shrī Krishna does not value life
for its own sake, or even brotherhood for its own sake, or even love for
its own sake. All actions are valuable only because they lead to
knowledge of realities of the soul and the ultimate self. Regarding the
aspirant's work or living in the world as stimulating a hunger for
something better, which, did he but know it, causes the awakening in
himself of a deeper knowledge, and regarding all *buddhi-yoga* and
*karma-yoga* as an offering on the altar of world-welfare, valuable also
because they are a means of true self-education, useful to everybody,
Shrī Krishna says: "Better than the offering of any material object is
the offering of knowledge, for all work culminates in knowledge. You
should learn this by reverence, enquiry and service, and those who know
and see the truth will teach you the knowledge. By this you will see all
beings without exception in the self, and thus in me. Even if you were
the most wicked of evildoers, you would cross over all sin by the raft
of (this) knowledge. As fire reduces fuel to ashes, so does the fire of

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

knowledge reduce all *karmas* to ashes. There is indeed no purifier in
the world like knowledge. He who is accomplished finds the same in the
self in course of time. Having attained (this) knowledge he very soon
goes to the peace of the Beyond." <span id="fr_41"></span>[12](#fn_41)
The word "knowledge" (*jnāna*) in the *Gītā* means always something
known—high or low. "Wisdom" is *buddhi*, meaning the faculty of
understanding the life side of the world.

This passage introduces us to a portion of the definite path of
training—the equivalent of Patanjali's practical yoga. It was not
sufficient for Arjuna to have great love. If he would tread the path, he
must express it in work in the form of service, and must also have an
enquiring mind, so as to gain some understanding. The unbalanced
character is unfit for the higher path, no matter how great the progress
it may have made along one line. Three practices are prescribed;
reverence, enquiry and service—in the original, *pranipāta*,
*pariprashna* and *sevā*. <span id="fr_42"></span>[13](#fn_42) The first
means bowing, or respect for the Divine in all beings and events, which
is the same thing as Patanjali's *īshwara-pranidhāna*. The second is
enquiry or questioning, resembling Patanjali's *swādhyāya*. The third is
service, another form of practical effort, the equivalent

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

on this path of Patanjali's *tapas*. The requirements are thus the same
in each school, but the order and emphasis varies.

When speaking of service, it is necessary to emphasize broad
conceptions. Some would narrow it down to personal service to a
particular teacher, but the whole *Gītā* points to that brotherhood
which is the doing of one's best duty to all around, in one's own
limited sphere of circumstances and ability. The aspirant should desire
the welfare of the world. This does not imply that we should merely
engage ourselves with those who are in need, who are weak or poor or
ignorant, and bestow our assistance upon them. That is a dangerous
pastime, as it tends to a habit of superiority, and often ends in the
production of a missionary spirit which is fatal to occult progress.
Right association with those who are approximately one's equals is, on
the whole, the best means for rendering the greatest help to others and
oneself. Life does not flow harmoniously across big gaps. The beginner
does not become an expert tennis player by playing against great
experts, but with those just a little better than himself, and it is not
the business of the greatest expert to teach the mere beginner, just as
it is not the business of the chief professor of a college to teach the
infant class. A good, sensible, brotherly life, in which one does not
embarrass others

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

by making conspicuous sacrifices on their behalf, is always the best.
The teaching does not ask for *rājasic* efforts, but a *sāttwic* fitting
in of oneself into the social welfare.

We may see all mankind in process of evolution or self-unfoldment in
seven degrees or stages, according to Shrī Krishna's teaching. In the
first three stages the man's life is energized from the personality; in
the last three, from the real self. In the middle stage there is a
conflict between the two, while the man is beginning to work at the
three practices mentioned above.

There is one term which Shrī Krishna applies to all those who are
renouncing allegiance to mere pleasures and self-satisfactions and
personal attachment to the objects of the world. He calls them
*sannyāsīs*. In the final discourse of the *Gītā*, the eighteenth
chapter, there is a long explanation of the meaning of the term
*sannyāsa*. It is compared with another—*tyāga*. *Tyāga* means
abandoning, giving up, leaving behind, and a *tyāgī* is therefore one
who has renounced the world, given up all possessions, and taken to the
uncertain life of a religious mendicant, except perhaps that the term
mendicant is not quite appropriate, since this man does not positively
beg. *Sannyāsa* is the same thing in *spirit*. The *sannyāsī* does not
necessarily give up the material things, but he gives up personal
attachment to them.

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

There is still plenty to do for the man who is becoming more and more
conscious of the life around him, and therefore less liable to merely
personal interests and motives. The things that he must do are described
by Shrī Krishna as follows: "Acts of *yajna*, *dāna* and *tapas* should
not be given up, but should be done without personal attachment or
desire for results." <span id="fr_43"></span>[14](#fn_43) These three
kinds of action which alone the *sannyāsī* is permitted to do, and which
in fact he must do, are sacrifice, gift and effort.

It is always unsatisfactory to try to translate these technical Sanskrit
words into one-word equivalents in English. Sacrifice (*yajna*) does not
mean the mere surrender of things, but it really means to make all
things holy. This occurs when they are offerings. Any action done with
an unselfish motive is thus holy. The *sannyāsī* does not, however, need
to make any ceremonial offerings, because he sees the one life
everywhere, and all his actions are direct service of that life. In the
West it is significant that "holy" is connected with "whole," and so
what is done not for selfish gain but in the interests of all is holy.
Sacrifice is thus a law by which living beings are related into one
great brotherhood. A very important part of the teaching of the *Gītā*
is that one should recognize, accept and like the great fact of the
mutual support of

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

all living beings, and act or live accordingly. This is called the law
of sacrifice.

The *sannyāsī* gives freely; leaving it to the law to repay. He also
consents to receive only freely, and should any one offer food or
anything else for his use, he declines it if the gift is not sincere and
free from any suggestion of obligation. His life is one of giving
(*dāna*). All his powers are completely at the service of mankind. And
he must strive also, by *tapas*, to increase those powers. There is
plenty to do for the man whose life is only sacrifice, gift and effort,
whether he be a wandering monk in India or a railroad magnate in the
United States.

This yoga does not exclude meditation. On the contrary it recommends it,
but we need not study that here as it has been so fully dealt with in
our previous chapters.

In all this teaching one seems to hear the echo of the words of all the
spiritual guides of mankind: "We are not interested in the outer man,
but in the real man in you. Cling to the real man. That is union with
yoga. Let this be a matter for frequent reflection and all else will be
purified." The practice of this meditation is essential, but only brings
its effect in combination with the practice of true valuation of things
in our material living—which is estimation of their value by love, their
value *for* somebody.

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This love leads on
to spiritual insight which, as it combines knowing and being, can be
called unification—through purification—with the ever present Divine
reality.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_30"></span>[43:1](gsoy05.htm#fr_30) Verses ii 11, 12, 13,
22, 23.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[45:2](gsoy05.htm#fr_31) iii 19, 20.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[46:3](gsoy05.htm#fr_32) iii 22-24.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[47:4](gsoy05.htm#fr_33) xviii 45-47, and iii
35.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[48:5](gsoy05.htm#fr_34) ix 26-31.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[49:6](gsoy05.htm#fr_35) vii 7.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[49:7](gsoy05.htm#fr_36) vii 19 and xviii 55,
56.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[49:8](gsoy05.htm#fr_37) xii 13-15, 20.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[50:9](gsoy05.htm#fr_38) xiii 27, 28.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[51:10](gsoy05.htm#fr_39) xviii 7-9, 26-28.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[53:11](gsoy05.htm#fr_40) ii 45.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[55:12](gsoy05.htm#fr_41) iv 33-39.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[55:13](gsoy05.htm#fr_42) iv 34.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[58:14](gsoy05.htm#fr_43) xviii 5, 6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Four. Shankaracharya's Gnyana-Yoga](gsoy06)
