[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Yoga](../yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gsoy07) 
[Next](gsoy09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1425482597/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Great Systems of Yoga*, by Ernest Wood, \[1954\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span> <span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

# THE BHAKTI AND MANTRA YOGAS

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span> <span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

### THE BHAKTI AND MANTRA YOGAS

#### CHAPTER SIX

BHAKTI, or devotion, arises from the appreciation of goodness. There
will be no devotional feeling towards what is not good. If some persons
were to worship or rather propitiate a dangerous deity it would not be
devotion. So devotion implies goodness and is towards goodness. It is a
form of love, but essentially love of something or some person who is
"good."

Merchants, who speak of goods, not of mere things or articles, are in
this particular excellent psychologists. Goods are things which are good
for us, or we might better put it, good to us. We go further as our
intelligence or knowledge increases and recognize that some things which
are not good to us are good to others. "The farmer prays for rain, the
washerman for sun," says the Japanese proverb. On

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

this basis, everything is seen to be good because everything is good to
some being.

When men ask themselves where all these goods come from they easily
ascribe them to a goodness which has the nature of a superior mind. They
find that the good man is one who positively produces goods of some kind
and passes them on to others. Not only the things he produces but he
himself is thus a manifestation of goodness. From such thoughts it is
easy to pass on to the idea of a deity or deity who is goodness, and, in
the height of this idea, is good to all and always, even when the
goodness of his gift of the moment is not understood and felt as such.
In this way the intellect permits the goodness to be universalized, and
prevents the judgment of goodness from being based on one's own personal
pleasure or one's own material welfare. Thus devotion, which arises at
first from the reception of some goods, ends up by declaring that all is
good, and this devotion then makes logical a predisposition towards
appreciative feelings, even when there is not understanding.

That is true and complete religious devotion, which never questions but
always appreciates everything, or judges all things and their Giver as
expressions and sources of that goodness. In the West philosophers have
said that it is possible to get good out of every experience, so one
should "look for the

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

good in everything"; but in India they always went one better than that
by saying one should "look for the God in everything," because in this
way the feelings as well as the intellect had their play. In looking for
the good in everything there is usually a somewhat antagonistic feeling.
This philosopher says he will face all situations boldly and extract
some good from them. But in accepting the God in everything there is a
glad meeting and full attentiveness and openness of heart. It is a
perfectly happy condition, in which the poet could say:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Hither! take me, use me, fill me,  
Vein and artery, though ye kill me!</span>

</div>

Another way of approaching a knowledge of the heart of the devotee is to
ask oneself where the philosopher gets his truth, which is a good. Did
he make it? No, he found it. Where did the artist get his beauty? Did he
make it? No, he found it. Since it takes the best and greatest men
merely to find these goods and present them to others in, at best, an
imperfect form, what shall be thought of the original Cause of all the
truths and beauties? We naturally bow with great joy before the thought
of that Cause.

The *bhakta* or devotee is satisfied with the joy of the consciousness
of the presence of Goodness. But he still has also a touch of
philosophy—the thought that his own joyous devotion—imperfect as he
knows

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

it to be and rejoiceful as he is that he has even a little of it, and
perhaps even then only sometimes—will ultimately increase to fill the
whole of his life and then be present at all times. Thus devotion is
itself another good, and a source of joy.

It is only one step more to the formation of *bhakti-yoga*, a method for
increasing the *bhakti*. Religious services are usually a mixture of
this with what we shall presently study as the mantra-yoga. They aim at
the direction of the feelings, and mix it with ceremonial words and
actions. In India there is no collective or congregational worship, but
still there are occasional gatherings at which stories are told and
songs are sung extolling the exploits of divine Incarnations, or there
is singing the names or appellations of Deity. In country places there
are often *bhajanas* in which songs are sung containing mostly the names
of the deities, to the accompaniment of drums and music, before a statue
or a picture representing the divinity. Individual worship appears in
daily prayers and in yoga practice.

Why is a separate or outside God adored, reverenced, worshipped? Because
he is regarded as the source of wealth and bounty, considered either as
an example, or as a giver of material benefits, or at least of divine
"grace." It is a question whether the rāja-yogī could allow himself this
form of devotion, which leans on "goodness." The goal of his being is
upright,

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

strong life, happy and free because it is illuminated as to *its own*
divine nature and that of *all* the other lives seen around, using other
forms. If, then, his goal of life is this happiness, which is the joy of
upright, strong life, master of its own small world of body and
circumstances, how can he look for help towards that freedom at any
stage by what he would call the intoxications or consolations or refuges
of religion? Let a man do his small daily task according to his strength
of will, love and thought, and all will be well with him. He can be
immensely devoted to all the life around him, regarding his neighbor as
himself. His refuge from selfishness and the fear it brings exists, but
he will not bring into it the unnatural considerations of another and
separate life governing or uplifting his own. To him this devotion is a
*hatha-yoga*, inasmuch as it depends on another "good," external to
himself. Therefore this devotion is often found along with the *hatha*
schools of yoga. It comes in also along with concentration in the
various *chakras*. The *Gheranda Sanhitā* mentions it as one of the
means to *samādhi*: "Let him meditate in his own heart upon the proper
form of his desired deity; let him meditate with the *bhakti-yoga*, full
of the greatest gladness; let him shed tears of happiness." <span
id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73)

The flow of unrestrained feeling, even if it means

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

self-abandonment before the recognized glory of the divine, also has its
dangers if not balanced by thought and knowledge, as insane asylums
testify all over the Western world, and a red record of fanaticism and
cruelty witnesses in history; though it is a path that may be followed
without special guidance, provided the development of intelligence and
will in practical life is not neglected. Many churches and other
organizations are busy on this line, but for the most part they miss the
point of it because they direct attention to God or his representative
as something for the weakling to lean upon or as a fountain of blessing
for personal gratification, rather than as something so splendid—a Good
beyond all goods—that at the mere sight of it one loses personal desires
completely, forgets oneself in the contemplation of it, and adds a new
form of ecstasy to the permanent treasures of the soul.

From the Hindu point of view there is an error in the Western idea that
grace can come down from above in response to devotion, or, still worse,
that higher forces can be brought down by it and by ceremonials. Their
view is that by grace we are lifted up, not that anything is brought
down. It is akin to the doctrine of intuition. If there is intuition,
following upon much thought on a given subject, the field of thought is
clarified. Yoga, however, aims at the raising of consciousness above the
mind into the

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

clarifier. A crude simile may make this clear; a man owns a car, looks
after it and drives it along the road to some destination, and because
of that the car is both preserved and used. If the car were left to
itself it would rot. Or if it were started up and sent off by itself it
would soon meet with an accident. But when it is properly used, the car
is still a car; it does not become a man, and the man is still a man and
does not become a car. So with the mind. If left to itself it will rot
or produce an accident. But what is above mind—the ethical and moral
principles—will preserve it and use it well, will harmonize its parts
and contents and illumine its path. All are glad of the intuition, but
the yogī wants more than that—his consciousness must be raised into the
very source of that intuition. One is speaking of the *bhakta*, who is
to be himself raised up, not to have his material nature glorified.

The use of *mantras* constitutes another very definite department of
occult practices, known in India from the oldest times. *Mantras* are
charms, spells, magical formulas, incantations. *Mantra-yoga* is the
employment of words so arranged as to produce these effects. It is not
usually considered that ordinary people are qualified to make *mantras*,
but that the *mantra-yogī* is a person who knows the *mantras* which
have been made by great *mantra-kāras* (*mantra*-makers) in the past.
All the hymns of the Vedas are called *mantras*;

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

those which are metrical and meant to be recited loudly are called
"*rich*" (hence *Rig-Veda*), those in prose and to be uttered in a low
voice are called "*yajus*" (hence *Yajur-Veda*) and the metrical ones
intended for chanting are called *sāman* (hence *Sāma-Veda*). Mantras
are formularies which are meant to produce an effect on people and
sometimes on things, which will be so affected that they would then
affect people. Thus, for example, *mantras* are useful for consecrating
shrines, instruments, vestments and other things. People of Western
countries are familiar with the idea, as it occurs not only in their
stories or folk-lore about wizards and witches, but also in the
practices of some of the churches, in which it is imperative that the
priest shall conduct the ceremonies with the words exactly as
prescribed, and shall also wear the vestments and make the gestures or
movements traditionally associated with them and use the instruments
according to rule.

It is to be noted that the prescribed wording and chanting must be
accompanied by the right intention and belief in the mind. The *mantra*
is not supposed to be effective without the thought which is called the
intent or purpose; nevertheless the incantator need not know the meaning
of the words employed—it makes no difference to the mantric action
whether he knows them or not. But the correct *intention* must

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

be used with the *mantra* belonging to it. This implies that one cannot
use a *mantra* for any purpose other than that originally intended. It
also indicates that the use of *mantras* is not passive (such as that of
prayer-wheels or prayer-flags), but they are considered as tools. Thus
the reproduction of a recited *mantra* by gramophone record would have
no effect beyond that of its mere sound or music.

There are many different *mantras* associated with different schools of
activity. But in all of them the chief feature is the repetition
(*japa*) of certain fixed forms of words, often with a definite
intonation, and always with the thought of their meaning and intention.
We find this practice frequently combined with *bhakti-yoga*, as in the
following example, from the *Gopālatāpani Upanishad* and the *Krishna
Upanishad*. Of all the mantras of Shrī Krishna, none is considered more
powerful than this five-divisioned, eighteen-syllabled one, which is:
"Klīm, Krishnāya, Govindāya, Gopī-jana, Vallabhāya, Swāhā!" The
following is the explanation, translated in my book on Concentration:

"Once the sages came to the great Brahma and asked: 'Who is the supreme
God? Whom does Death fear? Through the knowledge of what does all become
known? What makes this world continue on its course?'

"He replied: 'Shrī Krishna verily is the supreme God. Death is afraid of
Govinda (Shrī Krishna). By knowledge

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

of the Lord of Gopī-jana (Shrī Krishna) the whole is known. By Swāhā the
world goes on evolving.'

"Then they questioned him again: 'Who is Krishna? Who is Govinda? Who is
the Lord of Gopī-jana? What is Swāhā?'

"He replied: 'Krishna is he who destroys all wrong. Govinda is the
knower of all things, who, on earth, is known through the great
teaching. The Lord of Gopī-jana is he who guides all conditioned beings.
Swāhā is his power. He who meditates on these, repeats the *mantra*, and
worships him, becomes immortal.'

"Again they asked him: 'What is his form? What is his *mantra*? What is
his worship?'

"He replied: 'He who has the form of a protector of cows. The
cloud-colored youth. He who sits at the root of the tree. He whose eyes
are like the full-blown lotus. He whose raiment is of the splendor of
lightning. He who is two-armed. He who is possessed of the sign of
wisdom. He who wears a garland of flowers. He who is seated on the
center of the golden lotus. Who meditates upon him becomes free. His is
the *mantra* of five parts. The first is *Klīm Krishnāya*. *Klīm* is the
seed of attraction. The second is *Govindāya*. The third is *Gopī-jana*.
The fourth is *Vallabhāya*. The fifth and last is *Swāhā*. *Klīm*—to
Krishna—to the Giver of Knowledge—to the Lord of the Cowherds—*Swāhā*!'

"Om. Adoration to the Universal Form, the Source of all Protection, the
Goal of Life, the Ruler of the Universe, and the Universe itself.

"Om. Adoration to the Embodiment of Wisdom, the Supreme Delight,
Krishna, the Lord of Cowherds! To the Giver of Knowledge, adoration!"

Such *mantras* as this are full of symbology, which helps the intent.
The word *krishna* means the color

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

of the rain cloud, a symbol of protection and beneficence. The cows are
the verses of scripture, *Vallabha* means Lord and also Beloved, and the
"cow-herd people" are the great sages. The tree is creation or
evolution.

Favorite among the *laya-yogīs* is the mantra "*Om, aim, klīm, strīm*."
"*Om*" is introductory; the other three are called "seed" *mantras*;
*aim* being the seed of speech or intelligence, in the first lotus,
*klīm* the seed *mantra* of love, in the heart lotus, and *strīm* the
seed *mantra* of power, in the eyebrow lotus. On the *chitrinī* canal at
these points there are *granthis*, or "knots," which obstruct the
advance of *kundalinī*. With the aid of these *mantras*, they are broken
through. Great results are said to accrue from many repetitions of this
*mantra*, which must be said neither too quickly nor too slowly.

The *mantra* *Om*, which is used at the beginning and end of all
prayers, needs special mention. It is considered to have a harmonizing
effect, as being the word, or true name, not merely the appellative
name, of the "one life without a second." It is composed of three
letters, a, u, and m, and can be pronounced with the a and u both
distinctly heard, or, as is more usual, with the two blended together as
O. The meaning may be derived in the following way. As a is sounded from
the throat, it is the beginning of all sounds, and as m is formed by the
closing of the lips,

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

it is the end, u being in the middle. Therefore when *Om* is properly
sounded with a glide from one letter to the next, it is the complete
word. And since sound is creative power, *Om* is not only the natural
name of God, but pronunciation of it is a means to harmony with the
divine.

The same idea is symbolically represented in the *Shāndilya Upanishad*,
where the yogī is told to meditate, using the *pranava* that is, *Om*,
at the same time thinking of three goddesses: Gāyatrī, a girl of reddish
color, seated on a swan and carrying a mace, who represents the letter
a; Sāvitrī, a young woman of white color, mounted on an eagle and
carrying a disc, who represents the letter u; and Saraswatī, a mature
woman of dark color, riding on a bull and carrying a trident, who
represents the letter m. Those goddesses are the wives and *shaktis*, or
powers, of the three members of the Trinity—Shiva, Vishnu and Brahmā—who
together constitute the one Brahman. The yogī is told to use the
proportions sixteen, sixty-four and thirty-two for breathing during this
meditation.

Very closely allied psychologically with the *mantra-yoga* is the
practice of art in connection with religious matters. Just as the
repetition of certain words helps the devotee to keep his mind well
concentrated, so in the case of the temperament which

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

runs to external creativeness, painting and sculpture is a means of
holding up and preserving the desired emotional and mental states. The
whole process is like damming up a valley and so conserving the water
for the constant use of the countryside. Art may be looked upon as a
form of yoga. Shukrāchārya says: "Let the image-maker establish images
in temples by meditation on the deities who are the objects of his
devotion. In no other way, not even by direct and immediate vision of an
actual object, is it possible to be so absorbed in contemplation as thus
in the making of images."

Out of this inevitably comes beauty, even when the intention to do so is
not intellectually formulated, for action well done always produces that
effect in some natural way. Thus, for example, the limbs and figure of
the racehorse are wonderfully beautiful because of the skill developed
in running, and also the running is beautiful to see. When an artist
does his best, the same effect is produced, both in the man and in the
work. This itself constitutes a kind of union with the divine, for if it
can be said that God is expressible in material form, it must be in
beauty, since that is the one thing in the material world of which the
soul never tires.

To understand all this theoretically one has to remember that in the use
of the senses there are three

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

factors—the conscious being, the sensations (as of color, or sound) and
the sense-organ (including the whole mechanism from the eye or the ear
to the brain-center). Occultly, the sensations are something in
themselves, which the mind carries within itself even away from the
body. The objects of the world with their colors etc., are expressions
of these sensations in innumerable combinations, brought about through
action-organs, and then those objects can arouse the sensations again
through the sense-organs.

These sensations are vastly important, because they arouse the
attentiveness of the consciousness, and assist its concentration or
attentiveness and so enrich its content and power. When consciousness is
stronger, clearer, its power is greater. Thus sensations are carriers of
the will, both ways—from man to the world and from the world to man. It
is easy from this principle to see how all that is going on in this
world is a sort of magic. In that magic we get our most formative and
delighting effect in what we call beauty, and all things affect us
through the shock of beauty or through the lesser process of repetition.
Deliberate use of this process is a form of yoga; in the case of the
latter method, repetition, we have the mantric effect.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_73"></span>[113:1](gsoy08.htm#fr_73) *Gheranda Sanhitā* vii
14-15.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Seven. The Occult Path of Buddha](gsoy09)
