[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Yoga](../yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gsoy01) 
[Next](gsoy03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1425482597/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Great Systems of Yoga*, by Ernest Wood, \[1954\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

### PREFACE

THERE are many people in America and Europe who want to know what yoga
is, and they say, "Do not tell us about the yoga of one particular
school; we want a concise survey of the whole field."

This need I have tried to fill in the present small volume. In doing so
I have endeavored to preserve the perfect authenticity and clearness of
the original teachings of ten different well-known Oriental schools of
yoga teaching and practice. This I am doing mainly direct from the
original texts and with an extensive knowledge of their actual
operation, acquired largely during my thirty-eight-years residence in
the East.

Then comes the remark: "We want to find out whether there is anything in
these forms of yoga which we can use in our present civilization. Has it
anything for us?"

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

It certainly has. In explanation of this reply, I will first mention
that it will be seen by the reader of this book that reflectiveness and
meditation play a large part in most of the yoga systems, and then add,

"Half an hour spent in meditation or even in reflection in the morning
is not time wasted. It is not even time spent. It is time gained,
because it will make the rest of the day far more fruitful than it would
otherwise have been."

"How so?"

"It will do this in four ways:

"First, it will co-ordinate the contents of the mind on all aspects of
the matters in which you are currently interested, and ensure that
nothing is missed or overlooked.

"Secondly, it will permit the rising of new ideas, through the
recombinations of old ones, and suggestions arising from them.

"Thirdly, it will exercise the mental faculty, and thus increase both
its grip and its grasp, improving its functionality for the whole day,
just as the muscular development acquired by ten minutes' exercise in
the morning gives the body greater strength for the whole day.

"Fourthly, it will automatically work some of the magic of the mind,
whereby you will be put tele-magnetically into touch with things and
persons you

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

are interested in, and thus it will create opportunities and even
so-called coincidences."

If this is not enough, let us add that it will open new fields of
interest, especially those which are concerned with the understanding
and right use of life itself.

It will also enrich consciousness itself. Inasmuch as we all enjoy
consciousness more than anything else it will be giving us the best of
all benefits. There is a story about two men who were talking about a
little boy who was licking an ice-cream cone. One remarked that the boy
did not like ice-cream. The other, sensing a catch, said he supposed
that what was meant by that remark was that what was liked was the taste
of the ice-cream. But the reply was that what the boy really liked was
only the consciousness of the taste of the ice-cream, and that applies
to everything in our lives.

Why should not our subjective faculties be cultivated? We take care of
our horses and other animals, and give them proper food, exercise and
rest. Why not do the same for our mental faculties—also for our moral
and spiritual ones, too, and that not merely by the way?

But to return to the material practicality of the subject. Thousands of
people are breaking down in modern life because they cannot stand the
pace. Suppose we can teach them how to keep up the pace of

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

outward modern life but at the same time have such inner calm and poise
that they can stand it without strain and fatigue. That is something
well worth while, is it not? Well, this is not an idle promise. It is a
fact.

But you must be warned. What you gain in yoga must be accompanied by
goodwill towards others and the wish that they also may benefit in some
way by your increased knowledge and power. Without this there will be a
recoil on your head, just as sure as the magic of the magnetism of
thought operates to benefit you. But that is no hardship, is it, when we
all know full well in these enlightened days that there is no true
pleasure in life when our neighbors or companions are suffering, and
indeed almost the greatest of all pleasures is to see others happy. This
nature of ours is not merely negative and concerned with sympathy for
the suffering. It is also positive—the enjoyment of the happiness of
others. Is that not why people like a peaceful country scene? As one
lady remarked a few days ago: "How much nicer the meadow is now that the
cows are in it!"

In the present world crisis most of us are concerned not so much with
the idea that a bomb may fall on our own heads—we would rather it did so
than on the heads of those near and dear to us, or on any considerable
number of people anywhere. We are very

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

much concerned about the plight of humanity in general. We rejoice over
the prosperity of the average family of today, and we quake to think
that it may be destroyed and an age of torment and slavery may engulf
it. We think of the welfare of the children and the aged, and most of us
would not enjoy a personal prosperity built upon the sufferings of
these.

These are matters which yoga also puts before us, studies and explains,
so that we learn that happiness is a matter not merely of physical,
emotional and mental health and strength, and these in balance—no small
matter—but of social and moral and ethical health and balance also, and
even something more of which we know only the rudiments now, namely that
which we call the spiritual self, from the consecration by which all the
invigoration of our powers proceeds.

Let us be definite and certain about this. If by some personal suffering
or loss you could stop for good and all the sort of war that took place
in Korea—stop the maiming and killing of unbelligerent men, stop the
ruin and slaughter of gentle people, the populations of admirable lands
of ancient culture, such as Korea was—how far would you go in that loss
and suffering? Most people would go to the limit. Does this not tell us
that it is *ability* we lack, not *love* of our fellowmen? We are held
back by helplessness, not by selfishness. If the issue could be squarely
put, how many

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

would shrink from the supreme sacrifice? Very few. It is the sort of
thing Tom Paine asked the people of the American Colonies to do when
George Washington was on the wrong side of victory, and most of them
held off through that helpless feeling, but there were enough responses
to turn the tide, and ensure the material establishment of a grand set
of social ideals which are again in danger today.

Washington acted much because he had thought and felt much. We do not
think enough—that is what is the matter. Let us have some practice and
more know-how in thinking—that is what yoga can give to every one. Not
to make the opposite error, to sink ourselves in thought, as some have
done, but to invigorate and rationalize the whole of living by the
awakening of more of man-ness in our minds.

The man-ness of man is constantly being surrendered to externals. This
is one of the warnings of the yoga theoreticians. By a curious paradox
of our life, the very service of mammon, as we may call it, is often the
one thing which calls the man-ness of man into activity. I must explain.
The human body has its more or less permanent set-up, with a group of
pains and pleasures geared to its activities and designed primarily to
warn it against dangers and tempt it into healthful activities, which
have for the most part become automatic. When, for example, the needs of

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

the body are satisfied with food, the natural appetite dies away for the
time being, and if it is then stimulated artificially by exciting spices
pain will arise after some time and tend to stop that excess. To correct
this and numerous other troubles the man-ness of the man, in the shape
of his power of thought and affection is aroused. But it is rather a
pitiful situation that the man-ness of the man should be awakened and
operated for such negative reasons, when it is really the activity of
that man-ness which is the chief possibility of enjoyment in human life.

Thus we have heard recently a story of two boys who now, as men, are
regarded as fine examples of the resolute betterment of human life.
Briefly, they mortgaged everything they had and went into the silver fox
business and made a lot of money. That was the betterment! And
presumably they then settled down to a life of bodily enjoyment or
bodily excitement, the chief feature of which could be described as the
consciousness bathing, as it were, in the body's enjoyment. How
different from the pursuit of knowledge, affection and art—which grow by
exercise, and show us the man enjoying *himself*, or enjoying, to use my
previous phrase, the man-ness of man, and thereby increasing his
man-ness.

The paradox of the situation is resolved by the knowledge that all
material gains *can be used* for the

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

purposes of the real man that we all the time truly are, did we but
observe and remember that important fact. It could be summed up in the
old trinity of truth, goodness and beauty, resulting from the use of
honest thought, affection and the will. And when they are so used there
is more man-ness and in consequence more happiness.

Briefly, then, the great yogīs do not teach abandonment of
circumstances, but triumph over circumstances. The result is that man
being true to himself overcomes all his troubles—of body, emotions and
mind—and there is then harmony between the outer and the inner life. It
could then be said that man does not serve mammon, but mammon serves
him.

Now we must notice a very important principle of yoga, which arises from
this recognition of the true nature of man. It is that in yoga practice
there must be no negativity or passivity of the man. Anything in the
nature of hypnotism, suggestion or auto-suggestion, repetition of words,
sentences or ideas to form *habits* of thought or feeling is strictly
taboo.

The emotions and the ideas which constantly spring up from past
associations are to be used *under the surveillance of the real man* in
all circumstances. With his present powers of thought, love and the will
he will either permit them or change them, as the case may be, just as
he permits or orders the body to

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

walk or jump or talk on a given occasion, and does not expect it to
follow old habits of activity but to keep quiet when he does not want it
to do something. The body must be well treated, of course, like a good
horse, but it is not supposed to run around the country-side on its own
account. Similarly, the emotions and the mind should be quiet, having
only that functional flow which in them is analogous to the movements of
breathing, heart action, digestion etc. in the body.

This matter of *no passivity* appears very clearly in the practice of
concentration, meditation and contemplation. Concentration is *voluntary
attentiveness* to something. This brings about a contraction which is at
the same time an intensification of consciousness, somewhat analogous to
placing a reflector round a lamp. Meditation, which proceeds as soon as
concentration is established, is an *expansion of attention* to the
object *without loss of this intensification*. It thus consists of a
flow or fountain of observation and thought about the object. When this
process is complete it can be followed by an *active poise* of the mind,
without any passivity, which is contemplation. At the end of the
meditation it will be observed, the thinking stops. Then the *new
process*—a third process—must go on without any diminution of the high
quality or intensity of consciousness obtained by the

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

concentration or voluntary attention. If the reader tries this method
with some perseverance he will soon find the benefit of it, in the
consciousness, in the powers of the mind (will, love and thought) and in
the body and his world of things and events.

It will soon be found that this three-fold meditation, practiced at
first at special times, begins to work with great swiftness even in the
midst of activity, and even amid what were previously regarded as
disturbing circumstances. In this connection one wishes again to issue
the warning that increase of knowledge and power without love will lead
to a point of great recoil. No organism can continue if it develops one
or two of its functions at the expense of the rest—that is obvious in
the body, which to be healthy must have harmoniousness and balance in
all its parts. This is true with regard to the three parts of the
man-ness of us. One cannot know everything, love everything, do
everything, but what one does in the small area of a human being's life
must be *positive* in thought, love and the will. There can be no hate
and such emotions, no carelessness of judgment, no surrender of the
will, all of which imply negativity and waste of man-ness. There can and
indeed must be relaxation, but this also must be voluntary. Voluntary
relaxation carried on with your approval, sometimes with your
assistance.

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

Another question is, "What is the relation between mysticism and yoga?"

In connection with this we have to think of yoga as goal—not only as
methods or the way to the goal. The goal of yoga is the Beyond. Some
call this God. God is the Beyond. This word Beyond only is used in the
*Bhagavad Gītā* for what in the West we call the goal or God. To know
the Beyond and to enter the Beyond are familiar expressions. If someone
asks what God is we cannot in these enlightened days say "He is a big
man, an exacting but benevolent old gentleman with a white beard," nor
even, "He is a great mind, a great thinker and lover and law-giver." We
have to admit that God is the *Beyond*, beyond both world and mind,
*beyond object and subject*, and therefore a Mystery, except to those
who have experience of the Beyond. The very word mystic means "with the
eyes closed"—in terms of yoga we say with the eyes of the body and the
eyes of the mind—both sets—closed. There are, of course, mystic eyes
belonging to the Beyond. That is another truth. Man has them, but
scarcely knows it, and so has in most cases still to learn to use them.
He is sometimes reminded that he has them by the rare God-knowers of
past or present.

One last question: "Why Oriental yoga? Why not merely yoga? Surely this
yoga cannot be Oriental or

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Occidental, any
more than science or, strictly, religion, or the good life."

The answer is that many Eastern thinkers and writers have dealt with
this subject, and have left us books explaining it. That is all we mean
by the word Oriental in this matter. Those books have their individual
emphasis on the use and study of thought or of love—the human feeling—or
the will, but all concur in the nature of the goal. The subject has not
been dealt with so extensively in the new civilizations of Europe and
America, which have been mostly engaged in building a satisfactory
material life. Let us therefore blend the knowledge from the Orient with
the culture of body and environment which we have derived from Greece
and the culture of the heart which has been accepted from Palestine.

ERNEST WOOD

Bethel,  
Connecticut.  
November, 1953.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter One. The Ten Oriental Yogas](gsoy03)
