[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Homer](../homer/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoto23) 
[Next](aoto25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1904675018/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Authoress of the Odyssey*, by Samuel Butler, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Book XIX

#### ULYSSES CONVERSES WITH PENELOPE, AND IS RECOGNISED BY EURYCLEA.

Ulysses and Telemachus were left alone in the cloister, and Ulysses
said, "We must take the armour down from the walls; if the suitors are
surprised, say what I told you when we were in Eumæus's hut."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_19:15">15</span></span> Telemachus
called Euryclea, and bade her shut the women up in their room, for he
was going to take the armour down into the store room. "Who," asked
Euryclea, "will show you

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

a light if the women are all shut up?" "The stranger," answered
Telemachus; "I will not have people doing nothing about my premises."

He and Ulysses then began removing the armour, and <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_19:31">31</span></span> Minerva went
before them, shedding a strange lambent light that played on walls and
rafters. Telemachus was lost in wonder, but Ulysses said, "Hush, this is
the manner of the gods. Get you to bed, and leave me to talk with your
mother and the maids." So Telemachus crossed the court and went to the
room in which he always slept, leaving Ulysses in the cloister.

Penelope now came down, and they set a seat for her by <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_19:53">53</span></span> the fire; the
maids also were let out, and came to take away the meats on which the
suitors had been feasting, and to heap fresh wood upon the braziers
after they had emptied the ashes on to the ground. <span
id="fr_39"></span>[\*](#fn_39) Melantho again began scolding at Ulysses
for stopping in the house to spy on the women. Penelope heard her and
said, "Bold hussy, I hear you, and you shall smart for it; I have
already told you that I wish to see the stranger and enquire from him
about my husband. Eurynome, bring a seat for him, and spread a fleece on
it."

Eurynome did as she was told, and when Ulysses had sat <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_19:100">100</span></span> down Penelope
wanted to know who he was. Ulysses implored her not to ask this, for it
would make him weep, and she or the servants might then think he had
been drinking.

"Stranger," answered Penelope, "heaven robbed me of all <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_19:123">123</span></span> my beauty when
the Argives set out for Troy and Ulysses with them." She then told about
the suitors, and her web, and said that she was now at the very end of
her resources. Her parents were urging her to marry again, and so also
was her son, who chafed under the heavy burden of expense which her long
courtship had caused him. "In spite of all this, however," she
continued, "I want to know who you are; for you cannot be the son of a
rock or of an oak."

Thus pressed, Ulysses said that his name was Æthon and <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_19:164">164</span></span>

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

that he came from Crete, where he had entertained Ulysses and his men
for many days when they were on their way to Troy. Penelope wept
bitterly as she listened, and it was all Ulysses could do to restrain
his own tears—but he succeeded. "I will now prove you," said she; "tell
me how my husband was dressed. Tell me also what manner of man he was,
and about the men who were with him."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_19:220">220</span></span> "I will
tell you," replied Ulysses, "as nearly as I can remember after so long a
time. He wore a mantle of purple wool, double lined, and it was fastened
by a gold brooch with two catches for the pin. On the face of this there
was a device that shewed a dog holding a spotted fawn between its fore
paws, and watching it as it lay panting on the ground. Every one
marvelled at the way in which these things had been done in gold—the dog
looking at the fawn and strangling <span class="margnote"><span
id="an_19:231">231</span></span> it, while the fawn was struggling
convulsively to escape. As for his shirt, it fitted him like the skin of
an onion, and glistened in the sunlight to the admiration of all the
women who beheld it. He had a servant with him, a little older than
<span class="margnote"><span id="an_19:246">246</span></span> himself,
whose shoulders were hunched; he was dark, and had thick curly hair. His
name was Eurybates."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_19:249">249</span></span> Penelope
was deeply moved. "You shall want for nothing," she said, "It was I who
gave him the clothes and the brooch you speak of, but I shall never see
him again."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_19:261">261</span></span> "Be not
too dejected, Madam," answered Ulysses; "when I was with the
Thesprotians I heard for certain that he was alive and well. Indeed he
would have been here ere now, had he not deemed it better to amass great
wealth before returning. Before this month is out I swear most solemnly
that he will be here."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_19:308">308</span></span> "If you
say truly," replied Penelope, "you shall indeed be rewarded richly, but
he will not come. Still, you women, take the stranger and wash him; make
him a comfortable bed, and in the morning wash him again and anoint him,
that he may sit at the same table with Telemachus; if any of the suitors
<span class="margnote"><span id="an_19:322">322</span></span> molest
him, he shall rue it, for fume as he may, he shall have no more to do in
this house. How indeed, Sir, can you know how much I surpass all other
women in goodness and discretion unless I see that you are well clothed
and fed?"

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

"Make me no bed, Madam," said Ulysses, "I will lie on the <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_19:336">336</span></span> bare ground as I
am wont to do. Nor do I like having my feet washed. I will not allow any
of your serving women to touch my feet; but if you have any respectable
old woman who has gone through as much as I have, I will let her wash
them."

"Stranger," answered Penelope, "your sense of propriety <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_19:349">349</span></span> exceeds that of
any foreigner who has ever come here. I have exactly the kind of person
you describe; she was Ulysses’ nurse from the day of his birth, and is
now very old and feeble, but she shall wash your feet. Euryclea, come
and wash the stranger's feet. He is about the same age as your master
would be."

Euryclea spoke compassionately to Ulysses, and ended by <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_19:361">361</span></span> saying that he
was very like her master. To which Ulysses replied that many other
people had observed the likeness.

Then the old woman got a large foot bath and put some <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_19:386">386</span></span> cold water into
it, adding hot water until it was the right heat. As soon, however, as
she got Ulysses’ leg in her hands, she recognised a scar on it as one
which her master had got from being ripped by a boar when he was hunting
on Mt. Parnassus with his mother's father Autolycus, whom <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_19:394">394</span></span> Mercury had
endowed with the gift of being the most accomplished thief and perjurer
in the whole world, for he was very fond of him. She immediately dropped
the leg, which <span class="margnote"><span
id="an_19:468">468</span></span> made a loud noise against the side of
the bath and upset all the water. Her eyes filled with tears, and she
caught Ulysses by the beard and told him that she knew him.

She looked towards Penelope to tell her; but Minerva <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_19:476">476</span></span> had directed
Penelope's attention elsewhere, so that she had observed nothing of what
had been going on. Ulysses gripped Euryclea's throat, and swore he would
kill her, nurse to him though she had been, unless she kept his return
secret—which she promised to do. She also said that if heaven delivered
the suitors into his hands, she would give him a list of all the women
in the house who had misconducted themselves.

"You have no need," said Ulysses, "I shall find that out <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_19:499">499</span></span> for myself. See
that you keep my counsel and leave the rest to heaven."

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_19:503">503</span></span> Euryclea
now went to fetch some more water, for the first had been all spilt.
When she had brought it, and had washed Ulysses, he turned his seat
round to the fire to dry himself, and drew his rags over the scar that
Penelope might not see it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_19:508">508</span></span> Then
Penelope detailed her sorrows to Ulysses. Others, she said, could sleep,
but she could not do so, neither night nor day. She could not rest for
thinking what her duty might be. Ought she to stay where she was and
stand guard over her son's estate, or ought she to marry one of the
suitors and <span class="margnote"><span
id="an_19:530">530</span></span> go elsewhere? Her son, while he was a
boy, would not hear of her doing this, but now that he was grown up and
realised the havoc that the suitors were making of his property, he was
continually urging her to go. Besides, she had had a strange <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_19:538">538</span></span> dream about an
eagle that had come from a mountain and swooped down on her favourite
geese as they were eating mash out of a tub, <span
id="fr_40"></span>[\*](#fn_40) and had killed them all. Then the eagle
came back and told her he was Ulysses, while the geese were the suitors;
but when she woke the geese were still feeding at the mash tub. Now,
what did all this mean?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_19:554">554</span></span> Ulysses
said it could only mean the immediate return of her husband, and his
revenge upon the suitors.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_19:559">559</span></span> But
Penelope would not believe him. "Dreams," she said, "are very curious
things. They come through two gates, one of horn, and the other of
ivory. Those that come through the gate of ivory have no significance.
It is the others that alone are true, and my dream came through the gate
of ivory. Tomorrow, therefore, I shall set Ulysses’ bow before the
suitors, and I will leave this house with him who can draw it most
easily and send an arrow through the twelve holes whereby twelve
axeheads are fitted into their handles."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_19:582">582</span></span> "You need
not defer this competition," said Ulysses, "for your husband will be
here before any one of them can draw the bow and shoot through the
axes."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_19:588">588</span></span>
"Stranger," replied Penelope, "I could stay talking with you the whole
night through, but there is a time for everything,

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

and I will now go to lie down upon that couch which I have never ceased
to water with my tears from the day my husband set out for the city with
an ill-omened name. You can sleep within the house, either on the ground
or on a bedstead, whichever you may prefer."

Then she went upstairs and mourned her dear husband till <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_19:600">600</span></span> Minerva shed
sweet sleep over her eyes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_39"></span>[79:\*](aoto24.htm#fr_39) There is no indication
as though they went out to do this; they seem to have emptied the ashes
on to the open part of the court.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[82:\*](aoto24.htm#fr_40) I have repeatedly seen
geese so feeding at Trapani and in the neighbourhood. In summer the
grass is all burned up so that they cannot graze as in England.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XX. Theoclymenus Foretells the Suitors' Doom](aoto25)
