[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Homer](../homer/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoto03.md) 
[Next](aoto05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1904675018/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Authoress of the Odyssey*, by Samuel Butler, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# The Authoress of the Odyssey

### Chapter I

<div style="font-size: 90%">

IMPORTANCE OF THE ENQUIRY—THE STEPS WHEREBY I WAS LED TO MY
CONCLUSIONS—THE MULTITUDE OF EARLY GREEK POETESSES REMOVES ANY *À
PRIORI* DIFFICULTY—THE MUSES AND MINERVA AS HEADS OF LITERATURE—MAN,
RATHER THAN WOMAN, THE INTERLOPER.

</div>

<span class="smallcaps">If</span> the questions whether the "Odyssey"
was written by a man or a woman, and whether or no it is of exclusively
Sicilian origin, were pregnant with no larger issues than the
determination of the sex and abode of the writer, it might be enough
merely to suggest the answers and refer the reader to the work itself.
Obviously, however, they have an important bearing on the whole Homeric
controversy; for if we find a woman's hand omnipresent throughout the
"Odyssey," and if we also find so large a number of local details, taken
so exclusively and so faithfully from a single Sicilian town as to
warrant the belief that the writer must have lived and written there,
the presumption seems irresistible that the poem was written by a single
person. For there can hardly have been more than one woman in the same
place able to write such—and such homogeneous—poetry as we find
throughout the "Odyssey."

Many questions will become thus simplified. Among others we can limit
the date of the poem to the lifetime of a single person, and if we find,
as I believe we shall, that this person in all probability flourished,
roughly between 1050 and 1000 <span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span>, if,
moreover, we can show, as we assuredly can, that she had

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

the "Iliad" before her much as we have it now, quoting, consciously or
unconsciously, as freely from the most suspected parts as from those
that are admittedly Homer's, we shall have done much towards settling
the question whether the "Iliad" also is by one hand or by many.

Not that this question ought to want much settling. The theory that the
"Iliad" and "Odyssey" were written each of them by various hands, and
pieced together in various centuries by various editors, is not one
which it is easy to treat respectfully. It does not rest on the well
established case of any other poem so constructed; literature furnishes
us with no poem whose genesis is known to have been such as that which
we are asked to foist upon the "Iliad" and "Odyssey." The theory is
founded on a supposition as to the date when writing became possible,
which has long since been shown to be untenable; not only does it rest
on no external evidence, but it flies in the face of what little
external evidence we have. Based on a base that has been cut from under
it, it has been sustained by arguments which have never succeeded in
leading two scholars to the same conclusions, and which are of that
character which will lead any one to any conclusion however
preposterous, which he may have made up his mind to consider himself as
having established. A writer in the *Spectator* of Jan. 2, 1892, whose
name I do not know, concluded an article by saying,

<div style="font-size: 90%">

That the finest poem of the world was created out of the contributions
of a multitude of poets revolts all our literary instincts.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Of course it does,
but the Wolfian heresy, more or less modified, is still so generally
accepted both on the continent and in England that it will not be easy
to exterminate it.

Easy or no this is a task well worth attempting, for Wolf's theory has
been pregnant of harm in more ways than are immediately apparent. Who
would have thought of attacking Shakespeare's existence—for if
Shakespeare did not write his plays he is no longer Shakespeare—unless
men's minds had been unsettled by Wolf's virtual denial of Homer's? Who
would have reascribed picture after picture in half the galleries of
Europe, often wantonly, and sometimes in defiance of the

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

clearest evidence, if the unsettling of questions concerning authorship
had not been found to be an easy road to reputation as a critic? Nor
does there appear to be any end to it, for each succeeding generation
seems bent on trying to surpass the recklessness of its predecessor.

And more than this, the following pages will read a lesson of another
kind, which I will leave the reader to guess at, to men whom I will not
name, but some of whom he may perhaps know, for there are many of them.
Indeed I have sometimes thought that the sharpness of this lesson may be
a more useful service than either the establishment of the points which
I have set myself to prove, or the dispelling of the nightmares of
Homeric extravagance which German professors have evolved out of their
own inner consciousness.

Such language may be held to come ill from one who is setting himself to
maintain two such seeming paradoxes as the feminine authorship, and
Sicilian origin, of the "Odyssey." One such shock would be bad enough,
but two, and each so far-reaching, are intolerable. I feel this, and am
oppressed by it. When I look back on the record of Iliadic and Odyssean
controversy for nearly 2500 years, and reflect that it is, I may say,
dead against me; when I reflect also upon the complexity of academic
interests, not to mention the commercial interests vested in well-known
school books and so-called education—how can I be other than dismayed at
the magnitude, presumption, and indeed utter hopelessness, of the task I
have undertaken?

How can I expect Homeric scholars to tolerate theories so subversive of
all that most of them have been insisting on for so many years? It is a
matter of Homeric (for my theory affects Iliadic questions nearly as
much as it does the "Odyssey") life and death for them or for myself. If
I am right they have invested their reputation for sagacity in a
worthless stock. What becomes, for example, of a great part of Professor
Jebb's well-known *Introduction to Homer*—to quote his shorter title—if
the "Odyssey" was written all of it at Trapani, all of it by one hand,
and that hand a woman's? Either my own work is rubbish, in which case it
should not be

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

hard to prove it so without using discourteous language, or not a little
of theirs is not worth the paper on which it is written. They will be
more than human, therefore, if they do not handle me somewhat roughly.

As for the "Odyssey" having been written by a woman, they will tell me
that I have not even established a *primâ facie* case for my opinion. Of
course I have not. It was Bentley who did this, when he said that the
"Iliad" was written for men, and the "Odyssey" for women. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0.md) The history of literature furnishes us with
no case in which a man has written a great masterpiece for women rather
than men. If an anonymous book strikes so able a critic as having been
written for women, a *primâ facie* case is established for thinking that
it was probably written by a woman. I deny, however, that the "Odyssey"
was written for women; it was written for any one who would listen to
it. What Bentley meant was that in the "Odyssey" things were looked at
from a woman's point of view rather than a man's, and in uttering this
obvious truth, I repeat, he established once for all a strong *primâ
facie* case for thinking that it was written by a woman.

If my opponents can fasten a cavil on to the ninth part of a line of my
argument, they will take no heed of, and make no reference to, the eight
parts on which they dared not fasten a misrepresentation however gross.
They will declare it fatal to my theory that there were no
Greek-speaking people at Trapani when the "Odyssey" was written. Having
fished up this assertion from the depths of their ignorance of what
Thucydides, let alone Virgil, has told us,—or if they set these writers
on one side, out of their still profounder ignorance of what there was
or was not at Trapani in the eleventh century before Christ—they will
refuse to look at the internal evidence furnished by the "Odyssey"
itself. They will ignore the fact that Thucydides tells us that
"Phocians of those from Troy," which as I will show (see Chapter xii.)
can only mean Phocæans, settled at Mount Eryx, and ask me how I can
place Phocæans on Mount Eryx when Thucydides says it was

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Phocians who
settled there? They will ignore the fact that even though Thucydides had
said "Phocians" without qualifying his words by adding "of those from
Troy," or "of the Trojan branch," he still places Greek-speaking people
within five miles of Trapani.

As for the points of correspondence between both Ithaca and Scheria, and
Trapani, they will remind me that Captain Fluelen found resemblances
between Monmouth and Macedon, as also Bernardino Caimi did between
Jerusalem and Varallo-Sesia; they will say that if mere topographical
resemblances are to be considered, the Channel Islands are far more like
the Ionian group as described in the "Odyssey" than those off Trapani
are, while Balaclava presents us with the whole Scherian combination so
far more plausibly than Trapani as to leave no doubt which site should
be preferred. I have not looked at the map of Balaclava to see whether
this is so or no, nor yet at other equally promising sites which have
been offered me, but am limiting myself to giving examples of criticisms
which have been repeatedly passed upon my theory during the last six
years, and which I do not doubt will be repeatedly passed upon it in the
future.

On the other hand I may comfort myself by reflecting that however much I
may deserve stoning there is no one who can stone me with a clear
conscience. Those who hold, as most people now do, that the "Iliad" and
"Odyssey" belong to ages separated from one another by some generations,
must be haunted by the reflection that though the diversity of
authorship was prominently insisted on by many people more than two
thousand years ago, not a single Homeric student from those days to the
end of the last century could be brought to acknowledge what we now deem
self-evident. Professor Jebb, writing of Bentley, <span
id="fr_1"></span>[\*](#fn_1.md) says

<div style="font-size: 90%">

He had not felt what is now so generally admitted, that the "Odyssey"
bears the marks of a later time than the "Iliad."

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> How came so great
a man as Bentley not to see what is so obvious? Truly, as has been said
by Mr. Gladstone, if

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Homer is old, the
systematic and comprehensive study of him is still young. <span
id="fr_2"></span>[\*](#fn_2.md)

I shall not argue the question whether the "Iliad" and "Odyssey" are by
the same person, inasmuch as if I convince the reader that the "Odyssey"
was written by a woman and in Sicily, it will go without saying that it
was not written by Homer; for there can be no doubt about the sex of the
writer of the "Iliad." The same canons which will compel us to ascribe
the "Odyssey" to a woman forbid any other conclusion than that the
"Iliad" was written by a man. I shall therefore proceed at once to the
question whether the "Odyssey" was written by a man or by a woman.

It is an old saying that no man can do better for another than he can
for himself, I may perhaps therefore best succeed in convincing the
reader if I retrace the steps by which I arrived at the conclusions I
ask him to adopt.

I was led to take up the "Odyssey" by having written the libretto and
much of the music for a secular oratorio, *Ulysses*, on which my friend
Mr. H. Festing Jones and I had been for some time engaged. Having
reached this point it occurred to me that I had better, after all, see
what the "Odyssey" said, and finding no readable prose translation, was
driven to the original, to which I had not given so much as a thought
for some five and thirty years.

The Greek being easy, I had little difficulty in understanding what I
read, and I had the great advantage of coming to the poem with fresh
eyes. Also, I read it all through from end to end, as I have since many
times done.

Fascinated, however, as I at once was by its amazing interest and
beauty, I had an ever-present sense of a something wrong, of a something
that was eluding me, and of a riddle which I could not read. The more I
reflected upon the words, so luminous and so transparent, the more I
felt a darkness behind them that I must pierce before I could see the
heart of the writer—and this was what I wanted; for art is only
interesting in so far as it reveals an artist.

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

In the hope of getting to understand the poem better I set about
translating it into plain prose, with the same benevolent leaning, say,
towards Tottenham Court Road, that Messrs. Butcher and Lang have shewn
towards Wardour Street. I admit, however, that Wardour Street English
has something to say for itself. "The Ancient Mariner," for example,
would have lost a good deal if it had been called "The Old Sailor," but
on the whole I take it that a tale so absolutely without any taint of
affectation as the "Odyssey" will speed best being unaffectedly told.

When I came to the Phæacian episode I felt sure that here at any rate
the writer was drawing from life, and that Nausicaa, Queen Arēte, and
Alcinous were real people more or less travestied, and on turning to
Colonel Mure's work <span id="fr_3"></span>[\*](#fn_3.md) I saw that he was
of the same opinion. Nevertheless I found myself continually aghast at
the manner in which men were made to speak and act—especially, for
example, during the games in honour of Ulysses described in Book viii.
Colonel Mure says (p. 407) that "the women engross the chief share of
the small stock of common sense allotted to the community." So they do,
but it never occurred to me to ask myself whether men commonly write
brilliant books in which the women are made more sensible than the men.
Still dominated by the idea that the writer was a man, I conjectured
that he might be some bard, perhaps blind, who lived among the servants
much as the chaplain in a great house a couple of hundred years ago
among ourselves. Such a bard, even though not blind, would only see
great people from a distance, and would not mix with them intimately
enough to know how they would speak and act among themselves. It never
even crossed my mind that it might have been the commentators who were
blind, and that they might have thus come to think that the poet must
have been blind too.

The view that the writer might have lived more in the steward's room
than with the great people of the house served (I say it with shame) to
quiet me for a time, but by and by it

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

struck me that though the men often both said and did things that no man
would say or do, the women were always ladies when the writer chose to
make them so. How could it be that a servant's hall bard should so often
go hopelessly wrong with his men, and yet be so exquisitely right with
every single one of his women? But still I did not catch it. It was not
till I got to Circe that it flashed upon me that I was reading the work,
not of an old man, but of a young woman—and of one who knew not much
more about what men can and cannot do than I had found her know about
the milking of ewes in the cave of Polyphemus.

The more I think of it the more I wonder at my own stupidity, for I
remember that when I was a boy at school I used to say the "Odyssey" was
the "Iliad's" wife, and that it was written by a clergyman. But however
this may be, as soon as the idea that the writer was a woman—and a young
one—presented itself to me, I felt that here was the reading of the
riddle that had so long baffled me. I tried to divest myself of it, but
it would not go; as long as I kept to it, everything cohered and was in
its right place, and when I set it aside all was wrong again; I did not
seek my conclusion; I did not even know it by sight so as to look for
it; it accosted me, introduced itself as my conclusion, and vowed that
it would never leave me; whereon, being struck with its appearance, I
let it stay with me on probation for a week or two during which I was
charmed with the propriety of all it said or did, and then bade it take
rank with the convictions to which I was most firmly wedded; but I need
hardly say that it was a long time before I came to see that the poem
was all of it written at Trapani, and that the writer had introduced
herself into her work under the name of Nausicaa.

I will deal with these points later, but would point out that the moment
we refuse to attribute the "Odyssey" to the writer of the "Iliad" (whom
we should alone call Homer) it becomes an anonymous work; and the first
thing that a critic will set himself to do when he considers an
anonymous work is to determine the sex of the writer. This, even when
women are posing as men, is seldom difficult—indeed it is done almost

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

invariably with success as often as an anonymous work is published—and
when any one writes with the frankness and spontaneity which are such an
irresistible charm in the "Odyssey," it is not only not difficult but
exceedingly easy; difficulty will only arise, if the critic is, as we
have all been in this case, dominated by a deeply-rooted preconceived
opinion, and if also there is some strong *à priori* improbability in
the supposition that the writer was a woman.

It may be urged that it is extremely improbable that any woman in any
age should write such a masterpiece as the "Odyssey." But so it also is
that any man should do so. In all the many hundreds of years since the
"Odyssey" was written, no man has been able to write another that will
compare with it. It was extremely improbable that the son of a Stratford
wool-stapler should write *Hamlet*, or that a Bedfordshire tinker should
produce such a masterpiece as *Pilgrim's Progress*. Phenomenal works
imply a phenomenal workman, but there are phenomenal women as well as
phenomenal men, and though there is much in the "Iliad" which no woman,
however phenomenal, can be supposed at all likely to have written, there
is not a line in the "Odyssey" which a woman might not perfectly well
write, and there is much beauty which a man would be almost certain to
neglect. Moreover there are many mistakes in the "Odyssey" which a young
woman might easily make, but which a man could hardly fall into—for
example, making the wind whistle over the waves at the end of Book ii.,
thinking that a lamb could live on two pulls a day at a ewe that was
already milked (ix. 244, 245, and 308, 309), believing a ship to have a
rudder at both ends (ix. 483, 540), thinking that dry and well-seasoned
timber can be cut from a growing tree (v. 240), making a hawk while
still on the wing tear its prey—a thing that no hawk can do (xv. 527).

I see that Messrs. Butcher and Lang omit ix. 483 in which the rudder is
placed in the bows of a ship, but it is found in the text, and is the
last kind of statement a copyist would be inclined to intercalate. Yet I
could have found it in my heart to conceive the text in fault, had I not
also found the writer explaining in Book v. 255 that Ulysses gave his
raft a rudder

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "in order that he
might be able to steer it." People whose ideas about rudders have become
well defined will let the fact that a ship is steered by means of its
rudder go without saying. Furthermore, not only does she explain that
Ulysses would want a rudder to steer with, but later on (line 270) she
tells us that he actually did use the rudder when he had made it, and,
moreover, that he used it τεχνηέντως, or skilfully.

Young women know that a horse goes before a cart, and being told that
the rudder guides the ship, are apt—and I have more than once found them
do so—to believe that it goes in front of the ship. Probably the writer
of the "Odyssey" forgot for the moment at which end the rudder should
be. She thought it all over yesterday, and was not going to think it all
over again to-day, so she put the rudder at both ends, intending to
remove it from the one that should prove to be the wrong one; later on
she forgot, or did not think it worth while to trouble about so small a
detail.

So with Calypso's axe (v. 234-36). No one who was used to handling an
axe would describe it so fully and tell us that it "suited Ulysses’
hands," and was furnished with a handle. I have heard say that a
celebrated female authoress was discovered to be a woman by her having
spoken of a two-foot *ruler* instead of a two-foot *rule*, but
over-minuteness of description is deeper and stronger evidence of
unfamiliarity than mistaken nomenclature is.

Such mistakes and self-betrayals as those above pointed out enhance
rather than impair the charm of the "Odyssey." Granted that the
"Odyssey" is inferior to the "Iliad" in strength, robustness, and wealth
of poetic imagery, I cannot think that it is inferior in its power of
fascinating the reader. Indeed, if I had to sacrifice one or the other,
I can hardly doubt that I should let the "Iliad" go rather than the
"Odyssey"—just as if I had to sacrifice either Mont Blanc or Monte Rosa,
I should sacrifice Mont Blanc, though I know it to be in many respects
the grander mountain of the two. <span id="fr_4"></span>[\*](#fn_4.md)

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

It should go, however, without saying that much which is charming in a
woman's work would be ridiculous in a man's, and this is eminently
exemplified in the "Odyssey." If a woman wrote it, it is as lovely as
the frontispiece of this volume, and becomes, if less vigorous, yet
assuredly more wonderful than the "Iliad"; if, on the other hand, it is
by a man, the half Bayeux tapestry, half Botticelli's Venus rising from
the sea, or Primavera, feeling with which it impresses us gives place to
astonishment how any man could have written it. What is a right manner
for a woman is a wrong one for a man, and *vice versâ*. Jane Austen's
young men, for example, are seldom very interesting, but it is only
those who are blind to the exquisite truth and delicacy of Jane Austen's
work who will feel any wish to complain of her for not understanding
young men as well as she did young women.

The writer of a *Times* leading article (Feb. 4th, 1897) says:

<div style="font-size: 90%">

The sex difference is the profoundest and most far-reaching that exists
among human beings. . . . Women may or may not be the equals of men in
intelligence; . . . but women in the mass will act after the manner of
women, which is not and never can be the manner of men.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And as they will
act, so will they write. This, however, does not make their work any the
less charming when it is good of its kind; on the contrary, it makes it
more so.

Dismissing, therefore, the difficulty of supposing that any woman could
write so wonderful a poem as the "Odyssey," is there any *à priori*
obstacle to our thinking that such a woman may have existed, say, <span
class="smallcaps">B.C.</span> 1000? I know of none. Greek literature
does not begin to dawn upon us till about 600 <span
class="smallcaps">B.C.</span> Earlier than this date we have hardly
anything except the "Iliad," the "Odyssey," and that charming writer
Hesiod. When, however, we come to the earliest historic literature we
find that famous poetesses abounded.

Those who turn to the article Sappho" in Smith's *Dictionary of
Classical Biography* will find Gorgo and Andromeda mentioned as her
rivals. Among her fellows were Anactoria of Miletus, Gongyla of
Colophon, Eunica of Salamis, Gyrinna, Atthis, and Mnasidica. "Those,"
says the writer, "who

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

attained the highest celebrity for their works were Damophila, the
Pamphylian, and Erinna of Telos." This last-named poetess wrote a long
poem upon the distaff, which was considered equal to Homer himself—the
"Odyssey" being probably intended.

Again, there was Baucis, whose Epitaph Erinna wrote. Turning to Müller's
work upon the Dorians, I find reference made to the amatory poetesses of
Lesbos. He tells us also of Corinna, who is said to have competed
successfully with Pindar, and Myrto, who certainly competed with him,
but with what success we know not. Again, there was Diotima the
Arcadian; and looking through Bergk's *Poetae Lyrici Graeci* I find
other names of women, fragments of whose works have reached us through
quotation by extant writers. Among the Hebrews there were Miriam,
Deborah, and Hannah, all of them believed to be centuries older than the
"Odyssey."

If, then, poetesses were as abundant as we know them to have been in the
earliest known ages of Greek literature over a wide area of Greece, Asia
Minor, and the islands of the Ægæan, there is no ground for refusing to
admit the possibility that a Greek poetess lived in Sicily <span
class="smallcaps">B.C.</span> 1000, especially when we know from
Thucydides that the particular part of Sicily where I suppose her to
have lived was colonised from the North West corner of Asia Minor
centuries before the close of the Homeric age. The civilisation depicted
in the "Odyssey" is as advanced as any that is likely to have existed in
Mitylene or Telos 600-500 <span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span>, while in
both the "Iliad" and the "Odyssey" the status of women is represented as
being much what it is at the present, and as incomparably higher than it
was in the Athenian civilisation with which we are best acquainted. To
imagine a great Greek poetess at Athens in the age of Pericles would be
to violate probability, but I might almost say that in an age when women
were as free as they are represented to us in the "Odyssey" it is a
violation of probability to suppose that there were no poetesses.

We have no reason to think that men found the use of their tongue sooner
than women did; why then should we suppose that women lagged behind men
when the use of the pen had

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

become familiar? If a woman could work pictures with her needle as Helen
did, <span id="fr_5"></span>[\*](#fn_5.md) and as the wife of William the
Conqueror did in a very similar civilisation, she could write stories
with her pen if she had a mind to do so.

The fact that the recognised heads of literature in the Homeric age were
the nine Muses—for it is always these or "The Muse" that is involved,
and never Apollo or Minerva—throws back the suggestion of female
authorship to a very remote period, when, to be an author at all, was to
be a poet, for prose writing is a comparatively late development. Both
"Iliad" and "Odyssey" begin with an invocation addressed to a woman,
who, as the head of literature, must be supposed to have been an
authoress, though none of her works have come down to us. In an age,
moreover, when men were chiefly occupied either with fighting or
hunting, the arts of peace, and among them all kinds of literary
accomplishment, would be more naturally left to women. If the truth were
known, we might very likely find that it was man rather than woman who
has been the interloper in the domain of literature. Nausicaa was more
probably a survival than an interloper, but most probably of all she was
in the height of the fashion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[4:\*](aoto04.htm#fr_0.md) See *Introduction to the
Iliad and the Odyssey*, by R. C. Jebb, 1888, p. 106.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[5:\*](aoto04.htm#fr_1.md) *Bentley*, English Men of
Letters, Macmillan, 1892, p. 148.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[6:\*](aoto04.htm#fr_2.md) *Homer*, Macmillan, 1878,
p. 2.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[7:\*](aoto04.htm#fr_3.md) *Language and Literature
of Ancient Greece*, Longman, 1850, Vol. I., p. 404.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[10:\*](aoto04.htm#fr_4.md) Shakespeare, of course,
is the whole chain of the Alps, comprising both Mont Blanc and Monte
Rosa.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[13:\*](aoto04.htm#fr_5.md) "Iliad," iii. 126.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](aoto05.md)
