[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Homer](../homer/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoto08.md) 
[Next](aoto10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1904675018/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Authoress of the Odyssey*, by Samuel Butler, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Book IV

#### TELEMACHUS AT THE HOUSE OF MENELAUS—THE SUITORS RESOLVE TO LIE IN WAIT FOR HIM AS HE RETURNS, AND MURDER HIM.

When the two young men reached Lacedæmon they drove straight to
Menelaus's house \[and found him celebrating

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

the double marriage of his daughter Hermione and his son
Megapenthes.\] <span id="fr_14"></span>[\*](#fn_14.md)

Menelaus (after a little demur on the part of his *major* <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_4:22">22</span></span> *domo* Eteoneus,
for which he was severely reprimanded by his master) entertained his
guests very hospitably, and overhearing Telemachus call his friend's
attention to the splendour of the house, he explained to them how much
toil and sorrow he had endured, especially through the murder of his
brother Agamemnon, the plundering of his house by Paris when he carried
off Helen, and the death of so many of his brave comrades at Troy.
"There is one man, however," he added, "of whom I cannot even think
without loathing both food and sleep. I mean Ulysses."

When Telemachus heard his father thus mentioned he could <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_4:112">112</span></span> not restrain his
tears, and while Menelaus was in doubt what to say or not say, Helen
came down (dinner being now half through) with her three attendant
maidens, Adraste, Alcippe, and Phylo, who set a seat for her and brought
her her famous work box which ran on wheels, that she might begin to
spin.

"And who pray," said she to her husband, "may these two <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_4:138">138</span></span> gentlemen be who
are honouring us with their presence? Shall I guess right or wrong, but
I really must say what I think. I never saw such a likeness—neither in
man nor woman. This young man can only be Telemachus, whom Ulysses left
behind him a baby in arms when he set out for Troy."

"I too," answered Menelaus, "have observed the likeness. <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_4:147">147</span></span> It is
unmistakeable."

On this Pisistratus explained that they were quite right, <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_4:155">155</span></span> whereon Menelaus
told him all he had meant doing for Ulysses, and this was so affecting
that all the four who were at table burst into tears. After a little
while Pisistratus complimented Menelaus on his great sagacity (of which
indeed his father Nestor had often told him), and said that he did not
like weeping when he was getting his dinner; he therefore

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

proposed that the remainder of their lamentation should be deferred
until next morning. Menelaus assented to this, and <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_4:220">220</span></span> dinner was
allowed to proceed. Helen mixed some Nepenthe with the wine, and
cheerfulness was thus restored.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_4:235">235</span></span> Helen then
told how she had met Ulysses when he entered Troy as a spy, and
explained that by that time she was already anxious to return home, and
was lamenting the cruel calamity <span class="margnote"><span
id="an_4:261">261</span></span> which Venus had inflicted on her in
separating her from her little girl and from her husband, who was really
not deficient either in person or understanding.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_4:265">265</span></span> Menelaus
capped her story with an account of the adventures of the Achæans inside
the wooden horse. "Do you not remember," said he, "how you walked all
round it when we were inside, and patted it? You had Deiphobus with you,
and <span class="margnote"><span id="an_4:279">279</span></span> you
kept on calling out our names and mimicking our wives, till Minerva came
and took you away. It was Ulysses’ presence of mind that then saved us."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_4:290">290</span></span> When he had
told this, Telemachus said it was time to go to rest, so he and
Pisistratus were shown to their room in the vestibule, while Menelaus
and Helen retired to the interior of the house. <span
id="fr_15"></span>[\*](#fn_15.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_4:306">306</span></span> When
morning came Telemachus told Menelaus about the suitors, and asked for
any information he could give him concerning the death of his father.
Menelaus was greatly shocked, but could only tell him what he had heard
from Proteus. He said that as he was coming from Egypt he had been
detained some weeks, through the displeasure of the gods, in the island
of Pharos, where he and his men would have been starved but for the
assistance given him by a goddess Idothea, daughter to Proteus, who
taught him how to ensnare her father, and compel him to say why heaven
was detaining him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_4:440">440</span></span> "Idothea,"
said Menelaus, "disguised me and my three chosen comrades as seals; to
this end she had brought four

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

fresh-flayed seal-skins, under which she hid us. The strong smell of
these skins was most distressing to us—Who would go to bed with a sea
monster if he could help it? but Idothea <span class="margnote"><span
id="an_4:443">443</span></span> put some ambrosia under each man's
nostrils, and this afforded us great relief. Other seals (Halosydne's
chickens as they call them) now kept coming up by hundreds, and lay down
to bask upon the beach.

"Towards noon Proteus himself came up. First he counted <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_4:450">450</span></span> all his seals to
see that he had the right number, and he counted us in with the others;
when he had so done he lay down in the midst of them, as a shepherd with
his sheep, and as soon as he was asleep we pounced upon him and gripped
him tight; at one moment he became a lion, the next he was running
water, and then again he was a tree; but we never loosed hold, and in
the end he grew weary, and told us what we would know.

"He told me also of the fate of Ajax, son of Oïleus, and of <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_4:499">499</span></span> my brother
Agamemnon. Lastly he told me about Ulysses, who he said was in the
island of the nymph Calypso, unable to get away inasmuch as he had
neither ship nor crew.

"Then he disappeared under the sea, and I, after appeasing <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_4:570">570</span></span> heaven's anger as
he had instructed me, returned quickly and safely to my own country."

Having finished his story Menelaus pressed Telemachus to <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_4:587">587</span></span> remain with him
some ten or twelve days longer, and promised to give him a chariot and a
pair of horses as a keepsake, but Telemachus said that he could not
stay. "I could listen to you," said he, "for a whole twelve months, and
never once think about my home and my parents; but my men, whom I have
left at Pylos, are already impatient for me to return. As for any
present you may make me, let it be a piece of plate. I cannot take
horses to Ithaca; it contains no plains nor meadow lands, and is more
fit for breeding goats than horses. None of our islands are suited for
chariot races, and Ithaca least among them all."

Menelaus smiled, and said he could see that Telemachus <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_4:609">609</span></span> came of good
family. He had a piece of plate, of very great value, which was just the
thing, and Telemachus should have it.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_4:621">621</span></span> \[Guests
now kept coming to the king's house, bringing both wine and sheep, and
their wives had put them up a provision of bread. Thus, then, did they
set about cooking their dinner in the courts.\] <span
id="fr_16"></span>[\*](#fn_16.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_4:625">625</span></span> Meanwhile,
the suitors in Ithaca were playing at quoits, aiming spears at a mark,
and behaving with all their old insolence on the level ground in front
of Ulysses’ house. While they were thus engaged Noëmon came up and asked
Antinous if he could say when Telemachus was likely to be back from
Pylos, for he wanted his ship. On this everything came out, and the
suitors, who had no idea that Telemachus had really gone (for they
thought he was only away on one of his farms in Ithaca), were very
angry. They therefore determined to lie in wait for him on his return,
and made ready to start.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_4:695">695</span></span> Medon, a
servant, overheard their plot, and told all to Penelope, who, like the
suitors, learned for the first time that her son had left home and gone
to Pylos. She bitterly upbraided her women for not having given her a
call out of her bed when Telemachus was leaving, for she said she was
sure they knew all about it. Presently, however, on being calmed by
Euryclea, she went upstairs and offered sacrifice to Minerva. After a
time she fell into a deep slumber, during which she was comforted by a
vision of her sister Ipthime, which Minerva had sent to her bedside.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_4:842">842</span></span> When night
fell the suitors set sail, intending to way-lay Telemachus in the Strait
between Same and Ithaca.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[25:\*](aoto09.htm#fr_14.md) For fuller translation
and explanation why I have bracketed the passage, see Chapter vi.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[26:\*](aoto09.htm#fr_15.md) It is curious that the
sleeping arrangements made by Helen for Telemachus and Pisistratus, as
also those made for Ulysses by Queen Arēte (vii. 336, &c.), though taken
almost verbatim from those made by Achilles for Priam and Idæus ("Il."
xxiv. 643-47 and 673-76), should do so well for a building of such a
different character as the house of Menelaus must have been from the
quarters of Achilles before Troy.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[28:\*](aoto09.htm#fr_16.md) For explanation why I
bracket this passage see Chapter vi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book V. Ulysses in the Island of Calypso](aoto10.md)
