[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Homer](../homer/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoto27) 
[Next](aoto29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1904675018/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Authoress of the Odyssey*, by Samuel Butler, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Book XXIII

#### PENELOPE COMES DOWN TO SEE ULYSSES, AND BEING AT LAST CONVINCED THAT HE IS HER HUSBAND, RETIRES WITH HIM TO THEIR OWN OLD ROOM—IN THE MORNING ULYSSES, TELEMACHUS, PHILŒTIUS, AND EUMÆUS GO TO THE HOUSE OF LAERTES.

Euryclea now went upstairs and told Penelope what had happened. "Wake
up, my dear child," said she, "Ulysses is come home at last and has
killed the suitors who were giving so much trouble in the house, eating
up his estate and ill-treating his son."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_23:10">10</span></span> "My good
nurse," answered Penelope, "you must be mad. The gods sometimes send
very sensible people out of their minds, and make foolish people
sensible. This is what they must have been doing to you. Moreover, you
have waked me from the soundest sleep that I have enjoyed since my
husband left me. Go back into the women's room; if it had been any one
but you, I should have given her a severe scolding."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_23:25">25</span></span> Euryclea
still maintained that what she had said was true, and in answer to
Penelope's further questions told her as much as she knew about the
killing of the suitors. "When I came down," she said, "I found Ulysses
standing over the corpses; you would have enjoyed it, if you had seen
him all bespattered with blood and filth, and looking just like a lion.
But the corpses are now piled up in the gatehouse, and he has sent me to
bring you to him."

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

Penelope said that it could not be Ulysses, but must be <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_23:58">58</span></span> some god who had
resolved to punish the suitors for their great wickedness. Then Euryclea
told her about the scar.

"My dear nurse," answered Penelope, "however wise you <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_23:80">80</span></span> may be, you can
hardly fathom the counsels of the gods. Still I will go and find my son
that I may see the corpses of the suitors, and the man who has killed
them."

On this she came down into the cloister and took her seat <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_23:85">85</span></span> opposite Ulysses,
in the fire-light, by the wall at right angles to that by which she had
entered, while her husband sat by one of the bearing-posts of the
cloister, looking down and waiting to hear what she would say. For a
long time she sat as one lost in amazement and said nothing, till
Telemachus upbraided her for her coldness. "Your heart," he said, "was
always hard as a stone."

"My son," said his mother, "I am stupefied; nevertheless <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_23:104">104</span></span> if this man is
really Ulysses, I shall find it out; for there are tokens which we two
alone know of."

Ulysses smiled at this, and said to Telemachus, "Let your <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_23:111">111</span></span> mother prove me
as she will, she will make up her mind about it presently. Meanwhile let
us think what we shall do, for we have been killing all the picked youth
of Ithaca."

"We will do," answered Telemachus, "whatever you may <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_23:123">123</span></span> think best."

"Then," said Ulysses, "wash, and put your shirts on. Bid <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_23:129">129</span></span> the maids also
go to their own room and dress. Phemius shall strike up a dance tune, so
that any who are passing in the street may think there is a wedding in
the house, and we can get away into the woods before the death of the
suitors is noised abroad. Once there, we will do as heaven shall
direct."

They did as he had said. The house echoed with the sound of <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_23:141">141</span></span> men and women
dancing, and the people outside said, "So the queen has been getting
married at last. She ought to be ashamed of herself, for not staying to
protect her husband's property."

Eurynome washed and anointed Ulysses; Minerva also <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_23:152">152</span></span> beautified him,
making the hair grow thick on the top of his head and flow down in
hyacinthine curls. He came from the

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

bath looking like an immortal god, and sat down opposite his wife.
Finding, however, that he could not move her, he said to Euryclea,
"Nurse, get a bed ready for me. I will sleep alone, for this woman has a
heart as hard as iron."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_23:173">173</span></span> "My dear,"
said Penelope, "I have no wish to set myself up, nor to depreciate you,
but I am not struck by your appearance, for I well remember what kind of
a man you were when you left Ithaca. Nevertheless, Euryclea, take his
bed out of the room he built for it, and make it ready for him."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_23:185">185</span></span> Ulysses
knew that the bed could not be moved without cutting down the stem of a
growing olive tree on the stump of which he had built it. He was very
angry, and desired to know who had ventured on doing this, at the same
time describing the bed fully to Penelope.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_23:205">205</span></span> Then
Penelope was convinced that he really was Ulysses, and fairly broke
down. She flung her arms about his neck, and said she had only held
aloof so long because she had been shuddering at the bare thought of any
one deceiving her. Ulysses in his turn melted and embraced her, and they
would have gone on indulging their sorrow till morning came, had not
Minerva miraculously prolonged the night.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_23:247">247</span></span> Ulysses
then began to tell her of the voyages which Tiresias had told him he
must now undertake, but soon broke off by saying that they had better go
to bed. To which Penelope rejoined that as she should certainly have to
be told about it sooner or later, she had perhaps better hear it at
once.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_23:263">263</span></span> Thus
pressed Ulysses told her. "In the end," said he, "Tiresias told me that
death should come to me from the sea. He said my life should ebb away
very gently when I was full of years and peace of mind, and that my
people should bless me."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_23:288">288</span></span> Meanwhile
Eurynome and Euryclea made the room ready, <span
id="fr_46"></span>[\*](#fn_46)

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

and Euryclea went inside the house, leaving Eurynome to light Penelope
and Ulysses to their bed-room. Telemachus, Philœtius, and Eumæus now
left off dancing, and made the women leave off also. Then they laid
themselves down to sleep in the cloisters.

When they were in bed together, Penelope told Ulysses how <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_23:300">300</span></span> much she had had
to bear in seeing the house filled with wicked suitors who had killed so
many oxen and sheep on her account, and had drunk so many casks of wine.
Ulysses in his turn told her the whole story of his adventures, touching
<span class="margnote"><span id="an_23:350">350</span></span> briefly
upon every point, and detailing not only his own sufferings but those he
had inflicted upon other people. She was delighted to listen, and never
went to sleep till he ended his story and dropped off into a profound
slumber.

When Minerva thought that Ulysses had slept long enough <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_23:344">344</span></span> she permitted
Dawn to rise from the waters of Oceanus, and Ulysses got up. "Wife,"
said he to Penelope, "now that we have at last come together again, take
care of the property that is in my house. As for the sheep and goats
that the wicked suitors have eaten, I will take many by force from other
people, and will compel the men of the place to make good the rest. I
will now go out to my father's house in the country. At sunrise it will
get noised about that I have been killing the suitors. Go upstairs,
therefore, and stay there with your waiting women. See nobody, and ask
no questions."

As he spoke he girded on his armour; he roused the others <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_23:366">366</span></span> also and bade
them arm. He then undid the gate, and they all sallied forth. It was now
daylight, but Minerva enshrouded them in darkness, and led them quickly
out of the town.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_46"></span>[98:\*](aoto28.htm#fr_46) This room was
apparently not within the body of the house. It was certainly on the
ground floor, for the bed was fixed on the stump of a tree; I strongly
suspect it to be the vaulted room, round the outside of which the bodies
of the guilty maids were still hanging, and I also suspect it was in
order to thus festoon the room that Telemachus hanged the women instead
of stabbing them, but this is treading on that perilous kind of
speculation which I so strongly deprecate in others. If it were not for
the gruesome horror of the dance, in lines 129–151, I should not have
entertained it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XXIV. The Suitors in Hades, Ulysses Makes Peace with
Ithaca.](aoto29)
