[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Homer](../homer/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoto22.md) 
[Next](aoto24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1904675018/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Authoress of the Odyssey*, by Samuel Butler, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Book XVIII

#### THE FIGHT BETWEEN ULYSSES AND IRUS—THE SUITORS MAKE PRESENTS TO PENELOPE—AND ILL-TREAT ULYSSES.

Now there came a common tramp to Ulysses’ house, begging—a great hulking
fellow with no stay in him—whose name was Arnæus; but people called him
Irus, because he would run errands for any one who would send him on
them. This man began to threaten Ulysses, and said the suitors had urged
him to turn him away from the house.

Ulysses said there was room enough for both of them, and <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_18:14">14</span></span> that it should be
a case of live-and-let-live between them. "If, however," he continued,
"it comes to blows, I will deluge your mouth and chest with blood, and I
shall have the place to myself, for you will not come back again."

Irus retorted angrily, and Antinous, hearing them wrangle, <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_18:34">34</span></span> told the other
suitors that Irus and the stranger were about to have a fight. "It is
the finest piece of sport," he said, "that heaven ever sent into this
house. We are to have goat's paunches stuffed with blood and fat for
supper; whichever of the two beats in this fight shall have his pick of
the lot of them."

The preliminaries being arranged, and fair play bargained <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_18:58">58</span></span> for by Ulysses, he
began to strip. When Irus saw his muscles his heart misgave him; but
Antinous kept him up to it, and the fight began. <span
id="fr_37"></span>[\*](#fn_37.md) Ulysses forthwith nearly killed Irus and
dragged him by the heels into the outer court, where he put his staff in
his hand and propped him up against the wall more dead than alive.
Antinous then gave Ulysses a great goat's paunch, and Amphinomus drank
his health.

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:124">124</span></span> Ulysses
made Amphinomus a very grave and impressive speech, warning him to leave
the house, inasmuch as Ulysses would return shortly. "You seem," said
he, "to be a man of good understanding, as indeed you may well be,
seeing whose son you are. I have heard your father well spoken of; he is
Nisus of Dulichium, a man both brave and wealthy. They tell me you are
his son and you seem to be a considerable person; listen, therefore, and
take heed to what I am saying. Man is the vainest of all creatures that
live and move upon the earth: as long as heaven vouchsafes him health
and strength he thinks that he shall come to no harm hereafter, and even
when the blessed gods bring sorrow upon him, he bears it as he needs
must and makes the best of it, for God Almighty gives men their daily
minds day by day. I know all about it, for I was a rich man once, and
did much wrong in the stubbornness of my pride and in the confidence
that my father and my brothers would support me; therefore let a man
fear God in all things always, and take the good that heaven may see fit
to send him without vainglory." But Amphinomus, though his heart boded
ill, would not be persuaded.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:158">158</span></span> Minerva
then put it in Penelope's mind to get some presents out of the suitors.
"I hate them," said she to Eurynome, "but still for once in a way I will
see them; I want to warn my son against them."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:169">169</span></span>
"Certainly, my dear child," answered Eurynome, "but you must wash your
face first. You cannot be seen with the stain of tears upon your
cheeks."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:177">177</span></span>
"Eurynome," replied her mistress, "do not try to persuade me. Heaven
robbed me of all my beauty on the day when my husband sailed for Troy;
but send Autonoë and Hippodamia to attend me, for I cannot think of
seeing the suitors unattended." The old woman then went through the
house to fetch the women; and as soon as she was gone, Minerva sent
Penelope into a deep sleep during which she endowed her with the most
dazzling beauty, washing her face with the ambrosial loveliness which
Venus wears when she goes out dancing with the Graces, and giving her a
statelier and more imposing presence. When the two maids came, the noise
of their

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

coming woke her. "What a delicious sleep," she exclaimed, "has
overshadowed me. Would that it had been the sleep of death, which had
thus ended all my sorrows."

She then went down stairs, and the suitors were dazzled <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_18:206">206</span></span> with her beauty.
She began by upbraiding Telemachus for having allowed the fight to take
place. Telemachus admitted his fault, but pleaded the extreme difficulty
of his situation and the fact that after all Ulysses had thrashed Irus.

Eurymachus broke in upon their conversation by telling <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_18:243">243</span></span> Penelope how
very beautiful she was; and Penelope answered that heaven had robbed her
of all her beauty on the day when her husband sailed for Troy.
"Moreover," she added, "I have another great sorrow—you suitors are not
wooing me in the <span class="margnote"><span
id="an_18:275">275</span></span> usual way. When men are suing for the
hand of one who they think will make them a good wife, they generally
bring oxen and sheep for her relations to feast upon, and make rich
presents to the lady herself, instead of sponging upon other people's
property."

When Ulysses heard her say this, he was delighted at <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_18:281">281</span></span> to his wife
trying to get presents out of the suitors, and hoodwinking them.

Then Antinous said, "Penelope, take all the presents you <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_18:284">284</span></span> can get, but we
will not go till you have married the best man among us." On this they
all made Penelope magnificent presents, and she went back to her own
room, followed by the women, who carried the presents for her.

The suitors now turned to singing and dancing, lighted by <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_18:304">304</span></span> large braziers
that were placed in the court, <span id="fr_38"></span>[\*](#fn_38.md) and
also by <span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:307">307</span></span>
torches, which the maids held up by turns. Ulysses after a while told
them to go inside, saying that he would hold the <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_18:317">317</span></span> torches himself.
The maids laughed at this, and Melantho, who was one of them, began to
gibe at him. She was daughter to Dolius but Penelope had brought her up
from childhood, and used to give her toys; she showed no consideration,
however, for Penelope's sorrows, but misconducted herself with
Eurymachus. "Are you drunk?" she said to Ulysses, "or are you always
like this?"

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:337">337</span></span> Ulysses
scowled at her, and said he would tell Telemachus, who would have her
cut up into mincemeat. The women, therefore, were frightened and went
away, so Ulysses was left holding up the flaming torches—looking upon
all the suitors and brooding over his revenge.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:346">346</span></span> Presently
Eurymachus began to jeer at him, and taunt him by saying he preferred
begging to working. Ulysses answered, "If you and I, Eurymachus, were
matched one against the other in early summer, when the days are at
their longest—give us each a good scythe, and see whether you or I will
mow the stronger or fast the longer, from dawn till dark when the mowing
grass is about. Or let us be in a four acre field with a couple of tawny
full fed oxen each, and see which of us can drive the straighter furrow.
Again, let war break out this day—give me armour and you will find me
fighting among the foremost. You are insolent and cruel, and think
yourself a great man because you live in a little world, and that a bad
one."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_18:394">394</span></span> Eurymachus
was furious, and seized a stool; but Ulysses sat down by the knees of
Amphinomus of Dulichium, for he was afraid; the stool hit the cupbearer
and knocked him down, whereon there was a general uproar, amid which
Telemachus said that he would compel no man, but he thought it would be
better if they would all go home to bed. To this they assented, and
shortly afterwards left the house.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_37"></span>[75:\*](aoto23.htm#fr_37.md) They might very well
fight in the middle of an open court, but hardly in a covered hall. They
would go outside.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[77:\*](aoto23.htm#fr_38.md) ἐν μεγάροισιν, but not
ἐν μεγάροισι σκιόεσσι.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XIX. Ulysses Converses with Penelope](aoto24.md)
