[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Homer](../homer/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoto25.md) 
[Next](aoto27.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1904675018/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Authoress of the Odyssey*, by Samuel Butler, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Book XXI

#### THE TRIAL OF THE BOW AND OF THE AXES.

Then Minerva put it in Penelope's mind to let the suitors compete for
the bow and for a prize of iron. So she went upstairs and got the key of
the store room, where Ulysses’ treasures of gold, copper, and iron were
kept, as also the mighty bow which Iphitus son of Eurytus had given him,
and which had been in common use by Eurytus as long as he was alive.
Hither she went attended by her women, and when she had unlocked the
door she took the bow down from its peg and carried it, with its
quiverfull of deadly arrows, to the suitors, while her maids brought the
chest in which were the many prizes of iron that Ulysses had won. Then,
still attended by her two maidens, she stood by one of the bearing posts
that supported the roof of the cloister, and told the suitors she would
marry the man among them who could string Ulysses’ bow most easily, and
send an arrow through the twelve holes by which twelve axe-heads were
fastened on to their handles.

So saying she gave the bow into the hands of Eumæus and <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_21:80">80</span></span> bade him let the
suitors compete as she had said. Eumæus wept as he took it, and so did
Philœtius who was looking on, whereon Antinous scolded them for a couple
of country bumpkins.

Telemachus said that he too should compete, and that if he <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_21:113">113</span></span> was successful
he should certainly not allow his mother to leave her home with a second
husband, while he remained alone. So saying he dug a long trench quite
straight, set the

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

axes in a line within it, and stamped the earth about them to keep them
steady; every one was surprised to see how accurately he fixed them,
considering that he had never seen anything of the kind before. <span
id="fr_42"></span>[\*](#fn_42.md) Having set the axes duly, he stood on the
stone pavement, and tried to string the bow, but failed three times. He
would, however, have succeeded the fourth time, if Ulysses had not made
him a sign that he was not to try any more. So he laid both bow and
arrow down and took his seat.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_21:140">140</span></span> "Then,"
said Antinous, "begin at the place where the cup-bearer begins, and let
each take his turn, going from left to right." On this Leiodes came
forward. He was their sacrificial priest, and sat in the angle of the
wall hard by the mixing bowl; but he had always set his face against the
wicked conduct of the suitors. When he had failed to string the bow he
said it was so hard to string that it would rob many a man among them of
life and heart—for which saying Antinous rebuked him bitterly.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_21:175">175</span></span> "Bring
some fire, Melantheus, and a wheel of fat from inside the house," said
he to Melanthius, \[*sic*\] "that we may warm the bow and grease it." So
they did this, but though many tried they could none of them string it.
There remained only Antinous and Eurymachus who were their ring leaders.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_21:188">188</span></span> The
swineherd and the stockman Philœtius then went outside the forecourt,
and Ulysses followed them; when they had got beyond the outer yard
Ulysses sounded them, and having satisfied himself that they were loyal
he revealed himself and shewed them the scar on his leg. They were
overjoyed, and Ulysses said, "Go back one by one after me, and follow
these instructions. The other suitors will not be for letting me have
the bow, but do you, Eumæus, when you have got it in your hands, bring
it to me, and tell the women to shut themselves

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

into their room. If the sound of groaning or uproar reaches any of them
when they are inside, tell them to stick to their work and not come out.
I leave it to you, Philœtius, to fasten the gate of the outer court
securely." He then went inside, and resumed the seat that he had left.

Eurymachus now tried to string the bow but failed. "I do <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_21:245">245</span></span> not so much
mind," he said, "about not marrying Penelope, for there are plenty of
other women in Ithaca and elsewhere. What grieves me is the fact of our
being such a feeble folk as compared with our forefathers."

Antinous reminded him that it was the festival of Apollo. <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_21:256">256</span></span> "Who," said he,
"can shoot on such a day as this? Let us leave the axes where they
are—no one will take them; let us also sacrifice to Apollo the best
goats Melanthius can bring us, and resume the contest tomorrow."

Ulysses then cunningly urged that he might be allowed to <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_21:274">274</span></span> try whether he
was as strong a man as he used to be, and that the bow should be placed
in his hands for this purpose. The suitors were very angry, but Penelope
insisted that Ulysses should have the bow; if he succeeded in stringing
it she said it was absurd to suppose that she would marry him; but she
would give him a shirt and cloak, a javelin, sword, and a pair of
sandals, and she would send him wherever he might want to go.

"The bow, mother, is mine," said Telemachus, "and if I <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_21:343">343</span></span> choose to give
it this man out and out I shall give it him. Go within the house and
mind your own proper duties."

Penelope went back, with her women, wondering into the <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_21:354">354</span></span> house, and going
upstairs into her room she wept for her dear husband till Minerva shed
sweet sleep over her eyes.

Eumæus was about to take the bow to Ulysses, but the <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_21:359">359</span></span> suitors
frightened him and he was for putting it down, till Telemachus
threatened to stone him back to his farm if he did not bring it on at
once; he therefore gave the bow to Ulysses. Then he called Euryclea
aside and told her to shut the women up, and not to let them out if they
heard any groans or uproar. She therefore shut them up.

At this point Philœtius slipped out and secured the main <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_21:388">388</span></span>

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

gate of the outer court with a ship's cable of Byblus fibre that
happened to be lying beside it. This done, he returned to his seat and
kept his eye on Ulysses, who was examining the bow with great care to
see whether it was sound in all its parts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_21:397">397</span></span> "This
man," said the suitors, "is some old bow-fancier; perhaps he has got one
like it at home, or wants to make one, so cunningly does the old rascal
handle it."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_21:404">404</span></span> Ulysses,
having finished his scrutiny, strung the bow as easily as a bard puts a
new string on to his lyre. He tried the string and it sang under his
hand like the cry of a swallow. He took an arrow that was lying out of
its quiver by his table, placed the notch on the string, and from his
seat sent the arrow through the handle-holes of all the axes and outside
into the yard.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_21:424">424</span></span>
"Telemachus," said he, "your guest has not disgraced you. It is now time
for the suitors to have their supper, and to take their pleasure
afterwards with song and playing on the lyre." So saying he made a sign
to Telemachus, who girded on his sword, grasped his spear, and stood
armed beside his father's seat.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_42"></span>[88:\*](aoto26.htm#fr_42.md) If Telemachus had
never seen anything of the kind before, so probably, neither had the
writer of the "Odyssey"—at any rate no commentator has yet been able to
understand her description, and I doubt whether she understood it
herself. It looks as though the axe heads must have been wedged into the
handles or so bound on to them as to let the hole be visible through
which the handle would go when the axe was in use. The trial is
evidently a double one, of strength as regards the bending of the bow,
and accuracy of aim as regards shooting through a row of rings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XXII. The Killing of the Suitors](aoto27.md)
