[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Homer](../homer/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoto13.md) 
[Next](aoto15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1904675018/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Authoress of the Odyssey*, by Samuel Butler, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Book IX

#### THE VOYAGES OF ULYSSES—THE CICONS, LOTUS EATERS, AND THE CYCLOPS POLYPHEMUS.

Then Ulysses rose. "King Alcinous," said he, "you ask my name and I will
tell you. I am Ulysses, and dwell in Ithaca, an island which contains a
high mountain called Neritum. In its neighbourhood there are other
islands near to one another, Dulichium, Same, and Zacynthus. It lies on
the horizon all highest up in the sea towards the West, while <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_9:25">25</span></span> the other islands
lie away from it to the East. This is the island which I would reach,
for however fine a house a man

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

may have in a land where his parents are not, there will still be
nothing sweeter to him than his home and his own father and mother.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_9:39">39</span></span> "I will now
tell you of my adventures. On leaving Troy we first made a descent on
the land of the Cicons, and sacked their city but were eventually beaten
off, though we took our booty with us.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_9:62">62</span></span> "Thence we
sailed South with a strong North wind behind us, till we reached the
island of Cythera, where we were driven off our course by a continuance
of North wind which prevented my doubling Cape Malea.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_9:82">82</span></span> "Nine days
was I driven by foul winds, and on the tenth we reached the land of the
Lotus eaters, where the people were good to my men but gave them to eat
of the lotus, which made them lose all desire to return home, so that I
had a great work to get those who had tasted it on board again.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_9:105">105</span></span> "Thence we
were carried further, till we came to the land of the savage Cyclopes.
Off their coast, but not very far, there is a wooded island abounding
with wild goats. It is untrodden by the foot of man; even the huntsmen,
who as a <span class="margnote"><span id="an_9:120">120</span></span>
general rule will suffer any hardship in forest or on mountain top,
never go there; it is neither tilled nor fed down, but remains year
after year uninhabited save by goats only. For the Cyclopes have no
ships, and cannot therefore go from place to place as those who have
ships can do. If they had ships they would have colonised the island,
for it is not at all a bad one and would bring forth all things in their
season. There is meadow land, well watered and of good quality, that
stretches down to the water's edge. Grapes would do wonderfully well
there; it contains good arable land, which would yield heavy crops, for
the soil is rich; moreover it has a convenient port—into which some god
must have taken us, for the night was so dark that we could see nothing.
There was a thick darkness all round the ships, neither was there any
moon, for the sky was covered with clouds. No one could see the island,
nor yet waves breaking upon the shore till we found ourselves in the
harbour. Here, then, we moored our ships and camped down upon the beach,

<span id="img_04200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE CAVE OF
POLYPHEMUS](tn/04200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/04200.jpg.md)  
THE CAVE OF POLYPHEMUS  
</span>

<span id="img_04300"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![SIG. SUGAMELI AND
THE AUTHOR, IN THE CAVE OF POLYPHEMUS](tn/04300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/04300.jpg.md)  
SIG. SUGAMELI AND THE AUTHOR, IN THE CAVE OF POLYPHEMUS  
</span>

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

"When morning came we hunted the wild goats, of which <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_9:152">152</span></span> we killed over a
hundred, <span id="fr_22"></span>[\*](#fn_22.md) and all day long to the
going down of the sun we feasted on them and the store of wine we had
taken from the Cicons. We kept looking also on the land of the Cyclopes
over against us, which was so near that we could see the smoke of their
stubble fires, and almost fancy we heard the bleating of their sheep and
goats.

"We camped a second night upon the beach, and at day <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_9:169">169</span></span> break, having
called a council, I said I would take my own ship and reconnoitre the
country, but would leave the other ships at the island. Thereon I
started, but when we got near the main land we saw a great cave in the
cliff, not far from the sea, and there were large sheep yards in front
of it. On landing I chose twelve men and went inland, taking with me a
goat skin full of a very wondrous wine that Maron, priest of Apollo, had
given me when I spared his life and that of his family at the time that
we were sacking the city of the Cicons. The rest of my crew were to wait
my return by the sea side.

"We soon reached the cave, and finding that the owner <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_9:216">216</span></span> was not at home
we examined all that it contained; we saw vessels brimful of whey, and
racks loaded with cheeses: the yards also were full of lambs and kids.
My men implored me to let them steal some cheeses, drive off some of the
lambs and kids, and sail away, but I would not, for I hoped the owner
might give me something.

"We lit a fire in the cave, sacrificed some of the cheeses to <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_9:231">231</span></span> the gods, and ate
others ourselves, waiting till the owner should return. When he came we
found him to be a huge monster, more like a peak standing out against
the sky on

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

some high mountain than a human being. He brought in with <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_9:233">233</span></span> him a great
bundle of firewood, which he flung down upon the floor with such a noise
that we were scared and hid ourselves. He drove all his female goats and
ewes into the cave, but left the males outside; and then he closed the
door with a huge stone which not even two and twenty waggons could
carry. <span class="margnote"><span id="an_9:245">245</span></span> He
milked his goats and ewes all orderly, and gave each one her own young
\[for these had been left in the yard all day\]; then he drank some of
the milk, and put part by for his supper. Presently he lit his fire and
caught sight of us, whereon he asked us who we were.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_9:256">256</span></span> "I told him
we were on our way home from Troy, and begged him in heaven's name to do
us no hurt; but as soon as I had answered his question he gripped up two
of my men, dashed them on the ground, and ate them raw, blood, bones,
and bowels, like a savage lion of the wilderness. Then he lay down on
the ground of the cave and went to sleep: on which I should have crept
up to him and plunged my sword into his heart while he was sleeping had
I not known that if I did we should never be able to shift the stone. So
we waited till dawn should come.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_9:307">307</span></span> "When day
broke the monster again lit his fire, milked his ewes all orderly, and
gave each one her own young. Then he gripped up two more of my men, and
as soon as he had eaten them he rolled the stone from the mouth of the
cave, drove out his sheep, and put the stone back again. He had,
however, left a large and long piece of olive wood in the cave, and when
he had gone I and my men sharpened this at one end, and hid it in the
sheep dung of which there was much in the cave. In the evening he
returned, milked his ewes, and ate two more men; whereon I went up to
him with the skin of wondrous wine that Maron had given me and gave him
a bowl full of it. He asked for another, and then another, so I gave
them to him, and he was so much delighted that he enquired my name and I
said it was Noman.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_9:371">371</span></span> "The wine
now began to take effect, and in a short time he fell dead drunk upon
the ground. Then my men and I put the sharp end of the piece of olive
wood in the fire till it was

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

well burning, and drove it into the wretch's eye, turning it round and
round as though it were an auger. After a while he plucked it out, flung
[it](errata.htm#1.md) from him, and began crying to his neighbours for
help. When they came, they said, 'What ails you? Who is harming you?'
and he answered, 'No man is harming me.' They then said that he must be
ill, and had better pray to his father Neptune; so they went away, and I
laughed at the success of my, stratagem.

"Then I hid my men by binding them under the sheep's <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_9:424">424</span></span> bellies. The
Cyclops, whose name was Polyphemus, groped his way to the stone, rolled
it away, and sat at the mouth of the cave feeling the sheep's backs as
they went out; but the men were under their bellies so he did not find
one of them. Nor yet did he discover me, for I was ensconced in the
thick belly-fleece of a ram which by some chance he had brought in with
the ewes. But he was near finding me, for the ram went last, and he kept
it for a while and talked to it.

"When we were outside, I dropped from under the ram and unbound my
companions. We drove the ewes down to my <span class="margnote"><span
id="an_9:462">462</span></span> ship, got them on board, and rowed out
to sea. When we were a little way out I jeered at the Cyclops, whereon
he tore up a great rock and hurled it after us; it fell in front of the
ship and all but hit the rudder; the wash, moreover, that it <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_9:483">483</span></span> made nearly
carried us back to the land, but I kept the ship off it with a pole.

"When we had got about twice as far off as we were before, <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_9:491">491</span></span> I was for
speaking to the Cyclops again, and though my men tried to stay me, I
shouted out to him 'Cyclops, if you would know who it is that has
blinded you, learn that it is I, Ulysses, son of Laertes, who live in
Ithaca.'

"'Alas,' he cried in answer, 'then the old prophecy about <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_9:506">506</span></span> me is coming
true. I knew that I was to lose my sight by the hand of Ulysses, but I
was looking for some man of great stature and noble mien, whereas he has
proved to be a mere whippersnapper. Come here, then, Ulysses that I may
offer you gifts of hospitality and pray my father Neptune, who shall
heal my eye, to escort you safely home.'

"'I wish,' said I, 'that I could be as sure of killing you <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_9:521">521</span></span>

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

body and soul as I am that not even Neptune will be able to cure your
eye.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_9:526">526</span></span> "Then he
prayed to Neptune saying 'Hear me Neptune, if I am indeed your son, and
vouchsafe me that Ulysses son of Laertes may never reach his home.
Still, if he must do so, and get back to his friends, let him lose all
his men, and though he get home after all, let it be late, on another
man's ship, and let him find trouble in his house.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_9:537">537</span></span> "So saying
he tore up a still larger rock and flung it this time a little behind
the ship, but so close that it all but hit the rudder: the wash,
however, that it made carried us forward to the island from which we had
set out.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_9:556">556</span></span> "There we
feasted on the sheep that we had taken, and mourned the loss of our
comrades whom Polyphemus had eaten.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_22"></span>[43:\*](aoto14.htm#fr_22.md) Dwellers on the East
coast of Sicily believe the island here referred to to be Acitrezza,
between Acireale and Catania. I have been all over it and do not believe
that it contains more than two acres of land on which any goat could
ever have fed. The idea that the writer of the "Odyssey" would make
Ulysses and his large body of men spend half a day in killing over a
hundred goats on such a site need not be discussed seriously, I shall
therefore pass it over without notice when I come to discuss the voyage
of Ulysses. That it should be so confidently believed to be the island
off the land of the Cyclopes serves as a warning to myself, inasmuch as
it shows how easily people can bring themselves to accept any site for
any scene if they make up their minds to do so.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book X. Æolus, Læstrygonians, Circe](aoto15.md)
