[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Homer](../homer/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoto11) 
[Next](aoto13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1904675018/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Authoress of the Odyssey*, by Samuel Butler, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Book VII

#### THE SPLENDOURS OF THE HOUSE OF KING ALCINOUS—QUEEN ARĒTE WANTS TO KNOW WHERE ULYSSES GOT HIS SHIRT AND CLOAK, FOR SHE KNOWS THEM AS HER OWN WORK—ULYSSES EXPLAINS.

WHEN Nausicaa reached home her brothers attended to the waggon and
mules, and her waiting-woman Eurymedusa lit the fire and brought her
supper for her into her own room.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_7:14">14</span></span> Presently
Ulysses considered it safe to come on, and entered the town enveloped in
a thick mist which Minerva shed round him for his protection from any
rudeness that the Phæacians might offer him. She also met him outside
the town disguised as a little girl carrying a pitcher.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_7:21">21</span></span> Ulysses saw
her in spite of the mist, and asked her to show him the way to the house
of Alcinous; this, she said, she could easily do, and when they reached
the house she told Ulysses all about the king's family history, and
advised him how he should behave himself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_7:50">50</span></span> "Be bold,"
she said; "boldness always tells, no matter where a man comes from.
First find the mistress of the house. She is of the same family as her
husband, and her descent is in this wise. Eurymedon was king of the
giants, but he and his people were overthrown, and he lost his own

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

life. His youngest daughter was Peribœa, a woman of surpassing beauty,
who gave birth by Neptune to Nausithous, king of the Phæacians. He had
two sons, Rhexenor and <span class="margnote"><span
id="an_7:62">62</span></span> Alcinous; Rhexenor died young, leaving an
only daughter, Arēte, whom her uncle Alcinous married, and whom he
honours as no other woman in the whole world is honoured by her husband.
All her family and all her neighbours adore her as a friend and
peacemaker, for she is a thoroughly good woman. If you can gain her good
offices all will go well with you."

Minerva then left him and went to Marathon and Athens, <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_7:78">78</span></span> where she visited
the house of Erechtheus, but Ulysses went on to the house of Alcinous,
and he pondered much as he paused awhile before he reached the threshold
of bronze, for the splendour of the palace was like that of the sun and
moon. The walls on either side were of bronze from end to end, and the
cornice was of blue enamel. The doors were of gold and hung on pillars
of silver that rose from a floor of bronze, while the lintel was of
silver and the hook of the door was of gold.

On either side there were gold and silver mastiffs which <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_7:91">91</span></span> Vulcan with his
consummate skill had fashioned expressly to keep watch over the palace
of King Alcinous, so they were immortal and could never grow old. Seats
were ranged here and there all along the wall, from one end to the
other, with coverings of fine woven work, which the women of the house
had made. Here the chief persons of the Phæacians used to sit and eat
and drink, for there was abundance at all seasons; and there were golden
figures of young men with lighted torches in their hands, raised on
pedestals to give light to them that sat at meat.

There are fifty women servants in the house, some of whom <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_7:103">103</span></span> are always
grinding rich yellow grain at the mill, while others work at the loom
and sit and spin, and their shuttles go backwards and forwards like the
fluttering of aspen leaves, while the linen is so closely woven that it
will turn oil. As the Phæacians are the best sailors in the world, so
their women excel all others in weaving, for Minerva has taught them all
manner of useful arts, and they are very intelligent.

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

Outside the gate of the outer court there is a large garden <span
id="fr_19"></span>[\*](#fn_19) of about four acres, with a wall all
round it. It is full of beautiful trees—pears, pomegranates, and the
most delicious apples. There are luscious figs also, and olives in full
growth. The fruits never rot nor fail all the year round, neither winter
nor summer, for the air is so soft that a new crop ripens before the old
has dropped. Pear grows on pear, apple on apple, and fig on fig, and so
also with the grapes, for there is an excellent vineyard; on the level
ground of a part of this, the grapes are being made into raisins; on
another part they are being gathered; some are being trodden in the
wine-tubs; others, further on, have shed their blossom and are beginning
to show fruit; others, again, are just changing colour. In the furthest
part of the ground there are beautifully arranged beds of flowers that
are in bloom all the year round. Two streams go through it, the one
turned in ducts throughout the whole garden, while the other is carried
under the ground of the outer court to the house itself, and the
townspeople drew water from it. Such, then, were the splendours with
which heaven had endowed the house of King Alcinous.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_7:133">133</span></span> So here
Ulysses stood for a while and looked about him, but when he had looked
long enough he crossed the threshold and went within the precincts of
the house. He passed through the crowd of guests who were nightly
visitors at the table of King Alcinous, and who were then making <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_7:137">137</span></span> their usual drink
offering to Mercury before going for the night. He was still shrouded in
the mist of invisibility with which Minerva had invested him, and going
up to Arēte he embraced her knees, whereon he suddenly became visible.
Everyone was greatly surprised at seeing a man there, but Ulysses paid
no attention to this, and at once implored the queen's assistance; he
then sat down among the ashes on the hearth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_7:154">154</span></span> Alcinous
did not know what to do or say, nor yet did any one else till one of the
guests Echeneüs told him it was not

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

creditable to him that a suppliant should be left thus grovelling among
the ashes. Alcinous ought to give him a seat and set food before him.
This was accordingly done, and after Ulysses had finished eating
Alcinous made a speech, in which he proposed that they should have a
great banquet next day in their guest's honour, and then provide him an
escort to take him to his own home. This was agreed to, and after a
while the other guests went home to bed.

When they were gone Ulysses was left alone with Alcinous <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_7:230">230</span></span> and Arēte sitting
over the fire, while the servants were taking the things away after
supper. Then Arēte said, "Stranger, before we go any further there is a
question I should like to put to you. Who are you? and who gave you
those clothes?" for she recognised the shirt and cloak Ulysses was
wearing as her own work, and that of her maids.

Ulysses did not give his name, but told her how he had <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_7:240">240</span></span> come from
Calypso's island, and been wrecked on the Phæacian coast. "Next day," he
said, I fell in with your daughter, who treated me with much greater
kindness than one could have expected from so young a person—for young
people are apt to be thoughtless. It was she who gave me the clothes."

Alcinous then said he wished the stranger would stay with <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_7:308">308</span></span> them for good and
all and marry Nausicaa. They would not, however, press this, and if he
insisted on going they would send him, no matter where. "Even though it
be further than Eubœa, which they say is further off than any other
place, we will send you, and you shall be taken so easily that you may
sleep the whole way if you like." <span class="margnote"><span
id="an_7:318">318</span></span>

To this Ulysses only replied by praying that the king <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_7:329">329</span></span> might be as good
as his word. A bed was then made for him in the gate-house and they all
retired for the night.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_19"></span>[36:\*](aoto12.htm#fr_19) Penelope and Calypso
also had gardens: so had Laertes (xxiv. 247). I remember no allusion to
them in the "Iliad."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VIII. The Phæacian Games](aoto13)
