[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Homer](../homer/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoto39.md) 
[Next](aoto41.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1904675018/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Authoress of the Odyssey*, by Samuel Butler, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

### Chapter XIII

### FURTHER EVIDENCE IN SUPPORT OF AN EARLY IONIAN SETTLEMENT AT OR CLOSE TO TRAPANI.

<span class="smallcaps">I am</span> often asked how I explain the fact
that we find no trace in ancient authors of any tradition to the effect
that the "Odyssey" was written at Drepanum or that the writer was a
woman. This difficulty is laid before me as one that is almost fatal. I
confess, however, that I find it small in comparison with that of
explaining how both these facts should have failed of being long since
rediscovered. Neptune indeed did not overwhelm Scheria under Mt. Eryx,
but he, or some not less spiteful god, seems to have buried both it and
its great poetess under another mountain which I fear may be found even
more irremovable—I mean a huge quasi-geological formation of academic
erudition.

The objection is without sufficient foundation in its implied facts; for
that the Phæacians were a real people who lived at a place bearing the
name of Drepane (which is near enough to Drepanum for all practical
purposes), <span id="fr_85"></span>[\*](#fn_85.md) has never been lost
sight of at all—except by those who find it convenient to lose sight of
it. Thucydides (i. 25) tells us that the inhabitants of Corfu were the
descendants of the Phæacians, and the rock into which their ship was
turned as it was entering the harbour after having escorted Ulysses to
Ithaca is still shown at Corfu—as an island 58 feet high with a
monastery on the top of it. But the older name of Corfu was
Drepane, <span id="fr_86"></span>[†](#fn_86.md) and when the Carthaginians
had established themselves at the Sicilian Drepanum, it would be an easy
matter for the inhabitants of the Corfu Drepane to claim Phæacian
descent, and—as they

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

proceeded to do—to call their island Scheria, in spite of its offering
no single point of correspondence with the description given in the
"Odyssey."

I grant that no explicit tradition exists to the effect that the
"Odyssey" as a whole was written at or in Corfu, but the Phæacian
episode is the eye of the poem. I submit, then, that tradition both long
has, and still does, by implication connect it with a place of which the
earliest known name was to all intents and purposes the same as that of
the town where I contend that it was written.

The Athenian writers, Thucydides included, would be biassed in favour of
any site which brought Homer, as they ignorantly called the writer of
the "Odyssey," nearer their own doors. The people, moreover, of Eryx and
Segesta, and hence also of Drepanum, were held to be barbarians, and are
so called by Thucydides himself (vi. 2); in his eyes it would be little
less than sacrilege to hesitate between the Corfu Drepane and the
Sicilian Drepanum, did any tradition, however vague, support Corfu. But
it is not likely that Thucydides was unaware of the Sicilian claim not
only to the Phæacian episode, but to the entire poem, for as late as 430
<span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span>, only a little before the date of
his own work, there were still people on or near Mt. Eryx who present
every appearance of having claimed it, as I will almost immediately
show.

As for losing sight of its having been written by a woman, the people
who could lose sight of the impossibility of its having been written by
Homer could lose sight of anything. A people who could not only do this,
but who could effectually snuff out those who pointed out their error,
were not likely to know more about the difference underlying the two
poems than the average English layman does about those between the
synoptic gospels and that of St. John.

I will now return to my assertion that in the time of Thucydides there
seem to have been not a few who knew of, and shared in, the claim of
Drepanum to the authorship of the "Odyssey."

The British Museum possesses a unique example of a small bronze coin
which is classed with full confidence among those

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

of Eryx and Segesta. It is of the very finest period of the numismatic
art, and is dated by the museum authorities as about 430 <span
class="smallcaps">B.C.</span>

The reader will see that the obverse bears the legend ΙΑΚΙΝ, and the
reverse a representation of the brooch described by Ulysses ("Od." xix.
225-231). A translation of this passage is given on page 80.

The cross line of the A is not visible in the original, but no doubt is
felt at the Museum about its having existed.

There seems, however, to be more doubt whether the legend should be
ΙΑΚΙΝ, or <span id="img_22700"></span> ![P](img/22700.jpg.md)IAKIN—<span
id="img_22700"></span> ![P](img/22700.jpg.md) being the older form of Π.
Possibly from a desire to be right in either case, the Museum catalogue
gives it as ΙΑΚΙΝ in the illustration, and <span id="img_22700"></span>
![P](img/22700.jpg.md)ΙΑΚΙΝ in the descriptive letterpress. The one reading
will do nearly as well as the other for my argument, which only requires
that the coin should belong to the Eryx and Segesta group and be dated
about 430 <span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span>—neither of which points
are doubted. I will, however, give the reasons that convince me that
ΙΑΚΙΝ is the true reading.

Firstly, neither I nor some artist friends of mine whose opinion is
infinitely better worth having than my own, can find any trace of a
<span id="img_22700"></span> ![P](img/22700.jpg.md) between the lowermost
boss and the neck. I am aware that some experts of the highest
competence profess to be able to detect such traces, but the artist who
figured the coin in the Museum Catalogue evidently could not do so, and
the experts do not seem to have had such confidence in their own opinion
as to make him alter his drawing.

Secondly, the composition is obviously and intentionally symmetrical. It
would be abhorrent to the instincts of the man who could design so
exquisite a coin to destroy its balance by crowding a <span
id="img_22700"></span> ![P](img/22700.jpg.md) into the place which must be
assigned to it if it exists at all.

Thirdly, Piacus, to which town the coin had been ascribed by the dealer
from whom the Museum bought it, is mentioned very briefly by Stephanus
Byzantinus, but by no other writer, as a Sicilian city, and he expressly
states that its citizens were called ΠΙΑΚΗΝΟΙ; so that the coin, if it
was one of theirs, should bear the legend <span id="img_22700"></span>
![P](img/22700.jpg.md)ΙΑΚΗΝ instead of the alleged <span
id="img_22700"></span> ![P](img/22700.jpg.md)ΙΑΚΙΝ.

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Stephanus
Byzantinus did not write till about 500 <span
class="smallcaps">A.D.</span>, and in the absence of any statement from
him to the effect that Piacus was an old city, it argues some
recklessness to conclude that it had existed for at least a thousand
years when he mentioned it; there is no evidence from any quarter to
support such a conclusion, and a safer one will be that the dealer above
referred to, not knowing where the coin came from, and looking for a
city in Stephanus Byzantinus, found he could get nothing nearer than
Piacus—whereon he saw a P as the smallest thing he could do in H's, into
his coin, and sold it to the British Museum probably for a song as
compared with the value which it now proves to have. Thus the Museum
authorities having got it into part of their notes (for they seem to
have got ΙΑΚΙΝ into another part) that the legend was <span
id="img_22700"></span> ![P](img/22700.jpg.md)ΙΑΚΙΝ, have very naturally
been led to see more on the coin than those who have no notes will quite
bear them out in seeing. But I will add no more. The legend is obviously
ΙΑΚΙΝ.

This is an abbreviation for ΙΑΚΙΝΩΝ, as ΕΡΥΚΙΝ and ΚΕΝΤΟΡΙΠΙΝ are for
ΕΡΥΚΙΝΩΝ and ΚΕΝΤΟΡΙΠΙΝΩΝ, not to quote further examples. It means that
the people who struck it were called ΙΑΚΙΝΕΣ, and though we cannot
determine the precise name of their city we may infer with confidence
that it was some derivative of ΙΑΚΟΣ, which is given in Liddell & Scott
as meaning Ionian. The name may very likely have been ΙΑΞ though I
cannot find any authority for the existence of such a town.

I hold, therefore, that as late as <span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span>
430 there was near Trapani a town still more or less autonomous, which
claimed Ionian descent and which also claimed to be in some special way
connected with the "Odyssey"; for I am assured that nothing would be
allowed on a coin except what had an important bearing on the anterior
history of those who struck it. Admitting that the reverse of the coin
in question must be taken as a reproduction of Ulysses’ brooch—and I
found no difference of opinion among the numismatists at the Museum on
this head—it is hard to see what more apposite means of saying "Odyssey"
upon a coin can be suggested than to stamp it with the subject which
invites numismatic treatment more

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

than any other in the whole poem. It seems to me, then, that though the
theory that there was an Ionian city in the neighbourhood of Eryx which
could claim connection with the "Odyssey" will stand perfectly well
without the coin, the coin cannot stand without involving the existence
of an Ionian city near Eryx which claimed connection with the "Odyssey."
Happily, though the coin is unique, there is no question as to its
genuineness.

To those, therefore, who ask me for monuments, ruins of buildings,
historical documents to support a Sicano-Ionian civilisation near Eryx
in times heretofore prehistoric, I reply that as late as 430 <span
class="smallcaps">B.C.</span> all these things appear to have existed.
Letting alone the testimony of Thucydides, surely an Ionian coin is no
small historical document in support of an Ionian city. A coin will say
more in fewer words and more authoritatively than anything else will.
The coin in question cannot belong to an Ionian colony on Mt. Eryx or
thereabouts recently established in 430 <span
class="smallcaps">B.C.</span> We should have heard of such a colony; how
inconceivable again is the bringing in of the "Odyssey" on this
supposition. If the city existed at all it can only have done so as a
survival of the Phocæan settlement of which Thucydides tells us.

I want no evidence for the survival of such a settlement in later times;
it is not incumbent upon me to show whether it survived or no; the
abundant, I might almost say superabundant, coincidences between all
both Scherian and Ithacan scenes in the "Odyssey," and Trapani with its
immediate neighbourhood, is enough to demonstrate the Trapanese origin
of the poem. Its pre-Syracusan and pre-Sicelian indications fix it as
not later than about 1050 <span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span>, its
dialect, Ionic-Æolian, connects it with the Phocæans above referred to.
It does not concern me to show what became of these Phocæans after the
"Odyssey" had been written; what I have said about the coin ΙΑΚΙΝ is
said more in the interests of the coin than of the "Odyssey," which is a
more potent and irrefragable proof of its own *provenance* and date than
any coin struck some 600 years later can conceivably be. Still, the coin
being there, I use it to answer those who demand some evidence external
to the

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Odyssey" itself.
When they ask me where are my monuments, I answer that they are within
the coin, circumscribed by the small cincture of an inch and a half at
most. For a coin is a city in little; he who looks on one beholds a
people, an evidence of title, a whole civilisation with its buildings of
every kind. Destroy these, but so long as a single one of its coins
remains, the city though dead is yet alive, and the fact of its having
had buildings that could become ruinous is as palpable as though the
ruins themselves had come down to us.

The exact situation of this city Iax, Iacus, or Iace, cannot be
determined, but I incline to place it about a mile or a mile and a half
East of Trapani at or near a place called Argenteria. This place is said
to have yielded silver, but no one believes that it ever did so. It is a
quarry and by no means a large one, just at the beginning of the rise to
Mt. Eryx. Some say that Argenteria is a corruption of Cetaria and refers
to a monster fish that was killed here, though how it got so far from
the sea is not apparent; I think it much more likely, however, that it
is a corruption of Iacinteria and that Iax, or Iace, was a
quasi-autonomous suburb of Drepanum to which the Greek inhabitants were
permitted to retire when the Carthaginians took possession of the parts
of the town bordering on the harbour.

My friend Signor Sugameli of Trapani, whose zeal in this matter so far
outstrips even my own, that I would gladly moderate it if I knew how to
do so, assures me that in his younger days he used to employ a stone in
building that the mason told him came from a quarry at the foot of Mt.
Eryx called Dacinoi or D’Acinoi. This was years before any one thought
of bringing Ionians to Trapani. Signor Sugameli suggested that possibly
the name might be a corruption of D’Alcinoo—but we may be sure that
whatever else Alcinous’s name may have been it was not Alcinous. I asked
Signor Sugameli to produce the mason, but he could neither find him nor
hear of the quarry Dacinoi. Nevertheless I feel sure that he was told
what he said he was, and as the quarry cannot have been far from the
Argenteria, I think it probable that its name was a corruption of *degli
Iacinoi*.

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

Whether this is sound or not, I do not doubt that the Iacenses who
figure so largely in Sicilian history during the Eleventh Century of our
own era are to be connected with the Ionian settlement that produced the
"Odyssey." The Iacenses were then settled chiefly about forty miles East
of Trapani, but the interval of some 1400 years and more between the
date of the coin Iakin and the conquest of Sicily by the Normans will
leave plenty of time for them to have spread or migrated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_85"></span>[225:\*](aoto40.htm#fr_85.md) Drepanum means a
curved sword or scimitar. Drepane is a sickle.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[225:†](aoto40.htm#fr_86.md) See Smith's Dictionary
of Classical Geography, under Corcyra, where full references will be
found.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. That the Iliad Which the Writer of the Odyssey Knew
Was the Same As What We Now Have](aoto41.md)
