[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Homer](../homer/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoto10.md) 
[Next](aoto12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1904675018/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Authoress of the Odyssey*, by Samuel Butler, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Book VI

#### THE MEETING BETWEEN ULYSSES AND NAUSICAA.

While Ulysses was thus slumbering, Minerva went to the land of the
Phæacians, on which Ulysses had been cast.

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

Now the Phæacians used to live in Hypereia near the law-less <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_6:4">4</span></span> Cyclopes, who were
stronger than they were and plundered them; so their king Nausithous
removed them to Scheria, <span id="fr_17"></span>[\*](#fn_17.md) where they
were secure. Nausithous was now dead, and his son Alcinous was reigning.

Alcinous had an only daughter, Nausicaa, who was in her <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_6:15">15</span></span> bedroom fast
asleep. Minerva went to her bedside and appeared to her in a dream,
having assumed the form of one Captain Dymas's daughter, who was a bosom
friend of Nausicaa's. She reminded her of her approaching marriage (for
which, however, the bridegroom had not yet been decided upon), and
upbraided her for not making due preparation by the washing of her own
and of the family linen. She proposed, therefore, that on the following
morning Nausicaa should take all the unwashed clothes to the washing
cisterns, and said that she would come and help her: the cisterns being
some distance from the town, she advised Nausicaa to ask her father to
let her have a waggon and mules.

Nausicaa, on waking, told her father and mother about her <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_6:50">50</span></span> dream, "Papa,
dear," <span id="fr_18"></span>[†](#fn_18.md) said she, "could you manage
to let me have a good big waggon? I want to take all our dirty clothes
to the river and wash them. You are the chief man here, so it is only
proper that you should have a clean shirt when you <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_6:60">60</span></span> attend meetings of
the Council. Moreover you have five sons, two of them married, while the
other three are good looking young bachelors; you know they always like
to have clean linen when they go out to a dance."

Her father promised her all she wanted. The waggon was <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_6:71">71</span></span> made ready, her
mother put her up a basket of provisions, and Nausicaa drove her maids
to the bank of the river, where were the cisterns, through which there
flowed enough clear water to wash clothes however dirty they might be.
They washed their clothes in the pits by treading upon them, laid them
out to dry upon the sea-beach, had their dinner as the clothes were
drying, and then began to play at ball while Nausicaa sang to them.

In the course of time, when they were thinking about <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_6:110">110</span></span>

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

starting home, Minerva woke Ulysses, who was in the wood just above
them. He sat up, heard the voices and laughter of the women, and
wondered where he was.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:127">127</span></span> He resolved
on going to see, but remembering that he had no clothes on, he held a
bough of olive before him, and then, all grim, naked, and unkempt as he
was, he came out and drew near to the women, who all of them ran away
along the beach and the points that jutted into the sea. Nausicaa,
however, stood firm, and Ulysses set himself to consider whether he
should go boldly up to her and embrace her knees, or speak to her from a
respectful distance.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:145">145</span></span> On the
whole he concluded that this would be the most prudent course; and
having adopted it, he began by asking Nausicaa to inform him whether she
was a goddess or no. If she was a goddess, it was obvious from her
beauty that she could only be Diana. If on the other hand she was a
mortal, how happy would he be whose proposals in the way of settlements
had seemed most advantageous, and who should take her to his own home.
Finally he asked her to be kind enough to give him any old wrapper which
she might have brought with her to wrap the clothes in, and to show him
the way to the town.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:186">186</span></span> Nausicaa
replied that he seemed really to be a very sensible person, but that
people must put up with their luck whatever it might happen to be. She
then explained that he had come to the land of the Phæacians, and
promised to conduct him to their city.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:198">198</span></span> Having so
said, she told her maids not to be such cowards. "The man," she said,
"is quite harmless; we live away from all neighbours on a land's end,
with the sea roaring on either side of us, and no one can hurt us. See
to this poor fellow, therefore, and give him something to eat."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:211">211</span></span> When they
heard this the maids came back and gave Ulysses a shirt and cloak; they
also gave him a bottle of oil and told him to go and wash in the river,
but he said, "I will not wash myself while you kelp standing there. I
cannot bring myself to strip before a number of good-looking young
women." So they went and told their mistress.

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

When Ulysses had done washing, Minerva made him look <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_6:224">224</span></span> much grander and
more imposing, and gave him a thick head of hair which flowed down in
hyacinthine curls about his shoulders. Nausicaa was very much struck
with the change in his appearance. "At first," she said, "I thought him
quite plain, but now he is of godlike beauty. I wish I might have such a
man as that for my husband, if he would only stay here. But never mind
this; girls, give him something to eat and drink."

The maids then set meat and drink before Ulysses, who <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_6:247">247</span></span> was ravenously
hungry. While he was eating, Nausicaa got the clothes folded up and put
on to the cart; after which she gave him his instructions. "Follow after
the cart," she said, "along with the maids, till you get near the
houses. As for the town, you will find it lying between two good
harbours, <span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:263">263</span></span>
and approached by a narrow neck of land, on either side of which you
will see the ships drawn up—for every man has a place where he can let
his boat lie. You will also see the walls, and the temple of Neptune
standing in the middle of the paved market-place, with the ship-brokers'
shops all round it.

"When you get near the town drop behind, for the people <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_6:273">273</span></span> here are very
ill-natured, and they would talk about me. They would say, 'Who is this
fine looking stranger that is going about with Nausicaa? Where did she
find him? I suppose she is going to marry him. Is he a sailor whom she
has picked up from some foreign vessel, or has a god come down from
heaven in answer to her prayers and he is going to marry her? It would
be a good thing if she would go and find a husband somewhere else, for
she will have nothing to say to any of the many excellent Phæacians who
are in love with her.' This is what people would say, and I could not
blame them, for I should be scandalised myself if I saw any girl going
about with a stranger, while her father and mother were yet alive,
without being married to him in the face of all the world.

"Do then as I say. When you come to the grove of <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_6:289">289</span></span> Minerva a little
outside the town, wait till you think I and the

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

maids must have got home. Then come after us, ask which is Alcinous’s
house, and when you reach it go straight through the outer and inner
courts till you come to my mother. You will see her sitting with her
back to a bearing-post, and spinning her purple yarn by the fire. My
father will be sitting close by her; never mind about him, but go and
embrace my mother's knees, for if she looks favourably on your suit you
will probably get what you want."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_6:316">316</span></span> Nausicaa
then drove on, and as the sun was about setting they came to the grove
of Minerva, where Ulysses sat down and waited. He prayed Minerva to
assist him, and she heard his prayer, but she would not manifest herself
to him, for she did not want to offend her uncle Neptune.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_17"></span>[31:\*](aoto11.htm#fr_17.md) Scheria means
"Jutland"—a piece of land jutting out into the sea.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[31:†](aoto11.htm#fr_18.md) Gr. πάππα φίλ line 57.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VII. The Splendours of the House of King Alcinous](aoto12.md)
