[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Homer](../homer/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoto31.md) 
[Next](aoto33.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1904675018/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Authoress of the Odyssey*, by Samuel Butler, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

#### Chapter V

#### ON THE QUESTION WHETHER OR NO PENELOPE IS BEING WHITEWASHED.

<span class="smallcaps">It</span> is known that scandalous versions of
Penelope's conduct were current among the ancients; indeed they seem to
have prevailed before the completion of the Epic cycle, for in the
*Telegony*, which is believed to have come next in chronological order
after the "Odyssey," we find that when Ulysses had killed the suitors he
did not go on living with Penelope, but settled in Thesprotia, and
married Callidice, the queen of the country. He must, therefore, have
divorced Penelope, and he could hardly have done this if he accepted the
Odyssean version of her conduct. According to the author of the
*Telegony*, Penelope and Telemachus go on living in Ithaca, where
eventually Ulysses returns and is killed by Telegonus, a son who had
been born to him by Circe. For further reference to ancient, though a
good deal later, scandalous versions, see *Smith's Dictionary* under
"Penelope."

Let us see what the "Odyssey" asks us to believe, or rather, swallow. We
are told that more than a hundred young men fall violently in love, at
the same time, with a supposed widow, who before the close of their suit
can hardly have been under forty, and who had a grown up son—pestering
her for several years with addresses that they know are most distasteful
to her. They are so madly in love with her that they cannot think of
proposing to any one else (ii. 205-207) till she has made her choice.
When she has done this they will go; till then, they will pay her out
for her cruel treatment of them by eating her son Telemachus out of
house and home. This therefore, they proceed to do, and Penelope, who is
a model both wife and mother, suffers agonies of grief, partly because
of the death of her husband, and partly because she cannot get the
suitors out of the house.

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

One would have thought all she had to do was to bolt the doors as soon
as the suitors had left for the night, and refuse to open them in the
morning; for the suitors never sleep in the same house with Penelope.
They sleep at various places in the town, in the middle of which
Ulysses’ house evidently stands, and if they were meek enough to let
themselves be turned out, they would be meek enough to let themselves be
kept out, if those inside showed anything of a firm front. Not one of
them ever sees Penelope alone; when she comes into their presence she is
attended by two respectable female servants who stand on either side of
her, and she holds a screen or veil modestly before her face—true, she
was forty, but neither she nor the poetess seem to bear this in mind, so
we may take it as certain that it was modesty and nothing else that made
her hold up the veil. The suitors were not men of scrupulous delicacy,
and in spite of their devotion to Penelope lived on terms of improper
intimacy with her women servants—none of whom appear to have been
dismissed instantly on detection. It is a little strange that not one of
those suitors who came from a long distance should have insisted on
being found in bed as well as board, and so much care is taken that not
one breath of scandal should attach to Penelope, that we infer a sense
on the writer's part that it was necessary to put this care well in
evidence. I cannot think, for example, that Penelope would have been
represented as nearly so incredulous about the return of Ulysses in Book
xxiii., if she had been nearly as virtuous as the writer tries to make
her out. The amount of caution with which she is credited is to some
extent a gauge of the thickness of the coat of whitewash which the
writer considers necessary. In all Penelope's devotion to her husband
there is an ever present sense that the lady doth protest too much.

Still stranger, however, is the fact that these ardent passionate lovers
never quarrel among themselves for the possession of their middle-aged
paragon. The survival of the fittest does not seem to have had any place
in their system. They show no signs of jealousy, but jog along cheek by
jowl as a very happy family, aiming spears at a mark, playing

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

draughts, flaying goats and singeing pigs in the yard, drinking an
untold quantity of wine, and generally holding high feast. They insist
that Penelope should marry somebody, but who the happy somebody is to be
is a matter of no importance. <span id="fr_57"></span>[\*](#fn_57.md) No
one seems to think it essential that she shall marry himself in
particular. Not one of them ever finds out that his case is hopeless and
takes his leave; and thus matters drift on year after year—during all
which time Penelope is not getting any younger—the suitor's dying of
love for Penelope, and Penelope dying only to be rid of them.

Granted that the suitors are not less in love with the good cheer they
enjoy at Telemachus's expense, than they are with his mother; but this
mixture of perfect lover and perfect sponger is so impossible that no
one could have recourse to it unless aware that he (or she) was in
extreme difficulty. If men are in love they will not sponge; if they
sponge they are not in love; we may have it either way but not both;
when, therefore, the writer of the "Odyssey" not only attributes such
impossible conduct to the suitors, but asks us also to believe that a
clever woman could not keep at any rate some few of her hundred lovers
out of the house, although their presence had been for many years in a
high degree distasteful to her, we may know that we are being hoodwinked
as far as the writer can hoodwink us, and shall be very inclinable to
believe that the suitors were not so black, nor Penelope so white, as we
are being given to understand.

As for her being overawed by the suitors, she talks very plainly to them
at times, as for example in xviii. 274-280, and again in xix. 322 where
she speaks as though she were perfectly able to get rid of any suitor
who was obnoxious to her.

Over and above this we may infer that the writer who can tell such a
story with a grave face cannot have even the faintest conception of the
way in which a man feels towards a woman he is in love with, nor yet
much (so far as I may venture to form an opinion) of what women commonly
feel

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

towards the man of their choice; I conclude, therefore, that she was
still very young, and unmarried. At any rate the story told above cannot
have been written by Homer; if it is by a man at all it must be by some
prehistoric Fra Angelico, who had known less in his youth, or forgotten
more in his old age, than the writer of the "Iliad" is at all likely to
have done. If he had still known enough to be able to write the
"Odyssey," he would have remembered more than the writer of the
"Odyssey" shows any signs of having ever known.

A man, if he had taken it into his head (as the late Lord Tennyson might
very conceivably have done) to represent Penelope as virtuous in spite
of current scandalous stories to the contrary—a man, would not have made
the suitors a band of lovers at all. He would have seen at once that
this was out of the question, and would have made them mere marauders,
who overawed Penelope by their threats, and were only held in check by
her mother wit and by, say, some three or four covert allies among the
suitors themselves. Do what he might he could not make the permanent
daily presence of the suitors plausible, but it would be possible;
whereas the combination of perfect sponger and perfect lover which is
offered us by the writer of the "Odyssey" is grotesquely impossible, nor
do I imagine that she would have asked us to accept it, but for her
desire to exalt her sex by showing how a clever woman can bring any
number of men to her feet, hoodwink them, spoil them, and in the end
destroy them. This, however, is surely a woman's theme rather than a
man's—at least I know of no male writer who has attempted anything like
it.

We have now seen the story as told from Penelope's point of view; let us
proceed to hear it from that of the suitors. We find this at the
beginning of Book ii., and I will give Antinous's speech at fuller
length than I have done in my abridgement. After saying that Penelope
had for years been encouraging every single suitor by sending him
flattering messages (in which, by the way, Minerva fully corroborates
him in Book xiii. 379-381) he continues:

<div style="font-size: 90%">

"And then there was that other trick she played us. She set up a great
tambour frame in her room, and began to work on an

</div>

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

<div style="font-size: 90%">

enormous piece of fine needlework. 'Sweethearts,' said she, Ulysses is
indeed dead, still, do not press me to marry again immediately; wait—for
I would not have my skill in needlework perish unrecorded—till I have
completed a pall for the hero Laertes, to be ready against the time when
death shall take him. He is very rich, and the women of the place will
talk if he is laid out without a pall.'

"This was what she said, and we assented; whereon we could see her,
working on her great web all day, but at night she would unpick the
stitches again by torchlight. She fooled us in this way for three years
and we never found her out, but as time wore on and she was now in her
fourth year, one of her maids, who knew what she was doing, told us, and
we caught her in the act of undoing her work; so she had to finish it,
whether she would or no.

"The suitors, therefore, make you this answer, that both you and the
Achæans may understand: 'Send your mother away, and bid her marry the
man of her own and her father's choice,' for I do not know what will
happen if she goes on plaguing us much longer with the airs she gives
herself on the score of the accomplishments Minerva has taught her, and
because she is so clever. We never yet heard of such a woman. We know
all about Tyro, Alcmena, Mycene, and the famous women of old, but they
were nothing to your mother any one of them. It was not fair of her to
treat us in that way, and as long as she continues in the mind with
which heaven has now endowed her, so long shall we go on eating up your
estate; and I do not see why she should change, for it is she who gets
the honour and glory, and it is you, not she, who lose all this
substance. We however, will not go about our business, nor anywhere
else, till she has made her choice and married some one or other of us"
(ii. 93-128).

</div>

Roughly, then, the authoress's version is that Penelope is an injured
innocent, and the suitors’, that she is an artful heartless flirt who
prefers having a hundred admirers rather than one husband. Which comes
nearest, not to the truth—for we may be sure the suitors could have said
a great deal more than the writer chooses to say they said—but to the
original story which she was sophisticating, and retelling in a way that
was more to her liking? The reader will have noted that on this occasion
the suitors seem to have been in the house after nightfall.

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

We cannot forget that when Telemachus first told Minerva about the
suitors, he admitted that his mother had not point blank said that she
would not marry again. "She does not," he says, "refuse the hateful
marriage, nor yet does she bring matters to an end" (i. 249, 250).
Apparently not; but if not, why not? Not to refuse at once is to court
courtship, and if she had not meant to court it she seems to have been
adept enough in the art of hoodwinking men to have found some means of
"bringing the matter to an end."

Sending pretty little messages to her admirers was not exactly the way
to get rid of them. Did she ever try snubbing? Nothing of the kind is
placed on record. Did she ever say, "Well, Antinous, whoever else I may
marry, you may make your mind easy that it will not be you." Then there
was boring—did she ever try that? Did she ever read them any of her
grandfather's letters? Did she sing them her own songs, or play them
music of her own composition? I have always found these courses
successful when I wanted to get rid of people. There are indeed signs
that something had been done in this direction, for the suitors say that
they cannot stand her high art nonsense and æsthetic rhodomontade any
longer, but it is more likely she had been trying to attract than to
repel. Did she set them by the ears by repeating with embellishments
what they had said to her about one another? Did she ask Antinous or
Eurymachus to sit to her for her web—give them a good stiff pose, make
them stick to it, and talk to them all the time? Did she find errands
for them to run, and then scold them, and say she did not want them? or
make them do commissions for her and forget to pay them, or keep on
sending them back to the shop to change things, and they had given ever
so much too much money and she wished she had gone and done it herself?
Did she insist on their attending family worship? In a word, did she do
a single one of the thousand things so astute a matron would have been
at no loss to hit upon if she had been in earnest about not wishing to
be courted? With one touch of common sense the whole fabric crumbles
into dust.

Telemachus in his rejoinder to the suitors does not deny

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

single one of their facts. He does not deny that his mother had been in
the habit of sending them encouraging messages, nor does he attempt to
explain her conduct about the web. This, then, being admitted, and it
being also transparent that Penelope had used no due diligence in
sending her lovers to the right about, can we avoid suspecting that
there is a screw loose somewhere, and that a story of very different
character is being manipulated to meet the exigencies of the writer? And
shall we go very far wrong if we conclude that according to the original
version, Penelope picked out her web, not so much in order to delay a
hateful marriage, as to prolong a very agreeable courtship?

It was no doubt because Laertes saw what was going on that he went to
live in the country and left off coming into the town (i. 189, 190), and
Penelope probably chose the particular form her work assumed in order to
ensure that he should not come near her. Why could she not set about
making a pall for somebody else? Was Laertes likely to continue calling,
when every time he did so he knew that Euryclea would only tell him her
mistress was upstairs working at his pall, but she would be down
directly? Do let the reader try and think it out a little for himself.

As for Laertes being so badly off as Anticlea says he was in Book xi.,
there is not one grain of truth in that story. The writer had to make
him out poor in order to explain his not having interfered to protect
Penelope, but Penelope's excuse for making her web was that he was a man
of large property. It is the same with the suitors. When it is desired
to explain Telemachus's not having tried in some way to recover from
them, they are so poor that it would be a waste of money to sue them;
when, on the other hand, the writer wants Penelope to air her woman's
wit by getting presents out of them (xviii. 274-280), just before
Ulysses kills them, they have any amount of money. One day more, and she
would have been too late. The writer knew that very well, but she was
not going to let Penelope lose her presents. She evidently looks upon
man as fair game, which male writers are much less apt to do. Of course
the first present she receives is a new dress.

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

Returning to Laertes, he must have had money, or how could Ulysses be so
rich? Where did Ulysses’ money come from? He could hardly have made much
before he went to Troy, and he does not appear to have sent anything
home thence. Nothing has been heard from him, and in Book x., <span
id="fr_58"></span>[\*](#fn_58.md) he appears to be bringing back his share
of plunder with him—in which case it was lost in the shipwreck off the
coast of the Thrinacian island. He seems to have had a dowry of some
kind with Penelope, for Telemachus say that if he sends his mother away
he shall have to refund it to his grandfather Icarius, and urges this
fact as one of the reasons for not sending her (ii. 132, 133); the
greater part, however, of Ulysses’ enormous wealth must have come to him
from Laertes, who we may be sure kept more for himself than he gave to
his son. What, then, had become of all this money—for Laertes seems to
have been a man of very frugal habits? The answer is that it was still
in Laertes’ hands, and the reason for his never coming to town now was
partly, no doubt, the pall; partly the scandalous life which his
daughter was leading; but mainly the writer's inability to explain his
non-interference unless she got him out of the way.

The account, again, which Ulysses’ mother gives him in Hades (xi. 180,
&c.) of what is going on in Ithaca shows a sense that there is something
to conceal. She says not one word about the suitors. All she says is
that Telemachus has to see a good deal of company, which is only
reasonable seeing that he is a magistrate and is asked out everywhere
himself (xi. 185-187). Nothing can be more coldly euphemistic, nor show
a fuller sense that there was a good deal more going on than the speaker
chose to say. If Anticlea had believed her daughter-in-law to be
innocent, she would have laid the whole situation before Ulysses.

It may be maintained that the suitors were not yet come to Ithaca in
force, for the visit to Hades occurs early in the wanderings of Ulysses,
and before his seven years’ sojourn with Calypso, so that Anticlea may
really have known nothing

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

about the suitors; but the writer has forgotten this, and has
represented Telemachus as already arrived at man's estate. In truth, at
this point Telemachus was at the utmost only twelve or thirteen years
old, and a children's party was all the entertainment he need either
receive or give. The writer has made a slip in her chronology, for
throughout the poem Telemachus is represented as only just arriving at
man's estate in the twentieth year of Ulysses’ absence. It is evident
that in describing the interview with Anticlea the writer has in her
mind the state of things existing just before Ulysses’ return, when the
suitors were in full riot. This, indeed, appears still more plainly
lower down, when Agamemnon, also in Hades, says that Telemachus was a
baby in arms when the Trojan war broke out, and that he must now be
grown up (xi. 448, 449).

The silence therefore of Ulysses’ mother is wilful so far as the writer
is concerned. She must have conceived of Anticlea as knowing all about
the suitors perfectly well—for she did not die till Telemachus was, by
her own account, old enough to be a magistrate. The explanation I
believe to be, that at the time Book xi. was written, the writer had as
yet no intention of adding Books i.–iv., and from line 187 of Book xiii.
to Book xxiv. but proposed to ignore the current scandalous stories
about Penelope, and to say as little as possible about her. I will deal
with this more fully when I come to the genesis and development of the
poem, but may as well say at once that the difficulty above pointed out
will have to remain unexplained except as a slip in chronology on the
part of a young writer who was piecing new work on to old. Any one but
the writer herself would have seen it and avoided it; indeed it is quite
possible that she came to see it, and did not think it worth her while
to be at the trouble of altering it. If this is so I, for one, shall
think none the worse of her.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_57"></span>[127:\*](aoto32.htm#fr_57.md) "Od." ii. 127-128 and
203-207.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[132:\*](aoto32.htm#fr_58.md) "Od." x. 40, this
passage is not given in my abridgement.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. The Character of Penelope, The Journey of
Telemachus](aoto33.md)
