[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Homer](../homer/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoto17) 
[Next](aoto19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1904675018/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Authoress of the Odyssey*, by Samuel Butler, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Book XIII

#### ULYSSES IS TAKEN BACK TO ITHACA BY THE PHÆACIANS.

Thus did Ulysses speak, and Alcinous immediately proposed that they
should make him still further presents. The expense, however, of these,
he said, should be borne by a levy or rate upon the public at large. The
guests assented, and then went home to bed.

Next morning they brought their presents of hardware <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_13:18">18</span></span> down to the ship,
and Alcinous saw them so stowed that they should not incommode the
rowers. There was then a second banquet at Alcinous’s house, but Ulysses
kept looking at the sun all the time, longing for it to set that he
might start on his way. At last he rose and addressed the Phæacians;
after thanking them, he concluded by saying that he hoped he should find
his wife on his return living among her friends in peace <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_13:43">43</span></span> and
quietness, <span id="fr_29"></span>[\*](#fn_29) and that the Phæacians
would continue to give satisfaction to their wives and children. He also
bade farewell to Arēte, and wished her all happiness with her children,
her people, and with King Alcinous.

When Ulysses reached the ship, a rug and sail were spread <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_13:73">73</span></span> for him, on which
he lay down, and immediately fell into a deep sleep—so deep as to
resemble death itself. The ship sped <span class="margnote"><span
id="an_13:80">80</span></span> on her way faster than a falcon's flight
and with the break of day they reached Ithaca.

Now in Ithaca there is a sheltered harbour in which a ship <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_13:96">96</span></span> can ride without
being even moored. At the head of this there is a large olive tree, near
which there is a cave sacred to the Naiads, where you may find their
cups and amphoræ of stone, and the stone looms whereon they weave their
robes of sea-purple—very curious. The wild bees, too, build their nests
in it. There is water in it all the year round, and it has two
entrances, one looking North, by which mortals can go down

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

into the cave, and the other towards the South, but men cannot enter by
it—it is the way taken by gods.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_13:112">112</span></span> The
sailors knew this harbour, and took the ship into it. They were rowing
so hard that they ran half her length on to the shore, and when they had
got out of her they took Ulysses off, still fast asleep on his rug and
sail, and laid him down on the ground. Hard by him they also laid all
the presents the Phæacians had made him; they left them by the roots of
the olive tree, a little out of the path, that no passer by might steal
them, and then went back to Scheria.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_13:125">125</span></span> Neptune
now saw what the Phæacians had done, and went to consult Jove how he
should be revenged. It was arranged that he should go to Scheria, turn
the ship into stone just as it <span class="margnote"><span
id="an_13:163">163</span></span> was coming into port, and root it in
the sea. So he did this, and the Phæacians said, "Alack, who has rooted
the ship in the sea just as it was coming in? We could see all of it a
minute ago."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_13:171">171</span></span> Then
Alcinous told them how Neptune had long ago threatened to do this to
some Phæacian ship on its return from giving an escort, and also to bury
their city under a high mountain as a punishment for giving escorts so
freely. The Phæacians, therefore, made ready great sacrifices to
Neptune, that he might have mercy upon them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_13:185">185</span></span> While they
were thus standing round the altar of the god, Ulysses woke in his own
land, but he had been away so long that he did not know it. Minerva,
too, had shed a thick mist round him so that he might remain unseen
while she told him how things were going on; for she did not want his
wife or anyone else to know of his return until he had taken his revenge
upon the suitors. Therefore she made everything look strange to him—the
long straight paths, the harbours with their shipping, the steep
precipices, and the trees.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_13:197">197</span></span> Ulysses
now stood up and wondered where he was. He did not believe he was in
Ithaca and complained bitterly of the Phæacians for having brought him
wrong. Then he counted all the tripods, cauldrons, gold, and raiment,
that they had given him, to see if he had been robbed; but everything
was there, and he was in dismay as to what he should do with them.

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> As he was thus in
doubt Minerva came up to him disguised as a young shepherd, so he asked
her what country he was in, and she answered that he was in Ithaca.

Ulysses said he had heard that there was such a place; he <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_13:256">256</span></span> told Minerva a
long lying story as to how he had come to be where she saw him, and on
this the goddess assumed the form of a woman, fair, stately, and wise,
and laughed at him for not knowing her. Ulysses answered that she was
not an easy person to recognise for she was continually changing her
appearance. Moreover, though she had been very good to him at Troy, she
had left him in the lurch ever since, until she had taken him into the
city of the Phæacians. "Do not," he said, "deceive me any further, but
tell me whether or no this is really Ithaca."

"You are always cunning and suspicious," replied the <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_13:329">329</span></span> goddess, "and
that is why I cannot find it in my heart to leave you. Any one else on
returning from a long voyage would have at once gone up to his house to
see his wife and children, but you do not seem to care about knowing
anything about them, and only think of testing your wife's fidelity. As
for my having left you in the lurch, I knew all the time that <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_13:339">339</span></span> you would get
home safely in the end, and I did not want to quarrel with my uncle
Neptune. I will now prove to you that you are in Ithaca—Here is the
harbour of the old merman <span class="margnote"><span
id="an_13:345">345</span></span> Phorcys, with the large olive tree at
the head of it; near it is the cave which is sacred to the Naiads; here,
again, is the <span class="margnote"><span
id="an_13:347">347</span></span> overarching cavern in which you have
sacrificed many a <span class="margnote"><span
id="an_13:349">349</span></span> hecatomb to the nymphs, and this is the
wooded mountain of Neritum." <span class="margnote"><span
id="an_13:351">351</span></span>

The goddess then dispersed the mist and let the prospect <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_13:352">352</span></span> be seen. Ulysses
was thus convinced, and Minerva helped him to hide the treasure which
the Phæacians had given him, by concealing it in the cave. Having done
this she bade Ulysses consider how he should kill the wicked suitors.
"They have been lording it," she said, "in your house this three
years, <span id="fr_30"></span>[\*](#fn_30)

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

paying court to your wife and making her gifts of wooing, <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_13:380">380</span></span> while she, poor
woman, though she flatters them, and holds out hopes to every man of
them by sending him messages, is really plunged in the deepest grief on
your account, and does not mean a word of what she says."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_13:382">382</span></span> "Great
heavens," replied Ulysses, "what a narrow escape I have had from meeting
the fate of Agamemnon. Stand by me, goddess, and advise me how I shall
be revenged."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_13:397">397</span></span> "I will
disguise you," said Minerva, "as a miserable old beggar so that no one
shall know you. When I have done so, go to your swineherd, who has been
always loyal to you and yours. You will find him with his pigs by the
fountain Arethusa near the rock that is called Raven. Meantime I will go
to Sparta and fetch Telemachus, who is gone thither to try and get news
of you."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_13:416">416</span></span> "But why,"
Ulysses answered, "did you not tell him, for you knew all about it?"

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_13:420">420</span></span> "Do not be
uneasy about him," she answered, "he is in the midst of great abundance.
I sent him, that he might get himself a good name by having gone."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_13:429">429</span></span> Minerva
then disguised Ulysses beyond all possible recognition, and the two
separated—she going to Sparta, and Ulysses to the abode of his
swineherd.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_29"></span>[57:\*](aoto18.htm#fr_29) σὺν ἀρτεμέεσσι
φίλοισιν.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[59:\*](aoto18.htm#fr_30) Minerva, in her desire
to minimise the time during which the suitors had been at Ulysses’
house, seems to have forgotten that they had been there ever since
Telemachus was quite a child ("Od." ii. 312-314).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XIV. Ulysses in the Hut of Eumæus](aoto19)
