[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Homer](../homer/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoto05) 
[Next](aoto07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1904675018/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Authoress of the Odyssey*, by Samuel Butler, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Story of the Odyssey

#### Book I

#### THE COUNCIL OF THE GODS—TELEMACHUS AND THE SUITORS IN THE HOUSE OF ULYSSES.

Tell me, O Muse, of that ingenious hero who met with many adventures
while trying to bring his men home after the Sack of Troy. He failed in
this, for the men perished through their own sheer folly in eating the
cattle of the Sun, and he himself, though he was longing to get back to
his wife, was now languishing in a lonely island, the abode of the nymph
Calypso. Calypso wanted him to marry her, and kept him with her for many
years, till at last all the gods took pity upon him except Neptune,
whose son Polyphemus he had blinded.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:21">21</span></span> Now it so
fell out that Neptune had gone to pay a visit to the Ethiopians, who lie
in two halves, one half looking on to the Atlantic and the other on to
the Indian Ocean. The other gods, therefore, held a council, and Jove
made them a speech <span class="margnote"><span
id="an_1:35">35</span></span> about the folly of Ægisthus in wooing
Clytemnestra and

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

murdering Agamemnon; finally, yielding to Minerva, he consented that
Ulysses should return to Ithaca.

"In that case," said Minerva, "we should send Mercury to <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_1:80">80</span></span> Calypso to tell her
what we have settled. I will also go to Ithaca and embolden Ulysses’ son
Telemachus to dismiss the suitors of his mother Penelope, who are
ruining him by their extravagance. Furthermore, I will send him to
Sparta and Pylos to seek news of his father, for this will get him a
good name."

The goddess then winged her way to the gates of Ulysses’ <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_1:96">96</span></span> house, disguised as
an old family friend, and found the suitors playing draughts in front of
the house and lording it in great style. Telemachus, seeing her standing
at the gate, went up to her, led her within, placed her spear in the
spear-stand against a strong bearing-post, brought her a seat, and set
refreshments before her.

Meanwhile the suitors came trooping into the sheltered <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_1:144">144</span></span> cloisters that
ran round the inner court; here, according to their wont, they feasted;
and when they had done eating they compelled Phemius, a famous bard, to
sing to them. On this Telemachus began talking quietly to Minerva; he
told her how his father's return seemed now quite hopeless, and
concluded by asking her name and country.

Minerva said she was Mentes, chief of the Taphians, and <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_1:178">178</span></span> was on her way to
Temesa <span id="fr_8"></span>[\*](#fn_8) with a cargo of iron, which
she should exchange for copper. She told Telemachus that her ship was
lying outside the town, under Mt. Neritum, <span
id="fr_9"></span>[†](#fn_9) in the <span class="margnote"><span
id="an_1:186">186</span></span> harbour that was called Rheithron. <span
id="fr_10"></span>[‡](#fn_10) "Go," she added, "and ask old Laertes, who
I hear is now living but poorly in the <span class="margnote"><span
id="an_1:189">189</span></span> country and never comes into the town;
he will tell you that I am an old friend of your father's."

She then said, "But who are all these people whom I see <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_1:224">224</span></span>

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

behaving so atrociously about your house? What is it all about? Their
conduct is enough to disgust any right-minded person."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:230">230</span></span> "They are
my mother's suitors," answered Telemachus, "and come from the
neighbouring islands of Dulichium, Same, and Zacynthus, as well as from
Ithaca itself. My mother does not say she will not marry again and
cannot bring her courtship to an end. So they are ruining me."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:252">252</span></span> Minerva was
very indignant, and advised him to fit out a ship and go to Pylos and
Sparta, seeking news of his father. "If," she said, "you hear of his
being alive, you can put up with all this extravagance for yet another
twelve months. If on the other hand you hear of his death, return at
once, send your <span class="margnote"><span
id="an_1:296">296</span></span> mother to her father's, and by fair
means or foul kill the suitors."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:306">306</span></span> Telemachus
thanked her for her advice, promised to take it, and pressed her to
prolong her visit. She explained that she could not possibly do so, and
then flew off into the air, like an eagle.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:325">325</span></span> Phemius was
still singing: he had chosen for his subject the disastrous return of
the Achæans from Troy. Penelope could hear him from her room upstairs,
and came down into the presence of the suitors holding a veil before her
face, and waited upon by two of her handmaids, one of whom stood on
either side of her. She stood by one of the bearing-posts that supported
the roof of the cloisters, and bade Phemius change his theme, which she
found too painful as reminding her of her lost husband.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:345">345</span></span> Telemachus
reasoned with her, and ended by desiring her to go upstairs again. "Go
back," he said, "within the house and see to your daily duties, your
loom, your distaff, and the ordering of your servants; for speech is
man's matter, and mine above all others, for it is I who am master
here."

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:360">360</span></span> On this
Penelope went back, with her women, wondering into the house, and as
soon as she was gone Telemachus challenged the suitors to meet him next
day in full assembly, that he might formally and publicly warn them to
leave his house.

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

Antinous and Eurymachus, their two leaders, both rejoined; <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_1:383">383</span></span> but presently
night fell, and the whole body of suitors left the house for their own
several abodes. When they were gone his old nurse Euryclea conducted
Telemachus by torch light to his bedroom, in a lofty tower, which
overlooked the outer courtyard and could be seen from far and near.

Euryclea had been bought by Laertes when she was quite <span
class="margnote"><span id="an_1:430">430</span></span> young; he had
given the worth of twenty oxen for her, and she was made as much of in
the house as his own wife was, but he did not take her to his bed, for
he respected his wife's displeasure. The good old woman showed
Telemachus to his room, and waited while he undressed. She took his
shirt from him, folded it carefully up, and hung it on a peg by his bed
side. This done, she left him to dream all night of his intended voyage.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[19:\*](aoto06.htm#fr_8) Temesa was on the West
side of the toe of Italy and was once famous for its copper mines,
which, however, were worked out in Strabo's time. See *Smith's
Dictionary of Ancient Geography*.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[19:†](aoto06.htm#fr_9) Reading Νηρίτῳ instead of
Νηίῳ, *cf*. Book xiii, 96, &c., and 351, where the same harbour is
obviously intended.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[19:‡](aoto06.htm#fr_10) *i.e.* "flowing," or
with a current in it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II. Assembly of the People of Ithaca](aoto07)
