[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Homer](../homer/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoto32) 
[Next](aoto34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1904675018/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Authoress of the Odyssey*, by Samuel Butler, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

#### Chapter VI

#### FURTHER CONSIDERATIONS REGARDING THE CHARACTER OF PENELOPE—THE JOURNEY OF TELEMACHUS TO LACEDÆMON.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> question whether or no the writer of
the "Odyssey" is putting her own construction on grosser versions of
Penelope's conduct current among her countrymen, has such an important
bearing on that of the writer's sex, that I shall bring further evidence
to show how impossible she finds it to conceal the fact that those who
knew Penelope best had no confidence in her.

Minerva with quick womanly instinct took in the situation at a glance,
and went straight to the point. On learning from Telemachus that
Penelope did not at once say she would not marry again, she wastes no
words, but says promptly, "If your mother's mind is set on marrying
again" (and surely this implies that the speaker had no doubts that it
was so set) "let her go back to her father" (i. 276). From this we may
infer that Minerva had not only formed her own opinion about Penelope's
intentions, but saw also that she meant taking her time about the
courtship, and was not likely to be brought to the point by any measures
less decisive than sending her back to her father's house.

We know, moreover, what Minerva thought of Penelope from another source.
Minerva appears to Telemachus in a dream when he is staying with King
Menelaus, and gives him to understand that his mother is on the point of
marrying Eurymachus, one of the suitors (xv. I-42). This was (so at
least we are intended to suppose) a wanton falsehood on Minerva's part.
Nevertheless if the matter had ended there, nothing probably would have
pleased Telemachus better; for in spite of his calling the marriage
"hateful," there can be no question that he would have been only too
thankful to get his mother out of the house, if she would go of her own
free will.

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Penelope says he
was continually urging her to marry and go, on the score of the expense
he was being put to by the protracted attentions of the suitors (xix.
530-534). Penelope indeed seems to have been such an adept at lying that
it is very difficult to know when to believe her, but Telemachus says
enough elsewhere to leave no doubt that, in spite of a certain decent
show of reluctance, he would have been glad that his mother should go.

Unfortunately Minerva's story does not end with saying that Penelope
means marrying Eurymachus; she adds that in this case she will probably
steal some of Telemachus's property. She says to him:

<div style="font-size: 90%">

"You know what women are; they always want to do the best they can for
the man who is married to them at the moment. They forget all about
their first husband and the children that they have had by him. Go home,
therefore, at once, and put everything in charge of the most respectable
housekeeper you can find, until it shall please heaven to send you a
wife of your own" (xv. 20-26).

</div>

This passage not only betrays a want of confidence in Penelope which is
out of keeping with her ostensible antecedents, but it goes far to show
that Minerva had read the *Cypria*, in which poem (now lost) we are told
that Helen did exactly what is here represented as likely to be done by
Penelope; but leaving this, surely if Penelope's antecedents had been
such as the writer wishes us to accept, Telemachus would have made a
very different answer to the one he actually made. He would have said,
"My dear Minerva, what a word has escaped the boundary of your teeth. My
mother steal my property and go off with an unprincipled scoundrel like
Eurymachus? No one can know better than yourself that she is the last
woman in the world to be capable of such conduct." And then he would
have awoke as from a hideous dream.

What, however, happens in reality? Telemachus does indeed wake up (xv.
43) in great distress, but it is about his property, not about his
mother. "Who steals my mother steals trash, but whoso filches from me my
family heirlooms," &c. He kicks poor Pisistratus to wake him, and says
they

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

must harness the horses and be off home at once. Pisistratus rejoins
that it is pitch dark; come what may they must really wait till morning.
Besides, they ought to say good bye to Menelaus, and get a present out
of him; he will be sure to give them one, if Telemachus will not be in
such an unreasonable hurry. Can anything show more clearly what was the
inner mind both of Minerva and Telemachus about Penelope—and also what
kind of ideas the audience had formed about her?

How differently, again, do Minerva and Telemachus regard the stealing.
Telemachus feels it acutely and at once. Minerva takes it as a matter of
course—but then the property was not hers. The authoress of the
"Odyssey" is never severe about theft. Minerva evidently thinks it not
nice of Penelope to want to marry again before it is known for certain
that Ulysses is dead, but she explains that Eurymachus has been
exceeding all the other suitors in the magnificence of his presents, and
has lately increased them (xv. 17, 18). After all, Penelope had a right
to please herself, and as long as she was going to be bond fide married,
she might steal as much as she could, without loss of dignity or
character. The writer put this view into Minerva's mouth as a reasonable
one for a woman to take. So perhaps it was, but it is not a man's view.

Here I will close my case—as much of it, that is to say, as I have been
able to give in the space at my disposal—for the view that the writer of
the "Odyssey" was whitewashing Penelope. As, however, we happen to be at
Lacedæmon let me say what more occurs to me in connection with the visit
of Telemachus to King Menelaus that bears on the question whether the
writer is a man or a woman.

When Telemachus and Nestor's son Pisistratus reached Lacedæmon at the
beginning of Book iv., Menelaus was celebrating the double marriage of
his son Megapenthes and of his daughter Hermione. The writer says:

<div style="font-size: 90%">

……they reached the low lying city of Lacedæmon, where they drove
straight to the abode of Menelaus, \[and found him in his own house
feasting with his many clansmen in honour of the wedding of his son, and
also that of his daughter whom he was

</div>

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

<div style="font-size: 90%">

giving in marriage to the son of that valiant warrior Achilles. He had
given his consent and promised her to him while he was still at Troy,
and now the gods were bringing the marriage about, so he was sending her
with chariots and horses to the city of the Myrmidons over whom
Achilles' son was reigning. For his only son he had found a bride from
Sparta, the daughter of Alector. This son, Megapenthes, was born to him
of a bondwoman, for heaven had vouchsafed Helen no more children after
she had borne Hermione who was fair as golden Venus herself.\] (iv.
1-14).

</div>

I have enclosed part of the above quotation in brackets not because I
have any doubt that the whole of it is by the same hand as the rest of
the poem, but because I am convinced that the bracketed lines were
interpolated by the writer after her work had been completed, or at any
rate after Books iv. and xv. had assumed their present shape. The reason
for the interpolation I take to be that she could not forgive herself
for having said nothing about Hermione, whose non-appearance in Book xv.
and in the rest of Book iv. she now attempts to explain by interpolating
the passage above quoted, and thus making her quit Lacedæmon for good
and all at the very beginning of this last named book. But whatever the
cause of the interpolation may have been, an interpolation it certainly
is, for nothing can be plainer from the rest of Book iv. than that there
were no festivities going on, and that the only guests were uninvited
ones—to wit Telemachus and Pisistratus.

True, the writer tried to cobble the matter by introducing lines
621-624, which in our texts are always enclosed in brackets as
suspected—I suppose because Aristarchus marked them with *obeli*, though
he did not venture to exclude them. The cobble, however, only makes
things worse, for it is obviously inadequate, and its abruptness puzzles
the reader.

Accepting, then, lines 2-19 and 621-624 of Book iv. as by the writer of
the rest of the poem, the reader will note how far more interesting she
finds the marriage of Hermione than that of Megapenthes—of whose bride,
by the way, there is no trace in Book xv. The marriage of the son is
indeed mentioned in the first instance before that of the daughter; but
surely this is only because υἱέος ἠδὲ θυγατρός lends itself more readily
to

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

a hexameter verse than any transposition of the nouns would do. Having
mentioned that both son and daughter are to be married, the writer at
once turns to Hermione, and appears only to marry Megapenthes because,
as his sister is being married, he may as well be married too. A male
writer would have married Megapenthes first and Hermione afterwards; nor
would he have thought it worth while to make a very awkward
interpolation in his poem merely in order to bring Hermione into it, for
by this time she must have been over thirty, and it would have been easy
to suppose that she had been married years ago during Menelaus's
absence.

As regards the second and shorter interpolation (iv. 621-624), it refers
to the day after the pretended marriages, and runs as follows:

<div style="font-size: 90%">

Thus did they converse \[and guests kept coming to the king's house.
They brought sheep and wine, while their wives had put up bread for them
to take with them. So they were busy cooking their dinners in the
courts.\]

</div>

Passing over the fact that on such a great occasion as the marriage of
his son and daughter, Menelaus would hardly expect his guests to bring
their own provisions with them (though he might expect them, as Alcinous
did, <span id="fr_59"></span>[\*](#fn_59) to do their own cooking) I
would ask the reader to note that the writer cannot keep the women out
even from a mere cobble. A man might have told us that the guests
brought meat and wine and bread, but his mind would not instinctively
turn to the guests’ wives putting up the bread for them.

I say nothing about the discrepancy between the chronology of
Telemachus's visit to Sparta, and of Ulysses’ journey from the island of
Calypso to Ithaca where he arrives one day before Telemachus does. The
reader will find it dwelt on in Colonel Mure's *Language and Literature
of Ancient Greece*, Vol. I., pp. 439, 440. I regard it as nothing more
than a slip on the part of a writer who felt that such slips are matters
of very

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

small importance; but I will call attention to the manner in which the
gorgeousness of Menelaus's establishment as described in Book iv. has
collapsed by the time we reach Book xv., though as far as I can
determine the length of Telemachus's stay with Menelaus, the interval
between the two books should not exceed one entire day.

When Telemachus has informed Menelaus that he must go home at once,
Menelaus presses his guests to stay and have something to eat before
they start; this, he tells them, will be not only more proper and more
comfortable for them, but also cheaper.

We know from "Il." vii. 470-475 that Menelaus used to sell wine when he
was before Troy, as also did Agamemnon, but there is a frank
*bourgeoisie* about this invitation which a male writer would have
avoided. Still franker, however, is the offer of Menelaus to take them
on a personally conducted tour round the Peloponesus. It will be very
profitable, for no one will send them away empty handed; every one will
give them either a bronze tripod or a cauldron, or two mules, or a gold
chalice (xv. 75-85). As for the refreshments which they are to have
immediately, the king explains that they will have to take potluck, but
says he will tell the women to see that there is enough for them, of
what there might happen to be in the house.

That is just like Menelaus's usual fussiness. Why could he not have left
it all to Helen? After reading the "Odyssey" I am not surprised at her
having run away with Paris; the only wonder is that a second great war
did not become necessary very shortly after the Trojan matter had been
ended. Surely the fact that two young bachelors were going to stay and
dine was not such a frightful discord but that it might have been taken
unprepared, or at any rate without the monarch's personal interference.
"Of what there may be in the house" indeed. We can see that the dinner
is not going to be profusely sumptuous. If there did not happen to be
anything good in the house—and I suspect this to have been the
case—Menelaus should have trusted Helen to send out and get something.
But there should have been no sending out about it;

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Menelaus and Helen
ought never to have had a meal without every conceivable delicacy.

What a come down, again, is there not as regards the butler Eteoneus. He
was not a real butler at all—he was only a kind of char-butler; he did
not sleep in the house (xv. 96), and for aught we know may have combined
a shop round the corner with his position in Menelaus’ household. Worse
than this, he had no footman, not even a boy, under him, for Menelaus
tells him to light the fire and set about cooking dinner (xv. 97, 98),
which he proceeds to do without one syllable of remonstrance. What has
become of Asphalion? Where are the men servants who attended to
Telemachus and Pisistratus on their arrival? They have to yoke their own
horses now. The upper and under women servants who appear at all
Odyssean meals are here as usual, but we hear nothing more of Adraste
Alcippe, and Phylo. It seems as though after describing the splendour of
Menelaus's house in Book iv. the writer's nerve has failed her, and by
Book xv. her instinctive thrift has reasserted itself.

And now let me return, as I said in Chapter iv. that I intended doing,
to the very singular—for I do not like to say feminine—nature of the
arrangements made by Minerva for her protégé in the matter of his voyage
to Pylos and Lacedæmon.

When Minerva first suggested it to him, she knew that Ulysses was on the
point of starting from Calypso's island for Scheria, and would be back
in Ithaca almost immediately. Yet she must needs choose this particular
moment, of all others, for sending Telemachus on a perilous voyage in
quest of news concerning him. We have seen how she preached to him; but
surely if Telemachus had known that she was all the time doing her very
utmost to make his voyage useless, he might have retorted with some
justice that whether he was going to be a fool henceforward or no, he
should not make such a fool of any young friend of his own as she was
now making of himself. Besides, he was to be away, if necessary, for
twelve months; yet here before he had been gone more than four or five
days, Minerva fills him with an agony of apprehension about his property
and sends him post haste back to Ithaca again.

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

The authoress seems to have felt the force of this, for in xiii. 416-419
she makes Ulysses remonstrate with Minerva in this very sense, and ask:

<div style="font-size: 90%">

"Why did you not tell him, for you knew all about it? Did you want him,
too, to go sailing about amid all kinds of hardships when others were
eating up his estate?"

Minerva answered, "Do not trouble yourself about him. I sent him that he
might be well spoken about for having gone. He is in no sort of
difficulty, but is staying comfortably with Menelaus, and is surrounded
with abundance of every kind. The suitors have put out to sea and are on
the watch for him, for they mean to kill him before he can get home. I
do not much think they will succeed, but rather that some of those who
are now eating up your estate will first find a grave themselves."

</div>

What she ought to have said was:

<div style="font-size: 90%">

"You stupid man, can you not understand that my poetess had set her
heart on bringing Helen of Troy into her poem, and could not see her way
to this without sending Telemachus to Sparta? I assure you that as soon
as ever he had interviewed Helen and Menelaus, I took—or will take, for
my poetess's chronology puzzles my poor head dreadfully—steps to bring
him back at once."

</div>

At the end of Book iv. Penelope shows a like tendency to complain of the
manner in which she is kept in the dark about information that might
easily have been vouchsafed to her.

Minerva has sent her a vision in the likeness of her sister Ipthime.
This vision comes to Penelope's bedside and tells her that her son shall
come safely home again. She immediately says:

<div style="font-size: 90%">

"If, then, you are a goddess, or have heard news from Heaven tell me
about that other unhappy one. Is he still alive, or is he dead and in
the house of Hades?"

And the vision answered, "I shall not tell you for certain whether he is
alive or dead, and there is no use in idle conversation."

</div>

On this it vanished through the thong-hole of the door.

I may add that I never quite understood the fastening of the Odyssean
bedroom door, till I found my bedroom at the Hotel Centrale, Trapani,
fastened in the Odyssean manner.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_59"></span>[138:\*](aoto33.htm#fr_59) "Od." viii. 38-40,
*cf*. also 6i. It would seem that Alcinous found the provisions which
the poorer guests cooked for themselves and ate outside in the court
yards. The magnates ate in the covered cloister, and were no doubt
cooked for.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Further Indications That the Writer Is a Young,
Headstrong, and Unmarried Woman](aoto34)
