[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Homer](../homer/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoto35) 
[Next](aoto37) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1904675018/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Authoress of the Odyssey*, by Samuel Butler, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

### Chapter IX

### THE IONIAN AND THE ÆGADEAN ISLANDS—THE VOYAGES OF ULYSSES SHOWN TO BE PRACTICALLY A SAIL ROUND SICILY FROM TRAPANI.

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> a later chapter I propose to show that
the writer of the "Odyssey" had the "Iliad" before her in the state in
which we have it now, unimportant copyists’ errors alone excepted. I
shall show that those Books on which most doubt has been cast by eminent
Homeric scholars both on the Continent and in England, are just as fully
and freely quoted from as those that are admitted to have been by Homer.
I have seen no sufficient reason alleged for doubting that the
Catalogues of "Il." <span class="smallcaps">II</span>. 484-877 formed
part of the poem as Homer left it, though it is quite likely that he may
have got some one with greater knowledge of Greece to help him. I intend
returning to this question, but for the present will ask the reader to
accept my assumption that the writer of the "Odyssey" knew the
Catalogues above referred to. The group of the Echinades and the Ionian
islands are described as follows in the Catalogue of the Achæan forces:

<div style="font-size: 90%">

And they of Dulichium, with the sacred Echinean islands, who dwelt
beyond the sea off Elis—these were led by Meges, peer of Mars, the son
of Phyleus, who had erewhile migrated to Dulichium in consequence of a
quarrel with his father. And with him there came forty ships.

Ulysses led the brave Cephallenians, who held Ithaca, wooded Neritum,
Crocylea, rugged Ægilips, Zacynthus, and Samos, <span
id="fr_64"></span>[\*](#fn_64) with the mainland also that is over
against the islands. These were led by Ulysses, peer of gods in counsel,
and with him came twelve ships ("Il." ii. 625-637).

</div>

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

The reader will note that Dulichium, which means "Long Island," does not
belong to the Ionian islands, but to the

<span id="img_17500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Map of the Ionian
Islands](tn/17500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/17500.jpg)  
Map of the Ionian Islands  
</span>

neighbouring group of the Echinades. Let us now see how the islands in
the neighbourhood of Ithaca are described in the "Odyssey." Ulysses says
(ix. 21-26):

<div style="font-size: 90%">

"I dwell in Ithaca, an island which contains a high mountain called
Neritum. In its neighbourhood there are other islands near to one
another, Dulichium, Same and Zacynthus. It lies on the horizon all
highest up in the sea towards the west, while the other islands lie away
from it to the east."

</div>

In the "Odyssey" there are never more than three islands besides Ithaca.
When mentioned all together they are always named in the order given
above—probably for reasons of scansion—but Dulichium is the most
important in the eyes of the writer, being more frequently mentioned
separately, and sending fifty-two suitors as against twenty-four from
Same, twenty from Zacynthus, and twelve from Ithaca itself (xvi.
247-251).

A glance at the map given above will show that there is no

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

island in the neighbourhood of Ithaca which can with poetical propriety
be held to have sent nearly as many suitors as the other three put
together. Least of all could Dulichium be so held. It seems, then, that
it was the name, and not the island, that the writer wanted; and further
that she wanted this so badly as to lay violent hands upon it and raid
it from another group.

Why should she strain so considerable a point in order to get hold of
it? The Iliadic catalogue omits three or four but leaves us six Ionian
islands. After suppressing the small islands of Crocylea and Ægilips,
there remained four, which it seems was the exact number that the writer
of the "Odyssey" meant to introduce; why, then, should not Neritum have
been good enough for her? It evidently did not answer her purpose, or
she would not, in the face of the catalogue, have stowed it away inside
Ithaca and gone further afield for her dominant island. These things are
never done without a reason, and in this case a reason is particularly
necessary, for it would have been more easy and also suitable,
considering the insignificance of the real Dulichium, to make the
fifty-two suitors come from the very considerable island of Neritum.

All difficulty is removed by supposing that the writer lived at Trapani
and was drawing the Ionian islands from the, to her, familiar Ægadean
group. A glance at the foregoing map will shew that she cannot have been
drawing from the real Ionian islands. Ithaca cannot be tortured into
lying "all highest up in the sea towards the West." It is completely
covered by Samos. Nor do the other islands lie away from it to the East.
It is clear, then, that the Ionian islands were not those present to the
mind of the writer, but we may infer in passing, firstly, that her
audience lived at a sufficient distance from Greece to make the
infraction of topographical accuracy a matter of no importance, and
secondly, that the islands from which she was in reality drawing lay,
like the true Ionian group, off a West coast.

I will now give a map of the islands off Trapani. I see that Professor
Freeman, in his map of the West coast of Sicily, as he supposes it to
have been in ancient times, has joined the

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Isola Grande to
the neighbouring main land, but he gives no authority for doing so. I
can find none in ancient writers, and having examined the ground see
nothing to indicate any change in the distribution of land and water, as
having taken place within measurable distance of our own times.

<span id="img_17700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Map of the Ægadean
Islands](tn/17700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/17700.jpg)  
Map of the Ægadean Islands  
</span>

The lofty and rugged island of Marettimo did duty in the writer's mind
for Ithaca, though, as I have said, when details are wanted they are
taken from Trapani and Mt. Eryx. The long island, now the Isola
Grande—low lying and wheat growing—was her Dulichium; this must have
been far the most important of the four as regards Trapani, being
accessible in all weathers, and probably already pregnant with the
subsequently famous city of Motya, of which hardly anything remains, but
which stood on the Southernmost of the two islands that lie between
Isola Grande and the mainland. The other two islands stood for Same and
Zacynthus, but which was which I have not been able to determine.
Marettimo can hardly be seen from Trapani, being almost entirely hidden
by Levanzo. From the heights, however, of Mt. Eryx, with which, for
other reasons, I suppose the writer to have been familiar, it is seen
"on the horizon, all highest up in the sea towards the West." I do not
doubt the poetess was describing it as she knew it from the top of Mt.
Eryx, and as the reader may still see it. The rough sketch on the
following page will explain πανυπεπτάτη εἰν ἁλὶ better than words can
do; the two small islands shown just over Trapani are the Formiche,
which I take to be the second rock thrown by Polyphemus.

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

<span id="img_17800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Sketch of Trapani
from Mt. Eryx](tn/17800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/17800.jpg)  
Sketch of Trapani from Mt. Eryx  
</span>

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

If what I have said above is not enough to satisfy the reader that the
writer of the "Odyssey" was drawing the Ionian islands from the Ægadean,
nothing that I can add is likely to convince him. I will therefore now
go on to my fourth point, namely, that the voyages of Ulysses are, as
nearly as the writer could make them, a voyage round Sicily, from
Trapani by the North coast, through the straits of Messina, to the
island of Pantellaria, and so back to Trapani, beyond which we need not
go, for Ithaca and Scheria are, both of them, Trapani, as I have already
shown.

The main episodes of the voyage occur in the following order. 1. The
Cicons. 2. The Lotus-eaters, arrived at after passing the island of
Cythera. 3. The island where Ulysses and his men hunted the goats, and
the adventure with Polyphemus. 4. The island of Æolus, and a ten days'
sail towards the East with a fair wind all the time, till Ithaca is well
in sight, followed by an immediate return to the island from which
Ulysses had started. This sail to Ithaca over the toe of Italy and the
island of Samos has no topographical significance except as showing that
the writer conceived of the island of Æolus as lying a long way West of
Ithaca. The episode is introduced merely for the purpose of bringing the
cup close to Ulysses’ lips and then dashing it from them. 5. The
Læstrygonians. 6. The island of Circe and the journey to Hades, which
last is again without topographical significance, being nothing but a
peg on which to hang colloquies with the dead, and bringing us back to
the island of Circe. 7. The Sirens. 8. Scylla and Charybdis. 9. The
cattle of the Sun. 10. The island of Calypso. xi. Scheria and Ithaca.

There is no difference of opinion among scholars as to the sites of the
Cicons, the island of Cythera, and the Lotus-eaters; the reader will,
therefore, see that we are taken without waste of time to a point at no
great distance from Sicily—the contrary winds off Cape Malea (ix. 81)
being apparently raised on purpose to take us away from Greece. It is
not quite easy to see why the Cicons were introduced unless it was that
Ulysses might become possessed of the wondrous wine of

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ismarus with which
he intoxicated Polyphemus. The wine of this neighbourhood was famous
many centuries after the "Odyssey" was written, and presumably was so in
the time of the "Odyssey" itself. A gasconading story of this wine may
well have existed among the people of Trapani which might prompt the
writer to introduce it, poke fun at it and make Polyphemus drunk with
it.

Or again, knowing as we do from Thucydides (vi. 2) that the original
Sican inhabitants of this part of Sicily received an influx of fugitives
from the neighbourhood of Troy after the fall of that city, it is
possible that traditions may have existed among the writer's audience to
the effect that some of them were of Cicon origin, and she may have
wished to flatter them by telling them that they had repulsed Ulysses.
Nothing can be said with any confidence upon this head; all we may note
is that the country is quite featureless, and hence does not suggest
drawing from personal knowledge, any more than does the land of the
Lotus-eaters.

On leaving the land of the Lotus-eaters the full consent which has
accompanied us so far fails us; nevertheless a considerable weight of
authority, ancient, medieval, and modern, carries us to the island of
Favognana, anciently called Ægusa or Goat Island, as the one on which
Ulysses and his men hunted the goats. Indeed this incident seems
introduced as though purposely to suggest the Ægadean or "goat" islands
to the audience, as also does the line iv. 606 in which Ithaca—that is
to say, in reality, the island of Marettimo—is said to be an island fit
for goats. <span id="fr_65"></span>[\*](#fn_65)

A very considerable consent accompanies us also to Mt. Eryx as the site
of the adventure with Polyphemus. Here, and with the island on which the
goats were hunted, the local colour is stronger than anywhere else in
Ulysses’ voyages, as indeed might be reasonably expected from a writer
whom I have shown to have been so intimately acquainted with the
neighbourhood of Trapani.

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

<span id="img_18100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![The Voyages of
Ulysses](tn/18100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/18100.jpg)  
The Voyages of Ulysses  
</span>

Even partial consent, however, now fails us. The island of 'Bolus and
the country of the Læstrygonians have been placed in almost as many
sites as there have been writers upon the "Odyssey." I shall return to
these on a later page, as also to the island of Favognana and the
Cyclopes. My present object is to show how much of the voyage we may
consider as known, how much as supported by considerable authority, and
how much we have yet to find.

The partial consent which we lost at the cave of Polyphemus returns to
us with the island of Circe, the Sirens and the Wandering Cliffs, which
are generally considered to have been the Lipari islands, and universal
consent rejoins us for Scylla and Charybdis. I can hardly say that
consent is universal for placing the cattle of the Sun on the East coast
of Sicily, somewhere about Tauromenium now Taormina; but it is very
general, and is so obviously well founded that I shall claim this point
as certain; for the name of the island sufficiently indicates Sicily,
the winds that detain Ulysses show him to have been on an East coast,
and the South wind that blew him back to Charybdis in a night shows that
he was supposed to be at no great distance South of the Straits of
Messina.

The island of Calypso has been generally held to be Malta, but on no
foundation either internal or external to the "Odyssey," I shall,
therefore, consider Calypso's island as yet to find.

I have no consent for Scheria being Trapani, but after what I have
written above shall claim this point too as certain. The map, therefore,
which I here give will show the reader how we stand as regards assent
and otherwise ascertained points. I have used strong lines for the parts
of the voyage that may be claimed as certain, interrupted lines for the
parts that are backed by considerable authority, and dotted lines for
those which I would supply. I have made Ulysses approach Trapani from
the South, on the strength of Calypso's directions to him that he was to
sail towards the Great Bear, keeping it on his left hand (v. 276,
277). <span id="fr_66"></span>[\*](#fn_66) This indicates certainly a

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Northerly, and one
would say a N.N. Easterly, course; at any rate such a course would in no
way conflict with Calypso's instructions. Perhaps I had better give the
words of the poem which run:

<div style="font-size: 90%">

He sat keeping his eyes upon the Pleiades, <span
id="fr_67"></span>[\*](#fn_67) late setting Boötes, and on the Bear,
also called the Wain, which turns round and round facing Orion, and
alone never sinks beneath the sea—for Calypso had bidden him steer by
this, keeping it on his left hand (v. 272-277).

</div>

All the places in Ulysses’ voyage have been generally referred to some
actual locality, which was present to the writer's mind either under its
own or a fictitious name; and when we have once got into Sicilian
waters, all those about which there is any considerable amount of
consent, or which we may now, with or without consent, claim as
ascertained—I mean Circe's island, the Sirens, Scylla and Charybdis, the
Thrinacian island, Scheria and Ithaca are on, or hard by, the coast of
Sicily. Is not the temptation irresistible to think that the three
unknown sites—the island of Æolus, the Land of the Læstrygonians and the
island of Calypso—are also real places however fictitious the names may
be, and to hold that they should be looked for on, or near, the coast of
Sicily in the same order as that in which we find them described?

If, on the hypothesis that Favognana and Mt. Eryx are the true sites of
the island on which Ulysses and his men hunted the goats, and of the
cave of Polyphemus, we are immediately led to others, in due order of
sequence, which commend themselves as being those of the island of
Æolus, the Land of the Læstrygonians, Circe's island, the other
established sites, and

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

lastly Calypso's island, should we not conclude, at any rate
provisionally, that the hypothesis is a true one?

I will so conclude, and proceed to look for the island of Æolus in some
island, apparently solitary, a good way to the West of the Lipari
islands, and at no great distance from Mt. Eryx.

I should first correct a very general misapprehension. The word πλωτῇ
(x. 3) has been unduly pressed into meaning that the island floated
about, and thus changed its place. But if so singular a phenomenon were
intended more would have been made of it. It would not have been dealt
with in a single word, admitting easy explanation as mere metaphor. No
one presses the "swiftly moving" islands of xv. 299 into meaning that
the islands actually moved. All that is meant is that they "seemed to
move" as the ship flew past them, and so with the island of Æolus—"it
seemed to float on the horizon." It shows no signs of having moved
during the month that Ulysses stayed on it, and when he returns to it
after an absence of three weeks, we have no hint given of its having
changed its place. <span id="fr_68"></span>[\*](#fn_68) I conclude,
therefore, that it was as fixed as any other island, and proceed to look
for it.

This is no hard matter, for the island of Ustica offers itself at once.
In clear weather it can be faintly seen from Mt. Eryx, and would
naturally have impressed itself on the mind of a writer to whom Eryx and
its neighbourhood was all in all. It is in the quarter from which the
winds blow most fiercely on Trapani during the winter months, and may
fitly have been selected by a Trapanese writer as the home of the winds.
The distance, a long way West of the Lipari islands, and a greatly
longer distance West of Ithaca, is all as it should be. I accept it,
therefore, and go on to look for the land of the Læstrygonians, and
their city Telepylus, at some point on the North coast of Sicily between
Ustica and the Lipari islands.

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

The name of the Læstrygonians or Workers in Stone, <span
id="fr_69"></span>[\*](#fn_69) like all names of places or people inside
Sicily, is fictitious. If there had ever been any people really so
called in Sicily Thucydides would have been able to find out some
little, at any rate, about them; whereas he declares (vi. 2) that he
cannot do so, and subrisively refers his readers to the poets, or
whatever other source of information they can command. Clearly he does
not believe in them except as poetical fictions concerning the most
ancient inhabitants of Sicily—of whom none are known to him as more
ancient than the Sicans.

But why should not the writer of the "Odyssey" be referring under names
of her own coinage to these same Sicans, for both the Cyclopes and the
Læstrygonians? The name of the Læstrygonian city, Telepylus, is
certainly fictitious. It means "with gates far asunder," which can only
be an *ex post facto* name: a city receives its name long before it is
known what it will prove to be in the matter of growth. All that we can
gather from the name is that the writer of the "Odyssey" intended her
audience to understand that the city was large.

Its inhabitants, like the Cyclopes, are giants and ogres. They being
giants, we should look for remains of megalithic buildings, and being
ogres we should suspect identity of race between them and the Cyclopes
whom they so closely resemble. The writer hates them both, and looks
down upon the Cyclopes much as the Normans looked down upon the Saxons
for some generations after the Conquest.

The Cyclopes appear to have been subdued and outlawed; not so the
Læstrygonians. These last are a flourishing and very industrious people,
who work by night as well as by day (x. 84-86). There is a poor little
prehistoric joke about them, to the effect that in their country a man
could earn double wages if he could only do without sleep. Moreover they
were so wealthy and luxurious that they used to have relays of fresh

<span id="img_18400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![WALL AT CEFALÙ,
RISING FROM THE SEA](tn/18400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/18400.jpg)  
WALL AT CEFALÙ, RISING FROM THE SEA  
</span>

<span id="img_18500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![MEGALITHIC REMAINS
ON THE MOUNTAIN BEHIND CEFALÙ](tn/18500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/18500.jpg)  
MEGALITHIC REMAINS ON THE MOUNTAIN BEHIND CEFALÙ  
</span>

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

milk (x. 82, 83), instead of being contented with a morning supply, as
Sicilian towns generally are even at the present day. More than this I
cannot collect about them from the "Odyssey."

Can we, then, find a place answering to the description of Telepylus, on
the North coast of Sicily between Ustica and the island of Lipari? I
have no hesitation in saying that Cefalù will give us .all we want. It
has two fine examples of megalithic work. They must both of them be
centuries earlier than the "Odyssey." They are about three quarters of a
mile apart, one, a wall rising from the sea, the other a building on the
hill, behind the town, in part polygonal, and very rude, and in part of
much later and singularly exquisite work—the later work being generally
held to be of the Mycenæan age.

The city, therefore, must have been for those days extensive. The whole
modern town is called among the common people Portazza, *i.e.*,
*portaccia*, or "wide gate," which is too like a corrupt mistranslation
of Telepylus to allow of my passing it over.

There can, I think, be no doubt that Eryx and Cefalù were built in a
very remote age by people of the same race. I have seen no other
megalithic remains in Sicily than at the two places just named; I have
seen remains of ancient buildings at Collesano about fifteen miles S.W.
of Cefalù, which are commonly called Cyclopean, but they are very
doubtful, and Dr. Orsi suspects them, I have little doubt correctly, to
be Byzantine. I have also seen a few, neither striking nor yet certain
ones, at Capo Schisò near Taormina. What little is left of the walls of
Segesta is of a greatly later age, and I find it very difficult to think
that Segesta was in existence when the "Odyssey" was being
written. <span id="fr_70"></span>[\*](#fn_70) I have heard of the
remains of a Cyclopean acropolis behind Termini, a monograph about which
by Sigr. Luigi Mauceri will be found in the British Museum. At Isnello
two hours inland from Collesano a very early necropolis has been
discovered not long since, and the

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

efforts of local archæologists will, I doubt not, lead to the finding of
others at or near many of the little known mountain sites in the North
of Sicily; Dr. Orsi, indeed, has recently discovered the remains of a
megalithic house at Pantalica some forty miles inland from Syracuse. No
megalithic work, however, that has yet been found will compare in
importance with the remains at Eryx and Cefalù, nor does it seem likely
that any other such remains will be discovered.

Bearing in mind, then, the situation of Cefalù both as regards Ustica
and Lipari, the affinity between its founders and those of Eryx as
evidenced by existing remains, its great extent, and the name it still
bears among the common people, I do not hesitate to accept it as the
city of the Læstrygonians, nor does it affect me that the details of the
harbour as given in the "Odyssey" have no correspondence with the place
itself. I may mention that when my friend, Mr. H. F. Jones, and myself
were at Cefalù in the spring of 1896, we met a flock of goats coming
into the town to be milked about five in the afternoon, and on our
return from a walk we met another flock coming out after having been
just milked. These two flocks must have met, and the shepherds must have
saluted one another as in x. 82, 83, but unfortunately we did not happen
to be at their point of meeting.

On enquiry we found that relays of fresh milk come into the town from
six till eight in the morning, and from five till seven in the
afternoon, and were told that there was no other town known to our
informant which had more than a morning supply. At Trapani, a town with
30,000 inhabitants, there is no evening supply, and though I have no
doubt that fresh milk can be had in the evening at Palermo, Catania, and
Syracuse, it is not easily procurable even in these large towns, while
in smaller ones, so far as I know them, it is not to be had at all. At
Rome I asked the landlord of my hotel whether the goats came to be
milked in the evening as in the morning, and he said it would be only in
exceptional cases that they would do so.

I have now only to find the island of Calypso, which in the "Odyssey" is
called the "navel" of the sea (i. 50), a metaphor

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

absolutely impossible of application to any but a solitary island, and
prohibitive of either Gozo or Malta, or of the other two small islands
of the same group. Calypso lives by herself and is cut off from every
one else—Ulysses cannot be supposed to have other islands in sight as he
sits on the sea shore weeping and looking out upon the waves. Moreover,
Scheria being fixed at Trapani, Ulysses could never get there from
either Gozo or Malta if he followed the directions of Calypso and
steered towards the Great Bear, keeping it on his left hand. We are,
therefore, compelled to look for some other island, which shall be more
solitary and more S.S.W. of Trapani.

The island of Pantellaria fulfils both these conditions; true, in clear
weather the coast of Africa can sometimes be just made out—I have seen
it from Pantellaria, but it is not sufficiently near or sufficiently
often seen to have obtruded itself on Ulysses’ notice; still less so is
Mt. Eryx, which can also be seen sometimes, but very rarely. No doubt
the island is represented as being a good deal further off Scheria than
it really was, but the liberty taken in this respect is not greater than
is generally conceded in poetry.

As, therefore, the writer begins the voyage, when Ulysses is once clear
of Trapani, with an island interesting to herself and her audience as
being well within their ken, so she ends it with another island which
has like claims on her and their attention.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_64"></span>[174:\*](aoto36.htm#fr_64) In the "Odyssey" more
generally called Same.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[180:\*](aoto36.htm#fr_65) The name Favognana is
derived from Favonius, this wind blowing on to Trapani from off the
island. It is, however, also and perhaps most frequently called
Favignana.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[181:\*](aoto36.htm#fr_66) Gr.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Τὴν γὰρ δή μιν ἄνωγε Καλυψὼ δῖα θεάων  
ποντοπορευέμεναι ἐπ᾽ ἀριστερὰ χειρὸς ἔχοντα

</div>

<span id="fn_67"></span>[182:\*](aoto36.htm#fr_67) We may neglect the
Pleiades, as introduced simply because they are in the Iliadic passage
(xviii. 486-489) which the writer of the "Odyssey" is adopting with no
other change than taking out the Hyades and Orion, and substituting
Boötes. This she was bound to do, for she could not make Ulysses steer
towards both the Bear and Orion, when she is just going to tell us, as
the "Iliad" does, that Orion is on the other side of the sky. The
Pleiades she has allowed to stand—which of us knows in what quarter of
the heavens (let alone the Precession of the Equinoxes) they are to be
looked for?—and it is made quite clear that the Bear is the
constellation by which Ulysses is steering.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[183:\*](aoto36.htm#fr_68) At Messina a few
months since I saw a printed handbill about the hours when the boat
would start for Reggio, in which Italy was called "Terra firma," as
though a sense of instability attached itself to any island.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[184:\*](aoto36.htm#fr_69) The name seems
derived from λᾶας, τρυγάω, and αἶα, as Œnotria is from οἶνος, τρυγάω,
and αἶα. I have read, but forget where, that Œnotria is only a Greek
rendering of Italia, which is derived from *vites*, *alo*, and some
Latin equivalent for αἶα. The modern Italian word *lastricare*, "to pave
roads with stone," is probably derived from the same roots as
*Læstrygonian*.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[185:\*](aoto36.htm#fr_70) Segesta would have
been seen from the top of Mt. Eryx gleaming in the summer sunset, and I
think there would have been some kind of allusion to it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Further Details Regarding the Voyages of
Ulysses](aoto37)
