[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sjf02)  [Next](sjf04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

# PIRQE ABOTH.

### CHAPTER I.

Some passages of doubtful genuineness are printed in italics. Omissions
of the manuscript of Chapters I-V are supplied in smaller type.

1\. Moses received the Thorah from Sinai, and he delivered it to
Jehoshua', and Jehoshua' to the elders, and the elders to the prophets,
and the prophets delivered it to the men of the Great Synagogue. They
said three things: Be deliberate in judgment; and raise up many
disciples; and make a fence to the Thorah.

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

2\. Shime'on ha-Çaddiq was of the remnants of the Great Synagogue. He
used to say, On three things the world is stayed; on the Thorah, and on
the Worship, and on the bestowal of Kindnesses.

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

3\. Antigonus of Soko received from Shime'on ha-Çaddiq. He used to say,
Be not as slaves that minister to the lord with a view to receive
recompense; but be as slaves that minister to the lord without a view to
receives recompense; and let the fear of Heaven be upon you.

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

4\. Jose ben Jo'ezer of Çeredah and Jose ben Jochanan of Jerusalem
received from them. Jose ben Jo'ezer of Çeredah said, Let thy house be a
meeting-house for the wise; and powder thyself in the dust of their
feet; and drink their words with thirstiness.

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

5\. Jose ben Jochanan of Jerusalem said, Let thy house be opened wide;
and let the needy be thy household; and prolong not converse with woman.

6\.

His own wife, they meant, much less his neighbour's

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

wife.) Hence the wise have said, Each time that the man prolongs
converse with the woman he causes evil to himself, and desists from
words of Thorah, and in the end he inherits Gehinnom.

7\. Jehoshua' ben Perachia and Matthai the Arbelite received from them.
Jehoshua' ben Perachiah said, Make unto thyself a master; and possess
thyself of an associate; and judge every man in the scale of merit.

8\. Matthai the Arbelite said, Withdraw from an evil neighbour; and
associate not with the wicked;. and grow not thoughtless of retribution.

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

9\. Jehudah ben Tabai and Shime'on ben Shatach received from them.
Jehudah ben Tabai said, Make not thyself as them that predispose the
judges; and while the litigants stand before thee, let them be in thine
eyes as guilty; and when dismissed from before thee let them be in thine
eyes as righteous, because that they have received the doom upon them.

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

10\. Shime'on ben Shatach said, Make full examination of the witnesses;
but be guarded in thy words, perchance from them they may learn to lie.

11\. Shema'iah and Abtalion received from them. Shema'iah said, Love
work; and hate lordship; and make not thyself known to the government.

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

12\. Abtalion said, Ye wise, be guarded in your words; perchance ye may
incur the debt of exile, and be exiled to the place of evil waters; and
the disciples that come after you may drink and die, and the Name of
Heaven be profaned.

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

13\. Hillel and Shammai received from them. Hillel said, Be of the
disciples of Aharon; loving peace, and pursuing

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

peace; loving mankind, and bringing them nigh to the Thorah.

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

14\. He used to say, A name made great is a name destroyed; he who
increases not decreases; and he who will

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

not learn (*or* teach) deserves slaughter; and he who serves himself
with the tiara perishes.

15\. He used to say, If I am not for myself who is for me? and being for
my own self what am I? If not now when?

16\. Shammai said, Make thy Thorah an ordinance; say

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

little and do much; and receive every man with a pleasant expression of
countenance.

17\. Rabban Gamliel said, Make to thyself a master, and be quit of
doubt; and tithe not much by estimation.

18\. Shime'on his son said, All my days I have grown up

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

amongst the wise, and have not found aught good for a man but silence;
not learning but doing is the groundwork; and whoso multiplies words
occasions sin.

19\. Rabban Shime'on ben Gamliel said, On three things the world stands;
on Judgment, and on Truth, and on Peace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](sjf04.md)
