[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sjf05)  [Next](sjf07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

# CHAPTER IV.

1\. Ben Zoma said, Who is wise? He that learns from every man; for it is
said, From all my teachers I gat understanding (Ps. cxix. 99).

2\. Who is mighty? He that subdues his nature; for it

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

is said, He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty; and he that
ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a city (Prov. xvi. 32).

3\. Who is rich? He that is contented with his lot; for it is said, When
thou eatest the labour of thy hands, happy art thou, and it shall be
well with thee (Ps. cxxviii. 2). "Happy art thou" in this world; "and it
shall be well with thee" in the world to comes.

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

4\. Who is honoured? He that honours mankind; for it is said, For them
that honour me I will honour, and they that despise me shall be lightly
esteemed (I Sam. ii. 30).

5\. Ben 'Azzai said, Hasten to a slight precept, and flee from
transgression; for precept induces precept, and transgression

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

induces transgression; for the reward of precept is precept, and the
reward of transgression is transgression.

6\. He used to say, Despise not any man, and carp not at any thing; for
thou wilt find that there is not a man that has not his hour, and not a
thing that has not its place.

7\. R. Levitas of Jabneh said, Be exceeding lowly of spirit, for the
hope of man is the worm. R. Jochanan ben Baroqah said, Whoso profanes
the name of Heaven in secret, they punish him openly. The erring is as
the presumptuous, in profanation of the NAME.

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

8\. R. Ishma'el his son said, He that learns in order to

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

teach, they grant him the faculty to learn and to teach: he that learns
in order to practise, they grant him the faculty to learn, and to teach,
and to practise.

9\. R. Çadoq said, Make them not a crown, to glory in them; nor an ax,
to live by them. And thus was Hillel wont to say, And he who serves
himself with the tiara perishes. Lo, whosoever makes profit from words
of Thorah removes his life from the world.

10\. R. Jose said, Whosoever honours the Thorah is himself held in
honour with men; and whosoever dishonours the Thorah is himself
dishonoured with men.

11\. R. Ishma'el said, He that refrains himself from judgment, frees
himself from enmity, and rapine, and false swearing; and he that is
arrogant in decision is foolish, wicked, and puffed up in spirit.

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

12\. He used to say, Judge not alone, for none may judge alone save One;
and say not, Accept ye my opinion, for they are free-to-choose, and not
thou.

13\. R. Jochanan said, Whosoever fulfils the Thorah in poverty, will at
length fulfil it in wealth; and whosoever neglects the Thorah in wealth,
will at length neglect it in poverty.

14\. R. Meir said, Have little business, and be busied in Thorah; and be
lowly in spirit unto every man; and if thou idlest from the Thorah, thou
wilt have idlers many against thee; and if thou labourest in the Thorah,
He hath much reward to give unto thee.

15\. R. Li'ezer ben Jacob said, He who performs one precept has gotten
to himself one advocate; and he who

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

commits one transgression has gotten to himself one accuser. Repentance
and good works are as a shield against punishment.

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

16\. R. Jochanan Sandalarius said, Whatsoever assemblage is in the name
of duty will in the end be established; and that which is not in the
name of duty will not in the end be established.

17\. R. La'zar said, Let the honour of thy disciple be dear unto thee as
the honour of thine associate; and the honour of

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

thine associate as the fear of thy master; and the fear of thy master as
the fear of Heaven.

18\. R. Jehudah said, Be careful in Thalmud, for error in Thalmud
amounts to sin.

19\. R. Shime'on said, There are three crowns: the crown of Thorah, and
the crown of Priesthood, and the crown of Royalty (Ex. xxv. 10, 11; xxx.
1, 3; xxv. 23, 24); but the crown of a good name mounts above them
(Eccl. vii. 1).

20\. R. Nehorai said, Betake thyself to a place of Thorah, and say not
that it shall come after thee; for thine associates

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

will confirm it unto thee; and lean not unto thine own understanding
(Prov. iii. 5).

21\. R. Jannai said, Neither the security of the wicked, nor the
afflictions of the righteous, are in our hand.

22\. R. Matthiah ben Charash said, Be beforehand in saluting every man;
and be a tail to lions, and not a head to foxes.

23\. R. Jacob said, This world is like a vestibule before

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

the world to come; prepare thyself at the vestibule, that thou mayest be
admitted into the hall.

24\. He used to say, Better is one hour of repentance and good works in
this world than all the life of the world to come; better is one hour of
refreshment of spirit in the world to come than all the life of this
world.

25\. R. Shime'on ben Ele'azar said, Conciliate not thy friend in the
hour of his passion; and console him not in the hour when his dead is
laid out before him; and "interrogate" him not in the hour of his vow;
and strive not to see him in the hour of his disgrace.

26\. Shemuel ha-Qatan said, Rejoice not when thine

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

enemy falleth, and let not thine heart be glad when he stumbleth (Prov.
xxiv. 17).

27\. Elisha' ben Abiyyah said, He who learns as a lad, to what is he
like? to ink written on fresh paper; and he who learns when old, to what
is he like? to ink written on used paper.

28\. R. Jose ben Jehudah of Kaphar ha-Babli said, He who learns from the
young, to what is he like? to one that eats unripe grapes, and drinks
wine from his vat; and he who learns from the old, to what is he like?
to one that eats ripened grapes, and drinks old wine.

29\. R. said, Regard not the flask, but what is therein; there is a new
flask that is full of old (wine), and an old one in which there is not
even new.

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

30\. R. Li'ezer ha-Qappar said, Jealousy, and lust, and ambition, put a
man out of the world.

31\. He used to say, The born are to die; and the dead to revive; and
the living to be judged; for to know, and to notify, and that it may be
known, that He is the framer, and He the

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

creator, and He the discerner, and He the judge, and He the witness, and
He the "adversary," and He is about to judge with whom there is no
iniquity, nor forgetfulness, nor respect of persons, nor taking of a
bribe, for all is His, and know that all is according to plan.

32\. Let not thine imagination assure thee that the grave is an asylum;
for perforce thou wast framed (Jer. xviii. 6), and perforce thou wast
born, and perforce thou livest, and perforce thou diest, and perforce
thou art about to give account and reckoning before the King of the
kings of kings, the Holy One, blessed is He.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V.](sjf07)
