[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Wicca &
Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](idr02) 
[Next](idr04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# IRISH DRUIDS

Who were the Druids?

This question has agitated the minds of the learned for a long period;
and various, as well as contradictory, have been the replies. Tradition
preserves their memory as of a pious and superior race, prominently
associated with the British Isles and France, and, in a lesser degree,
with Belgium, Holland, Germany, and the lands of Scandinavia.

Much romance has been long attached to them. We hear their chants in the
Stone Circles. We listen to the heaven-inspired utterances of the
Archdruid, as be stands on the capstone of a cromlech, in the eye of the
sun, surrounded by the white-robed throng, with the bowed worshippers
afar. We see the golden sickle reverently cutting off the sacred
mistletoe. We follow, in imagination, the solemn procession, headed by
the cross-bearer. We look under the old oak at the aged Druid,
instructing disciples in mystic lore, in verses never to be committed to
writing. We gaze upon the assembly of kings and chieftains, before whom
the wise men debate upon some points of legislation.

Then, again, we recognize the priests as patriots, resisting the
invaders of their homes, and loudly chanting the Battle Hymn. We are at
the convocation of Brehons, in their

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

deliberations on law, and, awestruck, wait upon the observers of sun and
stars, or of the signs of the times in the investigation of terrestrial
phenomena. We go with them to the judgment upon offenders of an
unwritten code, and witness the dread ordeal, or the fiery human
sacrifice.

But our inquiry is, What has Irish tradition or literature to say to
these interesting details concerning Druids?

Were the Irish Druids like those of whom we read belonging to other
lands? Did they spring up from among the Irish people, or were they
strangers from another and distant shore? Could they have formed a
distinct community, like the tribe of Levi, intermarrying among
themselves only? Amidst much ignorance, and even barbarism, can the
Druids have been distinguished by the learning and refinement attributed
to them?

With our conceptions of the ancient religions of Ireland, should we
credit the Druids with the introduction 'of Sun worship, Serpent
reverence, and the adoration of Idols? Were they, on the contrary, new
corners, arriving subsequent to the establishment of these various forms
of paganism, and merely known a little before the rise of Christianity
in Erin?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Welsh Or British Druidism](idr04)
