[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Wicca &
Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](idr27) 
[Next](idr29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### HOLY BELLS

HE who has visited Burmah or Russia will have no doubt about the
reverence for bells, and special reverence being paid to special bells.
There are fixed bells, and portable bells, the last being held in the
highest estimation.

Their special virtue lay in dominion over the powers of darkness Duly
baptized bells, down to latter days, have been endowed with ability to
disperse demons When the Swedes under Charles XII. defeated the Russians
at Narva, the courage of the Muscovites was revived by incessant ringing
of bells, throughout Holy Russia, to drive devils from the sacred soil.
That superstition still prevails with the followers of Siva in India.

Baptized bells possess other powers. St. Teilo brought

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

a celebrated one from Jerusalem, that had such inherent sanctity, as to
make known, in some way, its detestation of particular crimes.

Bells could even work miracles by their enchantments. The children of
Lir were said by ancient Irish bards to have been changed by a Druidic
wand, more powerful than that of a harlequin, into four swans. They had
a dreary time of it for a few centuries. At first they dwelt in Loch
Derg for three hundred years. Then they flew to the Sea of Moyle,
between Erin and Alba. But the poor creatures still inhabited the bodies
of swans. Their release, according to bardic tales, was thus
effected:--"The bell that rang in the first Mass celebrated on Inis na
Gluaise (Isle of Glory) restored them to their human shapes; but they
were now emaciated and decrepid, and only waited for baptism to flee
away to rest eternal."

Holy bells of Ireland are of distinct Buddhist shape, being of an
irregular cylindrical form, as in India, &c., and not round as in
Christian lands. Irish bells were often ornamented with crosses, the
fleur-de-lis, and the pomegranate. St. Finnian's bell resembles that
seen in Jain temples of India.

A number of so-called St. Patrick's bells are still preserved, as in the
instructive and interesting Dublin Museum. They are of various sizes,
the largest being a foot in height. He is said to have had fifty. The
sweetest sounding one is known by the name of *Finn Faidheach*. Most of
his bells were of bronze, often beautifully adorned after an oriental
fashion. The *Betechan* is half iron. The *Clogdubh* or black bell of
the Saint, an alloy of different metals, is about twelve inches high,
and five by four otherwise.

The *Tripartite* Life of the Saint records his flinging a little bell
under a dense bush, and in time a birch grew through its handle,
revealing it to the eyes of Dieuill.

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

When he drove the demons into the sea at Croagh Patrick, Mayo, he flung
after them his bell. It is not certain whether this was the *Bearnan
Brighde* or the *Dubh-duaib-seach*. O'Donovan explains the
occasion--"According to all the Lives of the Irish apostle, he remained
for forty days and forty nights on this lofty mountain, which was then
infested by malignant demons, who opposed his progress in preaching the
gospel in this dreary region; but whom he drove thence headlong into the
sea." This was effectually done by means of his bell.

Another account is that a bell was brought down for St. Patrick by
angels from heaven, when a spring gushed forth at the place. He scared
the demons away by it, aided by blows, and not by the mere ringing.

The shrines of these cherished bells have always drawn forth much
admiration Miss Stokes, in her beautiful work on *Early Christian Art in
Ireland*, said, "Such covers or shrines for bells seem to be unknown to
any other branch of the Christian Church."

Among other Irish bells may be mentioned one with a very handsome border
This was twelve inches high, nine broad, and nine and a half deep. There
were *the Clog Beannaighte*, the *Clogdubh*, the *Cumaseach* MacAntils
of the Archbishop of Armagh, the *Doumragh* of Fenagh, the gapped bell
of St Culann, the golden bell of St. Sevan, the bronze one given by St.
Patrick to the Bishop Cloghir, the magnificent bronzed one with gold
filagree exquisite workmanship, and the bells of St. Ruadhan, St. Mura,
St. Mogue, or Maidoc, &c., &c.

The Dublin Museum has bells of St. Columba, which had the same virtue as
those of St Patrick in the expulsion of demons, and as the heathen
Burmese still relate of their own holy bells. Bells were brought from
Rome by St Patrick, St. Columba, and St. Mungo or Kentigern, of

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

Glasgow fame. It is singular that in the ruins of Zimbahwe, of Mashona
Land, travellers have found some double iron bells. No bell has any
charming power until duly consecrated by the priest of some faith.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Irish Crosses](idr29)
