[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Wicca &
Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](idr31) 
[Next](idr33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### OSSIAN THE BARD.

A WILD storm of controversy once raged, when Macpherson put forth a work
purporting to be a collection of old Gaelic songs, under the name of the
"Poems of Ossian," who was the last of the Fenian Chiefs, and who,
reported, on his return to Ireland after his enchantment, failed to
yield his paganism to St. Patrick's appeals.

While generally condemned as the inventor of the lays, the charms of
which enthralled even Byron and Goethe, he must surely have been a poet
of great merit, if they were of his own composition. But if they were
remains of ancient traditions, carried down by word of mouth, Macpherson
might at least be credited with weaving them into more or less connected
narratives.

There has been much debate as to the possibility such rude people, as in
Erin and on the opposite shore of North Britain, having so retentive a
memory, with the ability to transmit ideas at once beautiful and
refined, in language of imagination and taste. But, as with Edda, and
the folklore of other semi-barbarous nations, facts prove the reality of
extraordinary memory. It is not generally known that many Jews could
repeat faithfully the whole of their sacred scriptures.

The history of the poems is interesting. The Rev. John Home, the author
of *Douglas* and other publications, found a Tutor with transcripts
taken down from old

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

northern people, which were sent on to Professor Hugh Blair. Macpherson
was requested to translate some of them, and these were published by
Blair in 1760. Search was then made for similar traditions by Macpherson
himself, who found in Lord Bute a patron for the publishing of *Fingal*
in 1762. Dr. Johnson, the hater of all that was Scotch, furiously
attacked the book.

In 1849, Dr. Lounrost published 22,793 verses rescued from memory. The
1862 edition of the Dean of Lismore's book gives, in the appendix, a
long poem taken down from the mouth of an old woman as late as 1856. Sir
Walter Scott collected many Scotch ballads in the same way. The story of
Grainne and Diarmuid has been long known in the cabins of Ireland.
Fenian poems have been circulating for ages among the peasantry of
Ireland and Scotland. In 1785, Ford Hill published an ancient Erse poem,
collected among the Scottish Highlands, to illustrate Macpherson's
Ossian.

In Gillies's *History of Greece*, we are told that "the scattered
fragments of Grecian History were preserved during thirteen centuries by
oral tradition." Bards did the same service for Roman history till the
second century be lore Christ. "The *Dschungariade* of the Calmucks,"
the learned Heeren writes, "is said to surpass the poems of Homer in
length, as much as it stands beneath them in merit; and yet it exists
only in the memory of a people which is not unacquainted with writing.
But the songs of a nation are probably the last things which are
committed to writing, for the very reason that they are remembered."

Dr. Garnett, in his *Tour in Scotland*, 1798, says, "It seems to me
wonderful that any person who has travelled in the Highlands should
doubt the authenticity of the Celtic poetry, which has been given to the
English reader

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

by Macpherson." He speaks of the Macnab being "in possession of a MS.
containing several of the poems of Ossian and other Celtic bards, in
their native tongue, which were collected by one of his ancestors." At
Mull, he continues, "Here are some persons who can repeat several of the
Celtic poems of Ossian and other bards. The schoolmaster told me he
could repeat a very long one on the death of Oscar, which was taught him
by his grandfather."

The Royal Irish Academy had, in 1787, a notice of "ancient Gaelic poems
respecting the race of the Fians (Fenians) collected in the Highlands of
Scotland in the year 1784, by the Rev. M. Young, D.D., Fellow of Trinity
College, Dublin."

Upon this, the *Hibernian Magazine* for 1788, remarks--"Dr. Young gives
very copious extracts from Ossian, with a literal, or at least a close,
translation; and proves decidedly that the poems of that bard are Irish,
not Scotch compositions, and that Mr. McPherson has egregiously
mutilated, altered, added to, and detracted from them, according as it
suited his hypothesis. He appears particularly to have suppressed every
line of the author, from which it might be deduced they were of Irish
origin"

There seems ground for the latter statement The was the prejudice in
favour of the Scotch origin of the poems, although the narratives
clearly deal more with Irish history and manners. Dalriada was however,
inclusive of south west Scotland and north east Ireland

Croker declares that "many Irish odes are ascribed Oisin." The
*Inverness Gaelic Society* quotes G. J. Cambell--"The spirit is felt to
be ancient and Celtic. There can be no doubt regarding the existence of
Ossianic poems and ballads for ages before McPherson." Donald

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

Ross, Inspector of Schools, wrote in 1877--"A careful analysis of the
thought of the *West Highland Tales* (by T. E. Campbell) points to an
antiquity beyond the introduction of Christianity into Scotland."

The Rev. Dr. Waddell, in his *Ossian and the Clyde*, had no difficulty,
in spite of some apparent geological changes, in identifying some of the
localities mentioned in the poems. "In Ireland," says he, "the joint
tombs of Lamderg, Ullin, and Gelchosa, with the adjoining tomb of Orla
and Ryno, might be identified on the northern slope of the Carrickfergus
ranges, between the upper and lower Carneals (Ossian's Cormul), and Lake
Mourne." Yet, as he adds, "The topography of Ossian was a mystery to
Johnson, to Pinkerton, to Laing, and a wilderness of error to Macpherson
himself."

The Homeric dispute as to authenticity is recalled by the Ossianic one.
Thoreau thought Ossian "of the same stamp with the *Iliad* itself."
Homer appears to us in connection with blind reciters, as does Ossian.

The subject of Homer has had exhaustive treatment under the genius and
research of a Gladstone. Yet not a few learned men detect a different
author in the *Odyssey* to that of the *Iliad*. The two poems depict
different conditions of civilization, the *Iliad* being the older, with
different ideas as to the Future Life. If, then, there be such
difficulty in deciding upon Homer, obscurity may be imagined in relation
to Ossian. In both cases, probably, there was need of a compiler of the
scattered bardic lays, the Macpherson of the period.

Dr. Shaw's *Gaelic Dictionary* asserts that--"Fion is not known in the
Highlands by the name of Fingal. He is Universally supposed to be an
Irishman." King James, in 1613, in a speech, said--"The ancient Kings of
Scotland were descended from the Kings of Ireland." Of the several

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

migrations northward from Ireland, that led by Carbry Riada, King
Cormac's relative, founded Dalriada of Argyle. The Irish certainly
carried their own name of Scots into the northern country.

It may be said of Ossian, as Girardet said of Homer--"We know nothing of
his birth, life, or death." But tradition calls him the son of Fion,
stolen by a magician, and ultimately becoming the chief bard of the
Fianna or Fenians. When these people were crushed at the battle of
Gavra, he was spirited away by a fair lady, and lived with her in a
palace below the ocean for a hundred and fifty years. Allowed to return
to Erin, the story goes that he met with St. Patrick, to whom he related
the events of the past, but refused to be a convert to the new faith,
Another tale declares that, when staying with the Saint, he objected to
the larder.

The *Harp*, a periodical of 1859, remarks, that other bards got hold of
the poems of Oisin or Ossian, "and linked them together by the addition
of a suppositious dialogue between the old bard and the Saint." The
*Harp* fancies Ossian had met with "some of the missionaries of the
Faith who preceded St. Patrick into Erinn."

Miss Brook, a distinguished Irish authority, thinks some of the
so-called Ossianic poems arose as late as the eighth, ninth, and tenth
centuries Anyhow, those coming down to our day betray a remarkably
heathenish character, and preserve the manners and opinions of a
semi-barbarous people, who were endowed with strong imagination, high
courage, childlike tenderness, and gentle chivalry for women.

Goethe makes Werther exclaim--"Ossian has, in heart, supplanted Homer."
Windisch, no mean critic, has these observations--"The Ossian epoch is
later than that of Conchobat and Cuchulinn, but yet preceded the
introduction

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

of Christianity into Ireland." Skene, justly esteemed one of the first
of Scottish historians, sees that Windisch "regards the figures of Finn
and Ossian as a property common to the Gaels of Scotland and Ireland."
He thus expresses his own opinion--"The Scotch legend attaches itself
evidently to the Irish legend; the Irish legends and poetry have passed
from Ireland to Scotland." He says elsewhere--"The old blind poet Ossian
is a poetic invention, which has taken birth, and which found itself at
first created in Ireland."

In the chapter on Irish superstitions, reference is made to some
traditional ideas of the olden times. It is sufficient here to observe
that, whatever the views which may be entertained as to the authenticity
of Ossian, those poems do throw some light upon the religious belief of
the ancient Irish race. Their tales accord with those of other
semi-barbarous people, and need interpreting after a similar manner. The
legendary heroes are not all of flesh and blood.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Culdees of Druidical Days](idr33)
