[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m07063) 
[Next](m07065) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION LXVII

"Narada said, 'Rantideva, the son of Srinjaya, we hear, fell a prey to
death. That high-souled king had two hundred thousand cooks to
distribute excellent food, raw and cooked, like unto *Amrita*, unto the
Brahmanas, by day and by night, who might come to his house as
guests. <span id="fr_108"></span>[1](#fn_108) The king gave away unto
the Brahmanas his wealth acquired by righteous means. Having studied the
*Vedas*, he subjugated his foes in fair fight. Of rigid vows and always
engaged in due performance of sacrifices, countless animals, desirous of
going to heaven, used to come to him of their own accord. <span
id="fr_109"></span>[2](#fn_109) So large was the number of animals
sacrificed in the *Agnihotra* of that king that the secretions flowing
from his kitchen from the heaps of skins deposited there caused a
veritable river which from this circumstance, came to be called the
*Charmanwati*. <span id="fr_110"></span>[3](#fn_110) He, incessantly
gave away *nishkas* of bright gold unto the Brahmanas, 'I give thee
*nishkas*.' 'I give thee *nishkas*,' these were the words incessantly
uttered by him. 'I give thee,' 'I give thee' saying these words he gave
away thousands of *nishkas*. And once again, with soft words to the
Brahmanas, he gave away *nishkas*. Having given away, in course of a
single day, one crore of such coins, he thought that he had given away
very little. And, therefore, he would give away more. Who else is there
that would be able to give what

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

he gave? The king gave away wealth, thinking, If I do not give wealth in
the hands of Brahmanas, great and eternal grief, without doubt, will be
mine.' For a hundred years, every fortnight, he gave unto thousands of
Brahmanas a golden bull into each, followed by a century of kine and
eight hundred pieces of *nishkas*. All the articles that were needed for
his *Agnihotra*, and all that were needed for his other sacrifices, he
gave away unto the *Rishis*, including *Karukas* <span
id="fr_111"></span>[1](#fn_111) and water-pots and plates and beds and
carpets and vehicles, and mansions and houses, and diverse kinds of
trees, and various kinds of viands. Whatever utensils and articles
Rantideva possessed were of gold. They that are acquainted with the
history of ancient times seeing the superhuman affluence of Rantideva,
sing this song, *viz*., 'We have not seen such accumulated treasures
even in the abode of Kuvera; what need be said, therefore, of human
beings?' And people wonderingly said, Without doubt, the kingdom of
Rantideva is made of gold. <span id="fr_112"></span>[2](#fn_112) On such
nights, when guests were assembled in the abode of Rantideva, one and
twenty thousand kine were sacrificed (for feeding them). And yet the
royal cook adorned with begemmed ear-rings, had to cry out, saying, 'Eat
as much soup as you like, for, of meat, there is not as much today as in
other days. Whatever gold was left belonging to Rantideva, he gave even
that remnant away unto the Brahmanas during the progress of one of his
sacrifices. In his very sight the gods used to take the libations of
clarified butter poured into the fire for them, and the Pitris the food
that was offered to them, in *Sraddhas*. And all superior Brahmanas used
to obtain from him (the means of gratifying) all their desires. When he
died, O Srinjaya, who was superior to thee in respect of the four
cardinal virtues and who, superior to thee was, therefore, much superior
to thy son, thou shouldst not, saying, '*Oh, Swaitya, Oh, Swaitya*,'
grieve for the latter who performed no sacrifice and made no sacrificial
present.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_108"></span>[129:1](m07064.htm#fr_108) The Bengal reading
of the second line of the second verse is vicious. At any rate, the
Bombay reading is better.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[129:2](m07064.htm#fr_109) Animals slain in
sacrifices are believed to go to heaven.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[129:3](m07064.htm#fr_110) Identified with the
modern Chumbal.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[130:1](m07064.htm#fr_111) A kind of vessel
used by Brahmanas and others for begging.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[130:2](m07064.htm#fr_112) *Vaswoksara* means
made 'of gold.' It is a feminine adjective. The substantive is omitted.
I think the passage may mean--'The city of Rantideva is made of gold.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section LXVIII](m07065)
