[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m07036) 
[Next](m07038) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XXXVII

 

"Dhritarashtra said, 'My heart, O Sanjaya, is agitated with different
emotions, *viz*., shame and gratification, upon hearing that Subhadra's
son singly held in cheek the whole army of my son. O son of Gavalgana,
ten me everything once more in detail about the encounter of youthful
Abhimanyu, which seems to have been pretty like Skanda's encounter with
the *Asura* host.'

"Sanjaya said, 'I will relate to thee that fearful encounter that fierce
battle, as it took place between one and the many. Mounted upon his car,
Abhimanyu, with great daring, showered his arrows on the warriors of thy
army mounted on their cars, all of whom were chastisers of foes, endued
with great courage. Careering with great speed like a circle of fire, he
pierced Drona and Karna, and Kripa, and Salya and Drona's son, and
Kritavarman of the Bhoja race, and Vrihadvala, and Duryodhana, and
Somadatta, and mighty Sakuni, and diverse kings and diverse princes and
diverse bodies of troops. While engaged in slaying his foes by means of
superior weapons, the valiant son of Subhadra, endued with mighty
energy, seemed, O Bharata, to be present everywhere. Beholding that
conduct of Subhadra's son of immeasurable energy, thy troops trembled
repeatedly. Seeing that warrior of great proficiency in battle,
Bharadwaja's son of great wisdom, with eyes expanded in joy, quickly
came towards Kripa, and addressing him said, as if crushing (by that
speech of his) the very vitals of thy son, O Bharata, the following
words, 'Yonder cometh the youthful son of Subhadra at the head of the
Parthas, delighting all his friends, and king Yudhishthira, and Nakula,
and Sahadeva, and Bhimasena, the son of Pandu, and all his kinsmen, and
relatives by marriage, and all who are watching the battle as spectators

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

without taking any part in it. I do not regard any bowman to be his
equal in battle. If only he entertains the wish, he can slay this vast
host. It seems, that for some reason or other, he doth not entertain
that wish.' Hearing these words of Drona, so expressive of the
gratification he felt, thy son, enraged with Abhimanyu, looked at Drona,
faintly smiling the while. Indeed, Duryodhana said unto Karna and king
Valhika and Duhsasana and the ruler of the Madras and the many other
mighty car-warriors of his army, these words, 'The preceptor of the
entire order of the Kshatriyas,--he that is the foremost of all
conversant with *Brahma*, doth not, from [stupefaction](errata.htm#27),
wish to slay this son of Arjuna. None can, in battle, escape the
preceptor with life, not even the Destroyer himself, if the latter
advanceth against the preceptor as a foe. What, O friend, shall we say
then of any mortal? I say this truly. This one is the son of Arjuna, and
Arjuna is the preceptor's disciple. It is for this that the preceptor
protecteth this youth. Disciples and sons and their sons are always dear
to the virtuous people. Protected by Drona, the youthful son of Arjuna
regardeth himself valourous. He is only a fool entertaining a high
opinion of himself. Crush him, therefore, without delay.' Thus addressed
by the Kuru king, those warriors, O monarch, excited with rage and
desirous of slaying their foe, rushed, in the very sight of Drona at the
son of Subhadra that daughter of the Satwata race. Duhsasana, in
particular, that tiger among the Kurus, hearing those words of
Duryodhana, answered the latter, saying, 'O monarch, I tell thee that
even I will slay this one in the very sight of the Pandavas and before
the eyes of the Panchalas. I shall certainly devour the son of Subhadra
today, like *Rahu* swallowing *Surya* (sun).' And once more addressing
the Kuru king loudly, Duhsasana said, 'Hearing that Subhadra's son hath
been slain by me, the two Krishnas, who are exceedingly vain, will
without doubt, go to the region of the departed spirits, leaving this
world of men. Hearing then of the death of the two Krishnas, it is
evident that the other sons born of Pandu's wives, with all their
friends, will, in course of a single day, cast away their lives from
despair. It is evident, therefore, that this one foe of thine being
slain, all thy foes will be slain. Wish me well, O king, even I will
slay this foe of thine.' Having said these words, O king, thy son
Duhsasana, filled with rage and uttering a loud roar, rushed against the
son of Subhadra and covered him with showers of arrows. Abhimanyu then,
O chastiser of foes, received that son of thine thus advancing upon him
wrathfully, with six and twenty arrows of sharp points. Duhsasana,
however, filled with rage, and looking like an infuriated elephant,
fought desperately with Abhimanyu, the son of Subhadra in that battle.
Both of them masters in car-fight, they fought on describing beautiful
circles with their cars, one of them to the left and other to the right.
The warriors then, with their *Panavas* and *Mridangas* and *Dundubhis*
and *Krakachas* and great *Anakas* and *Bheris* and *Jharjaras*, caused
a deafening noise mingled with leonine roars, such as arise from the
great receptacle of salt waters!"

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

### SECTION XXXVIII

"Sanjaya said, 'Then the intelligent Abhimanyu, with limbs mangled with
arrows, smilingly addressed his foe, Duhsasana, stationed before him
saying, 'By good luck it is that I behold in battle that vain hero
arrived before me, who is cruel, who hath cast away all righteousness,
and who brawleth out lustily his own praises. In the assembly (for the
Kurus) and in the hearing of king Dhritarashtra, thou hadst, with thy
harsh speeches, angered king Yudhishthira. Relying on the deception of
the dice and the skill (therein) of Suvala's son, thou hadst also
maddened by success, addressed many delirious speech to Bhima! <span
id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66) In consequence of the anger of those
illustrious persons, thou art, at last, about to obtain the fruit of
that conduct of thine! <span id="fr_67"></span>[2](#fn_67). O thou of
wicked understanding, obtain thou without delay the fruit <span
id="fr_68"></span>[3](#fn_68) of the robbery of other people's
possessions, wrathfulness, of thy hatred of peace, of avarice, of
ignorance, of hostilities (with kinsmen), of injustice and persecution,
of depriving my sires--those fierce bowmen--of their kingdom, and of thy
own fierce temper. I shall today chastise thee with my arrows in the
sight of the whole army. Today, I shall in battle disburden myself of
that wrath which I cherish against thee. I shall today free myself of
the debt I owe to angry Krishna and to my sire who always craveth for an
opportunity to chastise thee. O Kaurava, today I shall free myself of
the debt I owe to Bhima. With life thou shalt not escape me, if indeed,
thou dost not abandon the battle.' Having said these words, that
mighty-armed warrior, that slayer of hostile heroes, aimed a shaft
endued with the splendour of Yama or of Agni or of the Wind-god, capable
of despatching Duhsasana to the other world. Quickly approaching
Duhsasana's bosom, that shaft fell upon his shoulder-joint and
penetrated into his body up to the very wings, like a snake into an
ant-hill. And soon Abhimanyu once more struck him with five and twenty
arrows whose touch resembled that of fire, and which were sped from his
bow drawn to its fullest stretch, Deeply pierced and greatly pained,
Duhsasana, sat down on the terrace of his car and was, O king, overtaken
by a swoon. Afflicted thus by the arrows of Subhadra's son and deprived
of his senses, Duhsasana. was speedily borne away from the midst of the
fight by his charioteer. Beholding this, the Pandavas, the five sons of
Draupadi, Virata, the Panchalas, and the Kekayas, uttered leonine
shouts. And the troops of the Pandavas, filled with joy, caused diverse
kinds of musical instruments to be beat and blown. Beholding that feat
of Subhadra's son they laughed with joy. Seeing that implacable and
proud foe of theirs thus vanquished,

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

those mighty car-warriors, *viz*., the (five) sons of Draupadi, who had
on their banners the images of Yama and Maruta and Sakra and the twin
Aswins, and Satyaki, and Chekitana, and Dhrishtadyumna, and Sikhandin,
and the Kekayas, and Dhrishtaketu, and the Matsyas, Panchalas, and the
Srinjayas, and the Pandavas headed by Yudhishthira, were filled with
joy. And all of them rushed with speed, desirous of piercing Drona's
array. Then a dreadful battle took place between the warriors and those
of the foe, All of them were unretreating heroes, and inspired by desire
of victory. During the progress of that dreadful encounter, Duryodhana,
O monarch, addressing the son of Radha, said, 'Behold, the heroic
Duhsasana, who resembleth the scorching sun who was hitherto slaying the
foe in battle, hath at last himself succumbed to Abhimanyu. The Pandavas
also, filled with rage and looking fierce like mighty lions, are rushing
towards us, desirous of rescuing the son of Subhadra.' Thus addressed,
Karna with rage and desirous of doing good to thy son, rained showers of
sharp arrows on the invincible Abhimanyu. And the heroic Karna, as if in
contempt of his antagonist, also pierced the latter's followers on the
field of battle, with many excellent shafts of great sharpness. The
high-souled Abhimanyu, however, O king, desirous of proceeding against
Drona, quickly pierced Radha's son with three and seventy shafts. No
car-warrior of thy army succeeded at that time in obstructing the
progress towards Drona, of Abhimanyu, who was the son of Indra's son and
who was afflicting all the foremost car-warriors of the Kaurava host.
Then Karna, the most honoured of all bowmen, desirous of obtaining
victory, pierced the son of Subhadra with hundreds of arrows, displacing
his best weapons. That foremost of all persons conversant with weapons,
that valiant disciple of Rama, by means of his weapons, thus afflicted
Abhimanyu who was incapable of being defeated by foes. Though afflicted
in battle by Radha's son with showers of weapons, still Subhadra's son
who resembled a very celestial (for prowess) felt no pain. With his
shafts whetted on stone and furnished with sharp points, the son of
Arjuna, cutting off the bows of many heroic warriors, began to afflict
Karna in return. With shafts resembling snakes of virulent poison and
shot from his bow drawn to a circle, Abhimanyu quickly cut off the
umbrella, standard, the charioteer, and the steeds of Karna, smiling the
while. Karna then shot five straight arrows at Abhimanyu. The son of
Phalguna, however, received them fearlessly. Endued with great valour
and courage, the latter then, in a moment, with only a single arrow, cut
off Karna's bow and standard and caused them to drop down on the ground.
Beholding Karna in such distress, his younger brother, drawing the bow
with great force, speedily proceeded against the son of Subhadra. The
Parthas then, and their followers uttered loud shouts and beat their
musical instruments and applauded the son of Subhadra \[for his
heroism\].'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_66"></span>[89:1](m07037.htm#fr_66) There are the names of
diverse kinds of drums small and large.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[89:2](m07037.htm#fr_67) I adopt the Bombay
reading of the 1st line of 4.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[89:3](m07037.htm#fr_68) The fruit being the
present encounter with Abhimanyu in which Duhsasana, according to
Abhimanyu, shall have to lay down his life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XXXIX](m07038)
