[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m07162) 
[Next](m07164) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CLXVI

'Sanjaya said, 'Karna, the son of Vikartana, <span
id="fr_221"></span>[1](#fn_221) O king, resisted the mighty car-warrior
Sahadeva in that battle, who advanced from desire of getting at Drona.
Piercing the son of Radha with nine shafts, Sahadeva once more pierced
that warrior with nine straight arrows. Karna then pierced Sahadeva in
return with a hundred straight shafts, and displaying great lightness in
hand, cut off the latter's stringed bow. Then the valiant son of Madri,
taking up another bow, pierced Karna with twenty arrows. This feat of
his seemed exceedingly wonderful. Then Karna, slaying Sahadeva's steeds
with many straight shafts, speedily despatched the latter's driver with
a broad-headed shaft, to Yama's abode. This carless Sahadeva then took
up a sword and a shield. Even those weapons were cut off by Karna
smiling the while. Then the mighty Sahadeva, in that encounter, sped
towards the car of Vikartana's son, a heavy and terrible mace decked
with gold. Karna, then with his shafts, quickly cut off that mace which
hurled by Sahadeva, coursed towards him impetuously, and caused it to
fall down on the earth. Beholding his mace cut off, Sahadeva quickly
hurled a dart at Karna. That dart also was cut off by Karna. The son of
Madri, then, quickly jumping down from his excellent car, and blazing
with wrath upon beholding Karna stationed before him, took up a
car-wheel and hurled it at the son of Adhiratha. The *Suta's* son,
however, with many thousands of arrows, cut off that wheel coursing
towards him like the uplifted wheel of Death. When that wheel had been
cut off, Sahadeva, O sire, aiming at Karna, hurled at him the shafts of
his car, the traces of his steeds, the yokes of his cars, the limbs of
elephants and

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

steeds and dead human bodies. Karna cut off all these with his shafts.
Seeing himself deprived of all weapons, Madri's son, Sahadeva, struck by
Karna with many shafts, left the battle. Pursuing him for a while, the
son of Radha, O bull of Bharata's race, smilingly addressed Sahadeva and
said these cruel words, 'Do not, O hero, fight in battle with those that
are superior to thee. Fight with thy equals, O son of Madri! Do not
mistrust my words.' Then touching him with the horn of his bow, he once
more said, 'Yonder, Arjuna is fighting resolutely with the Kurus in
battle. Go there, O son of Madri, or return home if thou likest.' Having
said those words, Karna, that foremost of car-warriors, smilingly
proceeded on his car against the troops of the king of the Panchalas.
The slayer of foes, that mighty car-warrior, devoted to truth, slew not
the son of Madri although he had got the opportunity, recollecting the
words of Kunti. Sahadeva, then, heartless and afflicted with arrows, and
pierced with the wordy darts of Karna, no longer cherished any love for
life. That mighty car-warrior then quickly ascended the car of
Janamejaya, the illustrious prince of the Panchalas.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_221"></span>[383:1](m07163.htm#fr_221) *Vaikartana* may
also mean one who has peeled off his skin of natural armour. To preserve
dramatic propriety, the Hindu commentators explain it in this sense when
it occurs in any such passage, for the real origin of Karna, *viz*., his
procreation by the deity of the sun, became known after his death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CLXVII](m07164)
