[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc17017)  [Next](cc17019.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 17: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part I*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xix"></span>

<span id="xix-p1"></span>CHAPTER 9

<span id="xix.i"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p1"></span><span id="xix.i-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#001.md)<span id="xix.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p2"></span>**1**. Oh that my head were waters, and mine
eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain
of the daughter of my people!

<span id="xix.i-p3"></span>**1**. Quis ponet caput meum aquas, et oculum
meum fontem lachrymarum? et deflebo die et nocte (*hoc est,* dies et
noctes) interfectos filiae populi mei.

<span id="xix.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xix.i-p5"></span><span id="xix.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p6"></span>He follows the same subject. During times of
tranquillity, when nothing but joyful voices were heard among the Jews,
he bewails, as one in the greatest grief, the miseries of the people;
and being not satisfied with this, he says, *Who will set,* or make, *my
head waters, and my eye a fountain of tears?* He intimates by these
words, that the ruin would be so dreadful that it could not be bewailed
by a moderate or usual lamentation, inasmuch as God’s vengeance would
exceed common bounds, and fill men with more dread than other
calamities.

<span id="xix.i-p7"></span>The meaning is, that the destruction of the
people would be so monstrous that it could not be sufficiently bewailed.
It hence appears how hardened the Jews had become; for doubtless the
Prophet had no delight in such comparisons, as though he wished
rhetorically to embellish his discourse; but as he saw that their hearts
were inflexible, and that a common way of speaking would be despised, or
would have no weight and authority, he was constrained to use such
similitudes. And at this day, there is no less insensibility in those
who despise God; for however Prophets may thunder, while God spares and
indulges them, they promise to themselves perpetual quietness. Hence it
is, that they ridicule and insult both God and his servants, as though
they were too harshly treated. As then, the same impiety prevails now in
the world as formerly, we may hence learn what vehemence they ought to
use whom God calls to the same office of teaching. Plain teaching, then,
will ever be deemed frigid in the world, except it, be accompanied with
sharp goads, such as we find employed here by the Prophet  <span
id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234.md) He adds —

<span id="xix.ii"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p1"></span><span id="xix.ii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#002.md)<span id="xix.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p2"></span>**2**. Oh that I had in the wilderness a
lodging place of wayfaring men; that I might leave my people, and go
from them! for they *be* all adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men.

<span id="xix.ii-p3"></span>**2**. Quis statuet me in deserto, in
diversorio *(alii,* tugurium, *vertunt; sed nescio an* *reperiatur*
<span id="xix.ii-p3.1"></span>מלון *in hoc sensu)* viatorum? et
relinquam populum meum et discedam ab illis; quia omnes adulteri,
conventus transgressorum *(vel,* perfidorum; *nam* <span
id="xix.ii-p3.2"></span>בגדים *sunt perfidi et apostatoe, ut alibi
vidimus.)*

<span id="xix.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xix.ii-p5"></span><span id="xix.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p6"></span>Here the Prophet entertains another wish: He
had before wished that his head were waters, that he might shed tears,
and he had wished his eyes to be the fountains of tears; but now, after
having duly considered the wickedness of the people, he puts off every
feeling of humanity, and as one incensed, he desires to move elsewhere,
and wholly to leave the people; for their impiety had so prevailed that
he could no longer live among them. It is indeed certain that the
Prophet had no common grief, when he perceived that God’s dreadful
vengeance was not far distant: it is also certain that he was moved and
constrained by their detestable conduct to desire to be removed
elsewhere. But he speaks not only for his own sake; for he regards his
own nation, and expresses his feelings, that he might more effectually
touch their hearts. We must then understand, that so great was the
sympathy of the Prophet, that he was not satisfied with shedding tears,
but that he wished that his whole head would flow into fearn It appears,
also, that he was so moved with idignation, that he wished wholly to
leave his own people. But, as I have said, his object was to try whether
he could restore them to the right way.

<span id="xix.ii-p7"></span>He then shews, in this verse, that the Jews
had become so detestable, that all the true servants of God wished to be
removed far away from them: *Who* then *will set me in the desert?* He
seeks not for himself another country; he desires not to dwell in a
pleasant situation, or that some commodious asylum should be offered to
him? but he desires to be placed in the desert, or in the lodging of
travelers. He speaks not of those lodgings or inns, which were in
villages and towns; but of a lodging in the desert; according to what is
the case, when a long and tedious journey is made through forests, some
sheds are formed, that when a traveler is over — taken by the darkness
of night, he might be protected by some covering, and not He down in the
open air. It is of this kind of lodging that the Prophet speaks: then he
no doubt means a shed; but as to the word, we may retain, as I have
said, its proper meaning. What is meant is, that to dwell in the desert
alllong wild beasts was better than to be among that abominable people.
By expressing this wish he inflamed no doubt the fury of the whole
people, or at least of most of them; but it was necessary thus forcibly
to address them: as they submitted to no kind and wholesome warnings and
counsels, they were to be forcibly stimulated and urged by such reproofs
as these.

<span id="xix.ii-p8"></span>*I will leave my people* This had an
emphatic, bearing; for delightful to every one is his native soil, and
it is also delightful to dwell among one’s own people. As then the
Prophet wished to be removed into the desert,, and to leave his own
people, all his relatives and the nation from which he sprang, and to
depart frora them, it follows that they nmst have come to extremities.

<span id="xix.ii-p9"></span>And the reason is added, *For all are
adulterers* I take the word <span id="xix.ii-p9.1"></span>מנאפים
*menaphim,* adulterers, in a metaphorical sense, as meaning all those
who had departed from God, and abandoned themselves to ungodly
superstitions, or those who had become so vitiated and corrupt as to
retain no integrity. He does not then call them adulterers, because they
were given to whoredoms, but because they were immersed in all kinds of
defilements. He afterwards calls them *an assembly of apostates,* or of
perfidious men. The word <span id="xix.ii-p9.2"></span>עצר*, otsar,*
means to prohibit, to restrain: hence the noun <span
id="xix.ii-p9.3"></span>עצרת *ostaret,* means a summoned assembly, when,
according to an oath or laws, men are forced to meet; and after the
assembly is proclaimed, they dare not depart. Then the Prophet by this
word points out the consent and union that existed among that people, as
though he had said, that they no less clave to their sins, that if by a
solemn rite or authority or ordinance they had been summoned together
and were prohibited to depart. We hence see that he condemns the impious
consent that was among the people, and also their pertinacity; for they
could by no means be restored to a right mind. And for this reason he
calls them also <span id="xix.ii-p9.4"></span>בגדים *begadim,*
transgressors; for by this word the Hebrews mean, not every kind of
sinners, but those who are wholly wicked: and hence the prophets, when,
they speak of apostates and revolters, ever call them <span
id="xix.ii-p9.5"></span>בגדים, *begadim,* as in this passage.  <span
id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235.md) I shall not proceed farther.

<span id="xix.iii"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xix.iii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou hast
been pleased that the prophetic writings should be preserved for our
use, that they may continually excite us to repentance, and that since
thou stiffest up daily those who urge us by their exhortations, and draw
us, as it were by force, to repent, — O grant, that there may not be in
us such perverseness as we see existed in thine ancient people; but that
we may render ourselves teachable, and be so moved by thy threatenings,
as to anticipate thy judgment, lest we, mistaking thy forbearance,
should at length be visited with that dread, described to us by thy
servant Jeremiah, but that we may, on the contrary, find thee to the end
to be not only a reconcilable but also a most merciful Father, until we
shall at last enjoy a fuller knowledge of thy goodness in thy celestial
kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="xix.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xix.iv"></span>

<span id="xix.iv-p1"></span>LECTURE THIRTy-FIFTH

<span id="xix.v"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p1"></span><span id="xix.v-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#003.md)<span id="xix.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p2"></span>**3**. And they bend their tongues *like*
their bow *for* lies; but they are not valiant for the truth upon the
earth; for they proceed from evil to evil, and they know not me, saith
the LORD.

<span id="xix.v-p3"></span>**3**. Et jaculati sunt lingua *(quidam
vertunt,* Et jaculare fecerunt; *alii,* intenderunt linguas suas) arcum
suum ad mendacia *(alii vertunt,* arcum mendacii; *sed male;*) et non ad
veritatem roborati sunt *(aut,* invaluerunt) in terra; quia a malo ad
malum egressi sunt, et me non cognoscunt, dicit Jehova.

<span id="xix.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="xix.v-p5"></span><span id="xix.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p6"></span>Jeremiah confirms what he had said of the
near destruction of the people; for, as we have said, the Jews ridiculed
threatenings while they thought themselves far from every danger. But
the Prophet shews, from the nature of God himself, that they must
necessarily perish in a short time; for since God is the judge of the
world, and as they were continually advancing in impiety and wickedness,
they could no longer be tolerated. This is the meaning.

<span id="xix.v-p7"></span>He first says, that they *stretched their
tongues as a bow for falsehoods* The verb <span
id="xix.v-p7.1"></span>דרך, *darek,* means to walk, and often occurs in
this sense; but; it means also to stretch, to bend, and is frequently
applied to bows. As it is here in Hiphil, some take it in a transitive
sense. It ought in this case to have <span id="xix.v-p7.2"></span>י*,
iod;* but such defect is often found in other places. This sense is the
most suitable; that is, that they shot with their tongues falsehood as
with a bow. Others improperly construe <span id="xix.v-p7.3"></span>שקר,
*shikor,* in the genitive case, as though he had said, “the bow of
falsehood, but this gives no meaning; and therefore “the bow of
falsehood” cannot be admitted here. The sense is, that they shot
falsehood with their tongue as with a bow, or that they made their
tongue to go to falsehood, or that they stretched their tongue like a
bow for falsehood. If the last rendering be approved, — that they
stretched their tongue, etc., then the Prophet compares their tongues to
bows and falsehoods to arrows. As to the subject itself, there is no
difference, whether we read that they shot lies with their tongues, or
that they stretched their tongues for lies: for the Prophet simply means
that their tongues, as he will hereafter tell us, were so pointed that
they pierced one another with slanders and falsehoods, as though one
stretched a bow and shot an arrow. He then intimates, that all their
words were deadly, for they were intent on slanders and falsehoods, so
that there was no intercourse without a mortal wound.

<span id="xix.v-p8"></span>He then adds, that they were *not strong for
the truth* Some read, “They have been strong, but not for the truth;”
others, “They have been strong as to the truth,” or for the truth: but I
think that the Prophet’s meaning is different, — that having checked the
truth, they took more liberty for themselves, as though he had said that
they triumphed when all faithfulness and rectitude were destroyed; for
by the word, <span id="xix.v-p8.1"></span>אמונה *amune,* the Prophet no
doubt means that fidelity by which men ought to carry on their concerns
one with another. Since, then, there was no uprightness among them, he
says, that they marched forth as victorious when they trod under foot
what was just and right. It is indeed a proof of extreme impiety, when
men, trampling upon faithfulness and equity, allow themselves every kind
of licentiousness. Some give this explanation, — that they ruled, not
through their faithfulness or virtues, for they had crept into and
obtained honors by wicked and deceitful arts. And it. is indeed certain
that the Prophet directs his discourse, not against the common people,
but against the chief men, who had attained their power by frauds. But I
am satisfied with the view that I have already given, — that they had
become *strong* because there was no truth, as when we say that the
blind rule in darkness, when everything is in confusion. The meaning is,
that they were not only given up to their sins, but that they also
triumphed over fidelity and justice, by allowing themselves every
liberty, as there was no one who dared to say a word to restrain them.
He says, that they thus became strong through the *whole land;* for he
sets forth here the deplorable state of the people in general; as though
he had said, “There is no hope of deliverance left, for truth and
faithfulness are everywhere oppressed.”  <span
id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236.md)

<span id="xix.v-p12"></span>An explanation follows, — that they
*proceeded from evil to evil;* that is, they obstinately went on in
their evil doings; for to go forth means the same as to pass. They then
*passed from evil to evil;* that is, when they had done one evil, no
repentance entered their hearts, so as to turn back; but they continued
their wickedness, and aceunrelated evils on evils. We now then
understand what the Prophet means; for he sets forth their pertinacity
in evil deeds, and at the same time shews that there was no evidence of
amendment, for they passed from one bad deed to another like it.

<span id="xix.v-p13"></span>*And me have they not known, saith Jehovah*
He shews here what is the source of all evils; they had cast aside every
knowledge and every thought of God. We indeed know that when God is
really known, his fear must necessarily influence our hearts; and the
knowledge of God begets reverence and a regard for religion. It is
indeed true, that God is somewhat known by even the ungodly and the
wicked, and that they have some notions respecting him; but it is no
more than an empty knowledge. When indeed we are fully persuaded that
God is the judge of the world, and when we have also a knowledge of his
goodness and paternal favor, we necessarily fear him and spontaneously
and willingly worship and serve him. Ignorance of God, then, is a kind
of madness which carries men headlong to every sort of impiety. On this
account, God complains that he was not known by the people, for the fear
of him was not in them. It follows —

<span id="xix.vi"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p1"></span><span id="xix.vi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#004.md)<span id="xix.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p2"></span>**4**. Take ye heed every one of his
neighbour, and trust ye not in any brother: for every brother will
utterly supplant, and every neighbour will walk with slanders.

<span id="xix.vi-p3"></span>**4**. Et vir a socio suo cavete *(hoc est,*
caveat; *ad verbum,* custodiat se; caveat *igitur* sibi quisque a
socio,) et super omni fratre *(ad verbum)* ne confidatis *(hoc est,*
nemo confidat proprio fratre;) quia omnis frater supplantando
supplantat, et omnis socius fraudulenter incedit.

<span id="xix.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xix.vi-p5"></span><span id="xix.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vi-p6"></span>In this verse the Prophet describes the
extreme wickedness of the people. For though sometimes thefts,
robberies, frauds, slaughters, perjuries, sorceries prevail, yet some
regard for near relations remains; but it is monstrous when all relative
affections are destroyed. As then, even in the most wicked, there remain
some natural affections, called *storgoe* by philosophers, it follows,
that men depart wholly from nature and become wild beasts, when these no
longer exist. This is the import of what is here said.

<span id="xix.vi-p7"></span>There is a similar passage in <span
id="xix.vi-p7.1"></span>[Mic. 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#006.md)<span id="xix.vi-p7.1"></span>. The
idea is there indeed more fully expanded; for the Prophet adds,

<span id="xix.vi-p8"></span>“From her who sleeps in thy bosom guard the
doors of thy mouth; for the son lies in wait for his father, and the
daughter delivers up her mother to death; and the chief enemies of man
are his own domestics.”

<span id="xix.vi-p9"></span>The prophets then mainly agree in shewing,
that there was no humanity left among flmm; for the son, forgetful of
his duty, rose up against his father, and every one was perfidious
towards his own friend, and a brother spared not his own brother.

<span id="xix.vi-p10"></span>*Let a man* then *guard himself* This is
not an admonition, as though the Prophet exhorted men to be wary; but he
only shews that there was no fidelity; for every one was perfidious and
unfaithful towards his own friend, and even a brother acted unjustly
towards his own brother. It hence follows, that the Jews are charged
with being natural monsters; for they were deservedly objects of
detestation, when they cast aside every care for their own blood, and as
far as they could, destroyed everything like humanity. He says that
brothers by *supplanting supplanted,* that is, craftily deceived and
circumvented their own brothers. The verb <span
id="xix.vi-p10.1"></span> עקב*okob,* is to be taken mttaphorically; it
is derived from the heel of the foot, and means to oppress the simple by
secret arts. He says also, that all *friends acted fraudulently.* Of
this kind of speaking we have spoken on <span
id="xix.vi-p10.2"></span>[Jer
6:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#028.md)<span id="xix.vi-p10.2"></span>;
for we found there the same complaint; and the Prophet then said the
Jews were like iron and brass, because they had hardened themselves so
as to be capable of any cruelty. This sort of speaking often occurs,
when the word <span id="xix.vi-p10.4"></span>רכיל, *rekil,* is connected
with the verb <span id="xix.vi-p10.5"></span>הלך *elak;* and they who
are the most learned in the language say, that this word is never found
in Scripture but in connection with the verb to go or to walk. They
hence conclude that some particular person is meant, that is, one who
goes about veiled or deceitfully, and rambles and runs here and there,
that he may find some opportunity of deceiving and cheating. It cannot
be taken here for slandering, as we have also stated on chapter the
sixth: it is too unmeaning. It is found indeed in this sense in <span
id="xix.vi-p10.6"></span>[Le
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#016.md)<span id="xix.vi-p10.6"></span>,

<span id="xix.vi-p11"></span>“Go not about a slanderer among thy
people;”

<span id="xix.vi-p12"></span>where some render it a whisperer. But the
Prophet no doubt condemns here the frauds and deceitful crafts, by which
they deceived and cheated one another: for <span
id="xix.vi-p12.1"></span>רכל, *recal* signifies a merchant; and as it is
often the case that traders act cunningly and practice crafty artifices,
the Hebrews call that man <span id="xix.vi-p12.2"></span>רכיל *racal,*
fraudulent and wickedly crafty, whose object is to deceive and cheat.
And we see that this is the meaning in this place, as it designates
those who circumvented one another: for the Prophet says, that they were
foolish who trusted in brothers or friends; and he gives the reason,
because brothers supplanted one another, and friends went about
fraudulently. It follows —

<span id="xix.vii"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p1"></span><span id="xix.vii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#005.md)<span id="xix.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p2"></span>**5**. And they will deceive every one his
neighbour, and will not speak the truth: they have taught their tongue
to speak lies, *and* weary themselves to commit iniquity.

<span id="xix.vii-p3"></span>**5**. Et vir proximo sue (socio) mentitur
(*hoc est,* quisque; n*am* <span id="xix.vii-p3.1"></span>איש *ponitur
indefinite apud Hebroeos pro nota universali;* quisque *ergo* proximum
suum circumvenit, *nempe* mendacio; n*am* <span
id="xix.vii-p3.2"></span>התל *significat mentiri,)* et veritatem non
loquitur; docuerunt linguas suas loqui mendacium *(hoc est,* linguas
suas formarunt ad mendacia,) male agere fatigati sunt *(hoc est,* male
agendo fatigantur.)

<span id="xix.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xix.vii-p5"></span><span id="xix.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p6"></span>Jeremiah goes on with the same subject. He
says that fidelity had so disappeared among the Jews, that every one
endeavored to deceive his neighbor. Hence it followed, that they were
withhout any shame. Some sense of shame at least remains among men, when
they have to do with their own friends; for though they may be wholly
given to gain, and to indulge in falsehoods, yet when they transact
business with friends, they retain some regard for equity, and shame
checks their wickedness: but when there is no difference made between
friends and strangers, it follows that their character is become
altogether brutal. This is what the Prophet meant.

<span id="xix.vii-p7"></span>And he adds, that they *spoke not the
truth* He now says that they were liars, not in this or that particular
business; but that they were perfidious and deceitful in everything.
This clause then is not to be limited to some special acts of fraud; but
it is the same as though he had said, that they knew not what truth was,
or what it was to act with good faith and to speak honestly to their
neighhours; for they were wholly imbued with deceits, and no truth could
come out of their mouth.

<span id="xix.vii-p8"></span>And for the same purpose he says, that they
had *taught their tongues to speak falsehood.* The expression in this
clause is stronger; for he means that they were wholly given to deceit,
as by long use they had formed their tongues for this work. The tongue
ought to be the representative of the mind, according to the old saying;
for why was the tongue formed, but in order that men may communicate
with one another? For the thoughts are hidden, and they come forth when
we speak with each other. But the Prophet says that the order of nature
was by them inverted, for they had *taught their tongues to lie* We also
hence learn that they had no fidelity whatever; for their very tongues
had been taught to deceive: as when one by practice has learnt anything,
it is what he does readily; so when the tongues are formed by continual
use and inured to lying, they can do nothing else.

<span id="xix.vii-p9"></span>He says at last, that they *wearied
themselves with evil deeds.* This is indeed an hyperbolical language;
but yet the Prophet very fitly sets forth the deplorable state of the
people, — that they practiced the doing of evil even to weariness. As
when any one is seized with some foolish lust, he spares no labor and
does himself much harm, but feels not his wearied state as long as he is
engaged, for his ardor dementares him: so he says now, that they were
wearied in doing evil. When a hunter pursues the game, he undergoes much
more labor than any common workman, or any husbandman. We see that even
kings and courtiers, while hunting, are so blinded, that they see no
danger nor feel any weariness. So we find that men given to pleasure,
when lust draws them here and there, feel no concern for the greatest
weariness. According to this sense then the Prophet says, that they were
wearied in doing evil, as though he had said, that they were so devoted
to wickedness, that the pleasure of doing evil wholly blinded them and
made them mad.  <span id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237.md)

<span id="xix.vii-p13"></span>We now perceive the Prophet’s meaning: He
confirms, as I have said, what he had stated before. He had threatened
the people with utter ruin; they were secure and heedless, and despised
all his denuncitations. He now shews, from God’s nature and office, that
ruin was nigh them, though they feared it not and thought themselves
abundantly safe. But if God be the judge of the world, as it will be
hereafter proved, how is it possible for him to connive perpetually at
so great wickedness? And to shew this he also adds —

<span id="xix.viii"></span>

<span id="xix.viii-p1"></span><span id="xix.viii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#006.md)<span id="xix.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.viii-p2"></span>**6**. Thine habitation *is* in the midst
of deceit; through deceit they refuse to know me, saith the LORD.

<span id="xix.viii-p3"></span>**6**. Tu habitas in dolo *(hoc est,*
inter homines dolosos; n*am subaudiendum est nomen, quemadmodum soepe
alibi vidimus genitivum casum poni pro epitheto, et subaudiri nomen
substantivum;* Tu *igitur* habitas inter homines dolosos;) in dolo
renuunt cognoscere me, dicit Jehova.

<span id="xix.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xix.viii-p5"></span><span id="xix.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xix.viii-p6"></span>The Prophet here introduces God as the
speaker, that the Jews might know that they had not to do with mortal
man. For they might, according to their usual perverseness, have raised
this objection, “Thou indeed severely condemnest us, and treatest us
reproachfully; but who has made thee our judge?” Lest then they should
think that the words which he had hitherto declared, were the words of
man, he interposes the authority of God, *Thou,* he says, *dwellest in
the midst of a deceitful people*

<span id="xix.viii-p7"></span>But we must observe that this admonition
to the Prophet was necessary for two reasons. For when God searches the
minds and hearts of men by his word, ministers of the word are necessary
to exercise this jurisdiction, men endued with wisdom, understanding,
and prudence. The word, says the apostle, is like a two — edged sword,
or it is one that cuts on both sides, for it penetrates into the hearts
and thoughts of man and into their very marrow. (<span
id="xix.viii-p7.1"></span>[Heb
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012)<span id="xix.viii-p7.1"></span>..md)
We also know what Paul says,

<span id="xix.viii-p8"></span>“When an unbeliever comes into your
assembly, his conscience is searched; so that he will be constrained to
fall down and to give glory to God.” (<span id="xix.viii-p8.1"></span>[1
Cor. 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#024.md),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#025)<span id="xix.viii-p8.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xix.viii-p9"></span>To the same purpose is this saying of
Christ,

<span id="xix.viii-p10"></span>“When the Spirit is come, He will judge
the world,”  
(<span id="xix.viii-p10.2"></span>[Joh
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#008)<span id="xix.viii-p10.2"></span>.md)

<span id="xix.viii-p11"></span>for by the Spirit He means the preaching
of the Gospel. It is then necessary that the ministers of the word, in
order that they may faithfully and profitably perform their office,
should be taught to understand the deceits and subterfuges by which men
are wont to deceive. As then there are many hidden things in the hearts
of men, he who would effectually teach must know that the innermost
recesses of the heart must be probed and searched. The Prophet had heard
from God that the people, over whom He was appointed, were fallacious
and filled with guiles and frauds: *Thou,* He says, *dwellest in the
midst of a deceitful people;* as though he had said, “Thou hast to do
with dishonest men, who not only openly betray their wickedness, but
also deceive when they pretend any repentance or profess obedience to
God: that they may not therefore weaken or cajole thy resolution by
their deceptions, settle it in thy mind that thou wilt have to contend
with their wiles.” This is one reason.

<span id="xix.viii-p12"></span>There is another reason; for as God’s
servants ought to know their wiles, which they are bidden to reprove, so
there is need of courage and perseverance, lest hypocrisy should
dishearten them: for such a thought as this may occur to the minds of
God’s servants, “What shall I do? for hidden to me are the thoughts of
men: now the truth ought to penetrate into the whole soul; but I know
not what lies hid within in any one.” Thus pious teachers might be
weakened in their efforts and disheartened, or wholly discouraged,
unless God supported them. It was then for this reason that Jeremiah was
expressly told, that He had to do with a deceitful and false people.
 <span id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238.md)

<span id="xix.viii-p19"></span>He afterwards adds, *Through guile they
refuse to know me* God had before complained, that he was not known by
the people; but he now exaggerates their crime by saying, that they
craftily evaded every light, as though he had said, that they could not
plead ignorance or any levity; for through guile, says God, they refuse
to know me. As they wholly flattered themselves with deceptions, they
designedly extinguished, as far as they could, the light. By guile then
he means that obstinate craftiness by which the people cast aside every
instruction. It afterwards follows —

<span id="xix.ix"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p1"></span><span id="xix.ix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#007.md)<span id="xix.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p2"></span>**7**. Therefore thus saith the LORD of
hosts, Behold, I will melt them, and try them; for how shall I do for
the daughter of my people?

<span id="xix.ix-p3"></span>**7**. Propterea sic dicit Jehova
exercituum, Ecce ego examinabo eos *(vel,* conflabo; *ad verbum,*
examinans, *vel,* conflans,) et probabo eos; nam quomodo agerem cum
filia *(ad verbum,* a facie filiae) populi mei?

<span id="xix.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="xix.ix-p5"></span><span id="xix.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p6"></span>Jeremiah, speaking in God’s name, concludes
that the chastisement, of which he had spoken, was necessary; And what I
have already said appears more clearly from this verse, — that he brings
to light their sins, that they might know that they could not escape
God’s hand, who is a just avenger of wickedness; for they had extremely
provoked him by their petulance and obstinacy.

<span id="xix.ix-p7"></span>*I will try* or melt *them,* he says, *and I
will prove them* As they put on a false color, he says that there was a
trial needful, as when any one shews copper or any other metal for gold,
he is disproved by trial. Any impostor might otherwise sell dross for
silver: the spurious metal, that is passed as gold or silver, must be
proved; it must be cast into the fire and melted. As then the Jews
thought that they had honest pretences to cover their baseness, God
gives this answer, that he had yet a way to discover their
deceitfulness, and as it were tells them, “The goldsmith, when any one
brings dross for silver, or copper for gold, has a furnace, and he tries
it; so will I *try* and melt you; for you think that you can dazzle ray
eyes by false pretences: this will avail you nothing.” In short, God
intimates that he had means ready at hand to discover their
deceitfulness, and that thus their hypocrisy would be of no advantage to
them, as his judgments would be like a furnace. As then stubble or wood,
cast into the furnace, is immediately burnt, so hypocrites cannot endure
God’s judgment. They indeed at first exhibit some brightness, until God
tries them; but their deceits must eventually be discovered; and they
themselves will be consumed when they come to be really proved. This is
the meaning.

<span id="xix.ix-p8"></span>And the reason is added, *For how should I
do with the daughter of my people?* This may be applied to Jeremiah
himself; but it would be a strained meaning. He then continues, I have
no doubt, to speak in God’s name; *How* then *should I do,* or act,
*with the daughter of my people?* God speaks here as one deliberating;
and thus he more fully proves the Jews guilty; for since he admits them
as judges or counsellors, they could give no other reply. We hence see
that this question is very emphatic; for the Prophet intimates, that
except the Jews were beyond measure stupid, they could no longer flatter
themselves in their sins, so as to demand to be otherwise treated by
God, as they had in so many ways and with s.uch perversity procured
vengeance for themselves.  <span id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239.md)

<span id="xix.ix-p14"></span>But we hence learn that it is right that
judgment should begin at the house of God, as it is elsewhere said.
(<span id="xix.ix-p14.1"></span>[1Pe
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#017)<span id="xix.ix-p14.1"></span>..md)
God indeed will not pass by anytliing without punishing it: hence the
heathens must at last stand before his tribunal. But as he is nearer to
his Church, their impiety, who profess themselves to be as it were his
domestics, is less tolerable, as though he had said, “I have chosen you
to be my peculiar people, and have taken you under my care and
protection; when ye become intractable, what remains for me to do, but
to try you, as ye act so unfaithfully towards me.” It follows —

<span id="xix.x"></span>

<span id="xix.x-p1"></span><span id="xix.x-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#008.md)<span id="xix.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.x-p2"></span>**8**. Their tongue *is as* an arrow shot
out; it speaketh deceit; *one* speaketh peacably to his neighbour with
his mouth, but in heart he layeth his wait.

<span id="xix.x-p3"></span>**8**. Sagitta tracta *(ut quidam vertunt;
alii,* occidens) lingua eorum; mendacium loquitur; os ejus pacem ad
proximum loquetur, et in medio sui *(hoc est,* intra viscera sua, intus)
ponet insidias.

<span id="xix.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="xix.x-p5"></span><span id="xix.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xix.x-p6"></span>The Prophet again complains of the
deceitfulness of their tongues; and he compares them to deadly, or drawn
out arrows. Gold is said to be drawn out, when refined by repeated
meltings; so also arrows, when sharpened, are more piercing. The Prophet
then says, that their tongues were like deadly or sharpened arrows: how
so? because they ever spoke guile, by either slandering or circumventing
others. But the expression is general; and the Prophet no doubt meant to
include all modes of deceiving.

<span id="xix.x-p7"></span>For it afterwards follows, *With the mouth
they speak peace;* that is, every one professed friendship, and his
words were honey; and yet *within he did set up,* or concealed
*intrigues.* Here in other words he sets forth their perfidy; for the
tongue and the heart differed. They shewed by the tongue what was
different from the sentiment of the heart. Hence he says, that they *set
up treacheries in the midst of them,* or in their hearts, while they
*spoke peace* with the mouth, that is, pretended brotherly kindness.
 <span id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240.md) At last he repeats again what
he had said before, (<span id="xix.x-p12.1"></span>[Jer
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#009)<span id="xix.x-p12.1"></span>.md) —

<span id="xix.xi"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p1"></span><span id="xix.xi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#009.md)<span id="xix.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p2"></span>**9**. Shall I not visit them for these
*things?* saith the LORD: shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation
as this?

<span id="xix.xi-p3"></span>**9**. An super hoc non visitabo eos, dicit
Jehova? an in gente quae talis est (quae est sicut haec) non se
ulciscetur anima mea?

<span id="xix.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xix.xi-p5"></span><span id="xix.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xi-p6"></span>We have already met with this verse; it will
therefore be enough briefly to refer to what it contains. God shews
here, that except he denied himself he must necessarily punish the Jews.
How so? He takes it as granted that he is the judge of the world: he had
said that the Jews were not only become wicked in one thing, but were so
given up to all kinds of wickedness, that they wearied themselves; what
then was to be done? God would not have acted in a manner worthy of
himself, nor preserved consistency, had he not punished such men; for he
must have changed his nature, had he not hated such a perverse nation.
But he speaks after the manner of men when he mentions vengeance; for we
know that no passions belong to God, as it has been often stated: but as
he hates wickedness, so he is said to execute vengeance, when he appears
as a judge and chastises those by whom he has been provoked to wrath.

<span id="xix.xii"></span>

<span id="xix.xii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xix.xii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we cease not
by our sins to provoke thee more and more, we may at least be warned by
thy threatenings and the words of thy prophets, and may not continue
obstinate in evil nor pertinaciously resist thy will, but that we may on
the contrary learn to anticipate thy judgment and thus receive thy
corrections, so that our sins may be hated by us, and that we may become
judges of ourselves, in order that we may obtain pardon, and that having
obtained it we may not doubt ever to call on thee as our Father, until
thou at length gatherest us unto that blessed inheritance, which has
been procured for us by the blood of thine only Son. — Amen.

<span id="xix.xii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xix.xiii"></span>

<span id="xix.xiii-p1"></span>Lecture Thirty-Sixth

<span id="xix.xiv"></span>

<span id="xix.xiv-p1"></span><span id="xix.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#010.md)<span id="xix.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xiv-p2"></span>**10**. For the mountains will I take up a
weeping and wailing, and for the habitations of the wilderness a
lamentation, because they are burned up, so that none can pass through
*them;* neither can *men* hear the voice of the cattle; both the fowl of
the heavens and the beast are fled; they are gone.

<span id="xix.xiv-p3"></span>**10**. Super montes tollam (*vel* assumam)
fletum et lamentationem, et super pascua *(vel,* loca amoena; *alii
vertunt,* tuguria) deserti planctum; quia vastata sunt *(alii vertunt,*
incensa;) ita non sit vir transiens, et non audiunt vocem pecudum; ab
ave coelorum *(hoc est,* ab avibus) usque ad bestiam migrarunt,
abierunt.

<span id="xix.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xix.xiv-p5"></span><span id="xix.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xiv-p6"></span>The Prophet had exhorted others to lament
and to bewail. He now comes forth as though none had ears to attend to
his admonition. As then he himself undertakes to mourn and to lament, he
no doubt indirectly condemns the insensibility of the whole people. He
saw by the spirit of prophecy, that all the rest thought what he said
incredible and therefore fabulous. For though the kingdom of Judah was
at that time much wasted, and the kingdom of Israel wholly fallen, they
yet continued secure and heedless when they ought to have expected God’s
vengeance every day, and even every hour. Since then there was such
insensibility in the people, the Prophet here prepares himself for
lamentation and mourning.

<span id="xix.xiv-p7"></span>*I will take up,* he says, *mourning and
lamentation for the mountains* The words may be explained, “I will take
up mourning, which shall ascend as far as the mountains;” but the cause
of mourning seems rather to be intended; for it immediately follows*,
and weeping for the pastures of the desert* Had not this clause been
added, the former meaning might be taken, that is, that mourning would
be so loud as to penetrate into the mountains or ascend into the highest
parts. But as Jeremiah connects the two clauses, for *the mountains,*
and *for the pastures of the desert,* the other meaning is much more
appropriate, — that the confidence of the people was very absurd, as
they thougilt themselves beyond danger, dwelling as they did on the
plains; for the enemies, he says, shall leave nothing untouched; they
shall come to the mountains and to the pastures of the desert. It hence
follows, that they were foolish who promised themselves quietness on the
plains, where the enemy could easily come.

<span id="xix.xiv-p8"></span>We now then understand the Prophet’s
meaning: he sets here his own fear and solicitude in contrast with the
stupor of the whole people. *I will raise,* he says, *weeping and
lamentation for the mountains:* but others remained secure and
thoughtless in their pleasures. He then shews, that while they were
blind, his eyes were open, and he saw the coming ruin which was now at
hand. And he sets the mountains and pastures of the desert in opposition
to the level country. For when a country is laid waste, we know that
still a retreat is sought on mountains; for enemies dread ambushes
there, and access is not easy where the roads are narrow. Then the
Prophet says, that even the mountains would not be beyond the reach of
danger, for the enemies would march there: he says the same of the
pastures of the desert. We hence learn how absurd was their confidence
who thought themselves safe because they inhabited the plain country,
which was the most accessible.

<span id="xix.xiv-p9"></span>As to the word <span
id="xix.xiv-p9.1"></span> נאות*naut,* it comes from <span
id="xix.xiv-p9.2"></span> נוה*hue,* which means to dwell.  <span
id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241.md) He then takes <span
id="xix.xiv-p10.6"></span>נאות *haut,* as signifying pleasant places, or
pastures. Some render it sheds or cottages. David uses the same word in
<span id="xix.xiv-p10.7"></span>[Ps
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#002.md)<span id="xix.xiv-p10.7"></span>,
in speaking of God’s favor to him, who was pleased to become his
shepherd:

<span id="xix.xiv-p11"></span>“He makes me to lie down,” he says, “in
pleasant places.”

<span id="xix.xiv-p12"></span>But the Prophet no doubt means pastures
here. And he calls them the *pastures of the desert.* The word <span
id="xix.xiv-p12.1"></span>מדבר *midbar,* we know, is taken to designate
not only waste and sterile places, but also a mountainous country.
Though then the richest pastures were on mountains, yet the Jews were
wont to call them deserts: there is therefore nothing absurd in saying,
the pleasant places or pastures of the desert. But we must bear in mind
the contrast, of which I have reminded you: for he intended to condemn
the foolish confidence of the people, who thought that they were
dwelling in safety, when yet they were exposed to enemies, and had no
means to repel or retard their progress.

<span id="xix.xiv-p13"></span>*Because they are laid waste,* He says.
This word may be taken in another sense, “burnt up;” but it is not
suitable here. He says then that these places are *laid waste, so that
no one passed through. He* means that mountains would not only be
without inhabitants, but would be so deserted and solitary that there
would be none passing over them. There would then be none to frequent
them. It hence follows, that there would be no inhabitants, He then
adds, that *no voice of cattle* was *heard;* as though he had said, that
their enemies would take away as their spoil whatever should be found
there: for the wealth of mountains consists in cattle; for there is
neither sowing nor reaping there; but inhabitants of mountains get their
living and whatever is necessary to support life, from flesh and skin
and milk and cheese. When therefore the Prophet declares that there
would be no voice of cattle, it is the same as though he had said, that
the mountains would become altogether uninhabited, for their enemies
would take away all the cattle found there.

<span id="xix.xiv-p14"></span>He then adds, *From the bird of the
heavens to the earthly beast they shall migrate and depart*  <span
id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242.md) Here he seems again indirectly to
reprove the insensibility of the people, as though he had said, that the
birds would feel it to be the judgment of God, while yet men were wholly
insensible; and that there would be a similar feeling in brute animals;
as though he had said, that there would be more understanding in birds
and animals than in the Jews, who had not only been created in the image
of God, but had also been enlightened as to the truth of salvation; for
shine among them did the truth of God in the law. Hence the Prophet
shews that this stupidity was most shameful; for they were as stupid as
if they had no thought and no understanding, while yet birds
acknowledged the vengeance of God, and brute animals were terrified by
it. We now perceive the meaning of the Prophet. It follows —

<span id="xix.xv"></span>

<span id="xix.xv-p1"></span><span id="xix.xv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#011.md)<span id="xix.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xv-p2"></span>**11**. And I will make Jerusalem heaps,
*and* a den of dragons; and I will make the cities of Judah desolate,
without an inhabitant.

<span id="xix.xv-p3"></span>**11**. Et ponam Jerusalem in acervos, in
locum draconum; et urbes Jehudah ponam vastitatem, ut non sit habitator.

<span id="xix.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xix.xv-p5"></span><span id="xix.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xv-p6"></span>The Prophet comes now toJerusalem and the
neighhouring cities. He said before, that ruin would reach the mountains
and the farthest recesses; but he says now, *I will turn Jerusalem into
heaps* This seemed incredible, for it was a well fortified city, and
also full of inhabitants to defend it: we know besides that the Jews
were in confederacy with the kingdom of Egypt. This denunciation then
was extremely unwelcome to the Jews. But though they thought themselves
hitherto safe, yet the Prophet set before their eyes their final
destruction. They indeed regarded it as a fable; but they found too
late, that the despisers of God gain no advantage in hardening·
themselves against his threatenings. We shall meet with this verse
again; I shall therefore now pass over it lightly.

<span id="xix.xv-p7"></span>He says, that it would be hereafter a *place
for dragons;* as though he had said, that it would be no longer
inhabited. He declares the same respecting the cities of Judah, — that
they would all be a *waste.* We hence see how courageous and persevering
a mind was Jeremiah endued with, that he dared to preach thus in the
midst of the city, and to set himself in opposition to the king and his
counsellors, and to the whole people, who wished to be soothed with
flatteries, and who had been thus treated by the false prophets. As then
Jeremiah was thus bold, as a celestial herald, to denounce on them this
dreadful calamity, we hence learn that he was endued with the power of
God, and that he did not speak as one commissioned by men; for had he
not been sustained by God’s power, he must have been a hundred times
disheartened, nor would he have dared to speak a word. This invincible
courage seals his doctrine; ibr we hence with certainty learn, that it
proceeded from God, because the wonderful power of the ttoly Spirit was
evident. He afterwards adds —

<span id="xix.xvi"></span>

<span id="xix.xvi-p1"></span><span id="xix.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#012.md)<span id="xix.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xvi-p2"></span>**12**. Who *is* the wise man, that may
understand this? and *who is he* to whom the mouth of the LORD hath
spoken, that he may declare it, for what the land perisheth *and* is
burned up like a wilderness, that none passeth through?

<span id="xix.xvi-p3"></span>**12**. Quis vir prudens ut intelligat hoc?
*(ad verbum,* et intelligens,) et ad quem loquutum est os Jehovae, ut
annunciet quare perierit terra, vastata sit instar deserti, ut nemo
transeat? (<span id="xix.xvi-p3.1"></span>מבלי עבר absque transeunte,
*ad verbum.)*

<span id="xix.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xix.xvi-p5"></span><span id="xix.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xvi-p6"></span>Here the Prophet reproves more sharply the
insensibility of the people, because none attended to the judgments of
God; for though they were apparent, no one considered them. The question
arose from astonishment; for it was like something dreadfully monstrous,
that so few among the people knew that God would be the punisher of
crimes so apparent to all. Had they a particle of understanding, they
must have known that a dreadful calamity was nigh at hand, since they
continued in so many ways to provoke God. And now that the labor of the
Prophet, after having said what ought to have roused them all, had been
all in vain; was not this doubly monstrous? For he had spent a long
time, and had never ceased to cry; and yet all were deaf, nay, his
teaching was treated with contempt.

<span id="xix.xvi-p7"></span>Hence is his astonishment, when he says,
*Who is a wise man?* he intimates that there was hardly one in a hundred
whom the fear of God influenced. It must then be remembered, that the
Prophet complains of the few number of those who perceived:, that it
could not be but that God would shortly put forth his hand to punish the
wickedness which then everywhere prevailed. But yet he exhorts all the
faithful children of God to disregard the nmltitude, and to gather
courage, and to make more account of God’s word than of the contumacy of
them all. There are then two things in this sentence; for the question
means, that few could be found among the people who were wise, and who
applied their minds and thoughts to consider the miserable state of the
people; but, on the other hand, he intimates that it is true wisdom in
God’s faithful servants, not to despond, and not to follow the
nmltitude. He then intimates that they are alone truly wise who consider
God’s judgments before He openly executes them. There is a similar
sentence in <span id="xix.xvi-p7.1"></span>[Psalm
107](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#000.md)<span id="xix.xvi-p7.1"></span>:
43; for the Prophet, after having spoken of God’s judgments, which are
visible through the whole world, exclaims,

<span id="xix.xvi-p8"></span>“Who is a wise man, that he may understand
these things?”

<span id="xix.xvi-p9"></span>as though he had said, that though the
works of God, which evidence both his goodness and his judgment, might
indeed be observed in every part of the world, yet that all were blind.
The Prophet then by this exclamation reprobates the insensibility of
men, who overlook God’s judgments, though they are apparent before their
eyes. So also the same thing is meant in this place, *Who is a wise
man?* But we must further notice the second thing, to which I have
referred, namely, that all the faithful are here encouraged, as the
Prophet teaches us, that this is the rule of wisdom, — to open our eyes
to see God’s judgments, which are hid from the world: while others are
drawn away by their lusts or sunk in their stupor, the Prophet teaches
us, that we are wise, when we duly consider, as I have already said,
what the Lord has made known to us in his word. Hence it follows, that
all the wise men of this world are foolish, who so harden themselves,
that they do not perceive in God’s word what is yet open to their eyes.
*Who* then *is a wise man, and he will understand these things?*

<span id="xix.xvi-p10"></span>He afterwards adds, *To whom has the mouth
of Jehovah spoken to declare this?* He complains here that there were no
prophets. He said, at the beginning of the verse, that there were none
wise, because all heedlessly despised the threatenings and judgments of
God: now in the second place he adds, there were none to arouse the
careless people who were asleep in their sins. But by this sentence he
claims authority for himself; for though he was without associates and
assistants, he yet intimates that his teaching was not, on that account
of less value: “Be *it,”* he says, (for he speaks by way of concession,)
“be it, that there is no prophet to recall the people from their sins,
to exhort them to repent, to terrify the ungodly: however this may be,
yet the Lord has appointed me to teach and to exhort the people.” We
hence see that the Prophet claims for himself full and complete
authority, though he alone denounced God’s vengeance. Many indeed then
boasted that they were prophets; but they were only false flatterers.
When the Prophet saw that many abused the name, and did not perform the
office faithfully and sincerely, he set himself in opposition to them
all; as though he had said, “It is enough that the Lord has commanded me
to do this; I therefore denounce on you this calamity, which ye
heedlessly disregard, because false teachers deeeive you by their
mischievous adulations.”

<span id="xix.xvi-p11"></span>*Who will declare,* he says, *why the land
is to perish,* and to be *laid waste like the desert, so that there
should be no inhabitant?* We may apply this to two periods. For when
Jeremiah spoke, the kingdom was yet standing, and, as I have said, the
Jews were not so subdued as to humble themselves before God: they were
therefore still indulging themselves in their sins. Now whence did this
indulgence proceed, except from their prosperous condition? Yet the
Prophet says that the land had perished, and justly so; but he says
this, because he did not judge of the people’s state according to what
it appeared then to be, but according to the judgment which he saw by
the prophetic spirit was impending over them. And we may extend this
farther; as though Jeremiah had said, “When God shall have so chastised
this people, that there may be as it were a visible monument of
celestial wrath; there shall yet be then no prophets to remind them
whence these evils have proceeded.” This indeed we know was the case,
when the city was partly burnt and partly demolished, and the temple
pulled down: the contumacy of the people was so great, that their hearts
were stone, and their minds iron. There was then a monstrous hardness in
that calamity. They indeed cried for their evils; but no one perceived
that God was executing what he had denounced for so many years. For
Jeremiah, as we have said, exercised his office of teaching for a long
time: but before he began, Isaiah had already been were out; and before
Isaiah, Micah had prophesied. Though, however, threatenings had been
renewed daily for a hundred years, and terrors had been announced, yet
there was no one who attended.  <span id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243.md)

<span id="xix.xvi-p15"></span>This passage, then, may be thus explained,
— That when threatenings should appear by the effect not to have been
announced in vain, yet the people would even then be insensible, for no
one would attend to nor consider God’s judgment: they would all indeed
feel their evils, but no one would regard the hand of him who smote
them, as it is said in another place. (<span
id="xix.xvi-p15.1"></span>[Isa
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#013)<span id="xix.xvi-p15.1"></span>..md)
Either meaning may be allowed; but, as I think, the Prophet here
deplores the hardness and contumacy of the people at that time; as
though he had said, that there were none who considered God’s judgments,
and that there was no prophet to rouse those who were torpid. But yet,
as it has been stated, he thus intimates, that he had sufficient
authority, though he had no associate or assistant; for he had been
chosen by God, and had been sent to carry this message. It follows —

<span id="xix.xvii"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p1"></span><span id="xix.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
9:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#013.md)<span
id="xix.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p2"></span>**13**. And the LORD saith, Because they
have forsaken my law which I set before them, and have not obeyed my
voice, neither walked therein;

<span id="xix.xvii-p3"></span>**13**. Et dixit Jehova, Quia
dereliquerunt legem meam, quam posui coram ipsis (ad faciem ipsorum, ad
verbum,) et non audierunt vocem meam, et non ambulaverunt in ea (hoc
est, secundum ipsam;)

<span id="xix.xvii-p4"></span>**14**. But have walked after the
imagination of their own heart, and after Baalim, which their fathers
taught them:

<span id="xix.xvii-p5"></span>**14**. Et ambulaverunt post cogitationes
(vel, post contumaciam; nam utroque modo vertunt hoc nomen, post
cogitationes ergo) cordis sui, et post Baalim, quos docuerunt patres
ipsorum:

<span id="xix.xvii-p6"></span>**15**. Therefore thus saith the LORD of
hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will feed them, *even* this people,
with wormwood, and give them water of gall to drink.

<span id="xix.xvii-p7"></span>**15**. Propterea sic dicit Jehova
exercituum, Deus Israel, Ecce ego cibans (cibabo) populum hunc
ameritudine, et potabo aquis veneni (vel, venenatis; alii vertunt, aquis
fellis; nam <span id="xix.xvii-p7.1"></span>ראש *utrumque significat.)*

<span id="xix.xvii-p8"></span> 

<span id="xix.xvii-p9"></span><span id="xix.xvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p10"></span>Jeremiah now confirms what I have stated,
and more fully explains it, — that though no teacher or a disciple was
found in the land, yet there was sufficient power in God’s word alone,
and that his judgment depended not on the will or the perceptions of
men. After having then complained that all were foolish, and that there
were no prophets to reprove their security and indifference, he adds,
*Thus saith Jehovah* Here he sets God in opposition to all men, to the
king and his courtiers, as well as to the common people. Who then is a
wise man? as though He looked around him; and there was no man who
considered. he was then in suspense; and afterwards he said, “There is
no prophet to rouse them from their usual stupor.” He remained still in
suspense; and then he turned to God and said, “But Jehovah has spoken;”
that is, “Be it, that they are like brute beasts, though they arrogate
to themselves great wisdom; nevertheless God speaks, and we ought to be
satisfied. We ought then to be silent, and to make no stir; though no
one approves, though no one attends to God speaking, there is yet
sufficient authority and power in his voice alone.” We now then more
fully understand the Prophet’s design: He had said that all men were
stupid, and that there was no prophet; and now, on the other hand, he
shews that God was not silent nor asleep.

<span id="xix.xvii-p11"></span>*Thus saith Jehovah, Because* this people
*have forsaken my law, etc*. He shews that the cause of all evils was a
departure from God’s law. No one was willing to confess this, and all
the prophets were silent; yet Jeremiah says here, that the cause was to
be asked of God why he so grievously afflicted the people. But he takes
as granted what was most true, that God was not without reason
displeased with the chosen people. It hence then follows, that they were
apost, ates, and had forsaken the law: God would not have otherwise so
severely punished them. Though then no one perceived the cause of their
evils, though no one shewed it, yet God himself ought to have been
attended to, who said, that they had *forsaken the law*

<span id="xix.xvii-p12"></span>He then adds, *Which l have set before
their face.* Here he takes away every pretense for ignorance; for they
might have objected and said, that the doctrine of the law was obscure,
and that they were deceived through want of knowledge. The Prophet
anticipates this objection by saying, that the law was set before them;
that is, that they were abundantly taught what was right, what pleased
God; so that they now in vain and even falsely pleaded ignorance; for
they went astray wilfully by closing their eyes against clear light.,
For this is what he means by saying that the law was set before their
face: and it is what Moses often repeats,

<span id="xix.xvii-p13"></span>“Behold, I have set before thee,”  
(<span id="xix.xvii-p13.2"></span>[De
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#032.md)<span
id="xix.xvii-p13.2"></span>, and elsewhere:)

<span id="xix.xvii-p14"></span>and this he said, that the people might
not seek for themselves vain excuses for ignorance, as they were wont to
do.

<span id="xix.xvii-p15"></span>But while we are not to overlook this
circumstance, we may yet hence learn this general truth, — that the law
of God is not so obscure but that we may learn from it what is right.
When, therefore, Moses is quoted, and the prophets are added as
interpreters, there is no ground for us to evade, or to make the excuse,
that the truth is too hidden or profound; for the law is set before our
face, that, the will of God may be made known to us. Whosoever then can
read and hear what God has revealed once to the world by Moses and the
prophets is inexcusable; for we are taught here, and in other places,
that it is a mere perverseness in all who hear the law, when they do not
obey: *I have set the law,* he says, *before their face*

<span id="xix.xvii-p16"></span>And he adds, *And they have not hearkened
to my voice, and have not walked in it* He defines what it is not to
hearken to his voice: for even hypocrites pretend to hear, and nod with
their ears like asses; but as they obey not God when he speaks, it is
evident that they are deaf. Hence He says that they *walked not* in his
voice,  <span id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244.md) that is, that they
obeyed not his voice. He hence concludes that they were deaf; for their
life ought to have testified that they had heard the voice of God
speaking to them.

<span id="xix.xvii-p18"></span><span id="xix.xvii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p19"></span>He then adds, *And they have walked after
the hardiness,* or *obstinacy*, or *imaginations*, *of their own heart*
 <span id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245.md) He opposes the imaginations, or
hardness of the heart, to the voice of God, as we find in other places,
where contrary things are stilted, that is, what men’s minds devise, and
what God shews by his word to be right; for there is no less contrariety
between the rule of right living and the imaginations of men, than there
is between fire and water. Let us therefore know, that our life cannot
be rightly formed except we renounce our own imaginations, and simply
obey the voice of God: for as soon as we yield the least to our own
imaginations, we necessarily turn aside from the right way, which God
has made known to us in his word. This contrast, then, between the law
of God and the imaginations or the obduracy of men ought to be carefully
noticed.

<span id="xix.xvii-p21"></span>He then more clearly explains how they
had sinned, *and after Baalim*  <span id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246.md)
The Prophet here adds nothing new; but by specifying one thing he shews
how the Jews followed their own imaginations, by giving themselves up to
profane superstitions. What indeed must happen to men, when they forsake
God, and allow themselves to follow their own thoughts? what but error
and superstition, yea, the abyss of all errors? In short, the Prophet in
this clause intended to cut off every occasion for subterfuges; for the
Jews, like hypocrites, who sophistically deal with God, might have made
this evasion, and said, “Why dost thou object to us our imaginations?
what are these imaginations?” *Baalim,* he says, “Ye have devised idols
far yourselves in addition to the only true God; it is hence quite
evident, that having forsaken God’s word, ye have followed your own
imaginations.” He adds to Baalim, *as their fathers have taught them:*
the relative <span id="xix.xvii-p22.3"></span>אשר, *asher,* is to be
taken for <span id="xix.xvii-p22.4"></span>כ *caph,* as.  <span
id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247.md) I shall speak of this clause tomorrow.

<span id="xix.xviii"></span>

<span id="xix.xviii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xix.xviii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast
not only testified what is right by the Law and the Prophets, in order
that we may form our life in obedience to thy will, but hast also made
more fully known to us by thy Gospel what is perfect righteousness, — O
grant, that being ruled by thy Spirit, we may surrender ourselves
altogether to thee, and so acquiesce in thy Word alone, that we may not
deviate either to the right hand or to the left, but allow thee alone to
be wise, and that acknowledging our folly and vanity, we may suffer
ourselves to be taught by thy Word, so that we may really prove that we
are truly obedient to thee, until having at length completed the course
of this life, we shall reach that heavenly rest which has been obtained
for us by the blood of thine only-begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="xix.xix"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p1"></span>Lecture Thirty-Seventh

<span id="xix.xix-p2"></span>We explained yesterday what the Prophet
said respecting the Jews, that though no one considered the reason why
God so severely afflicted them, yet they could not escape in this way,
and that they in vain set up the shield of iglnorance, for God had often
declared that he abominated their superstitions. Though then they were
all blind, and no prophet shewed to them the cause of their evils, yet
Jeremiah said, that this alone was sufficient — that God had spoken, and
would again speak to them. He said that they were not submissive to
God’s authority, but walked after the hardness of their own heart, and
after Baalim. He added, that they had been *thus taught by their
fathers* By this clause he exaggerated their sin; for they did not then
begin for the first time to sin, but became obstinate in their vices.

<span id="xix.xix-p3"></span>We may learn from this passage how
foolishly the Papists now glory in imitating the fathers: for they think
that examples stand for laws; nay, they hesitate not to oppose. God’s
authority by what has been done by men. But we see that such an excuse
is not only frivolous, but that thereby the crime is doubled; for more
excusable is the ignorance of one year, or of a short time, than when
there is a long obstinate persistency in it, and when children, after
having embraced abominations, received from their fathers, hand them
down to their posterity.

<span id="xix.xix-p4"></span><span id="xix.xix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p5"></span>He at length concludes that God would take
vengeance, but speaks in a figurativle language, *I will feed them with
bitterness* The word <span id="xix.xix-p5.1"></span>לענה *lone,* is
rendered “wormwood;” but as this is a wholesome herb, I prefer to render
it “bitterness.”  <span id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248.md) It is never
found in a good sense, and therefore unsuitable to the nature of
wormwood, which is often mentioned by Moses: and the other prophets
(<span id="xix.xix-p6.2"></span>[De
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#018.md)<span id="xix.xix-p6.2"></span>;
<span id="xix.xix-p6.3"></span>[De
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#032.md)<span id="xix.xix-p6.3"></span>;
<span id="xix.xix-p6.4"></span>[Heb
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#015)<span id="xix.xix-p6.4"></span>..md)
Hence I am inclined to adopt a general term, *“bitterness.”* He then
adds, *I will give them poisonous waters to drink;*  <span
id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249.md) as though God had said that he would
execute a dreadful vengeance, so that it would appear in the meat and
drink given them, which yet were remarkable testimonies of his paternal
kindness towards them: for we cannot eat a crumb of bread nor drink a
drop of water, except God’s goodness, and the care which he takes for
our safety, shines upon us. Hence is that awful imprecation in <span
id="xix.xix-p7.3"></span>[Ps. 69:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#022.md),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#023.md)<span id="xix.xix-p7.3"></span>,

<span id="xix.xix-p8"></span>“Turned let their table be into an
offense.”

<span id="xix.xix-p9"></span>David also complained, when describing the
barbarous cruelty of his enemies, that they gave him gall to drink: and
we shall hereafter see what Jeremiah says; for in speaking. of his
enemies, he says that they had conspired to put him to death, and said,

<span id="xix.xix-p10"></span>“Let us set wood for his bread.” (<span
id="xix.xix-p10.1"></span>[Jer
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#019)<span id="xix.xix-p10.1"></span>.md)

<span id="xix.xix-p11"></span>By these words then Jeremiah intended to
express the dreadful vengeance of God; for he would not onty deprive the
Jews of his benefits, but also turn their bread into poison, and their
water into bitterness.

<span id="xix.xix-p12"></span>We now then perceive the Prophet’s
meaning; and at the same time we must observe the expression, *the God
of Israel* The foolish boasting, that they were the descendants of
Abraham, and that they were a holy people, chosen by God, always deluded
the Jews. In order then to check their glorying, the Prophet says, float
the God who spoke to them was the God whose name they falsely professed,
and that he was the God who had chosen the children of Abraham as his
peculiar people. It follows —

<span id="xix.xx"></span>

<span id="xix.xx-p1"></span><span id="xix.xx-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#016.md)<span id="xix.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xx-p2"></span>**16**. I will scatter them also among the
heathen, whom neither they nor their fathers have known; and I will send
a sword after them, till I have consumed them.

<span id="xix.xx-p3"></span>**16**. Et dispergam eos inter gentes, quas
non noverunt ipsi, neque patres eorum, et mittam post eos gladium, donec
consumpsero ipsos.

<span id="xix.xx-p4"></span> 

<span id="xix.xx-p5"></span><span id="xix.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xx-p6"></span>As he had said that the Jews were following
what theyhad received from their fathers,so he says now that God would
*scatter them among nations,*which had been unknown to them and to their
fathers. He then alludes to their mischievous tradition; for the fathers
had imbued their children with ungodly errors, and had withdrawn them
from God, that their doctrine might become altogether familiar to them.
There is then a contrast to be noticed between the knowledge with which
the fathers had inebriated their children, and their ignorance of the
language of the nations.

<span id="xix.xx-p7"></span>And then as he had said, that they were
walking after the hardness of their own heart and after Baalim, he says,
*I will send a sword after them* We hence see that the Prophet in both
clauses alludes to the defection of which he had spoken. And he adds,
*Until I shall have consumed them;* and this is added, that they might
not promise themselves a temporary or a moderate chastisement. Jeremiah
then declares, that as they had abused God’s forbearance, destruction
was nigh them, and that God would contimle to consume them, until he had
wholly destroyed them. It follows —

<span id="xix.xxi"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p1"></span><span id="xix.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
9:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#017.md)<span id="xix.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p2"></span>**17**. Thus saith the LORD of hosts,
Consider ye, and call for the mourning women*,* that they may come; and
send for cunning *women,* that they may come:

<span id="xix.xxi-p3"></span>**17**. Sic dicit Jehova exercituum,
Attendite et votate lamentatrices, ut veniant, et ad peritas mittite ut
veniant:

<span id="xix.xxi-p4"></span>**18**. And let them make haste, and take
up a wailing for us, that our eyes may run down with tears, and our
eyelids gush out with waters.

<span id="xix.xxi-p5"></span>**18**. Et festinent et tollant super nos
luctum, et descendant oculi nostri in lachrymas, *(alii vertunt,*
descendant cum lachrymis, *vel,* emittant lachrymas,) et palpebrae
nostrae defluant in aquas.

<span id="xix.xxi-p6"></span> 

<span id="xix.xxi-p7"></span><span id="xix.xxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p8"></span>In this passage, as in many others, the
Prophet endeavors by a striking representation really to touch the
hearts of his people, for he saw that they were extremely refractory,
insensible, and secure. Since then the threatenings of God were either
wholly despised, or had not sufficiently moved the hearts of the people,
it was necessary to set forth God’s judgments as present. Therefore the
Prophet gives a striking description of what takes place in times of
mourning. At the same time he seems to condemn indirectly the Jews for
not knowing, through God’s word, that there was a calamity at hand: for
God’s word ought indeed to be like a mirror, by which men ought to see
God’s goodness in his promises and also his judgment in his
threatenings. As then all prophecies were deemed as fables by the
people, it was not without some degree of derision that he addressed
them in this manner, —

<span id="xix.xxi-p9"></span>*Hearken ye, and call for mourners, that
they may come* An absurd and a foolish custom has prevailed almost in
all ages to hire women as mourners, whom they called *proeficoe;* they
were employed to mourn for others. Heirs no doubt hired these foolish
women, in order to shew their reigned piety; they spoke in praise of the
dead, and shewed how great a loss was their death. The Prophet does not
commend this custom; and we ought to know that Scripture often takes
similes from the vices of men, as from filth and dirt. If then any one
concludes from these winds of Jeremiah, that lamentations at funerals
are not to be condemned, this would be foolish and puerile. The Prophet,
on the contrary, does here reprove the Jews, because they heedlessly
disregarded all God’s threatenings, and were at the same time soft and
tender at those foolish exhibitions, and all mourned at the sight of
those women who were hired to lament; as the case is at this time, when
a faithful teacher reprobates the prevailing folly of the Papists. For
when the unprincipled men, who occupy the pulpits under the Papacy,
speak with weeping, though they produce not a syllable from God’s word,
but add some spectacle or phantom, by producing the image of the Cross
or some like thing, they touch the feelings of the vulgar and cause
weeping, according to what actors do on the stage. As then the Papists
are seized as it were with an insane feeling, when their deceivers thus
gesticulate, so a faithful teacher may say to them, “Let any one come
and set before your eyes the image of a dead man, or say, that you must
all shortly die and be like the earcase shewn to you, and ye will cry
and weep; and yet ye will sot consider how dreadful God’s judgment is,
which I declare to you: I shew to you faithfully from the law, from the
prophets, and from the Gospel; how dreadful is God’s vengeance, and set
before you what ye deserve; yet none of you are moved; but my doctrine
is a mockery to you, and also my reproofs and threatenings: go then to
your prophets, who shew you pictures and the like trumperies.” So the
Prophet says now, “I see that I can do you no good; the Lord will
therefore give you no teachers but women.” Of what sort? Even such, he
says, as lament, or are hired to mourn.

<span id="xix.xxi-p10"></span>We now then perceive why the Prophet
speaks of hired women. *Attend ye,* he says; and why? They ought indeed
to have been attentive to or to understand (for <span
id="xix.xxi-p10.1"></span>בן *ben,* means properly to understand, and in
Hithpael it signifies to consider) his words; but as he saw that he was
ridiculed or despised, and that all the threatenings which proceeded
from God were esteemed as fables, he now says, *“Consider ye and call
for your lamenters:* — as I see such perverseness in you, be taught at
least by those women who are commonly invited to lament, and who sell
their tears!” *Send,* he says, *for the skilfu1, that they may come* By
these words he intended more clearly to express, that the calamity which
the people feared not was not far distant.

<span id="xix.xxi-p11"></span><span id="xix.xxi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p12"></span>*Let them,* he says, *take up for us a
wailing, and let our eyes come down to tears, and let our eyelids flow
down into waters* These are hyperbolical words, and yet they do not
exceed the intensehess of the coming vengeance: for it was not in vain
that he said at the begSnning of the chapter, “Who will make my head
waters, and my eyes a fountain of tears?” As then the greatness of the
calamity could be expressed by no words, the Prophet was constrained to
adopt these hyperbolical expressions: *Let them* then *take up for us a
wailing, that our eyes may come down to tears:* and this he said,
because he saw that he was heard with dry eyes, and that the people
disregarded what had been denounced:, when yet all ought to have been
smitten with fear, from the least to the greatest. As then the Prophet
saw that their contempt was so brutal, he says, that when lainenters
came, there would then be the time for wailing, not indeed the
seasonable time; but it is the same as though he had said, that the Jews
would then find out how insensible they had been, in not having in due
time considered the judgment of God.  <span
id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250.md) It follows —

<span id="xix.xxii"></span>

<span id="xix.xxii-p1"></span><span id="xix.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#019.md)<span id="xix.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxii-p2"></span>**19**. For a voice of wailing is heard
out of Zion, How are we spoiled! we are greatly confounded, because we
have forsaken the land, because our dwellings have cast *us* out.

<span id="xix.xxii-p3"></span>**19**. Quia vox luctus audita est ex
Sion, Quomodo perditi *(aut,* vastati) sumus? pudefacti valde? quia
dereliquimus terram, quia projecerunt habitacula nostra *(quidam
subaudirent,* projecerunt nos.)

<span id="xix.xxii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xix.xxii-p5"></span><span id="xix.xxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxii-p6"></span>We have said before, that when Jeremiah
addressed the people in these words, they were still in a tolerably good
condition, so that the king had confidence in his own resources; and his
counsellors also thought that some aid would come to them from Egypt,
and the people were likewise deceived. But the Prophet speaks of future
events and points out as by the finger the evils which were as yet
concealed from the view; for he could not otherwise teach with any
authority, as he had to do with men of iron hearts. As then he saw that
his teaching had no effect, and was wholly disregarded by men so
slothful, he felt it necessary to form his style so as to touch their
feelings.

<span id="xix.xxii-p7"></span>On this account he says, that a *voice was
heard, a voice of wailing from Sion;* where yet all exulted with joy.
Then he adds, *How have we been destroyed! and made greatly ashamed!*
The Jews thought this a fable, until they found by experience that they
had been extremely hard and obstinate: but this really happened. Though
they were then indulging in their pleasures, he yet proclaims
lamentations to them, as though they were already destroyed: *A voice,*
he says, *has been heard,* as though the Jews were bewailing the
calamity, respecting which they thought the Prophet was fabling, for no
danger was yet apparent.

<span id="xix.xxii-p8"></span>But in order, as I have said, to condemn
the hardness of their hearts, he represents them in another character,
as bewailing their ruinous condition, and saying, *We have left the
land;* in which however they thought their dwelling would be perpetual;
for they boasted that they could never be excluded, as it had been
declared,

<span id="xix.xxii-p9"></span>“This is my rest for ever, here will I
dwell, for I have chosen it.”  
(<span id="xix.xxii-p9.2"></span>[Ps
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014.md)<span
id="xix.xxii-p9.2"></span>.)

<span id="xix.xxii-p10"></span>As then God had testified that it would
be a quiet habitation to his people, they thought that they were
fortified by a triple wall and rampart, and that the city was altogether
unassailable. But Jeremiah represents them as saying, that they had left
their own land, that is, that they had been drawn and driven into exile.
Then he adds, *because they have cast us out* This seems to refer to
their enemies who had cast them out, that is, pulled down their
dwellings. Some take dwellings to be the nominative case to the verb,
“*Our dwellings have cast us out*.”  <span
id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251.md) But the first meaning reads better: I
therefore consider the sense to be simply this, — that they were cast
out and that their houses were destroyed by their enemies. It follows —

<span id="xix.xxiii"></span>

<span id="xix.xxiii-p1"></span><span
id="xix.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
9:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#020.md)<span
id="xix.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxiii-p2"></span>**20**. Yet hear the word of the LORD, O
ye women, and let your ear receive the word of his mouth, and teach your
daughters wailing, and every one her neighbour lamentation.

<span id="xix.xxiii-p3"></span>**20**. Itaque audite mulieres sermonem
Jehovae, et percipiant aures vestrae sermonem oris ejus, et docete
filias vestras luctum, et unaquaeque (mulier, ad verbum) sociam (vel,
propinquam) suam planctum:

<span id="xix.xxiii-p4"></span>**21**. For death is come up into our
windows, *and* is entered into our palaces, to cut off the children from
without, *and* the young men from the streets.

<span id="xix.xxiii-p5"></span>**21**. Quia ascendit mors in fenestras
nostras, intravit in palatia nostra ad excidendum infantem e platea (e
via publica) electos (hoc est adolescentes, etiam in flore oetatis et
vigore) in compitis.

<span id="xix.xxiii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xix.xxiii-p7"></span><span id="xix.xxiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxiii-p8"></span>He proceeds with the same subject, but
adopts another figure. He then somewhat changes the comparison; for he
had bidden them before to hire women to excite to mourning by fictitious
tears, but he now addresses women in general; as though he had said,
that such would be the mourning, that hired lamentations would not be
sufficient, for the calamity would touch all hearts, and that mercenary
wailing would not be real. *Hear,* he says, *ye women*

<span id="xix.xxiii-p9"></span>Why he addresses women may be accounted
for in two ways: the softness of women more easily leads them to weep;
there may be also here an indirect condemnation of the men, that they
were deaf and so hardened that no threatenings terrified them. But the
first seems to be the most suitable reason here, provided we still
understand that real mourning is opposed to reigned mourning. Then
Jeremiah passes from the particular to the general; that is, after
having spoken of hired women, he now includes all women; for lamentation
would prevail in every city, and also in every house: *Hear* then, *ye
women, the word of Jehovah*

<span id="xix.xxiii-p10"></span>And he adds, *and let your ears receive
the word of his mouth* He mentions on the one hand the *mouth* of God,
and on the other the *ears* of women. It seems indeed a redundancy, but
the repetition is not superfluous. Had he said only, “Let your ears hear
the word of his mouth,” there would have been a redundancy; but he spoke
before only of the word of God, and hear ye; now he adds, the *mouth* of
God, and the *ears* of women. The Prophet no doubt intended to rebuke
that hardness which we have often noticed. The word of God was deemed of
no moment; hence he says, the *mouth* of God: as though he had said,
“God speaks with you as it were from mouth to mouth: for though he
employs my labor, I am yet but his instrument; so that you may easily
find out that I declare nothing presumptuously, but faithfully deliver
what I have received from him.” We hence see how emphatical is this
repetition, which may seem at first sight to be superfluous. The same
emphasis belongs to the *ears* of women; it is as though he had said,
that they had been hitherto extremely indifferent, and that it was time
for their ears to be attentive.

<span id="xix.xxiii-p11"></span>He adds, *And teach your daughters;* as
though he had said, that such would be the wailing, that it would reach
not only the old and the middle-aged, but even young girls, as yet rude
and ignorant. *And let every one,* he says, *teach her neighbor
lamentation* In short, the meaning is, that no women, old or young,
would be exempt from this mourning, as all would be implicated in a
common sorrow; for God’s judgment would reach every age, sex, and order
of men, and would also penetrate into every house.

<span id="xix.xxiii-p12"></span><span id="xix.xxiii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxiii-p13"></span>And by way of explanation he adds, *For
death has ascended into our windows* There is here a kind of derision;
for the Jews, as it has been said, had falsely promised to themselves a
perpetual impunity; and therefore the Prophet adopts here a most
suitable comparison. For as they sleep securely, who with closed doors
seem to themselves to be beyond the reach of danger; so the Jews at that
time despised God and all his judgments, as though the doors of their
houses were closed. Hence the Prophet says, that *death* had entered in
*through the windows;* and he thus derides their folly for thinking that
they could escape the hand of God, because their gates were shut, as
though. God’s power could not ascend above the clouds nor enter through
their windows, when the doors were closed. In short, he intimates that
the doors would not be opened by God; for though he might not be
disposed to break them, he could yet immediately ascend into the
windows. We now apprehend the Prophet’s design in saying, that *death*
had entered through the *windows.*

<span id="xix.xxiii-p14"></span>And what he adds respecting *palaces*
bears the same import; as though he had said, “Were our houses even
fortified, and were they not. only commodious habitations, but made like
citadels, yet God could not be excluded; for his power can penetrate
through the highest and the thickest walls, so that a palace is to him
like the weakest and frailest cottage.” We hence see that by this
comparison he checks that foolisll confidence by which the Jews had
deceived themselves, and by which they were as yet inebriated. *Death*
then *has ascended into our windows, etc.*

<span id="xix.xxiii-p15"></span>He then adds, *To cut off the young,* or
children, *from the public ways, and the youths from the streets*  <span
id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252.md) By these words he sets forth the
dreadfulness of the calamity; for the youths would not be able to defend
themselves by their own strength; for by <span
id="xix.xxiii-p18.1"></span>בחורים, *bechurim,* he means the most
robust. Even these would not be able to repel the onset of their
enemies; though in the flower of their age, yet their rigor, however
strong, would not protect them, nor would children and infants be
spared. We see that two things are here set forth by the Prophet, — that
the assaults of their enemies would be so violent, that young men would
in vain resist them, as their vigor would avail them nothing, — and then
that such would be the cruelty of their enemies, that no regard would be
shewn for age, for they would put to death even infants newly born. It
follows —

<span id="xix.xxiv"></span>

<span id="xix.xxiv-p1"></span><span id="xix.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#022.md)<span id="xix.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxiv-p2"></span>**22**. Speak, Thus saith the LORD, Even
the carcases of men shall fall as dung upon the open field, and as the
handful after the harvestman, and none shall gather *them.*

<span id="xix.xxiv-p3"></span>**22**. Loquere, Sic dicit Jehova, Cadet
cadaver hominis, tanquam stercus in superficie agri, et tanquam
manipulus a tergo messoris, et nemo colligens.

<span id="xix.xxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xix.xxiv-p5"></span><span id="xix.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxiv-p6"></span>Though Jeremiah continues the same
subject, he yet introduces a preface, — that he had been commanded to
declare what he says here; for on account of the strangeness of the
event, the prophecy seemed incredible. He might, indeed, have proceeded
with the subject, and omitted the words, *“Thus saith Jehovah,”* and
have begun thus: “Fall shall the carcase of man,” etc. But, as I have
said, this prophecy seemed to the greatest part as worthless, as though
it was a fable: it was therefore necessary to introduce these words, —
that he came forth furnished with God’s command; and he at the same time
shews that he introduced nothing of his own, but that God himself spoke.
We now perceive why these few words were introduced.  <span
id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253.md)

<span id="xix.xxiv-p10"></span>He afterwards says, that the *carcases of
men* would be cast forth *as dung* He speaks by way of reproach, as
though he had said, that all would without honor be laid prostrate by
their enemies. And he adds a similitude, *They shall fall,* he says, *on
the face of the field,* that is, everywhere through all the fields shall
they fall *as dung,* which is cast forth, and which excites nausea by
its sight and by its odor. Thus the Prophet here denotes foetor and a
deformed sight by the comparison of dung: yet we know with what pride
were they then filled. This threatening then was to them very
disagreeable; but as they flattered themselves in their vices, it was
the more necessary to treat them roughly; for thus ought hypocrites to
be dealt with, who indulge their own delusions: the more boldly they
rise up against God, the more violently ought they to be east down, so
that they may at length humble themselves under the mighty hand of God.

<span id="xix.xxiv-p11"></span>He adds another comparison, *As a
handful,* etc. Jerome renders it “hay.” If <span
id="xix.xxiv-p11.1"></span>עמיד *omid,* were found elsewhere in this
sense, I would willingly adopt this meaning; but I rather think that it
means those ears of corn which are not gathered while the reapers
collect their handfuls. They do not, indeed, leave complete handfuls,
nor east them away; but it happens, through carelessness, that a few
ears escape them. Then the Prophet says, that the Jews would be like
those ears of corn which the reapers pass by and leave behind; and there
is no one afterwards to gather them: and those ears of corn which thus
remain in the field either rot of themselves, or are devoured by cattle
or wild beasts. He then means, that there would be no residue of the
people, for all, from the least to the greatest, would be given up to
destruction.

<span id="xix.xxiv-p12"></span>This is the meaning; and at the same time
he expresses contempt; for when reapers do not collect the whole produce
of the field, there are still the poor, who gather the ears of corn; but
when they are trodden under foot, and when there is no one to gather
them, it betokens contempt; and this is what the Prophet intended to
express. It now follows —

<span id="xix.xxv"></span>

<span id="xix.xxv-p1"></span><span id="xix.xxv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
9:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#023.md)<span id="xix.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxv-p2"></span>**23**. Thus saith the LORD, Let not the
wise *man* glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty *man* glory in
his might, let not the rich *man* glory in his riches:

<span id="xix.xxv-p3"></span>**23**. Sic dicit Jehova, Ne glorietur
sapiens in sapientia sua, et ne glorietur fortis in fortitudine sua; ne
glorietur dives in divitiis suis:

<span id="xix.xxv-p4"></span>**24**: But let him that glorieth glory in
this, that he understandeth and knoweth me, that I *am* the LORD which
exercise lovingkindness, judgment, and righteousness, in the earth: for
in these *things* I delight, saith the LORD.

<span id="xix.xxv-p5"></span>**24**. Sed in hoc glorietur qui gloriatur
cognoscendo et sciendo me, quod ego sum Jehova, faciens misericordiam,
(vel, clementiam) judicium et justitiam in terra; quia in his complacuit
mihi, dicit Jehova.

<span id="xix.xxv-p6"></span> 

<span id="xix.xxv-p7"></span><span id="xix.xxv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxv-p8"></span>This is a remarkable passage, and often
found in the mouth of men, as other notable sentences, which are known
as proverbial sayings: but yet few rightly consider how these words are
connected with the previous context. Hence there are many who are
satisfied with a simple explanation, as though it were a subject
abruptly introduced, and as though the Prophet commenced something new;
and they confine themselves to those words: and thus they misrepresent
the meaning of the Prophet, or at least diminish much of the force of
what is taught.

<span id="xix.xxv-p9"></span>The Prophet no doubt has a regard to what
has gone before. He saw, as I have often said, that he addressed the
deaf; for the Jews were so swollen with false confidence, that the word
of God was regarded worthless by them. As then some were proud for their
riches, and others thought themselves more prudent than that they could
by any means be taken, and others thought themselves so fortified by
wealth and power, that they could easily resist any evil, — as then the
minds of all were possessed with so much pride, the Prophet, in order to
confirm what he had said, declares here that men foolishly gloried,
while they set up their riches, or their strength, or their wisdom, in
opposition to God; for all these things would vanish away like smoke.

<span id="xix.xxv-p10"></span>We now then perceive why the Prophet
forbids here any to glory except in God alone, and how the passage ought
not to be deemed as abrupt, but connected with what he said, when he
denounced destruction on the Jews, which yet they dreaded not, because
they were filled with this ungodly and foolish conceit, — that they had
more than a sufficient protection in their own strength, or riches, or
wisdom. The rest to-morrow.

<span id="xix.xxvi"></span>

<span id="xix.xxvi-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xix.xxvi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou
settest before our eyes so many evils and vices by which we have
provoked thine anger against us, and yet givest us the hope of pardon if
we repent, — O grant us a teachable spirit, that we may with becoming
meekness attend to thy threatenings, and be in such a way territlcd by
them as not yet to despair of the mercy offered to us, but seek it
through thy Son: and as he has once for all pacified thee by shedding
his blood, so cleanse thou us also by thy Spirit from all our
pollutions, until we at length stand immaculate before thee in that day
when Christ shall appear for the salvation of all his people. — Amen.

<span id="xix.xxvii"></span>

<span id="xix.xxvii-p1"></span>Lecture Thirty-Eighth

<span id="xix.xxvii-p2"></span>We began yesterday to explain what the
Prophet means, when he forbids men to glory either in wisdom, or in
strength, or in riches. The meaning is, that all are greatly deceived
who think themselves blessed while alienated from God. We have also
noticed the reason why he speaks of wisdom, strength, and riches, even
this, — because it is a vice innate in all mortals to be proud of their
own excellency. Whatever we think valuable ought to be acknowledged as
received from God. If then all the excellency we have is God’s gift, it
is very strange that we do not learn humility when God thus binds us to
himself; but that, on the contrary, we abuse his bounty by making it the
occasion of pride. This ingratitude has nevertheless ever prevailed in
the world. This then is the reason why the Prophet here reduces to
nothing all the boastings of the world. There were among the Jews some
rich, others excelled in wisdom, and others in power: thus it happened,
that heavenly truth was of no value in their esteem. As then some
trusted in their riches and not. in God, and others in their wisdom, and
others in their valor, the Prophet here declares that all the glory they
arrogated on account of God’s temporal gifts, was all nothing. It
remained then for the Jews to consider, that all such confidences would
avail nothing against God’s judgment.

<span id="xix.xxvii-p3"></span>But we may hence learn a general truth;
and Paul no doubt had a regard to this passage in <span
id="xix.xxvii-p3.1"></span>[1Co
1:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#031.md)<span id="xix.xxvii-p3.1"></span>.
He teaches us there, that God chooses what is foolish in the world, that
he might thus shame the wisdom of the world, and that he chooses what is
weak, that he might upset the strength of the world; and then he adds,
That whosoever glories must glory in God alone. He doubtless took this
passage from the Prophet; and yet he does not only speak there of
strength of body, nor of riches, nor of worldly wisdom; but includes
also righteousness, and whatever is deemed valuable or honorable among
men. His object, then is to annihilate every glory that belongs to the
flesh, that the mercy of God alone may shine forth. Hence I said, that
though the Prophet mentions only three things, yet a generaal doctrine
may hence be suitably drawn; for what is said of wisdom, strength, and
riches, may and ought to be applied to that false conceit of
righteousness with which hypocrites swell. We shall now consider the
words.

<span id="xix.xxvii-p4"></span><span id="xix.xxvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxvii-p5"></span>*Thus saith Jehovah, Let not the wise
glory, etc*  <span id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254.md) By way of
concession he calls those wise who were without the fear of God, which
yet we know is the beginning of wisdom. (<span
id="xix.xxvii-p6.2"></span>[Ps
111:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#010.md)<span
id="xix.xxvii-p6.2"></span>; <span id="xix.xxvii-p6.3"></span>[Pr
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#007)<span id="xix.xxvii-p6.3"></span>..md)
But the Prophet speaks according to the common opinion; and the meaning
may be thus given, “Let; not him who seenas wise to himself glory in his
own wisdom:” and so the other words may be understood. It is then added,
*But let him who glories, glory in this,* etc. It appears from the
second verse, that men are not so stripped of all glory, that they may
be down in disgrace; but that they may seek a better glory, for God
detights not in the degradation of men. But as they arrogate to
themselves more than what is right, and even inebriate themselves with
delusions, he strips them naked, that after having known that all they
think they have, either from nature, or from themselves, or from other
creatures, is a mere phantom, they may seek true glory.

<span id="xix.xxvii-p7"></span>He afterwards adds, *In understanding and
knowing me* Though by these two word the Prophet means the same thing,
yet they are not used without a design; for as men despised the
knowledge of God, it was necessary to remind them, that to know God is
the chief part of perfect wisdom. He therefore intended to correct the
mischievous error under which almost the whole world labors; for while
all attend to wxrious pursuits, the knowledge of God is neglected. We
see with what ardor every one pursues his own fancies, while hardly one
in a hundred deigns to spend half an hour in the day in seeking the
knowledge of God. And there is also another evil, a false opinion, which
proceeds from pride, — that to know God is a common thing. We hence
perceive why the Prophet has employed these two words to designate the
same thing; it was to rouse more fully the attention of men; for he saw
that almost all were torpid and indifferent on a subject which is justly
entitled to the labor of a whole life; nay, were a hundred lives given
us, this one thing would be sufficient to engage our attention. But, as
it has been said, what ought to be preferred to all other things is
despised and neglected.

<span id="xix.xxvii-p8"></span>He afterwards adds, *That I am Jehovah,
who doeth judgment.* By calling himself Jehovah, he doubtless excludes
all those devices which then engaged the attention of the Jews; for the
whole land was corrupted by so many superstitions, that the name of the
only true God was unknown. They all, indeed, professed to worship the
God of Abraham, who had delivered to them his law by the hand of Moses;
but as many errors were mingled with the true doctrine, God was deprived
of his own honor. It was, then, God’s will that he should be so known as
to appear alone supreme, and to be alone as it were kept in view. But
the explanation which follows ought to be carefully observed; for had he
said only, “Let every one who glories, glory in the knowledge of me,
that I am Jehovah,” it would, indeed, have been a plain truth, but not
sufficiently persplcuous or evident; for the minds of men might have
been in suspense, and they might have said, “What does this mean? or,
why is it, that God regards the knowledge of himself to be so important?
They might also have supposed that it was quite enough to confess him to
be the only true God. Hence God here reminds the Jews of his own divine
perfections, that they might really know that he is God, and that they
might not ascribe to him an empty name. It was for this reason that I
have said, that these words, *who doeth mercy and judgement and
justice,* ought to be carefully observed.

<span id="xix.xxvii-p9"></span>We see at this day, under the Papacy,
that the name of God is presumptuously gloried in: there is no one who
is not ready boldly to declare that he worships the one true God, and
yet they profane his name; for they afterwards rob God, and bestow the
spoils on the dead. This passage then teaches us, that the name of God
of itself would be of no importance, if stripped of his power and
perfections. Hence we have then only the true knowledge of God, when we
not only acknowledge him to be the creator of the world, but when we
also fully believe that the world is governed by him, and when we
further understand the way in which he governs it, that is, by *doing
mercy and judgment and justice*

<span id="xix.xxvii-p10"></span>Now, the first thing respecting God is,
that we should acknowledge him to be beneficient and bountiful; for what
would become of us without the mercy of God? Therefore the true and
right knowledge of God begins here, that is, when we know him to be
merciful towards us. For what would it avail us to know that God is
just, except we had a previous knowledge of his mercy and gratuitous
goodness? We cannot know God without knowing ourselves. These two things
are connected. Now, if any examines himself, what will he find but what
will make him to despair? Thus, whenever God is thought of, we feel a
dread, and despair in a manner swallows us up. In short, all avoid God,
except the sweetness of his grace allures them. Why? Because, as I have
said, there is nothing but what brings misery to us, and a cause of
dread. Hence Jeremiah, while bidding men to glory in the knowledge of
God, has not in vain given the first and the highest place to his mercy.

<span id="xix.xxvii-p11"></span>He afterwards adds, *Judgement and
justice* When these two words are joined together, they denote perfect
government; that is, that God defends his faithful people, aids the
miserable, and delivers them when unjustly oppressed; and also that he
restrains the wicked, and suffers them not to injure the innocent at
their pleasure. These then are the things which the Scripture everywhere
means by the two words, judgment and justice. The justice of God is not
to be taken according to what is commonly understood by it; and they
speak incorrectly who represent God’s justice as in opposition to his
mercy: hence the common proverb, “I appeal from justice to mercy.” The
Scripture speaks otherwise; for *justice* is to be taken for that
faithful protection of God, by which he defends and preserves his own
people; and *judgment,* for the rigor which he exercises against the
transgressors of his law.

<span id="xix.xxvii-p12"></span>But, as I have already said, judgment
and justice, when found together, are to be taken for that legitimate
government, by which God so regulates the affairs of the world, that
there is nothing but what is just and right: and hence is confirmed more
fully what I have already stated, that he not only speaks generally, but
intends also to remove the evils which then stood in the way, and
prevented the Jews from rightly receiving either promises or
threatenings; for a false glory inebriated them all, inasmuch as one
thought his riches to be like an invincible fortress; another, his
wisdom; and the third, his strength. As then they were full of vain
pride, and thus despised God and his heavenly truth, it was necessary to
bring them to order, and even wholly to strip them, that they might know
that they were not to glory in anything but in the knowledge of God.

<span id="xix.xxvii-p13"></span>Now, the knowledge mentioned here
produces two fruits, even faith and fear; for if we are fully, persuaded
that there is propitiation with God, as it is said in <span
id="xix.xxvii-p13.1"></span>[Ps
130:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#004.md)<span
id="xix.xxvii-p13.1"></span> we recumb on him, and hesitate not to flee
to him, and to place our salvation in his hand. This is one thing. Then
faith brings fear, as it is said in the psalm referred to,

<span id="xix.xxvii-p14"></span>“There is propitiation with thee, that
thou mayest be feared.”

<span id="xix.xxvii-p15"></span>But the Prophet here distinctly refers
to these two things; for God, by expressing his will to be known as
being merciful, doubtless encourages us to exercise faith, so that we
may call on him witIx tranquil minds, and not doubt but he is propitious
to us; for he looks not on what we are, in order to repay to us wlmt we
deserve, but deals graciously with us according to his *mercy:* and by
saying that he doeth *judgment* and *justice,* he intimates, that these
two things ought to dispose and turn our hearts to fear and reverence.
At the same time, when God declares that he doeth justice, He supplies
us with a reason for *confidence;* for he thus promises to be the
guardian of our salvation: for, as I have said, his justice is not to
render to every one his just reward, but is to be extended further, and
is to be taken for his faithfulness. As then God never forsakes his own
people, but aids them in due time, and restrains the wicked, he is on
this account called just: we hence can then more securely, and with
quieter minds, recumb on him, when we know that his justice is such,
that he will never leave us destitute of help whenever necessary.

<span id="xix.xxvii-p16"></span>He afterwards adds, *For in these I
delight, saith Jehovah* This refers to men; as though God had said, that
he hated all who pass by the knowledge of his mercy, judgment, and
justice, and become ferocious and elated with a vain hope on account of
riches, or of strength, or of wisdom, according to what is said in <span
id="xix.xxvii-p16.1"></span>[Ps
147:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#010.md)<span
id="xix.xxvii-p16.1"></span>,

<span id="xix.xxvii-p17"></span>“The strength of a horse pleases not
God, nor is he delighted with the legs of a man;”

<span id="xix.xxvii-p18"></span>as though he had said, that God hates
that confidence by which men presumptuously extol themselves, while they
think their life and their safety to be in their own hand. So also, in
this passage, there is a contrast to be understood between the knowledge
of God’s mercy, judgment, and justice, and the wisdom, strength, riches,
and the foolish glorying, by which men are inflated, when they seek in
these their happiness.  <span id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255.md)

<span id="xix.xxvii-p22"></span>We now also more clearly see what I have
before said, — that not only condemned in these words is the boasting of
human power, and the glowing in wisdom and in wealth, but that men are
wholly stripped of all the confidence they place in themselves, or seek
from the world, in order that the knowledge of God alone may be deemed
enough for obtaining perfect happiness. For the Prophet shews, with
sufficient clearness, that all men without God are miserable: it hence
follows, that they are not otherwise happy but in him. Then the way and
manner is to be added. How are we made happy in God? Even by knowing his
mercy towards us, and then by delivering up ourselves to his defense and
protection, and by suffering ourselves to be ruled by him, and by
obeying also his law, because we fear his judgment. This passage might
indeed be more fully handled; but it is enough for me, according to my
custom, to point out the main things. It now follows —

<span id="xix.xxvii-p23"></span> 

<span id="xix.xxviii"></span>

<span id="xix.xxviii-p1"></span><span
id="xix.xxviii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
9:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#025.md)<span
id="xix.xxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxviii-p2"></span>**25**. Behold, the days come, saith the
LORD, that I will punish all *them which* *are* circumcised with the
uncircumcised;

<span id="xix.xxviii-p3"></span>**25**. Ecce dies veniunt, dicit Jehova,
ut visitem *(ad verbum,* et visitabo) super omnem circumcisum in
praeputio.

<span id="xix.xxviii-p4"></span>**26**. Egypt, and Judah, and Edom, and
the children of Ammon, and Moab, and all *that are* in the utmost
corners, that dwell in the wilderness: for all *these* nations *are*
uncircumcised, and all the house of Israel *are* uncircumcised in the
heart.

<span id="xix.xxviii-p5"></span>**26**. Super Egyptium (*vel*, super
Egyptum; *tam de terra quam de hominibus potest accipi) et* super
Jehudah, et super Edom, et super omnes filios Amon, et super Moab, et
super omnes finitos in angulo *(alii vertunt,* attonsos comam, *sed
nulla ratio apparet)* habitantes in deserto; quia omnes gentes
incircumcisae *(vel,* praeputiatae) et tota domus Israel praeputiati
sunt corde *(vel,* incircumcisi.)

<span id="xix.xxviii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xix.xxviii-p7"></span><span id="xix.xxviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxviii-p8"></span>The Prophet, after having removed the
obstacle which he saw hindered the Jews from reverently receiving the
truth of God, now speaks more sharply, and performs the office of a
herald in denouncing the vengeance which was at hand: *Behold,* he says,
*come shall the days,* in which *I will visit all the uncircumcised in
uncircumcision*

<span id="xix.xxviii-p9"></span>This passage admits of two meanings.
Some interpreters take as distinct these two words, <span
id="xix.xxviii-p9.1"></span>מול *mul,* the circumcised, <span
id="xix.xxviii-p9.2"></span>בערלה, *beorle,* in uncircumcision; as
though Jeremiah had said, “I will visit the Jews, who are circumcised,
as well as the heathen nations, who are uncircumcised,” Others read them
jointly, — that God threatens vengeance on the Jews and Gentiles,
because they were circumcised, and still retained uncircumcision. The
passage may however be thus suitably explained, — that there was a
mixture, which corrupted the sacredness of circumcision, and made it
like the uncircumcision of the Gentiles; as though it were thus
expressed, “I will visit the circumcised with the uncircumcision,” that
is, promiscuously and without any difference, as we say in our language,
*Pele mele.* For it follows afterwards, that *all were uncircumcised in
heart;* that is, all the Jews. We hence see that the Prophet makes
circumcision and uncireumcision the same, and that he intended to render
profane the sacred symbol of adoption;but he had reference to the Jews,
who, being degenerated, thus adulterated God’s covenant, and at the same
time violated circumcision, so that in differed nothing from
*uncircumcision.* I therefore think, that the Jews are classed with the
Gentiles, so that he ascribes even to them uncircumcision: *I will* then
*visit all the circumcised with the uncircumcision;* that is, the
*circumcision* of each is vain, and is like uncircumcision.

<span id="xix.xxviii-p10"></span><span id="xix.xxviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxviii-p11"></span>However this may be, the Prophet here
denounces ruin, not only on the Jews, but also on the Egyptians and on
other neighboring nations; but he yet speaks to his own people, for his
word was not destined for the Egyptians, nor for the Idumeans and the
Moabites. But as the Jews were wont to have recourse to the Egyptians,
when any danger arose from the Assyrians and Chaldeans, the Prophet here
connects the Egyptians with the Jews, and for the same reason, the other
nations. We indeed know that the Idumeans and the Moabites were most
hostile enemies to the Jews; but as the state of things changed, they
were at one time their enemies, at another their friends; and when they
saw that the Chaldeans extended their power, they saw also that they
were exposed to plunder, and hence it happened that they willingly
helped the Jews. Since then the Hebrews hoped that their neighbors on
every side would aid them, the Prophet says that a visitation was nigh
them all: and hence is confirmed what I have already said; for he
distinguishes not the Jews from the Egyptians and other nations; but, on
the contrary, as they had made alliances with them, he intends to unite
them in one body: *I will visit,* he says, *the circumcised with the
uncircumcision* For the Jews did not bear in mind that God was the
protector of their safety, and that they had been set apart by him from
other nations. He names the circumcised together with the
uncircumcision, because the Egyptians, the Idumeans, the Ammonites, and
the Moabites, were deemed circumcised on account of the covenant they
had made with the Jews; and the Jews were deemed uncircumcised, because
they had forsaken God, and thus profarted themselves.

<span id="xix.xxviii-p12"></span>It is indeed true that the Idumeans
were circumcised, for they were the descendants of Esau, and had no
doubt retained this external symbol; but their circumcision was
altogether a mockery, as Esau had departed from the Church of God. The
circumcision of the elect people was in itself efficacious; but as they
had alike fallen into superstitions, they were like the uncircumcised,
according to what Paul says, — that the letter of the circumcision, that
is, the external rite, was nothing. We hence see that there is no common
propriety in the Prophet’s words, when he denounces vengeance on the
Jews as well as on the Egyptians, and names the circumcised with the
uneircumcision; for the latter had uncircumcision, the former
circumcision, and thus they had blended profane and sacred things
together, so that there was nothing pure or uncorrupted: and hence he
mentions *Egypt, Judah, Edom,* the *children of Ammon,* and *Moab* We
have before stated why he enumerated all these nations; he did so,
because they expected help from one another, so that they all despised
God.

<span id="xix.xxviii-p13"></span>He afterwards adds, *And all the
extreme ones in a corner* The word <span
id="xix.xxviii-p13.1"></span>קף, *kots,* means the end; hence they take
<span id="xix.xxviii-p13.2"></span>קצוצים, *kotsutsim,* here for
extremities: and <span id="xix.xxviii-p13.3"></span>פאה *pae,* signifies
a corner, and an end. We might then, if propriety of language would bear
it, render the words thus, “the cornered in the corner.” But the meaning
is by no means ambiguous, which is, that though the Moabites and others
had hidden recesses, they could not be exempt from the calamity. God’s
vengeance shall come, says Jeremiah, into their farthest corners, where
they think that they dwell in safety. And what follows is explanatory,
*the inhabitants of the wilderness,* or, those who dwell in the
wilderness. He thus shews what he meant by <span
id="xix.xxviii-p13.4"></span>קצוצי פאה *kotsutsi pae,* the extremities,
of the corner. For when people inhabit remote places, they regard
themselves on that account safer, being secure in their hiding — places:
this confidence the Prophet derides; and he says that punishment would
*reach* them also.  <span id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256.md)

<span id="xix.xxviii-p19"></span>He then adds, *For all the nations are
uncircumcised, and the whole house of Israel is uncircumcised in heart*
By saying, that *all nations* were uncircumcised, he doubtless includes
the Israelites, and thus by way of reproach he takes away from the
chosen people their peculiar distinction; as though he had said, that
Israel was so mixed with the nations, that they only made a part of
them: the Jews would have otherwise denied, that they deserved to be
classed with the Gentiles; but the Prophet deprives them of every
excuse, and says that they were but one nation, having no difference:
*All these nations* then *are uncircumcised* And so <span
id="xix.xxviii-p19.1"></span>ה *He,* before <span
id="xix.xxviii-p19.2"></span>גוים *guim,* nations, may be taken as a
demonstrative pronoun, and not a relative, “All these nations.” He had
spoken not only of the Egyptians and the Idumeans and of other
neighboring nations, but had also mentioned Judah. He then says, “All
these nations are uncircumcised:” and as I have already said, he
condemns Israel, because they differed nothing from the nations, though
God had consecrated them to himself; for there was an entire mingling,
which made them all equal.

<span id="xix.xxviii-p20"></span>But as some objection might still be
alleged, he says, the Jews are *uncircumcised in heart* He had indeed
already included them in the nations; but it was necessary to insist
more on this point, for circumcision might have been pleaded by them.
Hence the Prophet says, that though they had the visible symbol in the
flesh, they were yet uncircumcised in heart, and ought therefore to be
classed with the nations. We see how sharply he reproves them: though he
separates them from other nations, he yet shews that they justly
deserved to be numbered with them; for God cares not for the external
symbol, but regards the chief thing, the circumcision of the heart.

<span id="xix.xxviii-p21"></span>It is a common thing with Moses and the
Prophets to call an unrenewed heart, uncircumcision, and to say that the
people are *uncircumcised* in heart: for circumcision, while an evidence
of free salvation in Christ, at the same time initiated the Jews into
the worship and service of God, and proved the necessity of a new life;
it was in short a sign both of repentance and of faith. When, therefore,
the Jews presented only the sign, they were justly derided by Moses and
the prophets; for they seemed as though they sought to pacify God by a
thing of nought, without regarding the end. The same is the case now
when we boast of baptism alone, and are at the same time destitute of
repentance and faith: our boasting is absurd and ridiculous. And hence
Paul calls the external rite, when the sign is separated from its
reality and substance, the letter of the circumcision; and on the other
hand he calls that the true circumcision, which is in secret and in the
spirit. We may also say the same of baptism, — that the literal baptism
avails hypocrites nothing, for they receive only the naked sign: and
therefore we must come to the spirit of baptism, to the thing itself;
for the interior power is renovation, when our old man is crucified in
us, and when we rise again with Christ into newness of life.

<span id="xix.xxix"></span>

<span id="xix.xxix-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xix.xxix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast
revealed to us in thy Gospel how guilty and miserable we are, we may
learn to loathe ourselves, ard so He down confounded and despairing on
account of the sins and guilt we have contracted, as yet to know that
true glory is offered to us, and that we can be made partakers of it, if
by true faith we embrace thy only-begotten Son, in whom is offered to us
perfect righteousness and salvation: And grant also that we may so
cleave to Christ, and so receive by faith his blessings, that we may be
able, not only before the world, but also against Satan and death
itself, to glory in thee, that thou alone art just and wise and strong;
and may thy strength and justice and wisdom shine forth upon us in our
iniquity and ignorance and infirmity, until we shall at length reach
that ruiness of glory, which has been prepared for us in heaven by
Christ our Lord. — Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_234"></span>[235](cc17018.htm#fr_234.md) <span
id="xix.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p8"></span> This verse is connected by some with the
last chapter: and it seems to belong to it. It forms in all the Hebrew
MSS. the 23d verse of the preceding chapter. The phrase, <span
id="xix.i-p8.1"></span>מי-יתן, “who will give,” means a wish, “O that my
head,” etc., or “May my head,” etc. The *Septuagint,* the *Vulgate,* the
*Arabic,* and the *Targum* express it literally, “Who will give;” but
the *Syriac* has, “O, I wish my head were turned into water.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_235"></span>[236](cc17018.htm#fr_235.md) <span
id="xix.ii-p9.6"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p10"></span> This verse may be rendered thus, —

<span id="xix.ii-p11"></span>O that I, had in the desert the lodging of
travellers, Then I would go away from them; For all of them *are*
adulterers, A company of hypocrites.

<span id="xix.ii-p12"></span>He preferred living in the temporary sheds
of travellers, erected in the desert, rather than to live among his own
people. How intolerably wicked they must have been! A company, or an
assembly, a multitude: the word need not be deemed as retaining its
primary idea. The meaning is, that the whole community, the whole
people, were hypocrites; they pretended to worship and serve God, and at
the same time were idolaters and treacherous and immoral in their
conduct. The word for “hypocrites” is derived from one that means a
garment, a cloak, a covering; and the verb means to act under a cover,
to act deceitfully, or falsely, or hypocritically, or perfidiously. It
is rendered “deceivers” by the *Septuagint,* “prevaricators” by the
*Vulgate,* “liars” by the *Syriac,* “falsifiers” by the *Targum,* and
“perfidious dealers” by *Blayney.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_236"></span>[237](cc17018.htm#fr_236.md) <span
id="xix.v-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p9"></span> The ancient versions differ in rendering the
first clauses of this verse: “They have bent their tongue like a bow;
falsehood and not truth has prevailed over the land,” *Septuagint;* —
“And they have stretched their tongue like a bow of falsehood, and not
of truth; they have become strong in the land,” *Vulgate;* — “Their
tongue as with their own bow have they shot; by falsity and
perfidiousness they have become great in the land,” *Syriac;* — “Their
tongues for falselhood have they bent, as a bow; and prevailed has
perfidy over the land,” *Arabic. Blayney* makes a conjectural
emendation, and *Houbigant* and *Horsley* make another; but neither is
necessary. The literal version is as follows, —

<span id="xix.v-p10"></span>And they bend their tongue, their lying bow;
And not for truth are they strong in the land.

<span id="xix.v-p11"></span>“Their lying bow,” or “their bow of
falsehood;” it was a bow by which they shot lies; they employed their
tongues for this purpose. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[238](cc17018.htm#fr_237.md) <span
id="xix.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xix.vii-p10"></span> The whole verse may he thus rendered, —

<span id="xix.vii-p11"></span>And they deceive, every one his neighbor,
And the truth they speak not; They have taught their tongue the word of
falsehood; *With* perverting have they wearied themselves.

<span id="xix.vii-p12"></span>The verb for “deceive” means to mock, to
trifle with, to play the fool with. Their object was to befool their
neighbors by cheating and deceiving them. “The word,” or the matter, “of
falsehood,” is falsehood itself, or sheer falsehood. The *Vulgate* and
the *Syriac’s* version is, “They have taught their tongue to speak
falsehood.” To teach the tongue false-hood, was to habituate it to tell
lies. The last line is differently rendered. The *Septuagint* deviates
far from the original. The version of the *Vulgate* is, “They have
labored to act unjustly;” and this comes near the meaning; only “to act
unjustly” is rather to act pervertingly: they wrested and turned
everything from its right course and meaning; and they labored in
perverting things, until they wearied themselves. Falsehood requires
more labor than truth. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[239](cc17018.htm#fr_238.md) <span
id="xix.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xix.viii-p13"></span> *Houbigant, Horsley,* and *Venema* have
suggested emendations as to this verse, derived in some measure from the
*Septuagint.* A part of the first word, <span
id="xix.viii-p13.1"></span>שבתך, is connected by the *Septuagint* with
the former verse; for it is divided into <span
id="xix.viii-p13.2"></span>שב and <span id="xix.viii-p13.3"></span>תך As
to this division the preceding authors agree; but they differ as to the
construction, though mainly the same in sense. The most probable is that
of *Venema,* for he only divides the word, and gives this version,

<span id="xix.viii-p14"></span>Burst forth does robbery upon robbery,
deceit, on deceit;  
They refuse to know me, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xix.viii-p15"></span>Burst forth, or *boil* — <span
id="xix.viii-p15.1"></span>*exoestuat,* is certainly not the meaning of
<span id="xix.viii-p15.2"></span>שב which signifies to return, to turn,
to restore, etc. Then the rendering would be,

<span id="xix.viii-p16"></span>Return does guile for guile, deceit for
deceit.

<span id="xix.viii-p17"></span>The first word is rendered “usury — <span
id="xix.viii-p17.1"></span>τόκος” by the *Septuagint,* but <span
id="xix.viii-p17.2"></span>תך means guile or fraud. See <span
id="xix.viii-p17.3"></span>[Ps
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#007.md)<span id="xix.viii-p17.3"></span>;
<span id="xix.viii-p17.4"></span>[Ps
55:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#012.md)<span
id="xix.viii-p17.4"></span>; <span id="xix.viii-p17.5"></span>[Ps
72:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#014.md)<span
id="xix.viii-p17.5"></span>. The meaning is, that their dishonest
dealings were reciprocal: the cheats cheated one another.

<span id="xix.viii-p18"></span>Our version agrees with the *Vulgate* and
the *Syriac,* and is adopted by *Blayney:* and he concludes from the end
of this verse, that the speaker from the 2d verse is not the Prophet,
but God; who, adopting the language of man, intimates his wish to leave
a people so wicked. But this conclusion is not necessary; for the
prophets often introduce sentences of this kind. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[240](cc17018.htm#fr_239.md) <span
id="xix.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ix-p9"></span> All the ancient versions (except the
*Vulgate)* and the *Targum* read, as though <span
id="xix.ix-p9.1"></span>בת “daughter,” were <span
id="xix.ix-p9.2"></span>רעת “wickedness,” as in <span
id="xix.ix-p9.3"></span>[Jer 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#012.md)<span
id="xix.ix-p9.3"></span>. Both *Houbigant* and *Horsley* adopt this
reading; and the first gives the meaning of “thus” to <span
id="xix.ix-p9.4"></span>איך, and not “how.” Then the verse would be,

<span id="xix.ix-p10"></span>Therefore thus saith Jehovah of hosts, —
Behold I will melt them that I may try them;  
For thus will I do because of the wickedness of my people.

<span id="xix.ix-p11"></span>The rendering of the last line, according;
to the received text, might be this, which is nearly the *Vulgate,* —

<span id="xix.ix-p12"></span>For how should I deal *otherwise* with the
daughter of my people?

<span id="xix.ix-p13"></span>The passage runs better in this way, than
according to the proposed emendation. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[241](cc17018.htm#fr_240.md) <span
id="xix.x-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xix.x-p8"></span> The word, <span id="xix.x-p8.1"></span>שוחט,
means “killing” or slaying; see <span id="xix.x-p8.2"></span>[Ge
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#010.md)<span id="xix.x-p8.2"></span>;
<span id="xix.x-p8.3"></span>[Ge
37:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#031.md)<span id="xix.x-p8.3"></span>;
<span id="xix.x-p8.4"></span>[Ex
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#006.md)<span id="xix.x-p8.4"></span>. Its
primary meaning, as Parkhurst thinks, is to shed, or to *drain off*,
either blood from animals, or juice from grapes, or gold from dross. But
it is used in the sense of slaying. The *Septuagint* and the *Vulgate*
render it here, “wounding,” —

<span id="xix.x-p9"></span>A killing arrow *is* their tongue; Deceit it
speaks; With his mouth does *one* speak peace to his neighbor, But in
his heart he sets an ambush for him.

<span id="xix.x-p10"></span>Literally, “his ambush,” that is, the ambush
of which he is the object. This form of speech is often in Hebrew. See
<span id="xix.x-p10.1"></span>[Job
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#010.md)<span id="xix.x-p10.1"></span>.
“<span id="xix.x-p10.2"></span>Penit ei insidias“ is the *Vulgate.
Blayney* gives a paraphrase, not a version, —

<span id="xix.x-p11"></span>But inwardly will he resolve to fall upon
him by surprise.

<span id="xix.x-p12"></span>The future tense here, as in many other
instances, is used as a present tense, and designed to shew the habitual
practice of the people. The same is done in the Welsh language: the
future tense is continually used to express a present action. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[242](cc17018.htm#fr_241.md) <span
id="xix.xiv-p9.3"></span>

<span id="xix.xiv-p10"></span> It is not from this root, but from <span
id="xix.xiv-p10.1"></span>אוה, to desire, in Niphal, <span
id="xix.xiv-p10.2"></span>נאוה to be desirable. The noun means
*desirable* or pleasant *places* or spots. See <span
id="xix.xiv-p10.3"></span>[Ps
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#002.md)<span id="xix.xiv-p10.3"></span>;
<span id="xix.xiv-p10.4"></span>[Jer
25:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#037.md)<span id="xix.xiv-p10.4"></span>;
<span id="xix.xiv-p10.5"></span>[Joe
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#019.md)<span id="xix.xiv-p10.5"></span>.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_242"></span>[243](cc17018.htm#fr_242.md) <span
id="xix.xiv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xiv-p15"></span> The whole verse is as follows, —

<span id="xix.xiv-p16"></span>**10.** For the mountains will I raise
weeping and wailing, And for the pleasant places of the desert, a
lamentation; For they are desolate, without any one passing through, And
they hear not the voice of cattle; From the bird of heaven even to the
beast, They have migrated, they have gone away.

<span id="xix.xiv-p17"></span>The “pleasant places” were “desolate;” and
“in the mountains” no “voice of cattle” was heard. No one “passing
through” explains the desolation. The word is improperly rendered,
“burnt up,” in our version and by *Blayney.* It was used before in the
sense of desolation, <span id="xix.xiv-p17.1"></span>[Jer
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#007.md)<span id="xix.xiv-p17.1"></span>;
and it ought to be so rendered in <span id="xix.xiv-p17.2"></span>[Jer
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#015.md)<span id="xix.xiv-p17.2"></span>.
In the last line, the migration refers to birds, and the going away to
the beasts. In none of the ancient versions is this distinction
intimated. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[244](cc17018.htm#fr_243.md) <span
id="xix.xvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xvi-p12"></span> Somewhat a different view may be taken of
this verse, as it will appear from the following version, —

<span id="xix.xvi-p13"></span>Who is the man that is wise, And he will
understand this, — And to whom the mouth of Jehovah has spoken, And he
will declare it, — *Even* why destroyed is the land, Made waste like the
desert, without a traveler.

<span id="xix.xvi-p14"></span>The wise man is the same with him to whom
God had spoken: and what he had to understand and to declare was the
reason why the land was destroyed. Then in the next verse God himself,
by the mouth of his prophet, makes this known. “Made waste” is rendered
“burnt up” by the*Septuagint* and the *Vulgate,* but desolated, or
desolate, by the *Targum, Syriac,* and *Arabic;* and no doubt rightly,
as “without a traveler,” or one passing through, explains what is meant:
in like manner, “without an inhabitant,” in the preceding verse, is an
explanation of “the cities of Judah” being made “desolate,” or rather,
entirely desolate. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[245](cc17018.htm#fr_244.md) <span
id="xix.xvii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p17"></span> “Voice” is for God’s word; and so the
*Targum* renders it: they did not walk *in,* or according to, his word —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_245"></span>[246](cc17018.htm#fr_245.md) <span
id="xix.xvii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p20"></span> See Note on <span
id="xix.xvii-p20.2"></span>[Jer. 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#017.md),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#018.md)<span id="xix.xvii-p20.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[247](cc17018.htm#fr_246.md) <span
id="xix.xvii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p22"></span> It is supposed that the Israelites made
a difference between this word and God: they allowed but one God, but
introduced Baalim, or inferior gods, and worshipped them. They tried to
evade the charge of idolatry, by alleging that Baalim were mediators.
But no excuse of this kind was admitted, as God everywhere imputed
idolatry to them. Notwithstanding this *example,* and the distinct
declaration of Scripture, that there is but one God and one Mediator,
(<span id="xix.xvii-p22.1"></span>[1 Cor.
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006.md)<span id="xix.xvii-p22.1"></span>;
<span id="xix.xvii-p22.2"></span>[1Ti
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005)<span id="xix.xvii-p22.2"></span>,.md)
the error, the awful error of praying to saints, etc., as mediators, has
prevailed in the Christian Church! — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_247"></span>[248](cc17018.htm#fr_247.md) <span
id="xix.xvii-p22.5"></span>

<span id="xix.xvii-p23"></span> It makes no difference as to the
meaning, but the true construction of this clause is as follows, —

<span id="xix.xvii-p24"></span>Which their fathers have taught them.

<span id="xix.xvii-p25"></span>The verb “to teach,” in Hebrew as well as
in some other languages, admits of two objective cases. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[249](cc17018.htm#fr_248.md) <span
id="xix.xix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p6"></span> But the reason why this herb is mentioned
is its bitterness, — and not its wholesome effects. It was hence chosen
to designate what is afflictive and distressing. This appears from.
<span id="xix.xix-p6.1"></span>[Pr
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#004.md)<span id="xix.xix-p6.1"></span>,
“bitter as wormwood.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_249"></span>[250](cc17018.htm#fr_249.md) <span
id="xix.xix-p6.5"></span>

<span id="xix.xix-p7"></span> See note on <span
id="xix.xix-p7.2"></span>[Jeremiah
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#014.md)<span id="xix.xix-p7.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[251](cc17018.htm#fr_250.md) <span
id="xix.xxi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxi-p13"></span> I render the verses thus, —

<span id="xix.xxi-p14"></span>**17.** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts,
bethink yourselves; And call for mourning women, that they may come;
*Yea,* for the skillful send, that they may come,

<span id="xix.xxi-p15"></span>**18.** And hasten, and raise for us a
wailing, That our eyes may pour forth tears, And our eyelids drop down
waters.

<span id="xix.xxi-p16"></span> — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_251"></span>[252](cc17018.htm#fr_251.md) <span
id="xix.xxii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxii-p11"></span> The true version is that given by
*Blaney* and approved by *Horsley,* —

<span id="xix.xxii-p12"></span>Because they have thrown down our
habitations.

<span id="xix.xxii-p13"></span>The ancient versions differ, but none
give the meaning of our version, which is that of *Junius* and
*Tremelius.* The whole verse is in the past tense: things are
represented as having already taken place: —

<span id="xix.xxii-p14"></span>For the voice of wailing has been heard
from Sion, -- “How have we been plundered! We have been put to great
shame; For we have left the land, For they have thrown down our
habitations.”

<span id="xix.xxii-p15"></span>The people are set forth as assembled in
Jerusalem, having been made to quit the land, their dwellings having
been pulled down. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[253](cc17018.htm#fr_252.md) <span
id="xix.xxiii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxiii-p16"></span> The objection, that there is an
inconsisteney in saying that death entered through the windows to cut
off children from the street, disappears, when we consider that the Jews
thought themselves safe because their gates were closed and their city
fortified. Be it so, says the Prophet, yet death will enter, if not
through the gates, yet through the windows, and through our towers, and
it will destroy the children who play in our streets, and our young men
assembled in the squares and the wide places of our city. That those
collected at Jerusalem are here meant, is evident from the nineteenth
verse. Then, in the next verse, he refers to those who still continued
in the country. And this accounts for the change made in the sentence,
which has puzzled some expounders, and induced them to propose
emendations. The verse may be thus rendered, —

<span id="xix.xxiii-p17"></span>For climbed has death through our
windows, It has come through our towers,  
To cut off the child from the street, The young men from the broad
streets.

<span id="xix.xxiii-p18"></span>Though the gates were closed, yet death
came in, not only through windows, or any openings there might have
been, but also through strong towers. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_253"></span>[254](cc17018.htm#fr_253.md) <span
id="xix.xxiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxiv-p7"></span> *Blayney* and some others connect <span
id="xix.xxiv-p7.1"></span>דבר with the former verse, and, on the
authority of the *Septuagint,* leave out “thus saith Jehovah.” The
*Vulgate* and the *Targum* retain the text as we have it, and the
*Syriac* omits only the first word; and there is no MS. in favor of what
has been proposed; and the meaning, as here represented by *Calvin,* is
so evident, that no change is at all necessary, —

<span id="xix.xxiv-p8"></span>**22.** Speak, Thus saith Jehovah, Fall
also shall the carcase of man, Like dung on the face of the field, Or
like an handful of corn after the reaper, And without any to gather
*it.*

<span id="xix.xxiv-p9"></span>This would be the fate of such as remained
in the country, whilst the greatest part had fled into Jerusalem. It is
by keeping this distinction in view that the whole passage, from verse
the seventeenth, may be rightly understood. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[255](cc17018.htm#fr_254.md) <span
id="xix.xxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxvii-p6"></span> The next sentence is, “the valiant in
his valor:” so the *Vulate;* but by the *Septuagint* “the strong (<span
id="xix.xxvii-p6.1"></span>ἰσχυρὸς) in his strength;” by the *Syriac,*
“the giant in his strength.” The *Targum* gives this paraphrase of the
verse, “Thus saith the Lord, Let not Solomon, the wise son of David,
delight in his wisdom; nor Sampson, the valiant son of Manoah, delight
in his valor; nor Ahab, the rich son of Omri, delight in his riches.” It
is military valor that is probably meant. They thought that they had
wisdom in counsel, valor in defense, and wealth to procure aid, or to
carry on war. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_255"></span>[256](cc17018.htm#fr_255.md) <span
id="xix.xxvii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xix.xxvii-p19"></span> *Blayney* and *Venema* agree with
*Calvin* in thinking that “these” refer to such men as knew God and
trusted in him, and not to “these” things, the mercy, judgment, and
justice before mentioned. The versions and the *Targum* are ambiguous,
like the Hebrew, except the *Vulgate,* in which “these” is in the neuter
gender, referring to things, and not to men. I would render the verse
thus, —

<span id="xix.xxvii-p20"></span>But in this let him glory who glories,
That he understands, and that he knows me, — That I am Jehovah, Who
doeth mercy, judgment, and justice in the land; For in these have I
delighted, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xix.xxvii-p21"></span>“Me” is left out in the *Septuagint,*
the *Syriac,* and the *Arabic.* “That he knows me” is only a more clear
enunciation of the previous words, “that he understands:” what he
understands or knows is then stated, “That I am,” etc. “Judgment,” when
connected with justice, seems to refer to what the law forbids; and
“justice,” to what the law enjoins. See <span
id="xix.xxvii-p21.1"></span>[Isa
56:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#001.md)<span
id="xix.xxvii-p21.1"></span>, where the command is, to “keep” or observe
“judgment,” and to “do” or execute “justice.” God doeth judgment in that
he doeth nothing wrong, contrary to what is right and just; and he doeth
justice in the defence of what is right and just, and in making good
what he hath promised. Judgment regards the negative part of the law,
and justice the active part. In <span id="xix.xxvii-p21.2"></span>[Jer
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#003.md)<span
id="xix.xxvii-p21.2"></span>, we find both words, “judgment and
justice,” or righteousness. Then, as it is usual with the prophets, the
last is described first, “delivered is the spoiled:” afterwards judgment
is set forth, it does “no wrong,” etc. But it is only when the two words
occur together that they have these specific meanings; for both,
occurring separately, have a much wider import. They are used together
more than twenty times. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[257](cc17018.htm#fr_256.md) <span
id="xix.xxviii-p13.5"></span>

<span id="xix.xxviii-p14"></span> The exposition of the phrase given in
this section is inconsistent with all the ancient versions and the
*Targum:* it is what has been given by modern rabbins. “The shaven
around the face,” is the *Septuagint;* “the shaven as to the hair,” the
*Vulqate* and the *Targum;* and to the same purpose is the *Syriac* and
*Arabic.* The word <span id="xix.xxviii-p14.2"></span>פאה is used in
<span id="xix.xxviii-p14.3"></span>[Le
19:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#027.md)<span
id="xix.xxviii-p14.3"></span>, with distinct reference to the *side* or
*corner* of the head, and of the beard; and the Israelites were
forbidden to imitate the nations who shaved off those parts. *Parkhurst*
renders the phrase (which occurs also in <span
id="xix.xxviii-p14.4"></span>[Jer
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#023.md)<span
id="xix.xxviii-p14.4"></span>, and in <span
id="xix.xxviii-p14.5"></span>[Jer
49:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#032.md)<span
id="xix.xxviii-p14.5"></span>) “trimmed on the sides,” that is, of the
head; more literally, “the shaven on the side,” that is, of the head,
or, “on the corner,” that is, of the beard. It was a phrase, though
defective, yet no doubt well understood, as it is the case in other
languages. The design of mentioning these seems to have been to class
together such as had been expressly separated. I propose the following
as the version of the two verses, —

<span id="xix.xxviii-p15"></span>**25.** Behold the days are coming,
saith Jehovah, That I will visit every one circumcised, *Who is* in
uncircumcision, —

<span id="xix.xxviii-p16"></span>**26.** The Egyptians and Judah, Edom
also and the children of Ammon and Moab, And all the shawn on the side
*of the head,* Who dwell in the desert; For all these nations are
uncircumcised; And all the house of Israel, — *They are* uncircumcised
in heart.

<span id="xix.xxviii-p17"></span>It is justly remarked by *Horsley* that
the nations here mentioned practiced circumcision. They were hence
circumcised, and yet in uncircumcision; and the Jews were like them: and
the last line explains this apparent contradiction: they had the outward
but not the inward circumcision. — *Ed.*

<span id="xix.xxviii-p18"></span> 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Translation of Jeremiah 1-9](cc17019.md)
