[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc17010)  [Next](cc17012.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 17: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part I*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii"></span>

<span id="xii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="xii.i"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p1"></span><span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#001.md)<span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p2"></span>**1**. Moreover, the word of the LORD came to
me, saying,

<span id="xii.i-p3"></span>**1**. Et fuit sermo Jehovae ad me, dicendo,

<span id="xii.i-p4"></span>**2**. Go and cry in the ears of Jerusalem,
saying, Thus saith the LORD; I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth,
the love of thine espousals, when thou wentest after me in the
wilderness, in a land *that was* not sown.

<span id="xii.i-p5"></span>**2**. Vade et clama ad aures Jerusalem,
dicendo, Sic dicit Jehova, Recordatus sum tui propter misericordiam
adolescentiae tuae et dilectionem desponsationis tuae, quum me sequuta
es (quum venisti post me, profecta es post me) in deserto, in terra non
seminata.

<span id="xii.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="xii.i-p7"></span><span id="xii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p8"></span>God now mentions to his servant the commands
which he was to convey to the king and priests, and to the whole people;
for by the *ears of Jerusalem* he means all its inhabitants. God here
intimates that the Jews were unworthy of being cared for by him any
more; but that he is induced by another reason not to reject them
wholly, until he had found out by experience their irreclaimable
wickedness. So then he makes this preface, *I remember thee for the
kindness of thy youth, and the love of thy espousals* In these words he
shews that he regarded not what the Jews deserved, nor acknowledged any
worthiness in them, as the reason why he was solicitous for their
salvation, and endeavored to bring them to the right way by the labors
of his Prophet, but that this is to be ascribed to his former benefits.

<span id="xii.i-p9"></span>Some render the words, “I remember the piety
or kindness of thy youth;” and <span id="xii.i-p9.1"></span>לך *l*a*k,*
may be thus taken, as it is in other places. Others omit this word;
while others consider a copulative to be understood, “I remember thee,
and the kindness of thy youth.” But none, as I think, have attained to
the meaning of the Prophet: there is yet no obscurity in the words, if a
preposition be considered as being understood, so as to read thus, —
that God remembered his people *for* the kindness which he had shewn to
them, and for the love which he had manifested towards them from the
beginning. Then the real meaning of the Prophet I think to be this, —
that God here takes away every ground for pride and boasting from the
Jews; as though he had said, that they were worthy, they had no reason
to think; but that he was still their Father, and was therefore
unwilling that the benefits he had formerly conferred upon them should
be wholly lost. There is, in short, given here a reason why God sent
Jeremiah after the other prophets; as though he had said, “It is a
testimony to you of the paternal care which I shew to you, when I send
my Prophet to give you a hope of pardon, if ye return to the right way
and be reconciled to me. But how is it that I still shew a concern for
you, as ye have forgotten me, and wholly disregarded my law? It is so,
because I wish to continue my favors to you.” The *kindness of thy
youth* he takes in a passive sense; for he does not mean that the Jews
were kind or merciful, but that they had experienced the kindness of
God.

<span id="xii.i-p10"></span>But the metaphor here used must be noticed.
God compares himself here to a young bridegroom, who marries a youthful
bride, in the flower of her age, and in the prime of her beauty: and it
is a manner of speaking commonly adopted by the prophets. I will not now
detain you with a long explanation, as the subject will be treated more
at large in another place.

<span id="xii.i-p11"></span>As God, then, had espoused the people of
Israel, when he redeemed and brought them out of Egypt, he says now,
that he *remembers* the people on account of that *kindness* and *love*.
He sets kindness or beneficence before love. The word <span
id="xii.i-p11.1"></span>חסר, *ch*e*s*a*d*, properly means a gratuitous
favor or kindness, which is shewn to the miserable, or beneficence. By
the word love, God means in many other places the gratuitous election
with which he had favored the whole people. The expression is indeed
made clearer when kindness or gratuitous favor is placed first, and then
love is added: though nothing new is added, yet the Prophet more fully
shews that the people had been loved by God in no other way than through
his kindness.  <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26.md)

<span id="xii.i-p16"></span>Now this is a remarkable passage; for God
shews that his covenant, though perfidiously violated by the Jews, was
yet firm and immutable: for though not all who derive their descent
according to the flesh from Abraham, are true and legitimate Israelites,
yet God ever remains true, and his calling, as Paul says, is without
repentance. (<span id="xii.i-p16.1"></span>[Ro
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#029)<span id="xii.i-p16.1"></span>..md)
We may therefore learn this from the Prophet’s words, — that God was not
content with one Prophet, but continued his favor, inasmuch as he would
not render void his covenant. The Jews indeed had impiously departed
from the covenant, and a vast number had deservedly perished, having
been wholly repudiated; yet God designed really to shew that his grace
depends not on the inconstancy of men, as Paul says in another place,
for it would then presently fail, (<span id="xii.i-p16.2"></span>[Ro
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004)<span id="xii.i-p16.2"></span>.md) and
that were all men false and perfidious, God would yet remain true and
fixed in his purpose. This we learn from the Prophet’s words, when it is
said, that God remembered the people on account of the kindness of their
youth.

<span id="xii.i-p17"></span>As to *youth* and *espousals,* we may hence
learn that they had been anticipated by God’s kindness; for they became
in no other way connected with God than by having been chosen by him:
their espousal would not have been enjoyed by the people, had not God
anticipated them. What was Abraham? and what were all his posterity? God
then now shews, that the beginning of all blessings, and as it were the
fountain, was this, — that it pleased him to choose the people for
himself.

<span id="xii.i-p18"></span>And the same thing is confirmed in other
words: *When,* he says, *thou didst follow me in the desert, in a land
not sown* The people, we know, did not obey God as they ought to have
done, even when he had redeemed them. Hence God does not so much in this
place commend the people for any merits of their own, but especially
confirms what I have already stated, — that he could not cast aside
every care for a people whom he had once adopted, and whom he had led
through the desert, that they might be a people separated from the rest
of the world. He however concedes to them, according to his great
goodness, the praise of obedience, because they followed God through
rough ways, as though a tender young woman refused not to undergo hard
and irksome toils from love to her bridegroom. He afterwards adds —

<span id="xii.ii"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#003.md)<span id="xii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p2"></span>**3**. Israel *was* holiness unto the LORD,
*and* the firstfruits of his increase: all that devour him shall offend;
evil shall come upon them, saith the LORD.

<span id="xii.ii-p3"></span>**3**. Sanctitas Israel Jehovae, primitiae
frugum ejus; quicunque comederint contrahent noxam (*alii vertunt,*
peccabunt; *sed ego potius ad poenam refero,)* malun veniet super eos
(*exegetice additur hoc membrum*) dicit Jehova.

<span id="xii.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.ii-p5"></span><span id="xii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p6"></span>God here more clearly reprobates the
ingratitude of the people: and first he enumerates his favors by which
he had bound the people for ever to himself; and secondly, he shews how
malignantly the people responded to the many blessings which they had
received.

<span id="xii.ii-p7"></span>In saying, then, that Israel was *holy,* he
intends it not by way of honor. It was indeed in itself an illustrious
testimony to their praise, that God had consecrated that people to
himself, that he designed them to be the first — fruits of his increase:
but we must remember that there is here an implied contrast between this
great and incomparable favor of God, and the wickedness of the people,
who afterwards fell away from that God who had been so liberal and
gracious to them. According to this view, then, does Jeremiah say, that
*Israel was holiness* to God; that is, that they were separated from all
other nations, so that the glory of God shone only among them.

<span id="xii.ii-p8"></span>He then adds, that they were the
*first-fruits of his produce* For though whatever produce the earth may
bring forth ought to be consecrated to God, by whose power it grows, yet
we know that the first — fruits were gathered and set on the altar as a
sacred food. As, then, God had commanded, under the law, the
first-fruits to be offered to him, and then given to the priests, he
says here, in accordance with that rite, that Israel were the first —
fruits of his produce. For the nations, who then everywhere dwelt, were
not removed from under God’s government (as he is the creator of all,
and shews himself to all as the Father and supporter); but he passed by
other nations, and chose the race of Abraham, and for this end, — that
he might protect them by his power and aid. Since, then, God had so
bound the nation to himself, how great and how strong was the obligation
under which that people was to him? Hence the more base and the more
detestable was their perfidy, when the people despised the singular
favors which God had conferred on them. We now see why the Prophet says
that Israel was holy to God, and the first — fruits of his increase.

<span id="xii.ii-p9"></span>He also intimates that the time would come,
when God would gather to himself other nations; for in the first-fruits
the people dedicated and offered to God the whole produce of the year is
included. So then Israel was like the first-fruits, because God
afterwards took to himself other nations, which for many ages were
deemed profane. But yet his special object was to shew that the guilt of
the people was extreme, as they did not acknowledge the great favors
which God had bestowed on them.

<span id="xii.ii-p10"></span>He then adds, *Whosoever will devour him
shall be punished* Of this meaning I approve, because the explanation
immediately follows, *evil shall come on them* God then means not that
they should be only guilty of a crime, who should devour the
first-fruits, but refers rather to punishment; as though he had said,
“The profane shall not be unpunished who shall devour the first-fruits
which has been dedicated to me.” For if any had stolen the first-
fruits, God would have executed a vengeance such as sacrilege deserved.
If, however, any one prefers the other explanation, — that it would be a
crime to injure Israel, or to do him any harm, because he was under
God’s protection, I shall not oppose him: but the wording of the
sentence leads me to the other view, that is, that those who would
injure Israel would not only be guilty, but would not be able to escape
God’s vengeance, — and why? because *evil will come upon them, saith
Jehovah*  <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27.md) He afterwards explains
more clearly the import of his doctrine —

<span id="xii.iii"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
2:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#004.md)<span id="xii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p2"></span>**4**. Hear ye the word of the LORD, O
house of Jacob, and all the families of the house of Israel:

<span id="xii.iii-p3"></span>**4**. Audite sermonem Jehovae domus Jacob,
et omnes cognationes (*vel,* familiae) domus Israel:

<span id="xii.iii-p4"></span>**5**. Thus saith the LORD, What iniquity
have your fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me, and have
walked after vanity, and are become vain?

<span id="xii.iii-p5"></span>**5**. Sic dicit Jehova, Quid invenerunt
patres vestri in me iniquitatis, quia alienati sunt a me, et
ambulaverunt (*vel,* profecti sunt) post vanitatem, et facti sunt
evanidi (*vel,* evanuerunt)?

<span id="xii.iii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xii.iii-p7"></span><span id="xii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p8"></span>Here God explains why he had referred to
what we have noticed, — that he had consecrated Israel to himself as a
peculiar people, and as the first — fruits. God often mentions his
favors to us, in order to encourage our hope, that we may be fully
persuaded that whatever may happen we are ever safe, because we are
under his protection, since he has chosen us. But in this place, and in
many other places, God recounts the obligations under which the
Israelites were to him, that thence their ingratitude might become more
apparent.

<span id="xii.iii-p9"></span>Hence he says, *Hear ye the word of
Jehovah* By this preface he seeks to gain attention; for he intimates
that he was going to address them on no common subject. *Hear ye,*
then*, O house of Jacob; hear all ye families of the house of Israel;*
as though Jeremiah had said, “Here I come forth boldly in the name of
God, for I fear not that any defense can be brought forward by you to
disprove the justice of God’s reproof; and I confidently wait for what
ye may say, for I know you will be silent. I then loudly cry like a
trumpet and with a clear voice, that I am come to condemn you; if there
is anything which ye can answer, I give you full liberty to do so; but
the truth will constrain you to be mute, for your guilt is extremely
odious and capable of the fullest proof.” Hence it was that he exhorted
them to hear attentively.

<span id="xii.iii-p10"></span><span id="xii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p11"></span>Then follows the charge: *What, iniquity
have your fathers found in me*, that having forsaken *me they should
walk after vanity and become vain?* Here Jeremiah charges the people
with two crimes, — that they had departed from the true God, whom they
had found to be a deliverer, — and that they had become vain in their
devices; or, in other words, that they were become for no reason
apostates: for their sin was enhanced, because there had been no
occasion given them to forsake God, and to alienate themselves from him.
As then God had kindly treated them, and they themselves had shaken off
the yoke, and as there was no one whom they could compare with God, they
could not have said, “We have been *deceived,*” — how so? “*For ye
have,* he says, *followed vanity;* and vanity alone was the reason why
ye have departed from me.”  <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28.md) I wish
I could proceed farther; but I have some business to which I was called
even before the lecture.

<span id="xii.iv"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xii.iv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou continuest
at this day, both morning and evening, to invite us to thyself, and
assiduously exhortest us to repent, and testifiest that thou art ready
to be reconciled to us, provided we flee to thy mercy, — O grant, that
we may not close our ears and reject this thy great kindness, but that
remembering thy gratuitous election, the chief of all the favors thou
hast been pleased to shew us, we may strive so to devote ourselves to
thee, that thy name may be glorified through our whole life: and should
it be that we at any time turn aside from thee, may we quickly return to
the right way, and become submissive to thy holy admonitions, that it
may thus appear that we have been so chosen by thee and called as to
desire to continue in the hope of that salvation, to which thou invitest
us, and which is prepared for us in heaven, through Christ our Lord. —
Amen.

<span id="xii.v"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p1"></span>Lecture Fifth

<span id="xii.v-p2"></span>WE heard yesterday God’s complaint, and his
expostulation with his people. He said in short, that if they came
before any judge there were reasons sufficient to condemn their
ingratitude, and that they were without excuse, because they had gone
after vanity and were become vain; or, in other words, that they had
without a cause forsaken him, and were carried away only by their own
intentions. It now follows —

<span id="xii.vi"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p1"></span><span id="xii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
2:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#006.md)<span id="xii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p2"></span>**6**. Neither said they, Where *is* the
LORD that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, that led us through
the wilderness, through a land of deserts and of pits, through a land of
drought, and of the shadow of death, through a land that no man passed
through, and where no man dwelt?

<span id="xii.vi-p3"></span>**6**. Et non dixerunt, (*hoc est,* non
cogitarunt apud se,) Ubi est Jehova, qui eduxit nos e terra Egypti, et
proficisci fecit nos per desertum in terra solitaria (*vel,* vasta) et
squalida, in terra horribili et umbrae mortis; in terra per quam vir non
transtit, et in qua non habitavit homo?

<span id="xii.vi-p4"></span>**7**. And I brought you into a plentiful
country, to eat the fruit thereof and the goodness thereof; but when ye
entered, ye defiled my land, and made mine heritage an abomination.

<span id="xii.vi-p5"></span>**7**. Et introduxi vos in terram fertilem,
ad comedendos fructus ejus (*vel,* ad comedendum fructum ejus, *in
singulari*,) et ubertatem ejus (*ad verbum est,* ad bonum ejus;) et
ingressi estis et polluistis terram meam, et haereditatem meam posuistis
in abominationem.

<span id="xii.vi-p6"></span> 

<span id="xii.vi-p7"></span><span id="xii.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p8"></span>The Prophet goes on with the same subject;
for God adduces here no small crime against his people, as they had
buried his favom’s in oblivion. Indeed, a redemption so wonderful was
worthy of being celebrated in all ages, not only by one nation, but by
all the nations of the earth. As then the Jews had thus buried the
memory of a favor so remarkable and valuable, their base impiety
appeared evident. Had they not experienced the power and kindness of
God, or had they only witnessed them in an ordinary way, their guilt
might have been extenuated; but as God had from heaven made an unusual
display of his power, and as his majesty had been manifested before the
eyes of the people, how great was their sottishness in afterwards
forgetting their God, who had openly and with such proofs made himself
known to them!

<span id="xii.vi-p9"></span>We now then understand what the Prophet
means by saying, *they have not said:* for God here sharply reproves the
stupidity of the Jews, — that they did not consider that they were under
perpetual obligations to him for his great kindness in delivering them
in a manner so wonderful from the land of Egypt. By saying that they did
not say, *Where is Jehovah,* he intimates that he was present with them
and nigh them, but that they were blind, and that hence they were
without an excuse for their ignorance, as he was not to be sought as one
at a distance, or by means tedious and difficult. If then this only had
come to their mind, “Did not God once redeem us?” they could not have
departed after their vanities. How then was it that their error, or
rather their madness, was so great that they followed idols? Even
because they did not choose to make any effort, or to apply their minds
to seek or to inquire after God.

<span id="xii.vi-p10"></span>Here then the Prophet meets the objection
of the hypocrites, who might have said, that they had been deceived, and
had relapsed through ignorance; for they have ever some evasions ready
at hand, when they are called to an account for their sins. But lest the
Jews should make any pretense of this kind, the Prophet here shews that
they had not been through a mistake deceived, but that they had followed
after falsehood through a wicked disposition, for they had willfully
despised God and refused to inquire respecting him, though he was
sufficiently nigh them.

<span id="xii.vi-p11"></span>This passage deserves to be especially
noticed; for there is nothing more common than for the ungodly, when
they are proved guilty, to have recourse to this subterfuge, — that they
acted with good intention, when they gave themselves up to their own
superstitions. The Prophet then takes off this mask, and shews that
where God is once known, his name and his glory cannot be obliterated,
except through the depravity of men, as they knowingly and willfully
depart from him. Hence all apostates are by this one clause condemned,
that they may no more dare to make evasions, as though they have been
through more simplicity deceived: for when the matter is examined, their
malignity and ingratitude are discovered, because they deign not to
inquire, *Where is Jehovah?*

<span id="xii.vi-p12"></span>And he afterwards adds what explains this
sentence. I have said that other nations are not here condemned, but the
Jews, who had known by clear experience that God was their father. As
then God had, by many testimonies, made himself known to them, they had
no pretext for their ignorance. Hence the Prophet says, that they did
not consider where God was who *brought them from the land of Egypt, and
made them to pass through the desert* He could not have stated this
indiscriminately of all nations; but, as it has been said, the words are
addressed particularly to the Jews, who had clearly witnessed the power
of God; so that they could not have sinned except willfully, even by
extinguishing, through their own malignity, the light presented to them,
which shone before their eyes. And here, also, the Prophet amplifies
their guilt by various circumstances: for he says, not simply that they
had been brought out of Egypt, but intimates that God had been their
constant guide for forty years; for this time is suggested by the word
“desert.” The history was well known; hence a brief allusion was
sufficient. He, at the same time, by mentioning the desert, greatly
extols the glory of God.

<span id="xii.vi-p13"></span>But the first thing to be observed is, that
the Jews were inexcusable, who had not considered that their fathers had
been wonderfully and in an unusual manner preserved by God’s hand for
forty years; for they had no bread to eat, nor water to drink. God drew
water for them from a rock, and satisfied them with heavenly bread; and
their garments did not wear out during the whole time. We then see that
all those circumstances enhanced their guilt. Then follows what I have
referred to: the Prophet calls the desert a dry or a waste land, a
*dreary land, a horrible land, a land of deadly gloom,* as though he had
said, that the people had been preserved in the midst of death, yea in
the midst of many deaths: for *man was not wont to pass through* that
land, *nor did any one dwell in it*  <span
id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29.md) “Whence then,” he says, “did salvation
arise to you? from what condition? even from death itself: for what else
was the desert but a horrible place, where you were surrounded, not only
by one kind of death, but by a hundred? Since then God brought you out
of Egypt by his incredible power, and fed you in a supernatural manner
for forty years, what excuse can there be for so great a madness in now
alienating yourselves from him?” Now this passage teaches us, that the
more favors God confers on us, the more heinous the guilt if we forsake
him, and less excusable will be our wickedness and ingratitude,
especially when he has manifested his kindness to us for a long time and
in various ways.

<span id="xii.vi-p19"></span><span id="xii.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p20"></span>He afterwards adds, *And I brought you in,
etc*. Here Jeremiah introduces God as the speaker; for God had, as with
his hand stretched forth, brought in the children of Abraham into the
possession of the promised land, which they did not get, as it is said
in <span id="xii.vi-p20.1"></span>[Ps
44:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#003.md)<span id="xii.vi-p20.1"></span>,
by their own power and by their own sword; for though they had to fight
with many enemies, yet it was God that made them victorious. He could
then truly say, that they did not otherwise enter the land than under
his guidance; inasmuch as he had opened a way and passage for them, and
subdued and put to flight their enemies, that they might possess the
heritage promised to them. *I brought you in,* he says, into the land,
*into Carmel* Some consider this to be the name of a place; and no doubt
there was the mount Carmel, so called on account of its great fertility.
As then its name was given to it because it was so fertile, it is
nothing strange that Jeremiah compares the land of Israel to Carmel.
Some will have the preposition <span id="xii.vi-p20.2"></span>כ,
*c*a*ph,* to be understood, “I have brought you into a land like
Carmel.” But there is no need laboriously to turn in all directions the
Prophet’s words. It is, as I think, a common noun, meaning fruitful, and
used here to shew that the Israelites had been brought by God’s hand
into a fertile land; for its fertility is everywhere celebrated, both in
the Law and in the Prophets.  <span id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30.md)

<span id="xii.vi-p22"></span>*That ye might eat its fruit and its
abundance;* that is, “I wished you to enjoy the large and rich produce
of the land.” By these words God intimates that the Israelites ought to
have been induced by such allurements cordially to serve him; for by
such liberal treatment he kindly invited them to himself. The greater,
then, the bounty of God towards the people, the greater was the
indignity offered by their defection, when they despised the various and
abounding blessings of God.

<span id="xii.vi-p23"></span>Hence he adds, *And ye have polluted my
land,*  <span id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31.md) *and mine heritage have ye
made an abomination;* as though he had said, “This is the reward by
which my bounty towards you has been compensated. I indeed gave you this
land, but on this condition, that ye serve me faithfully in it: but ye
have polluted it.” He calls it his own land, as though he had said, that
he had so given the land to the Israelites, that he remained still the
lord of it as a proprietor, though he granted the occupation of it to
them. He hence shews that they impiously abused his bounty, in polluting
that land which was sacred to his name. For the same purpose he calls it
his *heritage,* as if he said that they possessed the land by an
hereditary right, and yet the heritage belonged to their Father. They
ought, therefore, to have considered, that they had entered into the
land, because it had been given to Abraham and to his children for an
heritage, — by whom? By God, who was the fountain of this bounty. The
more detestable, then, was their ingratitude, when they *made the
heritage* of God *an abomination* It follows —

<span id="xii.vii"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p1"></span><span id="xii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#008.md)<span id="xii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p2"></span>**8**. The priests said not, Where *is* the
LORD? and they that handle the law knew me not: the pastors also
transgressed against me, and the prophets prophesied by Baal, and walked
after *things that* do not profit.

<span id="xii.vii-p3"></span>**8**. Sacerdotes non dixerunt, Ubi Jehova?
et qui tenebant (*vel,* servabant) legem (*ad verbum est,*
apprehendentes, *vel,* tenentes legem) non cognoverunt me: et pastores
perfide egerunt mecum; et prophetae prophetarunt in Baal (*hoc est,* per
Baal,) et post ea qua non prosunt ambulaverunt (*vel,* profecti sunt).

<span id="xii.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.vii-p5"></span><span id="xii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p6"></span>God assails here especially the teachers
and those to whom was committed the power of ruling the people. It often
happens that the common people fall away, while yet some integrity
remains in the rulers. But God shews here that such was the falling away
among the whole community, that priests as well as prophets and all the
chief men had departed from the true worship of God, and from all
uprightness.

<span id="xii.vii-p7"></span>Now, when Jeremiah thus rebukes the
teachers and the priests and others, he does not excuse the common
people, nor extenuate the crimes, which then prevailed everywhere, as we
shall see from what follows. As many think that they set up a shield
against God, when they pretend that they are not acquainted with so much
learning as to distinguish between light and darkness, but that they are
guided by their rulers, the Prophet, therefore, does not here cast the
faults of the people upon their rulers, but, on the contrary, he
amplifies the atrocity of their impiety, for they had, from the least to
the greatest, rejected God and his Law. We now, then, understand the
design of the Prophet.  <span id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32.md)

<span id="xii.vii-p9"></span>We may learn from this passage how unwise
and foolish are they who think that they are in part excusable when they
can say, that they have proceeded in their simplicity and have been
drawn into error by the faults of others; for it appears evident that
the whole community was in a hopeless state when God gave up the priests
and rulers unto a reprobate mind; and there is no doubt but that the
people had provoked God’s vengeance, when every order, civil as well as
religious, was thus corrupt. God then visited the people with deserved
punishment, when he blinded the priests, the prophets, and the rulers.

<span id="xii.vii-p10"></span>Hence Jeremiah now says, that the priests
did not inquire *where Jehovah was:* and he adds, *and they who keep the
law, etc*. The verb <span id="xii.vii-p10.1"></span>תפש *t*a*ph*e*sh,*
means to keep, to lay hold on, and sometimes to cover; so that there may
be here a twofold meaning, — that the priests kept the law, — or, that
they had it shut up as it were under their keeping. It would not,
however, be in harmony with the passage to suppose that the law was
suppressed by them; for God, by way of concession, speaks here honorably
of them, thought he thereby shews that they were the more wicked, as
they had no care for their office. He says, then, that they were the
keepers of his law, not that they really kept the law, as though a
genuine zeal for it prevailed among them, but because they professed
this. They indeed wished to be thought the keepers of the law, who
possessed the hidden treasure of celestial truth; for they wished to be
consulted as though they were the organs of God’s Spirit. Since, then,
they boasted that they kept and preserved the law, the Prophet now more
sharply rebukes them, because they knew not God himself. And Paul seems
to have taken from this place what he says in the second chapter of the
Epistle to the Romans,

<span id="xii.vii-p11"></span>“Thou who hast the form of the law — thou
who preachest against adultery, committest adultery, and thou who
condemnest idols art thyself guilty of sacrilege; for thou keepest the
law, restest in it, boastest in God, and with thee is understanding and
knowledge.”  
(<span id="xii.vii-p11.2"></span>[Ro
2:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#020.md)<span
id="xii.vii-p11.2"></span>.)

<span id="xii.vii-p12"></span>Paul in these words detects the wickedness
of hypocrites; for the more detestable they were, as they were thus
inflated with false glory; they profaned the name of God, while they
pretended to be his heralds, and as it were his prophets. We now see
that this second clause refers to the priests, and that they are called
the keepers of the law, because they were so appointed, according to
what we read in Malachi.  <span id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33.md)

<span id="xii.vii-p14"></span>He afterwards adds, *The pastors have
dealt treacherously with God* We may apply this to the counselors of the
king as well as to the governors of cities. The Prophet, I have no
doubt, included all those who possessed authority to rule the people of
God; for kings and their counselors, as well as prophets, are in common
called pastors.

<span id="xii.vii-p15"></span>And he says, that the *prophets prophesied
by Baal* The name of prophet is sacred; but Jeremiah in this place, as
in other places, calls those prophets (contrary to the real fact) who
were nothing but impostors; for God had taken from them all the light of
divine truth. But as they were held still in esteem by the people, as
though they were prophets, the Prophet concedes this title to them,
derived from their office and vocation. We do the same in the present
day; we call those bishops and prelates, and primates and fathers, who
under the papacy boast that they possess the pastoral office, and yet we
know that some of them are wolves, and some are dumb dogs. We concede to
them these titles in which they take pride; and yet a twofold
condemnation impends over their heads, as they thus impiously, and with
sacrilegious audacity, claim for themselves sacred titles, and deprive
God of the honor rightly due to him. So then Jeremiah, speaking of the
prophets, does now point out those as impostors who at that time
wickedly deceived the people.

<span id="xii.vii-p16"></span>He says that they prophesied *by Baal:*
they ascribed more authority to idols than to the true God. The name of
Baal, we know, was then commonly known. The prophets often call idols
Baalim, in the plural number; but when Baal signifies a patron, when the
prophets speak either of Baal in the singular number, or of Baalim in
the plural, they mean the inferior gods, who had then been heaped
together by the Jews, as though God was not content with his own power
alone, but had need of associates and helpers, according to what is done
at this day by those under the papacy, who confess that there is but one
true God; and yet they ascribe nothing more to him than to their own
idols which they invent for themselves at their pleasure. The same vice
then prevailed among the Jews, and indeed among all heathen nations; for
it was the plain and real confession of all, that there is but one
supreme Being; and yet they had gods without number, and these all were
called Baalim. When, therefore, the Prophet says here, that the teachers
were ministers of Baal, he sets this name in opposition to the only true
God, as though he had said that the truth was corrupted by them, because
they passed over its limits, and did not acquiesce in the pure doctrine
of the law, but mingled with it corruptions derived from all quarters,
even from those many gods which heathen nations had invented for
themselves.

<span id="xii.vii-p17"></span>Nor does the Prophet insist on a name; for
it may have been that these false teachers pretended to profess the name
of the eternal God, though falsely. But God is no sophist: there is then
no reason for the Papists to think that they are at this day unlike
these ancient impostors, because they profess the name of the only true
God. It has always been so. Satan has not begun for the first time at
this day to transform himself into an angel of light; but all his
teachers in all ages have presented their poison, even all their errors
and fallacies, in a golden cup. Though, then, these prophets boasted
that they were sent from above, and confidently affirmed that they were
the servants of the God of Abraham, it was yet all an empty profession;
for they mingled with the truth those corruptions which they had derived
from the ungodly errors of heathen nations.

<span id="xii.vii-p18"></span>It follows, *And after those who do not
profit have they gone*  <span id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34.md) He again,
by an implied comparison, exaggerates their sin, because they had
despised him whom they had known, by so many evidences, to be their
Father and the author of salvation, whose infinite power they had as it
were felt by their own hands, and then they followed their own
inventions, though there was nothing in all their idols which could have
justly allured the people of Israel. Since, then, they followed vain and
profitless deceptions, the more heinous and inexcusable was their sin.
It afterwards follows —

<span id="xii.viii"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p1"></span><span id="xii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#009.md)<span id="xii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p2"></span>**9**. Wherefore I will yet plead with
you, saith the LORD, and with your children’s children will I plead.

<span id="xii.viii-p3"></span>**9**. Propterea adhuc contendam (*vel,*
disceptabo) vobiscum, dicit Jehovah; et cum filiis filiorum vestrorum
disceptabo.

<span id="xii.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.viii-p5"></span><span id="xii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p6"></span>The particle <span
id="xii.viii-p6.1"></span>עוד *oud,* yet, or still, is not without
weight; for the Prophet intimates, that if God had already punished the
perfidy and wickedness of the people, he still retained whole his right
to do so, as though he had said, “Think not that you have suffered all
your punishment, though I have already severely visited your fathers for
their wickedness and obstinacy; for as ye proceed in the same course,
and as there is no moderation nor limits to your sins, I will not desist
from what I have a right to do, but will punish to the last both you and
your children, and all succeeding generations.” We now then understand
what the Prophet means.

<span id="xii.viii-p7"></span>It is indeed usual with hypocrites
foolishly to cast off all fear, especially after having been once
chastised by the Lord; for they think it enough that they have suffered
punishment for their sins; and they do not consider that God moderately
punishes the sins of men to invite others to repentance, and that he is
in such a way sharp and severe as yet to restrain himself, in order that
there may be room for hope, and that they who have sinned, while waiting
for pardon, may thus more readily and willingly return to the right way.
This is what hypocrites do not consider; but they think that God on the
first occasion expends all his rigor, and so they promise themselves
impunity as to the future. As for instance, — When God chastises a city,
or a country, with war, pestilence, or famine, while the evils continue
there is dread and anxiety: most of those whom God thus afflicts sigh
and groan, and even howl; but as soon as some relaxation takes place,
they shake off the yoke, and having no concern for their wickedness,
they return again as dogs to their vomit. It is hence necessary to
declare to hypocrites what we see to have been done here by Jeremiah, —
that God so visits men for their sins, that in future he ceases not to
pursue the same course, when he sees men so refractory as not to profit
under his scourges.

<span id="xii.viii-p8"></span>*Still, therefore,* he says: this threat
no doubt exasperated the minds of the nation: for as they dared to
clamor against God, as we find in many places, and said that his ways
were thorny, they spared not the prophets, and this we shall hereafter
see: they indeed gave the prophets an odious character; and what? “These
prophets,” they said, “chatter nothing else but burdens, burdens, as
though God ever fulminated against us; it would be better to close our
ears than to be continually frightened by their words.” It must then
have been a severe thing to the Jews, when the Prophet said, *Still God
will contend with you* But it was needful so to do.

<span id="xii.viii-p9"></span>Let us then learn from this passage, that
whenever God reproves us, not only in words, but in reality, and reminds
us of our sins, we do not so suffer for one fault as to be free for the
future, but that until we from the heart repent, he ever sounds in our
ears these words, *Still God will contend with you:* and a real
contention is meant; for Jeremiah speaks not of naked doctrine, but
intimates that the Jews were to be led before God’s tribunal, because
they ceased not to provoke his wrath:  <span
id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35.md) and he declares the same thing respecting
their children and the third generation. It afterwards follows —

<span id="xii.ix"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p1"></span><span id="xii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
2:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#010.md)<span id="xii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p2"></span>**10**. For pass over the isles of Chittim,
and see; and send unto Kedar, and consider diligently, and see if there
be such a thing.

<span id="xii.ix-p3"></span>**10**. Nempe (*vel,* nam) transite ad
insulas Chittim (Graeciae, *hoc est,* ad omnes regiones transmarinas,)
et videte, et in Kedar (*hoc est, in oppositam partem, nempe versus
Aratbiam*) mittite, et considerate diligenter, et videte, an factum sit
sicut hoc (*id est,* an factum sit aliquid simile:)

<span id="xii.ix-p4"></span>**11**. Hath a nation changed *their* gods,
which *are* yet no gods? but my people have changed their glory for
*that which* doth not profit,

<span id="xii.ix-p5"></span>**11**. An mutaverit gens deos, et ipsi non
sunt dii? et populus meus mutavit gloriam suam in id quod non prodest.

<span id="xii.ix-p6"></span> 

<span id="xii.ix-p7"></span><span id="xii.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p8"></span>Here, by a comparison, he amplifies the
wickedness and ingratitude of his own nation, — that they had surpassed
in levity all heathen nations; for he says that all nations so agreed in
one religion, that each nation followed what it had received from its
ancestors. How then was it that the God of Israel was repudiated and
rejected by his own people? If there was such persistency in error, why
did not truth secure credit among them who had been taught by the mouth
of God himself, as though they had been even in heaven? This is the
drift of the Prophet’s meaning, when he says, *Go into the islands of
Chittim, and send into Kedar*

<span id="xii.ix-p9"></span>He mentions Greece on one side, and the East
on the other, and states a part for the whole. The Hebrews, as we have
seen in Daniel, called the Greeks Chittim, though they indeed thought
that the term belonged properly to the Macedonians; but the Prophet no
doubt included in that term not only the whole of Greece and the islands
of the Mediterranean, but also the whole of Europe, so as to take in
those parts, the whole of France and Spain. There is indeed some
difference made in the use of the word; but when taken generally, it was
understood by the Hebrews, as I have said, to include France, Spain,
Germany, as well as Greece; and they called those countries islands,
though distant from the sea, because they carried on no commerce with
remote nations: hence they thought the countries beyond the sea to be
islands; and the Prophet spoke according to what was customary.  <span
id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36.md)

<span id="xii.ix-p11"></span>He then bids them to *pass into the
islands,* southward as well as northward; and then he bids them, on the
other hand, to send to explore the state of the East, Arabia as well as
India, Persia, and other countries; for under the word *Kedar* he
includes all the nations of the East; and as that people were more
barbarous than others, he mentions them rather than the Persians or the
Medes, or any other more celebrated nation, in order more fully to
expose the disgraceful conduct of the Jews. *Go* then, or *send,* to all
parts of the world, and *see* and *diligently consider,* see and see
again; as though he said, that so great was the stupidity of the Jews,
that they could not be awakened by a single word, or by one admonition.
This then is the reason why he bids them carefully to inquire, though
the thing itself was very plain and obvious. But this careful inquiry,
as I have said, was enforced not on account of the obscurity of the
subject, but for the purpose of reproving the sottishness of that
perverse nation, which must have been conscious of its gross impiety,
and yet indulged itself in its own vices.

<span id="xii.ix-p12"></span><span id="xii.ix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p13"></span>Hence he says, *Yea, pass over unto the
islands;* and then he adds, *see whether there is a thing like this;*
that is, such a monstrous and execrable thing can nowhere be found. An
explanation follows, *No nation has changed its gods, and yet they are
no gods;* that is, religion among all nations continues the same, so
that they do not now and then change their gods, but worship those who
have been as it were handed down to them by their fathers. *And yet,* he
says, *they are no gods* If it had been only said, that no nation has
changed its gods, the impiety of Israel would not have been so
grievously exposed; but the Prophet takes it for granted, that all the
nations were deceived and led away after fictitious gods, and yet
remained constant in their delusions. Now, God does not set this forth
as a virtue; he does not mean that the constancy of the nations was
worthy of praise in not departing from their own superstitions; but,
compared with the conduct of the chosen people, this constancy might
however appear as laudable. We hence see that the whole is to be thus
read connectively, — “Though no nation worships the true God, yet
religion remains unchangeable among them all; and yet ye have
perfidiously forsaken me, and you have not forsaken a mere phantom, but
your *glory*.”

<span id="xii.ix-p14"></span>He sets here the favor of God in opposition
to the delusions of false gods, when he says, *My people have changed
their own glory* For the people knew, not only through the teaching of
the law, but also by sure evidences, that God was their glory; and yet
they departed from him. It is then the same as though Jeremiah had said,
that all the nations would condemn the Israelites at the last day,
because their very persistency in error would prove the greater
wickedness of the Jews, inasmuch as they were apostates from the true
God, and from that God who had so clearly manifested to them his power.

<span id="xii.ix-p15"></span>Now, if one asks, whether religion has been
changed by any of the nations? First, we know that this principle
prevailed everywhere, — that there was to be no innovation in the
substance of religion: and Xenophon highly commends this oracle of
Apollo, — that those gods were rightly worshipped who have been received
by tradition from ancestors. The devil had thus bewitched all nations, —
“No novelty can please God; but be ye content with the usual custom
which has descended to you from your forefathers.” This principle then
was held by the Greeks and the Asiatics, and also by Europeans. It was
therefore for the most part true what the Prophet says here: and we know
that when a comparison is made, it is enough if the illustration is for
the most part, <span id="xii.ix-p15.1"></span>επὶ τὸ πολὺ, as Aristotle
says, confirmed by custom and constant practice. We hence see that the
charge of levity against the Jews was not unsuitably brought by
Jeremiah, when he said, that no nation had changed its gods, but that
God had been forsaken by his people whose *glory* he was; that is, to
whom he had given abundant reasons for glorying.  <span
id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37.md)

<span id="xii.x"></span>

<span id="xii.x-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xii.x-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou hast
made thyself known to us in so plain a manner, not only by thy law and
prophets, but also by thine only — begotten Son, that the knowledge of
thy truth ought to have already struck deep roots in us, — O grant, that
we may continue firm and constant in thy holy vocation, and make
continual progress in it, and ever hasten forward to the goal: and do
thou so humble us under thy mighty hand, that we may know that we are
paternally chastised by thee, and profit under thy discipline, until
being at length purified from all our vices we shall come to enjoy that
immortal life, which has been made known to us by Christ, when we shall
be able fully to rejoice in thee. — Amen.

<span id="xii.x-p3"></span> 

<span id="xii.xi"></span>

<span id="xii.xi-p1"></span>Lecture Sixth.

<span id="xii.xii"></span>

<span id="xii.xii-p1"></span><span id="xii.xii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#012.md)<span id="xii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xii-p2"></span>**12**. Be astonished, O ye heavens, at
this, and be horribly afraid, be ye very desolate, saith the LORD.

<span id="xii.xii-p3"></span>**12**. Obstupescite coeli super hoc, et
expavescite, desolamini (*vel,* arescite) valde, dicit Jehova.

<span id="xii.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.xii-p5"></span><span id="xii.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xii-p6"></span>When the Prophet saw that he had to do with
besotted men, almost void of all reason, he turned to address the
heavens: and it is a way of speaking, common in the Prophets, — that
they address the heaven and the earth, which have no understanding, and
leave men endued with reason and knowledge. This they were wont to do in
hopeless cases, when they found no disposition to learn.

<span id="xii.xii-p7"></span>Hence now the Prophet bids the *heavens* to
be *astonished* and to be *terrified* and to be *reduced* as it were
unto *desolation;* as though he had said, “This is a wonder, which
almost confounds the whole order of nature; it is the same as though we
were to see heaven and earth mixed together.” We now then perceive the
meaning of the Prophet: for by this representation he intended to shew,
how detestable was the impiety of the people, since the heavens, though
destitute of reason, ought justly to dread such a monstrous thing.

<span id="xii.xii-p8"></span>As to the words, some render them, “Be
desolate, ye heavens,” and then repeat the same: but as <span
id="xii.xii-p8.1"></span>שמם *sh*e*m*e*m*, means to be astonished, the
rendering I have given suits the present passage better, “Be astonished,
ye heavens, for this,” and then, “be ye terrified and dried up;” for:
<span id="xii.xii-p8.2"></span>חרב *ch*a*r*e*b,* signifies to become
dry, and sometimes, to be reduced to a solitude or a waste.  <span
id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38.md) It afterwards follows: —

<span id="xii.xiii"></span>

<span id="xii.xiii-p1"></span><span id="xii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#013.md)<span id="xii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xiii-p2"></span>**13**. For my people have committed two
evils; they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, *and* hewed
them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water.

<span id="xii.xiii-p3"></span>**13**. Certe (vel quia) duo mala fecit
populus meus, Me dereliquerunt fontem aquarum viventium, ut foderent
sibi puteos (vel, cisternas,) cisternas contritas (vel, confractas,)
quae non continent aquas.

<span id="xii.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.xiii-p5"></span><span id="xii.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xiii-p6"></span>If a reason is given here why the Prophet
had bidden the heavens to be astonished and terrified, then we must
render the words thus, “For two evils have my people done:” but I rather
think that the preceding verse is connected with the former verses. The
Prophet had said, “Go to the farthest lands, and see whether any nation
has changed its gods, while yet they are mere inventions.” I think then
the subject is closed with the exclamation in the preceding verse, when
the Prophet says, “Be astonished, ye heavens.” It then follows, “Surely,
two evils have my people done,” even these, — “they have forsaken me,” —
and then, “they sought for themselves false gods.” When any one forsakes
an old friend and connects himself with a new one, it is an iniquitous
and a base conduct: but when there is no compensation, there is in it
united together, folly, levity, and madness. If I despise what I know to
be profitable to me, and embrace what I understand will be to my hurt,
does not such a choice prove madness? This then is what the Prophet now
means, when he says, that the people had sinned not only by departing
from the true God, but also by going over, without any compensation,
unto idols, which could confer no good on them.

<span id="xii.xiii-p7"></span>He says that they had done *two evils:*
the first was, they *had forsaken God;* and the other, they had fallen
away unto false and imaginary gods. But the more to amplify their sin,
he makes use of a similitude, and says that God is a *fountain of living
waters;* and he compares idols to perforated or *broken cisterns, which
hold no water*  <span id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39.md) When one leaves a
living fountain and seeks a cistern, it is a proof of great folly; for
cisterns are dry except water comes elsewhere; but a fountain has its
own spring; and further, where there is a vein perpetually flowing, and
a perennial stream of waters, the water is more salubrious and much
better. The waters which rain brings into cisterns are never so
wholesome as those which flow from their own native vein: and when the
very receptacles of water are full of chinks, what must they be but
empty? Hence then God charges the people with madness, because he was
forsaken, who was a fountain and a fountain of living waters; and
further, because the people sought unprofitable things when they went
after their idols. For what is to be found in idols? some likeness; for
the superstitious think that they labor not in vain, when they worship
false gods, and they hope to derive some benefit. There are then some
resemblances to the true in false religions; and hence the Prophet
compares false gods to wells, because they were made hollow, suitable to
hold water; but there was not a drop of water in them, as they were
broken cisterns.

<span id="xii.xiii-p11"></span>We now perceive what the Prophet meant, —
that we cannot possibly be free from guilt when we leave the only true
God, as in him is found for us a fullness of all blessings, and from him
we may draw what may fully satisfy us. When therefore we despise the
bounty of God, which is sufficient to make us in every way happy, how
great must be our ingratitude and wickedness? Yet God remains ever like
himself: as then he has called himself the fountain of living waters, we
shall at this day find him to be so, except he is prevented by our
wickedness and neglect. But the Prophet adds another crime; for when we
fall away from God, our own conceits deceive us; and whatever may appear
to us at the first view to be wells or fountains, yet when thirst shall
come, we shall not find a drop of water in all our devices, they being
nothing else but dry cavities. It follows —

<span id="xii.xiv"></span>

<span id="xii.xiv-p1"></span><span id="xii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
2:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#014.md)<span id="xii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xiv-p2"></span>**14** *Is* Israel a servant? *is* he a
homeborn *slave*? why is he spoiled?

<span id="xii.xiv-p3"></span>**14**. An servus Israel? An (vel, si)
genitus domi? (hoc est, an verna? accipiunt enim puerum, domi natum pro
verna:) quare factus est in praedam?

<span id="xii.xiv-p4"></span>**15**. The young lions roared upon him,
*and* yelled, and they made his land waste: his cities are burned
without inhabitant.

<span id="xii.xiv-p5"></span>**15**. Super eum rugient (vel, rugiunt)
leones (alii vertunt, catulos leonum, et soepe significat minores leones
hoc nomen sed ubi adjungitur reliquis, ubi autem solum ponitur, ego
semper interpretor generaliter pro leonibus,) miserunt vocem suam;
posuerunt terram ejus in vastitatem; urbes ejus exustae sunt (vel,
destructae, nam*,* <span id="xii.xiv-p5.1"></span>צצץ *tandem valet*
atque *hoc loco*) absque habitatore.

<span id="xii.xiv-p6"></span>**16**. Also the children of Noph and
Tahapanes have broken the crown of thy head.

<span id="xii.xiv-p7"></span>**16**. Etiam filii Noph (hoc est,
Mempheos, vocant enim Hebroei Noph urbem quae fuit olim metropolis
Egypti) et Thaphanes (vel, Thaphis, ut vertunt Grraeci) frangent tibi
verticem.

<span id="xii.xiv-p8"></span>**17**. Hast thou not procured this unto
thyself, in that thou hast forsaken the LORD thy God, when he led thee
by the way?

<span id="xii.xiv-p9"></span>**17**. An non hoc fuit tibi, deserere
tuum, (hoc est, quod deserueris) Jehovam Deum tuum, quo tempore ducebat
to per viam.

<span id="xii.xiv-p10"></span> 

<span id="xii.xiv-p11"></span><span id="xii.xiv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xiv-p12"></span>These verses are to be read together; for
the Prophet first shews that Israel was not as to his original condition
miserable, but that this happened through a new cause, and then he
mentions the cause. He then first asks, *whether Israel was a servant or
a slave?* God had adopted them as his people, and had promised to be so
bountiful to them as to render them in every way happy; and what was
more, as a proof of their happiness, he said, In thee shall all nations
be blessed. (<span id="xii.xiv-p12.1"></span>[Ge
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#003.md)<span id="xii.xiv-p12.1"></span>;
<span id="xii.xiv-p12.2"></span>[Ge
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018.md)<span id="xii.xiv-p12.2"></span>;
<span id="xii.xiv-p12.3"></span>[Ge
26:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#004.md)<span id="xii.xiv-p12.3"></span>;
<span id="xii.xiv-p12.4"></span>[Ge
28:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#014.md)<span
id="xii.xiv-p12.4"></span>.) We then see what was the original condition
of Israel; they excelled all other nations, because they were God’s
peculiar people, they were his heritage, they were a royal priesthood.

<span id="xii.xiv-p13"></span>Hence the Prophet, as though astonished at
something new and strange, asks this question, *Is Israel a servant?* He
was free beyond all nations; for he was the first — born son of God: it
was therefore necessary to inquire for the cause why he was so
miserable; for he says afterwards, that *lions roared against him, and
sent forth their voice;* he says, that their *cities were burnt,* or
destroyed; he says, that their land was reduced to desolation; and at
length he adds, *Has not this done these things to thee?* This again is
put as a question, but it is doubly affirmative, for it takes away every
doubt: “What do you say is the cause why you are so miserable? for all
are hostile to you, and you are exposed to the wrongs of all: whence can
you say has all this proceeded, except from your own wickedness?” We now
see what the Prophet means.

<span id="xii.xiv-p14"></span>But that what he says may be more clear,
we must remember that he reminds the people, by way of reproach, of the
benefits which God had conferred on them. As then the children of
Abraham had been honored with so many singular favors that they had the
preeminence over all the world, this dignity is now referred to, but
only for the purpose of exposing their base conduct, as though he had
said, “God did not deceive you, when he promised to be bountiful to you;
his adoption is not deceptive nor in vain: hence you would have been
happier than all other nations, had not your own wickedness rendered you
miserable.” We now see for what end the Prophet asked, *Is Israel a
servant or a slave?* They were indeed on an equality with other people,
as they were by nature; but as they had been chosen by God, and as he
had favored them with that peculiar privilege, the Prophet asks, whether
they were servants, as though he had said, “What is it that prevents
that blessedness to appear among you, which God has promised? for it was
not God’s design to disappoint you: it then follows that you are
miserable through your own fault.”  <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40.md)

<span id="xii.xiv-p19"></span>And by saying, *Why is he become a prey,*
he intimates that except Israel had been deprived of God’s protection,
they would not have been thus exposed to the caprice of their enemies.
They were not then become a prey except for this reason, because God had
forsaken them, according to what is said in the song of Moses,

<span id="xii.xiv-p20"></span>“How should one chase a thousand, and ten
should put to flight as many thousands, except God had given us up as
captives, except we had been shut up by his hand.”  
(<span id="xii.xiv-p20.2"></span>[De
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#030.md)<span
id="xii.xiv-p20.2"></span>.)

<span id="xii.xiv-p21"></span>For Moses in that passage does also in an
indirect manner remind the people how often and how wonderfully God had
given them victories over their enemies, and thus he leaves it to their
posterity, when in distress, to consider how the change came that one
should chase a thousand; that is, how could it be, that they, possessing
great forces, should yet be put to flight by their enemies; for they
were not wont to turn their backs, but to conquer their enemies: it then
follows, that they were made captives by God, and not by the men who
chased them. So also here the Prophet shews, that Israel would not have
been made a prey, had they not been deprived of God’s assistance.

<span id="xii.xiv-p22"></span><span id="xii.xiv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xiv-p23"></span>He afterwards adds, *Over him roar the
lions.* The Prophet seems not simply to compare the enemies of Israel to
lions on account of their cruelty, but also by way of contempt, as
though he had said, that Israel found that not only men were incensed
against them, but also wild beasts: and it is more degrading when God
permits us to be torn by the beasts of the field. It is then the same,
as though he had said, that Israel were so miserably treated, that they
were not only slain by the hands of enemies, but were also exposed to
the beasts of prey. And then he adds, *they have sent forth their
voice;* which is the same as to say, that Israel, whom God was wont to
protect by his powerful band, were become the food of wild beasts, and
that lions, as it were in troops, were roaring against them.

<span id="xii.xiv-p24"></span>He then adds, without a metaphor, that
*his land was laid waste,* and *his cities burnt without an inhabitant*
This language cannot be suitably applied to lions or to any other wild
beasts; but what he had figuratively said before, he now explains in a
plain manner, and says, that the land was desolate, that the cities were
cut off or burnt up. Now this, as we have said, could not have been the
case, had not Israel departed from God, and had been on this account
deprived of his help.  <span id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41.md)

<span id="xii.xiv-p28"></span><span id="xii.xiv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xiv-p29"></span>By way of amplification he adds, *Also the
sons of Noph and of Tephanes shall for thee break the head,* or, the
crown of the head. We shall hereafter see that the Israelites were wont
to seek help from the Egyptians. The particle <span
id="xii.xiv-p29.1"></span>גם, *g*a*m*, may be thus explained, “Not only
those who have been hitherto professed enemies to thee, but even thy
friends, in whose help thou didst confide, shall turn their power
against thee and break for thee thy head.” Some think that their
degradation is here enhanced, because the Egyptians were an unwarlike
people; and ancient historians say that men there followed the
occupations of women; but as this is not mentioned in Scripture, and as
the Egyptians are not thus spoken of in it, I prefer to follow the usual
explanation, that the Egyptians, though confederate with Israel, would
yet be adverse to them, and had been so already. By the *head,* some
understand the chief men among the people of Israel: but we may render
it thus, *they will break for thee the head,* as we say in our language,
*Ils to romperont la tete,* or, *Ils to frotteront la tete;* and this,
in my judgment, is the real meaning.  <span
id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42.md)

<span id="xii.xiv-p42"></span><span id="xii.xiv-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xiv-p43"></span>Now follows the cause; the Prophet, after
having shewn that Israel were forsaken by God, now mentions the reason
why it so happened, *Has not this done it for thee?* Some read in the
second person, “Hast thou not done this for thee?” but the meaning is
still nearly the same. More probable, however, is the rendering which
others have given, “Has not this happened to thee, because thou hast
forsaken Jehovah thy God?” Jeremiah, in short, teaches us that the cause
of all the evils was the defection of the people, as though he had said,
“Thou hast concocted for thyself all this evil; then must thou swallow
it, and know that the blame cannot be cast on God; for he would have
been faithful to thee, except thine impiety had prevented him. God has
not, indeed, chosen thee in vain, nor has he in vain preferred thee to
other nations; but thou hast rejected his kindness. Thy condition then
would have never been as it is, hadst thou not procured thine own ruin.”
How so? “Because thou hast departed from thy God.”

<span id="xii.xiv-p44"></span>And he further exaggerates this sin by
saying, *At the time when he led thee in the way* To lead in the way, is
rightly to govern, so as to make people happy. The Prophet then shews,
that the people’s perfidy and defection were without excuse in rejecting
the worship of their God, for they were happy during the time they
served him. Had they been in various ways tempted, or tried, they might
have reigned some pretense. “We thought ourselves deceived in hoping in
the true God, for he concealed his favor from us; we were therefore
compelled by necessity. There ought at least some indulgence to be shewn
to our levity; for we could have formed no other conjecture but that God
had removed far from us.” The Prophet meets this objection, as he does
in the fifth verse, “What iniquity have your fathers found in me?” and,
as it is done in another place,

<span id="xii.xiv-p45"></span>“My people, what have I done to thee, or
in what have I been troublesome to thee?”  
(<span id="xii.xiv-p45.2"></span>[Mic
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#004)<span id="xii.xiv-p45.2"></span>.md)

<span id="xii.xiv-p46"></span>for God in that passage shews that he was
prepared to defend his own cause, and to clear himself from whatever the
people might object to him. So also he does in this place, “I have led
thee,” he says, “in the way;” that is, “Thou didst live happily under my
government, and yet I could not retain thee by my goodness while I
kindly treated thee; and thou knewest that nothing could be better for
thee than to continue under my protection; but thou hast determined to
go over into the service of idols. Now what excuse hast thou, or what
pretense is left thee?” We hence see, that the sin of the people is
greatly enhanced, for they were induced by no temptation or trial to
forsake God, but through mere perfidy gave themselves up to idols: and a
confirmation of this verse follows —

<span id="xii.xv"></span>

<span id="xii.xv-p1"></span><span id="xii.xv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#018.md)<span id="xii.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xv-p2"></span>**18**. And now what hast thou to do in the
way of Egypt, to drink the waters of Sihor? or what hast thou to do in
the way of Assyria, to drink the waters of the river?

<span id="xii.xv-p3"></span>**18**. Et nunc quid tibi ad viam Egypti, ut
bibas aquas Nili? et quid tibi ad viam Assur, ut bibas aquam fluminis?
(*Nempe, Eeuphratis*.)

<span id="xii.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.xv-p5"></span><span id="xii.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xv-p6"></span>As I have just stated, the Prophet confirms
what I said, — that the people could not ascribe the cause of their
evils to others; for they ought to have imputed to themselves whatever
they suffered; and at the same time their sin was doubled, because they
looked here and there for vain remedies, and thus accumulated for
themselves new causes of misery; for they ought to have acknowledged no
other remedy for their evils except reconciliation with God. If, for
instance, any one being ill knew the cause of his disease, and instead
of adopting the true remedy had recourse to some vain expedients
injurious to his recovery, is he not deemed worthy to die for having
willfully despised what might have healed him, and for indulging himself
in what is deceptive and fallacious? The same thing does Jeremiah now
reprove in the people of Israel. “If you carefully inquire,” saith God,
“how it is that you are so miserable, you will find that this cannot be
ascribed to me, but to your own sins. Now, then, what ought you to have
done? what remedy ought you to have sought, except to reconcile
yourselves to me, to seek pardon from me, and to strive to correct your
wickedness? I would then have immediately healed you; and had you come
to me, you would have found me the best physician. And why do you now
act in a way quite contrary? for you run after vain helps; now you flee
to Egypt, then you flee to Assyria; but you will gain nothing by these
expedients.” We now understand the object of the Prophet. For after
having proved the people to be guilty of impiety, and shewn that the
evils which they suffered could be ascribed neither to God nor to
chance, nor to any such causes, he now shews to them, that the one true
remedy was to return into favor with God; but that it was an evidence of
extreme madness to run now to Egypt, and then to Assyria.

<span id="xii.xv-p7"></span>Now this reproof is supported by history;
for the people had at one time the Assyrians as their enemies, and at
another the Egyptians; and the changes were many. God employed different
scourges to awaken the sottishness of the people; at one time, he
whistled for the Egyptians, as we shall presently see; at another, he
blew the trumpet in Assyria: so that the Israelites might know that they
could never be safe without being under the government of God. But all
these things being overlooked, such was the blindness of the people,
that when they were assailed by the Assyrians, they fled to Egypt and
sought aid from the Egyptians, and entered into a treaty with them;
afterwards, when a change occurred, they sought a treaty with the
Assyrians, and also bought it at a high price.

<span id="xii.xv-p8"></span>This madness is what the Prophet now
reprobates, when he says, *What hast thou to do in the way of Egypt?*
that is, “What advantage dost thou gain? How great is thy folly, since
thou knowest that God is angry with thee, and that thou art suffering
many evils? God is adverse to thee, and yet thou thinkest nothing of
reconciliation. Thy healing would be to flee to God and to be reconciled
to him; but what dost thou now do? Thou fleest to the Assyrians and to
the Egyptians. How wretched is thy condition, and how great is thy folly
in thus wearying thyself without any advantage!”

<span id="xii.xv-p9"></span>Now we may learn from this passage, that
whenever God chastises us for our sins, we ought to seek a remedy, and
not to rest in those vain comforts which Satan often suggests; for such
charms introduce drowsiness, and healable diseases are by such means
rendered fatal. What then ought we to do? We ought, as soon as we feel
the scourges of God, to seek to return into favor with him; and not in
vain shall be our effort. But if we look around us in all directions for
help, our evils shall not be lessened but increased. To drink the waters
of the Nile, and to drink the waters of Euphrates, is nothing else but
to seek aids here and there.

<span id="xii.xv-p10"></span>He indeed alludes to the legations which
had been sent; for they who went to Egypt drank of the waters of the
Nile, and others of Euphrates. He yet speaks metaphorically, as though
he had said, “God was ready to help thee, hadst thou betaken thyself to
his mercy as thine asylum; but having neglected him, thou thoughtest it
more advantageous to have such aids as Egypt and Assyria could bring.
Thou thus seekest drink in remote countries, while God could give thee
waters.” And he seems to refer to the similitude which he had shortly
before used: he had called God the fountain of living waters; as though
he had said, “God is to thee a refreshing and perennial fountain, and
there would be abundance of waters for thee wert thou satisfied with
him; but thy desire is to drink the waters of the Nile, and the waters
of the Euphrates.”  <span id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43.md) We now then
perceive the meaning of the Prophet.

<span id="xii.xv-p14"></span>He, no doubt, speaks of the waters of the
Nile and of the Euphrates, because both those nations abounded
apparently in wealth and power and in military forces. As, then, the
people of Israel trusted in such auxiliaries, the Prophet here reproves
their ingratitude, because they were not content with God’s help, though
that was not so visible and conspicuous. God, indeed, has help
sufficient for us; and were we content with him alone, no doubt an
abundance of good things would to a full satisfaction be given to us;
and as he is not wearied in doing good, he would supply us with whatever
is desirable: but as we cannot see his beneficence with carnal eyes, we
are therefore carried away after the allurements of the world. We may
hence learn that we are not to seek drink either from the Nile or from
the Euphrates, that is, from the enticing things of the world, which
make a great shew and display; but that we are, on the contrary, to
drink from the hidden fountain which is concealed from us, in order that
we may seek it by faith. It now follows —

<span id="xii.xvi"></span>

<span id="xii.xvi-p1"></span><span id="xii.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#019.md)<span id="xii.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xvi-p2"></span>**19**. Thine own wickedness shall correct
thee, and thy backslidings shall reprove thee: know therefore and see
that *it is* an evil *thing* and bitter, that thou hast forsaken the
LORD thy God, and that my fear *is* not in thee, saith the Lord GOD of
hosts.

<span id="xii.xvi-p3"></span>**19**. Castigabit to malitia tua, et
aversiones tuae, (*vel,* defectiones tuae) poenam de to exigent; et
cognosces et scies, quod malum et amarum tuum derelinquere (*ad verbum,
hoc est,* quod reliqueris) Jehovam Deum tuum, et quod timor meus super
to non fuerit, dixit Dominus Jehova exeercitum.

<span id="xii.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.xvi-p5"></span><span id="xii.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xvi-p6"></span>Here again, the Prophet confirms what I
have before stated, — that the people would at length find, willing or
unwilling, what it was to deport from God; as though he had said, “As
thou hast not hitherto learnt by so many evidences, that thy perfidy is
the cause of all thy evils, God will heap evils on evils, that thou
mayest at length know, even against thy will, that thou receivest, a
reward due to thy wickedness.” This is the sum of the whole.

<span id="xii.xvi-p7"></span>But he says first, *chastise thee shall thy
wickedness,* as though he had said, that though God ascended not his
tribunal, nor put forth his hand to punish the people, yet judgment
would be evident in their very sins. And this is much more powerful, and
has greater weight in it than if the Prophet had said only, that God
would inflict on the people a just punishment; *thy wickedness,* he
says, *shall chastise thee;* and a similar mode of speaking is adopted
by Isaiah;

<span id="xii.xvi-p8"></span>“Stand;” he says, “against thee shall thy
wickedness,”  
(<span id="xii.xvi-p8.2"></span>[Isa
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#009.md)<span id="xii.xvi-p8.2"></span>;
<span id="xii.xvi-p8.3"></span>[Isa
59:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#012)<span id="xii.xvi-p8.3"></span>.md)

<span id="xii.xvi-p9"></span>as though God had said, “If I were even to
be silent and not to take upon me the office of a judge, and if there
were no other accuser, and no one to plead the cause, yet stand against
thee will thy wickedness, and fill thee with shame.” To the same purpose
is what is said here, *thy wickedness*  <span
id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44.md) *shall chastise thee*

<span id="xii.xvi-p11"></span>But we must consider the reason why the
Prophet said this. There were then, we know, complaints in the mouths of
many, — that God was too rigid and severe. Since then they thus
continually clamored against God; the Prophet repels such calumnies, and
says that their wickedness was sufficient to account for the vengeance
executed upon them. He says the same of their *turnings aside;*  <span
id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45.md) but what he had said generally before, he
now expresses more particularly, — that the people had withdrawn
themselves from the worship of God and obedience to him. He therefore
points out here the kind of wickedness of which they were guilty, as
though he had said that there was no need of an accuser, of witnesses,
or of a judge, but that the defections of the people alone would
sufficiently avail to punish them.

<span id="xii.xvi-p13"></span>He afterwards adds, *Thou shalt know and
see how wicked and bitter it is to forsake Jehovah thy God* These are
words hard in their construction; but we have already explained the
meaning; “Thy forsaking,” or thy defection, means, “that thou hast
forsaken thy God.” *And my fear was not on,* or, *in thee* Here, again,
the Prophet points out as by the finger the sins of the people. He had
before spoken of their turnings aside; but he now mentions their
defection, — that the people had plainly and openly departed from the
true God. They, indeed, ever continued some kind of worship in the
Temple: but as the whole of religion was corrupted by many
superstitions, and as there was no fidelity, no sincerity; and as they
mingled the worship of idols with that of the true God, they had dearly
departed from God, who is jealous of his honor, according to what is in
the law, and allows of no rivals. (<span id="xii.xvi-p13.1"></span>[Ex
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005.md)<span id="xii.xvi-p13.1"></span>;
<span id="xii.xvi-p13.2"></span>[Ex
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#014)<span id="xii.xvi-p13.2"></span>.md)
We now then perceive the meaning of the Prophet.

<span id="xii.xvi-p14"></span>He says, *Thou shalt know that it is an
evil and a bitter thing, etc*. This must be applied to punishment; and
he repeats what he had said before, — that the evils which the people
then suffered did not happen by chance, and that as they were
overwhelmed with many bitter sorrows, the cause was not to be sought
afar off, for their bitterness, and whatever calamities they endured,
flowed from their impiety. *Thou shalt* then *know* by the reward
itself; even experience will convince thee what it is to depart from
God; and he says, *from Jehovah thy God,* or, to forsake Jehovah thy
God. For, if God had not made known his grace to the Israelites, their
perverseness would not have been so detestable; but since they had found
God to be a Father to them, and since he had so bountifully treated
them, having been pleased to enter into a covenant with them, their
wickedness was inexcusable.

<span id="xii.xvi-p15"></span>And afterwards the person is changed, *And
my fear was not in thee* Here at length the Prophet intimates, that they
were destitute of every sense of religion; for by the fear of God is
meant reverence for his name. Men often fall, we know, through mistake,
and are deceived by the craft of Satan; and when made thus miserable
they are to be pitied. But the Prophet shews here that the people were
wholly undeserving of pardon. How so? Because there was no fear of God
in them. “You cannot,” he says, “object and say, that you have been
deceived, or make any pretense by which you may cover your wickedness:
it is evident that you have acted shamelessly and basely in forsaking
thy God, for there was no fear of God in you.  <span
id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46.md) He subjoins at last, *saith Jehovah of
hosts:* by which words the Prophet secures more authority to what he had
announced; for what he had said must have been very bitter to the
people: and many of them, no doubt, according to their usual manner,
shook their heads; for we know how insolent were most of them. Hence the
Prophet here openly declares, that he was not the author of what he had
said, but only the proclaimer; that it proceeded from God, and that he
had spoken nothing but what God himself had commanded.

<span id="xii.xvii"></span>

<span id="xii.xvii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xii.xvii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast
hitherto shewn to us so many favors, since the time thou hast been
pleased to adopt us as thy people, — O grant, that we may not forget so
great a kindness, nor be led away by the allurements of Satan, nor seek
for ourselves inventions, which may at length turn to our ruin; but that
we may continue fixed in our obedience to thee, and daily call on thee,
and drink of the fullness of thy bounty, and at the same time strive to
serve thee from the heart, and to glorify thy name, and thus to prove
that we are wholly devoted to thee, according to the great obligations
under which thou hast laid us, when it had pleased thee to adopt us in
thine only — begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="xii.xvii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xii.xviii"></span>

<span id="xii.xviii-p1"></span>Lecture Seventh

<span id="xii.xix"></span>

<span id="xii.xix-p1"></span><span id="xii.xix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#020.md)<span id="xii.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xix-p2"></span>**20**. For of old time I have broken thy
yoke, *and* burst thy bands; and thou saidst, I will not transgress;
when upon every high hill and under every green tree thou wanderest,
playing the harlot.

<span id="xii.xix-p3"></span>**20**. Quia a seculo confregi,  <span
id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47.md) jugum tuum, disrupi vincula tua; et
dixisti, Non serviam (*vel,* non transgrediar, *est enim duplex
lectio;*) quia super omnem collem excelsum, et super omnem arborem
frondosam tu discurristi meretrix.

<span id="xii.xix-p9"></span> 

<span id="xii.xix-p10"></span><span id="xii.xix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xix-p11"></span>As there are two readings in Hebrew, two
meanings are given; for some think the verb to be, <span
id="xii.xix-p11.1"></span>עבד *ob*e*d,* and others, <span
id="xii.xix-p11.2"></span>עבר *ob*e*r,* the two letters being very
similar. If we read, “I will not pass over,” or, I will not transgress,
the sense is, “When I broke thy yoke;” that is, “When I delivered thee
from the tyranny of Egypt, then thou didst pledge thy faith to me.” The
covenant then made between God and the Israelites was mutual; for as God
received them under his protection, when he became, as it were, their
patron, so they, on the other hand, promised to submit to his authority.
If we take this reading, the passage is an expostulation; as though God
condemned here the people, for their ingratitude and perfidy. But the
Prophet seems to mean another thing; and therefore I prefer the other
reading, “I will not serve:” and yet I reject what interpreters have
alleged; for this passage, I have no doubt, has been perverted. The
prevailing exposition has been this, “I will not serve idols;” and they
who seemed endued with some judgment did not see that this sense is
unsuitable, and strained, or too far — fetched: and it may have been,
and it seems to me probable, that for this reason the letter has been
changed; for all gave this explanation, “Thou hast said, I will not
serve idols:” but it is wholly a strained comment.

<span id="xii.xix-p12"></span>Now, on the contrary, I think that God
here complains that the liberty which he had given to his people was
turned into licentiousness: and this view is exactly suitable, as it is
evident from the context, — *For from old time have I broken thy yoke*
and *burst thy bonds: therefore thou hast said,* (the <span
id="xii.xix-p12.1"></span>ו here is an illative,) *I will not serve;*
that is, “When thou oughtest to have devoted thyself to me, who had
become thy Redeemer, thou thoughtest that liberty to do thine own will
was granted thee.” And then the proof given of this is in every way
appropriate, *for on every high hill, and under every shady tree, didst
thou run here and there like a harlot* Then God shews that his
redemption had been ill bestowed on the ungodly, who made a bad use of
their privilege; for hence it was that they gave themselves up to all
kinds of lasciviousness.

<span id="xii.xix-p13"></span>If any one prefers the other reading, I
will not contend with him; and then the sense is, “I have long ago
shaken off thy yoke, and burst thy bands; and thou hast said, (he speaks
of the people as of a woman, for the feminine gender is used; and this
is done, because God sustained the character of a husband towards that
people; and whenever he accused them of defection, it was as though a
husband charged an unchaste wife with the crime of adultery,) *thou
hast* then *said to me,* that is, promised to me that thou wouldest not
transgress;” or, in other words, “thou hast promised to be faithful to
me, and pledged mutual chastity.” Then the particle, <span
id="xii.xix-p13.1"></span>כי, *ki,* which is commonly a causative, is to
be taken here, according to its meaning in some other parts of
Scripture, as an adversative, *Yet on every high hill and under every
shady tree, thou didst run here and there like harlots,* who are seeking
lovers.

<span id="xii.xix-p14"></span>But as I have already said, it seems to me
more probable that God is here expostulating with the people, because
they availed themselves of the favor of liberty as an occasion for
licentiousness and wantonness: and thus the whole passage reads well,
and every clause is most suitable, consistent the one with the other.

<span id="xii.xix-p15"></span>What God says, that he had *broken the
yoke* and *burst the bands,* is confined by some to their first
redemption: but I approve of what others say, — that the Prophet speaks
here of many deliverances. We indeed know that the people were brought
out of Egypt but once; but when they were afterwards oppressed, he
stretched forth his hand to deliver them: God then had from old time,
but at various periods, shaken off the yoke of the people; for this is
evident from the book of Judges. As, then, the people were not made
free, except through God’s kindness, who redeemed them, ought they not
to have devoted themselves to the service of their Redeemer? For on this
condition, and for this end, they were redeemed by God, — that they
might consecrate themselves wholly to him. God then now condemns the
people for their ingratitude, because they thought that the yoke was
shaken off, that they might be, as we shall hereafter find, like
untamable wild beasts.

<span id="xii.xix-p16"></span>That what the Prophet means may be more
evident to us, let us remember what Paul teaches us in the sixth chapter
of his Epistle to the Romans (<span id="xii.xix-p16.1"></span>[Ro
6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#000)<span id="xii.xix-p16.1"></span>.md), —
that while we serve sin we are free from righteousness; for we go astray
after our lusts, and are restrained by no bridle: but when God really
sets us free from the miserable bondage of sin, we begin to be his
servants, and the servants of righteousness; for being freed from sin we
become the servants of righteousness: and this is the end of our
redemption. But many turn the favor of God into an occasion for
licentiousness, and thus abandon themselves, as though there was no law
and no rule for a holy and upright life. God complains that this was the
case with the people of Israel: *Thou hast said, I will not serve* “It
is base ingratitude, that thou hast not in the first place regarded me
as thy Redeemer; and that in the second place thou hast not considered
that I dealt so kindly with thee for this very purpose — that thou
mightest be mine: for he who has been redeemed by another’s kindness is
no longer his own.” God had redeemed that people; and redemption brought
with it an obligation, by which the people were bound willingly to
submit to God as their Ruler and King. *Thou hast* then *said, I will
not serve* Thus God complains that his favor had been ill bestowed on
the people, because they had abused their liberty, and turned it into
lasciviousness.  <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48.md)

<span id="xii.xix-p20"></span>And the reason that is subjoined more
fully explains the meaning, *for thou didst run here and there as a
harlot, on every high hill and under every shady tree* For we know that
the Israelites, whenever they departed from God, had some particular
places, on hills and under trees, as though greater sanctity were there
than anywhere else. And at this day the case is the same with the
Papists; for the devotion, or rather the diabolical madness, by which
they are carried away, is of a similar kind. “O! this place, they say,
“is more favorable to devotion than another; there is in it more
sanctity.” Of the same opinion were the Israelites: for they thought
that they were nearer heaven when they went up to a mountain; they also
thought that they had a more familiar intercourse with God when
concealed under shady trees. And we see that the same folly has ever
bewitched all heathen nations: for they imagined that God was nigher
them on hills, and thought that there was some hidden divinity in
fountains and under the shades of trees. As, then, this superstition had
long prevailed among the Israelites, God here reproves them, because
they *ran here and there*

<span id="xii.xix-p21"></span>But we must further notice the comparison:
he says, that they were like harlots, who, having cast off all shame,
run here and there, not only because they burn with insane lust, but are
also carried away by their own avariciousness. *Thou, harlot,* he says,
*didst run here and there* on all the high hills, and under all the
shady trees; as though he had said, “This is what I have effected in
delivering thee! thou thinkest that unbridled liberty has been granted
thee! Hence, then, it is that thou art become so wanton as to follow thy
base lusts.” It follows —

<span id="xii.xx"></span>

<span id="xii.xx-p1"></span><span id="xii.xx-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#021.md)<span id="xii.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xx-p2"></span>**21**. Yet I had planted thee a noble vine,
wholly a right seed: how then art thou turned into the degenerate plant
of a strange vine unto me?

<span id="xii.xx-p3"></span>**21**. Et ego plantavi to vineam electam
(vineam nobilem, *vel,* exquisitam, *hoc enim significat nomen,* <span
id="xii.xx-p3.1"></span>שורק,) totam fidele semen (*hoc est,* semen
probum); et quomodo conversa es mihi degenerationes vitis alienae?

<span id="xii.xx-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.xx-p5"></span><span id="xii.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xx-p6"></span>God here confirms what is said in the last
verse; for he condemned the Israelites for having perversely run here
and there after their superstitions, when yet they had been redeemed for
this end, — that they might be ruled by the hand of God. Hence he says,
*I planted thee as a choice vine;* that is, “When I redeemed thee from
thine enemies, I did not give thee permission thus to prostitute thyself
without any restraint, without any shame; for I planted thee as a choice
vine.”

<span id="xii.xx-p7"></span>The metaphor is well known, and often
occurs; for God frequently compares his Church to a vine. He calls it
generally his heritage, or his land; but as vines excel other
possessions, (for they are usually preferred to pasture lands, or to
cultivated fields,) as then vines are the most valuable property, God
hereby testifies how highly he values his Church; for he calls it his
vine rather than his pasture or his field, when he speaks of it. So he
does in this place, “I did not deliver thee from Egypt, that I might
afterwards throw aside every care of thee; but my purpose was, that thou
shouldest strike roots, and become an heritage precious to me, as an
exquisite and a noble vine. I, therefore, *planted thee a generous
vine,* <span id="xii.xx-p7.1"></span>שורק *shur*e*k,* that thou mightest
bring me forth fruit.”

<span id="xii.xx-p8"></span>Then he says, *a wholly right seed;*  <span
id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49.md) that is, “I planted thee for this end, —
that thou mightest produce fruit acceptable and pleasant to me.” God
regards here his own grace, and not the character of the people; for
that people, as it is well known, was never a true seed: but God here
shews the purpose for which he had redeemed the people, which was, that
they might be like a choice vine. *How then?* he adds. God speaks here
of their corruptions with wonder, for the indignity was such as was
enough to astonish all men: *how then art thou turned to me into
degenerations!* So I render <span id="xii.xx-p11.2"></span>סורום
*surim,* though the word is not in common use in Latin: but it is enough
for me if we understand the meaning of the Prophet. The word is derived
from <span id="xii.xx-p11.3"></span>סור *sur,* to turn aside, or back.
We ought to say then correctly, “into turnings aside.” But as this would
be obscure, when the vine is spoken of, I have not hesitated to fix on
another word: *How then art thou turned to me into the degenerations of
a strange vine!* Some give this version, “into useless branches of
grapes:” but I know not whence they have taken the words. I wish to keep
to what is more genuine, — that the vine, which ought to have been
fruitful, had so degenerated that it produced nothing, as we shall find
in another place, but wild grapes.  <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50.md)
And he calls them the turnings aside of a strange vine, which ceases to
be the choice vine, <span id="xii.xx-p17.1"></span>שורק, *shur*e*k,* and
is turned to a wild vine, which produces nothing but sour or bitter
fruit: and in the last place, as it brought forth nothing useful, God
justly calls it a strange vine. It follows —

<span id="xii.xxi"></span>

<span id="xii.xxi-p1"></span><span id="xii.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#022.md)<span id="xii.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxi-p2"></span>**22**. For though thou wash thee with
nitre, and take thee much soap, *yet* thine iniquity is marked before
me, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="xii.xxi-p3"></span>**22**. Etiam si lveris to nitro (*ut
vertunt,)* et multiplicaveris tibi borith (*alii exponunt,* herbam
fullonum; *alii,* saponem; *quod ad rei summam spectat, nulla est
ambiguitas, quoniam intelligit Deus nullo artificio, nullis herbis posse
maculas populi purgari,)* impressa est (*vel,* insculpta est, *vel,*
signata, *ut alii vertunt*) iniquitas tua coram facie mea, dicit Dominus
Jehova.

<span id="xii.xxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.xxi-p5"></span><span id="xii.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxi-p6"></span>We have already seen, and the Prophet will
often repeat the same thing, — that the people were become so refractory
that they would not willingly give way to any reproofs; for they were
almost all of such a hard front, and so obdurate in their wickedness,
that they dared insolently to raise objections against the prophets;
whenever they severely reproved them: “What! Are not we God’s holy
people? Has he not chosen us? Are we not the holy seed of Abraham?” It
was therefore necessary for the prophets to apply a hard wedge to a hard
knot, as they commonly say. As, then, the Israelites were like a knotty
wood, it was necessary to strike hard their obstinacy.

<span id="xii.xxi-p7"></span>On this account Jeremiah now says, *Even if
thou wert to wash thyself with nitre, and multiply to thee borith, yet
thine iniquity would be before me marked;* that is, “Ye effect nothing
when ye set forth various pretences for the sake of excusing your
impiety: wash yourselves, but your iniquity remains marked before me.”
The Prophet speaks in the person of God, that he might add more weight
to the denunciation he pronounced on the Israelites, and by which he
reduced to nothing their self — flatteries, according to what has been
already stated.

<span id="xii.xxi-p8"></span>By nitre and borith they removed stains in
cloth; and hence borith is often mentioned in connection with fullers.
But there is no need of a laborious inquiry, whether it was an herb or
dust, or something of that kind; for as to what is meant, it is
generally agreed that the Prophet teaches us by this metaphor, — that
hypocrites gain nothing by setting up their pretences, that they may
escape, when God condemns them. Hence he says, that all their attempts
would be vain and fruitless. How so? Because their iniquity remained
unwashed; that is, because they could not remove by washing what is
imprinted. Spots or stains can indeed be cleansed or washed away by soap
or other things; but when the stain is inward, and imprinted within,
washing will avail nothing, for the marks are so deep that some more
efficacious remedy must be adopted. So now the Prophet says, that the
stains were imprinted, and therefore could not be washed away or
cleansed by soap or borith.  <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51.md)

<span id="xii.xxi-p10"></span>But the Prophet says, that the *stains
were marked,* or stamped, *before* God; for it was a common thing with
the Israelites to clear themselves from every blame; nay, so great was
their audacity, that they openly opposed the prophets, as though some
great wrong was done to them; and they called the prophets accusers and
slanderers, Hence he says, *Thine iniquity is stamped before me?*  <span
id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52.md) that is, “However thou mayest by self —
flatteries deceive thyself, and hidest thy sins before the world, yet
thou gainest nothing; for in my sight thine iniquity ever remains
*stamped*.” He afterwards adds —

<span id="xii.xxii"></span>

<span id="xii.xxii-p1"></span><span id="xii.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#023.md)<span id="xii.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxii-p2"></span>**23**. How canst thou say, I am not
polluted, I have not gone after Baalim? see thy way in the valley, know
what thou hast done: *thou art* a swift dromedary traversing her ways;

<span id="xii.xxii-p3"></span>**23**. Quomodo dices (*hoc est,* quomodo
dicis; n*am futurum tempus saepe accipitur apud Hebraeos pro acu
continuo,* quomodo *igitur* dicis) non sum polluta, post Baalim non
profecta sum? Vide vias tuas in valle, cognosce quid feceris dromedaria
velox corripiens vias suas (*vel,* circumiens, *nam deducitur vox ista a
corrigia calceamenti*).

<span id="xii.xxii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.xxii-p5"></span><span id="xii.xxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxii-p6"></span>Jeremiah goes on here with his reproof,
and dissipates the clouds of hypocrites, under which they thought
themselves to be sufficiently concealed: for hypocrites, when they
allege their fallacious pretences, think themselves already hidden from
the eyes of God and from the judgment of all men. Hence the Prophet here
sharply condemns this supine self — security, and says, How darest thou
to boast that thou art *not polluted?* How darest thou to say, that thou
hast *not walked after Baalim?* that is, after strange gods. I have
already said, that by this word were meant inferior gods: for though the
Jews acknowledged one Supreme Being, yet they sought for themselves
patrons; and hence arose, as it is usual, a great number of gods. The
superstitious never lapsed into that degree of impiety and madness, but
that they ever confessed that there is some supreme Deity; but they
added some inferior gods. And thus they had their Baalim and patrons,
like the Papists, who call their patrons saints, for they dare not in
their delusions to call them gods. Such was the sophistry of the Jews.

<span id="xii.xxii-p7"></span>*How then,* he says, canst thou excuse
thyself, and say, that thou hast *not walked after Baalim? See,* he
adds, *thy ways, see what thou hast done in the valley,* and *know* at
length that thou hast been like a *swift dromedary* The Prophet could
not have fully expressed the furious passions which then raged in the
Jews without comparing them to dromedaries: and as he addresses the
people in the feminine gender, the female dromedary is mentioned. I
consider that she is called swift, not only on account of the celerity
of her course, but on account of her impetuous lust, as we shall
presently see.

<span id="xii.xxii-p8"></span>Now this passage teaches us, that the
people had become so hardened, that they insolently rejected all
reproofs given them by the prophets. Their impiety was openly manifest,
and yet they ever dared to allege excuses, for the purpose of shewing
that the prophets unjustly condemned them. Nor are we to wonder that
such contumacy prevailed in that ancient people, since at this day we
find that the Papists, with no less perverseness, resist the clear light
of truth. For however gross and shameful their idolatry appears, they
yet think that they evade the charge by merely saying, that their
statues and images are not idols, and that the people of Israel were,
indeed, condemned for inventing statues for themselves, but that they
did this, because they were prone to superstition. Hence they cry
against us, and say, that the worship which prevails among them is
unjustly calumniated. We see, and even children know, that under the
Papacy every kind of superstition prevails; and yet they seek to appear
innocent, and free from every blame. The same was the case formerly: and
as the temple continued, and the people offered sacrifices there, and as
some kind of religion remained, whenever the prophets reproved the
impious corruptions, which were blended with and vitiated the pure
worship of God, and which were called adulteries, as they everywhere
declare, “What!” they said, “Do we not worship God?” This very
perverseness is what the Prophet now condemns by saying, *How* darest
thou to *say, I am not polluted, I have not walked after Baalim?* So the
Papists say at this day, “Do we not believe in one God? Have we devised
for ourselves various gods? Yet they rob God of all his power, and
dishonor him in a thousand ways: and at the same time they assert
against us, with a meretricious mouth and an iron front, that they
worship the one true God.  <span id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53.md) The case
was exactly the same with the Jews: but the Prophet here proves their
boasting to be vain and grossly false, *See*, he says, *thy ways in the
valley; see what thou, a swift dromedary, hast done* As they could not
be overcome by reasons, their willfulness being so great, the Prophet
compares them to wild animals: “Ye are,” he says, “like lascivious
dromedaries, which are so carried away by lust, that they forget
everything while pursuing their own courses.” It follows —

<span id="xii.xxii-p10"></span> 

<span id="xii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="xii.xxiii-p1"></span><span
id="xii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#024.md)<span id="xii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxiii-p2"></span>**24**. A wild ass used to the
wilderness, *that* snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure; in her occasion
who can turn her away? all they that seek her will not weary themselves;
in her month they shall find her.

<span id="xii.xxiii-p3"></span>**24**. Onager (sed adhuc retinet
foemineum genus, foemina igitur onagri) assueta deserto, in appetitu
animae sum (hoc est, pro desiderio, vel, cupidine animae suae colligens
ventura occasionis suae (vel, occursus sui) quis inde reducet eam?
Quisquis persequitur earn non fatigabitur, in mense suo inveniet eam.

<span id="xii.xxiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.xxiii-p5"></span><span id="xii.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxiii-p6"></span>As Jeremiah had called the people a
dromedary, so he now calls them a wild ass: “Thou,” he says, “art both a
dromedary and a wild ass.” For when a wild ass has caught the wind
according to her desire, that is, when she has pantingly sought it, and
has caught the wind of her occasion, that is, such as may chance to be;
for he meant to shew, by this expression, that there is no choice made
by beasts, no judgment shewn, no moderation exercised; — when,
therefore, she has *caught the wind,* wherever chance may take her, no
one can *restrain her from her impetuous course;* and he who pursues her
will *in vain fatigue himself, until he finds her in her month*

<span id="xii.xxiii-p7"></span>By these words the Prophet intimates the
untamable madness of the people, that they could not by any means be
restrained, being like a wild ass, which cannot be tamed nor divested of
its wildness, especially when she has caught the wind. For were she shut
in, bolts might do something, so as to prevent her headlong course: but
when a wild ass is free, and allowed to ramble over hill and dale, when
she catches the wind, and catches it according to her desire; that is,
when she can wander here and there, and nothing prevents her from
rambling in all directions, — when such a liberty is allowed to wild
animals that they catch the wind, and the wind of occasion; that is, any
wind that may chance to be, there is no reason, as the Prophet seems to
intimate, in wild beasts, nor do they keep within any due bounds. When
any one of us undertakes a journey, he inquires how far he can go in one
day, he avoids weariness, and provides against it as far as he can, and
after having fixed the extent of his journey, he thinks of a resting —
place; and he also makes inquiries as to the right way, and the best
road. The case is different with wild animals; for when they begin to
run, they go not to Lyons or to Lausanne, but abandon themselves to a
blind impulse: and then when they are fatigued, they cease not to
proceed in their course, for lust hurries them on. We now perceive the
design of the Prophet.

<span id="xii.xxiii-p8"></span>He then adds, *Who can bring her back?*
As though he had said, that the people could not be stopped or brought
back to anything like moderation, for a wildness, yea rather a complete
madness, had taken an entire possession of them.  <span
id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54.md)

<span id="xii.xxiii-p13"></span>It afterwards follows, *There is no
reason for any one to weary himself, he will at length find her in her
month* All interpreters agree that this month is to be taken for the
time of foaling. When the wild asses are in foal, and the time of
parturition draws nigh, they are then restrained by their burden, and
may be easily caught, as they retain not their previous swiftness, for
they carry a burden. The Prophet then says, that the people were like
wild asses, for they could be restrained by no instruction, and nothing
could bridle their excesses; but that the time of parturition must be
waited for.

<span id="xii.xxiii-p14"></span>Let us now see how this similitude
applies to the people. The verse contains two parts. The first shews, as
I have already said, that the people could not be turned by any
warnings, nor would they obey any counsels, but were carried away by
their insane passions, as it were by the wind of occasion, or any wind
that might blow. This is the first part. Now as the obstinacy of the
people was so great, God here declares to hypocrites, that the time
would come when he would put a restraint on them, and break down their
impetuous infatuation. How? The time of parturition would come; that is,
“when ye shall have done many iniquities, your burden will stop and
restrain you.” And he intimates, that it would be the time of his
judgment; as though he had said, “you must be dealt with not as sane
men, endued with a sound mind; for ye are wild beasts which cannot be
tamed.” What, then, remains to be done? As the wild ass is weighed down
with her burden when the time of parturition approaches, so I will cause
you at length to feel the burden of your iniquities, which will be by
its weight intolerable; and though your perverseness is untamable, yet
my hand will be sufficient to restrain you; for I shall break you down,
as ye will not bend nor obey my instruction.” We now, then, understand
the import of the similitude, and how applicable it was to the case of
the people; the use of which ought to be learnt, also, by us in the
present day. The rest tomorrow.

<span id="xii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="xii.xxiv-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xii.xxiv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that, as it pleased
thee, when thou didst deliver us from the tyranny of Satan, to lay on
our necks thy yoke: — O grant, that we may be influenced by the spirit
of docility, and of obedience, and of meekness, and willingly submit
ourselves to thee through the whole course of our life, so that thou
mayest gather from us the fruit of thy redemption: and may we so
renounce sin that we may devote ourselves to thy service, and become the
servants of righteousness, until having finished the course of our
warfare, we shall be gathered into that blessed rest. which has been
obtained for us by the blood of thine only — begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="xii.xxiv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xii.xxv"></span>

<span id="xii.xxv-p1"></span>Lecture Eighth

<span id="xii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="xii.xxvi-p1"></span><span id="xii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#025.md)<span id="xii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxvi-p2"></span>**25**. Withhold thy foot from being
unshod, and thy throat from thirst: but thou saidst, There is no hope:
no; for I have loved strangers, and after them will I go.

<span id="xii.xxvi-p3"></span>**25**. Prohibe pedem tuum a discalceare
(*hoc est,* ne discalceeris) et guttur tuum a siti (*quanquam alii
existimant esse nomen substantivum* <span id="xii.xxvi-p3.1"></span>יחף,
*et mihi placet; ita vertendum erit,* Prohibe pedem tuum a
discalceatione et guttur tuum a siti;) et dixisti, Acturm est; non, quia
dilexi alienos, et post illos ambulabo.

<span id="xii.xxvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.xxvi-p5"></span><span id="xii.xxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxvi-p6"></span>The words of the Prophet, as they are
concise, may appear at the first view obscure: but his meaning is simply
this, — that the insane people could by no means be reformed, however
much God might try to check that excess by which they were led away
after idols and superstitions. In the first clause, God relates how he
had dealt with the people. All the addresses of the prophets had this as
their object — to make the people to rest contented under the protection
of God. But he employs other words here, *Keep thy foot,* he says, *from
unshodding, and thy throat from thirst* For whenever there was any
danger they ran, now to Egypt, then to Assyria, as we have already seen.
Hence God complains of their madness, because they obeyed not his wise
and salutary counsels. Had God bidden them to run here and there, either
to the east or to the west, they might have raised an objection, and
say, that the journey would be irksome to them; but he only commanded
them to remain still and quiet. How great, then, was their madness, that
they would not with quietness wait for the help of God, but weary
themselves, and that with no benefit? Isaiah says nearly the same thing,
but in other words; for he expostulated with them, because they
underwent every kind of weariness, when they might have been protected
by God, and be in no way wearied.

<span id="xii.xxvi-p7"></span>We now, then, comprehend the design of the
Prophet: for God first shews that the people had been admonished, and
that in time; but that they were so taken up with their own perverse
counsels, that they could not endure the words of the prophets. It was
the highest ingratitude in them, that they refused to remain quiet at
home, but preferred to undergo great and severe labors without any
advantage, according to what is said by Isaiah in another place,

<span id="xii.xxvi-p8"></span>“This is your rest, but ye would not.”
(<span id="xii.xxvi-p8.1"></span>[Isa
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#015.md)<span
id="xii.xxvi-p8.1"></span>.)

<span id="xii.xxvi-p9"></span>There is no one who desires not rest and
peace; nay, all confess that it is the chief good, which all naturally
seek. The Prophet says now, that it was rejected by the people of
Israel. It hence follows, that they were wholly insane, for they had
lost a desire which is by nature implanted in all men. The Prophet,
then, does not here simply teach, but reminds the Jews of what they had
before heard from Isaiah, and also from Micah, and from all the other
prophets. For God had often exhorted them to remain quiet; and the
Prophet now upbraids them with ingratitude, because they gave way to
their own mad folly, and rejected the singular benefit offered them by
God.

<span id="xii.xxvi-p10"></span>Let us then know that the Prophet states
here what others before him had taught, *Keep back,* he says, *thy foot
from unshodding.* Some render the last word, “from nakedness,” because
they wore out their shoes by long journeys; but this I think must be
understood of what was commonly done, for they were wont to make
journeys unshod: *keep* then *thy foot from being unshod,*  <span
id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55.md) *and thy throat from thirst* We know that
thirst is very grievous to men: hence the Prophet here reproves the
madness of the people, — that they were so seized with the ardor of an
impious passion, that they willfully exposed themselves to thirst even
by long journeys. As then God required nothing from the people but to
ask his counsel, their sin was doubled by their unwillingness to obey
his salutary direction. A plausible excuse, as I have already said,
might have been alleged, had God dealt in a hard and severe manner with
the people; but as he was ready kindly and graciously to preserve them
in a complete state of quietness, no kind of excuse remained for them.

<span id="xii.xxvi-p12"></span>It then follows, *Thou hast said, There
is not a hope, no* The Prophet shews here, as to the people, how
perverse they were; for they obstinately rejected the kind and friendly
admonitions which had been given them. They say first, *There is not a
hope,* or, it is all over; for <span id="xii.xxvi-p12.1"></span>יאש
*iash,* in *Niphal,* means to despair, or, to be out of hope. It may be
rendered, “It is weariness;” and this would not be unsuitable, if taken
in this sense, “I have thoughtlessly tormented myself more than enough,
so that weariness itself induces me to rest.” *No*. The Prophet speaks
concisely in order to express more strikingly the refractory conduct of
the people. By saying, “There is not a hope,” it is the same as though
he had said, that they spurned all exhortations; and then he adds, *No*.
There is no verb put here; but an elliptical expression, as I have said,
is more forcible to set forth the ferocity of the people.  <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56.md)

<span id="xii.xxvi-p17"></span>Isaiah expostulated with them in another
way, and blamed them, because they did not say, “There is not a hope.”
(<span id="xii.xxvi-p17.1"></span>[Isa
57:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#010.md)<span
id="xii.xxvi-p17.1"></span>.) Thus Isaiah and Jeremiah seem to be
inconsistent; for our Prophet here reproves the people for saying,
“There is not a hope;” and Isaiah, for not having said so. But when the
Jews expressly answered, according to this passage, “There is not a
hope,” they meant that the prophets spent their labor in vain, as they
were determined to follow their own course to the last. Hence by this
expression, “There is not a hope,” is set forth the extreme perverseness
of the people; and he shews that no hope of repentance remained, since
they said openly and without any evasion that it was all over. But
Isaiah reproved the people for not saying, that there was not a hope,
because they did not acknowledge after long experience that they were
proved guilty of folly: for after having often run to Egypt and then to
Assyria, and the Lord having really taught them how ill-advised they had
been, they ought to have learnt from their very disappointments, that
the Lord had frustrated their expectations in order to lead them to
repentance. Justly then does Isaiah say, that the people were extremely
besotted, because they ever went on in their blind obstinacy, and never
perceived that God did set many obstacles in their way, in order to
compel them to go back and to cast aside all their vain hopes, by which
they deceived themselves. We hence see that there is a complete
agreement between the two prophets, though their mode of speaking is
different.

<span id="xii.xxvi-p18"></span>Jeremiah then introduces the people here
as saying expressly, and thus avowing their own perverseness, *There is
not a hope;* as though they said, “Ye prophets do not cease to stun our
ears, but vain and useless is your labor; for we have once for all made
up our minds, and we can never be brought to revoke our resolution.” But
what does Isaiah say? He reproves the madness of the people, that having
been so often deceived by the Egyptians as well as by the Assyrians,
they did not understand that they ought by such trials and experiments
to have been brought back to the right way, but continued obstinately to
follow their own wicked counsels. As to the passage before, we perceive
what the Prophet means, — that God had kindly exhorted the Jews to rest
quiet and dependent on his aid; but that they were not only
stiff-necked, but also insolently rejected the kindness offered to them.

<span id="xii.xxvi-p19"></span>It then follows, *For I have loved
strangers, and after them will I go* Here he exaggerates the sin of the
people, for they gave themselves up to strangers; and he retains the
similitude which we have already observed. For as God had taken the
people under his own protection, so the obligation was mutual: both
parties were connected together as by a sacred bond, as the case is
between a husband and his wife; as he pledges his faith to her, so she
by the law of marriage is bound to him. Jeremiah here retains this
similitude, and says that the people were like the basest strumpet, for
they would not hear the voice of their husband, though he was willing
and anxious to be reconciled to them. Now, a wife must be wholly
irreclaimable when she spurns her own husband, who is ready to receive
her into favor, and to forgive her all the wickedness she may have done.
The Prophet then shews, that there was in the people so great and so
hopeless an impiety, that they closed their ears against God who kindly
exhorted them to repent; and worse still, they shamelessly boasted that
they were resolved to worship idols and their own fictions, and to
reject the only true God. It follows —

<span id="xii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="xii.xxvii-p1"></span><span
id="xii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#026.md)<span id="xii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxvii-p2"></span>**26**. As the thief is ashamed when he
is found, so is the house of Israel ashamed; they, their kings, their
princes, and their priests, and their prophets,

<span id="xii.xxvii-p3"></span>**26**. Sicut pudor (*vel,* probrum)
furi, cum deprehensus est, ita pudefacti sunt domus Israel, reges eorum,
principes eorum, et sacerdotes eorum et prophetae eorum.

<span id="xii.xxvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.xxvii-p5"></span><span id="xii.xxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxvii-p6"></span>Some render the words in the future
tense, “So ashamed shall be the house of Israel,” etc.; and they think
that the Prophet is speaking here of the punishment which was impending
over the people: but I explain the words as they are, — that the impiety
of the people was so gross, that there was no need formally to prove it,
as it was so very palpable. Hence the Prophet compares the Jews to open
thieves, as though he had said, that hypocrites among that people gained
nothing by their evasions and subterfuges, for their impiety was quite
public: they were like a thief when caught, who cannot deny nor hide his
crime. Hence he says that they were caught, as they say, in the very
act; that is, their flagitious deeds were so conspicuous, that whatever
objections they might raise, they could not clear themselves, but their
baseness was known to all. We now then perceive what the Prophet means.
We have before seen that the people had recourse to many excuses, but
Jeremiah shews here, that they attained nothing by their evasions,
except that they more fully discovered their own effrontery, for their
dishonesty was evident to all; it was so manifest that they could not
cover it by any cloaks and pretences.  <span
id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57.md)

<span id="xii.xxvii-p13"></span>Nor does he speak only of the common
people; but he condemns *kings, princes, priests,* and *prophets,* as
though he had said, that they were become so corrupt from the least to
the greatest, that having cast off all shame, they openly shewed a
manifest and gross contempt for God by following their own inventions
and superstitions. And yet the Jews no doubt attempted by many excuses
to defend themselves; but God here shakes off all those fallacious
pretexts, by which they thought to cover their flagitious deeds, and
says that they were notwithstanding manifestly thieves.

<span id="xii.xxvii-p14"></span>The Prophet had said before, that the
Jews made a different declaration; and now he condemns their effrontery:
but there is no inconsistency as to the meaning. The Jews denied that
they were apostates and guilty of perfidy, or that they had forsaken the
worship of God; they denied this in words; but the Prophet, in now
proclaiming their shamelessness, does not refer to words; for they had
ready at hand their false pretensions, as it has been already stated:
but the Prophet now takes the fact itself as granted, and says that they
wickedly and perversely resisted God, so that their wickedness and
obstinacy were past all remedy. It now follows —

<span id="xii.xxvii-p15"></span> 

<span id="xii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="xii.xxviii-p1"></span><span
id="xii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
2:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#027.md)<span
id="xii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxviii-p2"></span>**27**. Saying to a stock, Thou *art* my
father; and to a stone, Thou hast brought me forth: for they have turned
*their* back unto me, and not *their* face: but in the time of their
trouble they will say, Arise, and save us.

<span id="xii.xxviii-p3"></span>**27**. Dicentes ligno, Pater meus tu
(*hoc est,* tu es pater meus,) et lapidi, Tu genuisti me (*si legamuss
per* <span id="xii.xxviii-p3.1"></span>י, *si autem per* <span
id="xii.xxviii-p3.2"></span>ו, Tu genuisti nos;) quia verterunt mihi
cervicem (dorsum, *alii vertunt, vel,* posteriora,) et non faciem: in
tempore autem calamitatis suae dicent (*hoc est,* dicunt,) Surge et
serva nos.

<span id="xii.xxviii-p4"></span>**28**. But where *are* thy gods that
thou hast made thee? let them arise, if they can save thee in the time
of thy trouble: for *according to* the number of thy cities are thy
gods, O Judah.

<span id="xii.xxviii-p5"></span>**28**. Et ubi sunt dii tui, quos
fecisti tibi? Surgant, an servent to tempore mali tui (*hoc est,*
afflictionis tuae, *sicuti prius;*) quia secundum numerum urbium tuarum
fuerunt dii tui, Jehudah.

<span id="xii.xxviii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xii.xxviii-p7"></span><span id="xii.xxviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxviii-p8"></span>The Prophet here confirms what he had
before said of the perverse wickedness of the people. He shews that he
had not said without reason, that their sins were extremely gross, and
could not be excused by any evasions: for they *say*, he adds, *to the
wood, Thou art my father, and to the stone, Thou hast begotten, me* By
these words the Prophet shews, that idolatry was so rampant among the
people, that they openly ascribed to their statues, made of wood or
stone, the honor due to the only true God.

<span id="xii.xxviii-p9"></span>But the Prophet points out here what is
especially to be detested in idolatry, and that is, the transferring of
the honor, due to God, to statues, not only as to the external act by
bending the knee before them, but by seeking salvation from them.

<span id="xii.xxviii-p10"></span>And this is what we ought particularly
to notice: for the Papists at this day, though they prostrate themselves
before their pictures and statues, do not yet acknowledge themselves
guilty of idolatry, when such a charge is brought against them. They say
that they worship the statues, not with the honor due to God, but with
such honor as a servant renders to his master.  <span
id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58.md) They think that they thus exculpate
themselves. But were we to grant what they allege, they yet cannot deny
but that they address prayers and supplications to statues. As then they
ask the very statues to save them, whatever sophistry they may adopt, it
is altogether nugatory: for the prophets condemn not merely the outward
gesture, the bowing down, and other ceremonious acts, as they are
called, when they condemned idolaters. What then? They condemned them,
because they said to *statues, Thou art my Father;* that is, because
they ascribed the power, which belongs only to God, to statues made of
wood or stone. It is indeed certain, that the Jews never sunk into so
great a depth of sottishness as expressly to profess that gods of wood
and stone were equal to the true God, and they never said any such
thing. Yet the Prophet did not calumniate them, in ascribing what is
here said to them: but as it is clearly evident from other places, the
Prophet regarded their thoughts rather than their words: for the Jews
professed the same thing as the Papists of the present day, when they
prostrated themselves before their statues; they said that they
worshipped the only true God and sought salvation from him; and yet they
thought that the power of God was inherent in the statues themselves:
hence they said, *Thou art my father, Thou hast begotten me* The case is
the same with the Papists of the present day. When any one prostrates
himself before the statue of Catherine or of Christopher, he says, “Our
Father.” When he justifies himself in doing this, he says that it is
done in honor to the one true God: and yet thou runnest blindly, now to
one statue, and then to another, and muttcrest, “Our Father.” There is
not the least doubt but that the superstition which now prevails under
the Papacy, is even more gross than that which prevailed among the Jews.
But to say nothing of the Papists, because they mutter, “Our Father,”
before their statues, there is no doubt but that when they present their
prayers to statues, they consider God’s power to be in them.

<span id="xii.xxviii-p12"></span>We must now, then, bear in mind, that
the Jews were not only condemned, because they burnt incense and offered
sacrifices to idols, but because they transferred the glory of God to
their statues, when they asked salvation from them. And as this was not
done in express words, the Prophet here brings to light their impious
thoughts; for they did not raise up their minds and thoughts to God, but
turned them to their statues.

<span id="xii.xxviii-p13"></span>It afterwards follows, *They have
turned to me the neck*  <span id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59.md) *and not
the face* In these words, God again confirms what he had before said,
that the apostasy or defection of the people was more manifest than what
could be disguised by any colorings. He then adds, *Yet* (the <span
id="xii.xxviii-p14.5"></span>ו is to be taken here adversatively) *in
the time of their affliction, they will say, Arise, and save us* God
here complains that the Jews most strangely abused his kindness; for
they came to him when any grievous calamity constrained them. “What have
I to do with you?” he says, “Ye are wholly devoted to your idols, ye
call them your fathers, and ascribe to them the glory of your salvation,
when things go on peaceably with you; but when your idols in time of
distress give you no aid, then ye return to me and say, *Arise, and save
us;* but, since idols are your fathers, and ye expect salvation from
them, I shall have nothing to do with you; be contented with your idols,
and trouble me no more, for I have been forsaken by you.”

<span id="xii.xxviii-p15"></span><span id="xii.xxviii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxviii-p16"></span>And hence he adds, *Where are your
gods?* Here God laughs to scorn the false confidence by which the Jews
deceived themselves: *Where are your gods, which you have made for
yourselves? Let them arise, let us see whether they will help you in the
time of your distress.* We now understand what the Prophet means: for he
shews that the people acted in a most strange manner; for they
worshipped idols when they were in safety, and afterwards would have God
to be bound to them; and yet they denied the true God when they fell
away unto idols. He then shews that they could expect no aid from God;
for they robbed him of his own power when they devised idols for
themselves. But we must ever remember what he said, that false gods were
counted as fathers and authors of salvation by the people.

<span id="xii.xxviii-p17"></span>The same thing is, no doubt, done at
this day under the Papacy; for the Papists have their patrons; and when
they find that their foolish superstitions can do nothing for them, they
would have God to help them, and yet they leave nothing to him: after
having taken away all his glory, and divided it as a spoil among dead
saints, they would then have God to be their helper. But we see what
God’s answer to them is, “Where are your gods?” etc.

<span id="xii.xxviii-p18"></span>Now this truth is of use to us; and we
hence learn, that we are not to wait until we are really, and in the
last state of despair, compelled to acknowledge that our labors have
been useless, while we hoped and prayed for help from idols; but that we
ought to come directly to God himself for aid in our distress.

<span id="xii.xxviii-p19"></span>God proceeds farther with the sarcasm
or the derision which he has employed, *Where are thy gods? Let them now
arise that they may help thee;* that is, — let them try their utmost
whether they can aid thee. *According to the number of thy cities have
been thy gods, O Judah* As the people were not satisfied with one God,
every city chose a patron for itself. “Since, then, innumerable gods are
invoked by you, how comes it that they do not help you?” We hence see
that the unbelief of the people is here sharply reproved; for they did
not acquiesce in God alone, but sought to procure for themselves gods
without number: there were many cities in the tribe of Judah, and there
were as many patrons. The one true God would have been fully sufficient
for them, and would have brought them complete deliverance whenever
needed; but the one true God they despised, and every city devised a god
for itself. “Since ye trust,” he says, “in such a multitude, *let them
now arise, that they may succor you;* for I, who am one, am despised by
you.” We now understand what the Prophet means also in this part. It
afterwards follows —

<span id="xii.xxix"></span>

<span id="xii.xxix-p1"></span><span id="xii.xxix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#029.md)<span id="xii.xxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxix-p2"></span>**29**. Wherefore will ye plead with me?
ye all have transgressed against me, saith the LORD.

<span id="xii.xxix-p3"></span>**29**. Cur litigatis mecum omnes impie
agentes in me (*vel,* perfide)? dicit Jehova.

<span id="xii.xxix-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.xxix-p5"></span><span id="xii.xxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxix-p6"></span>Jeremiah concludes here his previous
subject: he says that the Jews gained nothing by alleging against God
that they were innocent, and by thinking that they could by mere words
escape his judgment, and not only by doing so, but also by hurrying on
to such a degree of presumption as to challenge God himself, and to seek
to prove him guilty. But God answers them in one word, and says, that
they were perfidious. The meaning then is, that the Jews ill consulted
their own interest in hardening themselves in their obduracy; for God
would hold them fully convicted of impiety, so that they in vain alleged
this or that as an excuse.  <span id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60.md)

<span id="xii.xxix-p14"></span>Now this passage deserves especial
notice: for we know how prone we are by nature to hypocrisy; and when
God summons us to his tribunal, hardly one in a hundred will acknowledge
his guilt and humbly pray for forgiveness; but the greater part
complains, nay almost all murmur against God, and still more, they
gather boldness, and proudly dare to challenge and defy God. Since,
then, hypocrisy thus prevails in us and is deeply fixed in the hearts of
almost all, and since hypocrisy generates insolence and pride against
God, let us remember what the Prophet says here, — that all who dispute
against God gain nothing by their excuses, because he will at length
detect their defection and perfidy. It then follows —

<span id="xii.xxx"></span>

<span id="xii.xxx-p1"></span><span id="xii.xxx-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#030.md)<span id="xii.xxx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxx-p2"></span>**30**. In vain have I smitten your
children; they received no correction: your own sword hath devoured your
prophets, like a destroying lion.

<span id="xii.xxx-p3"></span>**30**. Frustra (vel, in vanum) castigavi
filios tuos, correctionem non receperunt; voravit gladius vester
prophetas vestros quasi leo vastator.

<span id="xii.xxx-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.xxx-p5"></span><span id="xii.xxx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxx-p6"></span>Some expound the beginning of this verse as
though the meaning were, — that God chastised the Jews on account of
their folly, because they habituated themselves to falsehoods: but the
latter clause does not correspond. There is therefore no doubt but that
God here expostulates with the Jews, because he had tried to bring them
to the right way and found them wholly irreclaimable. A similar
expostulation is found in Isaiah,

<span id="xii.xxx-p7"></span>“In vain,” he says, “have I chastised you;
for from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head there is no
soundness.”  
(<span id="xii.xxx-p7.2"></span>[Isa
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#006)<span id="xii.xxx-p7.2"></span>.md)

<span id="xii.xxx-p8"></span>There God shews that he had tried every
remedy, but that the Jews, being wholly refractory in their spirit, were
wholly incurable. Jeremiah speaks now on the same subject: and God thus
exaggerates the wickedness of the people; for he testifies that he had
tried whether they would be taught, not only by words, but also by
scourges and chastisements, but that his labor in both instances had
been in vain. He spoke before of teaching, “Keep thy foot from being
unshod, and thy throat from thirst.” The Prophets, then, had exhorted
the Jews by God’s command to rest quietly. This teaching had been
useless and unfruitful. God now adds, that he had tried in another way
to bring them back to a right mind; but this effort had been also
useless and in vain: *In vain have I chastised you; for ye have not
received correction*

<span id="xii.xxx-p9"></span>But he speaks of *children,* in order to
shew that the whole people were unteachable: for though lusts boil more
in youth, yet their obduracy is not so great as in the old; as he who
has through his whole life hardened himself in the contempt of God, can
hardly be ever healed and be amended by correction; for old age is of
itself morose and difficult to be pleased, and the old also think, that
wrong is in a manner done them when they are reproved: but when the
insolence and obduracy of the young are so great that they reject all
correction, it is more strange and monstrous. The Prophet then shews
that there was nothing sound or right in that people, since their very
children refused correction.  <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61.md)

<span id="xii.xxx-p11"></span>We now perceive his object, — that, as God
had sent his prophets, and as their labor availed nothing, he now shews,
that not only the ears of the people had been deaf to wholesome
teaching, but that they were hard — necked and untamable; for he had
tried to correct them by scourges, but effected nothing. It follows,
*their sword has devoured the prophets* But I cannot finish now.

<span id="xii.xxxi"></span>

<span id="xii.xxxi-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xii.xxxi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou, in
thy paternal kindness, daily invitest us to thyself, we may not harden
ourselves against thy holy and salutary admonitions: and whenever thou
chastisest us with scourges, may we not become obdurate against thee,
but learn humbly to submit to thy word, and receive thy chastisement,
and so profit by both, that we may not be exposed to the extreme
judgment which thou denouncest on the obstinate; but may we, on the
contrary, open a way for thy paternal goodness, so that thou mayest
kindly deal with us, until thou receivest us into that blessed rest
which has been prepared for us in heaven, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
— Amen.

<span id="xii.xxxii"></span>

<span id="xii.xxxii-p1"></span>Lecture Ninth

<span id="xii.xxxii-p2"></span>IN yesterday’s lecture, God complained
that he had spent labor in vain in chastising the children of Israel;
for they were of a nature utterly untamable and refractory, incapable of
being improved. Hence he says, “I have in vain endeavored by punishments
to bring you back to the right way.” But he now exaggerates their crime
of obduracy, as they not only had rejected wholesome instruction, but
had also shed innocent blood, and persecuted as their enemies the
prophets who had been sent to them from above, in order to promote their
wellbeing. God then condemns them here not only for perverseness, but
also for cruelty; for he says, that he had not gained his object in
leading them to repentance, and also, that they had not only been
refractory and incorrigible, but that they had besides cruelly raged
against the prophets: and Jerusalem, we know, had been a slaughter —
house where many of the prophets had been killed.

<span id="xii.xxxii-p3"></span>Some explain the passage of false
teachers, as though the Prophet had said, that it was to be ascribed to
the wickedness of the people, that prophets, who were false and
mendacious, suffered just punishment; and they lay hold on one word,
even because they are called *their* prophets. Hence *Jerome* says, that
they were said to be *your,* and not my prophets; as though God thus
denied that he had given them any commission. But this view is forced
and strained.

<span id="xii.xxxii-p4"></span>We must, then, understand the meaning to
be what I have stated, — that when God used means to heal the vices of
the people, the very prophets, the ministers of salvation, were cruelly
slain by the people. And this exposition best suits the expressions
which follow, *as a devouring lion* For God says, that the Jews raged
against the prophets, as though they had entered a forest full of lions.
It now follows —

<span id="xii.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="xii.xxxiii-p1"></span><span
id="xii.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
2:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#031.md)<span id="xii.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxxiii-p2"></span>**31**. O generation, see ye the word of
the LORD. Have I been a wilderness unto Israel? a land of darkness?
wherefore say my people, We are lords; we will come no more unto thee?

<span id="xii.xxxiii-p3"></span>**31**. Generatio, vos vidite verbum
Jehovae, an deserturn fui Israel? an terra caliginis? Quare dixerunt
populus meus (hoc est, dixit, sed plurali utitur, quia est nomen
collectivum) dominati sumus (alii, recessimus,) non veniemus amplius ad
to.

<span id="xii.xxxiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.xxxiii-p5"></span><span id="xii.xxxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxxiii-p6"></span>The prophet assumes the character, no
doubt, of one in astonishment, that he might render the sin of the
people more detestable: for he speaks as one astonished, *generation!*
The word, <span id="xii.xxxiii-p6.1"></span>דור, *dur;* as it is well
known, means an age. It is then the same as if he had said, “On what
time are we fallen? or in what an age do we now live?” We now then
perceive the import of the word. Then he adds, *See ye the word of
Jehovah* The word, *see,* seems not to be suitable; for he ought to have
said, “Attend to, “or “hear.” But he bids them to see, and most
appropriate is the term; for he does not require the people to hear,
but, on the contrary, to know, as though he had said, “See ye yourselves
what this is which the Lord declares.” And he emphatically says, <span
id="xii.xxxiii-p6.2"></span>אתם *at*e*m, “*ye yourselves.” For the Jews
might have been deservedly condemned by all nations, were they brought
into judgment. But the Prophet shews, that however blind they were, they
might see with their own eyes what the Lord now says. He does not refer
to instruction, but to a fact, as though he had said, “The Lord by me
expostulates with you; and though there should not be present any
witnesses or a judge or an umpire, ye yourselves are able to understand
and know the whole matter.” We hence see how fitly the Prophet speaks,
when he bids them to *see the word of Jehovah*  <span
id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62.md)

<span id="xii.xxxiii-p10"></span>For he immediately adds, *Have I been a
desert to Israel?* He makes the Jews themselves the umpires and judges
of the cause, whether they had not experienced the bounty of God and had
forsaken him, according to his former complaint, when he said that God
was the fountain of living waters, and that they had dug for themselves
broken cisterns. Hence he says, “How has it happened that ye have
departed from me? Have I in vain promised to be bountiful and kind to
you? Did I disappoint you or your expectation, while ye served me? Since
then I had not been to you a dark and a gloomy land, a land without the
light of the sun; but as abundance of blessings had ever been found in
me, how has it been that you have departed from me?”

<span id="xii.xxxiii-p11"></span>He afterwards mentions another crime,
Why has my people said, *We are lords* The verb <span
id="xii.xxxiii-p11.1"></span>רדנו, *r*e*d*e*nu,* is variously explained
by interpreters. Some derive it from <span
id="xii.xxxiii-p11.2"></span>ידר, *ir*e*d,* to descend, and think that
the <span id="xii.xxxiii-p11.3"></span>י, *iod*, is supplied by a point.
But these differ in their views: some refer to the calamities with which
the Jews had been visited, and others to their apostasy. The first give
this explanation, “We have descended;” that is, “We have been oppressed
with calamities, what then can we gain by calling on God, since our
affairs are in so hopeless a state?” The second draw forth another
meaning, “We have gone back;” that is, “There is no reason for the
prophets to stun our ears by their clamors, for we have once for all
resolved never to return to God; we have wholly renounced him; away with
him, let him begone together with his exhortations, for we will not
attend to them.” Both these expounders think it to be the language of
despair: but we perceive how they differ; the first apply “descend” to
the calamities of the people, and the second to their perfidy, because
they had bidden adieu, as it were, to God, and wished not to have any
farther intercourse with him.

<span id="xii.xxxiii-p12"></span>But there are others who take the word
more grammatically: for <span id="xii.xxxiii-p12.1"></span>רדה,
*r*e*de,* and <span id="xii.xxxiii-p12.2"></span>רוד, *rud,* signifies
to be lord, or to rule. I therefore prefer the view of those who render
the word, *We are lords* Some take the verb in a passive sense, but I
know not for what reason: and the comment of others is very diluted, “We
have kings and counselors.” I consider it to be the language of pride
and of vain boasting: for the Jews thought themselves to be kings,
according to what Paul says of the Corinthians,

<span id="xii.xxxiii-p13"></span>“Ye are rich, ye have reigned without
us, and I would ye did reign.” (<span id="xii.xxxiii-p13.1"></span>[1Co
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#008.md)<span
id="xii.xxxiii-p13.1"></span>.)

<span id="xii.xxxiii-p14"></span>The Corinthians, being inflated with
pride on account of the opulence of their city, despised the simplicity
of the Gospel; they looked for refined things, and were much addicted to
novelties. Hence Paul, seeing that they despised the grace of God,
ironically reproved them, and said, that they wished to be rich and to
be kings without him, to whom yet as an instrument they owed everything.
The same vice is what Jeremiah now condemns in that people, *We are
lords, we will not come to thee;* as though he had said, “Your happiness
has hitherto proceeded from me; for whatever you have been, and whatever
has been given you, ought to be ascribed to me and to my bounty: but now
without me (for God himself speaks) ye are kings, but by what right and
by what title? What have you as your own? *Why then has my people said,
We will come no more to thee?”* We now understand the real meaning of
the Prophet.

<span id="xii.xxxiii-p15"></span>As to the subject itself, he in the
first place, as I have already said, is in a manner astonished at the
wickedness of the people, as at something monstrous. Hence he exclaims,
*O generation!* as though he had said, that what he saw was incredible.
Then he immediately adds, *see ye yourselves the word of Jehovah,* This
was much more severe, than if he had summoned them before God’s
tribunal; for he thus proved that their wickedness was extremely gross;
for they had, without any cause, nay, without any pretext, and without
shame, renounced God, who had been so bountiful towards them. He also in
an indirect manner reproved them, because they refused to be instructed;
for he commanded them to look on the fact itself, inasmuch as they were
deaf, or having ears they closed them against all instruction; for, as
we have said, he calls away their attention from the word to the fact
itself, and this is what interpreters have not observed.

<span id="xii.xxxiii-p16"></span>Then follows an upbraiding, — that *God
had not been a desert to them;* but, as the Prophet had before shewed,
abundance of all blessings had flowed to them so as fully to satisfy
them. Since then God had enriched them through his blessing, their sin
in departing from him was thereby more increased.

<span id="xii.xxxiii-p17"></span>In the last part of the verse God
expostulates with them on their ingratitude, because they thought
themselves to be lords. They were indeed a royal priesthood, but it was
through God’s favor. They did not reign through their own right, they
did not reign because they had attained power through their own valor or
efforts, or through their own merits or their own good fortune; how
then? only through the favor of another. Though then they were kings
only on the condition of being subject to the supreme King, yet they
wished to reign alone, that is, according to their own pleasure; and
thus trod under their feet the favor of God. It is with this wickedness
then that the Prophet charges them. And the end of the verse is of the
same import, *we will come no more to thee;* as though they stood in no
need of God’s aid; for they thought that they could supply themselves
with whatever was necessary to support them. As then they were inflated
with much pride, they despised the favor of God, as though they stood in
no need of the aid of another. It follows —

<span id="xii.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="xii.xxxiv-p1"></span><span
id="xii.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#032.md)<span id="xii.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxxiv-p2"></span>**32**. Can a maid forget her ornaments,
*or* a bride her attire? yet my people have forgotten me days without
number.

<span id="xii.xxxiv-p3"></span>**32**. An obliviscetur puella ornamenti
sui? Sponsa ligaminum suorum (*ad verbum; alii vertunt,* murenulas;
*alii,* torques; *sed nomen hoc deducitur a* <span
id="xii.xxxiv-p3.1"></span>קשר, *quod est ligare; apud nos possemus
vertere* tressures *proprie?*) populus autem meus (*nam vau debet
resolvi in adversativam particulam*) oblitus est mei diebus innumeris
(quibus non est numerus, *ad verbum* *)*

<span id="xii.xxxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.xxxiv-p5"></span><span id="xii.xxxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxxiv-p6"></span>God here confirms what is said in the
last verse, and would make his people ashamed, because they valued him
less than girls are wont to value their ornaments. The necklaces of
young women are indeed nothing but mere trifles, and yet we see that
girls are so taken with them through a foolish passion, that they value
such trinkets more than their very life. “How then is it, “says God,
“that *my people have forgotten me?* Is there to be found any such
ornament? Can anything be found among the most valuable jewels and the
most precious stones which can be compared with me?”

<span id="xii.xxxiv-p7"></span>God shews by this comparison how
perverted the minds of the Jews were, when they renounced and rejected a
benefit so invaluable as to have God as their Father, and to be
prosperous under his dominion; for nothing necessary for a blessed life
had been wanting to them as long as they continued the recipients of
that paternal favor, which God had manifested towards them, and wished
to shew to them to the end. As then they had found God to have been so
bountiful, must they not have been more than mad, when they willfully
rejected his favor? while yet young women commonly set their thoughts
and affections strongly and permanently on such trifles as are of no
value.  <span id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63.md) But the Prophet designedly
used this similitude, that he might introduce what is contained in the
next verse: his object was to compare the Jews to adulterous women, who
being led away by unbridled lust, follow wanton lovers. As then he
intended to bring this charge against the Jews, he spoke expressly of
the ornaments of young women; and hence it follows —

<span id="xii.xxxv"></span>

<span id="xii.xxxv-p1"></span><span id="xii.xxxv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
2:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#033.md)<span id="xii.xxxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxxv-p2"></span>**33**. Why trimmest thou thy way to seek
love? therefore hast thou also taught the wicked ones thy ways.

<span id="xii.xxxv-p3"></span>**33**. Cur bonificas (*id est,* paras,
concinnas) vias tuas ad quaerendum amorem? itaque etiam pravitates
docuisti in viis tuis.

<span id="xii.xxxv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.xxxv-p5"></span><span id="xii.xxxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxxv-p6"></span>This verse is differently explained: but
the Prophet simply means; that the Jews were like lascivious women, who
not only despise their husbands at home, but ramble here and there in
all directions, and also paint their faces and seek for themselves all
the charms of wantonness. He says that the Jews had acted in this way;
and hence he says that they *made beautiful their ways* The verb in
Hebrew has a wide meaning: it means to prepare, to conciliate favor. But
its import here is, as though the Prophet had said, “Why dost thou
disguise and paint thyself like strumpets, who use many artifices to
allure young men and to inflame their lusts? why then dost thou
undertake so much labor to gain a meretricious hire?” We shall hereafter
see why he says this; for he upbraids them for applying to the Assyrians
and the Egyptians.

<span id="xii.xxxv-p7"></span>It was a common thing with the Prophets to
compare the people to lovers; for the Jews, while they ought to have
been firmly attached to God, (like a chaste woman, who does not turn her
eyes here and there, nor gad about, but has respect to her husband
alone,) thought to seek safety now from the Assyrians, then from the
Egyptians. This sinful disposition is then what the Prophet here
condemns; and hence he speaks of them metaphorically as of an adulterous
woman, who despises her husband and rambles after any she can find, and
seeks wanton and silly young men in all places, and subjects herself to
the gratification of all. We now then understand what the Prophet means.

<span id="xii.xxxv-p8"></span>The words must be noticed: he says, *Why
makest thou fine thy ways?* But he refers here to the care which a
wanton woman takes to adorn her person, as though he had said, “Why dost
thou thus prepare thyself? and why dost thou seek for thyself what is
splendid and elegant, that thy appearance may deceive the eyes of the
simple?” For the Jews might have remained safe and secure under God’s
protection, and might have been so without any calamity. As a husband is
content with the beauty of his wife, and seeks no adventitious and
refined elegancies; so God required nothing from that people except
fidelity, like a husband, who requires chastity in his wife. The meaning
then is, — “As a wife, really attached to her husband, has no need to
undergo much labor, for she knows that her own native beauty pleases
him, nor does she labor much to gain the heart of her husband, for the
best recommendation is her chastity; so ye might have lived without any
trouble by only serving me and keeping my law: but now what is your
chastity? ye are like wanton women, who labor to gain the hearts of
adulterers; for as they burn with lust, so there is no end nor limits to
their attempts to seek embellishments; and they torment themselves, only
that they might attach adulterers to themselves. Such then are ye (says
God;) for ye spend much care and labor in seeking for yourselves strange
lovers.”

<span id="xii.xxxv-p9"></span>He afterwards adds, *Therefore thou hast
also taught lewdnesses* He alludes to the words he had before used,
*Thou hast made fine* (or *fair*) *thy ways:* and now he says, *thou
hast also taught wickednesses by thy ways* He declares that the Jews
were worse than the Assyrians and the Egyptians, as a lascivious woman
is far worse than all the adulterers whom she captivates as her
paramours. For when a young man is not deceived, and the devil does not
apply the fagot, he may continue chaste and pure; but when an impudent
and wanton woman entices him, it is all over with him. The Prophet then
says, that the Assyrians and the Egyptians were innocent when compared
with his own nation. How so? “Because they have been led away,” he says,
“by your allurements, like young men, who are destroyed by the
fallacious ornaments of strumpets; for it is the same as though they had
fallen into snares: the evil then has proceeded from you, and the fault
lies with you.  <span id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64.md)

<span id="xii.xxxv-p13"></span>We now understand the Prophet’s meaning:
for he condemns the Jews, because they afforded an occasion of evil both
to the Assyrians and to the Egyptians, while they of their own accord
sought their favor. It now follows —

<span id="xii.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="xii.xxxvi-p1"></span><span
id="xii.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#034.md)<span id="xii.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxxvi-p2"></span>**34**. Also in thy skirts is found the
blood of the souls of the poor innocents: I have not found it by secret
search, but upon all these.

<span id="xii.xxxvi-p3"></span>**34**. Etiam in alis tuis repertus est
sanguis animarum pauperum innocentum; non in suffossione repertae erant,
sed super omnibus his (alii vertunt quia in onmibus illis; et particula
est causalis, sed tamen hic adversative debet resolvi, quemadmodum
multis locis.)

<span id="xii.xxxvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.xxxvi-p5"></span><span id="xii.xxxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxxvi-p6"></span>The Prophet repeats, as I think, what he
had before said, — that the wickedness of his nation was incorrigible;
for they repented not when warned, but on the contrary raged like wild
beasts against the Prophets and religious teachers. Those interpreters
are mistaken who think that the savage cruelty of the Jews in general is
here condemned; and all are of this opinion. But the Prophet no doubt
enhances this evil, by saying, that the Jews were not only obstinate in
their vices, but also raged furiously against the Prophets. Hence he
shews again, that God had used all remedies to heal the Jews, but
without effect, for what better medicine could have been offered than
for the Prophets to reprove the people and to shew to them how wickedly
they had departed from God? God then wished thus to correct the vices of
his own people; but so far was he from effecting anything, that at
Jerusalem and through the whole of Judea, the Prophets were slaughtered,
and the whole land was filled with and polluted by their blood.

<span id="xii.xxxvi-p7"></span>Hence he says, *Even in thy wings has
been found the blood of the souls of the poor innocents.* He calls the
borders of garments wings. He seems to say, that these slaughters were
not hid, for the Jews were besprinkled with blood to the very
extremities of their garment; as though he had said, “There is no cause
for me to deal sharply with you in this instance; for your filthiness is
most apparent: ye have not only been rebellious against my teaching, but
ye have also cruelly murdered my prophets. If ye ask, Where these
slaughters are to be found? Even in your wings, on the borders of your
garments; so that your crimes are fully known.” We now perceive what the
Prophet means.

<span id="xii.xxxvi-p8"></span>We must also notice the import of the
particle <span id="xii.xxxvi-p8.1"></span>גם, *g*a*m*, also, or even.
Their cruelty was worse and more nefarious, because they thus rose up
against their own physicians; for the prophets, as it has been said,
were the ministers of their safety. As then they thus raged against
God’s favor so as to murder his prophets, it became still more evident,
that they were utterly irreclaimable.

<span id="xii.xxxvi-p9"></span>He afterwards adds what serves for a
confirmation. *They have not been found in digging under* Some give
another explanation; but their opinion is right who think, that the
Prophet alludes to what is said by Moses in <span
id="xii.xxxvi-p9.1"></span>[Ex
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#002.md)<span id="xii.xxxvi-p9.1"></span>,
— that if a thief should be found in digging under, (or undermining,) he
might be killed with impunity: for he who thus breaks through into the
houses of others, is equal to a robber in audacity; and he ought to be
counted not only a thief, but also as one guilty of manslaughter and
felony. God then says, that the Prophets, who had been slain by the
Jews, had not been *found in digging up,* that is, had not been found
guilty of any crime, either of robbery or of murder: for he mentions a
particular act, instead of the general crime. But it has been *on
account of all these things;* that is, “because they boldly dared to
reprove you, because they severely condemned your vices, because they
discovered your baseness, because they were enemies to your perfidy and
to your sins: as then the prophets had thus by the divine Spirit carried
on war with your sins, they have on this account been murdered by you.
 <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65.md)

<span id="xii.xxxvi-p13"></span>We see how well the whole passage reads,
provided it be applied to the prophets only. It was not indeed the
object of Jeremiah to condemn murders generally among the Jews, but to
shew that they were the enemies of the prophets, because they were
opposed to every good and sound counsel, and were incapable of receiving
instruction. The mistake of other expounders is hereby made evident: for
in the last clause they touch neither heaven nor earth. It follows —

<span id="xii.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="xii.xxxvii-p1"></span><span
id="xii.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
2:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#035.md)<span id="xii.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxxvii-p2"></span>**35**. Yet thou sayest, Because I am
innocent, surely his anger shall turn from me. Behold, I will plead with
thee, because thou sayest, I have not sinned.

<span id="xii.xxxvii-p3"></span>**35**. Et dixisti (*hoc est,* dixisti
tamen; *nam copula hic accipitur pro* tamen,) certe (*nam* <span
id="xii.xxxvii-p3.1"></span>כי *causalis particula hic audaciam notat,
vel illam jactantiam plenam impudentiae, ut auderent asserere Iudaei se
esse innoxios,* certe) ego sum munda (ego sum innocens;) tantum recedat
furor ejus a me: Ecce ego judico to (*vel,* contendam tecum in judicio,)
quia dixisti, non peccavi.

<span id="xii.xxxvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.xxxvii-p5"></span><span id="xii.xxxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxxvii-p6"></span>The Prophet here shews that the Jews
were possessed of such a brazen front, that they could not be led by any
admonitions to feel any shame. Though then they were like adulterous
women, and though they gave meretricious hire to such as they ran to in
all parts, and though also they had murdered the prophets and the pious
ministers of God, yet they boasted, as persons conscious of no evil,
that they were innocent.

<span id="xii.xxxvii-p7"></span>*Thou hast yet said;* that is, “How
darest thou to pretend to be innocent, since thou art proved to be
guilty, not by allegations, but by manifest and glaring proofs?” In
short, the Prophet shews that the condition of the people was past
remedy, for they would not receive any admonition; nay, they dared, as
it were with the front of brass, obstinately to boast that they were
innocent: Thou hast said, (he still speaks of a woman, in the feminine
gender,) *Thou hast yet said, surely I am clean* Thus hypocrites not
only excuse themselves, and allege vain pretences, but dare to come
forth publicly, and to fly as it were above the clouds, elated by their
own self — confidence. “Who will dare to allege anything against me?”
Thus hypocrites willfully and impertinently challenge all the servants
of God and seek by their own presumption to close the mouth of all. The
Prophet now condemns this petulancy in the Jews; for though they were
manifestly proved guilty, yet they boastingly asserted that they were
innocent. *Only* (<span id="xii.xxxvii-p7.1"></span>אך, *ak*, I take
here to mean only) *depart,* etc. The Prophet upbraids the Jews with
another crime, — that they said, that wrong was done to them by God in
seeking to bring them to a right mind by punishment and by reproofs. For
God, as it is well known, had inflicted many punishments on the Jews,
and had also added serious reproofs. He tried by these means to find out
whether they were capable of being healed. What did they say? “I am
innocent; and God is angry with me without a cause. *Let him remove his
anger from me;*” that is, “only let not God deal severely with us, nor
use his supreme authority, and we shall be able to prove our innocency.”
Thus ungodly men, when urged with severe warnings, vomit forth their
blasphemies against God, — “O what can I do? I know that I am not able
to resist; God fights with a shadow when he afflicts me; his violence I
must indeed bear though he may overwhelm me; yet he doeth me wrong: but
were he to deal justly and fairly with me, I could prove that I do not
deserve these evils.” Such then was the language of the Jews, — *only
depart let his fury from me,* we could then shew that we are just, or at
least excusable.

<span id="xii.xxxvii-p8"></span>Now also in this part we perceive the
design of the Prophet: it was to shew, that the Jews not only dared
dishonestly and proudly to claim innocency for themselves, but hesitated
not to contend with God, and to intimate that he with too much severity
oppressed them, and did not treat them justly, but announced a cruel
sentence for the purpose of overwhelming them.

<span id="xii.xxxvii-p9"></span>*Behold,* he *says, I will judge thee,
because thou hast said, I have not sinned* Some give this version, “I
judge, *or,* condemn thee.” But there is here no doubt a contrast
between the fury of God and his judgment. The people said, that God was
too rigorous; this was his fury: God now mentions his judgment. “There
is no reason,” he says, “for you to allege such a pretext as this, as it
will vanish into nothing; for I will in judgment contend with you;” that
is, “I will really prove that I am a just judge and not a tyrant, that I
execute just punishments and according to the law, and that I am not
like a man in anger, who takes vengeance on his enemies and does so
precipitantly and rashly: I will shew,” he says, “that I am a just
judge.”

<span id="xii.xxxvii-p10"></span>We may hence gather a profitable
instruction. Let it in the first place be observed, that nothing is so
displeasing to God as this headstrong presumption, that is, when we seek
to appear innocent, while our own conscience condemns us. Then in the
second place observe, that all who thus perversely rebel and strive
dishonestly and shamelessly to defend their own vices, contend at the
same time with God: for false excuses have ever this tendency — to
charge God with unjust severity. But we see what such men gain for
themselves; for God shews that he will be at length their judge, and
that he will openly discover the vices of those who thought that they
could excuse themselves by evasions and by false charges against
himself. They then who thus obstinately resist God, must at length,
according to what the Prophet declares, come to this end, — that they
will be constrained to acknowledge that God has not been too violently
angry with them, but has only executed a just punishment.  <span
id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66.md)

<span id="xii.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="xii.xxxviii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xii.xxxviii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since we are
loaded with so many vices, and provoke thee so often, yea, daily and in
ways innumerable, — O grant, that we may not at last become hardened
against thy godly admonitions, but be teachable and submissive and in
time repent, lest our wantonness and hardness should constrain thee to
put forth thy powerful hand against us; but as we have hitherto
experienced thy patental kindness, so may we in future be made partakers
of it, and thus become more and more accustomed to bear thy yoke, until
having at length completed our warfare, we shall come to that blessed
rest, which has been provided for us in heaven, through Christ our Lord.
— Amen.

<span id="xii.xxxviii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xii.xxxix"></span>

<span id="xii.xxxix-p1"></span>Lecture Tenth

<span id="xii.xl"></span>

<span id="xii.xl-p1"></span><span id="xii.xl-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#036.md)<span id="xii.xl-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xl-p2"></span>**36**. Why gaddest thou about so much to
change thy way? thou also shalt be ashamed of Egypt, as thou wast
ashamed of Assyria.

<span id="xii.xl-p3"></span>**36**. Quid discurris tantopere ad mutandum
vias tuas? Etiam ab Egypto pudefies, sicuti pudefacta es ab Assur.

<span id="xii.xl-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.xl-p5"></span><span id="xii.xl-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xl-p6"></span>The Prophet goes on with the same subject.
He had said before that the people were like an unfaithful wife, who
having left her husband rambles here and there to gratify her lusts. For
this view he now gives the reason; for he might have appeared to treat
the people too severely, had not the fact been pointed out as it were by
the finger; and this he does now. He says, that they ran here and there,
not in a common manner, but in a way to render evident their shameful
levity, such as is seen in strumpets, who without any shame seek either
adulterers or fornicators.

<span id="xii.xl-p7"></span>But I have already briefly shewn what the
Prophet means: When any danger was nigh, the Jews sought aid, now in
Egypt, then in Assyria. Yet they knew that this was forbidden them; not
that it was in itself an evil or a bad thing to seek help from
neighbors; but because it was God’s will that the safety and security of
that people should be dependent on him only; for he had taken them under
his safeguard. As then the Jews were God’s dependents, they ought to
have acquiesced in his protection. When they wandered here and there, it
was an evidence of unbelief; and what they attributed to the Egyptians
or to Assyrians, they took away from their own God, who had promised
that their safety would be the object of his care. Hence he compares
these movements to wanton levity; they were like those of strumpets, who
ramble in all directions. Now a strumpet must be wholly shameless, when
she thus seeks the gratification of her lust: for harlots often wait for
the coming of lovers; but when they ramble everywhere, they are
altogether abominable. This then is what the Prophet now means, that is,
that the Jews ran here and there; and thus it was, that they *changed
their ways*

<span id="xii.xl-p8"></span>There remains indeed often in harlots some
natural love; but it is a proof of a brutish, shameless, and monstrous
lust, when a woman seeks the company of any one she may see, or when a
man lusts after any woman he may meet with. When there is such a
shamelessness as this, it appears that no modesty remains, nor even what
is natural; for as I have already said, it ought to be deemed monstrous,
when a woman is inflamed with lust at the sight of any one. And yet this
lewdness is what the Prophet reprobates in the Jews when he says, that
they *ran here and there to change their ways:* so that their love never
continued, but they lusted after any they met with; nay, they went here
and there to allure them. This subject is spoken of oftener and more at
large by Ezekiel; and we shall find this comparison used also in other
parts of this book. But it is enough for me to mention briefly the
design of the Prophet.  <span id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67.md)

<span id="xii.xl-p16"></span>He then adds, *Ashamed shalt thou also be
of the Egyptians, as ashamed thou hast been of the Assyrians* Before the
time of Hezekiah, the Jews had made a treaty with the Assyrians against
the Syrians and the Israelites, as it is well known; and then against
the Egyptians; for soon after a war arose between them and the
Egyptians, who had been their confederates, and changing their policy,
they went for help to Assyria. They afterwards reconciled themselves to
their ancient enemies; but this second treaty also turned out unhappily.
Hence the Prophet says, that the end would be the same with what they
had before experienced. God had indeed chastised their ungodly defection
when they went to Assyria. He now says, that no better success would
attend the help of the Egyptians than what attended the help of the
Assyrians. The Jews, we know, were ever subjected to plunder, and
suffered more loss from their associates than from their open enemies.
It was the just reward of their impiety and defection. God then declares
that he would be the avenger of this second defection, as he had been of
the former. It follows —

<span id="xii.xli"></span>

<span id="xii.xli-p1"></span><span id="xii.xli-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
2:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#037.md)<span id="xii.xli-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xli-p2"></span>**37**. Yea, thou shalt go forth from him,
and thine hands upon thine head: for the LORD hath rejected thy
confidences, and thou shalt not prosper in them.

<span id="xii.xli-p3"></span>**37**. Et jam ab hoc (ab hac re, *hoc
est,* propter hoc scelus) egredieris, et manus tuae super caput tuum,
quia detestatur Jehova confidentias tuas, et in illis non prospere tibi
succedet.

<span id="xii.xli-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.xli-p5"></span><span id="xii.xli-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xli-p6"></span>He expresses more clearly what he had said
of the shameful character of his own nation, — that the Jews, who
thought that their safety would be secured by the Egyptians, were
seeking their own entire ruin. This seemed to them indeed incredible;
for as the Egyptians were neighbors, and as the Jews then only feared
the Assyrians and Chaldeans, who were afar off, they thought that they
had the best prospect: “What! our enemies are distant from us twenty or
thirty days’ journey; and those who are prepared to help us will be soon
with us at the shortest warning.” Hence the Jews thought, as we have
said, that they were quite safe. But the Prophet here declares, that
they were greatly mistaken; for on account of this wickedness, that is,
because they trusted in their unlawful and accursed treaty, and promised
themselves peace from their enemies, or thought that they could easily
overcome them; *on this account,* he says, *thou shalt go forth:* but
nothing could have been less credible to the Jews than what the Prophet
said; for as the Egyptians opposed themselves as a wall against the
Chaldeans, and were deemed unassailable, who could have otherwise
thought but that the Jews would be preserved quiet in their own country?
But he says, *Go forth shalt thou, and thine hands on thy head*  <span
id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68.md)

<span id="xii.xli-p8"></span>By this gesture he means extreme despair;
for women did either strike or extend their arms when any great calamity
happened, as we see it done often in the present day; for when a woman,
not able to keep within due bounds, either loses a husband, or expects
some very great calamity, she beats her breast, or raises up her hands,
according to what is said here. Jeremiah then mentions this gesture as
an evidence of extreme despair; as though he had said, “The treaty which
fills the Jews with so much confidence shall be so far from being
advantageous to them, that it will, on the contrary, bring on them utter
ruin and disgrace.  <span id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69.md) But the reason
which follows ought especially to be observed, *because abhor does
Jehovah thy confidences* The Prophet here shews why he had spoken so
severely. It might have appeared that he spoke hyperbolically when he
said, that the people were like an abandoned harlot, who rambled here
and there in all directions: but the reason here given ought to have
been sufficient to take away all evasions, and that is, that they
foolishly trusted in those fallacious helps which they knew were
condemned by God. Had this been permitted by God, they would not have
been so severely reprimanded; but as God had forbidden them to flee to
the Egyptians, it was in the first place a disallowed confidence; and in
the second place, they thus despised the aid of God, and cast aside, as
it were, all his promises: for as their hearts were fixed on the
Egyptians, and as they thought that their safety would be secured by
them; so their prayer to God became not only cold, but almost wholly
extinguished.

<span id="xii.xli-p16"></span>We hence see that the Prophet did not
exceed due limits when he spoke against the Jews with so much
displeasure, and condemned them in such reproachful terms; for they had
transferred the glory due to God to the Egyptians, when they considered
them to be the authors of their safety; and they had thus despised the
promises of God, so that there was no attention given to prayer: *Abhor,
then, does Jehovah thy confidences*  <span
id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70.md)

<span id="xii.xli-p20"></span>He then adds, *Thou shalt not prosper in
them.* It ought to be carefully observed, that whatever we resolve to do
that is not approved by God, cannot possibly succeed; for God will
subvert all our hopes. Let us then know that here is set before us the
punishment of all unbelievers, who, being not content with God’s
protection, wander after vain and false objects of trust, and prefer to
have men propitious to them rather than God himself. Now follows —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc17011.htm#fr_26.md) <span
id="xii.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p12"></span> Though most of modern commentators,
*Grotius, Gataker, Blayney, Scott, Adam Clarke,* etc., give the same
view of this verse with *Calvin,* yet the probability is, and something
more than the probability, that the sense in which it was taken by the
ancients is the correct one; which is the sense given in our version,
and adopted by *Henry*. A literal rendering of the verse is sufficient
to shew its meaning, —

<span id="xii.i-p13"></span>**2.** Go and cry in the ears of Jerusalem,
saying, Thus saith Jehovah, — I remember, with regard to thee, The
kindness of thy youth, The love of thy espousals, Thy coming after me in
the desert, Through a land not sown.

<span id="xii.i-p14"></span>“Thy coming, *or,* walking after me,“ stands
in the same relation to “remember” as the two preceding words: this is
plainly the construction; and this construction determines the meaning
of the foregoing lines. Our version is quite wrong in rendering <span
id="xii.i-p14.1"></span>לך, “thee;” it ought ever to be rendered as
above, when the verb, as here, is followed by an accusative case. See
<span id="xii.i-p14.2"></span>[Le
26:45](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#045.md)<span id="xii.i-p14.2"></span>;
<span id="xii.i-p14.3"></span>[Ps
79:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#008.md)<span id="xii.i-p14.3"></span>;
<span id="xii.i-p14.4"></span>[Ps
106:45](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#045.md)<span id="xii.i-p14.4"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p15"></span>What has led commentators, no doubt, to
divert this passage from its right meaning was their impression that
more is here ascribed to Israel than their history warrants. But this is
not the only instance in which their former conduct is contrasted with
their latter conduct. This is done in <span id="xii.i-p15.1"></span>[Mal
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#005.md)<span id="xii.i-p15.1"></span>, as
to the priests. The object here is to set forth the difference between
the people when brought out of Egypt, and following God’s guidance in
the wilderness, and their conduct at the time of Jeremiah. They were
indeed very far from being what they ought to have been in the first
instance, but their deportment in Jeremiah’s age was incomparably worse.
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc17011.htm#fr_27.md) <span
id="xii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p11"></span> *Blayney* considers this verse as
referring to Israel in ancient times, and as spoken by God: hence he
renders the last words, “said Jehovah.” The first part seems to declare
what Israel was, and the other appears to be the language of God
respecting them, —

<span id="xii.ii-p12"></span>Holy was Israel to Jehovah,  
The first-fruits of his produce:  
“All his devourers shall be deemed guilty,  
Evil shall come to them,” said Jehovah.

<span id="xii.ii-p13"></span>The verb <span id="xii.ii-p13.1"></span>אשם
is rendered “<span id="xii.ii-p13.2"></span>πλημμελήσουσι — shall
offend,” by the *Septuagint,* as in our version, and by *Grotius;*
“trespass,” by *Gataker;* and, “guilty of a trespass,” by *Blayney*. The
contradiction of guilt is what is meant, as the punishment is announced
in the next words. See <span id="xii.ii-p13.3"></span>[Ps.
105:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#014.md),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#015.md)<span id="xii.ii-p13.3"></span>. —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc17011.htm#fr_28.md) <span
id="xii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p12"></span> The literal rendering of this verse is as
follows, —

<span id="xii.iii-p13"></span>**5.** Thus saith Jehovah, What have your
fathers found in me? Oppression? For they have gone far from me, And
have followed after vanity, And have become vain.

<span id="xii.iii-p14"></span>The word <span
id="xii.iii-p14.1"></span>שול, oppression, injustice, or tyranny, is so
placed in the sentence that it cannot be construed with “what.” The word
“vanity” means often an idol, and it is so considered here by the
*Targum,* by *Piscator, Grotius, Gataker,* and others. It is often found
in the plural, “vanities,” as it is here in the *Septuagint;* see <span
id="xii.iii-p14.2"></span>[De
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021.md)<span id="xii.iii-p14.2"></span>;
<span id="xii.iii-p14.3"></span>[1Ki
16:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#026.md)<span id="xii.iii-p14.3"></span>;
<span id="xii.iii-p14.4"></span>[Ps
31:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#006.md)<span id="xii.iii-p14.4"></span>:
but it is here the poetical singular. They “became vain,” that is,
foolish, sottish, having no more sense or reason than their idols, as
idolaters are represented in <span id="xii.iii-p14.5"></span>[Ps
115:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#008.md)<span id="xii.iii-p14.5"></span>.
Their senselessness is set forth in the next verse. An idol is
especially called “vanity,” because it can do no good and avails
nothing: deluded imagination alone gives it all its efficacy and power.
Samuel gives a true account of idols, <span
id="xii.iii-p14.6"></span>[1Sa
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#021.md)<span id="xii.iii-p14.6"></span>.
But as long as the devil deceives and deludes the world, idols and
images will be in repute, though they are in themselves wholly useless
and worthless, while yet they prove ruinous to the souls of men. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc17011.htm#fr_29.md) <span
id="xii.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p14"></span> Though the general import of this verse is
given, yet the version is not very accurate. I offer the following-

<span id="xii.vi-p15"></span>And they have not said, “Where is Jehovah,
Who brought us up from the land of Egypt, Who led us in the wilderness,
Through a land of waste and of the pit, Through a land of drought and of
the shadow of death, Through a land in which no man traveled, And no
human being dwelt there?”

<span id="xii.vi-p16"></span>The word “pit” is used poetically, the
singular for the plural, and correctly rendered “pits” in our version.
It is probably an allusion to the practice of digging pits and covering
them over, in order to catch wild beasts; and the word is used here only
to express hidden dangers. “The shadow of death” means a barren
dreariness. After “land,” in the last line but one, <span
id="xii.vi-p16.1"></span>אשר is supplied by three MSS., and by the
*Septuagint,* though by no means in character with the Greek language;
but the idiom of the Hebrew requires it, and is no doubt the true
reading. I have rendered <span id="xii.vi-p16.2"></span>אדם in the last
line, after *Blayney,* “human being.” The five last lines are thus given
by the *Septuagint,* —

<span id="xii.vi-p17"></span>*Who conducted you in the wilderness,  
In a land unknown and inaccessible (*<span
id="xii.vi-p17.2"></span>*ἀβάτῳ)  
In a land without water and barren (*<span
id="xii.vi-p17.4"></span>*ἀκάρπῳ* — *fruitless)  
In a land through which no man passed,  
And no son of man inhabited there.*

<span id="xii.vi-p18"></span>The word “barren” is rendered more
literally by *Theodotion,* “<span id="xii.vi-p18.1"></span>σκιασ θανάτου
— of the shadow of death.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc17011.htm#fr_30.md) <span
id="xii.vi-p20.3"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p21"></span> That the word means a fruitful field or
country is evident from <span id="xii.vi-p21.1"></span>[Isa
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#018.md)<span id="xii.vi-p21.1"></span>;
<span id="xii.vi-p21.2"></span>[Isa
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#010.md)<span id="xii.vi-p21.2"></span>;
<span id="xii.vi-p21.3"></span>[Jer
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#026.md)<span id="xii.vi-p21.3"></span>,
etc. there was also a city bearing this name, situated in the tribe of
Judah, <span id="xii.vi-p21.4"></span>[Jos
15:55](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#055.md)<span id="xii.vi-p21.4"></span>,
and also a mountain belonging to the tribe of Manasseh, <span
id="xii.vi-p21.5"></span>[Jos
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#026.md)<span id="xii.vi-p21.5"></span>.
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc17011.htm#fr_31.md) <span
id="xii.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p24"></span> “And ye came” is left out. The same verb
in a causative sense is used at the beginning of the verse, rendered, “I
brought.” It would be more striking to retain the same verb, and not to
use “but when” in the latter instance, as in our version, —

<span id="xii.vi-p25"></span>And I caused you to come into a fruitful
land, To eat its fruit and its rich produce; And ye came and polluted my
land, And made mine heritage an abomination.

<span id="xii.vi-p26"></span>The whole runs thus much better, and has
the conciseness of poetry: and the idea intended to be conveyed is more
apparent — God caused them to come, and they came. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc17011.htm#fr_32.md) <span
id="xii.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p8"></span> It appears that the Prophet has already
condemned the people in the foregoing portion of this chapter. In <span
id="xii.vii-p8.1"></span>[Jer
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#018.md)<span id="xii.vii-p8.1"></span>,
we find the different classes thus arranged — kings and princes,
priests, the people of the land. At the beginning of this chapter, he
addresses the people-the whole community, and here he names the priests,
and the pastors, *i*.*e*., in the state, including kings and princes.
Thus he reverses the order according to the common usage of Scripture:
but to these are added here, prophets, because they were the spiritual
pastors, as kings and princes were the civil. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](cc17011.htm#fr_33.md) <span
id="xii.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p13"></span> Perhaps no better word can express the
verb here used than that of our versions., “handle” —”they that handle
the law,” that is explain and teach it. To “handle the harp,” is to play
on it, <span id="xii.vii-p13.1"></span>[Ge
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#021.md)<span id="xii.vii-p13.1"></span>;
to “handle war,” is to carry it on, <span id="xii.vii-p13.2"></span>[Nu
31:27](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#027.md)<span id="xii.vii-p13.2"></span>;
to “handle the oar,” is to ply with it, <span
id="xii.vii-p13.3"></span>[Eze
27:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#029.md)<span id="xii.vii-p13.3"></span>;
and to “handle the bow,” is either to use it, or to know how to use it,
<span id="xii.vii-p13.4"></span>[Am
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#015.md)<span id="xii.vii-p13.4"></span>.
They who handled the law were evidently those who undertook to explain
and teach it to others. To lay hold on, seems to be the primary meaning
of the verb, and that either for a good or a bad purpose. “The Scribes,”
observes *Scott,* “who undertook to expound the Scriptures, did not
understand them.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](cc17011.htm#fr_34.md) <span
id="xii.vii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p19"></span> Some say that idols are referred to; and
others, as *Calvin* think that the false gods are intended: the meaning
is the same; only the context seems more favorable to the latter idea.
The *Septuagint* have a neuter adjective, “After what is
profitless-<span id="xii.vii-p19.1"></span>ἀνωφελοῦσ — have they gone.”
The verb for profit is plural; and if we take <span
id="xii.vii-p19.2"></span>לא only as a negative, both the antecedent and
relative are omitted: but <span id="xii.vii-p19.3"></span>לא here, and
in <span id="xii.vii-p19.4"></span>[Jer
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#011.md)<span id="xii.vii-p19.4"></span>,
and in other places, is evidently a noun or a pronoun, signifying *none*
or *nothing:* and like <span id="xii.vii-p19.5"></span>*neb,* none, in
*Welsh,* it is either singular or plural, according to the verb in
connection with it. It precedes here a verb in the plural number, and in
<span id="xii.vii-p19.6"></span>[Jer
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#011.md)<span id="xii.vii-p19.6"></span>,
in the singular. The relative is often understood both in Hebrew and in
*Welsh* before future verbs, and in both languages especially when the
present time or act is intended. In the present instance, both languages
may be considered to be literally the same. The Hebrew, word for word,
may be thus rendered in Welsh:

<span id="xii.vii-p20"></span><span id="xii.vii-p20.1"></span>Arol neb a
lesant y rhodiasant.

<span id="xii.vii-p21"></span>After none (who) profit have they walked.

<span id="xii.vii-p22"></span>That is, After none who can do them good
have they gone. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc17011.htm#fr_35.md) <span
id="xii.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p10"></span> *Gataker* thinks that it was *verbal*
pleading: “It is as if he had said, ‘I have argued the case with your
forefathers already, let me debate the matter a little further with you,
and let your posterity also consider well what I now say,‘ (see <span
id="xii.viii-p10.1"></span>[Deut.
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#019.md),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#021)<span id="xii.viii-p10.1"></span>..md)
And so is the same word afterwards used for debating the case or
pleading, verse 29 (<span id="xii.viii-p10.2"></span>[Jer
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#029.md)<span
id="xii.viii-p10.2"></span>).” *Henry, Adam Clarke,* and *Blayney,* take
the same view; but *Scott* seems to agree with *Calvin* The verb <span
id="xii.viii-p10.3"></span>רוב, followed as it is here by <span
id="xii.viii-p10.4"></span>את, ever means a *verbal* dispute or
contention. See <span id="xii.viii-p10.5"></span>[Nu
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#013.md)<span
id="xii.viii-p10.5"></span>; <span id="xii.viii-p10.6"></span>[Neh.
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#011.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#017.md)<span id="xii.viii-p10.6"></span>;
Proverb 25:9; <span id="xii.viii-p10.7"></span>[Isa
45:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#009.md)<span id="xii.viii-p10.7"></span>.
— *Ed*

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc17011.htm#fr_36.md) <span
id="xii.ix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p10"></span> *Parkhurst* doubts whether the word <span
id="xii.ix-p10.1"></span>איים, rendered islands, has ever strictly that
meaning. He renders the singular, <span id="xii.ix-p10.2"></span>אי, a
settlement, a habitation, and refers to <span
id="xii.ix-p10.3"></span>[Job
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#030.md)<span id="xii.ix-p10.3"></span>;
<span id="xii.ix-p10.4"></span>[Isa
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#006.md)<span id="xii.ix-p10.4"></span>;
and says, that the plural, in <span id="xii.ix-p10.5"></span>[Isa
42:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#015.md)<span id="xii.ix-p10.5"></span>,
ought to be rendered “habitable places,” and not “islands,” as in our
version. It may be rendered here, “countries,” as by *Blarney*. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc17011.htm#fr_37.md) <span
id="xii.ix-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p16"></span> “Their glory” are by some considered to be
God himself, and not the glory, that is, the honor, dignity, and
greatness which he bestowed on the people, as *Calvin* here intimates:
but the latter is more consistent with what follows, which literally is,
“for nothing that profits:” for the <span id="xii.ix-p16.1"></span>לא
here, as in <span id="xii.ix-p16.2"></span>[Jer
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#008.md)<span id="xii.ix-p16.2"></span>, is
evidently a noun, or a pronoun. The comparison here is between what God
gives and what false gods give; the comparison before was between God
himself and the false gods. God gives glory, renders his people great
and illustrious; but the false gods give nothing that profits, that
really benefits, or does any good. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc17011.htm#fr_38.md) <span
id="xii.xii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="xii.xii-p9"></span> *Blarney,* following the *Septuagint,*
renders the verbs as in the third person plural. “The heavens are
astonished,” etc.; but it is better to take them as being in the second
person in the imperative mood, as both *Aquila* and *Symmachus* do.
Similar passages are so construed, see <span
id="xii.xii-p9.1"></span>[Isa 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002.md)<span
id="xii.xii-p9.1"></span>. There is alliteration in the two first words,
as though we said in our language, “Heave, ye heavens:” and there is a
gradation in the expressions — be astonished — be horrified — be wholly
wasted, or consumed, or dried up, —

<span id="xii.xii-p10"></span>Astonished be ye, the heavens, for this,
And be horrified, Be ye wholly wasted, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xii.xii-p11"></span>The alteration in the last verb, in
accordance with the *Syriac,* <span id="xii.xii-p11.1"></span>חרדו,
which means to “tremble,” instead of <span
id="xii.xii-p11.2"></span>חרבו, though proposed by *Secker* and approved
by *Horsley,* is by no means necessary, and countenanced by no MSS. Nor
is the emendation of *Blarney,* in conformity with the *Septuagint,* to
be at all approved. These alterations are not only unnecessary, but
destroy the expressive and striking character of the passage. Learned
men are sometimes led too much by an innovating spirit. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc17011.htm#fr_39.md) <span
id="xii.xiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xiii-p8"></span> *Blarney* innovated here, because he
seemed not rightly to distinguish between the two words that are here
used. Both are rendered “cisterns” in our version; but they are two
distinct words, though they are similar, and mean similar or the same
things. The first is <span id="xii.xiii-p8.1"></span>בארות, pits, and
the other is <span id="xii.xiii-p8.2"></span>בארת in our received text,
but ought evidently to be <span id="xii.xiii-p8.3"></span>ברות, or, as
in one MS., <span id="xii.xiii-p8.4"></span>בורת, which means “wells” or
pools. The first is a feminine noun, the last is a masculine noun; and
hence we find that the adjective added here to the last word is
masculine, as in other places, see <span id="xii.xiii-p8.5"></span>[De
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#011.md)<span id="xii.xiii-p8.5"></span>;
<span id="xii.xiii-p8.6"></span>[2Ch
26:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#010.md)<span id="xii.xiii-p8.6"></span>;
<span id="xii.xiii-p8.7"></span>[Ne
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#025.md)<span id="xii.xiii-p8.7"></span>;
while the first is accompanied with adjectives in the feminine gender.
The verse may be thus rendered, —

<span id="xii.xiii-p9"></span>For two evils have my people done, — Me
have they forsaken, the fountain of living waters; In order to dig for
themselves pits, Broken wells, which cannot hold water.

<span id="xii.xiii-p10"></span>It is singular that *Adam Clarke* should
say that these cisterns were “vessels in put together,” since they were
pits dug in the ground to receive rain-water. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc17011.htm#fr_40.md) <span
id="xii.xiv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xiv-p15"></span> The difficulty of understanding this
passage has arisen from not considering the questions in a negative
sense, as implying a strong denial-”Is Israel a servant (or, rather a
slave)?” No, by no means. “Is he one begotten in the house,” that is, in
a state of bondage? No, by no means. Then the following question comes
naturally; since he is neither a purchased slave, nor a slave born in
the house, “why has he become a prey?” That there were two sorts of
slaves of this kind is evident from many parts of Scripture. See <span
id="xii.xiv-p15.1"></span>[Ge
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#012.md)<span id="xii.xiv-p15.1"></span>,
<span id="xii.xiv-p15.2"></span>[Ge
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#023.md)<span id="xii.xiv-p15.2"></span>,
<span id="xii.xiv-p15.3"></span>[Ge
17:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#027.md)<span id="xii.xiv-p15.3"></span>;
<span id="xii.xiv-p15.4"></span>[Ex
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#004.md)<span id="xii.xiv-p15.4"></span>;
<span id="xii.xiv-p15.5"></span>[Le
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#011.md)<span id="xii.xiv-p15.5"></span>.
This is the view taken evidently in our version, by *Jun* and *Trem*.*,
Piscator, Gataker, Grotius, Henry,* and *Scott*.

<span id="xii.xiv-p16"></span>*Blarney* renders the two first lines
thus, —

<span id="xii.xiv-p17"></span>Is Israel a slave? or if a child of the
household, Wherefore is he exposed to spoil?

<span id="xii.xiv-p18"></span>He considers “the child of the household”
to be the son and the heir, as Isaac was, and refers to <span
id="xii.xiv-p18.1"></span>[Ga 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#007.md)<span
id="xii.xiv-p18.1"></span>. *Horsley* coincides with him. But the <span
id="xii.xiv-p18.2"></span>*usus loquendi* gives no countenance to this
view, while it confirms the other. To refer to <span
id="xii.xiv-p18.3"></span>*filiusfamilias* in Latin is to no purpose.
“The child of the house,” as the expression literally is, and similar
phrases, ever mean in Scripture those who were born slaves in a family.
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc17011.htm#fr_41.md) <span
id="xii.xiv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xiv-p25"></span> The verse literally is as follows,-

<span id="xii.xiv-p26"></span>Over him shall young lions roar;  
They have uttered their voice,  
And have made his land a waste;  
His cities are grown over with grass,  
Without an inhabitant.

<span id="xii.xiv-p27"></span>The verb in the first line is future, the
other verbs are in the past tense; and *Blarney* thinks that they are so
put to denote the certainty of what is said, as it is often done by the
prophets: and this is rendered probable by what is contained in <span
id="xii.xiv-p27.1"></span>[Jer
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#007.md)<span id="xii.xiv-p27.1"></span>,
where the same judgment is spoken of. The verb <span
id="xii.xiv-p27.2"></span>נצתה, in the received text, ought evidently to
be <span id="xii.xiv-p27.3"></span>נצתו, according to the *Keri* and
twenty MSS.; and so we find it in <span id="xii.xiv-p27.4"></span>[Jer
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#010.md)<span id="xii.xiv-p27.4"></span>.
Our version and *Calvin* give it the idea of “burning;” but according to
*Leigh* and *Parkhurst,* its meaning is, to shoot forth, to produce
grass, or to grow over with grass, as the case is with ruined cities;
and the words connected with it here and in other places seem to favor
this meaning. It is rendered in our version, “laid waste,“ in <span
id="xii.xiv-p27.5"></span>[Jer
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#007.md)<span id="xii.xiv-p27.5"></span>,
and “desolate” in <span id="xii.xiv-p27.6"></span>[Jer
46:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#019.md)<span id="xii.xiv-p27.6"></span>.
— *Ed*

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc17011.htm#fr_42.md) <span
id="xii.xiv-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xii.xiv-p30"></span> There have been many expositions of this
latter clause, which may be seen in the Assembly’s Annotations, which
were written, as to Isaiah and Jeremiah, by the learned *Gataker*. He
gives the preference to the idea, that the crown of the head means the
best and the principal part of the land, and to break the crown means
the plunder of this portion. See <span id="xii.xiv-p30.1"></span>[Isa
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#004.md)<span id="xii.xiv-p30.1"></span>.
This seems to correspond in meaning with the previous verse. It was the
opinion *of Blarney* that an allusion is prophetically made to the
slaying of Josiah by the Egyptians. The words literally are, —

<span id="xii.xiv-p31"></span>They shall break thee, the crown of the
head.

<span id="xii.xiv-p32"></span>“The crown of the head” seems to be
explanatory of “thee;” it might then be rendered, —

<span id="xii.xiv-p33"></span>They shall break thee, even the crown of
thy head.

<span id="xii.xiv-p34"></span>The *Septuagint* mistook one letter for
another, and took the verb to be, <span id="xii.xiv-p34.1"></span>ידעוך,
“they knew thee,” instead of <span id="xii.xiv-p34.2"></span>ירעוך “they
shall break thee;” but what they made the last word to be, it is hard to
know, for they rendered it, “and searched thee.” The *Vulgate* has
followed the *Septuagint;* and the idea is a very indecent one: and
there is nothing in the context to favor it. The *Targum’s* paraphrase
is this, “They shall slay thy brave men, and plunder thy riches;” which
countenances the idea evidently conveyed by the figurative terms of the
Hebrew.

<span id="xii.xiv-p35"></span>The next verse literally rendered is as
follows, —

<span id="xii.xiv-p36"></span>Is not this what thou wilt do for
thyself,  
By thy forsaking of Jehovah thy God,  
At the time he was leading thee in the way?

<span id="xii.xiv-p37"></span>The first verb is no doubt future, whether
it be rendered in the second or third person. The sentence may be
rendered in *Welsh* without “Is,” or the relative “what,” and word for
word, —

<span id="xii.xiv-p38"></span><span id="xii.xiv-p38.1"></span>Ai nid hyn
a wnai i’th hun?

<span id="xii.xiv-p39"></span>And the future is understood as the
present. Blayney’s version is, —

<span id="xii.xiv-p40"></span>Shall not this be done unto thee,  
Because thou hast forsaken Jehovah thy God,  
At the time that he led thee in the way?

<span id="xii.xiv-p41"></span>— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc17011.htm#fr_43.md) <span
id="xii.xv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xv-p11"></span> No doubt this is the peculiar import of
the passage, as though the Prophet had said, “What good to thee is to
travel to Egypt to drink the waters of Sihor, a muddy river, (as the
word imports;) and what good to thee is to travel to Assyria to drink
the waters of the river, while thou hast at home a fountain of living,
pure and perennial waters?” So *Gataker* considers the drift of the
passage: — “To drink the water of Nilus in Egypt is put here for to seek
help and relief there: but he delivereth it in these terms, as if he
should say, that they could have nothing to do there, or no errand
thither, unless it were to drink of the puddle water of that river, when
they had, or might have had, as good, yea, far better than that, nearer
at hand, at home. See <span id="xii.xv-p11.1"></span>[Jer
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#014.md)<span id="xii.xv-p11.1"></span>;
so <span id="xii.xv-p11.2"></span>[2Ki
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#003.md)<span id="xii.xv-p11.2"></span>.”
Then the plainest version would be thus, —

<span id="xii.xv-p12"></span>And now, what hast thou to do with a
journey to Egypt, That thou mightest drink the waters of Sihor? And what
hast thou to do with a journey to Assyria, That thou mightest drink the
waters of the river?

<span id="xii.xv-p13"></span>The comparison evidently is between the
waters of Sihor and of the river Euphrates, and the living waters. As in
other parts of Scripture the Euphrates is no doubt meant by the river,
though here, as in <span id="xii.xv-p13.1"></span>[Ps
80:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#011.md)<span id="xii.xv-p13.1"></span>,
and <span id="xii.xv-p13.2"></span>[Isa
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#020.md)<span id="xii.xv-p13.2"></span>,
the article <span id="xii.xv-p13.3"></span>ה is not prefixed to it. —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc17011.htm#fr_44.md) <span
id="xii.xvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xvi-p10"></span> *Blarney* renders it “adversity.” That
the word sometimes means that, is true, but most commonly wickedness;
and this is the sense required by the context: it must be that which
corresponds in character with the word that follows — apostasy, or
turning aside. “Wickedness” is the meaning sanctioned by all the early
versions, as well as modern. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc17011.htm#fr_45.md) <span
id="xii.xvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xvi-p12"></span> The word is singular in all the early
versions. It is rendered “apostasy — <span
id="xii.xvi-p12.1"></span>ἀποστασία,” by the *Septuagint,* and, “turning
aside — <span id="xii.xvi-p12.2"></span>aversio,” by the *Vulgate*
Though there is no MS. in favor of the singular, yet the verb connected
with it is in that number. The true reading no doubt is according to the
versions, confirmed as it is by the number of the verb. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc17011.htm#fr_46.md) <span
id="xii.xvi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xvi-p16"></span> The verse literally is as follows, —

<span id="xii.xvi-p17"></span>**19.** Chastise thee shall thy
wickedness, And thy apostasy, it shall correct thee; Know then and see,
That evil and bitter shall be Thy forsaking of Jehovah thy God; And my
fear is not in thee, Saith the Lord, Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="xii.xvi-p18"></span>The future is spoken of. They were warned;
they were to know and see, or consider, that the forsaking of God, “the
apostasy,” would be afflictive and bitter: and then the cause of the
“wickedness” first mentioned is stated, no “fear” of God. How
“wickedness” was to chastise them, and “apostasy” to correct them, is
signified, — they would turn out to be “evil” — afflictive — hurtful,
and “bitter” — grievous — painfully distressing. Hence *Grotfius’s*
exposition cannot be right —”Thy wickedness shall be a proof that thou
art justly punished.” The reference is to the very evils and miseries to
which their “wickedness” and “apostasy” would inevitably lead them.
Their foreign alliances were eventually the means of their degradation
and misery; and in seeking them, they forsook God as their protector;
and by adopting idols, they forsook him as the object of their worship.
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc17011.htm#fr_47.md) <span
id="xii.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xix-p4"></span> On the authority of the *Septuagint* and
of the *Vulgate, Blarney* has rendered this verb and the following in
the second person, “thou hast broken,“ etc. There is no MS. that has
this reading except one, and that as to the first verb only. The
*Targum* and the *Syriac* retain the first person; but the *Arabic* the
second. There is no necessity of a change, as *Blarney* intimates,
arising from the <span id="xii.xix-p4.1"></span>*usus loquendi;* see
<span id="xii.xix-p4.2"></span>[Jer
28:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#002.md)<span id="xii.xix-p4.2"></span>;
<span id="xii.xix-p4.3"></span>[Isa
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#004.md)<span id="xii.xix-p4.3"></span>.
*Jerome* followed the *Septuagint;* but all modern versions have adopted
the Hebrew text. *Horsley* gives this version, —

<span id="xii.xix-p5"></span>**20.** Verily of old time I broke thy
yoke, I burst thy bands asunder; Yet thou saidst, I will not obey:
Verily, upon every high hill, And under every green tree, Thou layest
thyself along, playing the strumpet.

<span id="xii.xix-p6"></span>*Blarney* having proposed to amend the last
line, the Bishop justly says, “The text wants no correction.” The verb
<span id="xii.xix-p6.1"></span>צעה found only here, and in <span
id="xii.xix-p6.2"></span>[Jer
48:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#012.md)<span id="xii.xix-p6.2"></span>,
and in <span id="xii.xix-p6.3"></span>[Isa
51:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#014.md)<span id="xii.xix-p6.3"></span>;
<span id="xii.xix-p6.4"></span>[Isa
63:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001.md)<span id="xii.xix-p6.4"></span>,
means, according *to Buxtorff* and *Leigh,* to wander, to ramble, to
travel up and down, and in a transitive sense, to cause to travel, or to
migrate; but, according to *Parkhurst,* to stretch out, to lie along,
and transitively to cause to be stretched out, that is, to throw down.
The first meaning is more suitable to the passages referred to above. It
is here a participle, preceded by a pronoun, “thou,” the way in which a
present act is commonly expressed in Hebrew. The line may then be thus
rendered, —

<span id="xii.xix-p7"></span>Thou ramblest, playing the strumpet.

<span id="xii.xix-p8"></span>The *Targum* gives the meaning, though not
the right tense, “Thou didst worship idols.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc17011.htm#fr_48.md) <span
id="xii.xix-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xii.xix-p17"></span> The received Text has <span
id="xii.xix-p17.1"></span>עבד, to serve, and the *Keri,* <span
id="xii.xix-p17.2"></span>עבר, to transgress. In favor of the latter
there are about 30 MSS., while the rest of those examined by Kennicott
(in all 198, 71 examined throughout, and 127 on particular parts) retain
the former verb, and also all the early versions, the *Septuagint,* the
*Syriac,* the *Arabic,* and the *Vulgate* The *Targum* only has the
latter. *Piscator, Jun* and *Trem* *, Capellus, Blarney,* and *Horsley*
decide with *Calvin* in favor of the former; while *Munster* and
*Gataker* side with our version and that of *Geneva,* in which the
latter has been adopted. Clearly the former has the weight of authority:
and the contrast, too, is striking, “I have broken thy bonds of slavery;
but thou hast refused to serve or obey me.” The former part of this
verse is of the same purport with <span id="xii.xix-p17.3"></span>[Jer
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#006.md)<span id="xii.xix-p17.3"></span>,
and the latter with <span id="xii.xix-p17.4"></span>[Jer
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#025.md)<span id="xii.xix-p17.4"></span>.
The verse begins with <span id="xii.xix-p17.5"></span>כי, rendered “for”
in our version, by *Calvin,* and many others, but “surely” by *Blarney,*
and “verily” by *Horsley* It is omitted in the *Vulgate*. Were it
rendered “though,” the meaning would be more evident, —

<span id="xii.xix-p18"></span>Though from old time I had broken thy
yoke, I had burst thy bands asunder; Yet thou hast said, “I will not
obey:” For on every high hill and under every green tree Thou ramblest,
playing the strumpet.

<span id="xii.xix-p19"></span>— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc17011.htm#fr_49.md) <span
id="xii.xx-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xx-p9"></span> The word means not only the seed of
vegetables, but whatever forms that from which anything grows. It is
applied as a verb to the planting of shoots or cuttings in <span
id="xii.xx-p9.1"></span>[Isa
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#010.md)<span id="xii.xx-p9.1"></span>.
The proper rendering here would be, —

<span id="xii.xx-p10"></span>The whole of it a genuine plant (or shoot).

<span id="xii.xx-p11"></span>What is rendered “choice vine,” <span
id="xii.xx-p11.1"></span>שורק is the yellow vine; the best was so
called, because it produced wine of that color. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc17011.htm#fr_50.md) <span
id="xii.xx-p11.4"></span>

<span id="xii.xx-p12"></span> Much difference exists as to the literal
meaning of this clause, though the general meaning is quite evident.
None of the early versions are the same. The word <span
id="xii.xx-p12.1"></span>סורי is rendered, “into bitterness — <span
id="xii.xx-p12.2"></span>εἰς πικρίαν,” by the *Septuagint;* “thou hast
rebelled,” by the *Syriac;* “into what is corrupt — <span
id="xii.xx-p12.3"></span>in pravurn,” by the *Vulgate;* “thou hast
declined from my fear,” by the *Targum* *Blarney* takes it as a verb in
the imperative mood, and renders the two lines thus, —

<span id="xii.xx-p13"></span>Yet how I find thee changed! Depart, O vine
of spurious growth.

<span id="xii.xx-p14"></span>But there is a harshness and incongruity in
this version that renders it inadmissible. Besides “vine of spurious
growth” is not the meaning of the words used, for it is “a foreign
vine,” that is, a heathen vine; which contains an allusion to the
idolatry which had been imported from heathen nations.

<span id="xii.xx-p15"></span>It is most probable that <span
id="xii.xx-p15.1"></span>סורי, or in full, <span
id="xii.xx-p15.2"></span>סורים, means degenerate shoots or branches, as
*Parkhurst* thinks. To turn aside, to decline, to degenerate, seems to
be the most common meaning of the verb. There would in this case be a
congruity in the whole verse, —

<span id="xii.xx-p16"></span>And I myself had planted thee a choice
vine, The whole of it a genuine plant; How then art thou become to me
The degenerate shoots of a foreign vine?

<span id="xii.xx-p17"></span>The plant was of the best kind, but the
shoots or the branches had become degenerated, such as a foreign or
heathen vine produced. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc17011.htm#fr_51.md) <span
id="xii.xxi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxi-p9"></span> What we call “nitre” is different from the
“nitron” here mentioned. The verb, from which the noun is derived, means
to loosen, to set free: and hence the article called nitron dissolves in
water, and loosens and washes away spots and stains. *Borith* was an
herb, which, being burnt, and its ashes dissolved in water, had a strong
cleansing power. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc17011.htm#fr_52.md) <span
id="xii.xxi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxi-p11"></span> The verb rendered “stamped” is only found
here in Niphel, but, as a participial noun, it seems to mean gold
stamped or marked to shew its genuineness. See <span
id="xii.xxi-p11.1"></span>[Ps
45:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#009.md)<span id="xii.xxi-p11.1"></span>;
<span id="xii.xxi-p11.2"></span>[Pr
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#012.md)<span id="xii.xxi-p11.2"></span>.
A stain or spot is not what it signifies, as given by the *Septuagint*
and the *Vulgate,* nor “blot,” according to Blarney; but it refers to
the stamp or mark imprinted on a hard metal, such as gold: and this idea
alone corresponds with the other parts of the verse. A stain, a spot, or
a blot, might be cleansed by abstergents, but not a mark stamped on a
metal, —

<span id="xii.xxi-p12"></span>But thou washest thyself with nitron, And
multipliest for thyself fuller’s ashes: Stamped is thine iniquity before
me, Saith the Lord Jehovah.

<span id="xii.xxi-p13"></span>— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc17011.htm#fr_53.md) <span
id="xii.xxii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxii-p9"></span> “The Jews, it seems,” says *Loath,* “had
found out distinctions, whereby to reconcile the worship of the true God
with those religious rites which they paid to the deities of the
heathen, called here Baalim. These, they pretended, were only inferior
demons or spirits, or the souls of men departed, and might be worshipped
in subordination to the supreme God.” *Scott* adds to this quotation
this just remark, “This, and nothing better, can the Papists urge in
excuse of their manifest idolatry in worshipping saints and angels” —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc17011.htm#fr_54.md) <span
id="xii.xxiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxiii-p9"></span> The grammatical anomalies at the
beginning of this verse are satisfactorily removed by *Parkhurst,* and
what he has proposed is approved by *Horsley*. He considers <span
id="xii.xxiii-p9.1"></span>פרה to be the female dromedary, he derives
<span id="xii.xxiii-p9.2"></span>למד from <span
id="xii.xxiii-p9.3"></span>מד, measure, or extent, with a <span
id="xii.xxiii-p9.4"></span>ל prefixed, and regards <span
id="xii.xxiii-p9.5"></span>נפשה as the true reading, being that of the
*Keri,* and of the largest number of MSS. This verse and the preceding
are to be thus connected, —

<span id="xii.xxiii-p10"></span>**23.** How canst thou say, “I have not
been polluted, After Baalim have I not walked!” See thy way in the
valley, Know what thou hast done, — Like a swift dromedary which winds
about her courses, —

<span id="xii.xxiii-p11"></span>**24.** A female which, in the wide
space of the wilderness, Through the desire of her natural instinct,
Snuffs up the wind she meets with: Who can turn her back? All who seek
her, Let them not weary themselves; In her month they shall find her.

<span id="xii.xxiii-p12"></span>By “winding about her courses,” or
tracks, or ways, is meant running in this and in that direction, and not
in a straight course. The word, as a noun, denotes the string or latchet
by which the ancients fastened their sandals, and which they *twined*
round the feet. “The wind she meets with,” is literally, “the wind of
her meeting.” The *Septuagint* and the early versions have departed
widely from the original; the *Vulgate* comes nearest to it; nor is the
*Targum* far off — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc17011.htm#fr_55.md) <span
id="xii.xxvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxvi-p11"></span> That the word means to be barefooted, or
without shoes, is clear from <span id="xii.xxvi-p11.1"></span>[Isa
20:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#002.md)<span
id="xii.xxvi-p11.1"></span>, and also from <span
id="xii.xxvi-p11.2"></span>[2Sa
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#030.md)<span
id="xii.xxvi-p11.2"></span>: and it is nowhere else found except here.
It being here a noun, it signifies literally barefootedness. They are
here exhorted not to travel for aid to foreign lands, so as to wear out
their shoes and thus become barefooted. This was said in contempt, in
order to pour ridicule on their folly in seeking foreign aid. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc17011.htm#fr_56.md) <span
id="xii.xxvi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xii.xxvi-p13"></span> It has been disputed whether the
negative “no,” refers to the advice given at the beginning of the verse,
or to the immediately preceding word. The latter is the most natural.
The word <span id="xii.xxvi-p13.1"></span>נואש is a participle, as in
<span id="xii.xxvi-p13.2"></span>[Job
6:26](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#026.md)<span id="xii.xxvi-p13.2"></span>.
The verse may be thus rendered, —

<span id="xii.xxvi-p14"></span>**25.** Keep thy foot from being bare And
thy throat from thirst; But thou hast said, “Hopeless! No; For I have
loved strangers, And after them will I go.”

<span id="xii.xxvi-p15"></span>The first part implies that they were
pursuing a useless course. The insolent answer was, “Is it hopeless? By
no means.” The *Septuagint* omit the negative, and have only “<span
id="xii.xxvi-p15.1"></span>ἀνδριοῦμαι — I will act manfully;” and this
version has been followed by the *Syriac* and *Arabic* The *Vulgate*
has, “<span id="xii.xxvi-p15.2"></span>desperavi, nequaquam faciam — I
have despaired, I will by no means do *so*.” The most literal rendering
is given above, and affords the best and the most suitable meaning.

<span id="xii.xxvi-p16"></span>To confess that it was a hopeless thing
to attempt to reform them, is not so appropriate, as to deny it to be
hopeless to have recourse to foreign alliances: which seems to be the
import of the passage. This is the view which *Gataker* seemed most
inclined to take; and he mentions this rendering, “Should I despair?
No.” To the same purpose is the version of *Jun*. and *Trem*. But
*Grotius, Henry,* and *Adam Clarke,* agree with the explanation of
*Calvin*. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc17011.htm#fr_57.md) <span
id="xii.xxvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxvii-p7"></span> The verb rendered “is ashamed,” is in
the past tense in Huphal, and means “made ashamed,” or, “confounded,” as
rendered, by the *Targum* and the *Vulgate*. The *Septuagint* have
converted it into the future tense, and so have the *Syriac* and the
*Arabic,* which have been followed by most modern versions, and by
commentators. If we rightly view the whole passage, we shall see reason
to take this verb as we find it, in the past tense. The verse is an
answer, as it were, to what is contained in the latter part of the
previous verse, by a reference to what had already taken place as to the
people of Judah; and the 30th verse (<span
id="xii.xxvii-p7.1"></span>[Jer
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#030)<span id="xii.xxvii-p7.1"></span>.md)
countenances the past tense. This and the following verse may be thus
rendered, —

<span id="xii.xxvii-p8"></span>**26.** As a thief is ashamed when he is
found out, So made ashamed have been the house of Israel, They, their
kings, their princes, Their priests and their prophets;

<span id="xii.xxvii-p9"></span>**27.** Who have said to the wood, “My
father art thou,” And to the stone, “Thou hast begotten me.” Though they
have turned to me the back and not the face; Yet in the time of their
calamity, They say, “Arise and save us.”

<span id="xii.xxvii-p10"></span>The participles in Hebrew are regulated
as to their tense by the verbs in the passage. Hence <span
id="xii.xxvii-p10.1"></span>אמרים in <span
id="xii.xxvii-p10.2"></span>[Jer
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#027.md)<span
id="xii.xxvii-p10.2"></span>, is to be in the same tense with the
previous verb. The future in the last line is to be in the present, as
it expresses what was commonly done. Then what was usually said to them
is mentioned in the following verse, —

<span id="xii.xxvii-p11"></span>**28.** But where are thy gods, which
thou hast made for thyself? Let them arise, if they can save thee In the
time of thy calamity: For according to the number of thy cities Have
been thy gods, O Judah.

<span id="xii.xxvii-p12"></span>*Blayney* has kept to the past tense as
to the last line, and also as to the beginning of <span
id="xii.xxvii-p12.1"></span>[Jer
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#026.md)<span
id="xii.xxvii-p12.1"></span>. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc17011.htm#fr_58.md) <span
id="xii.xxviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxviii-p11"></span> The words employed by *Calvin* are the
technical terms, <span id="xii.xxviii-p11.1"></span>*latria* and <span
id="xii.xxviii-p11.2"></span>*dulia,* the fictions of the Papists. The
first means specifically worship, and the second, service, obedience.
The verb <span id="xii.xxviii-p11.3"></span>δουλεύω in the New Testament
is never used in the sense of worshipping or adoring, but of serving and
obeying: but to bow to images or to kiss them, is an act of adoration,
and not of service. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](cc17011.htm#fr_59.md) <span
id="xii.xxviii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxviii-p14"></span> The “neck” here means evidently the
hinder part, for it is in contrast with “face;” and the word generally
means the hinder part. Hence it is properly rendered here “back” in our
version and by *Blayney,* and so by the *Targum* and the early versions,
except the *Syriac,* which retains the hinder part of the neck. We have
no single word, except it be nape, which denotes the back part of the
neck. There is one in *Welsh,* “<span
id="xii.xxviii-p14.1"></span>gwegil,“ and so in *Latin,* “<span
id="xii.xxviii-p14.2"></span>cervix,“ and in *Greek,* <span
id="xii.xxviii-p14.3"></span>ἀυχὴν But the *Septuagint* have adopted
here “<span id="xii.xxviii-p14.4"></span>νῶτα — backs.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc17011.htm#fr_60.md) <span
id="xii.xxix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxix-p7"></span> The verb rendered “plead” in our version,
is followed by <span id="xii.xxix-p7.1"></span>אל, against or in
opposition to. There are two other instances, <span
id="xii.xxix-p7.2"></span>[Jud
21:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#022.md)<span id="xii.xxix-p7.2"></span>;
<span id="xii.xxix-p7.3"></span>[Job
33:13](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#013.md)<span id="xii.xxix-p7.3"></span>.
Our version in Job is, “Why dost thou strive against him?” The most
suitable rendering of this passage is,

<span id="xii.xxix-p8"></span>Why should ye contend against (or, with)
me?

<span id="xii.xxix-p9"></span>Then follows a fact sufficient to put an
end to all contention, —

<span id="xii.xxix-p10"></span>All of you have rebelled against me,
Saith Jehovah.

<span id="xii.xxix-p11"></span>The primary idea of <span
id="xii.xxix-p11.1"></span>פשע is, to go, to pass, to march on. See
<span id="xii.xxix-p11.2"></span>[Isa
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#004.md)<span id="xii.xxix-p11.2"></span>.
Its meaning depends on the preposition which follows it. Followed by
<span id="xii.xxix-p11.3"></span>על, over, it means to transgress, it
being a *going* or *passing over* the limits set by the law, <span
id="xii.xxix-p11.4"></span>[Ho
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#001.md)<span id="xii.xxix-p11.4"></span>,
— by <span id="xii.xxix-p11.5"></span>מ, to go from, to revolt, to
apostatize, <span id="xii.xxix-p11.6"></span>[2Ki
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#022.md)<span
id="xii.xxix-p11.6"></span>,-and by <span id="xii.xxix-p11.7"></span>ב,
to go against, to rebel, as in this passage. Hence the noun has attained
various meanings-transgression, apostasy, and rebellion. Its precise
meaning in any case is to be determined by the context. *Gataker* and
*Blayhey* render the verb here the same, —

<span id="xii.xxix-p12"></span>All of you have rebelled against me,
saith Jehovah.

<span id="xii.xxix-p13"></span>The early versions vary. The *Septuagint*
have “<span id="xii.xxix-p13.1"></span>ἠσεβήσατε — ye have acted
impiously,” the *Syriac,* “ye have denied me,” — the *Arabic*, “ye have
sinned against me,”-and the *Vulgate*, “ye have forsaken me.” The
general idea is the same, but the specific one is that of rebelling
against God. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc17011.htm#fr_61.md) <span
id="xii.xxx-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxx-p10"></span> *Blayney* renders the word “instruction.”
The *Septuagint* have “<span id="xii.xxx-p10.1"></span>παιδείαν —
discipline: “the *Syriac, Vulgate,* and the *Targum* are the same; but
the *Arabic* has “instruction — <span
id="xii.xxx-p10.2"></span>eruditionem.” The strict meaning of the word
<span id="xii.xxx-p10.3"></span>מוסר, is restraint, check, discipline,
correction. Not to receive restraint or correction, is not to be thereby
improved or reformed, but to proceed in the same course, see <span
id="xii.xxx-p10.4"></span>[Jer
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#003.md)<span id="xii.xxx-p10.4"></span>.
The word has also a secondary meaning, instruction, as the effect of
correction, see <span id="xii.xxx-p10.5"></span>[Zep
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#007.md)<span id="xii.xxx-p10.5"></span>.
But here it clearly means correction. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc17011.htm#fr_62.md) <span
id="xii.xxxiii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="xii.xxxiii-p7"></span> The beginning of this verse literally
is “The age, ye,” that is, “Ye of this age,” or generation. He was
speaking before more especially of the preceding age. He now appeals to
the people of that generation, —

<span id="xii.xxxiii-p8"></span>Ye of this age, see, spoken hath
Jehovah, — Have I been a wilderness to Israel, Or a land of darkness?
Why have they said, even my people, “We have ruled, we will no more come
to thee?”

<span id="xii.xxxiii-p9"></span>The above rendering of the latter part
of the first line is favored by the *Septuagint, “*Hear ye the word of
the Lord; thus saith the Lord.” The *Arabic* is the same. The *Vulgate*
has, “See the word of the Lord,” — and the *Syriac, “*Hear the word of
the Lord.” *Blayney* renders thus, “Behold ye the cause of Jehovah.”
*Gataker* takes “see” in the sense of considering, “See,“ or seriously
consider, “the word of the Lord.” The particle <span
id="xii.xxxiii-p9.1"></span>אם after <span
id="xii.xxxiii-p9.2"></span>ה, may be rendered “or,” as in the *Syriac*
See <span id="xii.xxxiii-p9.3"></span>[Jos
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#013.md)<span
id="xii.xxxiii-p9.3"></span>. The word <span
id="xii.xxxiii-p9.4"></span>מאפליה is found in two MSS., <span
id="xii.xxxiii-p9.5"></span>מאפילה, which seems to be the true reading,
countenanced by the *Targum,* and all the early versions, except the
*Vulgate,* which has “<span id="xii.xxxiii-p9.6"></span>serotina —
lateward.” Darkness is a common metaphor for wretchedness and misery “We
have ruled” is the literal rendering of <span
id="xii.xxxiii-p9.7"></span>רדנו, and there is no other reading. The
*Septuagint* gives the same meaning, though the form is different, “We
shall not be lorded over — <span id="xii.xxxiii-p9.8"></span>οὐ
κυριευθησόμεθα.” The *Arabic* is the same. It is the language of proud
independence. The *Targum,* the *Vulgate,* and the *Syriac* have
mistaken the verb for <span id="xii.xxxiii-p9.9"></span>ירדנו, which
means, to descend, to come down, to bring down. *Blayney* gives the
correct idea, “We are our own masters, “which *Horsley* approves. The
preterite in Hebrew often includes the present; so the full meaning is,
“We have ruled and do rule.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc17011.htm#fr_63.md) <span
id="xii.xxxiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxxiv-p8"></span> The second word, <span
id="xii.xxxiv-p8.1"></span>כלה, is rendered “<span
id="xii.xxxiv-p8.2"></span>sponsa — a bride,” in our version, *by
Calvin* and *Blayney,* and so by the *Vulgate, Syriac,* and the
*Targum,* but by the *Septuagint,* “<span
id="xii.xxxiv-p8.3"></span>παρθένος — a virgin:” and *Parkhurst* says
that it never means a bride. The version then ought to be, —

<span id="xii.xxxiv-p9"></span>Can a maid forget her ornaments,  
A virgin her bands?

<span id="xii.xxxiv-p10"></span>That the word <span
id="xii.xxxiv-p10.1"></span>קשרים means bands of some kind is evident,
as the verb signifies to bind, to join closely. Bands or bandage for the
breast — <span id="xii.xxxiv-p10.2"></span>στηθοδεσμίδα, is the version
of the *Septuagint;* the *Arabic* and the *Vulgate* are the same.
*Parkhurst* considers that “head-bands” are meant. The word is found
also in <span id="xii.xxxiv-p10.3"></span>[Isa
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#020.md)<span
id="xii.xxxiv-p10.3"></span>; where the *Septuagint* render it “<span
id="xii.xxxiv-p10.4"></span>δακτυλίοις-rings,” and the *Targum, “*<span
id="xii.xxxiv-p10.5"></span>murenulas — chains,” which were of gold, and
worn around the neck. For any practical purpose it is only necessary to
know that they were embellishments which young women delighted in: and
women in every age are too fond of such things, and men too; but the
case is introduced here only for the sake of illustration. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc17011.htm#fr_64.md) <span
id="xii.xxxv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxxv-p10"></span> The exposition of this verse is no doubt
materially correct. The words have been variously rendered, On the first
clause there is a general agreement, The verb “taught” in the second, is
in the first person in the received text; and to this reading *Blayney*
gives the preference, and thus renders the line, —

<span id="xii.xxxv-p11"></span>Therefore also have I taught calamities
thy ways.

<span id="xii.xxxv-p12"></span>That is, “that God had directed
calamities where to find them.” But this is rather a remote idea. In
favor of the second person, “thou hast taught,“ are several MSS., all
the early versions and the *Targum;* and it is what has been by most
adopted. “The wicked ones” of our version is a rendering not
countenanced by any of the ancient versions, nor by the *Targum;* all
render it evil or evils or wickednesses. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc17011.htm#fr_65.md) <span
id="xii.xxxvi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xii.xxxvi-p10"></span> Our version of this text seems on the
whole the best. “Blood,” <span id="xii.xxxvi-p10.1"></span>דם, is to be
taken here in a collective sense, as the verb to which it belongs is
plural. Instead of “poor innocents, “it ought rather to be “the innocent
poor,“ as the noun in Hebrew generally precedes its adjective. “Found”
is in the first person, and there is no different reading, and it is so
in the *Septuagint,* and the *Vulgate,* though the *Syriac* and *Arabic*
give the second person, and the *Targum* the third person plural, as
*Calvin* does. The last word is rendered “these” in the *Vulgate* and
the *Targum;* but “oak” in the *Septuagint,* the *Syriac,* and the
*Arabic,* and adopted by *Blayney,* but disapproved by *Houbigant* and
*Horsley* As to the word, rendered in our version, “secret search,” the
early versions have pit, pits, or ditches, and so the *Targum* *Blayney*
renders it “a digged hole,“ of which *Horsley* approves; and he refers,
as an illustration, to <span id="xii.xxxvi-p10.2"></span>[Le
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#013.md)<span
id="xii.xxxvi-p10.2"></span>, and to <span
id="xii.xxxvi-p10.3"></span>[Eze
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#007.md)<span
id="xii.xxxvi-p10.3"></span>. The word means digging, and seems to be
used here metaphorically for searching; there is no need of adding
“secret” to it, —

<span id="xii.xxxvi-p11"></span>Also in thy skirts has been found  
The blood of the souls of the innocent poor:  
Not by searching have I found it,  
But upon all these (i.e., skirts.)

<span id="xii.xxxvi-p12"></span>The reference is to what is said in
<span id="xii.xxxvi-p12.1"></span>[Jer
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#030.md)<span
id="xii.xxxvi-p12.1"></span>, where the Jews are charged with the
killing the prophets. As to “the blood, “we find a similar passage in
<span id="xii.xxxvi-p12.2"></span>[Ezek.
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#008.md)<span id="xii.xxxvi-p12.2"></span>.
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc17011.htm#fr_66.md) <span
id="xii.xxxvii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxxvii-p11"></span> The literal rendering of this verse is
as follows: —

<span id="xii.xxxvii-p12"></span>**35.** And thou hast said, “Verily I
have been innocent; Surely turned away has he his anger from me:“ Behold
I will contend in judgment with thee, On account of thy saying, “I have
not sinned.”

<span id="xii.xxxvii-p13"></span>The *Septuagint* have rendered the
second line, “Let his anger be turned away from me;” the *Vulgate* and
the *Arabic* are the same. The *Syriac* is, “therefore he turns away his
anger from me.” “Turned away is his anger,“ is the *Targum, Piscator,
Jun*. and *Trem*. *Blayney* renders it, —

<span id="xii.xxxvii-p14"></span>Surely his wrath shall turn from me.

<span id="xii.xxxvii-p15"></span>There is no reason for construing the
verb in the future tense, or in the imperative mood. It is in the past
tense, and there is no other reading. The claim of innocency is made on
the supposition that God had turned away his displeasure. Hence the
declaration that follows — that God would contest the matter — would
bring it as it were into trial, as the verb here when in Niphal means. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc17011.htm#fr_67.md) <span
id="xii.xl-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xl-p9"></span> The idea of gadding, or of running here and
there, is not countenanced by any of the early versions. The notion of
vileness or degradation is what the versions convey. The *Vulgate* is, —

<span id="xii.xl-p10"></span><span id="xii.xl-p10.1"></span>Quinn vilis
factus es nimis, iterans vias tuas!  
How extremely worthless art thou become, iterating thy ways!

<span id="xii.xl-p11"></span>The other versions are nearly of the same
general import. *Blayney’s* version is, —

<span id="xii.xl-p12"></span>Why wilt thou make thyself exceedingly
vile, In repeating over again thy ways?

<span id="xii.xl-p13"></span>Modern critics have considered the verb to
be <span id="xii.xl-p13.1"></span>אזל, and not <span
id="xii.xl-p13.2"></span>זל. It no doubt may be either. As shame is
threatened at the end of the verse, the latter verb is the most
suitable, —

<span id="xii.xl-p14"></span>Why shouldest thou become wholly degraded
By repeating thy course?  
Even by Egypt shalt thou be put to shame, As thou hast been put to shame
by Assyria.

<span id="xii.xl-p15"></span>“Course,” or way, means here a proceeding,
and to repeat it is to pursue a course similar to what had been
previously adopted. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc17011.htm#fr_68.md) <span
id="xii.xli-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xli-p7"></span> There are three other expositions of the
words rendered by *Calvin, “*on this account.” One is that of our
version, “from him;” the second is, “from hence,” *i* *e* *,* from
Egypt, adopted by *Piscator, Grotius,* and *Blayney;* and the third is,
“from here,” *i* *e* *,* from this place, their own land; which, as
*Gataker* says, is probably “the genuine sense:” it is a threatening,
that they were to be led into captivity. The rendering of the
*Septuagint* is, “<span id="xii.xli-p7.1"></span>ἐντεῦθεν — from hence,”
or from this place; of the *Vulgate, “*<span id="xii.xli-p7.2"></span>ab
ista — from that,” meaning, evidently Egypt; of the *Syriac* and
*Targum, “*<span id="xii.xli-p7.3"></span>ex hoc — from this;” and of
*Arabic, “*<span id="xii.xli-p7.4"></span>illinc — from thence.” The
particle <span id="xii.xli-p7.5"></span>זה is “this,” and not “that.” —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc17011.htm#fr_69.md) <span
id="xii.xli-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xli-p9"></span> “The gesture” mentioned here, a striking
example of, we find in <span id="xii.xli-p9.1"></span>[2Sa
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#019.md)<span id="xii.xli-p9.1"></span>.
Many consider the <span id="xii.xli-p9.2"></span>ו here as having the
meaning of “with,” and render the line as *Blayney* does, —

<span id="xii.xli-p10"></span>With thy hands upon thy head.

<span id="xii.xli-p11"></span>But more consistent with the genius of the
language is to regard the auxiliary verb to be understood, —

<span id="xii.xli-p12"></span>And thy hands shall be on thy head.

<span id="xii.xli-p13"></span>There is a similar phrase in <span
id="xii.xli-p13.1"></span>[Isa
35:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#010.md)<span id="xii.xli-p13.1"></span>,
which ought to be rendered thus, —

<span id="xii.xli-p14"></span>And everlasting joy shall be upon their
heads.

<span id="xii.xli-p15"></span>— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc17011.htm#fr_70.md) <span
id="xii.xli-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xli-p17"></span> The verb for “abhor” is <span
id="xii.xli-p17.1"></span>מאם, which means to reject, that is, with
disdain and contempt; and the same when followed by <span
id="xii.xli-p17.2"></span>ב, though often rendered “despise” in our
version. It is rendered “reject, “without the <span
id="xii.xli-p17.3"></span>ב, in <span id="xii.xli-p17.4"></span>[1Sa
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#023.md)<span id="xii.xli-p17.4"></span>;
<span id="xii.xli-p17.5"></span>[Jer
7:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#029.md)<span id="xii.xli-p17.5"></span>;
and “despise” being followed by <span id="xii.xli-p17.6"></span>ב in
<span id="xii.xli-p17.7"></span>[Jud
9:38](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#038.md)<span id="xii.xli-p17.7"></span>;
<span id="xii.xli-p17.8"></span>[Jer
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#030.md)<span id="xii.xli-p17.8"></span>.
The early versions and the *Targum* mostly differ, and none of them give
the specific meaning of the verb, except that the *Septuagint* give its
meaning when not followed by <span id="xii.xli-p17.9"></span>ב, “<span
id="xii.xli-p17.10"></span>ἀπώσατο — has rejected.” The whole verse may
be thus rendered, —

<span id="xii.xli-p18"></span>**37.** Also from this place shalt thou go
forth, And thy hands shall be on thy head: For rejected has Jehovah
those in whom thou trustest, And thou shalt not prosper by them.

<span id="xii.xli-p19"></span>It is not correct to render <span
id="xii.xli-p19.1"></span>מבטחיך, “thy confidences;” for the word means
“thy confided ones,“ it being a Huphal participle. The *Syriac* renders
it, “those who afford thee confidence — <span
id="xii.xli-p19.2"></span>fiduciam tibi praebentibus.” *Blayney’s*
version is, “the objects of thy trust;” and he translates the verb,
“reprobated.” That this is its meaning when followed by <span
id="xii.xli-p19.3"></span>ב is evident from <span
id="xii.xli-p19.4"></span>[Jer
6:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#030.md)<span id="xii.xli-p19.4"></span>.
— *Ed*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](cc17012.md)
