[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc17013)  [Next](cc17015.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 17: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part I*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv"></span>

<span id="xv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 5

<span id="xv.i"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p1"></span><span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#001.md)<span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p2"></span>**1**. Run ye to and fro through the streets
of Jerusalem, and see now, and know, and seek in the broad places
thereof, if ye can find a man, if there be *any* that executeth
judgment, that seeketh the truth; and I will pardon it.

<span id="xv.i-p3"></span>**1**. Circuite per vias (*alii vertunt,*
inquirite, *vel,* explorate, *vel,* investigate per vias) Jerusalem, et
videte, agedum, (*hic enim* אנ *est hortantis, proximo versu debuit
verti* nunc, vae nunc mihi,) et cognoscite, et inquirite, in vicis ejus
(in compitis ejus,) an invenietis virum, an erit quifaciat judicium
(*hoc est,* rectitudinem,) qui quaerat veritatem, et parcam illi.

<span id="xv.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.i-p5"></span><span id="xv.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p6"></span>In this verse, as in those which follow, God
shews that he was not too rigid or too severe in denouncing utter ruin
on his people, because their wickedness was wholly incurable, and no
other mode of treating them could be found. We, indeed, know that it is
often testified in Scripture, that God is patient and waits until
sinners repent. Since then God everywhere extols his kindness, and
promises to be merciful even to the worst if they repent, and since he
of his own accord anticipates sinners, it may appear strange that he
rises with so much severity against his own Church. But we know how
refractory the ungodly are; and hence they hesitate not to expostulate
with God, and willfully accuse him, as though he treated them with
cruelty. It is then for this reason, that God now shews that he was not,
as it were, at liberty to forgive the people; “Even if I would, “he
says, “I could not.” He speaks, indeed, after the manner of men; but in
this way, as I have said, he shews that he tried all expedients, before
he had recourse to extreme severity, but that there was no remedy, on
account of the desperate wickedness of the people. And this is what the
words fully express.

<span id="xv.i-p7"></span>*Go round,*  <span
id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127.md) he says, *through the streets of
Jerusalem, and see, I pray, and know; inquire through all the
cross-ways* Jeremiah might have said in one sentence, “If one man be
found in the city, I am ready to forgive: “but God here permits the
whole world to inquire diligently and carefully what was the state of
the holy city, which ever gloried in that title. But he now, as also in
the next verse, speaks of Jerusalem. He had spoken also of the
neighboring cities; but as the holiness of the whole land seemed then to
have its seat and habitation at Jerusalem, God here addresses that city,
which as yet retained some appearance of sanctity, and excelled other
cities. He then says, *Inquire, see, know, look, whether there is a
man*, etc. He allows here all men to form a judgment, as though he had
said, “Let all be present, since the Jews seek to create an ill-will
towards me, and complain of too much rigor, as though I treated them
unhumanly; let all who wish come as judges, let them inquire, ask, make
a thorough search; and when it shall be found out that there is not in
it even one just man, what else can be done, but that the city must be
destroyed? for what can be done to the abandoned and irreclaimable,
except I execute my judgment on them?”

<span id="xv.i-p11"></span>We now understand the Prophet’s object; for
he intended here to shut the mouths of the Jews, and to expose their
slanders, that they might not clamor against God or blame his judgment,
as though it exceeded the limits of moderation: and he shews also, that
though God was disposed to pardon, there was yet no place for pardon,
and that his mercy was excluded by their untamable obstinacy, since
there was not one man in Jerusalem who had any regard for uprightness.

<span id="xv.i-p12"></span>Here, however, a question may be started, Why
does Jeremiah say that no good man could be found, since he himself was
at Jerusalem, and his friend Baruch, and some others, an account of whom
we shall hereafter find? There were then in the city some true servants
of God, and some as yet remained who had true religion, though the
number was small. It appears then that the language is hyperbolical.

<span id="xv.i-p13"></span>But we must observe, that the Prophet here
speaks of the people to the exclusion of the faithful. That this may
appear more evident, we must remember a passage in the eighth chapter of
Isaiah,

<span id="xv.i-p14"></span>“Seal the law and bind the testimony for my
disciples,”  
(<span id="xv.i-p14.2"></span>[Isa
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#016)<span id="xv.i-p14.2"></span>;.md)

<span id="xv.i-p15"></span>where it appears that God saw that he sent
his Prophet in vain, and that his labors were spent in vain among a
people wholly irreclaimable. Hence he says, “Bind the testimony and seal
the law among the disciples.” We see that God gathered as it were
together the few in whom remained any seed of true religion, yea, in
whose hearts any religion was found. They were not then numbered with
the people. So now Jeremiah did not consider Baruch and a few others as
forming a part of that reprobate people; and he speaks, as it has been
stated, of the community in general; for there were some separated from
the rest, not only by the secret counsel of God, but according to the
judgment that had been pronounced. He hence truly declares, that there
was not one just man.

<span id="xv.i-p16"></span>We ought also to consider with whom he was
then contending. On the one side were the king and his counselors, who,
inflated with the promises, which they perverted, did not think it
possible that the throne of David would fall.

<span id="xv.i-p17"></span>“This is my rest for ever — As long as the
sun and moon shall be, they shall be my witnesses in heaven, that thy
seed shall never fail.” (<span id="xv.i-p17.1"></span>[Ps
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014.md)<span id="xv.i-p17.1"></span>;
<span id="xv.i-p17.2"></span>[Ps.
89:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#037.md),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#038)<span id="xv.i-p17.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xv.i-p18"></span>With such words were they armed. But as
hypocrites falsely claim God’s promises, so these unprincipled men
boasted that God was on their side. Jeremiah had also to fight with
another party, as we shall hereafter see, that is, with a host of false
prophets; for there was a greater number of them, as is ever to be found
in the world. The whole priestly order was corrupt, and openly carrying
on war with God; and the people were nothing better. Jeremiah then had
to contend with the king and his counselors, with the false prophets,
with the ungodly priests, and with the wicked people. So he says, that
there was not one man among them who engaged himself in appeasing God’s
wrath.

<span id="xv.i-p19"></span>To *seek judgment* is the same thing as to
labor for uprightness: for the word <span id="xv.i-p19.1"></span>משפט,
*meshephet* means rectitude, or equity, or the rule of acting justly. He
says then, that there was no one who practiced what was just; that there
was no one who sought *the truth* Truth, as in a verse that follows, is
to be taken for integrity, honesty; as though he had said, that all were
given to falsehoods and frauds and crafts. It was therefore impossible
that God should have been propitious to the city; for the relative <span
id="xv.i-p19.2"></span>ה after <span id="xv.i-p19.3"></span>ל, being of
the feminine gender, cannot be otherwise applied than to Jerusalem. God
then says, that he would be merciful to it, if there could be found a
just man among the king’s counselors, or among the priests, or among the
prophets: but they had all united together in opposition to everything
just and right. It follows —

<span id="xv.ii"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#002.md)<span id="xv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p2"></span>**2**. And though they say, The Lord liveth;
surely they swear falsely.

<span id="xv.ii-p3"></span>**2**. Etsi, vivit Jehova, dixerint, ob id in
vanum (*vel,* fallaciter) jurabunt.

<span id="xv.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.ii-p5"></span><span id="xv.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p6"></span>This is added by way of anticipation; for the
Jews, as it is well known, thought that they had a cover for all their
vices, inasmuch as they had God’s name continually in their mouths.
Since then they professed to worship the God of Abraham, they thought
that this pretext was sufficient to cover all their wickedness. The
Prophet obviates this objection, and shews that this disguise was of no
avail, because in thus using God’s name, they profaned it: and he goes
still further; for he shews that the Jews, not only in common practice,
were wholly destitute of the fear of God, but that when anything of a
religious kind appeared among them, it was sacrilegious; and this is far
worse than when God’s name is forgotten, and wretched men allow
themselves a full license in sinning, as though they could not conceal
their wickedness: for when they openly provoke God, and as it were
dishonor him to his face, how detestable and how monstrous is their
impiety! This then is what Jeremiah sets forth, *Though they say, Live
does Jehovah, yet in this they swear falsely*

<span id="xv.ii-p7"></span>We now perceive the Prophet’s meaning: In the
first place, he takes away from hypocrites their vain confidence in
thinking that God would be propitious to them, provided they avowed his
name, without considering how precious God’s name is, but regarding it
as nothing to swear carelessly by his name: but the Prophet not only
condemns the hypocrisy of the Jews, but, as I have said, he enhances
their wickedness; for they hesitated not to profane God’s sacred name,
and to carry on, as it were, an open war with him, by abusing his name
in swearing.

<span id="xv.ii-p8"></span>By mentioning, *Live does Jehovah,* he refers
to the words which the godly also use when they make an oath; for when
they appeal to the living God, it is the same thing as though they stood
before his tribunal; and at the same time said, that they knew that
though God may defer his vengeance, yet an account must be given,
because he ever lives. Thus the godly acknowledge that there is nothing
gained by delay, in case God suspends his vengeance, if they swear
falsely. But the Prophet, as I have already said, applies this to
hypocrites, who seemed to ascribe great honor to God, for nothing is
more specious than their words: gall indeed was in their heart, while
honey was on their lips. Hence the Prophet derides this false pretense,
and says, “Even when they swear most solemnly as to the words used, and
shew a high concern for religion, nevertheless they swear falsely.” Some
render <span id="xv.ii-p8.1"></span>לכן, *lacen,* surely, or certainly;
but the meaning will be plainer, if we render it “nevertheless.”  <span
id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128.md) It follows —

<span id="xv.iii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#003.md)<span id="xv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p2"></span>**3**. O Lord, *are* not thine eyes upon the
truth? thou hast stricken them, but they have not grieved; thou hast
consumed them, *but* they have refused to receive correction: they have
made their faces harder than a rock; they have refused to return.

<span id="xv.iii-p3"></span>**3**. Jehova, oculi tui annon ad veritatem?
Percussisti eos, et non doluerunt; consumpsisti eos, et renuerunt
suscipere disciplinam (*vel,* correctionem;) obduraverunt facies suas
magis quam petram (*vel,* lapidem, magis quam saxum;) renuerunt converti
(*vel,* redire.)

<span id="xv.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.iii-p5"></span><span id="xv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p6"></span>Some give a strained exposition of the
beginning of the verse, or rather pervert it, as though the Prophet had
said, that God would not turn his eyes from what was right, because he
would rigidly execute his vengeance on his people. But Jeremiah goes on
here with the same subject, for there is no importance to be attached to
the division of the verses. They who have divided them have often
unknowingly perverted the meaning. The divisions then are not to be
heeded, only the number is to be retained as a help to the memory; but
as to the context, they often are a hindrance to readers; for it is
preposterous to blend things which are separate, and to divide what is
connected. This remark has just now occurred to me, and it is necessary,
as this place calls for it; for the Prophet, after having said that the
Jews were perfidious and guilty of duplicity, and destitute of all
integrity, immediately adds, But the *eyes* of God *regard fidelity;* as
though he had said, that they in vain pretended to avow God’s name, and
made a shew of religion by ceremonies and by an outward display; for God
searches the heart, and cares nothing for those external masks by which
men’s eyes are captivated.

<span id="xv.iii-p7"></span>The Prophet very significantly turns his
discourse to God, to shew that he was wearied in addressing the people,
for he saw that he prevailed nothing with the obstinate; for had there
been any teachable spirit in the Jews, he would no doubt have exhorted
them to practice integrity. He might have said, “They are mistaken who
swear falsely in God’s name, and persuade themselves that he will be
their Father; for his eyes regard fidelity and uprightness of heart.”
This would have been a regular way of proceeding, and this mode of
teaching would have been most suitable: but Jeremiah abruptly breaks off
his address, and leaves his own people; “O God, “he says, “thy eyes look
on fidelity;” as though he had said, “What more can I have to do with
this wretched people? I address words to rocks and stones: therefore I
bid you adieu, and shall have no more to do with you; I will now turn to
God.” We now see how much more forcible and striking is this turning
from the people to God, than if the Prophet continued his address to the
Jews, and sought to instruct them: for he now shews that he was broken
down with weariness; for he saw that his labor was useless, and that all
whom he had addressed were altogether refractory: nor did he, at the
same time, intend to speak these words at random, and to no purpose;
nay, his object was more sharply to touch those who were stupid, by
letting them know that he left off addressing them, because he had no
hope respecting them.

<span id="xv.iii-p8"></span>But what I have said elsewhere ought to be
borne in mind, — that the Prophets did not write all that they preached,
but collected the substance of what they had delivered to the people;
and this collection now forms the prophetic books. There is therefore no
doubt but that Jeremiah had spoken at large on repentance, — that he had
exposed the sins of hypocrites, — that he had denuded the fallacious
pretences of the people, — and that he had severely reproved their
obstinacy. But after having done all these things, he found it necessary
to desist from pursuing his course, for he saw that no fruit could be
hoped from his labors and his preaching. Now, when the Jews knew this,
they ought to have been deeply affected; and this ought to be the case
with us now, when we see that God’s Spirit is provoked by our
perverseness; and as this is a dreadful thing, it is what ought more
than anything else to touch our hearts. Consider what it is: God daily
invites us most kindly to himself; but when he sees that our hearts and
heads are so extremely hard, he leaves us, because we grieve his Spirit,
as it is said by Isaiah. (<span id="xv.iii-p8.1"></span>[Isa
63:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#010)<span id="xv.iii-p8.1"></span>..md)
It was not, then, an usual or common mode of teaching which the Prophet
adopted; but it was calculated to have more effect than plain
instruction; for he shews that the wickedness of the people could no
longer be endured.

<span id="xv.iii-p9"></span>*Jehovah,* he says, *thine eyes, are they
not on the truth?* In this address to God there is an implied contrast
between God and men. The most wicked, we know, flatter themselves while
they can retain the good opinion and applause of the world; and as long
as they continue in honor, they slumber in their vices. This foolish
confidence is what the Prophet evidently exposes; for he intimates that
the eyes of God are different from those of mortals: men can see a very
little way, hardly three fingers before them; but God penetrates into
the inmost and the most hidden recesses of the heart: and the Prophet
speaks thus of God’s eyes, in order to shew how worthless are the
opinions of men, who regard only a splendid outward appearance. By
*truth,* the Prophet means, as in the first verse, integrity of heart.
Hence without reason do they philosophize here, who seek to prove from
this passage that we are made acceptable to God by faith only; for the
Prophet does not speak of the faith by which we embrace free
reconciliation with God, and become members of Christ. The meaning
indeed is in no way obscure, which is this — that God cares not for that
external splendor by which men are captivated, according to what is said
in <span id="xv.iii-p9.1"></span>[1Sa
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#007.md)<span id="xv.iii-p9.1"></span>,

<span id="xv.iii-p10"></span>“Man sees what appears outwardly; but God
looks on the heart.”

<span id="xv.iii-p11"></span>There the Holy Spirit expresses the same
thing by “heart” as he does here by fidelity or “truth.” For Samuel
shews that David’s father was mistaken, because he brought forward his
sons who excelled in their outward appearance: “Man sees, “he says,
“what appears outwardly; but God looks on the heart.”

<span id="xv.iii-p12"></span>We now understand the true meaning of the
Prophet, — that though hypocrites flatter themselves, and the whole
world encourage them by their adulations, all this will not avail them;
for they must at last come before the tribunal of God, and that before
God truth only will be approved and honored.

<span id="xv.iii-p13"></span>He afterwards adds, *Thou hast smitten
them, and they have not grieved* The Prophet reproves here the hardness
of the people; for they had been smitten, but they repented not.
Experience, as they say, is the teacher of fools; and it is an old
proverb, that fools, when corrected, become wise. Both poets and
historians have uttered such sayings. Since, then, the Jews had such a
perverse disposition, that even scourges did not lead them to
repentance, it was an evidence of extreme wickedness. And thus the
Prophet here confirms what he had said before, that God would be
merciful to them, if one just man could be found in the city: he
confirms that declaration when he says, “Thou hast smitten them, but
they have not grieved.” The Jews, no doubt, groaned under their
scourges; yea, they howled and poured forth grievous complaints: for we
know how petulantly they spoke evil of God. They then had grieved; but
grief here is to be taken in a special sense, according to what Paul
says of repentance, that its beginning is grief or sorrow. (<span
id="xv.iii-p13.1"></span>[2 Cor. 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#010)<span id="xv.iii-p13.1"></span>..md)
In this sense it is that the Prophet says here, that they who had
disturbed minds grieved not, for they did not feel that they had to do
with God. He then means by this word what another Prophet means, when he
says, that they did not regard the hand of him who smote them. (<span
id="xv.iii-p13.2"></span>[Isa
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#013)<span id="xv.iii-p13.2"></span>..md)
For he does not say that they were so senseless as not to feel the
strokes; but that the hand of God was not seen by them; and yet this is
the principal thing in our sorrow. For if we blindly and violently cry
out in our troubles, and cry, Wo, a hundred times, what is it all? our
lamentations are only those of brute animals: but when we regard the
hand of him who smites us, our grief then is of the right kind. Jeremiah
says, that the Jews did not grieve in this manner, for they did not
perceive that they were justly chastened by God’s hand.

<span id="xv.iii-p14"></span>He afterwards enlarges on the subject,
*Thou hast consumed them* he says, *and they refused to receive
correction* By saying that they had been *consumed,* he proves them
guilty of extreme perverseness; for when God lightly chides us, it is no
great wonder if, through our tardiness and sloth, we are not immediately
roused; but when God doubles his strokes, yea, when he not only smites
us with his rods, but draws his sword to consume us entirely; yea, when
he thus deals with us, and executes his vengeance by terrible judgments,
if then we are still torpid in our sins, and feel not how dreadful it is
to endure his judgments, must we not be indeed wholly blinded by the
devil? This is then the stupor which the Prophet now deplores in the
Jews; for not only were they without a right feeling of grief when God
smote them, but when they were even consumed, they did not receive or
admit correction. And in this second clause he shews what we have
already said, — that the grief he speaks of is not to be taken for any
sort of grief, but of that which regards God’s judgment, and proves that
we fear him.

<span id="xv.iii-p15"></span>He adds, *They have hardened their faces as
a rock,* and lastly, *they have refused to return* The Prophet means,
that the Jews were not only refractory, but that they were also without
any shame. If, indeed, they had given every evidence of being ashamed,
it would have been still useless, except there was, as we have said, an
integrity of heart. But it often happens, that even the worst, though
inwardly full of impiety and of contempt towards God, and of
perverseness, do yet retain some measure of shame. In order to shew that
the Jews had arrived to extreme impiety, the Prophet says, that they had
*hardened their faces,* that is, that they were wholly without shame;
for they had cast away everything like reason, and made no difference
between right and wrong, between honesty and baseness. As, then, they
had put off every human feeling, he says that nothing remained to be
done, but that God, as he had previously declared, should execute on
them extreme vengeance. And he repeats what he had said, — that they
*refused to turn* He means, that they sinned and went astray, not
through mistake or want of knowledge, but that they disregarded their
own safety through willful and deliberate wickedness, and that they
knowingly and avowedly rejected God, so that they would not endure
either his teaching or his corrections.  <span
id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129.md)

<span id="xv.iv"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xv.iv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as the devil ceases
not to soothe us by his allurements, so that we may become torpid and
stupefied, — O grant, that thy word may so shine in our minds and hearts
that we may not grow torpid in darkness; and do thou also so rouse us by
thy Spirit, that we may attend to those warnings of thy prophets, by
which thou wouldest bring us to the right way, that we may not perish;
and may we so assiduously exercise repentance through the whole course
of our life, that we may ever be displeased with ourselves on account of
our sins; and may we judge ourselves daily, that we may turn away from
us thy wrath, until having at length finished our warfare, which we have
to carry on continually with our sins, we shall come to that blessed
rest which has been procured for us in heaven, by Jesus Christ our Lord.
— Amen.

<span id="xv.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xv.v"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p1"></span>Lecture Nineteenth

<span id="xv.vi"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p1"></span><span id="xv.vi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
5:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#004.md)<span id="xv.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p2"></span>**4**. Therefore I said, Surely these *are*
poor; they are foolish: for they know not the way of the Lord, *nor* the
judgment of their God.

<span id="xv.vi-p3"></span>**4**. Et ego dixi, Certe (*alii vertunt,*
forsan, <span id="xv.vi-p3.1"></span>אך) pauperes sunt hi, stulte
egerunt, quia non cognoscunt viam Jehovae, judicium Dei sui:

<span id="xv.vi-p4"></span>**5**. I will get me unto the great men, and
will speak unto them; for they have known the way of the Lord, *and* the
judgment of their God: but these have altogether broken the yoke, *and*
burst the bonds.

<span id="xv.vi-p5"></span>**5**. Ibo ad optimates (ad magnos, *ad
verbum*) et loquar apud eos; quia ipsi cognoscunt viam Jehovae judicium
Dei sui: atque ipsi fregerunt jugum, ruperunt vincula.

<span id="xv.vi-p6"></span> 

<span id="xv.vi-p7"></span><span id="xv.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p8"></span>Some think that the Prophet here makes an
excuse for the people, and, as far as he could, extenuates their fault;
but they are greatly mistaken. For there is no doubt but that he, by
this comparison, more clearly shews how past remedy was then the state
of things. The sum, then, of what he says is, — that corruptions so
prevailed, not only among the multitude, but also among the chief men,
that there remained no soundness, as they say, from the head to the sole
of the foot. Nearly the same thing, only in other words, is stated by
Isaiah in the twenty-eighth chapter; for after having spoken generally
against the people, he assails the leading men, and says that they were
inebriated no less than the common people, that they were inebriated
with wine and strong drink. But the meaning is, that they were like
drunken men, because they felt no shame, while they abandoned themselves
to deeds the most disgraceful.

<span id="xv.vi-p9"></span>To the same purpose is what Jeremiah says
here, when he declares, that he thought that they were the poor who had
thus sinned, and obscure men and of no repute; but that he had found the
same thing among the chief men as among the common people. He might,
indeed, have only said, “Not only the lowest orders, the multitude, are
become corrupt, but also the chief men, who ought to have excelled the
rest.” But much more striking is the comparison, when he says, “It may
be, that these miserable men have thus sinned because they understood
not the law of God, nor is it a matter of wonder; but greater integrity
will be found in the chief men.” By speaking thus the Prophet brings the
reader into the midst of the scene, and shews to him that not only all
the people were guilty, but also the priests and the prophets, and the
chief men in the state. The design of the Prophet is thus evident.

<span id="xv.vi-p10"></span>*I said,* he says, not that he thought so;
for he saw that all things were in such a disorder, that nothing better
could be hoped from the chief men than from the common people. This was
clearly seen by the Prophet: but, as I have said, he wished to shew
here, by a striking representation, how wretched was the condition of
the whole people. He says, *Surely* The particle <span
id="xv.vi-p10.1"></span>אך*, ak,* is an affirmative, or, as in the next
verse, an adversative. Some, indeed, take it here in the sense of <span
id="xv.vi-p10.2"></span>אולי, *auli,* perhaps, or, it may be; and regard
it as signifying a concession, “Let us grant this,” he says; “they are
the poor, they are of no account, they are as it were the offscourings,
who have thus sinned: it is nothing strange, if they conduct themselves
thus foolishly, for *they know not the way of Jehovah, nor the judgment
of their God* ”  <span id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130.md)

<span id="xv.vi-p14"></span>The law was, indeed, given to all without
any difference; so that the common people had no excuse. But this evil
has prevailed almost in all ages, — that few attend to the teaching of
the law; for there is no one who is not inclined to shake off this yoke.
The common people, indeed, think that they have some excuse for
neglecting it, because they have no leisure, and are not born for high
stations. The Prophet then speaks according to this prevailing opinion;
but he does not extenuate their fault who pleaded ignorance as an
excuse, because they had not been taught in schools; for, as it has been
said, God intended his law for the whole people without exception.

<span id="xv.vi-p15"></span>By *the way of Jehovah and the judgment of
God,* the Prophet means the same thing: such a repetition is very common
in Hebrew. God, in prescribing to us the rule of life, shews to us the
way in which we are to walk: our life, indeed, is like to a course; and
it is not God’s will that we should run at random, but he sets before us
the goal to which we are to proceed, and also directs us in the only way
that leads to it. For it is the office of the law to call us back from
our wandering, and to lead us to the mark set before us. Hence the law
is called the *way of Jehovah;* and *judgment,* <span
id="xv.vi-p15.1"></span>משפת, *meshephet,* as it was said yesterday,
means rectitude, or a rule of life. What he calls in the first clause
the *law of Jehovah,* he calls in the second the *judgment of God* And
thus he shews that they were inexcusable, who made the objection that
they were miserably ignorant, and knew nothing; for it was God’s purpose
to shew to them, no less than to the most learned, how they were to
live.

<span id="xv.vi-p16"></span><span id="xv.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p17"></span>He now adds, *I will go to the great* By the
great he meant the priests and the prophets, as well as the king’s
counselors, and the king himself. *I will go,*  <span
id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131.md) then, he says, *to the great, and will
speak to them* It is the same as though he had said, that everywhere his
labor was in vain, for not only he spoke to the deaf when addressing the
illiterate vulgar, but also when addressing the chief men. I have said,
that the Prophet did not make the inquiry as one doubtful, but his
purpose was to make the chief men ashamed of themselves, and also to
confirm what he had said before, — that not one just and upright man
could be found in Jerusalem.

<span id="xv.vi-p19"></span>*For they know,* he says, etc. He declares
the same thing in the same words. But we must ever remember, that the
Prophet did not believe this; but he speaks of it as a thing that
appeared probable: for who could have then thought that there was so
much ignorance in the chief men? for they were in great esteem among the
people. Since then the opinion prevailed, that all those who were rulers
were well acquainted with the law, Jeremiah speaks according to what was
commonly thought, and says, that they knew the *way of Jehovah*

<span id="xv.vi-p20"></span>He afterwards adds, *But* (for <span
id="xv.vi-p20.1"></span>אך, *ak,* is to be taken here adversatively, and
its proper meaning is, nay or but) *they have alike broken the yoke,
they have burst the bonds;* that is, “If any one thinks that the rulers
are better than the common people, he is much deceived; for I have
proofs enough to shew that their conduct is the same; they have broken
the yoke of God no less than the most ignorant.” By this repetition he
more fully confirmed their defection, and at the same time reminded them
how shameful it was, that prophets, priests, and rulers, who occupied
the first places in the state, had become so unbridled in their vices.
It follows —

<span id="xv.vii"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p1"></span><span id="xv.vii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#006.md)<span id="xv.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p2"></span>**6**. Wherefore a lion out of the forest
shall slay them, *and* a wolf of the evenings shall spoil them, a
leopard shall watch over their cities: every one that goeth out thence
shall be torn in pieces: because their transgressions are many, *and*
their backslidings are increased.

<span id="xv.vii-p3"></span>**6**. Propterea percussit eos leo e sylva;
lupus solitudinum (alii per <span id="xv.vii-p3.1"></span>ערבות
intelligunt vesperas, quia deducunt ab <span id="xv.vii-p3.2"></span>ערב
quod significat vesperum; ita vertunt, lupus vesperinus) vastavit eos;
pardus (alii vertunt, pantheram) vigilans super urbes eorum; quisquis
egredietur, discerpet (vel, lacerabit;) quoniam multiplices sunt
iniquitates eorum, auctae sunt defectiones ceorum.

<span id="xv.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.vii-p5"></span><span id="xv.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p6"></span>Here, at length, God shews that he was
moderate in his judgments, so that the wicked in vain charged him, as it
is usual with them, with too much rigor.

<span id="xv.vii-p7"></span>Some render the words in the past tense, and
think the sense to be, that the Prophet reminds the Jews that they had
not been afflicted without reason by so many evils, as they had deserved
heavier punishments. But another view may be taken; for we know that in
Hebrew the tenses often change; and I am inclined to regard the future
tense as intended; for the Prophet seems not here to record what they
had already suffered, but to remind them of the heavy punishment that
was awaiting them. *Smite* them *shall the lion from the forest*

<span id="xv.vii-p8"></span>The *wolf* is called the wolf of
*solitudes*, because of his coming forth from the desert. Some render
the words, “the wolf of the evening;” and this may be allowed. We indeed
know, that in other places hungry wolves are called the wolves of the
evening; for after having sought their prey in the day — time, and
finding none, they become in the evening almost mad, and their hunger
causes them to run furiously in all directions. This explanation, then,
may be admitted. But as he says first, that the lion would come from the
forest, it is more probable that the wolf is described as coming from
the desert.  <span id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132.md) As to the general
import of the passage there is not much difference.

<span id="xv.vii-p10"></span>He mentions here three wild beasts — the
lion, the wolf, and the leopard. By these wild beasts he understands no
doubt the enemies, who would shortly attack them with the greatest
cruelty. It is indeed true that the Jews, before the time in which
Jeremiah spoke to them, had been afflicted with many evils; for God had
not punished them only once, but had given them frequent warnings; and
had there been any hope of repentance, they might have still continued
in safety, though considerably reduced. But Jeremiah seems to predict
future punishment: he therefore refers, not only to the Egyptians and
the Assyrians, but also to other enemies. For that people, we know, were
hated by all their neighbors, and had suffered grievous wrongs even from
their own kindred. Since, then, many nations were hostile to the Jews,
it is nothing strange that the Prophet enumerates here three sorts of
wild beasts; as though he had said, that enemies would come from every
quarter, who would, like lions, wolves, and leopards, vent their fury on
them, because they had so often, and for so long a time, provoked God’s
wrath. At the same time, God does here check those false complaints
which are wont to be often alleged by the wicked, and shews that he is a
righteous Judge, and that the punishments he inflicted could not be
blamed by the Jews: and it was for this purpose that he used the
particle, *Wherefore* — <span id="xv.vii-p10.1"></span>על-כז, *ol-kan.*

<span id="xv.vii-p11"></span>He also adds, *A leopard shall watch,* that
he may *tear* all who shall go out of *the cities* This language is no
doubt metaphorical; and what he means is, that when the enemies would
occupy the land, the Jews would be shut up in their cities, and would
not venture to go forth, for dangers would await them everywhere.

<span id="xv.vii-p12"></span>At the end of the verse he repeats again,
and speaks more fully of what he meant by “*Wherefore* — <span
id="xv.vii-p12.1"></span>על-כז, “at the beginning of the verse;  <span
id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133.md) for he says, *Because multiplied have
their transgressions, and increased have their defections* By these
words he further proves what he had said, that God is a righteous judge,
even when he seems to be too severe: for it could not have been
otherwise, but that he must have visited with extreme vengeance a people
so abandoned and irreclaimable. Nor does he only call them wicked, and
apostates, but he says that their *iniquities*,  <span
id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134.md) or evil deeds, were *many,* and that
their *defections* had *increased* And by the last expression he
amplifies their guilt: for though <span id="xv.vii-p16.1"></span>פשע*,
pesho,* does not mean simply to offend, but to act wickedly; yet to fall
away from God is a baser and a more atrocious sin. We hence learn, that
such was the wickedness of the Jews, that it could not be corrected by
common means or moderate punishment. He afterwards adds —

<span id="xv.viii"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p1"></span><span id="xv.viii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#007.md)<span id="xv.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p2"></span>**7**. How shall I pardon thee for this?
thy children have forsaken me, and sworn by *them that are* no gods:
when I had fed them to the full, they then committed adultery, and
assembled themselves by troops in the harlots’ houses.

<span id="xv.viii-p3"></span>**7**. Quomodo super hoc parcam tibi (hoc
est, parcerem, nam debet resolvi futurum tempus in modum potentialem,
quomodo, inquit, parcerem tibi super hoc?) Filii tui dereliquerunt me,
et jurarunt in non Deo: ego autem saturavi eos, et scortati sunt (tamen
scortati sunt;) et domus meretricis congregaverunt se (vel, in domum
meretricis, *ita subaudienda erit litera* <span
id="xv.viii-p3.1"></span>ב *servilis.*)

<span id="xv.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.viii-p5"></span><span id="xv.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p6"></span>There is here what rhetoricians call a
conference: for God seems here to seek the judgment of the adverse
party, with whom he contends, on the cause between them, though it was
sufficiently clear; and this is a proof of confidence. When advocates
wish to shew that there is nothing doubtful or obscure, they thus
deliberate with the opposite party, — “Why, I will propose the matter
privately to yourself; have you anything to say? Even if you were at
liberty to determine the question, would not reason compel you to
pronounce such a judgment as this?” So now God shews that he was
constrained, as it were, by necessity to inflict on the Jews a most
severe punishment, and intimates that he was not, as it were, at liberty
to do otherwise. “If I am, “he says, “the judge of the world, is it
possible that they can escape unpunished, who thus openly provoke me?
Should I not expose to ridicule my glory? and should I not also divest
myself of my own power? I should cease to be what I am, and in a manner
deny myself, were I not to punish a people so wicked and irreclaimable.”
We now perceive the Prophet’s meaning.

<span id="xv.viii-p7"></span>Some consider <span
id="xv.viii-p7.1"></span>ו, *vau*, to be understood, and take <span
id="xv.viii-p7.2"></span>אי, *ai,* for <span
id="xv.viii-p7.3"></span>אין*, ain,* and read thus, “I will not spare
thee for this.” But as there is no reason to make any change, and many
agree in the view that has been given, I prefer to follow what has been
most commonly received. The meaning of <span
id="xv.viii-p7.4"></span>אי*, ai,* in Hebrew is “where;” but it also
means “how: “and here it is to be understood, not of place, but of
manner, “How could I for this be propitious to you?”

<span id="xv.viii-p8"></span>We see how God, as it were, deliberates
with the opposite party, and even appeals to them for judgment, “Say
now, were I to allow you so much liberty and power as to decide the
question, could I, who am the judge of the world, spare you who are
guilty of such vices?”

<span id="xv.viii-p9"></span>*Thy sons have forsaken me* This was the
first sin: and when God complained that he was forsaken, he intimated
that the people had willfully, and from deliberate wickedness, cast off
the yoke; for the same thing could not have been said of heathens. It is
indeed true, if we have regard to the beginning, that all may be charged
with defection, for God had revealed himself to the sons of Adam and of
Noah; and when they fell away into superstitions, they became apostates.
But the defection of the Jewish people was much more recent, and less to
be borne: nay, when they boasted that they were God’s people, who could
have alleged the pretense of ignorance? We now then see what the Prophet
means when he says, that God had been forsaken by the people.

<span id="xv.viii-p10"></span>He then adds, *They have sworn by a no-
god* He means, by stating a part for the whole, that the worship of God
was become corrupt and vitiated: for swearing, as it was stated
yesterday, is a part of God’s worship. Whenever we swear by God’s name,
we profess that we are under his power, and that we cannot escape if we
swear falsely: we also ascribe to him his glory as the God of truth; and
we further testify that nothing escapes him, or is hid from his view.
Hence, by saying here that the Israelites *swore by a no- god,* he means
that God was deprived of his own right. They were indeed guilty of other
sins; but, as it has been stated, the Prophet includes under one kind
all the superstitions which then prevailed among the people. It was then
the same as though he had said, that they worshipped idols and gods,
whom they had devised for themselves.

<span id="xv.viii-p11"></span>He adds a circumstance which enhanced
their guilt, *I have filled them,* he says, *and they have committed
adultery* There is here a striking alliteration, which must not be
omitted, he had said, <span id="xv.viii-p11.1"></span>ישבען, *ishbon,
“*they have sworn;” and now he says, <span
id="xv.viii-p11.2"></span>אשבע, *ashbo, “*I have filled them.” The only
difference is in a point; when placed on the left side of <span
id="xv.viii-p11.3"></span>ש, *shin,* the word means to fill, and when on
the right, to swear.  <span id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135.md) The
Prophet then says, that they had *sworn* to another God, and yet had
been *filled* God shews here how base and disgraceful had been the
ingratitude of the people; for they had been filled to the full with all
blessings, and yet they did not acknowledge their own God, who had been
to them a Father, so kind and bountiful: *I have filled them,* he says,
*and they have committed adultery*

<span id="xv.viii-p13"></span>Now this passage teaches us, that they who
go astray, when allured by God’s paternal kindness and bounty, are on
that account the more unworthy of pardon. When men grow wanton against
God, while he is kindly indulging them, they no doubt treasure up for
themselves wrath against the day of wrath, as Paul tells us in <span
id="xv.viii-p13.1"></span>[Ro 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#005.md)<span
id="xv.viii-p13.1"></span>. Let us then take heed, lest we indulge
ourselves, while God is, as it were, indulging us; and lest prosperity
should lead us to wantonness: but let us learn to submit ourselves
willingly to him, even because he thus kindly and sweetly invites us to
himself; and when he shews himself so loving, let us learn to love him.

<span id="xv.viii-p14"></span>He says, that they *committed adultery*
This may be taken metaphorically: but as in the next verse he inveighs
against their vagrant lusts and adulteries, this phrase may be taken in
its literal sense. I yet think that adultery here is to be understood
figuratively, as meaning that they had no spiritual chastity, inasmuch
as they did not give God his own glory. He further says, *And at the
house of the harlot have they assembled together* The word “house” may
be taken in the nominative case, as the Jews might have been called the
house of the harlot; as though the Prophet had said, that all Jerusalem
and Judea were like brothels. But some consider <span
id="xv.viii-p14.1"></span>ב, *beth,* to be understood, so that they
assembled themselves, as it were, at the house of a harlot; and that he
thus alludes to the temple. And it is a mark of great shamelessness,
when many adulterers or wanton men assemble in one house; for most are
ashamed of their adulteries, so that they endeavor to hide their
baseness: but when they come together in troops, as though under an
uplifted banner, it is a proof that there is no shame, but that they
thus disregard all decency, like brute beasts. The most suitable meaning
then is, that they are said to have assembled together in brothels,
because they gloried in their own superstitions and sacrileges.  <span
id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136.md) It follows —

<span id="xv.ix"></span>

<span id="xv.ix-p1"></span><span id="xv.ix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#008.md)<span id="xv.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ix-p2"></span>**8**. They were *as* fed horses in the
morning: every one neighed after his neighbour’s wife.

<span id="xv.ix-p3"></span>**8**. Equi saginati (*alii vertunt,* armati,
*intelligunt phaleratos*) mane surgentes (*alii vertunt,* trahentes,
*deducunt* a ךשמ*, sed rectius alii deducunt a* םכש, *et nomen esse
existimant;*) quisque ad uxorem proximi sui hinnit (*est quidem futurum
tempus, sed significat continuum actum.*)

<span id="xv.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.ix-p5"></span><span id="xv.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ix-p6"></span>Jeremiah comes now, I think, to the second
table, and mentions one kind of evil; but his object was to shew that
there was no chastity, no faithfulness, no honesty in that people. He
therefore compares them to wanton and lustful horses, and thus exposes
their infamous conduct. Had he said that every one did lie in wait for
the bed of his neighbor, it would have been a heinous crime; but when he
calls their lust *neighing,* and calls them *horses,* and those well
*fed,* and who *rise early* after they are filled, he doubtless shews
that such was their incontinence, that they were not only wanton and
adulterous, but that they were worse and more base, for they differed
nothing from lustful horses, and horses well fed. Some read the last
word “armed, “deducing it from <span id="xv.ix-p6.1"></span> יון*izan,*
which means to be armed; and others derive it from <span
id="xv.ix-p6.2"></span>זון, *zun,* which signifies to eat, and hence
they take <span id="xv.ix-p6.3"></span>מוזן, *muzan,* for food. There is
indeed no doubt but that it means here “fed, “or fat; for why should he
call them armed horses? What some say, that they rose early after having
committed adultery, in order to exhibit their disgrace, and to boast of
their vices, is too far-fetched. What is meant is, that they were strong
horses, and active, and that they rose up early after having been well
fed.  <span id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137.md)

<span id="xv.ix-p11"></span>We now then understand the Prophet’s object:
the sum of the whole is, — that there was no chastity among the Jews,
for they gave themselves up to wanton lusts, not only like adulterers
and whoremongers, but like lascivious horses. Nevertheless, as we have
said, he includes here, under incontinency, thefts, frauds, rapines, and
all vices of this kind; for he no doubt charges the Jews as guilty of
transgressing against the second table of the law. He afterwards adds —

<span id="xv.x"></span>

<span id="xv.x-p1"></span><span id="xv.x-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#009.md)<span id="xv.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.x-p2"></span>**9**. Shall I not visit for these *things*?
saith the Lord: and shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as
this?

<span id="xv.x-p3"></span>**9**. An non super his (*vel,* super hoc)
visitabo (*vel,* non visitarem,) dicit Jehova? et an in gente quae talis
est (quae secundum hanc) non se ulciscetur anima mea?

<span id="xv.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.x-p5"></span><span id="xv.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.x-p6"></span>God again holds, as it were, a conference with
them, and for this purpose, — that he might check all their complaints
and close their mouths, lest they should object and say, that they were
too severely treated. That this objection then might be removed, God
repeats that he could not pardon such atrocious sins. And this principle
is adopted, that it was impossible not to punish such wicked men who
would not repent. For since God is the Judge of the world, he can no
more surrender his judgment than his essence. As, then, the majesty of
God and his office of a Judge are inseparably connected, the Prophet
concludes, that what the Jews thought was impossible, that is, that they
could escape unpunished, and yet continue to provoke God, as it were, by
open war, with their dreadful sins: *Should I not then visit for this,
saith Jehovah?*

<span id="xv.x-p7"></span>Here is introduced the name of Jehovah. An
earthly judge may pardon the ungodly and the worst of men; but this
cannot be done by God; for whenever God pardons, he leads sinners to
repentance: so that he never suffers sins to be unpunished. For he who
repents becomes his own judge, and thus anticipates God’s judgment.
Where then there is true conversion, God shews no indulgence to sins.
But when persistency in sins is such, that they who are warned despise
all instruction, it is impossible that God should forgive; as in that
case he would renounce his own glory, which can never be. *Should I not
then visit for this, saith Jehovah?*

<span id="xv.x-p8"></span>*And on such a nation as this should not
vengeance my soul take?* God speaks here after the manner of men, for he
seeks no vengeance; and when he speaks of his soul, even this is not
strictly suitable to him; but there is here nothing obscure; for what is
meant is, that he is at enmity with wickedness, as it is said in <span
id="xv.x-p8.1"></span>[Ps 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#005.md)<span
id="xv.x-p8.1"></span>, that he cannot bear iniquity. Since it is so, it
follows that he must either be thrust from his celestial throne, or
punishment must be inflicted on the wicked, who remain perverse and set
no end nor bounds to their sins. Whenever then delusion creeps over us
and Satan seeks by his allurements to lead us to forget God’s judgment,
let this come to our minds — that God would not be God, except he were
to punish sins. It is then necessary that he should punish sins or be
displeased with us: but, as it has been said, he cannot be inconsistent
with himself or dissimilar in his nature, since no change can take place
in him. Either then his hand is stretched out to punish our sins, or his
judgment must be anticipated by us. And how can this be done? By
learning to bring sentence against ourselves, by becoming displeased
with our sins.

<span id="xv.x-p9"></span>When therefore our conversion will be of this
kind, then God will be merciful to us; and thus he will not pardon our
sins, as though he approved of them, or as though he did not exercise
his office as a judge. But as I have said, what is here taught is
rightly addressed to those who are either refractory, or whom Satan
renders so stupid and forgetful, that they call not themselves to an
account; in short, what is here said will render the ungodly, who go on
in their perverseness, inexcusable, or it will awake those who are
healable, that they may judge themselves, and not wait until God
stretches forth his hand to execute extreme punishment.

<span id="xv.xi"></span>

<span id="xv.xi-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xv.xi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we are at this
day inclined to those vices, to which we learn thine ancient people were
too much given, — O grant, that we, being governed by thy Spirit, may
not harden ourselves against those thy holy warnings, by which thou
daily reprovest us and our sins, but that we may be teachable and
obedient: and as we have hitherto too much resisted thee and carried on
war with thy justice, may we learn to fight with ourselves and with our
sins, and rely on thy word, until we gain the victory, and at length
attain that triumph, which has been prepared for us in heaven by Jesus
Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="xv.xi-p3"></span> 

<span id="xv.xii"></span>

<span id="xv.xii-p1"></span>Lecture Twentieth

<span id="xv.xiii"></span>

<span id="xv.xiii-p1"></span><span id="xv.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#010.md)<span id="xv.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xiii-p2"></span>**10**. Go ye up upon her walls, and
destroy; but make not a full end: take away her battlements; for they
*are* not the LORD’S.

<span id="xv.xiii-p3"></span>**10**. Ascendite muros ejus et diruite
(*vel,* dissipate;) et consumptionem ne feceritis (*vel potius,* finem;)
auferte propagines ejus (*vel,* ramos, *vel,* dentes murorum, *ut alii
vertunt, vel,* pinnas,) quia non sunt Jehovae.

<span id="xv.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.xiii-p5"></span><span id="xv.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xiii-p6"></span>Here God by the mouth of his Prophet
addresses the enemies of his people, whom he had appointed to be the
ministers of his vengeance: and this was usual with the prophets, when
they sought more effectually to rouse and more sharply to touch the
hearts of men; for we know how great is their indifference when God
summons them to judgment. As then Jeremiah saw that simple instruction
availed but little, he used this mode of speaking. He then in the person
of God addresses the Chaldeans, and bids them to come to attack
Jerusalem. The prophets often speak thus, — “Hiss will God for the
Egyptians,” or, “Sound shall the trumpet, and he will send for the
Chaldeans.” (<span id="xv.xiii-p6.1"></span>[Isa
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#026.md)<span id="xv.xiii-p6.1"></span>;
<span id="xv.xiii-p6.2"></span>[Isa
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#018)<span id="xv.xiii-p6.2"></span>..md)
But the representation is more effectual to penetrate into the hearts of
men, when the Prophet at God’s command assembles enemies as a celestial
herald and bids them what to do, even to destroy the whole city.

<span id="xv.xiii-p7"></span>He says first, *Ascend ye her walls* By
which words he intimates, that the Jews in vain boasted of the height of
their walls, for God would make their enemies to ascend them, so that
the entrance would not be difficult. They hoped indeed that *they* were
safe, because the city was well fortified. Hence he says, that they were
deceived; and he exposes their folly, for their walls would not protect
them.

<span id="xv.xiii-p8"></span>He afterwards adds, *An end do not make*
This sentence is explained in two ways. Some take it in a good sense, as
though God mitigated the extremity of their punishment, according to the
meaning which some attach to the words in the last chapter; for though
God in that passage terrified the Jews, yet they consider that by way of
mitigation this was added, “I will not yet make a consummation,” that
is, there will be some remaining. And the prophets are wont thus to
speak, when they intend to shew that some seed will ever remain, so that
the Church shall not wholly be destroyed. Thus also do the same
interpreters explain this passage, as though God had said, that the ruin
of Jerusalem would be such that the Church would still continue, for
there would be no consummation. But others take <span
id="xv.xiii-p8.1"></span>כלה, *cale,* as signifying an end: and this
meaning is more suitable; for God in this verse severely threatens the
Jews with destruction. It is no objection, that it is said elsewhere,
that the consummation would not be complete; for it is quite evident
that the prophets do not always adopt the same mode in speaking: when
they denounce vengeance on the reprobate, they leave no hope; and so
this mode of speaking often occurs, “I will make an end:” but when they
address the faithful, they moderate the severity of their threatenings
by saying, “God will not make a consummation.” I am therefore disposed
to take their view, whom regard consummation here as signifying an end;
and <span id="xv.xiii-p8.2"></span>כלל, *calal*, means to finish. The
meaning then is, “Demolish the city, and let there be no end,“ that is,
destroy it entirely.  <span id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138.md)

<span id="xv.xiii-p10"></span>To the same purpose is what immediately
follows, *Take away her shoots,* or her branches, or the teeth of her
walls, as some render the word. I think, however, that the Prophet
refers to the width of the walls in their foundations; for we know that
walls are so built, that the foundation is wider than the upper
structure. The word which the Prophet uses, means shoots, which spread
far and wide. They who render it, the wings of the walls, seem not to me
to understand what the Prophet means; for he speaks not here of the top
of the walls, but of the foundations, as though he had said, “Overthrow
or demolish from the foundation the walls of the city: “and why? *They
are not Jehovah’s,* he adds. The Jews were inflated with this empty
confidence, — that they were safe under the protection of God; for they
imagined that God was the guardian of the city, because the sanctuary
and the altar were there. Hence the Prophet declares, that the walls or
the foundations were not God’s.  <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139.md)
Nor could it have been objected, that it is said elsewhere, that the
city had been founded by the Lord: God had indeed chosen his habitation
and his throne there; but on this condition — that the people should
faithfully worship him. When Jerusalem was made a den of thieves, God
departed thence, according to what is said by Ezekiel in chapter 14
(<span id="xv.xiii-p11.3"></span>[Eze
14](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#000)<span id="xv.xiii-p11.3"></span>.md).
Here then the Prophet reproves that foolish confidence, by which the
Jews deceived themselves, when they thought that God was in a manner
bound never to forsake the defense of the city. He denies that their
walls and foundations were God’s; for the Jews by their sins had so
polluted the whole place, that God could not dwell in such filth. It
follows —

<span id="xv.xiv"></span>

<span id="xv.xiv-p1"></span><span id="xv.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#011.md)<span id="xv.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xiv-p2"></span>**11**. For the house of Israel and the
house of Judah have dealt very treacherously against me, saith the Lord.

<span id="xv.xiv-p3"></span>**11**. Quoniam transgrediendo transgressi
sunt in me domus Israel et domus Jehudah, dick Jehova.

<span id="xv.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.xiv-p5"></span><span id="xv.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xiv-p6"></span>The verb <span id="xv.xiv-p6.1"></span>בגד,
*begad,* means to deceive, to act perfidiously. God then charges the
Jews here with perfidy, because they had revolted from him: for he does
not only complain that they had in some measure sinned against him, and
that he was therefore offended with them, but he charges them with
general defection. Hence he says, that both the Israelites and the Jews
had become perfidious and apostates. The people, we knew, were now
divided into two kingdoms: and though Jeremiah had been given especially
as a teacher to the tribe of Judah, it was yet his duty to labor also
for the Israelites. The kingdom of Israel was now in some measure
fallen, for four tribes had been driven into exile, and the kingdom was
dismembered and feeble. He yet wished to do all the good he could to the
remnant. Hence he says here, that they were wicked apostates, for they
had *acted perfidiously* towards God.  <span
id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140.md) And as this charge was heinous, and
might have deeply wounded their minds, he ascribes to God what the Jews
would have hardly endured as coming from him; and says, thus *saith
Jehovah,* as though he had said, “There is no reason for you to contend
with me, as though I had dealt severely with you: contend with God
himself, since he it is who declares that you are all perfidious.” He
afterwards adds —

<span id="xv.xv"></span>

<span id="xv.xv-p1"></span><span id="xv.xv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#012.md)<span id="xv.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xv-p2"></span>**12**. They have belied the Lord, and said,
*It is* not he; neither shall evil come upon us; neither shall we see
sword nor famine:

<span id="xv.xv-p3"></span>**12**. Negarunt Jehovam (*alii vertunt,*
mentiti sunt Jehovae,) et dixerunt, Non est, et non veniet super nos
malum; et gladium et famem non videbimus.

<span id="xv.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.xv-p5"></span><span id="xv.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xv-p6"></span>He expresses more clearly and fully what he
had previously said. Their perfidy was, that they had *denied God* I do
not wholly reject what others have said, that they lied to God: but as
<span id="xv.xv-p6.1"></span>ב is here used after <span
id="xv.xv-p6.2"></span>כחש, I cannot see that it means to lie. It ought
to have been in that case, <span id="xv.xv-p6.3"></span>כחשו, <span
id="xv.xv-p6.4"></span> ליהוה*cacheshu La-Jeve:* but as it is <span
id="xv.xv-p6.5"></span>ביהוה, *Be-Jeve,* I doubt not but that he simply
declares that they *denied* God; and the context seems to require this
meaning; for he immediately adds, that they *said there was no God*
 <span id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141.md) This certainly was not to lie
to God, but to reject him as one who did not exist. As then the sense
would be less significant, were we to say, that they lied to God, I am
inclined to take the other meaning, that they *denied* God; that is,
that they wholly disregarded him or sought to erase the remembrance of
him.

<span id="xv.xv-p16"></span>The reason which follow requires special
notice: *They have said, He is not* To render this more clear, he says,
that they boasted of impunity. It seemed, no doubt, to exceed
credibility, when the Prophet said that God was denied by the Jews; but
that they might not evade the charge, he continued it, *they have said,
He is not* We are further to consider why he brought against them so
grievous and so atrocious a charge: it was, because they boasted that
they should be free from the punishments which the prophets had
threatened.

<span id="xv.xv-p17"></span>We then see what Jeremiah alleges against
them, even their contempt and also their perverseness. They felt
themselves safe notwithstanding the prophetic threatenings. The Prophet
says, this is nothing less than wholly to deny God. Were we judges, this
declaration might appear too severe: but let us pause, and acquiesce in
what the Holy Spirit has pronounced.

<span id="xv.xv-p18"></span>And this is a remarkable passage, whence we
may learn how abhorred by God is their indifference, who harden
themselves against his threatenings, and wholly disregard his judgment.
For if we acknowledge him as God, his power as a judge ought not to be
taken away. What does God’s name mean? Doubtless they who imagine that
God remains quiet in heaven and enjoys his leisure and his rest, though
they may not in words deny God, yet treat him with mockery: there is in
them at the same time no religion and no thought of a divine being. Let
us then carefully notice this passage, in which the Prophet testifies
that God is denied by us, except we be moved by his threatenings; for
the torpidity in which we indulge ourselves, when God denounces his
judgment on us, is the same as the denial of him; nor is there anything
by which they can extenuate their sin who thus despise the vengeance of
God. For the Holy Spirit has once for all declared, that all who trifle
with the prophets do in their hearts say, that there is no God, inasmuch
as they deprive him of his power and of his office, and leave him only a
naked essence; nay, they make him only a creature of the imagination or
a mere phantom.

<span id="xv.xv-p19"></span>We now then understand the meaning of the
Prophet: he more fully explains the perfidy with which he had charged
the Jews; for he says that they *denied God,* and *said, He is not*; and
they proved that they did all this, for they did not believe the evil to
be at hand which the prophets had announced. It afterwards follows —

<span id="xv.xvi"></span>

<span id="xv.xvi-p1"></span><span id="xv.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#013.md)<span id="xv.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xvi-p2"></span>**13**. And the prophets shall become wind,
and the word *is* not in them: thus shall it be done unto them.

<span id="xv.xvi-p3"></span>**13**. Et Prophetae erunt in ventum, et
sermo non est in eis; sic fiet illis.

<span id="xv.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.xvi-p5"></span><span id="xv.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xvi-p6"></span>The Prophet goes on with the same subject;
and this passage is worthy of especial notice, as it commends to us in
no common way the public preaching of the truth. For what can be
imagined more abominable than to deny God? yet if his word is not
allowed to have authority, it is the same as though its despisers
attempted to thrust God from heaven, or denied his existence. We hence
see how the majesty of God is, as it were, indissolubly connected with
the public preaching of his truth. The design of this verse is the same,
in which Jeremiah refers to the contempt manifested by the people.

<span id="xv.xvi-p7"></span>He introduces the Jews as saying, *The
prophets shall become wind, there is not in them the word,* and the evil
with which they have threatened us, *shall come upon their own heads* It
may have been, that the Jews did not openly give vent to such a
blasphemous language; but so gross was the contempt they shewed towards
the prophets, that this impiety was sufficiently conspicuous in their
whole life. It was not then without reason that the Prophet charged them
with so base an impiety, that they said, that the prophets would become
wind. The same is the case now; the greater part, when God thunders and
gives proofs of his vengeance by his servants, ridicule everything, and
heedlessly cast away every fear, — “Oh, they are mere words; for the
preachers fulminate boldly and terribly in the pulpit; but the whole
vanishes, and whatever they denounce on us will fall on their own
heads.” We see at this day that many ungodly and profane men use such a
bantering language as this. Though it might not have been, as I have
said, that the Jews dared thus openly to shew their contempt towards
God; yet the Holy Spirit, who extends his authority over the hearts,
minds, and feelings of men, justly charged them with this gross impiety.
It may also be learnt from other places, that they made such advances in
audacity, that they hesitated not to treat with scoffs the threatenings
announced by the prophets. However this may have been, the Prophet sets
forth by a striking representation how great was the contemptuous
perverseness of the people towards God: for there is here a vivid
description, by which he sets as it were before our eyes how impious the
Jews had become; inasmuch as they dared openly to assault the prophets
and willfully to charge them with declaring what was vain, *The
prophets,* they said, *shall become wind;* and farther, *There is not in
them the word*

<span id="xv.xvi-p8"></span>By these words the Jews denied that the
prophets were to be believed, however they might pretend God’s name, for
they boasted falsely that this or that was committed to them from above.
Thus it was, as we see, that every instruction was trodden under foot,
and the same we find to be the case in the present day; for what
reverence is manifested anywhere for God’s word? This passage then ought
to be especially noticed by us; for it shews as in a mirror to what
extent of audacity and madness men will break forth when they begin to
discredit God’s word.

<span id="xv.xvi-p9"></span>They afterwards add, *Thus shall it be done
to them;* or, “May it be thus done to them;” for some regard the words
as an imprecation, as though the wicked had said, “Let the prophets find
to their own destruction what the sword, the famine, and the pestilence
are; as they cease not continually to stun our ears with these terrible
things, may they themselves experience these scourges of God.” But we
may retain the form of the verb, *Thus shall it be done to them;*  <span
id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142.md) as though they set themselves in
opposition to God’s servants, and pretended that they were God’s
prophets, “Oh! we have a prophecy too: they terrify us by announcing the
sword, the famine, and the pestilence; we can in our turn retaliate on
them, and declare that the pestilence, the war, and the famine are nigh
them; for what authority have they thus to assail us? Have we not
authority to do the same to them?” We now then perceive what is meant in
this last clause. It now follows —

<span id="xv.xvii"></span>

<span id="xv.xvii-p1"></span><span id="xv.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#014.md)<span id="xv.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xvii-p2"></span>**14**. Wherefore thus saith the Lord God
of hosts, Because ye speak this word, behold, I will make my words in
thy mouth fire, and this people wood, and it shall devour them.

<span id="xv.xvii-p3"></span>**14**. Ergo sic dicit Jehova, Deus
exercituum, Quia protulistis verbum hoc: Ecce ego dabo verba mea.
(*vel*, ponam verba mea) in ore tuo quasi ignem (*vel,* in ignem,) et
populus hic, lignum, et vorabit eos.

<span id="xv.xvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.xvii-p5"></span><span id="xv.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xvii-p6"></span>God shews here how intolerable to him was
their wantonness in despising the prophets, through whom he would have
himself attended to. Though Christ did not refer to this passage, when
he said,

<span id="xv.xvii-p7"></span>“He who hears you hears me,  
and he who despises you despises me,”  
(<span id="xv.xvii-p7.3"></span>[Lu
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#016)<span id="xv.xvii-p7.3"></span>.md)

<span id="xv.xvii-p8"></span>yet it contains an eternal law; for God’s
will from the beginning has been, that his servants should be obeyed, as
though he himself had come down from heaven. Hence the Jews dealt no
less contumeliously with God in despising his prophets, than if they had
dared to treat God himself with contempt. God then now shews how much he
abhorred that madness, through which they rendered void all the labors
of his servants.

<span id="xv.xvii-p9"></span>*Therefore thus saith Jehovah, the God of
hosts* Jeremiah made this preface, that he might more effectually rouse
the Jews; for if he had omitted *Thus saith Jehovah,* and had begun
thus, “Because ye have announced this word, behold, as fire shall be the
word of God, “his doctrine would have been objected to, and treated with
contempt. But now, by alleging the name of God, and that not simply, but
by adorning it with a high attribute, and calling him “the God of hosts,
“he makes known his power in order to strike them with fear. He then
says, “Thus saith Jehovah, the God of hosts, *Because ye have spoken
this word, “*etc. Here he changes the persons often; and it behooved him
to do so, that there might be more force and point in what he said. He
ought to have said in the third person, “Because they have spoken thus,
Behold, I will make my words in thy mouth, “etc.: but he now addresses
the people, and then he turns to his servant Jeremiah. He therefore
says, “Ye have indeed spoken thus;” that is, “Ye have scoffingly spoken,
as though my prophets had nothing but the empty sound of words;”
*Behold,* he says, *I will make my words in thy mouth like fire,* (he
thus addresses the Prophet,) *and this people* shall be *wood, and* the
fire *shall devour them*

<span id="xv.xvii-p10"></span>God compares his own word to fire, not as
in other places, nor for the same reason; but this similitude has a
particular meaning, — that the prophetic word would consume the people
as fire consumes dry wood or straw. In other places the word of God is
called fire, because it kindles the hearts of men, because it cleanses
or burns the filth within. But he treats not here of the benefit or the
fruit which the faithful derive from God’s word: but God declares only
that the doctrine of the Prophet would prove fatal to the people; and
hence he expressly says, “I make my words in thy mouth like fire.” Had
he said, “Behold, my words shall be like fire, and this people shall be
stubble, “it would not have been sufficiently expressive. But as the
people had been accustomed to scoff and say, “Ah! what are these
prophets, and what are their words? they beat the air only;” as then the
Jews had been wont to speak in this manner, he now replies to them, and
says, “I will make my words in thy mouth like fire;” that is, Thy tongue
alone shall be more than sufficient to destroy the whole people.
Jeremiah teaches here the same thing with Paul, when he said,

<span id="xv.xvii-p11"></span>“We have vengeance in readiness against
all altitude which rises against the gospel.”  
(<span id="xv.xvii-p11.2"></span>[2 Cor.
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#005)<span id="xv.xvii-p11.2"></span>.md)

<span id="xv.xvii-p12"></span>For it has ever been an evil, common to
all ages, either to neglect, or wholly to despise the servants of God.
When Paul saw that the gospel was despised by many, he said that he and
other ministers had vengeance in readiness; as though he had said, “As
many words as we speak shall be so many swords to slay all the ungodly;
and though their hardness now reject the judgment of God, their
perverseness shall avail them nothing. Let them now then know that there
is so much power in my word, as though God were openly to put forth his
hand from heaven, as though he were to dart forth his lightnings.” The
same thing is what Jeremiah means here, *Behold,* he says, *I will make
my words in thy mouth fire;* that is, there will be so much power in thy
words, that the ungodly shall know to their own loss that thou art the
executioner of my vengeance.

<span id="xv.xvii-p13"></span>This passage ought to be carefully
observed by us, lest by our ingratitude we shall so provoke God’s wrath
against us, as that his word, which is destined for our food, shall be
turned to be a fire to us. For why has God appointed the ministers of
his gospel, except to invite us to become partakers of his salvation,
and thus sweetly to restore and refresh our souls? And thus the word of
God is to us like water to revive our hearts: it is also a fire, but for
our good, a cleansing, and not a consuming fire: but if we obstinately
reject this fire, it will surely turn to answer another end, even to
devour us, and wholly to consume us.

<span id="xv.xvii-p14"></span>But he says that this people would be
*wood:* as the ungodly set up an iron front against God, they think they
can thus drive to a distance his vengeance; the Prophet now laughs to
scorn this madness, and says that they would be like wood or straw. It
follows —

<span id="xv.xviii"></span>

<span id="xv.xviii-p1"></span><span id="xv.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#015.md)<span id="xv.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xviii-p2"></span>**15**. Lo, I will bring a nation upon you
from far, O house of Israel, saith the Lord: it *is* a mighty nation, it
*is* an ancient nation, a nation whose language thou knowest not,
neither understandest what they say.

<span id="xv.xviii-p3"></span>**15**. Ecce ego adduco super vos gentem e
longinquo, domus Israel, dicit Jehova; gentem duram (*hoc est,* quae
dura erit, *quia sequitur* אוה,) gentem quae est e seculo, gentem cujus
non tenebis (*vel,* cognosces) linguam (*nam relativum est* ו) et non
audies quid loquatur.

<span id="xv.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.xviii-p5"></span><span id="xv.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xviii-p6"></span>The Prophet shews here how the people
would become like straw or dry wood; for God would bring a sure calamity
which they did not fear. But the context is to be here observed: the
Prophet had said, that the word in his mouth would be like fire; he now
transfers this to the Assyrians and Chaldeans. Now these things have the
appearance of being inconsistent; but we have already shewn that all the
scourges of God depended on the power of his word: when, therefore, the
city was cut off by the Assyrians and Chaldeans, then the fire from the
mouth of Jeremiah broke forth to destroy the city and the people.

<span id="xv.xviii-p7"></span>In short, Jeremiah intimates, that when
the enemies came, no account was to be made of their strength nor of
their forces, and that they would not bring with them any aids for the
war, but that there would be the execution of what he had said, of what
had proceeded from his mouth; for we shall elsewhere see that he was
sent by God to besiege the city; but with what forces? He was alone and
unarmed; this is true; but this siege was not understood by the wicked
and reprobate, yet it was not without its effect; for as the Prophet
spoke, so God executed what had proceeded from his mouth. We hence see
that the Chaldeans proceeded as it were from the mouth of the Prophet,
like willing enemies, who throw darts to demolish the walls of a city,
who east stones and upset the walls by warlike engines, or like those
who at this day use other warlike machines, by which they demolish
cities. What then are all these instruments of war? They are the fire
which God casts forth by the mouth of his servants; and the truth which
had been declared by them, has accompanying it all those engines of war
which can destroy not only one city and one people, but the whole world,
when it shall so please him.

<span id="xv.xviii-p8"></span>*I bring* then *upon you a nation from
far* We have said elsewhere why the Prophet refers to long distance,
even because the Jews thought that there was no danger nigh them from
nations so remote, as though we were to speak of the Turks at this day,
“Oh! they have to fight with other nations: let those who are near them
contend with the Turks, for we may live three or four ages in
quietness.” We see such indifference prevailing in the present day.
Hence the Prophet, in order to deprive the Jews of this vain confidence,
says that this nation was near at hand, though coming from remote
quarters.

<span id="xv.xviii-p9"></span>He says that they were a *hard,* or a
strong *nation,* and a *nation from antiquity* He means not simply that
it was brave through age, but that it was hard and ferocious; for he
says afterwards that they were all <span
id="xv.xviii-p9.1"></span>גברים, *geberim,* that is, valiant. He then
calls it a hard nation, because it was cruel, and he afterwards mentions
the barbarity of that nation. But he says first that it was *from
antiquity:* for it generates spirits more ferocious, when a nation has
ruled for a long time, and from a period out of memory: this very
antiquity is wont to inflate the minds of men with pride, and to render
them more ferocious. He says then, that it was from *antiquity*

<span id="xv.xviii-p10"></span>He afterwards speaks of its barbarity:
*Thou wilt not,* he says, *understand its language, nor wilt thou hear
what it speaks*  <span id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143.md) By language, we
know, not only words, but also feelings are communicated. Language is
the expression of the mind, as it is commonly said, and it is therefore
the bond of society. Had there been no language, in what would men
differ from brute beasts? One would barbarously treat another; there
would indeed be no humanity among them. As then language conciliates men
one towards another, the Prophet, in order to terrify the Jews, says
that that nation would be barbarous, for there would be no communication
made with it by means of a language. Hence it followed that there would
be no pity to spare the conquered, no, not if they implored a hundred
times; nor could they be heard, who were miserable, and such as might
obtain some favor, if they were understood.

<span id="xv.xix"></span>

<span id="xv.xix-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xv.xix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that though thou
mightest justly condemn us at this day for the gross and wicked impiety,
which thou didst formerly condemn by the mouth of thy Prophet in thine
ancient people, — O grant, that we may not proceed in our obstinacy, but
learn with pliable minds, and in true docility of heart, to submit to
thy word, so that it may not turn to our ruin, but that we may by
experience find it to be appointed for our salvation, so that being
inflamed with a desire for true religion, and also cleansed from the
filth of depraved affections and of carnal lusts, we may devote
ourselves wholly to thy service, until having put off the flesh and all
its filth, we shall at length attain to that perfect purity, which is
set before us in thy gospel, and be made partakers of thy eternal glory
in Christ Jesus our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="xv.xix-p3"></span> 

<span id="xv.xx"></span>

<span id="xv.xx-p1"></span>Lecture Twenty-First

<span id="xv.xxi"></span>

<span id="xv.xxi-p1"></span><span id="xv.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#016.md)<span id="xv.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxi-p2"></span>**16**. Their quiver *is* as an open
sepulchre, they *are* all mighty men.

<span id="xv.xxi-p3"></span>**16**. Pharetra ejus tanquam sepulchrum
apertum; omnes fortes.

<span id="xv.xxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.xxi-p5"></span><span id="xv.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxi-p6"></span>The Prophet had already threatened the Jews
with the vengeance of God, and had said that the ministers and
executioners of it would be the Chaldeans: he now continues the same
subject, and says that their *quiver* would be like an *open sepulcher*
The nations of the East, we know, made much use of arrows and darts, for
they had no pitched battles; but they pretended a flight, and then
suddenly turning, they hurled their darts and arrows against their
enemies. The Prophet then had a regard to this mode of fighting, when he
says that their quivers would be like open sepulchres. It may seem at
first sight an unnatural comparison; but it is the same as though he had
said, that they would be so skillful in throwing arrows as to destroy
all who met them.  <span id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144.md)

<span id="xv.xxi-p8"></span>And he adds, that they would be all
*strong,* that the people might know that it would not be a slight
conflict: in short, it is the same as though he had said, that this war
would be a certain ruin to the Jews, in which they should all perish. He
afterwards adds —

<span id="xv.xxii"></span>

<span id="xv.xxii-p1"></span><span id="xv.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#017.md)<span id="xv.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxii-p2"></span>**17**. And they shall eat up thine
harvest, and thy bread, *which* thy sons and thy daughters should eat:
they shall eat up thy flocks and thine herds: they shall eat up thy
vines and thy fig trees: they shall impoverish thy fenced cities,
wherein thou trustedst, with the sword.

<span id="xv.xxii-p3"></span>**17**. Et vorabit messem tuam et panem
tuum; vorabunt filios tuos et filias tuas; vorabunt greges tuos et
armenta tua; vorabunt vitem tuam et ficum tuam; ad inopiam redigent
urbes munitionum tuarum, in quibus tu confidis, per gladium.

<span id="xv.xxii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.xxii-p5"></span><span id="xv.xxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxii-p6"></span>He continues to speak in a similar way of
the cruelty of their enemies; as though he said that victory was already
in their hand, for they were the scourges of God. He does not then set
before the Jews the troubles of war, but speaks of them as conquered;
and he only shews that the Chaldeans would be cruel in the use they
would make of their victory. He takes it as granted that the Chaldeans
would be conquerors, for they would come armed from above: and he makes
this addition, — that they would act cruelly and in an unusual manner
towards the vanquished Jews.

<span id="xv.xxii-p7"></span>Hence he says, *They will eat* (it will
eat, for he changes the number, though the sense remains the same  <span
id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145) .md) *thine harvest and thy bread;* that
is, all that thou gatherest shall become a prey to thine enemies; for by
harvest and bread he means every kind of provision. Then he adds, *thy
sons and thy daughters,* which was still worse; it is indeed hard to be
deprived of food, but it is still more dreadful for parents to see their
children slain before them. The Prophet however says, that such would be
the barbarity of their enemies, that they would not spare even boys and
girls. He further mentions *herds and flocks;* and then he adds the
*vine* and *the fig-tree;* as though he said, nothing would be safe
among the Jews, for their enemies would plunder everything, and that
being not content with meat and drink, they would kill their very
infants. And further, as the Jews had fortified cities, and were on that
account insolent towards the prophets, their vain pride is here brought
down; for he says, that their *fortified cities* would be reduced to
*poverty;* and he adds, *in which thou trustest* All these, he says,
shall fall by the *sword;* for this last word, <span
id="xv.xxii-p10.2"></span>בחרב, *becherab,* applies to the whole verse,
and to each part of it; as though he had said, “By the right of the
sword shall the conquerors lay waste thy whole country, even all thy
possessions; yea, and they shall slay thy sons and thy daughters.” It
follows —

<span id="xv.xxiii"></span>

<span id="xv.xxiii-p1"></span><span id="xv.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#018.md)<span id="xv.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxiii-p2"></span>**18**. Nevertheless in those days, saith
the Lord, I will not make a full end with you.

<span id="xv.xxiii-p3"></span>**18**. Atque etiam in diebus illis dicit
Jehova, non faciam vobiscum finem (*alii vertunt,* consumptionem.)

<span id="xv.xxiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.xxiii-p5"></span><span id="xv.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxiii-p6"></span>Different views may be taken as to the
meaning of this verse; but the greater part of interpreters think that a
hope is here given to the faithful; yea, nearly all are of this opinion;
indeed I know not any one who takes another view. They then think that
God moderates here what he had previously said, and that he gives some
ground of hope to his servants, lest they should imagine that the Church
would be so reduced as to have no seed remaining: and <span
id="xv.xxiii-p6.1"></span>כלה, *cale,* as it was said yesterday, is
often taken in this sense. But when I now carefully consider the
context, I feel constrained to take another view, even this — that God
here enhances the severity of his vengeance. And the particle <span
id="xv.xxiii-p6.2"></span>גם, *gam*, “also, “or even, favors this view;
as though he had said, “Think not that it will be all over when your
enemies shall thus plunder you of all your possessions, deprive you of
your children, and reduce you to extreme want; for ye shall not by any
means be thus freed from all evils, as I shall pursue my vengeance still
further.” There will hereafter follow promises to moderate threatenings,
that the hearts of the faithful may not despond: but in this place the
Prophet, I have no doubt, introduces God as a Judge, executing
vengeance, as though there was no place for mercy.

<span id="xv.xxiii-p7"></span>Then *also,* he says; for the particle
<span id="xv.xxiii-p7.1"></span>גם, *gam*, is inhansive and emphatic;
Then *also, in those days;* that is, “When your enemies shall strip your
land of its produce, and of all its animals, and of its inhabitants, I
shall not even then cease to pursue you: *I will not make an end with
you*, for there will still remain scourges, when ye shall think that
rest is given to you, and that the end of evils and of all calamities
had come.” In this manner is God wont to deal with the impenitent; for
such is their perverseness, that being smitten they become more and more
hardened, and champ the bit, according to the old proverb. And hence is
their hardness, because they think that God is, as it were, disarmed
when he has punished them for their sins. He therefore declares that he
has in his power different kinds of punishment and different ways of
punishing.  <span id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146.md) And to the same
purpose is what follows —

<span id="xv.xxiv"></span>

<span id="xv.xxiv-p1"></span><span id="xv.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#019.md)<span id="xv.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxiv-p2"></span>**19**. And it shall come to pass, when ye
shall say, Wherefore doeth the Lord our God all these *things* unto us?
then shalt thou answer them, Like as ye have forsaken me, and served
strange gods in your land, so shall ye serve strangers in a land *that
is* not yours.

<span id="xv.xxiv-p3"></span>**19**. Et erit quum dixeritis, Quare fecit
Jehova Deus noster nobis omnia haec? Tunc dices illis, Sicuti
dereliquistis me et serviistis diis alienorum (alieni, ad verbum, sed
est enallage numeri) in terra vestra; sic servietis alienis (subaudiunt
alii interpretes deos, sed pervertunt sensum Prophetae) in terra non
vobis (hoc est, in terra quae non erit vestra.)

<span id="xv.xxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.xxiv-p5"></span><span id="xv.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxiv-p6"></span>It hence appears that what I have said is
true, — that the Prophet did not soften what was severe in the
threatenings which we have noticed, but that he treated the Jews
according to their perverseness; for he saw that they were untamable;
and the Spirit had taught him that such would be their obstinacy, that
until they were wholly broken down, they would not bend their necks to
receive the yoke. He further assigns the cause here, that they might not
contend with God, as hypocrites are wont to do, whenever God sharply
chastises them; for they murmur against him, and complain and demand
reasons why he treats them so severely, as though they were wholly
innocent. As, then, hypocrites made such complaints, the Prophet here
replies to them.

<span id="xv.xxiv-p7"></span>*It shall be,* he says, *when ye shall
say:* he addresses the Jews in the person of God. He then immediately
turns God’s address to himself, *Why has Jehovah our God done to us all
these things?* He ascribes here to hypocrites what is ever in their
mouths whenever they are summoned to judgment; for they are so well
prepared to contend, as though their cause was the best that could be;
and, could God be constrained to render an account, they would prove him
guilty of cruelty and of immoderate rigor. We hence see how graphically
the Prophet describes refractory men, who will not yield nor acknowledge
their fault, but with an iron front rise up against God: and the same
thing we find in other passages in the prophets, especially in the first
chapter of Malachi; for there the Prophet often repeats the words of the
people, “In what? In what? What means this?” So also here Jeremiah says,
*When ye shall say, Why has Jehovah done all these things to us?* as
though they were innocent: for the reprobate, as though they had washed
away all their sins by having wiped their mouths, boldly come forth and
demand a reason why God chastises them. So also in this place they
hesitate not to call God their God, as though they had not denied God,
according to what we have seen yesterday. For so gross an impiety
prevailed among them, that they imagined that all things were ruled by
chance, and that God unjustly punished them. Though then they had
perfidiously forsaken God, yet the Prophet here, in order to expose
their petulancy, introduces them here as saying that they regarded God
as connected with them.

<span id="xv.xxiv-p8"></span>*Then,* he says, *thou shalt say* God one
while addresses the people, and at another time the Prophet. When,
therefore, they shall begin thus to murmur, then thou mayest reply,
*Because ye have forsaken me* That what was said might have more weight,
God would have the Prophet to speak in his name, “because ye have
forsaken me, “as though Jeremiah did not himself say the words, but God
by his mouth; *and have served the gods of the alien,* that is, of
aliens, *in your land* God shews here briefly what the Jews deserved;
and he thought it sufficient to mention one kind of sin only. We shall
see elsewhere, as we have often seen, that they were in other respects
wicked and guilty before God. But the Prophet observes brevity here, and
charges them only with one sort of sin. *Ye shall serve tyrants,* he
says, *in a strange land,* who shall cruelly oppress you, *because ye
have served* their *gods in your own land*

<span id="xv.xxiv-p9"></span>God reproves them here for having abused
his kindness; for he had expelled the heathen nations from Canaan, and
gave that land, which was so pleasant and fruitful, as an inheritance to
them, so as to be to them a perpetual rest. God called the land his own
rest, because he protected the Jews there, and appointed them as the
legitimate heirs of the land even to the end of the world. Hence he says
now, *your land* The reminding them of this kindness was doubtless
intended to amplify their guilt; for they possessed the land by the best
title, though they had not acquired it themselves.

<span id="xv.xxiv-p10"></span>*In your land,* he says, *ye worshipped
gods;* he does not say, “strange gods, “but “the gods of the stranger,
“or of strangers. The prophets often speak thus; they call them the gods
of the strangers, or of strange people: but the expression is
emphatical; for it was very base and less excusable for the Jews, while
they had God dwelling among them, to seek gods here and there, and as it
were to entreat heathens for gods, and say, “Give us your gods.” It was
then this base conduct that the Prophet now points out as with the
finger, *Because ye have served the gods of strangers.*

<span id="xv.xxiv-p11"></span>He afterwards adds, *Ye shall serve
strangers;* he does not mean, as I think, strange gods; and it seems to
me that those who introduce “gods” here, pervert the meaning.  <span
id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147.md) He speaks of tyrants, according to
what is said elsewhere,

<span id="xv.xxiv-p13"></span>“I had given you my good laws, which if
any one keeps he shall live in them; and ye would not obey: I will
therefore give you laws which are not good,” (<span
id="xv.xxiv-p13.1"></span>[Ezek.
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#021.md),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#025)<span id="xv.xxiv-p13.1"></span>:.md)

<span id="xv.xxiv-p14"></span>that is, “I will lay on you a tyrannical
yoke, and conquerors, and those barbarians whose language shall be
unknown to you, shall plunder you and your possessions, because ye have
been disobedient and unteachable.” It follows —

<span id="xv.xxv"></span>

<span id="xv.xxv-p1"></span><span id="xv.xxv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
5:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#020.md)<span id="xv.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxv-p2"></span>**20**. Declare this in the house of Jacob,
and publish it in Judah, saying,

<span id="xv.xxv-p3"></span>**20**. Nuntiate hoc in domo Jacob, et
promulgate (*ad verbum,* audire facite) in Jehudah, dicendo,

<span id="xv.xxv-p4"></span>**21.** Hear now this, O foolish people, and
without understanding; which have eyes, and see not; which have ears,
and hear not:

<span id="xv.xxv-p5"></span>**21**. Audite agedum hoc, popule stulte et
absque corde; oculi illis, et non vident; aures illis, et non audiunt
(et non audient, *ad verbum.*)

<span id="xv.xxv-p6"></span> 

<span id="xv.xxv-p7"></span><span id="xv.xxv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxv-p8"></span>The Prophet confirms what he had said, lest
the Jews should think that they were only terrified by words, and not
dread the consequences. Hence he says, *Declare this* The Prophet, no
doubt, alludes to a custom which prevailed; for wars were usually
proclaimed by heralds. Enemies did not immediately march forth, but they
proclaimed war that the cause might appear just. Hence God here
declares, that he had spoken in earnest by the mouth of Jeremiah, as
though war had been in the usual manner proclaimed, and armed enemies
were already nigh at hand.

<span id="xv.xxv-p9"></span><span id="xv.xxv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxv-p10"></span>*Declare ye* then *this;* and what is it?
*Hear, O foolish people,* etc. Here he first reproves the Jews and
Israelites for their stupidity, because they were even without common
sense; for the heart in Hebrew means the mind or understanding, as we
have seen elsewhere. He then says, that this people were destitute of
all understanding. He first calls them *fatuous* or foolish; but as many
are slow and heavy and yet not without common sense, he adds that they
were a people *without heart* or understanding. He seems indeed to add
by way of correction, that they had eyes and ears: but his object was
ironically to enhance what he had said, and to shew that they were
stupid, and no less so than blocks of wood or stones. How so? “Ye have
ears and eyes, “he says, “but ye neither see nor hear.”  <span
id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148.md)

<span id="xv.xxv-p14"></span>He no doubt alludes to the idols to which
they had become devoted: for it is said in <span
id="xv.xxv-p14.1"></span>[Ps
115:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#008.md)<span id="xv.xxv-p14.1"></span>,
that those who made idols were like them, as well as those who trusted
in them; for it had been previously said, that idols had ears but heard
not, and eyes but saw not. Jeremiah then indirectly condemns the Jews
here for having become so stupid in their superstitions as to be like
dead idols: for there is in an idol some likeness to man; it has various
members but no understanding. So also he says, the Jews had eyes and
ears and the external form of men; but they were at the same time no
less stupid than if they were stones or blocks of wood. Now follows the
proclamation —

<span id="xv.xxvi"></span>

<span id="xv.xxvi-p1"></span><span id="xv.xxvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#022.md)<span id="xv.xxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxvi-p2"></span>**22**. Fear ye not me? saith the Lord:
will ye not tremble at my presence, which have placed the sand *for* the
bound of the sea by a perpetual decree, that it cannot pass it: and
though the waves thereof toss themselves, yet can they not prevail;
though they roar, yet can they not pass over it?

<span id="xv.xxvi-p3"></span>**22**. An me non timebitis, dicit Jehova?
an a facie mea non contremiscetis? Qui posui arenam terminum mari,
statutum seculi aeternum, et non praeteribit illud (*vel,* terminum
illud; *quidam enim ad proximum referunt, alii ad prius,)* et movebunt
se et non praevalebunt, et tumultuabuntur (*vel,* resonabunt) fluctus
ejus (*istud* <span id="xv.xxvi-p3.1"></span>גליו *extendunt ad duo
verba,)* et non transgredientur ipsum (non transilient, *est idem verbum
quod paulo ante usurpavit.*)

<span id="xv.xxvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.xxvi-p5"></span><span id="xv.xxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxvi-p6"></span>God shews here why he had said that the
people were foolish and without understanding. It was indeed a monstrous
stupidity, not to fear at the presence of God, since even inanimate
elements obey his bidding: and he takes the sea especially as an
example; for there is nothing more terrific than a tempestuous sea. It
appears as if it would overwhelm the whole world, when its waves swell
with so much violence. No one can in this case do otherwise than
tremble. But the sea itself, which makes the stoutest to tremble,
quietly obeys God; for however furious may be its tossings, they are yet
under restraint. Now, if any inquires how this is, it must be confessed
to be a miracle which cannot be accounted for; for the sea, we know, as
other elements, is spherical. As the earth is round, so also is the
element of water, as well as the air and fire. Since then the form of
this element is spherical, we must know that it is not lower than the
earth: but it being lighter than the earth shews that it stands above
it. How then comes it that the sea does not overflow the whole earth?
for it is a liquid, and cannot stand in one place, except retained by
some secret power of God. It hence follows, that the sea is confined to
its own place, because of God’s appointment, according to what is said
by Moses,

<span id="xv.xxvi-p7"></span>“Let the dry land,” said God, “appear,”
(<span id="xv.xxvi-p7.1"></span>[Ge
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#009)<span id="xv.xxvi-p7.1"></span>:.md)

<span id="xv.xxvi-p8"></span>for he intimates that the earth was covered
with water, and no part of it appeared, until God formed the sea. Now
the word of God, though it is not heard by us, nor resounds in the air,
is yet heard by the sea; for the sea is confined within its own limits.
Were the sea tranquil, it would still be a wonderful work of God, as he
has given the earth to be the habitation of men: but when it is moved,
as I have said, by a tempest, and heaven and earth seem to blend
together, there is no one, being nigh such a sight, who does not feel
dread. Hence then the power of God, and his dread might, appear more
evident when he calms the turbulent sea.

<span id="xv.xxvi-p9"></span>We now see the scope of the Prophet’s
words: He shews that the Jews were monsters, and unworthy not only to be
counted men, but even to be classed with brute animals; for there was
more sense and understanding in the tempestuous and raging sea than in
men, who seemed endued with reason and understanding. This is the design
of the comparison.

<span id="xv.xxvi-p10"></span>But as it was a heavy complaint, the
Prophet asks a question, *Will ye not fear me?* As though God had said,
“What do you mean? How is it that I am not feared by you? The sea obeys
me, and its fury is checked by my secret bidding; for I have once for
all commanded the sea to remain within its own limits, and though it may
be violently agitated by storms and tempests, it does not yet exceed my
orders. Will not you men, endowed with reason, fear me? will you not
tremble at my presence?” And he says, that he had *set the sand* to be
*the boundary of the sea:* and this is much more expressive than if he
had said that he had set boundaries to the sea; for the sand is movable
and driven by a small breath of wind, and the sand is also penetrable.
Were there rocks along all the shores of the sea, it would not be so
wonderful. Had God then restrained the violence of the sea by firm and
strong mounds, the keeping of it within its limits might be ascribed to
nature; but what firmness is there in sand? for a little water thrown on
it will soon penetrate through it. How then is it, that the sea, when
tossed by violent storms, does not remove the sand, which is so easily
shifted? We hence see that this word is not in vain introduced. And
there is a similar passage in <span id="xv.xxvi-p10.1"></span>[Job
38:11](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#011.md)<span id="xv.xxvi-p10.1"></span>,
where God, speaking of his infinite power, says among other things,

<span id="xv.xxvi-p11"></span>“Hitherto shalt thou come, but no
further:”

<span id="xv.xxvi-p12"></span>for doubtless no storm arises, except when
it pleases God. He might indeed keep the sea in the same quiet state;
but he does not do so: on the contrary, he gives it as it were loose
reins, but he says, “Hitherto shall it come.” When therefore high
mountains seem to threaten all mortals, and the earth seems nigh an
overthrow, then suddenly the impetuous waves are repressed and become
calm.

<span id="xv.xxvi-p13"></span>And he adds, *A perpetual ordinance* It is
indeed true that the sea sometimes overflows its limits; for many
cities, we know, have been swallowed up by a flood; but still it is
rightly said, that it is a *perpetual ordinance* or decree, that God
confines the sea within its own limits. For whenever the sea overflows a
small portion of land, we hence learn what it might do without that
restraint, mentioned here by Jeremiah and in the book of Job. We hence
learn, that there is nothing to hinder the sea from overflowing the
whole earth, but the command of God which it obeys. In the mean time the
perpetuity of which the Prophet speaks remains generally the same: for
though many storms arise every year, yet the fury of the sea is still
quieted, but not otherwise than by the command of God. True then is this
— that the sea has prescribed limits, over which its waves are not
permitted to pass. And hence he says, *Move themselves and not prevail
shall its waves;* and again, *Resound,* or tumultuate *shall they, and
shall not pass over*  <span id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149.md)

<span id="xv.xxvi-p17"></span>We now apprehend the design of this verse:
God complains, that there was so much madness and stupidity in the
people, that they did not obey him as much as the sea, even the stormy
sea. He then condemns here the Jews, as though they were monsters; for
nothing can be more contrary to nature than for the tempestuous sea to
have more understanding than man, created in God’s image and endued with
reason. He then adds —

<span id="xv.xxvii"></span>

<span id="xv.xxvii-p1"></span><span id="xv.xxvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#023.md)<span id="xv.xxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxvii-p2"></span>**23**. But this people hath a revolting
and a rebellious heart; they are revolted and gone.

<span id="xv.xxvii-p3"></span>**23**. Atqui populo huic fuit cor
perversum et rebelle; deflexerunt et abierunt

<span id="xv.xxvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.xxvii-p5"></span><span id="xv.xxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxvii-p6"></span>Here the previous verse is completed; for
what is said here is connected with the question which we have noticed.
But God now proves more clearly why he adduced what he said of the sea.
The copulative <span id="xv.xxvii-p6.1"></span>ו*, vau,* is to be taken
here as an adversative, and to be thus rendered, *But this people have a
perverse heart:* for <span id="xv.xxvii-p6.2"></span>סורר*, surer,*
means “*perverse;*” some render it “*revolting, “*but improperly; for it
appears from many other passages that it is something more: besides, the
other meaning is more suitable to the context here; for he says first,
that the people had a *perverse heart;*  <span
id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150.md) and then, that they had a *rebellious*
or an untamable heart. He no doubt compares the obstinacy with the
obedience of the sea, or sets one in contrast with the other, and
conveys simply this truth, that there was more fury and stupidity in
that people than in the raging sea.

<span id="xv.xxvii-p10"></span>And he proves that the people had a
perverse heart by the effect; for they had *fallen away and departed*
Had he said only that they had fallen away, the proof would not have
been so complete; but by adding “departed, “he points out their
obstinacy; as though he had said, that their corruption was permanent,
like settled diseases, which can be healed by no remedies. *They have
then fallen away and departed;* that is, “I could not bring them back.”
God had indeed often tried by his servants to restore them to a right
course; but their perverseness only discovered itself more and more, and
shewed itself to be irreclaimable; for they *departed,* so that there
was no prospect of repentance. It follows —

<span id="xv.xxviii"></span>

<span id="xv.xxviii-p1"></span><span
id="xv.xxviii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#024.md)<span id="xv.xxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxviii-p2"></span>**24**. Neither say they in their heart,
Let us now fear the LORD our God, that giveth rain, both the former and
the latter, in his season: he reserveth unto us the appointed weeks of
the harvest.

<span id="xv.xxviii-p3"></span>**24**. Et non dixerunt in corde suo,
Timeamus agedum Jehovam, Deum nostrum, qui dat pluviam et imbrem
matutinum et serotinum (*diximus de his verbis alibi*) tempore suo;
hebdomadas perpetuas messis (*hoc est,* ad messem) custodit nobis.

<span id="xv.xxviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.xxviii-p5"></span><span id="xv.xxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxviii-p6"></span>The Prophet in other words proves here
that the *Jews* had been justly charged with perverseness: he says, that
it did not come to their minds, that they did not think, to fear God. We
hence see that all that is said is designed to shew, that the people
were no less senseless and stupid, than if they were lifeless elements;
nay, that there was more stupidity and more furious madness in their
hearts than in any created thing.

<span id="xv.xxviii-p7"></span>To *say in the heart* means in Hebrew to
weigh, to consider. We should say in Latin, “It did not come to their
minds,” (*non venit illis in mentem;*) that is, “Have they not been so
void of common sense, that this thought did not come to their minds, or
did not occur to them, *Let us fear the Lord?*” And here he takes away
every pretense of ignorance, that they might not object and say, that
they did not worship God through error or want of knowledge: “But ye had
eyes,” he says, and ye had ears, and all the faculties belonging to men;
God gave you rain; there has been no year in which the earth did not
bring forth its fruit for you; when ye eat bread, does not the bounty of
God occur to your minds? and yet ye consider not that he ought to be
worshipped.” We hence see that he takes away every excuse for their
ingratitude by saying, that they had been inattentive to those
blessings, which were seen by the eyes, and felt by the hands, and
touched by every part of the body. But of the rest we must speak
to-morrow.

<span id="xv.xxix"></span>

<span id="xv.xxix-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xv.xxix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou daily
invitest us to thyself with so much kindness and benevolence, and since
thy word continually sounds in our ears, — O grant, that we may not
become deaf through the depravity of our flesh, but be attentive to hear
the doctrine of salvation, and become so teachable and obedient, that we
may be willing to be turned wherever thou pleasest, and to be guided in
the way thou pointest out to us, until we shall at length reach that
blessed rest, which has been prepared for us in heaven by Jesus Christ
our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="xv.xxx"></span>

<span id="xv.xxx-p1"></span>Lecture Twenty-Second

<span id="xv.xxx-p2"></span>Yesterday was exhibited the senselessness of
those who were not induced by God’s blessings to serve him. The Prophet
indeed mentioned the benefits which God usually bestows on the good and
the bad without distinction, — that he gives rain and spring and autumn,
and so regulates all the year as to ripen all the fruit; for by the
*appointed weeks* he only means, that God so arranges the different
parts of the year, that what men sow comes to maturity; and the word
*reserve,* or keep, is intended to shew the same thing. For it is the
same as though he had said, “The seasons through the whole year are so
changed, that there is a regular succession of suitable weather
preserved.”

<span id="xv.xxx-p3"></span>We now then understand the Prophet’s object:
He shews that the Jews had been extremely thoughtless; for they did not
regard the paternal favor of God as to their daily food, so as to be
thereby moved to worship and serve Him. Paul, also, when addressing
heathens, adduced this reason,

<span id="xv.xxx-p4"></span>“God,” he says, “never left himself <span
id="xv.xxx-p4.1"></span>ἀμάρτυρον, without a testimony; for he gave rain
and fruitful seasons,”  
(<span id="xv.xxx-p4.3"></span>[Ac
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#017)<span id="xv.xxx-p4.3"></span>.md)

<span id="xv.xxx-p5"></span>that is, he so arranged the seasons, that
the care he takes of mankind may be thus seen as in a mirror. But it was
the Prophet’s object here to condemn the Jews for their ingratitude,
because they did not consider how bountifully God had ever dealt with
them and beyond what was common. For he had not only in an ordinary way
allured them to himself by his benefits; but his object had been to
attach them to himself by singular and unusual means. Since then he had
shewn to them singular favors, the more base was their ingratitude; for
they did not consider, that the many benefits which God conferred on
them, were so many motives or allurements, by which he bound them as it
were to himself.

<span id="xv.xxx-p6"></span>We now then see the Prophet’s meaning, when
he says, *They have not said, “Let us fear Jehovah, who gives us rain;*
that is, the vernal rain and the rain that precedes the harvest, and
that also *in its season* For hence God’s providence shines forth,
because the rain follows when the husbandmen have sown; and it supplies
the earth with moisture; and then before the fruit ripens, God renders
it plump by latter rain. And for the same purpose is added this, *Who
reserves the appointed weeks,* (literally, the weeks of ordinances;) and
he says, that they are the weeks of *the harvest*  <span
id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151.md) It now follows —

<span id="xv.xxxi"></span>

<span id="xv.xxxi-p1"></span><span id="xv.xxxi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#025.md)<span id="xv.xxxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxxi-p2"></span>**25**. Your iniquities have turned away
these *things*, and your sins have withholden good *things* from you.

<span id="xv.xxxi-p3"></span>**25**. Iniquitates vestrae averterunt
haec, et scelera vestra prohibuerunt bonum a vobis.

<span id="xv.xxxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.xxxi-p5"></span><span id="xv.xxxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxxi-p6"></span>Inasmuch as hypocrites, according to what
has been said before, often reply to God, and bring this and that
objection, the Prophet here checks what they might have alleged; for he
says that God’s beneficence had been restrained by them, and that it was
indeed their fault that it did not flow to them. For they might have
thus objected, “Thou indeed preachest well respecting God’s paternal
bounty, because he supplies us with food; but the heat at one time burns
our corn, the unseasonable rains at another time destroy our provisions:
in a word, there is nothing certain, but all things are in a state of
disorder.” That he might therefore obviate this objection, he says, that
it was on account of their wickedness and depravity, that God did not so
regulate every part of the year as to allow them to see with their eyes
his continued bounty.

<span id="xv.xxxi-p7"></span>This passage is worthy of special notice:
for God’s paternal favor does not so continually shine forth in our
daily sustenance, but that many clouds intercept our view. Hence it is,
that ungodly men think that the years are now barren and then fruitful
through mere chance. We indeed see nothing so regulated in every respect
in the world, that the goodness of God can be seen without clouds and
obstructions: but we do not consider whence this confusion proceeds,
even because we obstruct God’s access to us, so that his beneficence
does not reach us. We throw heaven and earth into confusion by our sins.
For were we in right order as to our obedience to God, doubtless all the
elements would be conformable, and we should thus observe in the world
an angelic harmony. But as our lusts tumultuate against God; nay, as we
stir up war daily, and provoke him by our pride, perverseness, and
obstinacy, it must needs be, that all things, above and below, should be
in disorder, that the heavens should at one time appear cloudy, and that
continuous rains should at another time destroy the produce of the
earth, and that nothing should be unmixed and unstained in the world.
This confusion then, in all the elements, is to be ascribed to our sins:
and this is what is meant by the Prophet. Though indeed the reproof was
then addressed to the Jews, we may yet gather hence a lesson of general
instruction.

<span id="xv.xxxi-p8"></span>These two things are then both true, — that
God is not without a testimony as to his beneficence, for he gives rain,
he gives suitable seasons, he renders the earth fruitful, so as to
supply us with food, — and also, that heaven and earth are often in
great disorder, that many things happen unseasonably, as though God had
no care for us, because we provoke him by our sins, and thus confound
and subvert the order of nature. These two things then ought to be
viewed as connected together: for in the ordinary course of nature we
may see the inconceivable bounty of God towards mankind; but as to
accidental evils, the cause ought to be considered, even this — because
we do not allow God to govern the world in a regular and consistent
order, but as far as we can we disturb and confound his providence. We
hence see how suitably the Prophet has added this truth — that the
*iniquities* of the people had turned away the beneficence of God.
 <span id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152.md) It afterwards follows —

<span id="xv.xxxii"></span>

<span id="xv.xxxii-p1"></span><span id="xv.xxxii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#026.md)<span id="xv.xxxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxxii-p2"></span>**26**. For among my people are found
wicked *men*: they lay wait, as he that setteth snares; they set a trap,
they catch men.

<span id="xv.xxxii-p3"></span>**26**. Quia inventi sunt (*aut*,
inveniuntur) in populo meo scelerati; aspicient (*hoc* *est,* astute
observabunt) secundum ponere laqueos (*hoc est,* ac si decipulas
tenderent;) perditionem locant, in qua homines capiant.

<span id="xv.xxxii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.xxxii-p5"></span><span id="xv.xxxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxxii-p6"></span>What the previous verse contains is here
confirmed, — that the Jews, through their own fault, had deprived
themselves of God’s favor. It was necessary to do this; for otherwise
they would have had some answer to give, inasmuch as hypocrites, being
so perverse, do not easily yield. Hence the Prophet confirms what he had
said, — that there were *wicked* men among God’s people. But this ought
not to be confined to some among them, as it is done by interpreters,
who seem not to explain quite correctly what the Prophet meant. For he
does not reprove or condemn some only; but he says that the people, whom
God had chosen, were *wicked* It is then a general condemnation of the
whole people, when he says, that there were *found wicked* men among
God’s people; as though he had said, “The wicked are not to be sought
among heathens, but iniquity so reigns among the elect people, that
there is in them nothing sound, nothing pure.”

<span id="xv.xxxii-p7"></span>When he says *found,* I understand his
meaning to be, found guilty, or convicted: for he means that their sins
were not secret, so that they could escape by evasions; but he says that
they were found, as thieves are found, according to a common saying, in
the very act of stealing. The Prophet then intimates that there was no
need of long dispute, as though the Jews could find out some excuse, for
they were manifestly guilty. But it was much more disgraceful that they
should be found wicked, than that the blind and unbelieving should be
found so; for God had adopted them as his people on this condition —
that holiness and purity of life should prevail among them. Since then
they were not only sinners, but <span id="xv.xxxii-p7.1"></span>רשעים,
*reshoim,* wholly impious and wicked, it was, as I have said, a far more
atrocious thing. And thus he takes away from them every pretense for
evasion.

<span id="xv.xxxii-p8"></span>He afterwards urges still farther his
charge, and says, that *every one looked,* or espied, for this is the
meaning of the verb <span id="xv.xxxii-p8.1"></span>שור, *shur.* He
indeed changes the number, but the sense is not rendered thereby more
obscure: and to look here, is to lie in wait. Then *look,* or lie in
wait, did every one, as though they were laying snares as fowlers do. He
then says, that they were furnished with *snares,* by which they dragged
men into destruction, after having caught them.  <span
id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153.md) What is particular is here mentioned
for what is general: for the Prophet meant to shew that there was then
no faithfulness nor integrity among the people, for every one by frauds
and wicked crafts oppressed the simple. Since then they were so
perfidious one towards another, he fitly compares them to fowlers, who
by their snares entrap the simple birds: but he explains this more
clearly in what follows —

<span id="xv.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="xv.xxxiii-p1"></span><span
id="xv.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#027.md)<span id="xv.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxxiii-p2"></span>**27**. As a cage is full of birds, so
*are* their houses full of deceit: therefore they are become great, and
waxen rich.

<span id="xv.xxxiii-p3"></span>**27**. Sicuti cavea plena est ave (*hoc
est,* avibus,) sic domus eorum plenae sunt fraude: propterea aucti sunt
et ditati.

<span id="xv.xxxiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.xxxiii-p5"></span><span id="xv.xxxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxxiii-p6"></span>Jeremiah goes on with the same subject.
He made use, as we have said, of a similitude taken from fowling: he now
applies this similitude to the Jews, — that *their houses* were *full of
fraud, as the cage* (some render it basket  <span
id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154) .md) *is full of birds:* for fowlers,
when they go for game, carry with them either bags or cages or baskets.
So then Jeremiah says, that they collected plunder on every side, so
that their houses were full of frauds: but by *fraud* he means spoils,
which they acquired by unjust means. It may at the first view seem an
obscure language; but if we take the word <span
id="xv.xxxiii-p9.1"></span>מרמה, *mereme,* in a passive sense, there
will be nothing ambiguous. The Prophet then does not use a language
strictly correct when he says, that their houses were full of deceit or
fraud; but they were full of spoils which they had acquired by deceit
and fraud. Hence, what he means by fraud were the plunders by which they
had become rich, as he afterwards explains.

<span id="xv.xxxiii-p10"></span>We now perceive, that the meaning of the
Prophet is, — that there was no longer a proof required, that the Jews
circumvented the helpless and the poor, for their houses were filled
with such spoils as made evident their wickedness: they had scraped
together their riches by depriving the helpless and the poor of their
substance. And hence he adds, *By this have they increased and become
rich* It is probable that they gloried in their wealth, like thieves,
whose trade is to plunder: for when they increased, they thought
themselves raised above all danger. They were like courtiers, who by
rapines and frauds and tyrannical violence, draw to themselves from all
quarters the possessions of others, so that one got annually sixty
thousands and another a hundred thousands; and then they became the more
ferocious, because they thought that they could not be called to an
account, being blinded by the splendor of their riches. But the Prophet
here derides this besotted glorying, and says, “Behold, they are become
great in the world, and they would have themselves to be on this account
exalted;” *increased have they,* he says, *and become rich;* that is,
“If any one will now search their houses, he will indeed find many
things by which they make a display before the eyes of the simple; but
they are nothing but rapines, plunders, frauds, spoils, thefts, and, in
a word, robberies.” This is what he simply means. He afterwards adds —

<span id="xv.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="xv.xxxiv-p1"></span><span id="xv.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#028.md)<span id="xv.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxxiv-p2"></span>**28**. They are waxen fat, they shine:
yea, they overpass the deeds of the wicked: they judge not the cause,
the cause of the fatherless, yet they prosper; and the right of the
needy do they not judge.

<span id="xv.xxxiv-p3"></span>**28**. Impinguati sunt (*nam* <span
id="xv.xxxiv-p3.1"></span> שמנו*deducitur ab oleo,* perfusi sunt
pinguedine, *si Latine et proprie reddere velimus,)* postea nitent
(*vel,* sunt candidi, *alludit ad pingues et bene saginatos, quorum
cutis est nitida;*) etiam excedunt (*vel,* quamvis excesserint) verba
impii (*hoc est,* scelera impiorum:) causam non judicant, causam
pupilli, et prosperantur; et judicium pauperum non judicant.

<span id="xv.xxxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.xxxiv-p5"></span><span id="xv.xxxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxxiv-p6"></span>Here the Prophet reproves those who were
high in dignity, station, and wealth, and who wished at the same time to
be deemed inviolable, because they were the rulers of the people. He had
spoken before generally, but now he assails the higher orders, the
king’s counselors, the priests, the judges, and all endowed with
authority. He says, that they were swoln with *fatness,* that they were
*shining,* though they had *exceeded,* etc We see how he confirms what
he had briefly referred to; for as they protected themselves under the
pretense of being rich, that they might not be called to an account, he
says, by way of concession, “I allow that ye are bright and splendid,
and indeed that ye are all over gold; but whence is this splendor?
whence is this specious appearance, which dazzles the eyes of the
simple? Ye are bright, ye are fat, though ye have surpassed the words of
the impious, that is, the ways, the doings, and the designs of the
impious.” He means, in short, that it was of no avail to the wicked,
that by their aspect they terrified people, that they gained great
respect by their riches, and made men afraid of them: the Prophet admits
that they had honors, wealth, splendor, repute, dignity, and such
things; but he says, at the same time, Ye *have surpassed all the doings
of the wicked*  <span id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155.md) And then he
brings this charge against them, that they did not *judge judgment*

<span id="xv.xxxiv-p12"></span>It hence appears that the Prophet was not
dealing with the common people nor with private individuals; but that he
openly and avowedly reproved the king’s court and the judges. “They
judge not judgment, “he says; which means, that they had no care for
executing justice, but suffered thefts and robberies to go unpunished:
and he still enhances their guilt and says, *They judge not the judgment
of the fatherless* Pity towards young orphans is often found in those
who are otherwise cruel; for that age, especially when deprived of all
protection, touches our feelings in a peculiar manner. Since then young
orphans were plundered with impunity, and found no defense from the
judges, their dishonesty appeared most glaringly.

<span id="xv.xxxiv-p13"></span>And he says, that they yet *prospered.*
He again repeats, by way of concession, what he had before intimated, —
that it was a foolish and vain pretense, that they openly boasted of
their wealth, honors, and fortunes. How is this, he says? *They prosper;
but yet they judge not the judgment of the poor,* that is, they help not
the poor, but dissemble and connive at all the wrongs done to them. We
now then see that he exposes to view the wickedness of the people, so
that not even the principal men should be able to hide themselves; for
the Lord shews that they had wholly neglected their duties, and were
even destitute of all humanity. It afterwards follows —

<span id="xv.xxxv"></span>

<span id="xv.xxxv-p1"></span><span id="xv.xxxv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#029.md)<span id="xv.xxxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxxv-p2"></span>**29**. Shall I not visit for these
*things*? saith the Lord: shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation
as this?

<span id="xv.xxxv-p3"></span>**29**. An super hoc non visitabo dicit
Jehova? an in gente quae talis est, non se ulciscetur anima mea?

<span id="xv.xxxv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.xxxv-p5"></span><span id="xv.xxxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxxv-p6"></span>He repeats what we have before noticed, so
there is no need of an explanation. But the repetition is not without
its use; for the Jews had become so torpid, that all reproofs and
threatenings were regarded with indifference. Hence God rouses them with
great vehemence, *Shall I not,* he says, *visit for these things?* He
takes it for granted, that we ought to be fully persuaded, that he is
the judge of the world. It is the proper office of a judge to punish the
wicked, and also to relieve the helpless and the oppressed, and to check
the audacity of those who allow themselves every liberty. God then
reasons here from his own nature and office, as though he had said,
“Since I am God, can I suffer so much impiety and wantonness to prevail
unpunished among my people?” Then he adds —

<span id="xv.xxxv-p7"></span>On such a nation as this, shall not avenged
be my soul?

<span id="xv.xxxv-p8"></span>God transfers here to himself, as we have
said elsewhere, what does not strictly belong to him; but it is the same
as though he had said, “There is no one among earthly judges so void of
feeling as to bear such indignities; for when the judge sees that he is
treated with contempt by the wicked, is he not provoked?” *Avenged then
shall be my soul;* as though he said, that he is not so soft, or so
slothful, or so careless, as not to take vengeance on such wanton
contempt. It follows —

<span id="xv.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="xv.xxxvi-p1"></span><span id="xv.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
5:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#030.md)<span
id="xv.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxxvi-p2"></span>**30**. A wonderful and horrible thing is
committed in the land;

<span id="xv.xxxvi-p3"></span>**30**. Stupor (*vel,* res stupenda) et
foeditas in terra (*vel,* res pudenda; <span
id="xv.xxxvi-p3.1"></span>שער, *unde nomen deductum est, significat
proprie cogitare vel reputare; sed videtur per antiphrasin Deus hoc
loco, ut aliis quibusdam, notare rem prodigiosam, quae non cadit sub
sensum humanum, quasi diceret hoc non posse concipi neque apprehendi
hominis mente; scio hoc posse videri novum, sed tamen subest optima
ratio, ut mihi videtur. Postea addit.*)

<span id="xv.xxxvi-p4"></span>**31**. The prophets prophesy falsely, and
the priests bear rule by their means; and my people love *to have it*
so: and what will ye do in the end thereof?

<span id="xv.xxxvi-p5"></span>**31**. Prophetae prophetant in mendacio,
et sacerdotes dominantur per manum ipsorum (*vel,* accipiunt in manus
suas,) et populus meus voluit ita (*hoc est,* ita vult et appetit:) et
quid facietis in novissimo ejus?

<span id="xv.xxxvi-p6"></span> 

<span id="xv.xxxvi-p7"></span><span id="xv.xxxvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxxvi-p8"></span>The Prophet, being not satisfied with the
reproof which we have observed, speaks still more strongly against the
wickedness of the people. He then says, that so deplorable was their
state as to make all to feel amazed. *A stupendous thing,* he says, has
happened, which exceeds all human conception, and cannot be
comprehended. By the two words he uses, he intimates that the impiety of
the people could not be expressed in words or could not be conceived by
the mind; for it was a monstrous thing. This is the meaning.  <span
id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156.md)

<span id="xv.xxxvi-p12"></span><span id="xv.xxxvi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxxvi-p13"></span>Let us now see what was this monstrous
thing which the Prophet here refers to, and which he abhorred. *The
prophets,* he says, *prophesy falsely* It was no doubt enough to make
all astonished, when these impostors assumed the name of prophets at
Jerusalem, where God had chosen his habitation and his sanctuary: how
great and how base a profanation was it of God’s name? There were indeed
at that time impostors everywhere, who boasted that they were God’s
prophets, who in many places passed as oracles the delusions of Satan;
but to see the ministers of the devil in the very sanctuary of God,
(which was then the only one in the world,) even in the very city where
he had, as it has been said, his habitation and dwelling, was a
monstrous thing, which ought to have made all men astonished. It is
indeed a detestable thing under the Papacy, when monks and similar
unprincipled men ascend the pulpit, and there most shamefully pretend
that they are the true prophets of God, and faithful teachers; but still
it would be doubly monstrous, were any among us to corrupt pure doctrine
with their errors and infect the people with their superstitions. It was
not then without reason that Jeremiah introduced his subject by saying,
that it was an astonishing thing and hardly to be conceived, when
*prophets prophesied falsely*

<span id="xv.xxxvi-p14"></span>He then adds, *Priests receive into their
hands;* so some render the words: but there may be a twofold meaning.
Sampson is said in <span id="xv.xxxvi-p14.1"></span>[Jud
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#009.md)<span id="xv.xxxvi-p14.1"></span>,
to have received into his hands honey from the lion, and the same verb
is found there: but as it means also to rule, to govern, the exposition
most suitable to this place is, — that the priests ruled by the means of
the false prophets. At the same time, if any one takes the other view, —
that the priests received into their hands, that is, that they gathered
and accumulated gifts from all quarters, the meaning would not be
unsuitable.  <span id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157.md)

<span id="xv.xxxvi-p20"></span>However this may be, the Prophet
evidently shews that there was a mutual collusion between the false
prophets and the priests. The false prophets, he says, deceive the
people by their flatteries, and what do the priests? It was their duty
to oppose them: *they receive,* he says, *into their hands;* that is,
they are satisfied, for they see that these fallacies bring gain to
them, and therefore they easily assent to what is taught by the false
prophets. The same thing is to be seen at this day under the Papacy: the
monks flatter the people and prop up the whole system of Popery; and
hence these unprincipled men call themselves the chariots of the Pope;
for the Pope is carried as it were on four wheels — the four mendicant
orders. And this they boast, when they wish to shew what adepts they are
in lying. The Pope then is carried by the four wheels of the mendicants.
We see how he has honored and daily honors these mendicants with
privileges, and why? Because they prop up his tyranny. Such was at that
time the state of the people; the priests took their prey, and the false
prophets snatched also a part of it, like these hungry dogs at this day;
who yet do not act so oppressively as the Pope: they lick as it were his
seat, like dogs; while he and his mitered bishops devour the fattest
spoils. The meaning then, that they received into their hands, is not
unsuitable.

<span id="xv.xxxvi-p21"></span>But when we consider the main drift of
the passage, it is more in harmony with it to say, that the *priests
ruled by their means;* for without the false prophets they could not
have retained their influence over the people; they must have been
repudiated by them all. Since then they ruled by their means, there was
a mutual collusion between them.

<span id="xv.xxxvi-p22"></span>He then adds, *And my people have wished
it to be so* The common people, no doubt, exculpated themselves, as they
do at this day, who hold forth this excuse as their shield, “O, we are
not learned, we have never been in school, and what can we do but to
follow our bishops?” Thus, then, at this day, the lower orders, the
multitude, seek to cast off every blame from themselves. But the Prophet
says here, that the *people loved* to have things so. And, doubtless, we
shall find that to be ever true which is said in <span
id="xv.xxxvi-p22.1"></span>[De
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#003.md)<span id="xv.xxxvi-p22.1"></span>,
that when false prophets come, it is for the purpose of trying God’s
people, whether they from the heart love God. It is then his object to
try our religion, whenever he gives loose reins to impostors and false
prophets: for every one who truly loves God will be preserved by his
Spirit from being led away by such deceivers. When, therefore, ignorant
men are deluded, it is certain that they are justly punished for their
neglect and contempt of God, because they have not been sufficiently
attentive to his service; yea, because they have wished for impostors,
according to what has been also often said by the monks, “The world
wishes to be deceived, let it be deceived in the name of the devil.”
These impostors have become so shameless, as to boast that they are the
ministers of Satan to deceive men. However, that common saying has been
found true; for the world is never deceived except with its own consent,
and willingly; for those who are the most ignorant close their eyes
against clear light, and shun God as much as they can, and seek to hide
themselves in darkness, according to what Christ says,

<span id="xv.xxxvi-p23"></span>“Whosoever committeth sin hateth the
light.” (<span id="xv.xxxvi-p23.1"></span>[Joh
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#020)<span id="xv.xxxvi-p23.1"></span>.md)

<span id="xv.xxxvi-p24"></span>The Prophet adds in the last place, *And
what will ye do at last,* or at the end of it? Some omit the pronoun
<span id="xv.xxxvi-p24.1"></span>ה, *he;* and others apply it to the
false prophets and the priests; but the Prophet, I have no doubt, refers
to Jerusalem, *What will ye do at the end of it?* For we know that as
Jerusalem had been founded by God’s hand, and while it had him as its
protector and guardian, it was safe; but this was a false confidence,
when they despised God and gloried in their wickedness. *What,* then, he
says, *will ye do at the end of it?* as though he had said, “You deceive
yourselves, if you think that this city will be perpetual; for its
overthrow is nigh at hand: what then will ye do, when the city itself
shall bc destroyed, except that you shall be all destroyed together with
it?”  <span id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158.md)

<span id="xv.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="xv.xxxvii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="xv.xxxvii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since we have
been hitherto extremely deaf to thy many exhortations, and also to those
threatenings by which thou hast sharply stimulated us to repentance, — O
grant, that this perverseness may not always remain in us, but that we
may at length submit to thee, not only for a short time, but
continually, so that we may to the end devote ourselves wholly to thee,
and thus glorify thy name, that we may at last become partakers of that
glory, which has been procured for us by the blood of thy only —
begotten Son. — Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_127"></span>[128](cc17014.htm#fr_127.md) <span
id="xv.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p8"></span> Our version is, “Run ye to and fro,” which
has been taken from the *Septuagint-περιδρύμετε*; but this is a more
correct rendering. The *Vulgate* is “<span
id="xv.i-p8.1"></span>circuite — go round;” the *Syriac* is the same.
“Streets” were the narrow ones, the lanes; and what *Calvin* renders
“the cross-ways,“ and our version “broad places,“ were the wide streets,
or the squares. In the former the poor people lived, and in the latter
the great people, the chief men of the city. The examination was to
extend to all the inhabitants. First, it takes place as to the poor in
the lanes, and afterwards among the higher orders in the wide streets.
The whole verse might be thus rendered, —

<span id="xv.i-p9"></span>**1.** Go ye round through the narrow streets
of Jerusalem, And see, I pray, and know; Yea, seek in the broad streets;
If ye can find a man, if there be *any,* Who doeth justice, who seeks
faithfulness, Then will I spare it.

<span id="xv.i-p10"></span>The <span id="xv.i-p10.1"></span>ו after
<span id="xv.i-p10.2"></span> אםmay be often rendered “Then;” and this
passage requires it to be so rendered. “That I may pardon her” is
*Blayney’s* version; but this hardly corresponds with the former part;
“If,” and “that,” form no connection. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_128"></span>[129](cc17014.htm#fr_128.md) <span
id="xv.ii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p9"></span> There are many MSS. which have <span
id="xv.ii-p9.1"></span>אכן, “surely, “but <span id="xv.ii-p9.2"></span>
לכןmay also be so rendered; yet, as “nevertheless” is its meaning, in
<span id="xv.ii-p9.3"></span>[Jer
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#014.md)<span id="xv.ii-p9.3"></span>,
and other places, it may be so taken here. The *Septuagint* must have
read <span id="xv.ii-p9.4"></span>לא כן, and the sentence is a question,
“Do they not thus swear falsely?” But the early versions favor the
present reading; and it gives a suitable meaning, —

<span id="xv.ii-p10"></span>And though “Live does Jehovah, “they say,
Nevertheless falsely do they swear.

<span id="xv.ii-p11"></span>The verbs are in the future tense, but used
to express present acts, as is the case often in Hebrew, and also very
commonly in *Welsh.* The words in the latter language might be expressed
exactly as in the former, and be understood as speaking of what is
present, —

<span id="xv.ii-p12"></span><span id="xv.ii-p12.1"></span>Ac er “Byw yw
Jehova” a ddywedant,  
Etto yn gelwyddog y tyngant.

<span id="xv.ii-p13"></span>— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[130](cc17014.htm#fr_129.md) <span
id="xv.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p16"></span> The literal rendering of this verse is as
follows, —

<span id="xv.iii-p17"></span>Jehovah! thine eyes, are *they* not on
faithfulness? Smitten them hast thou, but they have not grieved; Thou
hast consumed them, — they have refused to receive correction; Harder
have they made their faces than a rock; They have refused to return.

<span id="xv.iii-p18"></span>The “truth” here, and in the first verse,
is regarded by *Calvin* and most commentators, as faithfulness towards
men. But a right view of the context will shew that it refers to
fidelity towards God. Of what does the preceding verse speak? Of
unfaithfulness towards God — swearing falsely in his name; that is,
making a false and hypocritical profession of him; and in this verse
they are described as refusing to return to him. In the fifth and sixth
verses they are represented as having “broken the yoke,“ and as having
apostatized from him; and in the seventh their going after other gods is
expressly mentioned.

<span id="xv.iii-p19"></span>The word “judgment” has been taken in the
same way, but not, in my view, agreeably to the context. To do judgment,
is to do what is just and right; and “the way of Jehovah,“ and “the
judgment of God,“ in the next verse, are the same, and hence put in
apposition; the word “nor,“ in our version, being improperly introduced.
The way of the Lord is the way he has prescribed in his word; and it is
called his judgment, because it is what he has determined and ordained,
or what is just and right. God had not only revealed his law, but had
also appointed and ordained it for the people of Israel. His law is
called a way, because it points out the course which we are to take; and
it is his judgment, because it is what God has determined, fixed, and
appointed. Hence in the fifth verse they are said to have broken the
yoke and burst the bonds. The yoke was the law, and the bonds were those
of loyalty and obedience; or they were the bonds of justice, such as
were justly ordained and imposed on them. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[131](cc17014.htm#fr_130.md) <span
id="xv.vi-p10.3"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p11"></span> It is better to take <span
id="xv.vi-p11.1"></span> אךhere and in the next verse as an affirmative,
Truly, surely, doubtless. *Blayney,* as well as *Calvin,* render <span
id="xv.vi-p11.2"></span>נואלו, “have acted foolishly.” The verb occurs
in three other places, <span id="xv.vi-p11.3"></span>[Nu
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#011.md)<span id="xv.vi-p11.3"></span>;
<span id="xv.vi-p11.4"></span>[Isa
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#013.md)<span id="xv.vi-p11.4"></span>;
<span id="xv.vi-p11.5"></span>[Jer
50:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#036.md)<span id="xv.vi-p11.5"></span>.
To be, or to become, foolish, or rather stupid, sottish, or stupidly
ignorant, seems to be its meaning. It is here opposed to knowledge; and
evidently refers to the state of the mind, and not to the conduct. Their
sottishness was their idolatry. This is the special sin referred to
throughout the passage, —

<span id="xv.vi-p12"></span>Then I said, Doubtless, the poor *are*
these, they have become stupid, For they have not known the way of
Jehovah, The judgment of their God.

<span id="xv.vi-p13"></span>— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[132](cc17014.htm#fr_131.md) <span
id="xv.vi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p18"></span> Literally it is, “I will go for myself,” —
an idiomatic form of speech. The *Welsh* is exactly the same, <span
id="xv.vi-p18.1"></span>*af rhagof;* which means, I will go forth; but
it cannot be literally expressed in another language. After the verb, as
in Hebrew, there is a preposition prefixed to “me.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[133](cc17014.htm#fr_132.md) <span
id="xv.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p9"></span> The word, as found here, is never used for
the evening; it ever means the desert, or uncultivated plains. The
plural termination of the word, when it means the evening, is <span
id="xv.vii-p9.1"></span>-ים, and not <span id="xv.vii-p9.2"></span>-ות,
as here. See <span id="xv.vii-p9.3"></span>[Nu
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#001.md)<span id="xv.vii-p9.3"></span>;
<span id="xv.vii-p9.4"></span>[Jos
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#010.md)<span id="xv.vii-p9.4"></span>;
<span id="xv.vii-p9.5"></span>[Jer
39:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#005.md)<span id="xv.vii-p9.5"></span>. In
these verses it is rendered “plains;” they were evidently uncultivated,
and might properly be called deserts. The *Vulgate* and the *Targum*
have led commentators astray as to this word. The *Septuagint* have
completely misunderstood it, and have rendered the sentence, “The wolf
even to the houses (<span id="xv.vii-p9.6"></span>ἕως τῶν οἰκιῶν) has
destroyed them.” The version of *Blayney* is, “The wolf of the plains:“
and he says in a note, that they were “unenclosed commons.” used for
sheepwalks, which were commonly “infested with wolves.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_133"></span>[134](cc17014.htm#fr_133.md) <span
id="xv.vii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p13"></span> This illative, “wherefore,” or therefore,
or, for this cause, is both retrospective and anticipative. It is a
reason given for what is contained in the latter part of the last verse,
and for what is contained in the last words of this verse; it
anticipates the particle “because” before “multiplied.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[135](cc17014.htm#fr_134.md) <span
id="xv.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p14"></span> It is rendered “<span
id="xv.vii-p14.1"></span>ἀσεβείας — *impieties, “*by the *Septuagint*;
“prevarications” by the *Vulgate; “*rebellions” by the *Targum.* It does
not mean “iniquities,“ but willful violations of the law in matters
connected with God’s worship and service. The other word means
apostasies, defections from God, rendered by the *Septuagint, “*<span
id="xv.vii-p14.2"></span>ἀποστρόφαις — turnings away, “and so by the
*Vulgate* and the *Targum.* They were defections to various forms of
idolatry. Their idols increased in number. The *Septuagint* render the
last sentence thus, “They have become strong (<span
id="xv.vii-p14.3"></span>ἴσχυσας) in their turnings away.” The *Vulgate*
and the *Targum* are the same. The Verb <span id="xv.vii-p14.4"></span>
עצםmeans an increase in quality or in quantity. But both verbs may be
rendered here as transitives, —

<span id="xv.vii-p15"></span>Because they have multiplied their
transgressions,  
They have strengthened (or increased) their apostasies.

<span id="xv.vii-p16"></span>— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_135"></span>[136](cc17014.htm#fr_135.md) <span
id="xv.viii-p11.4"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p12"></span> This has been done by the Punctuists, and
is no part of the language. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_136"></span>[137](cc17014.htm#fr_136.md) <span
id="xv.viii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p15"></span> The last line may be rendered thus, —

<span id="xv.viii-p16"></span>And the house of the harlot they crowd.

<span id="xv.viii-p17"></span>The verb for “crowd” seems here to be
transitive, though it be intransitive in <span
id="xv.viii-p17.1"></span>[Mic
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#001.md)<span id="xv.viii-p17.1"></span>. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138](cc17014.htm#fr_137.md) <span
id="xv.ix-p6.4"></span>

<span id="xv.ix-p7"></span> The literal rendering of this verse, and
countenanced by ancient versions, is as follows, —

<span id="xv.ix-p8"></span>Horses well fed! libidinous have they become;
They neigh, every one at the wife of his neighbor.

<span id="xv.ix-p9"></span>Both *Venema* and *Blayney* agree in giving
this meaning.

<span id="xv.ix-p10"></span>It does not seem, when the whole context is
viewed, that adultery here is to be taken in its literal sense. It is
spiritual adultery, that is, idolatry, that is referred to throughout
the chapter. Besides, the comparison in this verse is such, that its
application is more suitable to idolatrous acts than to those which are
adulterous. The same may be said of what is found in the preceding
verse, — that they crowded the house of the harlot. This is not so much
the case in adultery as in idolatry, when people fill their idolatrous
temples. A simile is sometimes carried beyond what is actually the case,
in order to convey a right idea of what it is intended to illustrate.
When they are said to be like well-fed stallions, and neighing at the
wives of their neighbors, the purpose was to shew with what intense
ardor they were devoted to idolatry: and the degrading comparison was no
doubt made in order to pour contempt on their mad propensity: it was
like the impetuous instinct of an animal, uncontrolled by any reason,
persuasion, or remonstrance. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139](cc17014.htm#fr_138.md) <span
id="xv.xiii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="xv.xiii-p9"></span> See Note on <span
id="xv.xiii-p9.2"></span>[Jer
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#027.md)<span id="xv.xiii-p9.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](cc17014.htm#fr_139.md) <span
id="xv.xiii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xiii-p11"></span> It is true the word means shoots or
branches; but as the root means to spread, it evidently signifies here
battlements, bulwarks, or ramparts. It is rendered “<span
id="xv.xiii-p11.1"></span>ὑποστηρίγματα — props, pillars,” by the
*Septuagint; “*<span id="xv.xiii-p11.2"></span>propagines — shoots,” by
the *Vulgate; “*foundations,” by the *Syriac* and *Arabic;* and
“palaces, or towers,” by the *Targum.* Our version has the most suitable
word — “battlements.” *Blayney* has “branches,“ and thinks that the
cities of Judea are meant; but this is not suitable to the context. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](cc17014.htm#fr_140.md) <span
id="xv.xiv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xv.xiv-p7"></span> The verb <span id="xv.xiv-p7.1"></span>בגד,
when followed by <span id="xv.xiv-p7.2"></span> בas here, means to deal
deceitfully, perfidiously, or treacherously, with one. See <span
id="xv.xiv-p7.3"></span>[Ex 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#008.md)<span
id="xv.xiv-p7.3"></span>; <span id="xv.xiv-p7.4"></span>[Jud
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#023.md)<span id="xv.xiv-p7.4"></span>;
<span id="xv.xiv-p7.5"></span>[La
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#002.md)<span id="xv.xiv-p7.5"></span>. It
may be rendered here to dissemble, —

<span id="xv.xiv-p8"></span>For they dissembling have dissembled with
me, The house of Israel and the house of Judah, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xv.xiv-p9"></span>As the verb is repeated, if we render it “to
act perfidiously,“ instead of repeating the words, to give them their
force and meaning, we must say,

<span id="xv.xiv-p10"></span>For they have dealt most perfidiously with
me.

<span id="xv.xiv-p11"></span>To “deal unfaithfully,” as rendered by
*Blayney*, is too feeble an expression. To “prevaricate” is the word
used by the *Vulgate,* and the same by the *Septuagint* and the
*Targum.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc17014.htm#fr_141.md) <span
id="xv.xv-p6.6"></span>

<span id="xv.xv-p7"></span> According to all the instances in which the
verb occurs, followed by <span id="xv.xv-p7.1"></span>ב, its meaning is
what *Calvin* states, though not so rendered uniformly in our version.
The verb, followed by <span id="xv.xv-p7.2"></span>ב, occurs elsewhere
five times, — Leviticus, 6:2, 3; <span id="xv.xv-p7.3"></span>[Jos
24:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#027.md)<span id="xv.xv-p7.3"></span>;
<span id="xv.xv-p7.4"></span>[Job
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#018.md)<span id="xv.xv-p7.4"></span>;
<span id="xv.xv-p7.5"></span>[Isa
59:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#013.md)<span id="xv.xv-p7.5"></span>;
<span id="xv.xv-p7.6"></span>[Ho
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#002.md)<span id="xv.xv-p7.6"></span>. In
<span id="xv.xv-p7.7"></span>[Le
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#003.md)<span id="xv.xv-p7.7"></span>,
<span id="xv.xv-p7.8"></span>וכחש בה, ought to be rendered, “and denieth
it;” and so the verb ought to be, rendered in the previous verse, “and
deny to his neighbor his deposit,” etc. It is rendered here “lied to the
Lord” by the Septuagint and the *Targum;* and “denied the Lord” by the
*Vulgate* and the *Syriac,* and so also by *Piscator, Venema,* and
*Blayney.* The denial seems to have been as to the Lord speaking in his
prophets. *Calvin* appears to have gone too far in saying that they
denied his existence. The expression which follows, “Not he,“ means that
he was not in the prophets. The import is correctly given in our
version, “It is not he,“ that is, who speaks in the prophets. The verse
might be literally given thus, —

<span id="xv.xv-p8"></span>**12.** And they deny Jehovah, And say, “*It
is* not he, And come upon us shall not evil, And the sword and the
famine we shall not see.”

<span id="xv.xv-p9"></span>Then the following verse, which is a
continuation of what they said, proves clearly what the meaning of this
is, —

<span id="xv.xv-p10"></span>**13.** “And the prophets shall be wind, For
the word *is* not in them: Thus shall it happen to them,”

<span id="xv.xv-p11"></span>or,

<span id="xv.xv-p12"></span>Thus shall it be done to them.

<span id="xv.xv-p13"></span>That is, they shall be found out to be like
the wind, having spoken nothing real, such as shall be accomplished.
Indeed the last line may be translated thus, —

<span id="xv.xv-p14"></span>Thus shall he do to (or, deal with) them.

<span id="xv.xv-p15"></span>The reference in this case is to God, who,
they thought, would render abortive, or turn as it were into wind, what
the prophets had threatened. Their blindness and presumption appear to
us to have been extreme. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](cc17014.htm#fr_142.md) <span
id="xv.xvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xvi-p10"></span> This sentence is left out in the
*Septuagint,* the *Syriac,* and the *Arabic,* but retained by the
*Vulgate*, — “<span id="xv.xvi-p10.1"></span>Haec ergo evenient illis —
These things shall therefore come to them.” This meaning the original
will hardly bear. The reference seems to be to the Prophets becoming
wind, being so proved by the event. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_143"></span>[144](cc17014.htm#fr_143.md) <span
id="xv.xviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xviii-p11"></span> The verb <span
id="xv.xviii-p11.1"></span> שמעhere is not merely to hear, but to hear
effectually, that is, so as to understand. It has this meaning in other
places; see <span id="xv.xviii-p11.2"></span>Deuteronomy 38:49<span
id="xv.xviii-p11.2"></span>; <span id="xv.xviii-p11.3"></span>[2Ki
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#026.md)<span
id="xv.xviii-p11.3"></span>. The whole verse may be thus rendered, —

<span id="xv.xviii-p12"></span>**15.** Behold, I am bringing upon you a
nation from far, O house of Israel, saith Jehovah, — A nation, strong it
*is,* A nation, from antiquity it *is,* A nation, thou wilt not know its
language, Nor understand what it speaks.

<span id="xv.xviii-p13"></span>The third, fourth, and fifth lines, as
well as the first of the next verse, are left out in the *Septuagint,*
but retained by the *Vulgate, Syriac,* and the *Targum.* The two first
render the word for “strong,“ “<span
id="xv.xviii-p13.1"></span>robustam,“ and the last by “<span
id="xv.xviii-p13.2"></span>fortis — brave.” *Blayney* renders it
“strong,“ which is no doubt its meaning. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[145](cc17014.htm#fr_144.md) <span
id="xv.xxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxi-p7"></span> The idea intended is capaciousness. The
grave is represented as never satisfied, ready to receive any number.
See <span id="xv.xxi-p7.1"></span>[Prov.
27:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#020.md), [Prov.
30:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#016.md), [Hab.
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#005.md)<span id="xv.xxi-p7.1"></span>. The
Chaldean quiver would be so large as to contain a vast quantity of
arrows, as though it was an open grave. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[146](cc17014.htm#fr_145.md) <span
id="xv.xxii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxii-p8"></span> According to the Hebrew, the verbs, except
the second, are all in the singular number. The *Septuagint* have
pluralized them, but the singular is retained by the *Vulgate,* the
*Targum,* and the *Syriac.* It is the “nation” described in the 15th
verse. The second verb may be rendered in a passive sense, and the
meaning will be more appropriate, —

<span id="xv.xxii-p9"></span>And it will devour thy harvest and thy
food, Devoured shall be thy sons and thy daughters; It will devour thy
sheep and thy ox, It will devour thy wine and thy fig-tree; It will
wholly desolate thy fortified cities, In which thou trustest, by the
sword.

<span id="xv.xxii-p10"></span>The language used here, and in the 15th
verse, is remarkably like that of Moses in <span
id="xv.xxii-p10.1"></span>[De
28:48-52](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#048.md)<span
id="xv.xxii-p10.1"></span>. The second line may be deemed parenthetic.
It is better to preserve the poetic singular in sheep, ox, vine, and
fig-tree. As it is a reduplicate verb, entire desolation is intended,
and that by the “sword” in destroying all the occupants of fortified
cities. *Venema,* and others, as well as *Calvin,* connect the “sword”
with all the preceding clauses; but this is not necessary, nor is it
indeed suitable. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[147](cc17014.htm#fr_146.md) <span
id="xv.xxiii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xv.xxiii-p8"></span> See note on <span
id="xv.xxiii-p8.2"></span>[Jer
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#027.md)<span id="xv.xxiii-p8.2"></span>.
Even if the design pleaded for by *Calvin* be admitted, there is no
necessity to give the expression a meaning different from what it has in
other places, —

<span id="xv.xxiii-p9"></span>Yet even in those days, saith Jehovah,  
I will not make with you a completion,

<span id="xv.xxiii-p10"></span>that is,

<span id="xv.xxiii-p11"></span>I will not wholly destroy you.

<span id="xv.xxiii-p12"></span>It depends on the context what the
bearing of this may be, while the sentence itself retains the same
meaning. “I will not wholly destroy you, for I intend to preserve a
Church for myself,” he might also say, “I will not wholly destroy you,
for I have other punishments in reserve for you:“ and the latter, as
*Calvin* maintains, seems to be the purport of the expression in this
passage. Still the words themselves have the same meaning. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[148](cc17014.htm#fr_147.md) <span
id="xv.xxiv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxiv-p12"></span> The last clause has been improperly
omitted in the *Arabic:* it is found in the other versions. The word for
“strangers” is different from that connected with “gods.” They served
“the gods of the alien,“ or, of the heathen: they would have to serve
“strangers,“ or, foreigners, in a land not their own. As they had
adopted the *religion* of heathens, they would have to submit to the
*dominion* and tyranny of heathens: and as they did the former in their
own land, they would have to do the latter in a foreign land. Thus their
idolatry would expel them from their own country, and subject them to
the tyranny of those from whom they derived their idolatry. Thus God
often makes the tempters of his people (if they succeed) to be their
tormentors. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[149](cc17014.htm#fr_148.md) <span
id="xv.xxv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxv-p11"></span> It is better to retain the future tense,
as their obstinacy is thereby more fully expressed; the whole verse may
be thus literally rendered, —

<span id="xv.xxv-p12"></span>Hear, I pray, this, Ye perverse people and
without understanding, — Eyes they have, but they will not see, Ears
they have, but they will not hear.

<span id="xv.xxv-p13"></span>The “this” which they were to hear is
contained in the next verse. The two last lines are only explanatory of
the preceding. They were “without understanding,“ for they would not
see, though they had eyes; and they were “perverse,“ or perversely
foolish, for they would not hear, though they had ears. When two things
are mentioned and afterwards referred to, the prophets usually explain
the last, and then the first, as the case is here. The two last lines
may be included in a parenthesis. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[150](cc17014.htm#fr_149.md) <span
id="xv.xxvi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxvi-p14"></span> The reference seems to be to the decree
or ordinance, and not to the boundary: therefore “transgress” is the
most suitable word. I would render the verse thus, —

<span id="xv.xxvi-p15"></span>**22.** Should you not fear me? saith
Jehovah; Ought you not at my presence to tremble? Who have set the sand
a boundary to the sea. — An ordinance perpetual, and it transgresses it
not; Though toss themselves and prevail not, and roar do its waves, Yet
it does not transgress it.

<span id="xv.xxvi-p16"></span>The future tense in Hebrew may be often
rendered subjunctively or potentially, and especially in questions. The
non-transgressor is the sea — the non-transgressor of the decree,
notwithstanding the tumult of its waves. “An ordinance perpetual” is
rendered “<span id="xv.xxvi-p16.1"></span>πρόσταγμα αἰώνιον — an
everlasting command,” by the *Septuagint,* — “<span
id="xv.xxvi-p16.2"></span>praeceptum sempiternum — a sempiternal
precept,“ by the *Vulgate* and the *Targum*, — and “<span
id="xv.xxvi-p16.3"></span>lege perpetua — by a perpetual law,“ by the
*Syriac.* A perpetual ordinance is the version of *Blayney.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_150"></span>[151](cc17014.htm#fr_150.md) <span
id="xv.xxvii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="xv.xxvii-p7"></span> It is true that the idea of perverseness
is conveyed by this word; but it means one bent on turning away from
God. To turn away, or to apostatize, is its primary meaning, as in the
latter clause of this verse; but here it is a participle in a
reduplicate form, which has ever an expansive meaning. It means here
either a heart continually turning away from God, or a heart resolutely
determined to turn away from him. The last seems to be the meaning, as
it appears to correspond with the next line, —

<span id="xv.xxvii-p8"></span>But in this people has been a heart,  
Thoroughly revolting and disobedient;  
They have revolted and gone away.

<span id="xv.xxvii-p9"></span>When they turned away from God or
revolted, they were remonstrated with and exhorted to return; but they
disobeyed; hence their thorough revolt and their going away. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[152](cc17014.htm#fr_151.md) <span
id="xv.xxx-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxx-p7"></span> *Blayney,* following the *Septuagint* and
the *Vulgate,* has rendered the latter clause thus, —

<span id="xv.xxx-p8"></span>A sufficiency of the appointed things of
harvest he secureth to us.

<span id="xv.xxx-p9"></span>But the *Targum* agrees with our version;
and *Gataker, Grotius, Venema,* and others, take the same view, which is
more expressive and more accordant with the passage, —

<span id="xv.xxx-p10"></span>The weeks, the appointed seasons of
harvest,  
He preserves for us.

<span id="xv.xxx-p11"></span>The word <span
id="xv.xxx-p11.1"></span>חקות, means what is established, fixed,
ordained, or appointed, as to time, place, course, portion, or law; and
it is here, not in regimine, but in apposition with “weeks.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_152"></span>[153](cc17014.htm#fr_152.md) <span
id="xv.xxxi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxxi-p9"></span> There is a correspondence between the
terms here used, and those in the last verse. Their iniquities had
*turned aside,* or diverted from their right course, the *appointed*
seasons; and their sins had *restrained* the good, the *seasonable rain*
which had been given them. As it is commonly the case in the prophets,
the last thing mentioned in the previous verse, is the first thing
referred to here, and then what is antecedently mentioned. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[154](cc17014.htm#fr_153.md) <span
id="xv.xxxii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xv.xxxii-p9"></span> There is a grammatical difficulty
connected with the word <span id="xv.xxxii-p9.1"></span> ישורThe
*Septuagint,* and the *Syriac* and the *Arabic,* omit the word, and the
*Vulgate* renders it in the plural number, as if it was <span
id="xv.xxxii-p9.2"></span>ישורו, which *Blayney* adopts. *Venema*
renders it “upright” or just, and considers the root to be <span
id="xv.xxxii-p9.3"></span> ישרand refers to <span
id="xv.xxxii-p9.4"></span>[Mic
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#004.md)<span id="xv.xxxii-p9.4"></span>,
when the upright is said to be “sharper than a thorn hedge,“ that is,
such as were counted or ought to have been “upright.” The reference here
is evidently to the judge, who assumed the office of an upright one. See
<span id="xv.xxxii-p9.5"></span>[Jer
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#028.md)<span id="xv.xxxii-p9.5"></span>.
The literal version would then be as follows, —

<span id="xv.xxxii-p10"></span>For found among my people are the unjust;
The upright *is* like the setter of snares; They have set up entrapping,
Men they catch.

<span id="xv.xxxii-p11"></span>Thus all the parts correspond, and what
is said corresponds with <span id="xv.xxxii-p11.1"></span>[Jer
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#028.md)<span id="xv.xxxii-p11.1"></span>.
The verb rendered “set up, “means to settle, to constitute, to
establish; the office of the upright, that is, of the judge, was set up
as an office for entrapping, he being like a setter of snares. The
“unjust” among the people, as stated here, were the judges; the word,
<span id="xv.xxxii-p11.2"></span> רשעis the perverter of justice, and
stands in contrast with <span id="xv.xxxii-p11.3"></span>צדק, who acts
justly. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_154"></span>[155](cc17014.htm#fr_154.md) <span
id="xv.xxxiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxxiii-p7"></span> It is so rendered in <span
id="xv.xxxiii-p7.1"></span>[Amos 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#002.md)<span id="xv.xxxiii-p7.1"></span>.
This was no doubt a wicker-basket or cage for birds, to keep them, and
not a trap-cage, as suggested by the *Septuagint* and *Vulgate*
versions. The *Targum* is, “the house of feeding.” The comparison is
between a cage full of birds, which had been caught by snares, nets, or
traps, and houses filled with spoils, which had been procured by frauds.
And were “full” rendered “filled, “as it might be, there would be no
need of the metonymy supposed to be in the word “fraud,“ —

<span id="xv.xxxiii-p8"></span>As the cage is filled with birds, So
their houses *are* filled by means of fraud: Hence they have become
great and grown rich.

<span id="xv.xxxiii-p9"></span>— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[156](cc17014.htm#fr_155.md) <span
id="xv.xxxiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxxiv-p7"></span> Expounders differ as to the meaning of
these words. They are partly omitted by the *Septuagint* and *Syriac.*
The *Vulgate* is, “<span id="xv.xxxiv-p7.1"></span>et praeterierunt
sermones meos pessime — and they have passed by my words very
haughtily.” The *Targum* is a loose version, “They have also
transgressed the words of the law, they have done what is evil.” Such
meanings do not correspond with the context. The words literally are,
“They have passed over (or, by) the words of wrong;” but as the term for
“words” often means things, affairs, matters, the version may be,
“matters of wrong,“ or wrong things. These “matters of wrong” are
afterwards specified, as will be seen in the following version, —

<span id="xv.xxxiv-p8"></span>**28.** They have become fat, they have
shined: Moreover, they have passed by matters of wrong; The cause they
have not defended — The cause of the orphan, yet have they prospered;
And the right of the meek have they not pleaded.

<span id="xv.xxxiv-p9"></span>The word “moreover,“ may be rendered
“though,“ as *Blayney* does, (see <span id="xv.xxxiv-p9.1"></span>[Ne
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#001)<span id="xv.xxxiv-p9.1"></span>:.md)
but the rest of the sentence is not so well rendered, —

<span id="xv.xxxiv-p10"></span>Though they have gone beyond the claims
of the wicked.

<span id="xv.xxxiv-p11"></span>He conceived that the meaning is, that
they granted to the wicked man more than he claimed, while they denied
justice to the orphan and the poor. But what is more accordant with the
words is, that he states here what he afterward specifies. It is not
properly the “poor” who are meant, but the quiet, the humble: for the
poor, strictly speaking, had not much to lose; hence the judges were not
bribed to allow them to become a prey to dishonest men. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[157](cc17014.htm#fr_156.md) <span
id="xv.xxxvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxxvi-p9"></span> The words literally are, —

<span id="xv.xxxvi-p10"></span>Amazement and horribleness has been done
in the land.

<span id="xv.xxxvi-p11"></span>That is, what occasioned both had been
done, or what ought to have filled all with the feeling of amazement and
horror. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[158](cc17014.htm#fr_157.md) <span
id="xv.xxxvi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xv.xxxvi-p15"></span> The *Septuagint* and the *Vulgate* have,
“And the priests have applauded with their own hands;” and the *Targum,
“*And the priests have helped their hands.” Both mean the same thing,
though the words are different: and *Blayney* gives the same meaning,
“And the priests have concurred with them.” *Horsley* says that the
words literally are, “And the priests go down according to their hands;”
that is, he adds, “the priests go which way their bands permit; *i.e.,*
the priests are directed by them.” Though the points lead us to regard
<span id="xv.xxxvi-p15.1"></span> ירדוas future from <span
id="xv.xxxvi-p15.2"></span>רדה, to bear rule; yet the context requires
it to be in the past tense, as the previous verb is so, and that which
follows: and therefore it must be <span id="xv.xxxvi-p15.3"></span>ירד,
to come down, to descend. When followed by <span
id="xv.xxxvi-p15.4"></span>על, as here, the preposition never means
“according to,“ as *Horsley* renders it, but ever, upon, toward or
against, and mostly “upon.” See <span id="xv.xxxvi-p15.5"></span>[Ex
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#019.md)<span id="xv.xxxvi-p15.5"></span>;
<span id="xv.xxxvi-p15.6"></span>[Nu
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#009.md)<span id="xv.xxxvi-p15.6"></span>;
<span id="xv.xxxvi-p15.7"></span>[Ps
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#016.md)<span id="xv.xxxvi-p15.7"></span>;
<span id="xv.xxxvi-p15.8"></span>[Ps
72:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#006.md)<span id="xv.xxxvi-p15.8"></span>.
Therefore the literal rendering is this, —

<span id="xv.xxxvi-p16"></span>And the priests have descended upon their
hands.

<span id="xv.xxxvi-p17"></span>An idiomatic expression, which seems to
mean, that the priests assisted the prophets, according to what is
expressed by the *Targum. “*Hand” signify labor, efforts; the priests
joined their efforts to those of the prophets. To “concur with them” is
too feeble: the line may be rendered, —

<span id="xv.xxxvi-p18"></span>And the priests have aided them.

<span id="xv.xxxvi-p19"></span>— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[159](cc17014.htm#fr_158.md) <span
id="xv.xxxvi-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xv.xxxvi-p25"></span> The “it” refers rather to the “strange
and horrible thing” which had been done in the land, —

<span id="xv.xxxvi-p26"></span>But what will ye do at the end of it?

<span id="xv.xxxvi-p27"></span>That is, when this dreadful thing shall
come to an end, when the prophets, encouraged by the priests and
approved by the people, shall be found liars, what then shall you do?
The *Septuagint* render the last words by “<span
id="xv.xxxvi-p27.1"></span>μετὰ ταῦτα — after these things,“ referring
evidently to the particulars just mentioned, the acts of the prophets,
priests, and people: but the same thing is meant. Then in the next
chapter he reminds them of the approaching destruction, which the false
prophets denied. — *Ed*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](cc17015.md)
