[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc17011)  [Next](cc17013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 17: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part I*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii"></span>

<span id="xiii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="xiii.i"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p1"></span><span id="xiii.i-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#001)<span id="xiii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p2"></span>**1**. They say, If a man put away his wife,
and she go from him, and become another man’s, shall he return unto her
again? shall not that land be greatly polluted? but thou hast played the
harlot with many lovers; yet return again to me, saith the LORD.

<span id="xiii.i-p3"></span>**l**. Dicendo, si dimiserit vir uxorem
suam, et profecta ab eo, fuepit viri alterius, (*id est,* transierit ad
alium virum) an revertetur ad eam adhuc? Annon pollutione polluta est
terra in hoc? et tu scortata es cum sociis multis; revertere tamen ad
me, dicit Jehova.

<span id="xiii.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.i-p5"></span><span id="xiii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p6"></span>Many regard this verse as connected with the
last, and thus read them connectedly, “God hates false confidences,
because he says, “etc. But this seems not to me to be suitable; for
Jeremiah brings before us here a new subject, — that God seeks to be
reconciled to his people, according to what a husband does, who desires
to receive into favor an unchaste wife, and is ready to grant her full
pardon, and to take her again as a chaste and faithful wife. This verse,
then, cannot be connected with the foregoing, in which, as we have seen,
the people are condemned. The word <span id="xiii.i-p6.1"></span>לסמר
*lam*e*r,* means the same, as I think, as when we say in French, *par
maniere de dire,* or as when it is commonly said, “Suppose a case.” For
the Prophet does not here introduce God as the speaker, but lays before
us a common subject, with this preface, <span
id="xiii.i-p6.2"></span>לאמר, *lamer,* that is, “Be it so, that a man
divorces his wife, and she becomes allied to another husband, can she
again return to her first husband? This is not usually done; but I will
surpass whatever kindness there may be among men, for I am ready to
receive thee, provided thou wilt in future observe conjugal fidelity,
and part with thy adulteries and adulterers.”  <span
id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71)

<span id="xiii.i-p10"></span>As to the main point, there is here no
ambiguity: for God shews that he would be reconciled to the Jews,
provided they proceeded not obstinately in their sinful courses. But in
order to set forth more fully his mercy, he uses a comparison which must
be a little more attentively considered. He had before said that he held
the place of a husband, that the people occupied the station of a wife;
and then he complained of the base perfidy of the people, who had
forsaken him, and said that they had acted like a wife who, having
despised her husband, prostituted herself to such adulterers as might
happen to meet her: but he now adds, “Behold, if a man dismisses his
wife, and she becomes the wife of another, he will never receive her
again.” And this was forbidden by the law. “But I am ready, “he says,
“to receive thee, though I had not given thee the usual divorce at my
pleasure, as husbands are wont to do who repudiate their wives, when
there is anything displeasing in them.” It is not a simple comparison,
as many think; (I know not whether all think so, for I have not read any
who seem to understand the true meaning;) for God does not simply
compare himself to a husband who has repudiated his wife for adultery;
but as I have already said, there are here two clauses. The Jews were
then wont to divorce their wives even for slight causes, and for no
cause at all.

<span id="xiii.i-p11"></span>Now, God speaks thus by Isaiah,

<span id="xiii.i-p12"></span>“Shew me the bill of your mother’s
divorcement,”  
(<span id="xiii.i-p12.2"></span>[Isa
50:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#001)<span id="xiii.i-p12.2"></span>)

<span id="xiii.i-p13"></span>as though he had said, “I have not
repudiated your mother.” For if any one then departed from his wife, the
law compelled him to take some blame on himself; for what was the bill
of divorcement? It was a testimony to the wife’s chastity; for if any
one was found guilty of adultery, there was no need of divorcement, as
it was a capital crime. (<span id="xiii.i-p13.1"></span>[Le
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#010)<span id="xiii.i-p13.1"></span>;
<span id="xiii.i-p13.2"></span>[De
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#022)<span id="xiii.i-p13.2"></span>.)
Hence adulteresses were not usually divorced; but if any woman had
conducted herself faithfully towards her husband, and he wished to
repudiate her, the law constrained him to give her the bill of
divorcement: “I repudiate this wife, not because she hath broken or
violated the bond of marriage, but because her manners are not
agreeable, because her beauty does not please me.” Thus the husbands
were then commanded to take some of the blame on themselves. Hence the
Lord says by Isaiah,

<span id="xiii.i-p14"></span>“Shew me the bill of your mother’s
divorcement;”

<span id="xiii.i-p15"></span>as though he had said, “She has departed
from me; she has broken the bond of marriage by her fornications; I am
not then in fault for being alienated from you.”

<span id="xiii.i-p16"></span>God then does not mean in this place, that
he had divorced the people; for this would have been wrong and unlawful,
and could not have been consistent with the character of God. But as I
have already said, there is here a twofold comparison. “Though a husband
should fastidiously send away his wife, and she through his fault should
be led to contract another marriage, and become the partner of another,
as though in contempt of him, he could hardly ever bear that indignity,
and become reconciled to her: but ye have not been repudiated by me, but
are like a perfidious woman, who shamefully prostitutes herself to all
whom she may meet with; and yet I am ready to receive you, and to forget
all your base conduct.” We now then understand the import of the words.

<span id="xiii.i-p17"></span>In the second clause there is a comparison
made from the less to the greater. For the return into favor would have
been easier, if the repudiated wife had afterwards become acceptable to
him, though she had become the wife of another; but when an adulteress
finds her husband so willing of himself, and ready to grant free pardon,
it is certainly an example not found among mortals. Thus we see that
God, by an argument from the less to the greater, enhances his goodness
towards the people, in order to render the Jews the less excusable for
rejecting so pertinaciously a favor freely offered to them.

<span id="xiii.i-p18"></span>But it may be asked, why the Prophet says,
*By pollution shall not this land be polluted,* or, *through this?* I
shall speak first of the words, and then refer to the subject. Almost
all give this version, “Is not that land by pollution polluted.” But I
know not what sense we can elicit by such a rendering, except, it may
be, that God compares a divorced wife to the land, or that he, by an
abrupt transition, transfers to the land what he had said of a divorced
wife, or rather that he explains the metaphor which had been used. If
this sense be approved, then the copulative which follows must be
rendered as a causative, which all have rendered adversatively, and
rightly too, “But thou.” I then prefer to read <span
id="xiii.i-p18.1"></span>ההיא, *eeia*, by itself, “by this;” that is,
when a wife returns again to her first husband, after having married
another; for the law, as we have said, forbad this; and the husband must
have become an adulterer, if he took again the wife whom he had
repudiated. Liberty was granted to women by divorce; not that divorce
was by God allowed; but as the women were innocent, they were released,
for God imputed the fault to the husbands. And when the repudiated wife
married another man, this second marriage was considered legitimate. If,
then, the first husband sought to recover the wife whom he had divorced,
he violated the bond of the second marriage. For this reason, and
according to this sense, the Prophet says, that the land would by this
become polluted; as though he had said, “It is not lawful for husbands
to take back their wives, however ready they may be to forgive them; but
I require no other thing but your return to me.”

<span id="xiii.i-p19"></span>As to the words, we now see that the
Prophet does not say without reason, “By this;” that is, when a woman
unites herself to one man, and then to another, and afterwards returns
to her first husband; for society would thus be torn asunder, and also
the sacred bond of marriage, the main thing in the preservation of
social order, would be broken.

<span id="xiii.i-p20"></span>It is added, *But thou hast played the
harlot with many companions*  <span id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72) What
we have before observed is here confirmed, — that the people had been
guilty, not only of one act of adultery, but that they were become like
common strumpets, who prostitute themselves to all without any
difference; and this is what will be presently stated. Those whom he
calls companions or friends were rivals. He says, *Yet return to me,
saith Jehovah:* by which he intimated, — “Pardon is ready for thee,
provided thou repentest.”

<span id="xiii.i-p22"></span>An objection may, however, be here raised,
— How could God do what he had forbidden in his law? The answer is
obvious, — No other remedy could have been given to preserve order in
society when men were allowed to repudiate their wives, except by adding
this restraint, as a proof that God did not favor their levity and
changeableness. It was thus necessary, for the interest of society, to
punish such men as were too morose and rigid, by withholding from them
the power of recovering the wives whom they had dismissed. It might
otherwise have been, that one changed his love the third day, or in a
month, or in a year, and demanded his wife. God then intended to put
this restraint on divorce, so that no man, who had put away his wife,
could take her again. But the case is very different as to God himself:
it is therefore nothing strange that he claims for himself the right of
being reconciled to the Jews on their repentance. It follows —

<span id="xiii.ii"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#002)<span id="xiii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p2"></span>**2**. Lift up thine eyes unto the high
places, and see where thou hast not been lien with. In the ways hast
thou sat for them, as the Arabian in the wilderness; and thou hast
polluted the land with thy whoredoms, and with thy wickedness.

<span id="xiii.ii-p3"></span>**2**. Tolle oculos tuos ad loca excelssa
(hoc est, ad colles,) et vide ubi non scortata fueris; super vias (vel,
juxta vias) sedisti illis (hoc est, ad illos captandos,) quemadmodum
Arabs in deserto; et polluisti terraim scortationibus tuis et malitia
tua.

<span id="xiii.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.ii-p5"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p6"></span>As the Prophet had charged the Jews with
being wanton in a loose and promiscuous manner, as it is the case with
abandoned women, after having cast away all shame, that they might not
evade the charge and object, that they were not conscious of any crime,
he makes them in a manner the judges themselves, *Raise up,* he says,
*thine eyes to the high places and see;* that is, “I bring forward
witnesses sufficiently known to thee; there is no hill in the land where
thou hast not been connected with idols.” We have already said, and we
shall find the same thing often mentioned by this Prophet, — that
superstitions are deemed idolatries by God. But it was a customary thing
with the Jews to ascend high places, as though they were there nearer to
God. This is the reason why the Prophet bids them to turn their eyes to
all the hills: *See,* he says, whether is there any hill free from thy
fornications. For as strumpets seek hiding — places to perpetrate their
obscenities, so the Jews sought hills as their brothels. And thus their
impiety was the more execrable as they went forth openly, and especially
as they wished their flagitious acts to be seen at a distance,
ascending, as they did, elevated places; but strumpets, having found
adulterers or paramours, are wont to seek some secret retreats. The
Prophet then cuts off from the Jews every occasion for evading the
charge, when he bids them to raise up their eyes to the high places; for
when they prostrated themselves before their idols, it was the same as
when strumpets commit acts of adultery.

<span id="xiii.ii-p7"></span>And he adds, that they *sat by the ways, as
the Arabian in the desert* He again repeats what we have before
observed, — that the Jews were not led away by the enticement of others
to violate the conjugal pledge which they had given to God, but were, on
the contrary, moved by their own wantonness, so that they of themselves
sought base and filthy gratifications, he had before said, “Thou hast
corrupted others by thy wickedness;” and now he confirms the same, “Thou
hast sat, he says, “by all the ways.” This also is what is done by vile
strumpets, who, as it has been said, have lost all shame. But the
Prophet enhances this crime by another comparison, *As an Arabian in the
desert,* who lies in wait for travelers, that he may rob and kill them:
thus hast thou *sat by the ways*  <span id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73)

<span id="xiii.ii-p12"></span>We then see here a double comparison; one
taken from strumpets, who having in time past made gain, when they find
themselves neglected, besiege the ways, and offer themselves to any they
may meet with. This is the first comparison; the other is, that they
were like robbers, who lie in wait for travelers; as though he had said,
that the Chaldeans and Egyptians were excusable when compared with the
Jews, because they had been drawn by their wicked arts into illicit
treaties, like a traveler who passing by is enticed by a robber, — “What
art thou but a helpless man; but if thou joinest me, and engagest to be
my companion, there is the best prospect of gain, and new spoils will
fall into our hands daily.” Such a robber is twice and three times more
wicked than the other. So also, the Prophet says of the Jews, that they
were like old robbers, who had become hardened in intrigues, in
plunders, and in every kind of wickedness, and had enticed to themselves
both the Egyptians and the Assyrians. It afterwards follows —

<span id="xiii.iii"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#003)<span id="xiii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p2"></span>**3**. Therefore the showers have been
withholden, and there hath been no latter rain; and thou hadst a whore’s
forehead, thou refusedst to be ashamed.

<span id="xiii.iii-p3"></span>**3**. Et prohibitae sunt pluviae, et
serotina non fuit; et frons mulieris meretricis fuit tibi, recusasti
erubescere.

<span id="xiii.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.iii-p5"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p6"></span>Jeremiah proceeds with his severe reproof,
— that the Jews were wholly given to wickedness, for they had altogether
devoted themselves to superstitions, and also to unlawful alliances, and
had in both instances despised God. He now shews how great and how
strong was their obstinacy. *Restrained,* he says, *have been the rains,
there has not been the latter rain; yet the front of a harlot has been
thine;* as though he had said, that the Jews had not in any degree been
subdued by punishment. It was a most atrocious wickedness to give no ear
to pious warnings, when the prophets continually cried to them, and
endeavored to restore them to the right way. That they thus hardened
themselves against the addresses of the prophets, was a proof of the
greatest impiety. But God tried also to restore them to himself by
punishments, and those very heavy. He punished them with sterility; and
the drought of which the Prophet speaks was no doubt so uncommon, that
the Jews might perceive, had they a particle of a sound mind, that God
was at war with them. It often happens that not a drop of rain fails
from heaven; for we see that many summers are hot and dry: there is no
doubt but that God then reminds us of our sins and exhorts us to repent.
But as familiarity makes us to overlook God’s judgments, he sometimes
punishes us in a new and unusual manner. I doubt not then but that the
Prophet, by saying, *Restrained have been rains* from them, refers to
some extraordinary instance of God’s vengeance, whereby the Jews might
have perceived, except they were extremely besotted, that God was
opposed to and displeased with them.  <span
id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74)

<span id="xiii.iii-p12"></span>The import of what is said is, — that the
Jews had not only run here and there through a mad impulse, according to
their own wills and inclinations, but that they had also been checked by
evident judgments, since God had from heaven openly shewed himself to be
the vindicator of his own glory, and as there had been so great a
drought, that it appeared clear that the curse of the law had been
fulfilled towards them,

<span id="xiii.iii-p13"></span>“I will make heaven iron to you, and the
earth brass.”  
(<span id="xiii.iii-p13.2"></span>[Le
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#019)<span
id="xiii.iii-p13.2"></span>)

<span id="xiii.iii-p14"></span>As to the latter rain, we have said
elsewhere that by this word is meant the rain which falls just before
harvest; and it is called “latter” with reference to the harvest. For,
as there is great heat in those eastern parts, they want rain before the
harvest commences; the extreme heat of the sun would otherwise scorch up
the grain. Hence, they especially look for the latter rain, which comes
shortly before harvest — time. The other rain, in September and October,
is called, on account of the sowing — time, a seasonable rain; for it
soaks and moistens the seed, that it may strike roots and gather rigor
and strength. The object is to shew, that God had from heaven given to
the Jews manifest tokens of his displeasure, and yet without any
benefit; for they had the front of a harlot, and felt no shame; that is,
they were moved by no judgments of God, and could not bear to be
corrected.

<span id="xiii.iv"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xiii.iv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast been
once pleased not only to adopt us as thy children, but also to unite us
to thyself by the bond of marriage, and to give us a pledge of this
sacred union in thine only — begotten Son, — O grant, that we may
continue in the faith of thy Gospel, and so honestly keep the pledge
given to thee, that thou mayest also shew thyself to us as a Husband and
as a Father, and that we may to the end find in thee that merciful
kindness which is needful to retain us in the holy fear of thy name,
until we shall at length enjoy fellowship with thee in thy celestial
kingdom, through Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="xiii.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiii.v"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p1"></span>Lecture Eleventh

<span id="xiii.vi"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p1"></span><span id="xiii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#004)<span id="xiii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p2"></span>**4**. Wilt thou not from this time cry
unto me, My father, thou *art* the guide of my youth?

<span id="xiii.vi-p3"></span>**4**. An non posthac clamabis ad me, Pater
mi, dux adolescentiae meae tu es?

<span id="xiii.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.vi-p5"></span><span id="xiii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p6"></span>God, after having set forth the wickedness
of his people, and severely reproved them as they deserved, now kindly
invites them to repentance, *Wilt thou not say to me hereafter,* he
says, *My Father!* Some incorrectly render the words, “Wilt thou say to
me, My Father,” as though God would reject what they said: and they give
the meaning, — that the Jews would act dishonestly in thus glorying in
God’s name, from whom they were so alienated. But very different is the
meaning of the Prophet: for God mitigates the severity of the reproof
which we have observed, and shews that he would be ready to be
reconciled to them, if they repented: nay, he waits not for their
repentance, but of his own accord meets and allures these perfidious
apostates: “What!” says God, “shall there be no more any union between
us?” For God expresses here the feeling of one grieving and lamenting,
when he saw the people perishing; and he seems anxious, if possible, to
restore them.

<span id="xiii.vi-p7"></span>It is with this design that he asks, “Will
they not again call on me as their Father and the guide of their youth?”
And by this periphrastic way of speaking, he intimates that he was the
husband of that people; for most tender is that love which a youth has
for a young virgin in the flower of her age. God, then, makes use now of
this comparison, and says, that he still remembered the love which he
had manifested towards his people. In short, he shews here that pardon
was ready, if the people sought reconciliation; and he confirms the same
thing when he adds —

<span id="xiii.vii"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#005)<span id="xiii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p2"></span>**5**. Will he reserve *his anger* for
ever? will he keep *it* to the end? Behold, thou hast spoken and done
evil things as thou couldest.

<span id="xiii.vii-p3"></span>**5**. An observabit in seculum? an
custodiet in perpetuum? Ecce, loquuta es, et perpetrasti malitias (*vel,
scelera*) et potuisti.

<span id="xiii.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.vii-p5"></span><span id="xiii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p6"></span>God shews that it was the fault of the
Jews, that he did not receive them into favor. And here he takes the
argument from his own nature, and speaks of himself in the third person;
and it is the same as though the Prophet had interposed this reasoning,
“God is not inexorable, for he is as ready to forgive as he is long —
suffering: now, then, what prevents you from living happily again under
his government? for he will spare you, provided he finds in you genuine
repentance.” We now then see, what the Prophet means here: for as God
had kindly exhorted the people to repent, the Prophet speaks now
generally of God’s own nature, — that *he keeps not for ever, nor
reserves perpetually*

<span id="xiii.vii-p7"></span>These words, when put alone, mean that he
does not cherish vengeance, and in our language we imitate the Hebrews,
*Il lui garde*. This *garde,* when put without anything added to it,
means, as I have said, that vengeance is cherished within. But nothing
is more contrary than this to the nature of God. It hence follows, that
the Jews had no obstacle in their way, except that they shunned God, and
that being addicted to their own vices, they were unwilling to receive
the pardon that was freely offered to them.

<span id="xiii.vii-p8"></span>As to the second clause, it admits of
being explained in two ways. We may regard an adversative particle to be
understood, “though thou hast spoken and hast done, “etc.; as if God had
said, that he would be propitious to the Jews, however atrociously they
might have sinned. But another view is more simple, — that God here
complains that there was no hope of amendment, as they had become
hardened in their vices, “Thou hast spoken,” he says, “thou hast done,
and thou hast been able.” And interpreters further vary in their views:
for the copulative is explained by some as a particle of comparison, in
the sense of <span id="xiii.vii-p8.1"></span>כאשר, *k*e*ash*e*r,
“*according to what thou wert able, thou hast done wickedness.” But
others take the words more simply and more correctly, as I think, “Thou
hast been very strong;” that is, thou hast exerted all thy power, so
that thou hast put forth all thy strength in doing evil, as we say in
Latin, *pro virili*, with all thy might; that is, as far as thy capacity
extended, thou hast devoted thyself to wickedness.  <span
id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75)

<span id="xiii.vii-p15"></span>I therefore give this explanation: God
had before put on, as it were, the character of one in grief and sorrow,
and kindly exhorted the people to repent, and testified that he would be
ready to pardon them, and at the same time shewed in general that he
would be propitious, as he is by nature inclined to mercy. After having
set forth these things, he now adds, that he despaired of that people,
because they gloried in their own wickedness: for to speak and to do
means the same as if he had said, that the people were so impudent, that
they boasted of their rebellion against God, and dared to call darkness
light; for the superstitious, we know, glory against God without any
shame. Now, such was the state of the people; for God, by his prophets,
condemned this especially in them — that they had corrupted the pure
worship of the law; but they with a meretricious front dared to set up
against him their own devotions and good intentions, as they are
commonly called. As then, they thus presumptuously defended their wicked
deeds, God here complains that they were in no way healable, and so he
leaves them as past remedy. This I regard as the real meaning of the
Prophet: and of similar import is the verb <span
id="xiii.vii-p15.1"></span>תוכל, *tuc*a*l; “*thou hast put forth all thy
might,” he says, that is, thou hast observed no limits in sinning, but,
on the contrary, hast given thyself up to unbridled licentiousness. It
now follows —

<span id="xiii.viii"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p1"></span><span
id="xiii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
3:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#006)<span id="xiii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p2"></span>**6**. The LORD said also unto me in the
days of Josiah the king, Hast thou seen *that* which backsliding Israel
hath done? she is gone up upon every high mountain and under every green
tree, and there hath played the harlot.

<span id="xiii.viii-p3"></span>**6**. Et dixit Jehova ad me in diebus
Josiae regis, An vidisti quid fecerit aversatrix (alii vertunt,
rebellis) Israel? Profecta est ipsa super omnem montem excelsum, et
subtus omnem arborem frondosam, et scortata est illic:

<span id="xiii.viii-p4"></span>**7**. And I said after she had done all
these *things*, Turn thou unto me. But she returned not. And her
treacherous sister Judah saw *it*

<span id="xiii.viii-p5"></span>**7**. Et dixi, Post facere ipsam (hoc
est, postquam fecit omnia haec,) Ad me revertere (alii in tertia persona
reddunt, Revertatur;) et non reversa est: et vidit perfida ejus soror
Jehudah.

<span id="xiii.viii-p6"></span>**8**. And I saw, when for all the causes
whereby backsliding Israel committed adultery I had put her away, and
given her a bill of divorce; yet her treacherous sister Judah feared
not, but went and played the harlot also.

<span id="xiii.viii-p7"></span>**8**. Et vidi, quod super his omnibus
(hoc est, quod propter haec, nempe <span id="xiii.viii-p7.1"></span>אדות
significat occasiones vel causas,) quia scortata erat rebellis Israel,
dimiserim ipsam (repudiaverim,) et dederim librum repudiorum ejus
(repudii ejus) illi, et non timuit perfida Jehudah soror ejus, et
scortata est etiam ipsa.

<span id="xiii.viii-p8"></span> 

<span id="xiii.viii-p9"></span><span id="xiii.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p10"></span>Here the Prophet enters on a new
discourse: he relates what God had committed to him, and mentions the
time, even in the reign of Josiah. It is indeed well known, that the
land was then cleansed from superstitions; for that pious king labored
to restore the true worship of God, and to remove all the filth and
defilements, by which the temple and the whole of religion had been
corrupted. He strenuously exerted himself, and no doubt there was an
improved appearance of religion throughout the land; but we shall see
that a great portion of the people were under the influence of hypocrisy
and deceit., as it is usually the case when rulers seek to support the
pure worship of God, and to free it from all corruptions; for there are
many hypocrites, who for a time dissemble, while the same antipathy to
God still remains. Such was then the condition of the people.

<span id="xiii.viii-p11"></span>And this ought to be carefully observed;
for Jeremiah might have appeared to have dealt somewhat too sharply and
rigorously with his own nation, as reform was in the mouth of all,
according to what we find to be the case with many now, who having left
the superstitions of the Papacy, seemed at first to embrace the
doctrines of the Gospel, but all now wish to be satisfied with any kind
of reformation; at the same time, they shake off the yoke of Christ and
can bear submission to no discipline: in short, their object, is to
subvert all order; and yet they boldly claim to be the advocates of
reformation, whenever their impiety is reproved. This was no doubt the
contest which Jeremiah had to carry on, the same with that by which the
Lord tries his servants at this day. He therefore says, that he received
this commission *in the days of Josiah,* that is, when that king was
laboring to establish the pure worship of God, and no one dared to
oppose; for we find that God was then worshipped by the whole people
without any external corruptions.

<span id="xiii.viii-p12"></span>But what is contained in this
commission? *Hast thou seen,* he says, *what apostate Israel hath done?*
God here compares the ten tribes with the tribe of Judah, with whom was
united, as it is well known, the half tribe of Benjamin: he then
compares Israel with the tribe of Judah, “Do you not see what rebellious
Israel hath done?” But he introduces the kingdom of Israel, as well as
the kingdom of Judah, under the character of women; for God, as it has
already appeared, represents himself as the husband of his people. He
then says that he had two wives, even Israel and Judah. God had indeed
espoused to himself the whole seed of Abraham by one contract; but
Jeremiah speaks here in a popular manner. Though the Israelites had
departed from God, yet he had not wholly rejected them. The kingdom of
Israel had then become adulterous; but God for a time bore with that
sin, so that the covenant, in part, remained. For this reason he
acknowledges as his wives both Israel and Judah. Hence he says, “Hast
thou not seen what estranged Israel hath done?” The word <span
id="xiii.viii-p12.1"></span>משבה*, m*e*sh*i*be,* is derived from <span
id="xiii.viii-p12.2"></span>שוב, *shub,* which signifies, both to return
and to depart; and *Jerome* everywhere renders it *aversatrix,* one who
turns aside, or is estranged.  <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76) But
some render it “rebellious;” we might say more correctly in French,
*debauchee* *She went,* he says, on *every high hill, and under every
shady tree, and there played the harlot* In short, God complains that
the ten tribes had violated the sacred bond of marriage, when they
prostituted themselves to idols, even on all high hills and under all
shady trees: for as I have already said, they chose those places as
though there was some holiness both on mountains and under shades of
trees.

<span id="xiii.viii-p16"></span><span id="xiii.viii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p17"></span>He afterwards adds, *Yet I said;* God
here states, that he had long suspended his judgment before he punished
the people of Israel. He then extols here his patience, that he had not
immediately visited the Israelites as they deserved, but bore with them
and for a long time waited to see whether they could be reclaimed: *I
said,* then, *after she had done all these things, Return to me* If we
read in the third person, the sense will be the same, “I hoped indeed
that they would return to the right way, though they had thus fallen
away, yea though they had denied me by an impious defection, and had
become alienated from the faith and from piety.” But I am more inclined
to another view, — that God here records the fact, that he had recalled
to himself the ten tribes by his servants the Prophets, though they had
by their many crimes provoked his wrath. Here then God shews how
perverse the Israelites had been; for he had tried to restore them, if
possible, to himself, but had spent all his labor in vain. I thus
explain, *I said,* of the prophetic instruction: “Though then the
Israelites had plunged themselves into impieties, I yet ceased not to
try whether they could be restored to me.” He intimates, in short, that
he had been unlike those husbands, who will not be reconciled to their
wives, burning with jealousy, because they see that they had been
exposed to so much disgrace. God then shews that though the Israelites
had departed from him, he yet sent his prophets, and of his own free
will sought reconciliation with them, but that they had refused to
return.  <span id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77)

<span id="xiii.viii-p23"></span>He then adds, *See did she,* that is,
the whole kingdom of Judah, that, for al1 this, because the *rebellious
Israel had played the harlot, etc*. We shall hereafter find the design
of this comparison; for he amplifies the sin of the kingdom of Judah,
inasmuch she had time enough to observe what he now relates, and was
able to see it at a distance as it were from a watchtower; yet she saw
it without any advantage. God then intended to shew how great was the
hardness of the Jews, who had seen the defection of the ten tribes, and
had seen how severely they had been reproved by the prophets.

<span id="xiii.viii-p24"></span><span id="xiii.viii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p25"></span>He then says, *And I saw* As he had said
that the kingdom of Judah had seen what happened to Israel, so he now
says, that he had seen both, *See* then *did I* Now, what does he
declare that he had seen? Even that Judah had played the harlot; for he
now speaks of Judah as of a woman. Then God says, that it was not a
thing hid from him that Judah had surpassed the crimes of her sister,
not through ignorance or deception, but through deliberate wickedness:
See, he says, *did I,* that notwithstanding *all these things,* she
*played the harlot* He thus explains more fully what he had briefly
touched upon before. He had said, that Judah had seen, but this on
account of its brevity might have appeared ambiguous: he therefore
explains it more at large; “*See did* Judah that I gave a bill of
divorcement to her sister, because she had played the harlot; and yet
she feared not;” that. is, she thought not of repenting, when she had
such a striking example of vengeance set before her eyes.

<span id="xiii.viii-p26"></span>But it may be here asked, how could it
be said that a bill of divorce had been given to the Israelites, when he
denies by the Prophet Isaiah that he had given it? (<span
id="xiii.viii-p26.1"></span>[Isa
50:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#001)<span
id="xiii.viii-p26.1"></span>.) But the Prophet here takes another view
of the subject; for he does not speak here of the bills of divorce, such
as were usually given, when a husband repudiated a wife who had been
chaste and faithful; but he speaks of that lawful divorce, when a woman,
convicted of adultery, is liable to a capital punishment. God then by
his prophet Isaiah denies that he had given a bill of divorcement; but
he says here that he had given it, because he had repudiated an
adulterous woman. It was not indeed at that time customary among the
Jews to divorce an adulteress, for she was led to execution. But we have
seen at the beginning of the chapter that there is a difference between
God and husbands. As then God did not deal, as he might have justly
done, with the Israelites, and did not execute a capital punishment, as
he might rightly have done, and what was usually done, he says that he
had *given a bill of divorce,* that is, that he had repudiated that
people. But by the bill of divorce he means exile; for when the ten
tribes were banished, it was the same as though God openly shewed that
he had no connection with that people: as long as they continued in the
holy land and in the promised inheritance, some kind of union remained;
but when they were dispersed here and there, and every sort of worship
had ceased among them, and also when the very kingdom of Israel had no
longer an existence, God had then divorced them.

<span id="xiii.viii-p27"></span>*See* then *did her sister Judah,* and
she *feared not* It was indeed an instance of great insensibility, not
to learn wisdom at the expense of others; and it is a complaint found
everywhere in the prophets, — that the Jews were not stimulated to
repentance, while God spared them, and at the same time set before them
examples which ought in all reason to have terrified them. For what
ought they to have considered, but that God would punish those many
transgressions by which they provoked his wrath, since he had not spared
their brethren? They saw that the kingdom of Israel had been abolished,
and yet all of them derived their origin from the same father, even
Abraham: how was it then that they so heedlessly despised God’s
judgment, which had been for a long time before their eyes? Hence he
complains that they *feared not* It now follows —

<span id="xiii.ix"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p1"></span><span id="xiii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#009)<span id="xiii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p2"></span>**9**. And it came to pass through the
lightness of her whoredom, that she defiled the land, and committed
adultery with stones and with stocks.

<span id="xiii.ix-p3"></span>**9**. Et factum est a velocitate (*vertunt
tam Hieronymus quam alii interpretes,* facilitatem; *nomen deductum est
a* <span id="xiii.ix-p3.1"></span>קלל, *quod significat interdum esse
velocem; hic levitas notatur, vel petulantia,* factum est, *igitur,* a
levitate, *aut* petulantia) scortationum ejus, ut pollueret terram
(*vel,* contaminaret; *alii vertunt,* peccare faceret; *sed Hieronymus
ubique fere reddit hoc verbum per contaminare, neque male quadrat,)* et
scortata est cum lapide et cum ligno.

<span id="xiii.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.ix-p5"></span><span id="xiii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p6"></span>Here the Prophet completes his charge, —
that so far was it that the punishment which God had inflicted on the
Israelites, had any effect on the tribe of Judah, that she surpassed by
her levity and lustfulness the whoredomes of her sister. *She has
polluted,* he says, *the land,* or made the land to sin, that is,
rendered the land guilty. It is indeed what greatly exaggerates the
crime, when it is said that the land became guilty or contaminated. The
land, we know, was in itself pure, and could contract no pollution from
the vices of men; but that the impiety of men might be exhibited the
more detestable, the land is said to have been contaminated by them:

<span id="xiii.ix-p7"></span>Or, it may be said that the land was made
guilty. How so? The reason why they are said to have contaminated the
land or to have made it guilty or to have implicated it in their own
vices, he gives in these words, she has *played the harlot with stone
and with wood*  <span id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78) Of this metaphor of
playing the harlot it is not necessary now to speak; for we have said
already, that this similitude is often repeated, because God had united
that people to himself and bound them to him, as it were, by the sacred
bond of marriage. Hence whenever the people departed from the pure
worship of God, they were justly said to have played the harlot, for
they violated their pledged faith: as simplicity of faith is spiritual
chastity, so apostasy is that shamelessness and perfidy, when a wife
becomes unfaithful to her husband by following adulterers. It afterwards
follows —

<span id="xiii.x"></span>

<span id="xiii.x-p1"></span><span id="xiii.x-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#010)<span id="xiii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.x-p2"></span>**10**. And yet for all this her treacherous
sister Judah hath not turned unto me with her whole heart, but
feignedly, saith the LORD.

<span id="xiii.x-p3"></span>**10**. Atque etiam in tote hoc (*vel,* in
his onmibus) non reversa est ad me perfida (*vel,* fraudulenta: דגב *est
fraudare*) sorer ejus Jehudah in toto corde suo, sed in mendacio, inquit
Jehova.

<span id="xiii.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.x-p5"></span><span id="xiii.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.x-p6"></span>He goes on with the same subject, — that the
Jews were not moved by any fear when they saw the dreadful vengeance
executed on their brethren on account of their sins. *Her perfidious
sister,* he says, *returned not to me,* that is, after so many warnings
by the prophets and such an example of punishment. He however adds an
explanation, — she *turned not with her whole heart, but feignedly* and
falsely.  <span id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79)

<span id="xiii.x-p10"></span>The Prophet anticipates here such
objections as the Jews might have alleged, “What! thou deniest that we
have returned! Is not the whole land cleansed from idolatries? Is not
God worshipped according to the requirements of the law? Is there any
more an altar seen under the shades of trees or on hills?” As then they
might have thus evaded the charge as they usually did, the Prophet
obviates such an evasion and says, “Though they have ill appearance
given some tokens of repentance, yet they have only put on a disguise
and have acted falsely towards God; for there is no integrity in them.”
We now more clearly see why he had before specifically mentioned the
time of Josiah; for the Jews then returned feignedly to God: there was
in the king and in a few a right feeling, but in the rest dissimulation
only. God then in a few words shews, that he cares not for that
reformation which is false and feigned, but that he requires a genuine
feeling within: hence he thus concludes —

<span id="xiii.xi"></span>

<span id="xiii.xi-p1"></span><span id="xiii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#011)<span id="xiii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xi-p2"></span>**11**. And the LORD said unto me, The
backsliding Israel hath justified herself more than treacherous Judah.

<span id="xiii.xi-p3"></span>**11**. Et dixit Jehova ad me, justificavit
animam suam aversatrix Israel prae fraudulenta Jehuda (*vel,* perfida,
*semper est* <span id="xiii.xi-p3.1"></span>בגדה.)

<span id="xiii.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.xi-p5"></span><span id="xiii.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xi-p6"></span>We now see more clearly for what purpose
Jeremiah compared the ten tribes with the kingdom of Judah; it was done
in order to shew that the Jews, who wished to be deemed far more holy
than others, were yet more perfidious and deserved a heavier punishment,
because they acted so deceitfully with God.

<span id="xiii.xi-p7"></span>It may be here asked, why he pronounces the
Jews worse than the Israelites, while they still continued in a sort of
middle state of things. We indeed know that the kingdom of Judah was
become so corrupt, that hardly any religion remained there; yet the
temple was still standing and the priesthood still existed at Jerusalem.
But the Prophet condemns the Jews more than the Israelites for other
reasons, even because they ought to have become wise through the
calamities of others, and they ought to have been confirmed in true
religion when they saw their brethren falling away from the pure worship
of God: these things they ought to have maturely considered. It was this
supine sottishness that rendered them worse than all their brethren, and
also their pride, the chief cause of their condemnation, for they
boasted that they remained perfect, while the ten tribes had become
degenerated. These were the reasons why he says that Israel, though a
perfidious woman, was yet more righteous than her sister Judah.

<span id="xiii.xi-p8"></span>The language indeed is not to be strictly
taken when it is said, that she *justified her soul;* for God does not
here excuse the Israelites, nor does he free or absolve them from guilt,
(for he had severely punished them;) but this way of speaking is
commonly used by the prophets; — Sodom was righteous in comparison with
Jerusalem; and Tyre and Sidon were just when compared with the Jews.
(<span id="xiii.xi-p8.1"></span>[Ezek.
16:47](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#047),
[48](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#048)<span id="xiii.xi-p8.1"></span>.)
*Justified* then *has she her soul,*  <span
id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80) even the *treacherous* or the apostate
*Israel, in comparison with the perfidious Judah;* that is, for the
reasons which I have stated. The obstinacy of the Jews was greater and
less excusable: the external worship of God, which they had retained,
ought to have been a bridle to check them; and they had also seen how
severe a judge God had been towards the ten tribes; but the judgments of
God they despised, and derived no benefit from them.

<span id="xiii.xii"></span>

<span id="xiii.xii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xiii.xii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou hast
deigned to adopt us as thy people, and to unite us to thyself in thine
only — begotten Son, — O grant, that we may continue pure and chaste in
our obedience to thy Gospel, and never turn aside to those corruptions
which disunite that sacred bond of union, which has been confirmed
between us by the blood of thy Son, but that we may so persevere in
serving thee, that our whole life and all our actions may be evidences
of that holy calling, by which is laid up for us the hope of eternal
salvation, until we shall at length come into the possession of that
kingdom which has been obtained for us by so great a price, and there
enjoy the fruit of our faith, sincerity, and perseverance, through
Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="xiii.xii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiii.xiii"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiii-p1"></span>Lecture Twelfth

<span id="xiii.xiv"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p1"></span><span id="xiii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#012)<span id="xiii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p2"></span>**12**. Go and proclaim these words toward
the north, and say, Return, thou backsliding Israel, saith the LORD;
*and* I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you: for I *am* merciful,
saith the LORD, *and* I will not keep *anger* for ever.

<span id="xiii.xiv-p3"></span>**12**. Vade et clama (*hoc est,* cum
clamore intona) sermones hos versus Aquilonem, et dic, Revertere
rebellis Israel, dicit Jehova: non, non faciam incumbere (cadere, *ad
verbum*) iram meam (*alii vertunt,* faciem meam; *sed metaphorice
sl*g*nificat* iram) in vos, quia clemens ego, dicit Jehova, non servabo
in seculum.

<span id="xiii.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.xiv-p5"></span><span id="xiii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p6"></span>The Prophet, after having shewn that the
tribe of Judah deserved a heavier punishment than the ten tribes, and
having mentioned the cause, that they had seen their brethren severely
chastised and were not moved, now turns his discourse to the Israelites
themselves, or the ten tribes, and promises that God would be propitious
to them. The kingdom of Israel had now been overthrown, and the people
had been banished into Assyria, Persia, and Media. They had been
scattered, and the name of the kingdom had been obliterated. The land
had been often laid waste and the kingdom partly existed, as four tribes
only were first driven to exile; but at, length the very name of a
kingdom ceased to exist, and they were all, as I have said, led away
into captivity. Hence the Prophet is bidden to address his words towards
the north; for though the greater part of the people dwelt then in the
east, yet as they had been banished by the Assyrians, God had a regard
to the capital of the monarchy in bidding the Prophet to address those
whom the enemies had led away to the north.

<span id="xiii.xiv-p7"></span>*Cry,* then, not so much on account of the
distance of the place, but that the Jews, who were deaf, might hear him
crying; for the Prophet was bidden to speak not only for the sake of the
Israelites, but that through them he might set before the Jews the mercy
of God, if only they returned to a sound mind. Now the import of the
whole is, — that though the Israelites had been rebellious and had
turned away from God, yet pardon was ready for them, if they returned.
What the Prophet means by the word *return,* we have already in part
explained, and we shall have to speak on the subject more fully
elsewhere. He then requires repentance, and promises that God would be
propitious to them in case they returned to him.

<span id="xiii.xiv-p8"></span>He afterwards adds, *I will not make my
face,* or rather, my wrath, *to fall upon you;* for this latter meaning
is the most appropriate. God had already severely punished their sins;
for what can happen to a people more grievous than to be banished from
their own country, and then to be oppressed by cruel tyranny? They yet
suffered a heavier punishment; for the worship according to the Law had
been taken away from them, they had been repudiated by God, they had
lost that glory by which they thought that they excelled all other
nations in having been chosen as God’s peculiar people. All these things
had been entirely lost. In what sense then does God declare that he
would not be angry with them? By this way of speaking the Prophet simply
means, that God would not be irreconcilable, as though he had said, “My
wrath shall not dwell, or shall not he upon you; but I will mitigate the
punishment which I have inflicted.” Hence I do not disapprove of
Jerome’s rendering, “I will not make steady,” (*firmabo;*) though when
he adds “face, “he does not sufficiently set forth the meaning of the
Prophet. But this may be admitted, “I will not make steady my wrath upon
you;” that is, “My wrath shall not lie or dwell on your heads, so as
wholly to overwhelm you.” God’s wrath had already fallen upon them, but
in such a way that there was still some hope of deliverance. God then
denies, that the calamities, by which he had chastised their sins, would
be fatal, for he would withdraw his hand and not pursue them to the last
extremity.

<span id="xiii.xiv-p9"></span>The meaning then is, — that if the people
returned to God they would obtain pardon, because God of his own free
will invited them and promised that the punishment which he had
inflicted on account of their sins, would be only for a time.  <span
id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81)

<span id="xiii.xiv-p19"></span>God further confirms this truth by
mentioning what his nature is, *for merciful am I, and I will not retain
wrath for ever* The promise was special in case the people returned; God
now adds a general truth by way of confirmation, — that he was disposed
to shew mercy, and that he would readily forgive for his mercy’s sake.
Since God then is such, and cannot deny himself, there is no reason why
a sinner should despair and thus close up the way, that he should not in
his penitence implore God’s mercy.

<span id="xiii.xiv-p20"></span>We may hence gather a profitable
doctrine, — that whenever unbelief lays hold on our minds, so that we
cannot apply to our benefit the promises of God, this should ever be
remembered by us — that God is merciful. As God then is so gracious,
that he reserves not wrath for ever, but that it is only for a time, we
ought to entertain hope; and corresponding with this is what is said in
the Psalms,

<span id="xiii.xiv-p21"></span>“A moment *is he* in his wrath;  
and life *is* in his goodness and mercy,” (<span
id="xiii.xiv-p21.2"></span>[Ps
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#005)<span
id="xiii.xiv-p21.2"></span>;)

<span id="xiii.xiv-p22"></span>as though he had said, that God’s wrath
soon passes away, provided we repent, but that he shews his mercy
through all ages; for this is what is meant by the word “life.” He then
goes on —

<span id="xiii.xv"></span>

<span id="xiii.xv-p1"></span><span id="xiii.xv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#013)<span id="xiii.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xv-p2"></span>**13**. Only acknowledge thine iniquity,
that thou hast transgressed against the LORD thy God, and hast scattered
thy ways to the strangers under every green tree, and ye have not obeyed
my voice, saith the LORD.

<span id="xiii.xv-p3"></span>**13**. Tantnm modo (*vel,* atqui) cognosce
iniquitatem tuam, quia adversus Jehovam Deum tuum scelerate egisti, et
dispersisti (*vel,* dissipasti, *aut,* prostituisti) vias tuas alienis,
sub omni arbore frondosa, et vocem meam non audivisti, inquit Jehova.

<span id="xiii.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.xv-p5"></span><span id="xiii.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xv-p6"></span>God lays down here a condition, lest
hypocrites, relying on his goodness, should become more and more
hardened, and yet think that he is bound as it were to them; for they
usually reason thus, — “God is so kind that he recalls us to himself,
and of his own free will invites even sinners; we may therefore easily
settle matters with him.” Thus hypocrites by false thoughts’ delude
themselves, thinking that they can elude God, since he seeks nothing
else but to restore sinners to himself. Hence with the promise of favor
there ought ever to be connected an exhortation to repentance. God then
reminds here the Israelites, that they were greatly deceived, if they
thought they could without any difficulty obtain pardon.

<span id="xiii.xv-p7"></span>Hence he says, *know thine iniquity* The
particle <span id="xiii.xv-p7.1"></span>אך, *ak*, may be rendered only,
or but, or yet. I prefer the second meaning, *but;* for an exception, as
I have said, is here added, lest the Israelites slumbered in their
vices, if they persuaded themselves that God was, as it, were, in their
power and subject to their will. We hence see that the Prophet,
modifying what he had said, introduces this sentence, “*But* in the
meantime *know thine iniquity,* otherwise thou canst expect no peace
with God.” Then these words follow, *because thou hast acted wickedly
against Jehovah thy God* By these words the Prophet proves that the
Israelites were guilty, lest they supposed that they could by evasions
escape the wrath of God; for we know that often, even those who are
conscious of their guilt, are not willing to confess their sins; and it
is strange that men are so besotted as ever to contend with God. On this
account the Prophets, when they exhorted the people to repent, at the
same time brought to light their sins. Were there in men frankness and
honesty, there would be no need thus to charge them; but as they either
boldly deny their sins, or are so callous as to be moved by no fear, it
is necessary to prick them sharply and even deeply to wound them. This
is what the Prophet now does; *Thou,* he says, *hast done wickedly
against thy God;* as though he had said, “I do not now in vain remind
thee to own thy sins, for God himself condemns thee: think not thou that
thou canst gain anything by thy subterfuges.”

<span id="xiii.xv-p8"></span>He mentions also particulars, that he might
come into closer quarters with them, *Thou hast dispersed,* he says, or
scattered, *thy ways to strangers, under every shady tree* He again
compares the Israelites to strumpets, who commonly so prostitute
themselves, that they ramble from one place to another, invite and
allure all they meet with. The Prophet then says, that the Israelites
had thus dispersed themselves. He speaks delicately on an indelicate
subject. But what he means is, that the Israelites were not content with
one kind of superstition or with one idol, but blended together as many
superstitions as they could, and borrowed false notions from all
quarters: they were like a rambling strumpet, who prostitutes herself to
all men indifferently. And *strangers* he calls all their fictitious
gods; for as I have often said, they ought to have regarded him as their
husband. When therefore the Israelites turned away to other gods, they
became like a woman, who leaves her husband and prostitutes herself to
any she can find. It is indeed a most common thing for those who forsake
the true worship of God to seek for themselves various errors from all
quarters, and to abandon themselves unreservedly to all kinds of
superstitions.

<span id="xiii.xv-p9"></span>He at length adds, *And thou hast not
hearkened to my voice* By this fact the Prophet enhances their sin; for
they had been instructed in the doctrine of the law, and understood the
right way of salvation: how then was it that they thus polluted
themselves with so many superstitions? It could not have been attributed
to ignorance. It was then their manifest rebellion against God. The
Prophet then shews that they had been disobedient and intractable, and
that they had relapsed into idolatry and pernicious errors, because they
had shaken off the yoke of God, and suffered not themselves to be ruled
and guided by his word.  <span id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82)

<span id="xiii.xv-p13"></span>We now then perceive the meaning of this
verse: God *first* requires a confession of sins from the Israelites;
and thus he sets forth how available that return would be which he had
previously mentioned; for until a sinner knows his sinfulness, he will
never really and from the heart return to God, as the beginning of
repentance is the confession of guilt. He *then* proves them to have
been guilty, that he might cut off from them every pretense for evasion.
He mentions in the *third* place specific sins, that he might hold them
as it were fast bound, even that they had polluted themselves with
superstitions, and that they had become, not only like an adulterous
woman who follows another man, but also like filthy strumpets, who run
here and there and make no difference between men known or unknown. He
shews in the *last* place, that all this happened through mere
obstinacy; for they had cast aside every regard for God, though he had
given them his law, and sent the prophets as its faithful interpreters,
so that they understood what God approved and what was just and right.
The reason then why they went astray was, that they closed their ears to
God’s word, and suffered not themselves to be ruled by it, but became
wholly unteachable. Let us go on —

<span id="xiii.xvi"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvi-p1"></span><span id="xiii.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#014)<span id="xiii.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvi-p2"></span>**14**. Turn, O backsliding children,
saith the LORD; for I am married unto you: and I will take you one of a
city, and two of a family, and I will bring you to Zion:

<span id="xiii.xvi-p3"></span>**14**. Revertimini filii rebelles, dieit
Jehova, quoniam ego maritus vester (*vel,* dominatus sum in vobis, *ut*
*alii vertunt; alii,* taedio affectus sum in vobis; *dicemus postea de
hoc verbo,)* et assumam vos, unum e civitate, et duos e familia (*vel,*
cognatione, *vel,* tribu,) et addueam vos in Sion.

<span id="xiii.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.xvi-p5"></span><span id="xiii.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvi-p6"></span>Jeremiah repeats the same thing in other
words; but God by so many words shews clearer how ready he would be to
grant pardon, provided the Israelites really repented. It would have
been enough for God to testify once, that he would be reconcilable, but
seeing that they were slow and hard to believe, he proceeds in the same
strain. It is a wonderful forbearance and kindness that God, finding his
favor neglected, and as it were rejected through the sloth of men,
should yet persevere, and invite them again and again. What man would
thus patiently bear the loathing of his favor and kindness? But we see
that God does not immediately reject the tardy and the slothful, but
adds new stimulants that he might at length move them, though this may
seem more than necessary. How great is our torpidity? Were not God daily
to urge us, how little attention would any of us give to his
admonitions? It is, therefore, no wonder that he, pardoning our
tardiness, should again and again invite us to repentance; which we find
is done continually in the Church.

<span id="xiii.xvi-p7"></span>This, then, is the reason why the Prophet
now repeats the same thing, *Return,* now, *ye rebellious children;* for
he had said before, “Return, thou rebellious Israel.” He then adds, *For
I am a husband to you* Some regard <span id="xiii.xvi-p7.1"></span>בעל
*bol*, in the sense of being wearied, when found as here, <span
id="xiii.xvi-p7.2"></span>בעלתי בכם *bolti b*e*k*e*m, “*I have been
wearied by you:” but this meaning does not comport with this passage.
 <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83) More correctly, then, have others
rendered the words, “I am lord to you: “but this lord is not to be taken
indefinitely as in Latin, for it properly means a husband, who is a lord
to his wife. God, then, no doubt, continues the same comparison, that of
a marriage, which has already been often mentioned; for he charges the
Israelites with adultery, because they had departed from him. Hence it
is that he says, *I am your husband* He had previously said, “Though a
person, when he repudiates his wife, and she be married to another, will
never again be reconciled to her; yet I am ready to forgive your perfidy
and wantonness: only observe chastity hereafter, and I will deal kindly
with you.” Similar is this passage, “I am your husband,” though I have
repudiated you. He had, indeed, said, that he had given them a bill of
divorce, and thus testified, as by a public document, that there was no
longer any connection between him and that people, for exile was a kind
of divorce; but he says now, “I am your husband; for though I have been
grievously offended with you, because you have broken your pledged
faith, I yet remain in the same mind, so as to be ready to be your
husband.”

<span id="xiii.xvi-p9"></span>We now, then, perceive the real meaning of
the Prophet: despair might have laid hold on the Israelites so as to
dread that access to which the Prophet had invited them; but that no
terror might hinder them to repent, God here declares that he would
become their husband, and that he had not forgotten that relationship
with which he had once favored them. The sum of what he says is, “I have
once embraced you with the love of a husband; ye have, indeed, become
alienated from me, but return, and I am ready to forgive and to receive
you, as though ye had always been faithful to me.”

<span id="xiii.xvi-p10"></span>*Again will I take you,* he says; and
then he adds, *one from a city, two from a family* Deserving of especial
notice is this passage; for God shews that they were not to wait for one
another, and also, that though the whole body of the people rotted in
their sins, yet a few would return to him, and that he would be
reconciled to them. This was a point most necessary to be taught; for
God’s covenant was in common with the whole seed of Abraham; they might
then have concluded that the covenant was extinct, except he gathered
together the whole people; for he had not chosen one or two or a hundred
or a thousand, but all the seed of Abraham. Since then the promise,
without exception, was common, to all, any one might thus reason, “What
connection have I with God, except as one born of the race of Abraham?
but I am not alone, for we are all the children of Abraham: yet I see
that none turn to God, so I must perish with the rest of the people.”
Now, that this thought should not hinder the godly, he says, “I will
take one from a city, two from a family;”  <span
id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) that is, “If one only come to me from a
city he shall find an open door; if two only from a tribe come to me, I
shall receive them.” We now apprehend the design of the Prophet.

<span id="xiii.xvi-p12"></span>Interpreters, indeed, explain one from a
city as meaning, that though the multitude should perish, yet God would
not deny forgiveness to three or four; but they teach not what is
especially worthy of notice, that two or three are mentioned, because
this thought, as it has been said, might have perplexed them, that is,
that they had been all in common chosen as a holy people.

<span id="xiii.xvi-p13"></span>What is here taught may be useful to us
in the present day. For we see many foolishly excluding themselves from
the hope of salvation, and seeking no access to God, because they have a
regard to one another, and the great mass hold them entangled. How is it
under the Papacy, that so many pertinaciously resist God? even because
they think themselves safely hid in the multitude. We also find among us
that some are an hindrance to others. Let this truth be ever remembered,
that when God stretches forth his arms, he is ready to receive, not only
all, were they with one consent to come to him, but also two or three,
even from one city, or from a whole people.

<span id="xiii.xvi-p14"></span>He adds, *I will cause you to come to
Zion.* This had been once said before: God intimates that their exile
would be temporary, that the Israelites would again be made partakers of
his inheritance, if they returned to God in sincerity and truth. It
follows —

<span id="xiii.xvii"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvii-p1"></span><span
id="xiii.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#015)<span id="xiii.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvii-p2"></span>**15**. And I will give you pastors
according to mine heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and
understanding.

<span id="xiii.xvii-p3"></span>**15**. Et dabo vobis pastores secundum
cor meurn, et pascent vos scientia et intelligentia (*hoc est,* scienter
et prudenter).

<span id="xiii.xvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.xvii-p5"></span><span id="xiii.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvii-p6"></span>Here God promises that he would so
provide for the salvation of his people after their return from exile,
that they should not again perish. But the cause of God’s vengeance
ought to be observed, which is expressed in the fifth chapter of Isaiah,
“My people,” he says, “have been led captive, because they had no
knowledge; therefore the grave has widened its soul or its throat.
 <span id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85) He then says, that the cause of
the people’s ruin was, because instruction had ceased among them, and
pastors had become mute dogs or robbers. Here, on the other hand, God
declares that he would give them faithful pastors, who would discharge
in a befitting manner their office. I, indeed, allow, that under this
term are included faithful and wise magistrates; but he especially
refers to prophets and priests, whose office it is in particular to
reform idolatry.  <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86)

<span id="xiii.xvii-p9"></span>We hence learn that the Church cannot
continue without having faithful pastors to shew the way of salvation.
The wellbeing of the Church then is secured, when God raises up true and
faithful teachers to proclaim his truth: but when the Church is deprived
of sound teachers, all things soon fall into ruin. For God, no doubt,
intimates by this promise that he would not only be the deliverer of his
people, so as to restore them from exile, but that he would be also
their perpetual guardian after the people had returned to their own
country. It hence follows, that the Church of God is not only begotten
by means of holy and godly pastors, but that its life is also cherished,
nourished, and confirmed by them to the end. As it is not enough for
civil order to be once set up, except the magistrates continue in their
office, so nothing is more ruinous to the Church than for God to take
away faithful pastors. It cannot indeed be, that people will return to
God, unless prophets be first sent: but God speaks here of a continued
course of instruction, and of a well regulated government in the Church,
as though he had said, “I will not only give you prophets to lead you
from your wanderings to me, and to restore you to the way of salvation,
but I will also continually set over you sound and faithful teachers.”
But we must notice, that those who preside cannot rightly discharge
their office unless they are endued with wisdom. God also intimates his
paternal love, when he says, that good pastors would be dear to him. It
afterwards follows —

<span id="xiii.xviii"></span>

<span id="xiii.xviii-p1"></span><span
id="xiii.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#016)<span id="xiii.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xviii-p2"></span>**16**. And it shall come to pass, when
ye be multiplied and increased in the land, in those days, saith the
LORD, they shall say no more, The ark of the covenant of the LORD:
neither shall it come to mind: neither shall they remember it; neither
shall they visit *it,* neither shall *that* be done any more.

<span id="xiii.xviii-p3"></span>**16**. Et erit, cum multiplicati
fueritis et fructificaveritis (*vel*, creveritis) in terra diebus illis,
dicit Jehova, non dicent amplius, Arca foederis Jehovae, et non ascendet
in cor, et non recordabuntur ejus, et non visitabunt, et non fiet
amplius.

<span id="xiii.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.xviii-p5"></span><span id="xiii.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xviii-p6"></span>Interpreters have perverted this verse,
for none of them have understood the design of the Prophet. The Jews,
for the most part, have adduced frigid and far — fetched glosses, — that
they would no more bring out to battles the Ark of the Covenant, as no
enemy would invade their land. They think then that a peaceable state is
promised to the people, as they would be constrained by no hostile force
to carry the Ark of the Covenant here and there. But we clearly see that
the words mean no such thing: it is then a comment wholly foreign to the
subject. Others say, that what is said must be applied to the time of
the Messiah, and none even of the Jews deny this; for it afterwards
follows, that the Israelites would return with the tribe of Judah. This
had not yet been fulfilled; it hence follows, that the Prophet here
predicts of the kingdom of Christ. But the Jews, while allowing this, do
not understand that anything is said of the abrogation of legal
ceremonies; it has yet been thought by almost all Christians, that the
Prophet here teaches us, that when Christ should come, an end would be
put to all the shadows of the law, so that there would be no more any
Ark of the Covenant, as the fullness of the Godhead would dwell in
Christ.

<span id="xiii.xviii-p7"></span>This indeed is a view which seems
plausible, but the meaning of the Prophet, as I think, is wholly
different: for he refers here to that divorce or division which had for
a long time existed between the kingdom of Judah and the kingdom of
Israel. Though the kingdom of Israel, as to the number of its men,
largeness of territory and wealth, was more flourishing and prosperous
than the kingdom of Judah; yet there remained these advantages to the
Jews, — that they had a Temple built according to God’s command, — that
its place had been chosen by God, — that they had the Ark of the
Covenant as a symbol of God’s presence. Hence there was contention
between the kingdom of Judah and the ten tribes: the Israelites were
elated on account of their number and their riches, and other temporal
advantages; and the Jews gloried in their Temple and the Ark of the
Covenant. And what now does the Prophet say? He declares that such would
be the concord between the Israelites and the Jews, that the Jews would
no more say, “The Ark of the Covenant,” “The Temple of God;” for God
would be present with them all. And the Prophet proceeds to confirm more
fully what I have just said: it is therefore necessary to add the two
following verses. He then says —

<span id="xiii.xix"></span>

<span id="xiii.xix-p1"></span><span id="xiii.xix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
3:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#017)<span
id="xiii.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xix-p2"></span>**17**. At that time they shall call
Jerusalem the throne of the LORD; and all the nations shall be gathered
unto it, to the name of the LORD, to Jerusalem: neither shall they walk
any more after the imagination of their evil heart.

<span id="xiii.xix-p3"></span>**17**. Tempore illo vocabunt Jerusalem
solium Jehovae, et congregabuntur ad eam omnes gentes ad nomen Jehovae,
Jerusalem dico; et non ambulabunt posthac (*vel,* amplius) post duriciem
(*alii vertunt,* obstinationem; *est etiam interdum cogitatio,* <span
id="xiii.xix-p3.1"></span>שררות*, post duriciem*) cordis sui malam.

<span id="xiii.xix-p4"></span>**18**. In those days the house of Judah
shall walk with the house of Israel, and they shall come together out of
the land of the north to the land that I have given for an inheritance
unto your fathers.

<span id="xiii.xix-p5"></span>**18**. In diebus illis venient domus
Jehudah cum domo Israel, venient simul e terra aquilonis ad terram, quam
dedi in haereditatem patribus vestris (*vel,* quam dedi possidendam jure
haereditario patribus vestris.)

<span id="xiii.xix-p6"></span> 

<span id="xiii.xix-p7"></span><span id="xiii.xix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xix-p8"></span>We now understand more clearly what I have
already said, — that the Prophet promises here that there would be
concord between the ten tribes and the kingdom of Judah, when both
returned from exile; as though he had said, that their condition would
be better than it ever had been; for the seed of Abraham had been torn
as it were asunder; and the people whom God intended that they should
continue in a holy union had become divided in the most shameful manner.
We indeed know that there had been inveterate hatred between the Jews
and the Israelites. As then there had been such disgraceful division for
a long time between the children of Abraham, the Prophet now shews what
would be the fruit of exile; for after having been for a time chastised
by the Lord, they would return to their own country, not to entertain
the same emulation as had existed, but to unite together in calling on
God, in order that the Jews might be as brethren to the Israelites, and
the Israelites might cultivate mutual concord with the tribe of Judah.

<span id="xiii.xx"></span>

<span id="xiii.xx-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xiii.xx-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou at this
day mercifully sparest us, when yet in various ways we provoke thy
displeasure, — O grant, that we may not harden ourselves against thy
chastisements, but that thy forbearance may lead us to repentance, and
that also thy scourges may do us good, and that we may so truly turn to
thee, that our whole life may testify that we are in our hearts changed;
and may we also stimulate one another, that we may unite together in
rendering obedience to thy word, and each of us strive to glorify thy
name, through Christ Jesus our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="xiii.xxi"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxi-p1"></span>Lecture Thirteenth

<span id="xiii.xxi-p2"></span>WE began yesterday to explain what the
Prophet means, when he says, that there would be no more a remembrance
of the Ark of the Covenant after the return of the Israelites into their
country and their increase in it, even because there would be no discord
among them as there had been before they were led into exile. For the
ten tribes, we know, worshipped God after their own manner, as they had
departed from the pure and simple teaching of the law. The Prophet then
means, that they would all be the worshippers of the only true God, and
that there would be among them such an unity of faith, that the Jew
would not call God his God only, and that an Israelite would not desire
for himself another God. Hence he adds, *It shall not ascend on the
heart;* that is, such a thought shall no more come into their minds; and
*they shall not remember it;* that is, no monuments of their ancient
disunion shall exist any more among them; and *they shall not visit it,*
which means, they shall no more come stealthily into Jerusalem who may
wish to offer sacrifices to God; and in short, he says, *No such thing
shall be done*  <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87)

<span id="xiii.xxi-p8"></span>Then he says, *At that time called shall
be Jerusalem the throne of Jehovah* The Prophet may appear inconsistent
with himself by saying that *Jerusalem* would be *the throne* of God,
and yet that the Jews would make no mention of the Ark of the Covenant:
but the two clauses wholly agree, for he means that Jerusalem would be
the seat and habitation of the eternal God, without any dispute being
raised among them. The Israelites before their exile boasted that they
retained the worship of the true God, and so magnificent was the
display, and so great the pomp, that Jerusalem was quite obscure as to
any external splendor. But the Prophet says that this distinction would
no longer exist, and that the Israelites would no more contend with the
Jews, for all would allow Jerusalem to be the sanctuary of God; as
though he had said, “Pure religion shall flourish among them all without
exception, such as had not done before.” And this passage he more
clearly confirms by the words which follow: —

<span id="xiii.xxi-p9"></span>*Assemble into it shall all nations to the
name of Jehovah;* or, on account of the name of Jehovah (<span
id="xiii.xxi-p9.1"></span>ל, *lamed,* is here instead of a causal
particle) shall all nations assemble at Jerusalem.  <span
id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) We see that there is nothing doubtful in
these words, for the Prophet distinctly declares, that the worship of
God, such as the Law required, would attain such esteem, that all
nations would be ready to embrace whatever would be taught by the Jews.
But by all nations we are to understand strictly the ten tribes, as they
are called many nations in several places. If any one prefers to extend
the meaning, let him enjoy his own opinion.

<span id="xiii.xxi-p13"></span>As I have said yesterday, the Jews think
that the time of the Messiah is described here, because what Jeremiah
promises has never been fulfilled; for there was no assembling of
nations when the Jews returned from exile to their own country, as the
Jews alone returned at that time. Hence they conclude that this passage
can be explained in no other way than by referring it to the kingdom of
Messiah; which, indeed, I confess to be true. But as that return and
restoration of the people was a prelude of Christ’s kingdom, the
prophets ever begin at that time whenever they prophesy of the Church
being renewed. It is indeed true, that the restoration of the whole
world was to be looked for through the coming of Christ; yet God began
to restore his Church, when he stretched forth his hand to the Jews, and
when they built the city and the temple; which was necessary to be done
before Christ came forth. But as to this passage, whether by nations we
understand the ten tribes, or both kingdoms, or all nations
indiscriminately, the meaning of the Prophet is equally clear, which is
this, — that the Church would become larger than before, when God
restored the people, and that God would then cause true religion to
flourish, unaccompanied with envy and strife.

<span id="xiii.xxi-p14"></span>What follows confirms the opinion, that
the passage is to be explained of the two kingdoms, *Walk*, he says,
*shall they no more after the evil hardness of their own heart*  <span
id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89) It was not usual to speak thus of heathen
nations, who had ever been strangers to the teaching of the Law. As
this, then, can only be specifically applied to the Jews and Israelites,
that explanation is the most to be approved, which makes all nations to
mean the ten tribes, or the whole people.

<span id="xiii.xxi-p16"></span><span id="xiii.xxi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxi-p17"></span>Then is added, what is of the same
meaning, *In those days shall come the house of Judah with the house of
Israel* It hence appears, that the Prophet speaks of the posterity of
Abraham and not of other nations; for he adds this verse as explanatory.
It might, indeed, have been asked, “What does this mean, All nations
shall come?” To this he answers, “The house of Israel shall unite with
the house of Judah;” that is, there shall be no more hatred between
these two nations, for they shall acknowledge one another as brethren,
and know that they have arisen from the same source, and that they ought
to be one people. In short, the Prophet explains in this verse what he
had said before. And we ought especially to notice what he adds, *Come
shall they together from the land of the north into the land which I
have given to be possessed by their fathers* The Jews had not yet gone
into exile; the Prophet said this to them while they were quiet, as it
were, in their own nest at Jerusalem, and in the country around; nor
could he convince them of what they afterwards found to be true to their
great loss, — that an exile was nigh them, like that which they then saw
had happened to their brethren, the Israelites. But yet the Prophet
spoke of them, as though they had been exiled and dwelt like the
Israelites in the north country; *Come together* *,* he says*, shall
they from the land of the north*  <span id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90)

<span id="xiii.xxi-p21"></span>They might have objected and said, “We
are as yet enjoying our own inheritance, and no one can drive us hence,
for it cannot be that God shall be deprived of his own temple, as he has
chosen for himself a perpetual habitation among us.” Such words were no
doubt clamorously spoken by them. But the Prophet here repels their vain
confidence, and says, that their only hope of deliverance was in looking
forward to the restoration which the Lord would grant them after they
had been for a time banished from their country. Now the Prophet here
sets forth to them the benefit which would arise from exile, in order
that they might bear with more submission the punishment they were to
endure: for they might have a hundred times despaired, had they no hope
that this exile would be only for a time, and that they would again be
gathered together with their brethren the Israelites. It now follows —

<span id="xiii.xxii"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxii-p1"></span><span
id="xiii.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#019)<span id="xiii.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxii-p2"></span>**19**. But I said, How shall I put thee
among the children, and give thee a pleasant land, a goodly heritage of
the hosts of nations? and I said, Thou shalt call me, My father; and
shalt not turn away from me.

<span id="xiii.xxii-p3"></span>**19**. Et ego dixi, Quomodo ponam to in
filios, et dabo tibi terram desiderii (*hoc est,* desiderabilem,)
haereditatem cupiditatis  <span id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91) (*hoc
est*, quae concupiscitur,) exercitus gentium? Et dixi, Pater mi,
clamabis ad me, et a me non recedes (de post me, *ad verbtum,* <span
id="xiii.xxii-p6.2"></span>מאחרי.)

<span id="xiii.xxii-p7"></span> 

<span id="xiii.xxii-p8"></span><span id="xiii.xxii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxii-p9"></span>It is not my purpose to mention all the
expositions of this verse; but it is enough to shew what seems to be the
meaning of the Prophet. Whenever I touch on opinions which I disapprove,
this I feel constrained to do, because when they present the appearance
of truth, readers may be deceived by them: but when the truth itself is
sufficiently conspicuous, I am not disposed to spend labor in refuting
the opinions of others.

<span id="xiii.xxii-p10"></span>What, then, the words of the Prophet
mean is this, — God here asks, How was it possible that the race of
Abraham could again be propagated since it was nearly dead? The answer
is, It shall be, when thou wilt *call me Father, and turn not away from
me* The question was asked, that the Jews might feel as though their
condition was past remedy. And doubtless, since they had so greatly and
so obstinately provoked God by their wickedness, they might have seemed
to have become wholly lost. God then assumes here the character of one
filled with astonishment, as though he had said, “Ye are, indeed, in a
state of despair, there is no hope of your salvation; but yet, as it is
my purpose again to restore you, I wish now to find out a way, by which
your race may again be propagated.” How, then, is this to be done? He
shews that the only thing required was, to call him Father, not with the
mouth, but really with the heart.

<span id="xiii.xxii-p11"></span>We now, then, perceive the meaning of
the Prophet: for he humbles the Israelites by thus ascribing
astonishment to God, as though it was a thing very difficult to be done;
but at the same time he gives them hope, because salvation was prepared
for them, provided they called on God with a sincere heart, and
acknowledged him as their Father, and that perseveringly, without ever
turning aside from him. In short, God intimates that the Israelites were
like dead men, and that their salvation was hopeless, without a
resurrection, he yet promises them salvation on this condition, — that
they called on him and did this, not with a double heart, nor by a
sudden impulse, such as soon vanishes away; for he says, *Thou shalt not
turn aside from me;* that is, “Be always obedient to me, and I will
prove that I shall not be called in vain a Father by you.” It follows —

<span id="xiii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxiii-p1"></span><span
id="xiii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#020)<span id="xiii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxiii-p2"></span>**20**. Surely *as* a wife treacherously
departeth from her husband, so have ye dealt treacherously with me, O
house of Israel, saith the LORD.

<span id="xiii.xxiii-p3"></span>**20**. Certe (*subaudienda est
particula* sicut) perfideagit mulier a socio suo  <span
id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) (*hoc est,* perfide agit cum marito, *ubi
ab ipso discedit, vel, se alienat,)* sic perfide egistis in me, domus
Israel, inquit Jehovah.

<span id="xiii.xxiii-p7"></span> 

<span id="xiii.xxiii-p8"></span><span id="xiii.xxiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxiii-p9"></span>He confirms the first clause of the
preceding verse: for he had said that it could hardly be that the Jews
would recover what they had lost, and be formed again a new people; and
he shews the reason, — because they were like an adulteress, as he had
before stated. But he did not yet wish to take away every hope; only he
insists on this, that they were seriously to consider their sins, in
order that they might become displeased with themsalves, and flee to
God’s mercy for refuge. Nor did he do this so much for their sake, as
for the sake of the people among whom he dwelt. For he had respect, as
it has been often stated, especially to the Jews, who had become so
hardened in their vices as not to think that this example, by which God
intended to terrify them, so as to bend their hard hearts to repentance,
belonged to them. Hence it was for this reason that God so severely
reproved Israel; for he had said before, that the Jews were still worse.
He afterwards subjoins —

<span id="xiii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxiv-p1"></span><span
id="xiii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#021)<span id="xiii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxiv-p2"></span>**21**. A voice was heard upon the high
places, weeping *and* supplications of the children of Israel: for they
have perverted their way, *and* they have forgotten the LORD their God.

<span id="xiii.xxiv-p3"></span>**21**. Vox super excelsa audita est,
fletus precationum filiorum Israel; quia perverterunt viam suam, obliti
sunt Jehovae Dei sui.

<span id="xiii.xxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.xxiv-p5"></span><span id="xiii.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxiv-p6"></span>What I have stated becomes now more
evident, — that the case of the Israelites is here set before the Jews,
that the perverse, whom God had spared, might know that the same
punishment impended over them, except they returned in due time to him:
for the Prophet declares, that the Israelites were weeping and in tears,
because they had departed from their God, and violated their faith
pledged to him. For what purpose did he do this? That the Jews, who
indulged themselves in their own pleasures, might be awakened, and be
convinced, that except they anticipated God’s judgments, the same tears
and the same weeping were prepared for them. The Israelites, indeed, did
not as yet thus weep and shew signs of true repentance; for the Prophet
does not here commend their feeling or their piety, but intimates, that
they were thus severely afflicted, because they had forsaken their God.

<span id="xiii.xxiv-p7"></span>*A voice,* he says, *was heard on high
places, ‘*that is, It was everywhere sufficiently known how cruelly the
Israelites were oppressed by their enemies. Now they cried, then they
called themselves the most wretched of men: why was this lamentation?
*Because they had perverted their ways* It is, then, the same as though
he had said, — that it was a monstrous perverseness in the Jews, that
being warned by the punishment of their brethren, they did not repent:
for the calamity which happened to the Israelites filled all men with
terror. That kingdom had, indeed, flourished for a long time; but the
land had been emptied of its inhabitants, and was occupied by wild
beasts, until some were sent from Persia and other parts in the East to
cultivate it. How could a land so pleasant and so fruitful have become
like a desert? Even because God had so predicted:

<span id="xiii.xxiv-p8"></span>“Ye have neglected,” he says, “my
Sabbaths, and your land shall rest, and it shall no more be wearied by
you.”  
(<span id="xiii.xxiv-p8.2"></span>[Lev.
26:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#035)<span id="xiii.xxiv-p8.2"></span>.)

<span id="xiii.xxiv-p9"></span>It was an awful sight; and nations, far
and wide, were able to see how great must have been the impiety of that
people, on whom God had taken such dreadful vengeance. Were not the
Jews, who had this solitude before their eyes, and this devastation of
the land, extremely stupid in overlooking all this?

<span id="xiii.xxiv-p10"></span>We now see the design of the Prophet,
when he says, *A voice on high places was heard,* as though the
Israelites cried on the tops of mountains. And he adds, *the weeping of
the supplications,* etc.: but he does not mean, that they were prayers
which arose from faith; but simply that they were such lamentations as
betokened misery and wretchedness. In giving a reason, the Prophet
mentions not what the Israelites confessed, but only shews the cause why
they so deeply deplored their calamities; it was, because they had
*perverted their ways, and forgotten Jehovah their God*  <span
id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) He afterwards adds —

<span id="xiii.xxv"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxv-p1"></span><span id="xiii.xxv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
3:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#022)<span
id="xiii.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxv-p2"></span>**22**. Return, ye backsliding children,
*and* I will heal your backslidings. Behold, we come unto thee; for thou
*art* the LORD our God.

<span id="xiii.xxv-p3"></span>**22**. Revertimini, filii rebelles;
sanabo transgressiones vestras. Ecce, nos venimus ad to, quia Jehova
Deus noster.

<span id="xiii.xxv-p4"></span>**23**. Truly in vain *is salvation hoped
for* from the hills, *and from* the multitude of mountains: truly in the
LORD our God *is* the salvation of Israel.

<span id="xiii.xxv-p5"></span>**23**. Certe fallacia a collibus,
multitudo montium; certe in Jehova Deo nostro sans Israel.

<span id="xiii.xxv-p6"></span> 

<span id="xiii.xxv-p7"></span><span id="xiii.xxv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxv-p8"></span>God here exhorts the Israelites to repent,
that by their example he might move the Jews. The benefit of what is
here taught might indeed have reached to the miserable captives and
exiles; but as Jeremiah was especially the teacher of his own nation, he
labored chiefly no doubt for their advantage, as we have before stated.
God then here declares, that he would be reconcilable to the Israelites,
how grievously soever they had sinned, he afterwards introduces them as
answering, *Behold,* we return, or we shall *come to thee:* for the
Prophet speaks here of the future conversion of the ten tribes.

<span id="xiii.xxv-p9"></span>It is then a dialogue between God and the
Israelites. God himself freely invites them to repent: *Return,* he
says, *ye rebellious children;* and then he promises to be a physician
to heal their diseases: *I will heal thy transgressions;* that is, I
will blot out thy sins, and absolve thee from guilt. God then undertakes
to do these things; first, to stimulate the Israelites to repentance,
and then to give them the hope of pardon: and he says that a remedy was
provided for them, except they hardened themselves. Now, the Israelites,
on the other hand, make this answer, *Behold, we shall come to thee*
Here Jeremiah condemns the obstinacy of his own nation, by saying, that
the Israelites, when thus kindly invited by God, would not be perverse,
but would, on the contrary, be tractable and obedient. This indeed was
not fulfilled, when a liberty to return was given to the people, except
in the case of a few, who had a right feeling, and preferred the glory
of God to their temporal advantages. But the number was small; nor was
it a matter of surprise; for God had not previously said, without
reason, that if one came from a city, and two from a tribe, he would be
received, though others continued fixed in their perverseness. However
this may have been, God here intimates that the Israelites would not be
so refractory as not to obey his admonition when the hope of pardon and
salvation would be presented to them: and this is mentioned, that the
perverseness of the Jews might appear more detestable.

<span id="xiii.xxv-p10"></span>But some think that the Israelites are
here upbraided, because they hypocritically pretended that they always
sought God. Hence they elicit this meaning, “Ye indeed say, *Behold, we
return to thee, thou art our God;*” as though he condemned their
hypocrisy, because they falsely alleged that they always sought him. But
this view seems to me foreign to the intention of the Prophet. Hence I
doubt not but that Jeremiah sets before the Jews, as in a picture, what
ought to have constrained them not to persist so obstinately in their
sinful courses: “Behold,” he says, “God is prepared to receive into
favor your brethren, who are undone and past all hope; and when they
shall hear God’s voice kindly and graciously inviting them to himself,
they will doubtless return: why then do not ye obey?”

<span id="xiii.xxv-p11"></span><span id="xiii.xxv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxv-p12"></span>And in the same sense is to be taken what
follows, *Surely, deceit is from the hills, and the multitude of
mountains,* or, from the multitude of mountains, as the letter <span
id="xiii.xxv-p12.1"></span>מ is to be repeated. Here the Prophet more
fully expresses the evidence of their repentance, as though he had said,
“We have been deceived by the hills and the multitude of mountains; we
thought that there would be more defense from a large number of gods
than if we worshipped one God: this deception has led to ruin. Let then
all these deceits be now discarded; for we shall be content with the
only true God.” In short, the Israelites confess, in these words, that
they had been drawn into ruin by the worst of errors, while they sought
many gods, and did not acquiesce in the one true God.

<span id="xiii.xxv-p13"></span>Then they add, *for surely in Jehovah our
God is salvation* They set here the one true God in opposition to all
their idols, as though they had said, that the cause of all their evils
was, that they did not continue in the service of the one true God, but
wandered after a multitude of Gods. We hence see that these two things
cannot possibly be connected, — to worship the true God, — and to seek
for ourselves various other gods, and to form vain hopes, as they do,
who are not satisfied with the only true God.  <span
id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) It follows —

<span id="xiii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxvi-p1"></span><span
id="xiii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#024)<span id="xiii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxvi-p2"></span>**24**. For shame hath devoured the
labour of our fathers from our youth; their flocks and their herds,
their sons and their daughters.

<span id="xiii.xxvi-p3"></span>**24**. Et pudor (*vel,* probrum) voravit
laborem patrum nostrorum a pueritia nostra, oves eorum et pecora eorum,
filios eorum et filias eorum.

<span id="xiii.xxvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.xxvi-p5"></span><span id="xiii.xxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxvi-p6"></span>They confirm more fully the same
complaint, — That God had by manifest proofs shewed the sins of the
nation; for he had consumed their labor, that is, whatever they had
acquired by labor. He also adds *sheep and cattle,* and then *sons and
daughters* He does not indeed ascribe this consumption to God; but the
mode of speaking is more emphatic, when he says, *Shame has consumed the
labor of our fathers from our childhood:* for by *shame* he understands
wickedness, of which they ought to have been ashamed. The meaning then
is, that all the evils they had endured could in no other way be
accounted for, inasmuch as the whole was to be ascribed to their
wickedness. Our *shame,* then,  <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95)
that is, our wickedness, *has consumed the labor of our fathers* It
follows —

<span id="xiii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxvii-p1"></span><span
id="xiii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#025)<span id="xiii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxvii-p2"></span>**25**. We lie down in our shame, and
our confusion covereth us: for we have sinned against the LORD our God,
we and our fathers, from our youth even unto this day, and have not
obeyed the voice of the LORD our God.

<span id="xiii.xxvii-p3"></span>**25**. Jacuimus in pudore nostro, et
operuit nos ignomina nostra; quoniam cum Jehova Deo nostro scelerate
egimus, nos et patres nostri, a pueritia nostra, et ad hunc diem usque;
et non audivimus vocem Jehovae Dei nostri.

<span id="xiii.xxvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.xxvii-p5"></span><span id="xiii.xxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxvii-p6"></span>As the Israelites say here nothing new,
but continue the same subject, I propose only to touch briefly on the
words, lest I should be too tedious. They say then that they were
*lying* in their miseries; and why? *because they had dealt wickedly
with God* We see that they are explaining what they had confessed, —
even that the labor of their fathers had been consumed by their shame,
that is, by their wickedness; and they ascribe to themselves what might
have been put to the account of their fathers, because they knew that
they were heirs to their iniquity. *We have lain,* they say, *in our
shame*  <span id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96) They here shortly confess
that they were deservedly miserable, that they could not accuse God of
cruelty, as that he afflicted them too severely. How so? because they
were lying in their own *shame,* and *their own disgrace covered* them;
as though they said, that the cause of all their evils was to be found
in their sins, and that it was not to be sought anywhere else.

<span id="xiii.xxvii-p12"></span>*Because we and our fathers,* they say,
*have done wickedly* By these words they intimate that they had acted
thus, not for a day only, but had been so perverse, that from early life
they had imbibed the iniquity of their fathers, and thus added evils to
evils. They had said before, that the labor of their fathers had been
consumed from their childhood, thereby signifying the continuance of
their punishment; for God had not for a day chastised them, but had
often repeated his scourges, and yet without any benefit. Now they add,
“*As we have from our childhood dealt wickedly towards our God,* so also
he has warned us from our childhood to return to him; and it has been
our fault that we have not returned, for he called us; but as we were
obstinate, so also God has justly executed on us his vengeance.”

<span id="xiii.xxvii-p13"></span>They afterwards say, *even to this
day;* by which they confirm what I have already stated, — that they had
been so perverse as not to cease from their vices. At the same time he
points out the source of all their wickedness: *they hearkened not to
the voice of Jehovah* Had they gone astray, and had God been silent,
their fault might have been extenuated; but as God had daily sent
prophets to them, who never ceased to cry in their hearing, and yet they
continued deaf, their perverseness in their sinful courses was
inexcusable. We then see that their sin was increased by the
circumstance, that they refused to hear the voice of God; as though he
had said, that God had done his part in calling them back from the way
of ruin, but that they had been so obstinate as to disregard his favor,
and that they thus justly suffered, not only for their impiety, but also
for their ingratitude and perverse wickedness.

<span id="xiii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxviii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xiii.xxviii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we cease
not, though favored with many blessings, to provoke thee by our
misdeeds, as though we avowedly carried on war against thee, — O grant,
that we being at length warned by those examples, by which thou invitest
us to repentance, may restrain our depraved nature, and in due time
repent, and so devote ourselves to thy service, that thy name through us
may be glorified, and that we may strive to bring into the way of
salvation those who seem to be now lost, so that thy mercy may extend
far and wide, and that thus thy salvation, obtained through Christ thine
only — begotten Son, may be known and embraced by all nations. — Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc17012.htm#fr_71) <span
id="xiii.i-p6.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p7"></span> The word at the beginning of this verse has
puzzled most, the form being so unusual. It is left out by the
*Septuagint,* the *Syriac,* and the *Arabic* The *Vulgate* has “<span
id="xiii.i-p7.1"></span>vulgo dieitur — it is commonly said.” But <span
id="xiii.i-p7.2"></span>ל means at times “according to;” and it may be
so rendered here, —

<span id="xiii.i-p8"></span>According to what is said, If a man sends
away his wife, And she goes from him and becomes another man’s, Is he to
return to her again? Polluted, shall it not be polluted, even that land?
But thou hast played the harlot with many friends, Yet return to me,
saith Jehovah.

<span id="xiii.i-p9"></span>The particle <span
id="xiii.i-p9.1"></span>הן in the first line is Chaldee for <span
id="xiii.i-p9.2"></span>אם; it is so rendered by the *Targun* and the
early versions. The pronoun <span id="xiii.i-p9.3"></span>ההיא after
“land” cannot be rendered as *Calvin* proposes; it agrees in gender with
“land.” It is singular that the *Septuagint,* the *Vulgate,* and the
*Arabic,* have “woman” instead of “land;” yet *the Syriac* and *Targum*
retain “land:“ but in them all this pronoun is construed with the noun.
*Gataker* takes “land” here, and in <span id="xiii.i-p9.4"></span>[De
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#004)<span id="xiii.i-p9.4"></span>, as
meaning “the state,“ the community, and refers to <span
id="xiii.i-p9.5"></span>[Nu 35:33](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#033)<span
id="xiii.i-p9.5"></span>; <span id="xiii.i-p9.6"></span>[Ps
106:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#038)<span id="xiii.i-p9.6"></span>;
<span id="xiii.i-p9.7"></span>[Isa
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#005)<span id="xiii.i-p9.7"></span>. —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](cc17012.htm#fr_72) <span
id="xiii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p21"></span> The *Septuagint,* the *Syriac,* and the
*Arabic,* have by a mistake rendered the word “pastors” or shepherds;
but the *Vulgate* has “lovers,“ which our version and *Blayney* have
adopted. But the word means companions, friends, intimates, neighbors.
*Gataker* renders it “mates.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](cc17012.htm#fr_73) <span
id="xiii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p8"></span> *Gataker* suggests another idea,-that the
reference is made to the Arabian traders, who fix their tents in the
wilderness to wait for the merchants. *Blayney* renders the lines
differently, —

<span id="xiii.ii-p9"></span>Lift up thine eyes upon the open plains,
and see; Where hast thou not been defiled in the highways? Thou hast sat
waiting in them like an Arabian in the desert.

<span id="xiii.ii-p10"></span>To render <span
id="xiii.ii-p10.1"></span>שפים, “open plains,” is without authority; it
means “craggy eminences,“ or elevated places. See <span
id="xiii.ii-p10.2"></span>[Nu
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#003)<span id="xiii.ii-p10.2"></span>;
<span id="xiii.ii-p10.3"></span>[Isa
41:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#018)<span id="xiii.ii-p10.3"></span>;
<span id="xiii.ii-p10.4"></span>[Jer
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#006)<span id="xiii.ii-p10.4"></span>.
The division, too, is arbitrary. “The ways,” or highways, connects
better with the following verb; and <span id="xiii.ii-p10.5"></span>להם
is not “in them,“ but to or for them, that is, her lovers, mentioned in
the preceding verse. Our version is the most suitable, with which that
of *Calvin* corresponds.

<span id="xiii.ii-p11"></span>“Arabian” is rendered “crow” by the
*Septuagint,* the *Syriac,* and the *Arabic; “*robber” by the *Vulgate,*
but “Arabian” by the *Targum*. It is true that the word for a crow is
from the same root, but the *iod* attached to it shews it to be a proper
name. Where the *Vulgate* got the word “robber,“ it is hard to know. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75](cc17012.htm#fr_74) <span
id="xiii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p7"></span> It is usual to render the <span
id="xiii.iii-p7.1"></span>ו before “restrained,” “therefore;” but the
sentence will read better, connected as it is with the latter part of
the previous verse, by giving it its most common meaning, —

<span id="xiii.iii-p8"></span>And restrained have been the showers, And
the latter rain has not been; Yet the front of a wanton woman hast thou
had, Thou hast refused to be made ashamed.

<span id="xiii.iii-p9"></span>This last verb is in the Infinitive
Huphal. It means in Hiphil, to make ashamed; and then in Huphal, to be
made ashamed. The *Targum* expresses thus the general sense of the last
line, “Thou hast been unwilling to humble thyself.” The rest of the
verse is rendered almost literally. The *Septuagint* and the *Arabic*
wander very far from the Hebrew. The *Vulgate* is a literal version, and
the *Syriac* is nearly so, only it connects “wickedness, “in the last
verse, with restrained, thus, —

<span id="xiii.iii-p10"></span>And for thy wickedness have been
restrained the dews.

<span id="xiii.iii-p11"></span>And it is not improbable but that this
was the original reading. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[76](cc17012.htm#fr_75) <span
id="xiii.vii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p9"></span> This and the preceding verse have been
variously explained. The view given by *Calvin* has been most commonly
adopted; but it is hardly consistent with a literal rendering of the
original, which I consider to be as follows, —

<span id="xiii.vii-p10"></span>**4.** Hast thou not from this time
called to me, “My Father, the guide of my youth art thou:

<span id="xiii.vii-p11"></span>**5.** Will he reserve wrath for ever, Or
keep it to the end?” Behold, thou hast so spoken, And hast done evils
and persevered.

<span id="xiii.vii-p12"></span>“From this time,” that is, the time
spoken of before, when the people followed idolatry. During this time,
they called God their Father, and promised themselves the remittance of
his displeasure. They said this, and yet followed their superstitions.
This is the view which *Gataker* seemed most disposed to take. *Horsley*
thus paraphrases the last line, —

<span id="xiii.vii-p13"></span>“Thou hast persisted incorrigibly in
doing evil.”

<span id="xiii.vii-p14"></span>The *Septuagint* give “called,” in the
past tense; the *Vulgate,* in the imperative, “<span
id="xiii.vii-p14.1"></span>voca — call;” the *Syriac,* the *Arabic,* and
the *Targum,* in the future tense, “Wilt thou not call,” etc. The
received text has <span id="xiii.vii-p14.2"></span>קראתי, which is no
doubt wrong; the *iod* is not found in very many MSS., and all the early
versions agree in giving the verb in the second person. The same is to
be said of <span id="xiii.vii-p14.3"></span>דברתי, it ought to be <span
id="xiii.vii-p14.4"></span>דברת, though *Horsley* prefers the former;
but neither the early versions nor the context favor it. The phrase
<span id="xiii.vii-p14.5"></span>מעתה is rendered by the *Septuagint,*
“<span id="xiii.vii-p14.6"></span>ὡσ οἰκόν — as a house,” and by the
*Arabic, “*<span id="xiii.vii-p14.7"></span>ut filia — as a daughter.”
How such mistakes could have been made, it is difficult to say. The
*Syriac* has “hereafter;” and the *Targum, “*from this time.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_76"></span>[77](cc17012.htm#fr_76) <span
id="xiii.viii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p13"></span> It is correctly rendered as a noun, for
had it been an adjective or a participle, it would have followed the
word Israel. Literally it is, “the apostates,” —

<span id="xiii.viii-p14"></span>Hast thou seen what she did, the
apostates Israel?

<span id="xiii.viii-p15"></span>Or, it may be rendered, “the backslider
Israel,” though the word is deficient, having no feminine termination. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc17012.htm#fr_77) <span
id="xiii.viii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p18"></span> The difficulty at the beginning of the
eighth verse may be removed either by adopting <span
id="xiii.viii-p18.1"></span>ואראה, as in two MSS., and taking the verb
to be in Hiphil, or <span id="xiii.viii-p18.2"></span>ותרא, as in one
MS., as a repetition of the former verb, according to the *Syriac* It is
left out in the *Vulgate* But it is most suitable to the context to take
the verb to be in Hiphil. Then the passage would read thus, —

<span id="xiii.viii-p19"></span>**6.** Hast thou not seen what she did,
the apostate Israel? Go did she on every high hill and under every green
tree, And play there the harlot:

<span id="xiii.viii-p20"></span>**7.** And I said, after she had done
all these things, “To me return;” but she returned not: And see this did
the hypocrite, her sister Judah:

<span id="xiii.viii-p21"></span>**8.** And I caused her to see, that on
all these accounts, As adultery the apostate Israel would commit, I
dismissed her, and gave to her The bill of her divorcement; Yet fear
not, did the hypocrite Judah, her sister, But went and played the
harlot, even herself.

<span id="xiii.viii-p22"></span>“On all these accounts,” or, for all
these reasons, refers to several things-the first apostasy — God’s
invitation — and Israel’s refusal. God caused Judah to see these things
by his prophets, but Judah feared not. The word <span
id="xiii.viii-p22.1"></span>בגדה, hypocrite, or the perfidious one, is a
feminine participle, used as a noun. It is explained in the tenth verse
by “feignedly” or falsely. Hypocrites would be the correct rendering. It
is rendered by the *Septuagint, “*faithless — <span
id="xiii.viii-p22.2"></span>ασύνθετος,” — by the *Vulgate,
“*prevaricatress — <span id="xiii.viii-p22.3"></span>praevaricatrix,
“and by the *Targum, “*falsifier” or cheat. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc17012.htm#fr_78) <span
id="xiii.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p8"></span> This verse may be thus rendered, —

<span id="xiii.ix-p9"></span>And it was, that through the report of her
fornication, She polluted the land; And she committed adultery with
stone and wood.

<span id="xiii.ix-p10"></span>There is no instance of <span
id="xiii.ix-p10.1"></span>קל, in the sense of swiftness, etc., being
used as a noun. It is the Chaldee for <span
id="xiii.ix-p10.2"></span>קול, voice, fame, report. *Gataker*
paraphrases the words thus, “by her notorious fornication.” The early
versions and the *Targum* all differ. Excessive addiction to idolatry is
evidently what is spoken of. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc17012.htm#fr_79) <span
id="xiii.x-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.x-p7"></span> This verse stands connected, not with the
preceding, but with the eighth, —

<span id="xiii.x-p8"></span>Yea, even for all this, Return to me did not
the hypocrite, Her sister Judah, with all her heart, But in falsehood,
saith Jehovah.

<span id="xiii.x-p9"></span>“In falsehood,” or, by dealing falsely, as
it may be taken by a participle preceded by a preposition. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc17012.htm#fr_80) <span
id="xiii.xi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xi-p9"></span> This is the literal expression, but the
word <span id="xiii.xi-p9.2"></span>נפש is often taken for oneself, and
ought often to be so rendered. See <span id="xiii.xi-p9.3"></span>[Nu
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#005)<span id="xiii.xi-p9.3"></span>;
<span id="xiii.xi-p9.4"></span>[Job
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#004)<span id="xiii.xi-p9.4"></span>;
<span id="xiii.xi-p9.5"></span>[Ps
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#002)<span id="xiii.xi-p9.5"></span>;
God is said to swear by his soul, that is, by himself, <span
id="xiii.xi-p9.6"></span>[Am 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#008)<span
id="xiii.xi-p9.6"></span> —

<span id="xiii.xi-p10"></span>Then said Jehovah to me, — Justified
herself hath apostate Israel, More than the hypocrite Judah.

<span id="xiii.xi-p11"></span>Manifest and open apostasy is more honest
than the double dealing of hypocrites, who combine God’s worship with
idolatry; nor is it so hateful to God. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc17012.htm#fr_81) <span
id="xiii.xiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p10"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p11"></span>**12.** Go and proclaim these words
towards the north, and say, — Return, apostate Israel, saith Jehovah; I
will not cause my wrath to fall on you, For merciful am I, saith
Jehovah; I will not reserve it for ever.

<span id="xiii.xiv-p12"></span>That <span
id="xiii.xiv-p12.1"></span>פני, commonly rendered “face,” means
sometimes wrath or anger, is evident, see <span
id="xiii.xiv-p12.2"></span>[Ps
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#009)<span id="xiii.xiv-p12.2"></span>;
<span id="xiii.xiv-p12.3"></span>[La
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#016)<span id="xiii.xiv-p12.3"></span>.
God is said to have his face against the wicked, <span
id="xiii.xiv-p12.4"></span>[Ps
34:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#016)<span
id="xiii.xiv-p12.4"></span>, and to make his face to shine on his
people, <span id="xiii.xiv-p12.5"></span>[Ps
80:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#003)<span id="xiii.xiv-p12.5"></span>.
This accounts for the word being taken sometimes, as it were, in a bad
sense: He has an angry as well as a smiling face.

<span id="xiii.xiv-p13"></span>The rendering of the *Septuagint* is, “I
will not set firm (<span id="xiii.xiv-p13.1"></span>στηριῶ) my face upon
you,” of the *Vulgate, “*I will not turn away my face from you,” of the
*Syriac* and *Arabic, “*I will not harden my face against you,” and of
the *Targum, “*I will not send my wrath upon you.” The last comes
nearest to the Hebrew.

<span id="xiii.xiv-p14"></span>*Blayney’s* version is a paraphrase, —

<span id="xiii.xiv-p15"></span>I will not look down upon you with a
lowering brow;

<span id="xiii.xiv-p16"></span>and so is his version of the last line, —

<span id="xiii.xiv-p17"></span>I will not keep displeasure in view for
ever.

<span id="xiii.xiv-p18"></span>Our version in both instances is much to
be preferred. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc17012.htm#fr_82) <span
id="xiii.xv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xv-p10"></span>

<span id="xiii.xv-p11"></span>But yet know thine iniquity, That against
Jehovah thy God hast thou rebelled; For thou hast diversified thy ways
for strangers, Under every green tree; And to my voice ye hearkened not,
saith Jehovah.

<span id="xiii.xv-p12"></span>The word <span
id="xiii.xv-p12.1"></span>אך is rendered by the early versions and the
*Targum,* But, or But yet, or Nevertheless, “<span
id="xiii.xv-p12.2"></span>Verum,” “<span
id="xiii.xv-p12.3"></span>Verumtamen.” The third line is thus explained
by *Parkhurst, “*Thou hast run after *various* heathen nations in their
*several* idolatries.” And this they did, while they refused to attend
to the voice of God. To attend to, rather than to obey, is what is
meant. So the *Vulgate* and the *Syriac, “*My voice ye heard not,” or,
as the former, “thou didst not hear.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc17012.htm#fr_83) <span
id="xiii.xvi-p7.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvi-p8"></span> Nor is there an instance of such a
meaning. Literally it is, “For I have been married with (or to) thee.”
When this verb is followed by <span id="xiii.xvi-p8.1"></span>כ, as in
<span id="xiii.xvi-p8.2"></span>[Jer
31:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#032)<span id="xiii.xvi-p8.2"></span>,
this is its meaning; but when followed by <span
id="xiii.xvi-p8.3"></span>ל, as in <span id="xiii.xvi-p8.4"></span>[1Ch
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#022)<span id="xiii.xvi-p8.4"></span>,
it means to rule, to exercise dominion. The *Vulgate* is, “For I am thy
husband.” The *Targum* gives the meaning, “For I have chosen you.” The
*Septuagint* went astray, “For I will rule over you.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc17012.htm#fr_84) <span
id="xiii.xvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvi-p11"></span> The word is taken sometimes in a limited
sense, and means what we understand by family: but it has here evidently
a more extended meaning, and signifies a tribe, a community; for it
includes more than a city. Such is its meaning in <span
id="xiii.xvi-p11.1"></span>[Jer
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#003)<span id="xiii.xvi-p11.1"></span>;
and in <span id="xiii.xvi-p11.2"></span>[Am
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#001)<span id="xiii.xvi-p11.2"></span>,
it comprehends the whole community of Israel. It is rendered “<span
id="xiii.xvi-p11.3"></span>ἐκ πατριᾶς, — from a tribe,” by the
*Septuagint,* but improperly; “kindred,“ by the *Vulgate* and the
*Targum* It no doubt means sometimes kindred, but not evidently in this
place. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc17012.htm#fr_85) <span
id="xiii.xvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvii-p7"></span> Rather, “itself;” for the word often
rendered soul, has sometimes this meaning. See note on <span
id="xiii.xvii-p7.2"></span>[Jeremiah
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#011)<span id="xiii.xvii-p7.2"></span>.
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc17012.htm#fr_86) <span
id="xiii.xvii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvii-p8"></span> *Blayney,* following the *Targum,*
renders pastors “rulers,” and feed, “rule:” but this is to interpret and
not to translate, as the words have never strictly these meanings,
though what are sometimes to be understood by pastors are rulers, and by
feeding, ruling or governing. But the interpretation in this instance
seems not to be correct, and for the reason here assigned by *Calvin* It
is indeed the opinion of *Henry, Scott, Adam Clarke,* and others, that
both civil and ecclesiastical pastors are intended; and if so,
“knowledge” may be applied to the latter, and “wisdom” to the former.
The *Septuagint* have omitted “wisdom,” and retain only “knowledge.” The
*Targum* has “knowledge and wisdom;” the *Vulgate, “*knowledge and
doctrine;” the *Syriac, “*knowledge and prudence;” and *Blayney,
“*knowledge and discretion.” The verb <span
id="xiii.xvii-p8.1"></span>רעה means “to feed on,“ as in <span
id="xiii.xvii-p8.2"></span>[Isa
44:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#020)<span
id="xiii.xvii-p8.2"></span>, or, as here, to “feed with.” It means also
to “feed itself” as a beast does, <span id="xiii.xvii-p8.3"></span>[Isa
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#007)<span id="xiii.xvii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc17012.htm#fr_87) <span
id="xiii.xxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxi-p3"></span> The literal rendering of this verse I
conceive to be the following, —

<span id="xiii.xxi-p4"></span>**16.** And it shall be, that ye shall
multiply And be fruitful in the land. In those days, saith Jehovah, they
shall no more say, — “The Ark of the Covenant of Jehovah;” And it shall
not come to their mind, Nor shall they mention it, nor visit it; And not
made shall it be any more.

<span id="xiii.xxi-p5"></span>The two first lines seem connected with
the former verse. There is a gradation in the three last lines, — It
shall not be thought of, much less mentioned or named, as given by the
*Septuagint*, — still less be visited, — and much less still, be made.
This gradation is destroyed by *Blayney by* rendering the first line,

<span id="xiii.xxi-p6"></span>Nor shall it be the delight of their
heart;

<span id="xiii.xxi-p7"></span>literally it is, “And it shall not ascend
on the heart.” The “heart” means often in Hebrew the mind; and “to come
to mind” is the idea; it would not be thought of. The phrase occurs in
this book in two other places, <span id="xiii.xxi-p7.1"></span>[Jer
7:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#031)<span id="xiii.xxi-p7.1"></span>;
<span id="xiii.xxi-p7.2"></span>[Jer
44:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#021)<span id="xiii.xxi-p7.2"></span>;
and, not to think, or, not to come to mind, is the most suitable
meaning, as it is given in our version. The purpose of this kind of
gradation is to render the thing more certain and indisputable, so that
there might be no room for doubt. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc17012.htm#fr_88) <span
id="xiii.xxi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxi-p10"></span> This seems to be the best rendering.
*Blayney* leaves out the word “Jerusalem;” but for no sufficient reason.
The whole verse is as follows: —

<span id="xiii.xxi-p11"></span>In that day call shall they Jerusalem,
“The throne of Jehovah;” And gathered into it shall be all the nations,
For the name of Jehovah, even to Jerusalem; And they shall no more walk
after the resolutions of their wicked heart.

<span id="xiii.xxi-p12"></span> — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc17012.htm#fr_89) <span
id="xiii.xxi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxi-p15"></span> “Evil” is connected with “hardness;” but
it belongs properly to “their heart.” The word rendered “hardness” is
<span id="xiii.xxi-p15.2"></span>שררות a plural noun, found eight times
in Jeremiah; here, and in <span id="xiii.xxi-p15.3"></span>[Jer
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#024)<span id="xiii.xxi-p15.3"></span>;
<span id="xiii.xxi-p15.4"></span>[Jer
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#014)<span id="xiii.xxi-p15.4"></span>;
<span id="xiii.xxi-p15.5"></span>[Jer
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#008)<span id="xiii.xxi-p15.5"></span>;
<span id="xiii.xxi-p15.6"></span>[Jer
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#010)<span
id="xiii.xxi-p15.6"></span>; <span id="xiii.xxi-p15.7"></span>[Jer
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#012)<span
id="xiii.xxi-p15.7"></span>; <span id="xiii.xxi-p15.8"></span>[Jer
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#012)<span
id="xiii.xxi-p15.8"></span>; <span id="xiii.xxi-p15.9"></span>[Jer
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#017)<span
id="xiii.xxi-p15.9"></span>; and twice elsewhere, <span
id="xiii.xxi-p15.10"></span>[De
29:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#019)<span
id="xiii.xxi-p15.10"></span>; <span id="xiii.xxi-p15.11"></span>[Ps
81:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#012)<span
id="xiii.xxi-p15.11"></span>. It is so variously rendered by the
*Septuagint,* that they evidently did not understand its specific
meaning; <span id="xiii.xxi-p15.12"></span>ἐνθυμήματα, thoughts,
devices; <span id="xiii.xxi-p15.13"></span>τὰ ἄρεστα, things pleasing or
agreeable; <span id="xiii.xxi-p15.14"></span>πλάνη, wandering. These
words are used for it in Jeremiah. The *Vulgate* ever renders it “<span
id="xiii.xxi-p15.15"></span>pravitas — <span
id="xiii.xxi-p15.16"></span>pravity — wickedness.” The *Targum*
uniformly renders it “<span id="xiii.xxi-p15.17"></span>cogitatio —
thought or imagination.” The latter word is used in our version, (except
in <span id="xiii.xxi-p15.18"></span>[Ps
81:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#012)<span
id="xiii.xxi-p15.18"></span>, “lust,”) with a marginal reading
“stubbornness.” The *Syriac* and *Arabic* vary as much as the
*Septuagint, “*appetites, lusts, will,” etc. To “walk after” precedes it
in most instances except in <span id="xiii.xxi-p15.19"></span>[Jer
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#012)<span
id="xiii.xxi-p15.19"></span>, where it is preceded by “doing.” Now to
“do the hardness of the heart,” is no suitable expression; nor is
“imagination” or “stubbornness” anything better. It can be derived from
no verb which means to think or to imagine, or which has any connection
with depravity or wickedness, or with appetites or lusts. Nor can we
derive it from <span id="xiii.xxi-p15.20"></span>שרה, which those do who
render it “stubbornness;” for that will suit the passage referred to in
<span id="xiii.xxi-p15.21"></span>[Jer
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#012)<span
id="xiii.xxi-p15.21"></span>. It must then come from <span
id="xiii.xxi-p15.22"></span>שר, to direct, to regulate, to rule, to
exercise authority. It occurs three times in a reduplicate form; as a
participial noun in <span id="xiii.xxi-p15.23"></span>[Es
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#022)<span
id="xiii.xxi-p15.23"></span>, and as a verb and a participle in Hithpael
in <span id="xiii.xxi-p15.24"></span>[Nu
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#013)<span
id="xiii.xxi-p15.24"></span>, where it is applied in the sense of making
oneself a prince or a tyrant. The literal meaning of the noun then is,
in the plural number, predominances, domineerings, arbitraments; and it
may be rendered determinations, resolutions, predominant influences or
inclinations. “Walk shall they no more after the resolutions of their
wicked heart.” It is used in <span id="xiii.xxi-p15.25"></span>[Jer
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#024)<span
id="xiii.xxi-p15.25"></span>, in apposition with “counsels,” being
evidently a stronger word: it seems to mean resoluteness or
resolvedness, a full determination, a willful decision. *Parkhurst*
renders it, “the ruling principles.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc17012.htm#fr_90) <span
id="xiii.xxi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxi-p18"></span> *Calvin* uses the verb “<span
id="xiii.xxi-p18.1"></span>venient, “shall come, twice: but the first
verb is to walk, and expresses the associating of Judah with Israel, or
their union. The words are, —

<span id="xiii.xxi-p19"></span>In those days walk will the house of
Judah with the house of Israel, And come shall they together from the
land of the north, To the land which I made their fathers to inherit.

<span id="xiii.xxi-p20"></span>They would be first united, and then
advance together to their own land. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc17012.htm#fr_91) <span
id="xiii.xxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxii-p4"></span> *Calvin* takes the word in its Chaldee
meaning; <span id="xiii.xxii-p4.1"></span>צבי means in Hebrew, elation,
splendor, glory; but in Chaldee, desire, what is desired; and this suits
the passage best, “The inheritance of desire to hosts of nations;” that
is, “The inheritance desired by hosts of nations;” This is the meaning
preferred by *Gataker* I would render the whole verse thus, —

<span id="xiii.xxii-p5"></span>**19.** But I, said have I, “How shall I
put thee among the children, And give thee the land of delight, The
inheritance desired by hosts of nations?” Said have I also, “My Father
shalt thou call me, And from me thou wilt not turn away.”

<span id="xiii.xxii-p6"></span>When the pronouns are given before verbs
in Hebrew, as <span id="xiii.xxii-p6.1"></span>אנכי I, here, they are
ever emphatical. “But I,” or, “as for me,” or, “even I have said.” —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc17012.htm#fr_92) <span
id="xiii.xxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxiii-p4"></span> *Blayney,* contrary to all the early
versions, construes the word <span id="xiii.xxiii-p4.1"></span>מרעה with
woman, “a wicked woman.” “Friend,” or associate, or partner, is here
evidently put for husband; a thing commonly done in other languages. Our
common version of this verse is by no means correct: the preposition
<span id="xiii.xxiii-p4.2"></span>מ is not always “from,” but sometimes
“with.” So here, —

<span id="xiii.xxiii-p5"></span>Surely, as a woman deals perfidiously
with her partner,  
So perfidiously against me have ye dealt,  
O house of Israel, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xiii.xxiii-p6"></span> — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc17012.htm#fr_93) <span
id="xiii.xxiv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxiv-p11"></span> The verse may be thus rendered, —

<span id="xiii.xxiv-p12"></span>**21.** A voice on the high places!
Heard is the weeping, the supplications Of the people of Israel; Because
they had perverted their way, Had forgotten Jehovah their God.

<span id="xiii.xxiv-p13"></span>Instead of “high places,” *Blayney* has
“plains;” but there is no satisfactory reason for the change. As the
verb in Hebrew commonly precedes its nominative, the construction
adopted above is the most suitable to the character of the language. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc17012.htm#fr_94) <span
id="xiii.xxv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxv-p14"></span> The literal rendering of these two
verses is the following:-

<span id="xiii.xxv-p15"></span>**22.** Return, ye apostate children, I
will heal your apostasies. — Behold us! We come to thee; For thou art
Jehovah our God:

<span id="xiii.xxv-p16"></span>**23.** Surely, in vain are the hills,
The multitude of mountains; Surely, in (or through) Jehovah our God Is
the salvation of Israel.

<span id="xiii.xxv-p17"></span>The word rendered “apostate,” does not
mean “rebellious,” but such as turn away, *i.e.*, from God; and the word
for “apostasies” means the same, being from the same root. The <span
id="xiii.xxv-p17.1"></span>מ before the word for “hills,” is not a
preposition, as it is commonly taken, but a formative: so it appears
from all the versions. *Blayney* conjectures that it belongs to the
former word, and makes it <span id="xiii.xxv-p17.2"></span>לשקרים; but
then he does not account for the <span id="xiii.xxv-p17.3"></span>ל
prefixed to it. There is no different reading. The *Septuagint* is,
<span id="xiii.xxv-p17.4"></span>εἰς ψεῦδος ἧσαν οἱ ζουνοὶ — for a lie
were the hills. The *Vulgate, Syriac,* and *Arabic,* are materially the
same. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc17012.htm#fr_95) <span
id="xiii.xxvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxvi-p7"></span> Rather, “And the shame,” *i* *e* *,* the
idol-worship, referred to in the preceding verse; the article ה is
prefixed to the noun. This is the view taken by *Gataker* and *Blayney*
See <span id="xiii.xxvi-p7.1"></span>[Jer
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#013)<span
id="xiii.xxvi-p7.1"></span>; <span id="xiii.xxvi-p7.2"></span>[Ho
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#010)<span id="xiii.xxvi-p7.2"></span>.
— *Ed*

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc17012.htm#fr_96) <span
id="xiii.xxvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xxvii-p7"></span> *Calvin* seems to have followed the
*Septuagint* in rendering the verb in the past tense. The *Vulgate* and
*Syriac* retain the future of the original; but the *Targum* gives the
present, and rightly so, as the future in Hebrew is often to be so
taken. It is the same in *Welsh,* the future conveys the meaning of the
present. This distich might in that language be rendered exactly
according to the Hebrew, and the future would be understood as
expressing what the present state of things is, —

<span id="xiii.xxvii-p8"></span><span
id="xiii.xxvii-p8.1"></span>Gorweddwn yn ein cywilydd, A gorchuddia ni
ein gwarth.

<span id="xiii.xxvii-p9"></span>But in English the present must be used,
as it is the confession of the penitent when returning to God, —

<span id="xiii.xxvii-p10"></span>We lie in our shame, And cover us does
our disgrace, Because against Jehovah our God Have we sinned, we and our
fathers, From our childhood even to this day; And we have not hearkened
To the voice of Jehovah our God.

<span id="xiii.xxvii-p11"></span>— *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](cc17013)
