[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc17000)  [Next](cc17002.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 17: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part I*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span>TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE.

<span id="ii-p2"></span>The Commentaries On Jeremiah, like those on The
Minor Prophets, were delivered as Lectures In The Theological School At
Geneva, taken down by some of the Pupils, and afterwards read to Calvin,
and corrected. We find in them the production of the same vigorous and
expansive mind: The Divine Oracles are faithfully explained, the meaning
is clearly stated, and such brief deductions are made as the subjects
legitimately warrant. Though the Lectures were extemporaneously
delivered, there is yet so much order preserved, and such brevity,
clearness, and suitableness of diction are found in them, that in these
respects they nearly equal the most finished compositions of Calvin as
proof that he possessed a mind of no common order.

<span id="ii-p3"></span>The Ministry Of Jeremiah extended over a large
space of time from the thirteenth year of Josiah’s reign till after the
final overthrow of the nation; but for how long after that period, it is
not known.  <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) Between the thirteenth
year of Josiah and the destruction of the city and Temple, there were
about *forty* years. This was a remarkable period, and Jeremiah nearly
alone labored among the people. Their sins had been for the most part
the same for a long time — for nearly two centuries, as it appears from
the testimonies of his predecessors, Amos, Hosea, Isaiah, Joel, Micah,
Nahum, and Zephaniah; for these *seven* had in this order preceded him.
Zephaniah And Habakkuk were probably for a time his contemporaries, the
first at the commencement, and the other near the end of his ministry.
The contumacy with which Jeremiah often charged the Jews was here
evident, as they continued in their evil courses after so many urgent
remonstrances by the former Prophets.

<span id="ii-p5"></span>What an example of blindness and of the power of
superstition does the history of the Jews at this period exhibit! No
past nor present calamities, and no threatenings of still greater
calamities, and no promises of Divine favor and of temporal blessings,
were sufficient to keep them from idolatrous and immoral practices — and
such practices, too, as were plainly and explicitly condemned by that
very Law which they professed to receive! Such inconsistency might have
been deemed impossible, had it not been exemplified in the Jews: but it
is an inconsistency which is still exhibited in the conduct of many
calling themselves Christians.

<span id="ii-p6"></span>As to The Style Of Jeremiah, the opinion of the
accurate and elegant *Lowth* is as follows:

<span id="ii-p7"></span>“Jeremiah, though not wanting either in elegance
or sublimity, is yet in both inferior to Isaiah. Jerome seems to charge
him with some measure of rusticity as to his expressions; but of this, I
truly confess, I have found no traces. In thoughts, indeed, he is
somewhat less elevated, being for the most part more loose and diffuse
in his sentences, as one more conversant with the more tender feelings,
being especially capable of expressing sorrow and sympathy. This,
indeed, appears mainly in The Lamentations, where these feelings alone
predominate; but it is also often found in his Prophecies, and
particularly in the first part of his Book, which is chiefly poetical.
The middle part is nearly all historical; and the last, consisting of
six chapters, is altogether poetical, and contains several oracles
plainly expressed, in which the Prophet nearly approaches the sublimity
of Isaiah. But of the whole Book of Jeremiah, hardly the half do I
consider to be poetical.” — *Proel,* 21.

<span id="ii-p8"></span>*Venema* mainly agrees with *Lowth:* he blames
*Jerome* for ascribing rusticity of diction to our Prophet, and says
that he was no good judge (*peritus Judex*) of such matters. Speaking of
Jeremiah’s style, he says, “His diction is not so lofty and sublime as
that of Isaiah, though in the six last chapters, 46-51., it seems to me
to be nearly equal to it, being no less pure, expressive, and copious,
besprinkled also with tropes and metaphors as with lights, and fitted to
move the feelings and to stimulate the heart to repentance, for which it
was designed. The Lamentations alone are sufficient to defend Jeremiah
against the charge of ignorance and rusticity; for antiquity, as
*Sanctums* rightly observes, has nothing more grave, more harmonious,
more expressive.” *Com*. *ad Jer*., p. 8.

<span id="ii-p9"></span>“He is admirably pathetic,” says *Scott; “*his
descriptions of approaching judgments are peculiarly vivid; and his
eloquence is very vigorous and impressive, when inveighing against the
shameless audacity of the people in rebellion against God.”

<span id="ii-p10"></span>Of Jeremiah as a Prophet, *Henry* mentions
these particulars: 1. That he was made a Prophet when young;-2. That he
continued long a Prophet;-3. That he was a reproving Prophet;-4. That he
was a weeping Prophet; — and, 5. That he was a suffering Prophet, having
been persecuted by his own nation more than any other.

<span id="ii-p11"></span>There are several references in the New
Testament to Jeremiah and to his writings. See <span
id="ii-p11.1"></span>[Matt. 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#017.md),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#018.md)<span id="ii-p11.1"></span>; <span
id="ii-p11.2"></span>[Mt 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#014.md)<span
id="ii-p11.2"></span>; <span id="ii-p11.3"></span>[Heb
8:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#008.md)<span id="ii-p11.3"></span>;
<span id="ii-p11.4"></span>[Heb
10:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#015.md)<span id="ii-p11.4"></span>.
“These last references, “observes *Scott, “are* peculiarly important;
for in one of them God himself is mentioned as speaking the words
referred to; and in the other it is said, ‘Whereof the Holy Ghost is a
witness to us.’ This is decisive, as to the judgment of the inspired
Apostles, respecting the Book on which we now enter, and is peculiarly
suited to put us on our guard against those professed friends of the
Scriptures, who speak of these books as venerable, authentic, or genuine
remains of antiquity, of great value and high authority, but hesitate to
vindicate them as divinely inspired.” *Pref*. *to Jer*.

<span id="ii-p12"></span>Nothing is with any certainty known as having
been written by Jeremiah, except this Book and the Lamentations.
Ascribed to him has been a funeral song on the death of Josiah, (<span
id="ii-p12.1"></span>[2Ch 35:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#025.md)<span
id="ii-p12.1"></span>) which, *Josephus* says, was extant in his day. It
has been also said by some that he wrote the 137th Psalm (<span
id="ii-p12.2"></span>[Psalm 137](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#000.md)<span
id="ii-p12.2"></span>), and in connection with Ezekiel, the 46th Psalm
(<span id="ii-p12.3"></span>[Psalm
46](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#000)<span id="ii-p12.3"></span>.md). His
Letter to the captives in Babylon in the Apocrypha, appended to the book
of Barite, is no doubt spurious: its style is very different from that
of Jeremiah.

<span id="ii-p13"></span>It is universally admitted that the Chapters in
this Book are not in their right order. How this has happened, none have
been able to conjecture; but the fact is evident. According to
*Blayney,* whose account seems correct, the twelve first chapters
contain prophecies delivered in the reign of Josiah. Those in the
thirteenth, and in the following chapters to the twentieth inclusively,
were delivered in the reign of Jehoiakim. Now begins the disorder; the
twenty — first contains what was spoken in the time of Zedekiah, the
last king: and afterwards we have what was delivered in a former reign.
The kings of Judah, during Jeremiah’s ministry, were these: Josiah;
Shallum or Jehoahaz, his second son; Jehoiakim, his eldest son;
Jeconiah, the son of Jehoiakim; and Zedekiah, the youngest son of
Josiah. *Blayney* thinks that no prophecies were delivered in the reigns
of Shallum and of Jeconiah. Then his classification may be stated as
follows:-During the reign of

<span id="ii-p14"></span>**Josiah**, were delivered, chapters 1-12,
inclusively.

<span id="ii-p15"></span>**Shallum**, none.

<span id="ii-p16"></span>**Jehoiakim**, chapters 13-20, inclusively, 22,
23, 25, 26, 35, 36, 45, 46, 47, 48, and 49 to verse 33 inclusively.

<span id="ii-p17"></span>**Jeconiah**, none.

<span id="ii-p18"></span>**Zedekiah**, chapters 21, 24, 27 -34, 37-39,
49: from verse 34 to the end, 1, and 51.

<span id="ii-p19"></span>The 40-44, inclusively, were written after the
destruction of Jerusalem and the captivity of the people; and the 52,
the last, during the same time, or as it is commonly supposed, by Ezra;
it is an epitome of the progressive and final overthrow of the kingdom.

<span id="ii-p20"></span>There were several circumstances worthy of
notice, with regard to The Jews, during the ministry of Jeremiah:

<span id="ii-p21"></span>**1**. The *means* which God employed to lead
them to repentance, and to a reformation of their conduct, both as to
religion and morals: he gave them a pious and a reforming king in
Josiah; the Book of the Law was providentially discovered and widely
made known; a reformation was carried on according to its requirements,
while idolatrous practices were in a great measure put an end to; the
people had also before their eyes the awful judgment of God on their
brethren, The Israelites, in banishing them from their country; and the
powerful preaching of Jeremiah sounded in their ears.

<span id="ii-p22"></span>**2**. The manifest *evidences* of God’s
displeasure: their good king, Josiah, was suddenly taken from them, no
doubt as a judgment for their ingratitude; his successor, Suallum, was,
after three months’ reign, taken prisoner by the Egyptians, and the
country was put under tribute; the country was visited with grievous
famine, as recorded in chap. 14.; and Jeremiah, by God’s command,
denounced on them the punishment of an entire extinction as a nation.

<span id="ii-p23"></span>**3**. The extremely *corrupted state* of the
people: they were both most idolatrous and most immoral, unfaithful to
God and to man in a degree hardly credible. During Josiah’s reign they
pretended to cast away their gross superstitions, but after his death
they returned to them, as it were, with increased avidity; and with
these superstitions was combined the prostration of every moral
principle, and of every natural feeling. Superstition ever destroys
morality, and enfeebles all the social and natural sympathies of men.
What a picture of the effects of superstition is given by Jeremiah in
chapter 9!

<span id="ii-p24"></span>**4**. Notwithstanding this extremely
degenerated state of things, The Jews harbored the *conviction* that
their ruin, as denounced by Jeremiah, was impossible. While practically
denying God, they yet rested their confidence on his promises respecting
the perpetuity of David’s kingdom, and on their outward privileges;
taking as unconditional what was conditional, and regarding the mere
possession of divine institutions as a sufficient security. And in this
vain confidence they were encouraged and confirmed by false Prophets and
corrupt Priests, in opposition to God’s messages by his Prophet
Jeremiah, and to the plain declarations of that Law, the authority of
which they still ostensibly acknowledged!

<span id="ii-p25"></span>These things have been recorded for our
instruction.

<span id="ii-p26"></span>Some of Jeremiah’s Prophecies were fulfilled in
the days of many of those who heard them; such as those which refer to
the Captivity of the people, and to the destruction of the neighboring
nations by the king of Babylon. Other prophecies extend farther, to
times more remote, to the destruction of Babylon, to the restoration of
the Jews after the term of seventy years, and to the destinies of
various nations. There are also Prophecies respecting The Messiah, as
The Lord Our Righteousness, The Evangelical Covenant, The Call of the
Gentiles, and final Restoration of The Jews. So that there are in this
Book some Prophecies which were soon fulfilled, others at a more distant
time, and some which are still to be fulfilled. Who but GOD, the Sole
and the Supreme Ruler of the world, and the regulator and disposer of
all events, could have announced such Prophecies? All those which refer
to the past have been fulfilled, fully and completely; and with no less
certainty shall all such as refer to what is future be in due time
fulfilled. Nothing can intercept the exercise of Divine Faithfulness;
nothing can obstruct the working of Infinite Power.

<span id="ii-p27"></span>Facsimile copies of the old Latin, French, and
English title — pages follow this Preface, with a reprint of the
Dedication by Clement Cotton to the Countess Of Bedford, prefixed to his
English Translation of 1620.

<span id="ii-p28"></span>J. O.  
Thrussington, September 1850.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](cc17001.htm#fr_0.md) <span id="ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p4"></span> According to an ancient tradition, mentioned by
*Jerome* and others, Jeremiah was stoned to death by the Jews at
Tahpanhes in Egypt, (see <span id="ii-p4.1"></span>[Jer
43:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#008)<span id="ii-p4.1"></span>.md)
shortly after their removal there, subsequent to the destruction of
Jerusalem. So that he did not live long after that event: it may be two
or three years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Facsimile of the Title Page to the 1589 Latin Edition](cc17002.md)
