[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc Texts](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bb09)  [Next](bb11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 9. THE QUEST OF THE PHILOSOPHER'S STONE

THE need of unity is a primary need of human thought. Behind the varied
multiplicity of the world of phenomena, primitive man, as I have
indicated on a preceding excursion, begins to seek, more or less
consciously, for that Unity which alone is Real. And this statement not
only applies to the first dim gropings of the primitive human mind, but
sums up almost the whole of science and philosophy; for almost all
science and philosophy is explicitly or implicitly a search for unity,
for one law or one love, one matter or one spirit. That which is the aim
of the search may, indeed, be expressed under widely different terms,
but it is always conceived to be the unity in which all multiplicity is
resolved, whether it be thought of as one final law of necessity, which
all things obey, and of which all the various other "laws of nature" are
so many special and limited applications; or as one final love for which
all things are created, and to which all things aspire; as one matter of
which all bodies are but varying forms; or as one spirit, which is the
life of all things, and of which all things are so many manifestations.
Every scientist and philosopher is a merchant seeking for goodly pearls,
willing to sell every pearl that he has, if he may secure the One Pearl
beyond price, because he knows that in that One Pearl all others are
included.

This search for unity in multiplicity, however, is not confined to the
acknowledged scientist and philosopher. More or less unconsciously
everyone is engaged in this quest. Harmony and unity are the very
fundamental laws of the human mind itself, and, in a sense, all mental
activity is the endeavour to bring about a state of harmony and unity in
the mind. No two ideas that are contradictory of one another, and are
perceived to be of this nature, can permanently exist in any sane man's
mind. It is true that many people try to keep certain portions of their
mental life in water-tight compartments; thus some try to keep their
religious convictions and their business ideas, or their religious faith
and their scientific knowledge, separate from another one--and, it
seems, often succeed remarkably well in so doing. But, ultimately, the
arbitrary mental walls they have erected will break down by the force of
their own ideas. Contradictory ideas from different compartments will
then present themselves to consciousness at the same moment of time, and
the result of the perception of their contradictory nature will be
mental anguish and turmoil, persisting until one set of ideas is
conquered and overcome by the other, and harmony and unity are restored.

It is true of all of us, then, that we seek for Unity--unity in mind and
life. Some seek it in science and a life of knowledge; some seek it in
religion and a life of faith; some seek it in human love and find it in
the life of service to their fellows; some seek it in pleasure and the
gratification of the senses' demands; some seek it in the harmonious
development of all the facets of their being. Many the methods, right
and wrong; many the terms under which the One is conceived, true and
false--in a sense, to use the phraseology of a bygone system of
philosophy, we are all, consciously or unconsciously, following paths
that lead thither or paths that lead away, seekers in the quest of the
Philosopher's Stone.

Let us, in these excursions in the byways of thought, consider for a
while the form that the quest of fundamental unity took in the hands of
those curious mediaeval philosophers, half mystics, half
experimentalists in natural things--that are known by the name of
"alchemists."

The common opinion concerning alchemy is that it was a pseudo-science or
pseudo-art flourishing during the Dark Ages, and having for its aim the
conversion of common metals into silver and gold by means of a most
marvellous and wholly fabulous agent called the Philosopher's Stone,
that its devotees were half knaves, half fools, whose views concerning
Nature were entirely erroneous, and whose objects were entirely
mercenary. This opinion is not absolutely destitute of truth; as a
science alchemy involved many fantastic errors; and in the course of its
history it certainly proved attractive to both knaves and fools. But if
this opinion involves some element of truth, it involves a far greater
proportion of error. Amongst the alchemists are numbered some of the
greatest intellects of the Middle Ages--ROGER BACON (c. 1214-1294), for
example, who might almost be called the father of experimental science.
And whether or not the desire for material wealth was a secondary
object, the true aim of the genuine alchemist was a much nobler one than
this as one of them exclaims with true scientific fervour: "Would to God
. . . all men might become adepts in our Art--for then gold, the great
idol of mankind, would lose its value, and we should prize it only for
its scientific teaching."\[1\] Moreover, recent developments in physical
and chemical science seem to indicate that the alchemists were not so
utterly wrong in their concept of Nature as has formerly been
supposed--that, whilst they certainly erred in both their methods and
their interpretations of individual phenomena, they did intuitively
grasp certain fundamental facts concerning the universe of the very
greatest importance.

Suppose, however, that the theories of the alchemists are entirely
erroneous from beginning to end, and are nowhere relieved by the merest
glimmer of truth. Still they were believed to be true, and this belief
had an important influence upon human thought. Many men of science have,
I am afraid, been too prone to regard the mystical views of the
alchemists as unintelligible; but, whatever their theories may be to us,
these theories were certainly very real to them: it is preposterous to
maintain that the writings of the alchemists are without mean-

\[1\]EIRENAEUS PHILALETHES: An Open Entrance to the  
Closed Palace of the King. (See The Hermetic Museum,  
Restored and Enlarged, ed. by A. E. WAITE, 1893, vol.  
ii. p. 178.)

ing, even though their views are altogether false. And the more false
their views are believed to be, the more necessary does it become to
explain why they should have gained such universal credit. Here we have
problems into which scientific inquiry is not only legitimate, but, I
think, very desirable,--apart altogether from the question of the truth
or falsity of alchemy as a science, or its utility as an art. What
exactly was the system of beliefs grouped under the term "alchemy," and
what was its aim? Why were the beliefs held? What was their precise
influence upon human thought and culture?

It was in order to elucidate problems of this sort, as well as to
determine what elements of truth, if any, there are in the theories of
the alchemists, that The Alchemical Society was founded in 1912, mainly
through my own efforts and those of my confreres, and for the first time
something like justice was being done to the memory of the alchemists
when the Society's activities were stayed by that greatest calamity of
history, the European War.

Some students of the writings of the alchemists have advanced a very
curious and interesting theory as to the aims of the alchemists, which
may be termed "the transcendental theory". According to this theory, the
alchemists were concerned only with the mystical processes affecting the
soul of man, and their chemical references are only to be understood
symbolically. In my opinion, however, this view of the subject is
rendered untenable by the lives of the alchemists themselves; for, as Mr
WAITE has very fully pointed out in his Lives of Alchemystical
Philosophers (1888), the lives of the alchemists show them to have been
mainly concerned with chemical and physical processes; and, indeed, to
their labours we owe many valuable discoveries of a chemical nature. But
the fact that such a theory should ever have been formulated, and should
not be altogether lacking in consistency, may serve to direct our
attention to the close connection between alchemy and mysticism.

If we wish to understand the origin and aims of alchemy we must
endeavour to recreate the atmosphere of the Middle Ages, and to look at
the subject from the point of view of the alchemists themselves. Now,
this atmosphere was, as I have indicated in a previous essay, surcharged
with mystical theology and mystical philosophy. Alchemy, so to speak,
was generated and throve in a dim religious light. We cannot open a book
by any one of the better sort of alchemists without noticing how closely
their theology and their chemistry are interwoven, and what a remarkably
religious view they take of their subject. Thus one alchemist writes:
"In the first place, let every devout and God-fearing chemist and
student of this Art consider that this arcanum should be regarded, not
only as a truly great, but as a most holy Art (seeing that it typifies
and shadows out the highest heavenly good). Therefore, if any man desire
to reach this great and unspeakable Mystery, he must remember that it is
obtained not by the might of man, but by the grace of God, and that not
our will or desire, but only the mercy of the Most High, can bestow it
upon us. For this reason you must first of all cleanse your heart, lift
it up to Him alone, and ask of Him this gift in true, earnest and
undoubting prayer. He alone can give and bestow it."\[1\] Whilst another
alchemist declares: "I am firmly persuaded that any unbeliever who got
truly to know this Art, would straightway confess the truth of our
Blessed Religion, and believe in the Trinity and in our Lord JESUS
CHRIST.\[2\]

Now, what I suggest is that the alchemists constructed their chemical
theories for the main part by means of a priori reasoning, and that the
premises from which they started were (i.) the truth of mystical
theology, especially the doctrine of the soul's regeneration, and (ii.)
the truth of mystical philosophy, which asserts that the objects of
Nature are symbols of spiritual verities. There is, I think, abundant
evidence to show that alchemy was a more or less deliberate attempt to
apply, according to the principles of analogy, the doctrines of
religious mysticism to chemical and physical phenomena. Some of this
evidence I shall attempt to put forward in this essay.

In the first place, however, I propose to say a few words more in
description of the theological and philosophical doctrines which so
greatly influenced the alchemists, and which, I believe, they borrowed
for their attempted explanations of chemical and physical phenomena.
This system of doctrine I have termed "mysticism"--a word which is
unfortunately equivocal, and has been used to denote various systems of
religious and philosophical thought,

\[1\] The Sophic Hydrolith; or, Water Stone of the  
Wise. (See The Hermetic Museum, vol. i. pp. 74  
and 75.)  
\[2\] PETER BONUS: The New Pearl of Great Price  
(trans. by A. E. WAITE, 1894), p. 275.

from the noblest to the most degraded. I have, therefore, further to
define my usage of the term.

By mystical theology I mean that system of religious thought which
emphasises the unity between Creator and creature, though not
necessarily to the extent of becoming pantheistic. Man, mystical
theology asserts, has sprung from God, but has fallen away from Him
through self-love. Within man, however, is the seed of divine grace,
whereby, if he will follow the narrow road of self-renunciation, he may
be regenerated, born anew, becoming transformed into the likeness of God
and ultimately indissolubly united to God in love. God is at once the
Creator and the Restorer of man's soul, He is the Origin as well as the
End of all existence; and He is also the Way to that End. In Christian
mysticism, CHRIST is the Pattern, towards which the mystic strives;
CHRIST also is the means towards the attainment of this end.

By mystical philosophy I mean that system of philosophical thought which
emphasises the unity of the Cosmos, asserting that God and the spiritual
may be perceived immanent in the things of this world, because all
things natural are symbols and emblems of spiritual verities. As one of
the Golden Verses attributed to PYTHAGORAS, which I have quoted in a
previous essay, puts it: "The Nature of this Universe is in all things
alike"; commenting upon which, HIEROCLES, writing in the fifth or sixth
century, remarks that "Nature, in forming this Universe after the Divine
Measure and Proportion, made it in all things conformable and like to
itself, analogically in different manners. Of all the different species,
diffused throughout the whole, it made, as it were, an Image of the
Divine Beauty, imparting variously to the copy the perfections of the
Original."\[1\] We have, however, already encountered so many instances
of this belief, that no more need be said here concerning it.

In fine, as Dean INGE well says: "Religious Mysticism may be defined as
the attempt to realise the presence of the living God in the soul and in
nature, or, more generally, as the attempt to realise, in thought and
feeling, the immanence of the temporal in the eternal, and of the
eternal in the temporal."\[2\]

Now, doctrines such as these were not only very prevalent during the
Middle Ages, when alchemy so greatly flourished, but are of great
antiquity, and were undoubtedly believed in by the learned class in
Egypt and elsewhere in the East in those remote days when, as some
think, alchemy originated, though the evidence, as will, I hope, become
plain as we proceed, points to a later and post-Christian origin for the
central theorem of alchemy. So far as we can judge from their writings,
the more important alchemists were convinced of the truth of these
doctrines, and it was with such beliefs in mind that they commenced
their investigations of physical and chemical phenomena. Indeed, if we
may judge by the esteem in which the Hermetic maxim, "What is above is
as that which is below, what is below is as that which is above, to
accomplish the miracles of

\[1\]Commentary of HIEROCLES on the Golden Verses  
of PYTHAGORAS (trans. by N. ROWE, 1906), pp.  
101 and 102.  
\[2\]WILLIAM RALPH INGE, M.A.: Christian  
Mysticism (the Bampton Lectures, 1899), p. 5.

the One Thing," was held by every alchemist, we are justified in
asserting that the mystical theory of the spiritual significance of
Nature--a theory with which, as we have seen, is closely connected the
Neoplatonic and Kabalistic doctrine that all things emanate in series
from the Divine Source of all Being--was at the very heart of alchemy.
As writes one alchemist: " . . . the Sages have been taught of God that
this natural world is only an image and material copy of a heavenly and
spiritual pattern; that the very existence of this world is based upon
the reality of its celestial archetype; and that God has created it in
imitation of the spiritual and invisible universe, in order that men
might be the better enabled to comprehend His heavenly teaching, and the
wonders of His absolute and ineffable power and wisdom. Thus the sage
sees heaven reflected in Nature as in a mirror; and he pursues this Art,
not for the sake of gold or silver, but for the love of the knowledge
which it reveals; he jealously conceals it from the sinner and the
scornful, lest the mysteries of heaven should be laid bare to the vulgar
gaze."\[1\]

The alchemists, I hold, convinced of the truth of this view of Nature,
i.e. that principles true of one plane of being are true also of all
other planes, adopted analogy as their guide in dealing with the facts
of chemistry and physics known to them. They endeavoured to explain
these facts by an application to them of the principles of mystical
theology, their

\[1\]MICHAEL SENDIVOGIUS (?): The New Chemical  
Light, Pt. II., Concerning Sulphur. (See The Hermetic  
Museum, vol. ii. p. 138.)

chief aim being to prove the truth of these principles as applied to the
facts of the natural realm, and by studying natural phenomena to become
instructed in spiritual truth. They did not proceed by the sure, but
slow, method of modern science, i.e. the method of induction, which
questions experience at every step in the construction of a theory; but
they boldly allowed their imaginations to leap ahead and to formulate a
complete theory of the Cosmos on the strength of but few facts. This led
them into many fantastic errors, but I would not venture to deny them an
intuitive perception of certain fundamental truths concerning the
constitution of the Cosmos, even if they distorted these truths and
dressed them in a fantastic garb.

Now, as I hope to make plain in the course of this excursion, the
alchemists regarded the discovery of the Philosopher's Stone and the
transmutation of "base" metals into gold as the consummation of the
proof of the doctrines of mystical theology as applied to chemical
phenomena, and it was as such that they so ardently sought to achieve
the magnum opus, as this transmutation was called. Of course, it would
be useless to deny that many, accepting the truth of the great
alchemical theorem, sought for the Philosopher's Stone because of what
was claimed for it in the way of material benefits. But, as I have
already indicated, with the nobler alchemists this was not the case, and
the desire for wealth, if present at all, was merely a secondary object.

The idea expressed in DALTON'S atomic hypothesis (1802), and universally
held during the nineteenth century, that the material world is made up
of a certain limited number of elements unalterable in quantity, subject
in themselves to no change or development, and inconvertible one into
another, is quite alien to the views of the alchemists. The alchemists
conceived the universe to be a unity; they believed that all material
bodies had been developed from one seed; their elements are merely
different forms of one matter and, therefore, convertible one into
another. They were thoroughgoing evolutionists with regard to the things
of the material world, and their theory concerning the evolution of the
metals was, I believe, the direct outcome of a metallurgical application
of the mystical doctrine of the soul's development and regeneration. The
metals, they taught, all spring from the same seed in Nature's womb, but
are not all equally matured and perfect; for, as they say, although
Nature always intends to produce only gold, various impurities impede
the process. In the metals the alchemists saw symbols of man in the
various stages of his spiritual development. Gold, the most beautiful as
well as the most untarnishable metal, keeping its beauty permanently,
unaffected by sulphur, most acids, and fire--indeed, purified by such
treatment,--gold, to the alchemist, was the symbol of regenerate man,
and therefore he called it "a noble metal". Silver was also termed
"noble"; but it was regarded as less mature than gold, for, although it
is undoubtedly beautiful and withstands the action of fire, it is
corroded by nitric acid and is blackened by sulphur; it was, therefore,
considered to be analogous to the regenerate man at a lower stage of his
development. Possibly we shall not be far wrong in using SWEDENBORG'S
terms, "celestial" to describe the man of gold, "spiritual" to designate
him of silver. Lead, on the other hand, the alchemists regarded as a
very immature and impure metal: heavy and dull, corroded by sulphur and
nitric acid, and converted into a calx by the action of fire, --lead, to
the alchemists, was a symbol of man in a sinful and unregenerate
condition.

The alchemists assumed the existence of three principles in the metals,
their obvious reason for so doing being the mystical threefold division
of man into body, soul (i.e. affections and will), and spirit (i.e.
intelligence), though the principle corresponding to body was a
comparatively late introduction in alchemical philosophy. This latter
fact, however, is no argument against my thesis; because, of course, I
do not maintain that the alchemists started out with their chemical
philosophy ready made, but gradually worked it out, by incorporating in
it further doctrines drawn from mystical theology. The three principles
just referred to were called "mercury," "sulphur," and "salt"; and they
must be distinguished from the common bodies so designated (though the
alchemists themselves seem often guilty of confusing them). "Mercury" is
the metallic principle par excellence, conferring on metals their
brightness and fusibility, and corresponding to the spirit or
intelligence in man.\[1\] "Sulphur," the principle of combustion and
colour, is the analogue of the soul. Many alchemists postulated two
sulphurs in the metals, an inward and an

\[1\]The identification of the god MERCURY with THOTH,  
the Egyptian god of learning, is worth noticing in this  
connection.

outward.\[1\] The outward sulphur was thought to be the chief cause of
metallic impurity, and the reason why all (known) metals, save gold and
silver, were acted on by fire. The inward sulphur, on the other hand,
was regarded as essential to the development of the metals: pure
mercury, we are told, matured by a pure inward sulphur yields pure gold.
Here again it is evident that the alchemists borrowed their theories
from mystical theology; for, clearly, inward sulphur is nothing else
than the equivalent to love of God; outward sulphur to love of self.
Intelligence (mercury) matured by love to God (inward sulphur) exactly
expresses the spiritual state of the regenerate man according to
mystical theology. There is no reason, other than their belief in
analogy, why the alchemists should have held such views concerning the
metals. "Salt," the principle of solidity and resistance to fire,
corresponding to the body in man, plays a comparatively unimportant part
in alchemical theory, as does its prototype in mystical theology.

Now, as I have pointed out already, the central theorem of mystical
theology is, in Christian terminology, that of the regeneration of the
soul by the Spirit of CHRIST. The corresponding process in alchemy is
that of the transmutation of the "base" metals into silver and gold by
the agency of the Philosopher's Stone. Merely to remove the evil sulphur
of the "base" metals, thought the alchemists, though necessary, is not
sufficient to transmute them

\[1\]Pseudo-GEBER, whose writings were highly esteemed,  
for instance. See R. RUSSEL'S translation of his works  
(1678), p. 160.

into "noble" metals; a maturing process is essential, similar to that
which they supposed was effected in Nature's womb. Mystical theology
teaches that the powers and life of the soul are not inherent in it, but
are given by the free grace of God. Neither, according to the
alchemists, are the powers and life of nature in herself, but in that
immanent spirit, the Soul of the World, that animates her. As writes the
famous alchemist who adopted the pleasing pseudonym of "BASIL VALENTINE"
(c. 1600), "the power of growth . . . is imparted not by the earth, but
by the life-giving spirit that is in it. If the earth were deserted by
this spirit, it would be dead, and no longer able to afford nourishment
to anything. For its sulphur or richness would lack the quickening
spirit without which there can be neither life nor growth."\[1\] To
perfect the metals, therefore, the alchemists argued, from analogy with
mystical theology, which teaches that men can be regenerated only by the
power of CHRIST within the soul, that it is necessary to subject them to
the action of this world-spirit, this one essence underlying all the
varied powers of nature, this One Thing from which "all things were
produced . . . by adaption, and which is the cause of all perfection
throughout the whole world."\[2\] "This," writes one alchemist, "is the
Spirit of Truth, which the world cannot comprehend without the
interposition of the Holy Ghost, or without the instruction of those who
know

\[1\]BASIL VALENTINE: The Twelve Keys. (See The  
Hermetic Museum, vol. i. pp. 333 and 334.)  
\[2\]From the "Smaragdine Table," attributed to HERMES  
TRISMEGISTOS (ie. MERCURY or THOTH).

it. The same is of a mysterious nature, wondrous strength, boundless
power.... By Avicenna this Spirit is named the Soul of the World. For,
as the Soul moves all the limbs of the Body, so also does this Spirit
move all bodies. And as the Soul is in all the limbs of the Body, so
also is this Spirit in all elementary created things. It is sought by
many and found by few. It is beheld from afar and found near; for it
exists in every thing, in every place, and at all times. It has the
powers of all creatures; its action is found in all elements, and the
qualities of all things are therein, even in the highest perfection . .
. it heals all dead and living bodies without other medicine . . .
converts all metallic bodies into gold, and there is nothing like unto
it under Heaven."\[1\] It was this Spirit, concentrated in all its
potency in a suitable material form, which the alchemists sought under
the name of "the Philosopher's Stone". Now, mystical theology teaches
that the Spirit of CHRIST, by which alone the soul of man can be
tinctured and transmuted into the likeness of God, is Goodness itself;
consequently, the alchemists argued that the Philosopher's Stone must
be, so to speak, Gold itself, or the very essence of Gold: it was to
them, as CHRIST is of the soul's perfection, at once the pattern and the
means of metallic perfection. "The Philosopher's Stone," declares
"EIRENAEUS PHILALETHES" (nat. c. 1623), "is a certain heavenly,

\[1\]The Book of the Revelation of HERMES, interpreted by  
THEOPHRASTUS PARACELSUS, concerning the Supreme  
Secret of the World. (See BENEDICTUS FIGULUS, A Golden  
and Blessed Casket of Nature's Marvels, trans. by A. E. WAITE,  
1893, pp. 36, 37, and 41.)

spiritual, penetrative, and fixed substance, which brings all metals to
the perfection of gold or silver (according to the quality of the
Medicine), and that by natural methods, which yet in their effects
transcend Nature.... Know, then, that it is called a stone, not because
it is like a stone, but only because, by virtue of its fixed nature, it
resists the action of fire as successfully as any stone. In species it
is gold, more pure than the purest; it is fixed and incombustible like a
stone \[i.e. it contains no outward sulphur, but only inward, fixed
sulphur\], but its appearance is that of a very fine powder, impalpable
to the touch, sweet to the taste, fragrant to the smell, in potency a
most penetrative spirit, apparently dry and yet unctuous, and easily
capable of tingeing a plate of metal.... If we say that its nature is
spiritual, it would be no more than the truth; if we described it as
corporeal the expression would be equally correct; for it is subtle,
penetrative, glorified, spiritual gold. It is the noblest of all created
things after the rational soul, and has virtue to repair all defects
both in animal and metallic bodies, by restoring them to the most exact
and perfect temper; wherefore is it a spirit or 'quintessence.'"\[1\]

In other accounts the Philosopher's Stone, or at least the materia prima
of which it is compounded, is spoken of as a despised substance,
reckoned to be of no value. Thus, according to one curious alchemistic
work, "This matter, so precious by the excellent Gifts, wherewith Nature
has enriched it, is truly mean, with regard to the Substances from

\[1\]EIRENAEUS PHILALETHES: A Brief Guide to the  
Celestial Ruby. (See The Hermetic Museum, vol. ii. pp.  
246 and 249.)

whence it derives its Original. Their price is not above the Ability of
the Poor. Ten Pence is more than sufficient to purchase the Matter of
the Stone. . . . The matter therefore is mean, considering the
Foundation of the Art because it costs very little; it is no less mean,
if one considers exteriourly that which gives it Perfection, since in
that regard it costs nothing at all, in as much as all the World has it
in its Power . . . so that . . . it is a constant Truth, that the Stone
is a Thing mean in one Sense, but that in another it is most precious,
and that there are none but Fools that despise it, by a just Judgment of
God."\[1\] And JACOB BOEHME (1575-1624) writes: "The philosopher's stone
is a very dark, disesteemed stone, of a grey colour, but therein lieth
the highest tincture."\[2\] In these passages there is probably some
reference to the ubiquity of the Spirit of the World, already referred
to in a former quotation. But this fact is not, in itself, sufficient to
account for them. I suggest that their origin is to be found in the
religious doctrine that God's Grace, the Spirit of CHRIST that is the
means of the transmutation of man's soul into spiritual gold, is free to
all; that it is, at once, the meanest and the most precious thing in the
whole Universe. Indeed, I think it quite probable that the alchemists
who penned the above-quoted passages had in mind the words of ISAIAH,
"He was despised and we esteemed him not." And

\[1\]A Discourse between Eudoxus and Pyrophilus, upon the  
Ancient War of the Knights. See The Hermetical Triumph:  
or, the Victorious Philosophical Stone (1723), pp. 101 and  
102.  
\[2\]JACOB BOEHME: Epistles (trans. by J. E., 1649,  
reprinted 1886), Ep. iv., III.

if further evidence is required that the alchemists believed in a
correspondence between CHRIST--"the Stone which the builders
rejected"--and the Philosopher's Stone, reference may be made to the
alchemical work called The Sophic Hydrolith: or Water Stone of the Wise,
a tract included in The Hermetic Museum, in which this supposed
correspondence is explicitly asserted and dealt with in some detail.

Apart from the alchemists' belief in the analogy between natural and
spiritual things, it is, I think, incredible that any such theories of
the metals and the possibility of their transmutation or "regeneration"
by such an extraordinary agent as the Philosopher's Stone would have
occurred to the ancient investigators of Nature's secrets. When they had
started to formulate these theories, facts\[1\] were dis-

\[1\]One of those facts, amongst many others, that appeared  
to confirm the alchemical doctrines, was the ease with which  
iron could apparently be transmuted into copper. It was early  
observed that iron vessels placed in contact with a solution  
of blue vitriol became converted (at least, so far as their  
surfaces were concerned) into copper. This we now know to  
be due to the fact that the copper originally contained in the  
vitriol is thrown out of solution, whilst the iron takes its  
place. And we know, also, that no more copper can be obtained  
in this way from the blue vitriol than is actually used up in  
preparing it; and, further, that all the iron which is apparently  
converted into copper can be got out of the residual solution  
by appropriate methods, if such be desired; so that the facts  
really support DALTON'S theory rather than the alchemical  
doctrines. But to the alchemist it looked like a real transmutation  
of iron into copper, confirmation of his fond belief that iron and  
other base metals could be transmuted into silver and gold by the  
aid of the Great Arcanum of Nature.

covered which appeared to support them; but it is, I suggest,
practically impossible to suppose that any or all of these facts would,
in themselves, have been sufficient to give rise to such wonderfully
fantastic theories as these: it is only from the standpoint of the
theory that alchemy was a direct offspring of mysticism that its origin
seems to be capable of explanation.

In all the alchemical doctrines mystical connections are evident, and
mystical origins can generally be traced. I shall content myself here
with giving a couple of further examples. Consider, in the first place,
the alchemical doctrine of purification by putrefaction, that the metals
must die before they can be resurrected and truly live, that through
death alone are they purified--in the more prosaic language of modern
chemistry, death becomes oxidation, and rebirth becomes reduction. In
many alchemical books there are to be found pictorial symbols of the
putrefaction and death of metals and their new birth in the state of
silver or gold, or as the Stone itself, together with descriptions of
these processes. The alchemists sought to kill or destroy the body or
outward form of the metals, in the hope that they might get at and
utilise the living essence they believed to be immanent within. As
PARACELSUS put it: "Nothing of true value is located in the body of a
substance, but in the virtue . . . the less there is of body, the more
in proportion is the virtue." It seems to me quite obvious that in such
ideas as these we have the application to metallurgy of the mystic
doctrine of self-renunciation--that the soul must die to self before it
can live to God; that

<span id="img_fig41to42"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/fig41to42.jpg)

the body must be sacrificed to the spirit, and the individual will bowed
down utterly to the One Divine Will, before it can become one therewith.

In the second place, consider the directions as to the colours that must
be obtained in the preparation of the Philosopher's Stone, if a
successful issue to the Great Work is desired. Such directions are
frequently given in considerable detail in alchemical works; and,
without asserting any exact uniformity, I thinkthat I may state that
practically all the alchemists agree that three great colour-stages are
necessary--(i.) an inky blackness, which is termed the "Crow's Head" and
is indicative of putrefaction; (ii.) a white colour indicating that the
Stone is now capable of converting "base" metals into silver; this
passes through orange into (iii.) a red colour, which shows that the
Stone is now perfect, and will transmute "base" metals into gold. Now,
what was the reason for the belief in these three colour-stages, and for
their occurrence in the above order? I suggest that no alchemist
actually obtained these colours in this order in his chemical
experiments, and that we must look for a speculative origin for the
belief in them. We have, I think, only to turn to religious mysticism
for this origin. For the exponents of religious mysticism unanimously
agree to a threefold division of the life of the mystic. The first stage
is called "the dark night of the soul," wherein it seems as if the soul
were deserted by God, although He is very near. It is the time of trial,
when self is sacrificed as a duty and not as a delight. Afterwards,
however, comes the morning light of a new intelligence, which marks the
commencement of that stage of the soul's upward progress that is called
the "illuminative life". All the mental powers are now concentrated on
God, and the struggle is transferred from without to the inner man, good
works being now done, as it were, spontaneously. The disciple, in this
stage, not only does unselfish deeds, but does them from unselfish
motives, being guided by the light of Divine Truth. The third stage,
which is the consummation of the process, is termed "the contemplative
life". It is barely describable. The disciple is wrapped about with the
Divine Love, and is united thereby with his Divine Source. It is the
life of love, as the illuminative life is that of wisdom. I suggest that
the alchemists, believing in this threefold division of the regenerative
process, argued that there must be three similar stages in the
preparation of the Stone, which was the pattern of all metallic
perfection; and that they derived their beliefs concerning the colours,
and other peculiarities of each stage in the supposed chemical process,
from the characteristics of each stage in the psychological process
according to mystical theology.

Moreover, in the course of the latter process many flitting thoughts and
affections arise and deeds are half-wittingly done which are not of the
soul's true character; and in entire agreement with this, we read of the
alchemical process, in the highly esteemed "Canons" of D'ESPAGNET:
"Besides these decretory signs \[i.e. the black, white, orange, and red
colours\] which firmly inhere in the matter, and shew its essential
mutations, almost infinite colours appear, and shew themselves in
vapours, as the Rainbow in the clouds, which quickly pass away and are
expelled by those that succeed, more affecting the air than the earth:
the operator must have a gentle care of them, because they are not
permanent, and proceed not from the intrinsic disposition of the matter,
but from the fire painting and fashioning everything after its pleasure,
or casually by heat in slight moisture."\[1\] That D'ESPAGNET is
arguing, not so much from actual chemical experiments, as from analogy
with psychological processes in man, is, I think, evident.

As well as a metallic, the alchemists believed in a physiological,
application of the fundamental doctrines of mysticism: their physiology
was analogically connected with their metallurgy, the same principles
holding good in each case. PARACELSUS, as we have seen, taught that man
is a microcosm, a world in miniature; his spirit, the Divine Spark
within, is from God; his soul is from the Stars, extracted from the
Spirit of the World; and his body is from the earth, extracted from the
elements of which all things material are made. This view of man was
shared by many other alchemists. The Philosopher's Stone, therefore (or,
rather, a solution of it in alcohol) was also regarded as the Elixir of
Life; which, thought the alchemists, would not endow man with physical
immortality, as is sometimes supposed, but restore him again to the
flower of youth, "regenerating" him physiologically. Failing this, of
course, they regarded gold in a potable

\[1\]JEAN D'ESPAGNET: Hermetic Arcanum, canon 65.  
(See Collectanea Hermetica, ed. by W. WYNN  
WESTCOTT, vol. i., 1893, pp. 28 and 29.)

form as the next most powerful medicine--a belief which probably led to
injurious effects in some cases.

Such are the facts from which I think we are justified in concluding, as
I have said, "that the alchemists constructed their chemical theories
for the main part by means of a priori reasoning, and that the premises
from which they started were (i.) the truth of mystical theology,
especially the doctrine of the soul's regeneration, and (ii.) the truth
of mystical philosophy, which asserts that the objects of nature are
symbols of spiritual verities."\[1\]

It seems to follow, ex hypothesi, that every alchemical work ought to
permit of two interpretations, one physical, the other transcendental.
But I would not venture to assert this, because, as I think, many of the
lesser alchemists knew little of the origin of their theories, nor
realised their significance. They were concerned merely with these
theories in their strictly metallurgical applications, and any
transcendental meaning we can extract from their works was not intended
by the writers themselves. However, many alchemists, I conceive,
especially the better sort, realised more or less clearly the dual
nature of their subject, and their books are to some extent intended to
permit of a double interpretation, although the emphasis is laid upon
the physical and chemical application of mystical doctrine. And there
are a few writers who adopted alchemical terminology on the principle
that, if the language of theology

\[1\]In the following excursion we will wander again in the alchemical  
bypaths of thought, and certain objections to this view of the origin  
and nature of alchemy will be dealt with and, I hope, satisfactorily  
answered.

is competent to describe chemical processes, then, conversely, the
language of alchemy must be competent to describe psychological
processes: this is certainly and entirely true of JACOB BOEHME, and, to
some extent also, I think, of HENRY KHUNRATH (1560-1605) and THOMAS
VAUGHAN (1622-1666).

As may be easily understood, many of the alchemists led most romantic
lives, often running the risk of torture and death at the hands of
avaricious princes who believed them to be in possession of the
Philosopher's Stone, and adopted such pleasant methods of extorting (or,
at least, of trying to extort) their secrets. A brief sketch, which I
quote from my Alchemy: Ancient and Modern (1911), SS 54, of the lives of
ALEXANDER SETHON and MICHAEL SENDIVOGIUS, will serve as an example:--

"The date and birthplace of ALEXANDER SETHON, a Scottish alchemist, do
not appear to have been recorded, but MICHAEL SENDIVOGIUS was probably
born in Moravia about 1566. Sethon, we are told, was in possession of
the arch-secrets of Alchemy. He visited Holland in 1602, proceeded after
a time to Italy, and passed through Basle to Germany; meanwhile he is
said to have performed many transmutations. Ultimately arriving at
Dresden, however, he fell into the clutches of the young Elector,
Christian II., who, in order to extort his secret, cast him into prison
and put him to the torture, but without avail. Now it so happened that
Sendivogius, who was in quest of the Philosopher's Stone, was staying at
Dresden, and hearing of Sethon's imprisonment obtained permission to
visit him. Sendivogius offered to effect Sethon's escape in return for
assistance in his alchemistic pursuits, to which arrangement the
Scottish alchemist willingly agreed. After some considerable outlay of
money in bribery, Sendivogius's plan of escape was successfully carried
out, and Sethon found himself a free man; but he refused to betray the
high secrets of Hermetic philosophy to his rescuer. However, before his
death, which occurred shortly afterwards, he presented him with an ounce
of the transmutative powder. Sendivogius soon used up this powder, we
are told, in effecting transmutations and cures, and, being fond of
expensive living, he married Sethon's widow, in the hope that she was in
the possession of the transmutative secret. In this, however, he was
disappointed; she knew nothing of the matter, but she had the manuscript
of an alchemistic work written by her late husband. Shortly afterwards
Sendivogius printed at Prague a book entitled The New Chemical Light
under the name of 'Cosmopolita,' which is said to have been this work of
Sethon's, but which Sendivogius claimed for his own by the insertion of
his name on the title page, in the form of an anagram. The tract On
Sulphur which was printed at the end of the book in later editions,
however, is said to have been the genuine work of the Moravian. Whilst
his powder lasted, Sendivogius travelled about, performing, we are told,
many transmutations. He was twice imprisoned in order to extort the
secrets of alchemy from him, on one occasion escaping, and on the other
occasion obtaining his release from the Emperor Rudolph. Afterwards, he
appears to have degenerated into an impostor, but this is said to have
been a finesse to hide his true character as an alchemistic adept. He
died in 1646."

However, all the alchemists were not of the apparent character of
SENDIVOGIUS--many of them leading holy and serviceable lives. The
alchemist-physician J. B. VAN HELMONT (1577-1644), who was a man of
extraordinary benevolence, going about treating the sick poor freely,
may be particularly mentioned. He, too, claimed to have performed the
transmutation of "base" metal into gold, as did also HELVETIUS (whom we
have already met), physician to the Prince of Orange, with a wonderful
preparation given to him by a stranger. The testimony of these two
latter men is very difficult either to explain or to explain away, but I
cannot deal with this question here, but must refer the reader to a
paper on the subject by Mr GASTON DE MENGEL, and the discussion thereon,
published in vol. i. of The Journal of the Alchemical Society.

In conclusion, I will venture one remark dealing with a matter outside
of the present inquiry. Alchemy ended its days in failure and fraud;
charlatans and fools were attracted to it by purely mercenary objects,
who knew nothing of the high aims of the genuine alchemists, and
scientific men looked elsewhere for solutions of Nature's problems. Why
did alchemy fail? Was it because its fundamental theorems were
erroneous? I think not. I consider the failure of the alchemical theory
of Nature to be due rather to the misapplication of these fundamental
concepts, to the erroneous use of a priori methods of reasoning, to a
lack of a sufficiently wide knowledge of natural phenomena to which to
apply these concepts, to a lack of adequate apparatus with which to
investigate such phenomena experimentally, and to a lack of mathematical
organons of thought with which to interpret such experimental results
had they been obtained. As for the basic concepts of alchemy themselves,
such as the fundamental unity of the Cosmos and the evolution of the
elements, in a word, the applicability of the principles of mysticism to
natural phenomena: these seem to me to contain a very valuable element
of truth--a statement which, I think, modern scientific research
justifies me in making,--though the alchemists distorted this truth and
expressed it in a fantastic form. I think, indeed, that in the modern
theories of energy and the all-pervading ether, the etheric and
electrical origin and nature of matter and the evolution of the
elements, we may witness the triumphs of mysticism as applied to the
interpretation of Nature. Whether or not we shall ever transmute lead
into gold, I believe there is a very true sense in which we may say that
alchemy, purified by its death, has been proved true, whilst the
materialistic view of Nature has been proved false.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 10. The Phallic Element in Alchemical Doctrine](bb11)
