[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ktl06)  [Next](ktl08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Keep a True Lent*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1953\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  The Throne of Love Chapter 5 

DIVINE LOVE is the force that dissolves all the opposers of true thought
and thus smooths out every obstacle that presents itself. When love
ascends the throne and takes complete possession of our life its rule is
just and righteous. Even destructive faculties, such as resistance,
opposition, obstinacy, anger, jealousy, are harmonized through love.
Perfect love casts out all fear. When love harmonizes the consciousness
we find that our outer affairs are put in order and that where once
there seemed to be opposition and fear co-operation and trust prevail.

We demonstrate nonresistance by denying all intellectual opposition or
antagonism. When the substance of divine love is poured out upon all
alien thoughts we are not bothered by them any more. This leads to joy,
a positive force that has not been bearing fruit because of the
obstructions heaped upon it by the failure to fulfill the law of the
All-Good. The wonderful kingdom within man is developed through keeping
the commandments; that is, commanding, controlling, and directing every
thought according to the harmonious law of love to one another.

The dissolving power of spiritual love is the antidote for a dictatorial
will, but we must deny all

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

selfish desires out of our love before we use it in softening the
imperious will. When the consciousness of love stands in the inner court
of our being we cannot help acceding to its demands. Unselfish love is
fearless, because of its forgetfulness of self. Will divides its
dominion with love when it is approached in the right attitude; that is,
with understanding. Understanding of the law is necessary in all
permanent unions. When we know Truth we know that we are all one, that
there is no separation whatever. They that love without the adulteration
of selfishness or the lust of sense come into the very presence of God.

There is a distinction between love of the divine type, exercised by
divine man, and love of the human type, exercised by the mortal man. It
requires discriminating judgment to distinguish between human and divine
love. All love is divine in its origin, but in passing through the prism
of man's mind it is apparently broken into many colors. Yet, like the
ray of white light, it ever remains pure. It is within man's province to
make its manifestation in his life just as pure as its origin. This,
too, requires painstaking discrimination and good judgment. We learn by
experience that love must be directed by wisdom. If we give up blindly
to the impulses suggested by human love, we shall suffer many downfalls.

David represents love passing through some of these experiences. He let
his affections go out to many wives; he attached himself through the
heart

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

to the many sources of sensation that the love nature opens. When one
gives up to all the emotions engendered by love there is a saturnalia of
sensation in consciousness.

The first step in all reform is the recognition of the power of the law.
Wisdom shows us what the law is and where we have fallen short in our
use of it. Then we are shown that there is no anger against us on the
part of God. Transgression of the law brings its own punishment. We are
not punished for our sins but by them. God is kindness, God is
love--loving-kindness is a word of rare compound.

One good definition of love is that it is the feeling that excites
desire for the welfare of its object. If all people would recognize love
as embodying this ideal--recognize that God loves all men to the degree
that He has poured out His life and substance and intelligence equally
with us in the universal scheme--they would find in it the solution to
every problem of life. Our greatest good comes in the welfare of all.
Jesus recognized divine sonship and universal brotherhood. We confess
Jesus as the Son of God, and by that confession we acknowledge that all
men are sons of God. All of us want to know Truth and the help that
comes from it, but when it is presented to us we object to the broad
spirit that it proclaims. This is especially the case if our religious
training has been narrow and pharisaical.

The Jews were taught that they were the chosen people and that all
others were barbarians. Such

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

doctrine is the foundation of the caste system. When a man begins to see
himself better than other men, the thought of superiority extends to his
environment, and social apartness follows. What those in authority have
taught and what the customs and beliefs of the past have been are of
more weight than reason and logic. An innovation on old methods of
thought is resisted. The whole religious nature is moved; thought runs
to meet thought, and a concentration of resistance is set up in the
mind.

Many persons wonder why they do not develop divine love more quickly.
Here is the reason: They make a wall of separation between the religious
and the secular, between the good and the bad. Divine love sees no
distinction among persons. It is Principle and it feels its own
perfection everywhere. It feels the same in the heart of the sinner as
it does in the heart of the saint. When we let the Truth of Being into
our heart and pull down all walls of separation we shall feel the flow
of infinite love that Jesus felt.

A sense of oneness is a natural product of love, and it is accompanied
by a consciousness of security. Through our sense of oneness with the
All-Good, the greatest possible sense of security is realized;
therefore, all fear is readily and completely cast out. John emphasizes
the fact that in order to love God we must necessarily love our fellow
men. A love that is adulterated in any degree by hatred for anything or
anybody is not pure enough to discern

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

the great love of the Infinite, which unifies all men.

Jesus said that love of God is the greatest commandment. "Thou shalt
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thy mind. This is the great and first commandment. And a second
like unto it is this, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. On these
two commandments the whole law hangeth." Divine love is such a
transcendent thing that words describing it seem flat and stale. But
words used in right understanding quicken the mind, and we should not
despise them. Affirming that we do love God with all our heart, with all
our soul, with all our mind, and with all our might will cause us to
feel a love we have never felt before. No better treatment for the
realization of divine love can be given than that which Jesus
recommended.

Jerusalem, the Holy City, represents the love center in consciousness.
Physically, it is the cardiac plexus. Its presiding genius is John the
Mystic, who leaned his head on the Master's bosom. We establish the
ruling attitudes of mind throughout our body by our daily thoughts, and
they may or may not be in harmony with Principle. Our dominant thoughts
about love will show forth in the heart center and establish there a
general character. The loves and hates of the mind are precipitated to
this ganglionic receptacle of thought and crystallized there. Its
substance is sensitive, tremulous, and volatile. What we love or what we
hate builds cells of joy or pain in the cardiac plexus. In divine order

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

it should be the abode of all that is good and pure.

To be in subjection to the higher Power is the highest goal of human
attainment. The spirit of obedience is the spirit of love. Love is the
most obedient thing in the universe. It is also the greatest worker and
will accomplish more for our happiness than all other faculties
combined. If you want a servant that will work for you night and day,
cultivate divine love. At times there may be obstacles in the mind that
interfere with this fellowship of love. One of them is the thought that
we owe our neighbor something besides love. For some wrong, fancied or
otherwise, we think we owe him punishment. The higher Power tells us
that we owe him love only, and by sending him the word of love the law
is fulfilled, and the barrier is burned away. We must make friends with
everybody and everything in order to have this mighty worker, love,
carry out for us the divine law.

When we even faintly realize the love of God we begin to love our fellow
men. There is a fervent love among Christians that is not found among
any other group. Love is a divine ordinance, and those who let the love
of God pour itself out in charity do truly cover and forgive a
"multitude of sins," not only in themselves but in others; love pours
its balm over every wound and the substance of its sympathy infuses hope
and faith to the discouraged heart. Divine love has a balm for every
ill.

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](ktl08)
