[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ktl05)  [Next](ktl07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*Keep a True Lent*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1953\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  Christ in You Chapter 4 

VOLTAIRE IS CREDITED with saying that if there were no God, men would
invent one. The human characteristics of the gods of all religions
betray their man-made origin. Not discerning the real character of God,
man has thought of Him as acting as man would if he were God. The result
is a God who is angry every day, regrets that He made man, drowns the
whole human family, and condemns the wicked to the eternal fire of hell
if they fail to ask His forgiveness. This God of many of the religions
of the day is of such frightful mien that we find it difficult to accept
Him as the loving Father that Jesus taught Him to be.

Robert Ingersoll paraphrased "An honest man is the noblest work of God"
to "An honest God is the noblest work of man." He was not so far wrong.
All inventions are first pictured in the mind of the inventor. So we
form a mental picture of everything we conceive, and our conception of
God is no exception. We do not see persons and things as we think we see
them. What we see is our own conception of them.

We are forced by intuition, logic, and manifest evidence to the
conclusion that the Creator of the universe in which we live was and is
wise and good. This being true, we cannot accept descriptions of

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

Him or His acts that contradict that primal conclusion. When we read
that "God is angry with the wicked every day" we question the
understanding of the writer, although the evidence would tend to prove
the assumption.

Those who transgress divine law suffer in various ways, and it might
well seem that an angry Being is the executioner. However, we know that
even those who frame our civil laws are not angry with the persons who
break them. Those who conceive of God as a person will invest Him with
personal traits, some of which are ridiculous.

We can all understand that a creation which involves complex relations
must be governed by laws and orderly acts. Those who get the right
conception of the creative source and adjust their minds to its wisdom,
purity, power, love, and completeness as the ideal source of perfect man
are rewarded by a serene peace and confidence in the final supremacy of
justice and righteousness. God is good, and He is the only real power in
the universe; consequently, perfection must eventually establish itself
in the minds of the law-abiding people and through them in the whole
world.

God-Mind presents its perfect ideals to all minds, especially to those
that are open to the light of the Christ, by whom the bonds of error
thought are broken. Those who have been trained to think of God as a
person, as the parent of a family of billions can continue to think of
Him as such by adding

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

the attributes of unlimited principle. But they should not make their
God a man with the limitations of the human. The natural man thinks that
the world in which he lives is the real world and that the thoughts he
thinks are the real thoughts. Those who expect the second coming of
Jesus look forward to His appearance in a body of flesh similar to the
body that was crucified, if not the same.

But Jesus at the Ascension broke His physical organism into its primal
electrons or ions of substance and life, which He sowed as a body seed
for all those who follow Him in the regeneration. Thousands have
appropriated these seeds of the new Christ body in the past nineteen
hundred years and are now in the process of unfolding a redeemed
organism. No one has fully developed the Christ body as it will appear
when mortal life has been replaced by immortality. Many are experiencing
strange sensations that they or their medical advisers do not
understand. These are the transforming elements of the new life that
they have incorporated into their consciousness in this or some other
incarnation.

The redemptive work that Jesus began will require a long period of time
to be fulfilled. He told His apostles that many things would happen
before the consummation of what He called the "end of the age." This
phrase appears in the American Standard Version of the New Testament as
the "end of the world," but is corrected in the margin. This erroneous
translation, "the end of the world," has caused

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

wave after wave of fear to sweep over the earth for hundreds of years,
and many ministers are still using it as a club to scare people into
conversion.

Jesus never taught that God would destroy the earth, but He did teach
that race evolution was being carried forward in great periods or ages,
one of which was ending in His time. Jesus said that no one knew the
duration of this age except the Father. Paul doubtless had this in mind
when he wrote to the Colossians concerning "the mystery which hath been
hid for ages and generations . . . which is Christ in you, the hope of
glory." Through Christ we are unified with God and become joint heirs
with Jesus to all the treasures of the kingdom of heaven.

Every follower of Jesus should strive for a better and fuller
understanding of the unity He made with the Father, whereby He opened
the way for us to make the same unity and help others to do likewise.
People are no longer herded into heaven by persons preaching the fear of
hell, but many persons are sinking deeper and deeper into the delusions
of sense. The old serpent is deceiving them with the promise that they
get pleasure out of sensations of the flesh. We must preach and teach
and demonstrate that there is health and happiness in the spiritual life
of Christ. The blood of Jesus does save. We have a striking illustration
of the efficacy of human blood in the restoration of life to our wounded
soldiers. The blood of the human family has become corrupt, and the race
body is no longer vitalized

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

sufficiently. It has reached a point where an infusion of purified blood
is imperative.

Jesus raised the blood of His body to spiritual potency. This purified
blood was sown as seed in our race thought and can be appropriated by
anyone who raises his thoughts to those of Jesus. This is accomplished
through faith in Jesus to save one from sin, to inspire one with His
Spirit, or through asking Jesus to come to the aid of the sin-sick mind
or suffering body. A single atom of the purified blood of Jesus can
begin a vitalizing and purifying work in mind and body that will
continue until the Christ man appears. How long it will take to
transform the mortal into the immortal no man can tell. We do know,
however, that once the mind receives the Christ quickening it will
continue to grow in grace, incarnation after incarnation, until the
rejuvenating life has overcome death and reincarnation is no longer
necessary.

The multitudes who still labor under the logic of the personal-God
consciousness continue to ask why God does not plainly reveal Himself
and destroy the Adversary, who is leading so many astray.

Those who have for even a short time given their thoughts to the Christ
Spirit can testify that it has developed in them a new outlook on life.
Where before they were doubtful and uncertain, they now have the
assurance of the presence of a power that is helping them to better
living in every way. Christ has become a real Comforter, working with
them,

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

rather than a historical God-man in heaven. Health and prosperity have
replaced the former fear of sickness and financial worry.

How great is the need for a metaphysical understanding of God and His
relation to man! Jesus taught plainly that "God is Spirit." God is not a
sleight-of-hand performer who makes full-grown animals instantly. God
gives Himself to man, and man has the power to make himself what he
will. Freedom of will is man's inheritance, and he can use that freedom
to build or destroy as he determines. Jesus claimed that all authority
was given to Him "in heaven and on earth." What Jesus had, we all have
potentially. He developed His powers and was the great example for all
of us. We can attain the same unity with the Father-Mind that He
attained; and He promised us that He will help us to reach this unity
with the Father. If suffering humanity could appreciate the importance
of this stupendous invitation and accept it, the world and its people
would soon be transformed.

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](ktl07.md)
