[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ktl07)  [Next](ktl09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*Keep a True Lent*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1953\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  The World Calls to Courage Chapter 6 

OVER NINETEEN hundred years ago a man taught a religion that changed the
whole trend of thought of people. His teachings were called "the Way."

In the beginning He had few followers. He was, like Socrates, accused of
treason and killed. His enemies took for granted that after His death
His doctrine would utterly disappear, as had many doctrines before His
time. However, they lacked spiritual discernment, for the teachings of
the man Jesus of Nazareth possessed an element that the people vitally
needed and they soon sprang up in regions far beyond the little land
where they were promulgated; they spread to many lands and have been
spreading ever since.

It was the Word of God that Jesus was teaching; the Word of God is the
creative agent, and spiritual man is its supreme creation. Moreover, the
man Jesus stands far out in front, as evidenced by His teachings. He is
the divine man of this race. We should impress this on our
consciousness. We should study His teachings. We should understand and
follow them.

Jesus taught that the world belongs to man and that man is responsible
for it. The human family is responsible for the poverty or the
prosperity of the

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

world. By our mental beholding and working we determine whether we shall
have or have not.

In the days when the Israelites were held in captivity by the
Babylonians, a few of the companions of the prophet Nehemiah were
allowed to return with him to Jerusalem and to rebuild the wall. They
engaged those remaining in the city to help; the Bible says "the people
had a mind to work."

Our prosperity is the result of work--not physical work alone, but first
mental and spiritual work. There is an everlasting marching on in every
industry and science. We are never content with the present methods but
are constantly seeking better ones; we are not content with our schools
but are always finding easier ways to gain knowledge for ourselves and
our children. Our nation is, therefore, progressing.

We find that Christianity is surprisingly progressive, too. Our religion
is constantly unfolding new possibilities, new powers, and new beauties;
we are on the way to a great outpouring of spiritual development. We
have not realized what a wonderful religion we have. It is filled with
possibilities, and these possibilities are made known to us in mind and
spirit.

But we need more courage to develop these possibilities. We need more
initiative. We need more awareness of this divine power in us and when
we awaken to the spiritual man, which every one of us has within us, we
shall see that through spiritual

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

unfoldment all good things are possible of accomplishment, as Jesus
promised.

All things are possible to us, only we must believe. Believe what? We
must believe in ourselves, in this innate spiritual man in us and we
must encourage him. Encourage him with what? With sound words, with
affirmations of almightiness; then we shall have the key to the
overcoming world.

Our most important study is our own mind, not only the intellectual mind
but the spiritual mind. "Know thyself" was inscribed on the temple of
Apollo at Delphi; and it must be inscribed on our own temple, "over" the
door of our mind. "Know thyself." We must become acquainted with our own
mind.

Now that it is being universally taught that with every thought our
brain sends vibrations into the surrounding atmosphere, every
progressive metaphysician is admitting that with this invisible thought
stuff we are constantly making structures for ourselves and the world
about us. The scientific world is also beginning to recognize the fact
that man has within himself the capacity to re-form the world about him.

Modern metaphysicians have discovered that with every thought we think
there is a movement of active forces--not only a movement of those
forces, but a movement of everything connected with our consciousness,
our body, our world.

Every time we speak we cause the atoms and

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

cells of our body to tremble and go through certain changes. Not only do
we cause the cells and atoms of our body to form new adjustments, but we
even affect the cells of the bodies of those with whom we associate.

We are told that "the desert shall . . . blossom as the rose" and that
we shall have a millennium here on earth; that things will be changed
"in the twinkling of an eye." This is a Biblical view. We find that
changes come gradually, and they come through work.

We find in the Old Testament the poems and prophecies of Isaiah. He
tells in the language of the Orient some of the signs of the
millennium--and they have been shown by modern science!

The wilderness and the dry land shall be glad; and the desert shall
rejoice, and blossom as the rose. It shall blossom abundantly, and
rejoice even with joy and singing; the glory of Lebanon shall be given
unto it, the excellency of Carmel and Sharon: they shall see the glory
of Jehovah, the excellency of our God.

Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees. Say to them
that are of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear not: behold, your God will
come with vengeance, with the recompense of God; he will come and save
you.

Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf
shall be unstopped. Then shall the lame man leap as a hart, and the
tongue of the dumb shall sing; for in the wilderness shall waters break
out, and streams in the desert. And the glowing sand shall become a
pool, and the thirsty ground springs of water: in the habitation of
jackals, where they lay, shall be grass with

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

reeds and rushes. And a highway shall be there and a way, and it shall
be called the way of holiness; the unclean shall not pass over it; but
it shall be for the redeemed.

In every generation since the dawn of history have been prophets who
claimed that they received revelation of the end of the world. It is
claimed that even Jesus told of the end of the world. However, more
recent and accurate translations of the New Testament show this to be an
error. What Jesus spoke of was "the completion of the age."

A vivid description of the end of the earth's civilization is found in
the 34th chapter of Isaiah. Whether Isaiah knew any more about the end
of the world than many modern prophets is a question.

History testifies to the fact that they are all wrong. The world is not
coming to an end. Geologists say that it has taken the Colorado River at
least fifty million years to carve out the Grand Canyon. It is logical,
then, to conclude that God has a future for a globe that has taken Him
so long to make.

But through poets, prophets, and pessimists in every age we are warned
of what, from a human, destructive viewpoint, might occur. Shakespeare
says:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"These our actors.  
As I foretold you, were all spirits, and  
Are melted into air, into thin air;  
And, like the baseless fabric of this vision,  
The cloud-capped towers, the gorgeous palaces,  
The solemn temples, the great globe itself,  
</span>

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

Yea, all which it inherit, shall dissolve;  
And, like this insubstantial pageant faded,  
Leave not a rack behind."  

</div>

Now what we want to ask is this: Are these prophecies of the end of
civilization and the destruction of the earth and all things the result
of sane thinking or are they the work of sick minds?

They are undoubtedly the work of sick minds. The sane man with a little
logic would determine that our God, with the power and wisdom to create
a world of such mighty possibilities, would not destroy it and leave the
destiny of all the good people to the mercies of a few unscrupulous
fanatics.

The destiny of the earth and of its people is in the minds and hands of
those who seek to know God as Spirit, and those who seek Him must seek
Him in Spirit.

Jesus points the way, and by following His formulas we shall find the
solution to every problem. All the formulas given by Jesus are
constructive rather than destructive. He does not teach death but life.
"If a man keep my word, he shall never see death."

Where in Jesus' teachings shall we find a formula to offset, to
dissolve, to meet and nullify the atomic bomb? We find it in the 10th
chapter of Luke and the 22d chapter of Matthew. This is the formula:

"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; and thy neighbor

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

as thyself." "This is the great and first commandment," Jesus told the
lawyer who asked Him what was the "great" commandment. This is the
fulfillment of all commandments.

The formula has been tested, and history shows that it has built and
sustained civilization and produced peace, happiness, and prosperity.

Let us all join in prayer to this end, that we may take the formulas
that Jesus gave as working principles, that they may be sent out in the
world through the power of the word.

"Be strong and of good courage; for thou shalt cause this people to
inherit the land."

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](ktl09.md)
