[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ktl17)  [Next](ktl19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*Keep a True Lent*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1953\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  The Appropriation of Divine Life 

GOD IS LIFE, and wherever the pulse of life beats, there God is. Man
cannot give nor take life, but so long as he thinks he can slay the
living and so long as he proceeds to slay either man or beast, he will
be at enmity with life. Those who would lay hold on eternal life must
seek in every way to preserve the forms in which it manifests.

We all have life, and it is God's eternal life, but it does not become
ours in reality until we consciously realize it. The one who enters into
eternal life, as did Jesus, must lay hold on that omnipresent life and
make it one with his body. This is the secret of inheriting eternal
life.

So long as man continues to lose his body through death he will be in
doubt as to the reality of eternal life. Eternal life means to be
eternally conscious of life in its fullness. By his very belief that
life can go out of his body, man shows that he is not in the
consciousness of eternal life. In theory he may see that life is
omnipresent, and may reason to himself that he cannot therefore get
outside of life, yet the appearance is that he lets it slip away from
him. To entertain thought that life can even temporarily slip away will
rob man of the consciousness of eternal life.

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

The remedy is: Lay hold on eternal life. Have compassion on the life in
the body of every living creature, and especially in your own body.
Declare life perpetually abiding in the organism. Erase some of the ways
through which you are dissipating the life of your organism. Robbers are
at work on your body every day. They are the lusts of passion and
appetite. Resolutely drive them off. Give life the sanctuary of your
present thought and pay the price of overcoming.

God is life, and they who worship Him must worship Him in the life
consciousness; that is, in Spirit. When I worship Him in this way, I am
vitalized immediately. In order to build up the real, permanent life
consciousness I must touch the great inner life current. There is no
other way.

The first step in the realization of life is always to know that God is
life, abundant, omnipresent, eternal, and the second step is to make
positive connection with God life by declaring oneness with it.

Within my body is the center where pure life is generated. This center
is the fountain from which shall spring rivers of living water. When
quickened by Spirit through faith in the indwelling Lord, the source of
life, the waters of life are set free and purified

By keeping my mind steadily on the pure, sweet, redeeming life of
Christ, and refusing to allow any thought to come in that stops the
consciousness of the universal life flow, I increase my power to
appropriate

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

more life, and every cell in my body thrills with the new life of
Spirit.

Go in mind to the spiritual place that can be described only as I AM.
When you touch I AM, it changes the whole course of your thought and
your life. You are the offspring of God, of life. In life you live,
move, and have your being.

In Scripture the divine life combined with divine substance is termed
"the Lamb of God." This phrase carries the symbology of the lamb's
purity, innocence, and guilelessness. Its nature is to vivify with
perpetual life all things it touches.

The pure life of God flows into man's consciousness through the
spiritual body. This is the "river of water of life, bright as crystal,
proceeding out of the throne of God and of the Lamb," referred to in the
22d chapter of Revelation.

Jesus came proclaiming, "I am the way, and the truth, and the life"; "I
came that they may have life, and may have it abundantly"; "I am the
bread of life . . . which cometh down out of heaven, that a man may eat
thereof, and not die."

The whole race groans waiting for the redemption of their bodies. Jesus
gave us the one and only way to redemption, which is to incorporate the
great I AM into our consciousness. "I am the resurrection, and the
life." Make the resolve that you are master over all the life forces of
your being. Do not look away off for help; you will never find it
outside your own consciousness. God's power must be incorporated

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

in your consciousness, and you must understand how it works and work
with it. Through thought you must work Truth into every part of your
body temple. This is not too difficult, but it requires attention and
persistence. The body requires spiritual quickening, because it carries
on a line of action beyond the realm of conscious thinking. If I live in
a temple that belongs to me I should know what is going on in it.

The lifting up of the life forces and resurrection have the same
significance. One who has discovered the Truth of Being is raised,
lifted up in consciousness, resurrected daily out of old subconscious
negative thought conditions into the one positive reality.

The body is the fruit of mind. Do not talk about the body as being a low
vibration, or as material. In the study of mind action, take the body
into consideration as the fruit of thought, and affirm that it is pure,
holy, undefiled.

The life source is spiritual energy. It is deeper and finer than
electricity or human magnetism. It is composed of ideas, and a man can
turn on its current by making mental union with it.

The higher life is a higher state of mind. It exists as the soul of God;
and you know it when you realize, "I am the Son of God." You bring this
life into manifestation by acting from the divine life idea. The
consciousness of eternal life places one in the stream of life that
never fails.

Through repeated and constant affirmation in

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

mind of the one and only pure substance of God everywhere present, we
change the life currents in the organism until the corruptible flesh
puts on in-corruption.

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](ktl19.md)
