[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kort05)  [Next](kort07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 2. Big-Raven and the Mice. <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11)

Some Mouse-Girls walked along the seashore. The youngest Mouse also
wanted to follow. Her mother said, "Tie her (and leave her) on the
seashore." They bound her with two strings of her diaper. She began to
squeal, "Pawawawa'!" and they said, "What is it?"--"I have found a
genuine small nail."--"Go to her!" They went to her. "What is it that
you have found?" But it was only a small shell. "Oh, strike her!" They
struck her, and she whimpered, "Iġiġi'!"

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

After a while she turned to them again, and began as before, "What is it
that I have found? Oh, indeed, it has nails! Oh, indeed, it has eyes!
Oh, indeed, it has whiskers!"--"Go to her and see what she has found!"
They came to her, and really it was a small ringed seal.

Big-Raven said, "Eh, eh! Why are those Mouse-Girls shouting and
dancing?" Miti' said, "Oh, leave off! Why do you want to go to them?"
But he went to them. "Well, there! Mouse-Girls, what is the matter with
you?"

"Oh, nothing! only this Hairless-One grew angry with us." He said,
"Louse me, (one of you!)" One Mouse-Girl said, "I have pricked myself
with my father's awl."

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

\[paragraph continues\] One might think she were the daughter of some
artisan. He said to another small girl, "Louse me!"--"I have pricked
myself with my mother's needle." One might think she were the daughter
of some seamstress. "O Hairless-One! louse me." She said, "Eh, all
right!" She loused him. (He said,) "Oh, say (these words):
'Grandfather's lice taste of fat!'" <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12)

Then he shook his head, and the small mice were scattered in all
directions. Some fell into the sea, some into the coast-slime, others
into the river, and others again on the pebbles. Big-Raven took the
little ringed seal and carried it home. The Mouse-Girls crawled to the
shore

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

and asked one another, "Where did you fall?"--"I fell into the
sea."--"Then you were cold."--"And where did you fall ?"--"I fell on the
small pebbles."--"Then you were pricked."--"And where did you fall?"--"I
fell into the coast-slime."--"Then you were cold."--"And you,
Hairless-One, where did you fall?"--"I fell on the moss <span
id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13) spread by mother."--"Then you fell easy."

They said, "Let us go home!" They went home and told their mother, "See,
mamma! we have found a small ringed seal, but grandfather took it
away."--"Did he? Then we will fetch it back. O daughters! go and look

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

into his house." They looked in. Then they came back and said,
"Eine'mqut is skinning it."--"Now you there, \[you Mouse-Girl,\] go and
look in!" She looked in. "Just now they are cooking it."--"Now, you
there, this one, go and look in there!" She looked in. "Just now they
are taking the meat out of the kettle." Mouse-Woman said, "Oh, I wish
Big-Raven would say, 'We will eat it to-morrow!' We must find a shaman's
small stick (used in magic). Oh, you there, small Mouse-Girl! take this
bundle of grass (on which magic had been practised) and carry it to
Big-Raven's house. There drop it through the vent-hole."

They (the Mice) took it and carried it there, and dropped it into the
house. Big-Raven immediately said, "Miti',

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

we had better eat this meat to-morrow." And she said, "All right!"--"Oh,
you, small Mouse-Girl! go and look into the house!"--"Just now Miti' is
arranging the bed."--"And now you, go and have a look!"--"Just now they
have gone to sleep, they are snoring."--"Now, there, let us go!" They
took bags and iron pails, went there, and put all the cooked meat into
them, also what was left of the broth. They defecated (into the kettle),
also filled Miti''s and Big-Raven's boots with small pebbles.

Next morning they awoke. "Miti', get up! Let us eat!" Miti' began to put
on her boots. "Ah, ah, ah! ah, ah, ah!"--"What is the matter with
you?"--"Oh, nothing!"

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Big-Raven then put on his boots. "Ah, ah, ah!
ah, ah, ah, ah!"--"And what is the matter with you? You cry now, just as
I did."--"Oh, stop (talking), bring the cooked meat, heat the broth!"
Miti' drank some broth, (and immediately cried out,) "It tastes of
excrement, it tastes of excrement!"--"Oh, bring it here!" Then Big-Raven
also cried, "It tastes of excrement, it tastes of
excrement!"--"Mouse-Women have defiled us."--"I will not forgive this. I
will stun them with blows. Bring me my big club!" She gave it to him,
and he started to go to the Mouse-Women. "Oh, grandfather is coming.
Tell him, 'Eat some pudding of stone-pine nuts!'" "What good are those
puddings of stone-pine nuts! I have no

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

teeth."--"Then have some cloud-berry-pudding." "Yes, I will eat some of
the cloud-berry-pudding." He ate of the pudding. ""Grandfather, lie down
on your back and have a nap!"--"Yes, I will have a nap, lying thus on my
back."

He slept, and they fastened to his eyes some red shreds. "Grandfather,
enough, get up!"--"All right! now I will go home." He went home; and
when he was approaching, and came close to the house, he shouted all of
a sudden, "Miti', tear in twain the worst one of our sons, to appease
the fire!" Without any reason she tore her son in twain. "And where is
the fire? just now you said, 'It burns.' What happened to your eyes?
They have shreds fastened

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

to the eyelids. The Mouse-Women have defiled you." He said, "Hm! now at
last grew angry. Bring me my club. I will go there and club them."

He went there. "Oh, grandfather is coming! Say to him, 'Have some
pudding of root of *Polygonum viviparum*!'"--"What for?" "Then have some
pudding of berries of *Rubus Arcticus*."--"Yes, I will have some pudding
of berries of *Rubus Arcticus*." He entered, and began to eat the
pudding. "Grandfather, lie down on your side and have a nap!"--"All
right! I will lie down on my side and have a nap."

He slept, and they painted his face with charcoal. "O grandfather! get
up, the day is breaking!"--"Yes,

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

all right! I will get up." He awoke. "Grandfather, have a drink from the
river there!"--"All right! I will drink." He went away, and came to the
river. He began to drink, and there he saw in the water his own image.
"Halloo, Painted-Woman! you there, I will drop a stone hammer as a
present for you." Oh, he dropped it. "Halloo, Painted-Woman! I will drop
down my own body! Halloo, Painted-Woman! shall I marry you?" Oh, he
jumped down into the water. That is all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[23:1](kort06.htm#fr_11) See Jochelson, The
Koryak, *l. c.*, No. 88, p. 260.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[25:1](kort06.htm#fr_12) It seems that the
Hairless Mouse-Girl, according to the custom of many native tribes of
this country, was killing the lice with her teeth.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[26:1](kort06.htm#fr_13) Used as a child's
diaper. See W. Jochelson, The Koryak, *l. c.*, p. 252.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. The Mouse-Girls](kort07)
