[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kort04)  [Next](kort06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

# I. Little-Bird-Man and Raven-Man. <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8)

Raven-Man and Little-Bird-Man wooed (the daughter) of Big-Raven.
Big-Raven preferred Little- Bird-Man. He said, "I will give my daughter
to Little-Bird-Man." Miti' said, "I will give my daughter to Raven-Man."
After that Raven-Man would go out secretly. He would eat excrement and
dog-carrion. (In the morning) they would wake up, and several
wolverene-skins and wolf-skins would be there. They would ask both of
the suitors, "Who killed those?" and Raven-Man would answer, "I killed
them."

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

Then a snow-storm broke out, and continued for a long time with unabated
violence. Big-Raven said to the suitors, "Go and try to calm this storm!
To the one who calms it, to that one will I give my daughter to wife."
Raven-Man said, "I will calm the storm." He said, "Prepare some
provisions for me." They prepared several pairs of boots. He went out,
and staid near by under a cliff, eating. Little-Bird-Man went out, and
there he stood eating of the provisions. Raven-Man gave to
Little-Bird-Man a wicked look. Little-Bird-Man entered again, and did
not say anything.

Raven-Man staid at the same place. The snow-storm

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

continued with the same vigor, without abating. Oh, at last Raven-Man
entered. His boots were all covered with ice, for he would make water in
his boots. That is the reason why the boots had ice. He said, "It is
impossible! there is a crack in the heavens." After a while they said to
Little-Bird-Man, "Now, then, calm this storm!" He said, "It is
impossible. Shall I also go out and make water in my boots, like
Raven-Man?" Then Big-Raven said to both suitors, "Go away! None of you
shall marry here." Then Little-Bird-Man said, "All right! I will try."
He took a round stopper, a shovel, and some fat, and went up to heaven.
He flew up, and came to the crack in the heavens. He stopped it with a
stopper, and threw the fat on the heavens all around it. For a while it
grew calmer.

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

He came home, and the snow-storm broke out again. Even the stopper was
thrust back into the house. It was too small. He said, "It is
impossible. The heavens have a crack." Big-Raven made another stopper, a
larger one, and gave it to Little-Bird-Man. He also gave him a larger
piece of fat. Little-Bird-Man flew up to the same place and put this
stopper into the crack. It fitted well. He drove it in with a mallet. He
spread the fat around over the heavens, shovelled the snow around the
hole, and covered it. Then it grew quite calm.

He came back, and then Raven-Man grew hateful to all of them. He took a
place close to Miti'; and she said to him, "How is it that you smell of
excrement?"--

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "Why! it is because I have had no bread for a
long time. <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9) She said to him, "Enough,
go away! You have done nothing to quiet this storm." He went away.
Little-Bird-Man married Yini'a-ñawġut.

Summer came. It was raining hard. Then Raven-Man put the sun into his
mouth; so it grew quite dark. After that they said to Čan\*ai',
"Čan\*ai', go and fetch water!"--"How shall I fetch water? (It is too
dark)." After a while they said to her, "Why, we are quite thirsty, We
are going to die." She went groping in the dark, then she stopped and
began to sing. She sang, "Both small

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

rivers are stingy (with their water)." Then a small river came to that
place, bubbling. She filled her pail bought from the Russians (i. e., an
iron pail), and carried it on her back. (Suddenly) a man came to her.
She could not carry the pail. He said, "I will carry the pail (for
you)." She came home in the dark. The man followed. It was River-Man.
They said to her, "Who is this man?" He said, "I am River-Man. I took
pity on that singer." They scolded their daughter. Nevertheless
River-Man married her.

After that they remained still in complete darkness. They said to
River-Man, "Why are we living in darkness?" He said, "Why, indeed?" He
put on a headband

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

of ringed-seal thong. He went out (and practised magic). Then at least a
little light appeared. The day dawned. They spoke among themselves, "How
shall we do it?" Then Yini'a-ñawġut prepared for a journey. She went to
Raven-Man and asked, "Halloo! Is Raven-Man at home?" Raven-Woman said,
"He is." She said to Raven-Man, "Since you went away, I have been
feeling dull all the time." She found Raven-Man, and said to him, "Did
not you feel dull (since that time)? Will you stay so?" He turned his
back to her, but she wanted to turn him (so that he should look with)
his face to her. But he turned his back to her. Then she tickled him
under the arms. She put her hands under his armpits. His sister said to
him, "What is the matter with you?

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Stop it! This is good girl." After that he began
to a make sounds in her direction, "Ġm, ġm, ġm!" She turned him around,
and at last he laughed out, "Ha, ha, ha!" The sun jumped out and
fastened itself to the sky. It grew daylight.

After that they slept together. She said to him, "Have you a
tent?"--"No!"--"Have you a fork?"--"No!"--"Have you a plate?"--"No!" She
said, "Then let us go home! I have all those things at home." They moved
on to Big-Raven's house. She said to Raven-Man, "Oh, you are a good
man!" and he felt flattered. Afterwards she killed him.

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

Yini'a-ñawġut put Raven-Man's (head) on above. She said, "That spotted
palate of yours, let it grow to be a fine cloudless sky!" <span
id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10)

She came home. And they said to her, "What have you been doing?" She
said, "I killed Raven-Man. He had the sun in his mouth." From that time
on it was quite calm. Raven-Woman said, "Well, now, does my brother
remember me? (Probably) he has plenty to eat." She said, "Let me visit
him." She visited him, and he was dead. Then she cried (and said), "He
caused annoyance to the other people. (Therefore he is dead.)" She left
him there. There was nothing else to do.

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

Then those people said to Little-Bird-Man, "Go home, both of you!" They
said to them, "Go away with a caravan of pack-sledges!" He replied, "We
will go on foot." They went away on foot, and came to a river.
Little-Bird-Man said to the woman, "Let me carry you (across)!" The
woman said to him, "Do not do it!" He said, "It is all right." He
carried her, and in doing so he died. Yini'a-ñawġut slept a night among
stone-pines and was almost frozen to death. On the following morning it
dawned, and close to that place a reindeer-herd was walking. All the
reindeer had iron antlers. A man was walking there too. He said, "Oh,
come here!" She said, "I will not come. My husband has

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

died." He said to her, "I am he, I am your husband." He took out his
gloves. "These you made for me. I am your husband. I am
Little-Bird-Man."

A house was there, also reindeer (for driving). He said to her, "Let us
go to Big-Raven! Now let them say again that you have a bad husband!"
They went with a caravan of pack-sledges, and they arrived. The people
said to Big-Raven, "Oh, your daughter has come with a caravan."
Big-Raven said, "Our daughter went away on foot." She said, "Here I am,
I have been brought home by Little-Bird-Man." Little-Bird-Man made
numerous driving-sledges, all of silver. They lived there

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

all together, and travelled about in all directions with a caravan of
pack-sledges. They lived in joy. They staid there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[12:1](kort05.htm#fr_8) Compare W. Jochelson, The
Koryak (Publications of the Jesup North Pacific Expedition, vol. vi),
No. 82, p. 250.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[16:1](kort05.htm#fr_9) This is meant
sarcastically. Bread is considered a delicacy among the Koryak. The
Raven, who eats excrement, pretends to feed on bread.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[20:1](kort05.htm#fr_10) These words are used
also as an incantation against bad weather.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. Big-Raven and the Mice](kort06)
