[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kort20)  [Next](kort22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 17. How Big-Raven's Daughter was swallowed by a Kamak. <span id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37)

Big-Raven was living with his people. One of his daughters was (almost)
eaten by lice. They shook her combination suit, and found there one
small louse. (Big-Raven) said to his wife, "What shall we do with it?"
The woman said, "What will you do? Why, you will kill it." He said,
"(No,) we will make it into a drum."

They made it into a drum. They looked at it, and the small louse turned
into a drum. Big-Raven immediately began to act as a shaman. The news of
this was carried everywhere, to all the villages; and the people began
to talk, (and say,) "Big-Raven has become quite a shaman, but he has
grown old without having any spirits. What unknown kind of drum has he
made?"

Big-Raven's daughter was living in secrecy. She did not appear openly.
All the neighbors gathered as suitors. He said, "Whosoever can state
rightly the material of which my drum is made, to him I shall give my
daughter." They named all kinds of sea-game. One said, "Of whale;" but
Big-Raven said, "Not of that." Others also said it was of wolf-skin, of
reindeer-skin. They named every living thing but he said, "Not of that."
They could not describe it properly.

Then from the fire crept out an evil spirit, with no clothes on, with
only a cap (on his head). "I can tell of what your drum is made. It is
made of a chamber-vessel."--"Not of that."--"It is made of a kettle."--

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span> <span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "Not of that."--"Then of a small louse." Miti'
said, "That is right! Now we must give our daughter to the Kamak."

They brought out the daughter, and began to prepare her for the journey.
Then only, for the first time, was she seen. The daughter began to cry.
They arranged for her three lines of sledges. One was hauled by whales;
another, by reindeer; the third one, by white whales. All three kinds
were alive. In the end they brought a small cow. The girl mounted it.
She put on a large knife in a bandoleer, and also put a comb into her
pocket. They set off. The girl was crying very hard.

They came to the kamak's house, and the other kamaks went out and ate
all the reindeer, "N\*am, n\*am, n\*am!" Only that cow was left. Then
the girl began to kill the kamaks with her knife. At last only one was
left,--the first one, with no clothes. Then she threw down the comb,
(and it grew quite large.) She climbed to the top of it; but he could
not climb it, and so the evil spirit could not eat her.

He said, "Though at a future time you will marry a certain man and have
two children by him, just then I shall eat you." Then the evil spirit
went away. She married a reindeer-breeder. After a while she brought
forth a child, and then another. Again she began to cry. She said, "The
kamak is going to eat me!"

One time her husband had gone out, and then the kamak came and ate her.
She had concealed about her at this very moment her woman's knife, and
with that knife she ripped open his body (insides). The evil spirit
died, and she came out. The next morning, when they awoke, a woman was
busying herself around their house. (The mistress) said, "Who are
you?"--"I (am the one who) ate you yesterday)." <span
id="fr_38"></span>[3](#fn_38)

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span> <span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

Meanwhile her sons became (grown) men. One son married that woman. Just
then her husband came. They went to Big-Raven's people. Another son also
married. They came to Big-Raven's people. The people said (to
Big-Raven), "Your daughter is being \[brought\] here!" He said, "The
evil spirit took her away. What (kind of a) daughter may come from
there?' She looked into the house. "I am here, I have come!' They went
out (to meet her), and all entered. From that time they lived together
and grew rich. That is all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_37"></span>[77:1](kort21.htm#fr_37) Compare Jochelson, The
Koryak, *l. c.*, No. 103, p. 291.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[79:3](kort21.htm#fr_38) The ka'mak turned into
an ordinary human being; namely, into a woman, who was assisting them in
their work.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 18. The Kamak and his Wife](kort22)
