[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh2_551) 
[Next](bh2_553) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 2:551

*Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair and Said bin Al-Musaiyab:*

Haklm bin Hizam said, "(Once) I asked Allah's Apostle (for something)
and he gave it to me. Again I asked and he gave (it to me). Again I
asked and he gave (it to me). And then he said, "O Hakim! This property
is like a sweet fresh fruit; whoever takes it without greediness, he is
blessed in it, and whoever takes it with greediness, he is not blessed
in it, and he is like a person who eats but is never satisfied; and the
upper (giving) hand is better than the lower (receiving) hand." Hakim
added, "I said to Allah's Apostle , 'By Him (Allah) Who sent you with
the Truth, I shall never accept anything from anybody after you, till I
leave this world.' " Then Abu Bakr (during his caliphate) called Hakim
to give him his share from the war booty (like the other companions of
the Prophet ), he refused to accept anything. Then 'Umar (during his
caliphate) called him to give him his share but he refused. On that
'Umar said, "O Muslims! I would like you to witness that I offered Hakim
his share from this booty and he refused to take it." So Hakim never
took anything from anybody after the Prophet till he died.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2:552: 'Umar: Allah's Apostle used to give me something but I
would say to him, ...](bh2_553)
