[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh2_489) 
[Next](bh2_491) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 2:489

*Narrated Al-Ahnaf bin Qais:*

While I was sitting with some people from Quraish, a man with very rough
hair, clothes, and appearance came and stood in front of us, greeted us
and said, "Inform those who hoard wealth, that a stone will be heated in
the Hell-fire and will be put on the nipples of their breasts till it
comes out from the bones of their shoulders and then put on the bones of
their shoulders till it comes through the nipples of their breasts the
stone will be moving and hitting." After saying that, the person
retreated and sat by the side of the pillar, I followed him and sat
beside him, and I did not know who he was. I said to him, "I think the
people disliked what you had said." He said, "These people do not
understand anything, although my friend told me." I asked, "Who is your
friend?" He said, "The Prophet said (to me), 'O Abu Dhar! Do you see the
mountain of Uhud?' And on that I (Abu Dhar) started looking towards the
sun to judge how much remained of the day as I thought that Allah's
Apostle wanted to send me to do something for him and I said, 'Yes!' He
said, 'I do not love to have gold equal to the mountain of Uhud unless I
spend it all (in Allah's cause) except three Dinars (pounds). These
people do not understand and collect worldly wealth. No, by Allah,
Neither I ask them for worldly benefits nor am I in need of their
religious advice till I meet Allah, The Honorable, The Majestic." '

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2:490: Ibn Masud: I heard the Prophet saying, There is no envy
except in two: a person ...](bh2_491)
