[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh2_798) 
[Next](bh2_800) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 2:797

*Narrated Abu Bakra:*

The Prophet delivered to us a sermon on the Day of Nahr. He said, "Do
you know what is the day today?" We said, "Allah and His Apostle know
better." He remained silent till we thought that he might give that day
another name. He said, "Isn't it the Day of Nahr?" We said, "It is." He
further asked, "Which month is this?" We said, "Allah and His Apostle
know better." He remained silent till we thought that he might give it
another name. He then said, "Isn't it the month of Dhul-Hijja?" We
replied: "Yes! It is." He further asked, "What town is this?" We
replied, "Allah and His Apostle know it better." He remained silent till
we thought that he might give it another name. He then said, "Isn't it
the forbidden (Sacred) town (of Mecca)?" We said, "Yes. It is." He said,
"No doubt, your blood and your properties are sacred to one another like
the sanctity of this day of yours, in this month of yours, in this town
of yours, till the day you meet your Lord. No doubt! Haven't I conveyed
Allah's message to you? They said, "Yes." He said, "O Allah! Be witness.
So it is incumbent upon those who are present to convey it (this
information) to those who are absent because the informed one might
comprehend it (what I have said) better than the present audience, who
will convey it to him. Beware! Do not renegade (as) disbelievers after
me by striking the necks (cutting the throats) of one another."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2:798: Ibn 'Umar: At Mina, the Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, Do you
know what is the day ...](bh2_800)
