[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar00)  [Next](gar02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDMG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*General Ahiman Rezon*, by Daniel Sickels, \[1868\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

# AHIMAN REZON.

###### SIGNIFICATION OF THE TERM.

## BY WILLIAM S. ROCKWELL,

###### GRAND MASTER OF GEORGIA.

THESE two words have acquired a wide Masonic celebrity. They constituted
the title of the Book of Constitutions, used by the division of
Freemasons, which separated from the Grand Lodge of England in 1736, and
have since become the usual designation of such works in this country.
DERMOTT, in 1772, styled his book the TRUE *Ahiman Rezon*, and he
claimed for his portion of the Order the practice of Ancient Masonry.
The inference is obvious that there was a spurious work under this title
then extant. An inquiry into their meaning is, therefore, not
irrelevant.

I have met with no exposition of the signification of this phrase,
except in the edition first published in South Carolina by Dr. DALCHO,
in 1807, and reprinted, with additions, in 1822; and afterward
re-arranged and edited by Dr. MACKEY in 1852; and, also, in the
"*Lexicon of Freemasonry*," by the last-mentioned distinguished author.

The following is Dr. DALCHO'S definition in the edition of 1822: "The
Book of Constitutions is usually denominated AHIMAN REZON. The literal
translation of *ahiman* is a *prepared brother*, from *manah*, *to
prepare;* and that of *rezon*, *secret*. So that Ahiman Rezon literally
means *the secrets* of a *prepared brother*. It is likewise supposed to
be a corruption of *achi* *man ratzon*, the thoughts or opinions of a
true and faithful brother."

There are several difficulties which seem to render this definition
inadmissible. The derivations do not appear to be in accordance with the
structure of the Hebrew language (if the words be Hebrew); and the
phrase, with this view of its derivation, has no grammatical
construction. The Hebrews were accustomed to a species of inversion,
which in our language has no parallel: for example, *the great work of
Jehovah* would be in Hebrew ‏מעשה יהוי הנדוֹל‎, literally, *work of
Jehovah the great*. Now, if the phrase under consideration was intended
to import "the secrets of a prepared brother," the construction would
have been, according to the example just

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

quoted, *ahi* *rezon man*. But there are further objections to this
rendering of the phrase into English. True, ‏מנה‎ *MNE*, to divide, *to
number*, in its piel form, signifies to appoint, to constitute, and, in
that sense, to prepare; yet, in accordance with the genius of the Hebrew
tongue, it undergoes a change in its vocalization. Its stem-letter is
doubled, and the vowel sound softened; it is pronounced *minnah*, and
its derivative should be *ahiminnah*. In Chaldee, ‏רז‎ *RZ* signifies a
secret, and might be imported into the Hebrew, but its plural is
*razin;* besides, it is something of a misnomer to call a published book
"*Secrets* of a prepared brother."

The last suggestion of Dr. DALCHO would seem more plausible, if it were
not open to the same grammatical objection. *MAN* can not signify *true*
or *faithful*, unless derived from ‏אמן‎ *AMN*, and then the compound
word would be *achiamon;* and if the ‏א‎ *A* of *AMN* suffered elision,
it would indicate a different radical, and if no elision took place, the
two letters ‏י‎ *I* and ‏א‎ *A* would not coalesce, but the ‏י‎ *I*
resumes its consonant sound as in ‏בנימין‎ *BNIMIN* (which we sound
Benjamin), the vocalization would then be *Abhjamon*.

Dr. MACKEY thus renders it:—"This title is derived from three Hebrew
words—*ahim*, brothers; *manah*, to select or appoint; and *ratzon*, the
will or law—and it, consequently, signifies "the law of appointed or
selected brothers."

It is true, that this definition more nearly accords with what the book
contains, than that proposed by DALCHO; yet, there would seem to be no
less formidable objections to this view of its signification. The verb
‏מנה‎ MNE, above referred to by DALCHO, in Kal, (i.e., its active form)
means to appoint, but its radical meaning is to number; it was one of
the prophetic words written by the spectral hand on the wall of
Belshazzar's banqueting-room. It is itself a derivative, and will not
rid us of the final ‏ה‎ *E*, and if it be any part of the root of the
word, we must read *ahimanah*. It is just to notice, that the radical of
this verb, signifying something divided ‏מן‎ MN, from the obsolete root
‏מנן‎ *MNN*, when in composition, conveys the idea of a *law*, *rule* or
*precept*, in conformity with which something is done; as, for example,
‏מפי יהוה‎ *MPhI* *IHOH* by command of JEHOVAH (II. Chron. xxxvi. 12),
but then the grammatical construction would require some other
signification of *rezon*, and it should be construed as an adjective, in
conformity with the example above quoted, and it might read *ahi*, being
the genitive singular (‏אהי‎ *AHI*,) the "*Supreme Law of a Brother*."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Explanation of the Frontispiece](gar02)
