[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar37)  [Next](gar39) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDMG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*General Ahiman Rezon*, by Daniel Sickels, \[1868\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Working-Tools of a Fellow-Craft are the PLUMB, the SQUARE, and the
LEVEL.

The Plumb is an instrument made use of by Operative Masons, to try
perpendiculars; the Square, to square their work; and the Level, to
prove horizontals: but we, as Free and Accepted Masons, are taught to
make use of them for more noble and glorious purposes:—the Plumb
admonishes us to walk uprightly in our several stations before GOD and
man, squaring our actions by the Square of Virtue, and ever remembering
that we are traveling upon the Level of Time, to " that undiscovered
country, from whose bourne no traveler returns." \* \* \*

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

The symbols of those instruments used by architects are unknown to
common observers, who merely see in them the simple Square, the Level,
and the Plumb; but Free and Accepted Masons recognize them as emblems of
certain moral principles and religious duties, which, if followed out as
they should be, would render all men valuable members of society. The
Square, as an emblem of morality, teaches us to square our lives and
actions by the unerring laws of GOD'S Word, and to regulate our conduct
according to the doctrine laid down by our divine Creator; to preserve a
lively faith in his Holy Gospel, which, in the most impressive manner,
teaches us to live in brotherly love with all mankind. The Level is an
emblem of equality; and reminds us that, in the sight of GOD, all men
are equal; that He causes the sun to shine on the poor man's cottage, as
well as on the king's palace; with Him there is no distinction, unless
we so far forget our duty as to neglect and disobey the divine commands.
The Plumb, signifying uprightness, reminds us to observe justice and
equity in all our dealings on earth; so that, through the great mercy of
GOD, we may hope to obtain an entrance into the Grand Lodge above, held
in that temple not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.

#### SECTION II.

THE second section of this degree has reference to the origin of the
Institution, and views MASONRY under two denominations—OPERATIVE and
SPECULATIVE. These are separately considered, and the principles on
which both are founded, particularly explained. Their affinity is
pointed out by allegorical figures and typical representations. The
period stipulated for rewarding merit is fixed, and the inimitable moral
to which that circumstance alludes is explained; the creation of the
world is described, and many other particulars recited, all of which
have been carefully preserved among Masons, and transmitted from one age
to another by oral tradition.

Circumstances of great importance to the Fraternity are here
particularized, and many traditional tenets and customs

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

confirmed by sacred and profane record. The celestial and terrestrial
globes are considered with a minute accuracy; and here the accomplished
Craftsman may display his talents to advantage in the elucidation of the
ORDERS OF ARCHITECTURE, the SENSES of human nature, and the liberal ARTS
AND SCIENCES, which are severally classed in a regular arrangement. In
short, this section contains a store of valuable knowledge, founded on
reason and sacred record, both entertaining and instructive.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Operative and Speculative Masonry](gar39)
