[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar39)  [Next](gar41) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDMG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*General Ahiman Rezon*, by Daniel Sickels, \[1868\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### The Pillars of the Porch.

For he cast two pillars of brass, of eighteen cubits high apiece; and a
line of twelve cubits (lid compass either of them about.—I. KINGS Vii.
15.

Also he made before the house two pillars of thirty and five cubits
high, and the chapiter that was on the top of each of them was five
cubits.—II. CHRON. iii. 15.

And he made two chapiters of molten brass, to set upon the tops of the
pillars; the height of the one chapiter was five cubits, and the height
of the other chapiter was five cubits.—I. KINGS vii. 16.

The height of the one pillar was eighteen cubits, and the chapiter upon
it was brass: and the height of the chapiter three cubits; and the
wreathen work, and pomegranates upon the chapiter round

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

about all of brass: and like unto these had the second pillar with
wreathen work.—II. Kiwis xxv. 17. <span id="fr_23"></span>[\*](#fn_23)

#### THE TWO BRAZEN PILLARS

<span id="img_12800"></span>

<table data-align="LEFT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/12800.jpg"><img src="tn/12800.jpg" alt="Brass pillar from Solomon&#39;s Temple" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a><br />
<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

WHICH ornamented the porch of King SOLOMON'S Temple, were fluted, with
sixteen flutes each, a hand's breadth (about four inches) in depth.
Their shafts were eighteen cubits high (I. KINGS vii. 15; JEREMIAH lii.
21), about thirty feet seven inches; the circumference of the shaft at
the base was fourteen cubits, twenty-three feet eleven inches (LXX.
version I. KINGS vii. 15), giving a diameter of about seven feet seven
inches. At the top, the circumference was twelve cubits, giving a
diameter of six feet eight inches (JEREMIAH lii. 21; I. KINGS vii. 15).
They were surmounted by chapiters; the chapiters were composed of seven
wreaths of twisted brass, set perpendicularly on an abacus of seven
sides, crowning the shaft of each pillar. These wreaths were three
cubits high (II. KINGS xxv. 17); upon four of these wreaths, in a
*trapezoidal* [form](errata.htm#3) was suspended a latticed Net-work of
brass and copper, colored yellow and red; around the curved bottom of
which was a brass fringe, ornamented with two

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

rows of brazen Pomegranates, fifty in a row (I. KINGS vii. 18; II.
CHRON. iv. 12; JEREMIAH lii. 23). The pomegranates being arranged
ninety-six on a side (JEREMIAH lii. 23), two of the pomegranates hung on
each point of suspension; and eight to the cubit for twelve cubits (LXX.
version JEREMIAH lii. 22), which was the entire length of the *cycloidal
arc* of the net-work from one point of suspension to the other. Within
the net-work was set a hollow Lily of silver, with six pointed leaves;
the height of the points of the lily above the abacus was four cubits
(I. KINGS vii. 19). This lily circumscribed a SPHERE *of brass* (II.
CHRON. iv. 12), whose diameter was exactly equal to the diameter of the
top of the column (LXX. version L KINGS vii. 20), whose superior convex
surface reached an elevation of five cubits above the abacus, making the
whole height of the chapiter five cubits (I. KINGS vii. 15; IL CHRON.
iii. 15; JEREMIAH lii. 21).—*Symbols of Freemasonry, esoterically
considered, by W. S. ROCKWELL, P. G. M. of Georgia*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_23"></span>[128:\*](gar40.htm#fr_23) The discrepancy as to
the height of the pillars, as given in the book of Kings and in
Chronicles, is to be reconciled by supposing that in the book of Kings
the pillars are spoken of separately, and that in Chronicles their
aggregate height is calculated: and the reason that, in this latter
book, their united height is placed at thirty-five cubits, instead of
thirty-six, which would be the double of eighteen, is because they are
there measured as they appear with the chapiters upon them. Now, half a
cubit of each pillar was concealed in what Dr. LIGHTFOOT calls "the hole
of the chapiter;"—that is, half a cubit's depth of the lower edge of the
chapiter covered the top of the pillar, making each pillar apparently
only seventeen and a half cubits high, or the two, thirty-five cubits,
as laid down in the book of Chronicles.—In a similar way we reconcile
the difference as to the height of the chapiters. In I. Kings and II.
Chronicles the chapiters are said to be five cubits high, while in II.
Kings their height is described as being only three cubits. But it will
be noticed that it immediately follows in the same place, that "there
was a wreathen work and pomegranates upon the chapiter round about."
Now, this expression is conclusive that the height of the chapiters was
estimated exclusive and independent of the wreathen work round about
them, which was two cubits more, and this, added to the three cubits of
the chapiter proper, will make the five cubits spoken of In all other
parts of Scripture.—MACKEY'S *Manual of the Lodge*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Symbols of Peace, Unity and Plenty. Of the Globes.](gar41)
