[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar62)  [Next](gar64) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDMG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*General Ahiman Rezon*, by Daniel Sickels, \[1868\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

#### INSTALLATION

###### OF THE

### OFFICERS OF A GRAND LODGE.

AT the hour appointed for the installation of the officers of the Grand
Lodge, the Installing Officer (who should be the retiring Grand Master,
the actual Grand Master of another jurisdiction, or a Past Grand Master)
will assume the chair, call to order, and announce the business before
the Grand Lodge. The officers to be installed will then vacate their
places respectively, and substitutes will be appointed for the occasion.

The Grand Master and the other Grand Officers elect, to be installed,
will be in waiting in an adjoining apartment.

The announcement of the Installing Officer may be in the following form:

BRETHREN: Your Grand Master and other Grand Officers for the ensuing
year, having been duly elected, we are now in readiness to perform the
ceremony of installation. The R. W. Grand Marshal will announce to them
that we are waiting to receive them.

The Grand Marshal then retires, and on his return reports:

MOST WORSHIPFUL: The Grand Master and other Grand Officers elect are
without, in readiness to be installed into office, when it is your
pleasure to receive them.

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

*Installing Officer*. The R. W. Grand Marshal will admit them, and
conduct them to the East before the altar.

(Should there be objection to the installation of any or either of them,
it must now be made.)

As they enter the room, the Grand Lodge is called up by the Installing
Officer in the usual manner, and remain standing.

The Grand Marshal conducts them to the altar in procession, two and two,
in order of rank, the Grand Master elect and the Deputy Grand Master
being first. Ile then says:

MOST WORSHIPFUL: The Grand Officers elect are before you, and await your
pleasure. I have the honor to present to you for installation Brother A.
B., who has been duly elected Grand Master of Masons of the State of
...... for the ensuing year.

*Ins. Off:* (*to the Grand Master elect*). MY BROTHER: The exalted
station to which the free choice of your Brethren has called you,
involves great responsibilities, and requires to be inaugurated by
solemn sanctions. It elevates you to a position from which the power and
prerogative may depart with the expiration of your term of service, but
the honor and dignity, except by your own act, never. Have you been
instructed in the secret rites and ceremonies appertaining to the high
office of Grand Master of Masons preparatory to your installation, and
by which you may acquire and forever retain the evidence of your rank
among Masons?

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

*G. M. elect*. I have not.

*Ins. Off*. My Brother, it will be necessary for you to retire, and
receive those instructions from our M. W. Past Grand Masters here
present, who will escort you. And as we are now upon the threshold of a
great and important undertaking, Masonic teachings-require that we
should bow in solemn prayer with cur R. W. Grand Chaplain.

*Grand Chaplain*. Brethren, let us pray.

The Grand Chaplain may then make an appropriate extemporaneous prayer,
or use the following:

ETERNAL Source of Life and Light! We thine unworthy creatures reverently
bow before thee in adoration and praise. As when we first saw the light
at our mystic altar, we first implored thy guidance, protection, and
aid, so now we seek thee for thy divine blessing and direction. In thy
might we are strong, and without thee, in our best and highest estate,
we are but frail and feeble beings. We humbly implore thy divine favor
upon this occasion, and upon the institution in whose services we are
now engaged. Make it yet more helpful and beneficial to our race, and
inspire all who are connected with it with an ardent love to thee, to
each other, and to every member of the human family. Bless now thy
servant before thee, who is about to assume a new and important relation
to his brethren. Give him wisdom; give him strength; give him love.
Enable him so to

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

bear rule that he may keep in view the best interests of the great
brotherhood now about to be committed to his charge. Teach him to feel
that he is about to assume great and trying responsibilities, and enable
him so to discharge them as to win all hearts. Add thy blessing upon the
brethren who are to be associated with him in office. May they feel a
just sense of their accountability to thee and to the Fraternity; and
may they ever be faithful and zealous, and assist to uphold the hands of
their chief in all good deeds. In thee, O GOD! as in the days of our
apprenticeship, do we put our trust. Be thou our faithful Friend,
Conductor, and Guide, in the unseen vicissitudes of life before us, and
bring us all, at last, to see the Great Light, inaccessible and full of
glory, in thy presence, where we shall behold thee with unclouded vision
for evermore.—AMEN.

*Response*.—So mote it be!

*Ins. Off.* The Most Worshipful Brethren, Past Grand Masters present,
will now retire with the Grand Master, and give him suitable
instructions in the manner known to them only, preliminary to the
further ceremonies of installation.

He then calls down, and the Grand Officers elect, other than the Grand
Master, are provided with seats near the altar. The Past Grand Masters
retire to some suitable apartment, and engage in ceremonies, not proper
to be written, with the Grand Master elect.

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

When this is done, they return, having previously given notice of their
approach by the Grand Marshal. Upon their entrance, the Grand Lodge is
again called up, and after they have arrived near the East, one of their
number says:

*Past Grand Master*. MOST WORSHIPFUL: Our distinguished Brother having
been duly instructed by us, is now prepared to assume his installation
vows.

*Ins. Off*. It is well; and with pleasure do we now proceed in our
further services. R. W. Grand Marshal, you will conduct our Brother to
the altar, to take upon himself the obligation appertaining to the
duties of his office.

The Grand Marshal conducts him to the altar, where he kneels, the acting
Grand Deacons holding their rods crossed over his head. The Installing
Officer then administers the oath of office, the Grand Master elect.
repeating after him, as follows:

I, A. B., in the presence of Almighty GOD, and before the Grand Lodge of
the State of ......, do promise and swear, that, to the best of my
ability, I will faithfully, honestly, and impartially perform the duties
of Grand Master of Masons in this jurisdiction during my term of office;
and that I will conform to and maintain the Constitutions, laws, rules,
and regulations of the Grand Lodge of the State of ......, and the
usages and customs of Free and Accepted Masons, and at all times enforce
a strict obedience thereto. So help me GOD.

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

He then rises, and the Grand Marshal conducts him near the chair of the
Installing Officer.

*Ins. Off*. MOST WORSHIPFUL BROTHER (for from henceforth you are
entitled thus to be hailed): In inducting you to your chair of office,
as a symbol of the commencement of your government over the Craft, I am
performing a most solemn duty. By immemorial usage and the irrevocable
landmarks of Masonry, you are invested, as Grand Master of Masons, with
powers and prerogatives which are well nigh absolute. The interests of
the Craft, for weal or wo, are placed in your hands during your term of
office. The good resolutions which I doubt not that you have formed in
your own mind that these powers shall not be abused or perverted by you,
I would gladly strengthen by a word of admonition, which it will not
become me henceforth to utter. The very consciousness of the possession
of a great power will ever make a generous mind cautious and gentle in
its exercise. To rule has been the lot of many, and requires neither
strength of intellect or soundness of judgment; to rule WELL has been
the fortune of but few, and may well be the object of an honorable
ambition. It is not by the strong arm or the iron will that obedience
and order, the chief requisites of good government, are secured, but by
holding the key to the hearts of men.

The office of Grand Master is of great antiquity and respect, and is one
of the highest dignities to which

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

we may aspire. Its incumbent, to rule well, should possess and practice
several important requisites.

As a *man*, he should be of approved integrity and irreproachable
morals; freed from the dominion of hasty temper and ill-governed
passions; of good repute in the world; and practicing, as an example to
the Craft, the cardinal virtues of Fortitude, Prudence, Temperance, and
Justice.

As a *citizen*, he should be loyal to his government, obedient to its
laws, prompt in the duties he owes to society, and a pattern of fidelity
in all social and domestic relations.

As a *Mason*, he should cling to the old landmarks, and be sternly
opposed to their infringement; be a proficient in the laws, language,
and literature of the Fraternity; be desirous to learn, and apt to
teach; though not for the time a workman, yet be master of the work, and
qualified to earn his wages; be prompt to aid and relieve, and slow to
demand it; be ever mindful that, though elevated for a time above his
fellows, that he is elevated *by* them, and that he is yet a Craftsman,
more sacredly bound by a Craftsman's obligation; and that he should
cultivate every where and at all times the golden tenets of Brotherly
Love, Relief, and Truth.

As an *officer*, he should remember, first of all, that he is an
individual Mason, sharing in that respect a common lot with his
Brethren, and therefore interested in the welfare of each and all; be
devoid of

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

undue ostentation and haughty overbearing; be accessible to all,
cultivating the closest friendship and the most unlimited confidence
with his associate officers; be eager to take counsel with his Brethren,
and ready to give it; be patient in investigation and hearing; be
deliberate in judgment; be prompt in execution; be forbearing long and
much with evildoers; be ready to reward good; be devoid of favoritism,
and wholly impartial; be watchful over the treasury; having an eagle eye
upon every portion of his jurisdiction; and breasting over the restless
spirit of innovation.

Such are some of the most important qualifications which a Grand Master
should possess, and the leading errors which he should avoid. It may be
that most, if not all, of your predecessors have failed to reach this
standard: but it is attainable; and be it your purpose to reach it, and
be a bright and shining example to those who shall come after you!

It now but remains for me to clothe you with the external insignia of
your rank and authority.

I now with great pleasure invest you with this jewel of your office,
whose symbolic meaning will now have a new and striking significance to
you. (*Presents the jewel*.)

I also present you with this gavel, as the potent emblem of Masonic
power, which, in your hands, should never be sounded in vain. (*Presents
gavel*.)

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

I now surrender to you this seat of authority. (*Places him in the
chair*.)

And render you this, the first act of homage due to you as Grand Master.

The Grand Master having been covered on taking the chair, the Installing
Officer uncovers, and bows very low.

*Ins. Off.* I now hail, salute, and proclaim you Grand Master of Masons
of the State of ......! Brethren, behold your Grand Master!

*Senior Grand Warden*. Brethren, behold our Grand Master!

*Junior Grand Warden*. Brethren, behold our Grand Master 1

The Brethren, with their arms crossed, \* \* \* \* \*; and then all,
under the direction of the Installing Officer, salute with the public
grand honors.

The retiring Grand Master may then address his newly-installed successor
and brethren, and the Grand Master may, if he chooses, also address the
Grand Lodge. If he does not wish to do so, he may call down, and the
brethren continue seated during the remainder of the installation,
except as called up during the obligations.

It will be proper for the Grand Master here to announce the names of the
appointed officers, that they may be installed with the rest.

In case of the rëelection of a Grand Master, the preceding ceremony will
be omitted, except that he be conducted near the chair, the Charge given
him, he is invested with the jewel and gave, inducted and saluted as
above directed. So in the

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

case of any other officer being rëelected, he will be invested, and
given the Charge only.

The Grand Master then proceeds with the installation of the remaining
officers, or he may place the Installing Officer again in the chair,
delivering to him, without ceremony, the gavel and jewel. In designating
the officers hereafter, we will suppose the last to have been done.

*Ins. Off.* R. W. Grand Marshal, you will now present the Deputy Grand
Master elect for installation.

*Grand Marshal*. MOST WORSHIPFUL: I have the pleasure to present to you,
for installation, Brother C. D., who has been duly elected to the office
of Deputy Grand Master.

The foregoing address of the Installing Officer, and presentation by the
Grand Marshal, may be used for all the remaining officers, simply
changing the name and title of the officer. It may also be used for the
Grand Master, when reelected. The order of the Installing Officer, next
following, will be omitted when the officer to be installed has been
reelected.

*Ins. Off.* R. W. Grand Marshal, you will conduct our Brother to the
altar, to take upon himself the obligation appertaining to the duties of
his office.

The Grand Marshal conducts him to the altar, when he kneels, and is
attended by the Grand Deacons, as in the case of the Grand Master, and
takes the same obligation, with the change of name and designation of
office.

*Ins. Off.* R. W. BROTHER: You have not been an inattentive observer of
the ceremony of installing the

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> M. W. Grand
Master; for you are aware that, in case of his incapacity to act in
contingencies mentioned in our constitutions, you succeed to his duties
and prerogatives, as you do also when acting as his substitute in any
matters specially delegated to you. Your office, therefore, is one of
great dignity and importance; and it was in view of these considerations
that your Brethren selected you to fill it. Treasure up, therefore, the
suggestions made to the M. W. Grand Master; for you know not how soon
they may have a personal application to you; and remember, also, that
usage, as well as our particular regulations, have placed you in most
intimate and confidential relations to him, as supporter and counselor.

I now, with pleasure, proceed to invest you with your jewel of office
(*gives it*), and proclaim you Deputy Grand Master of Masons of the
State of ...... You will now be seated in your place, which is at the
right hand of the M. W. Grand Master.

Before he is seated, the Installing Officer calls up the Grand Lodge,
and the Deputy Grand Master is saluted with the grand honors.

The others of the first six elective Grand Officers are presented and
obligated in like manner as the Deputy Grand Master, but without being
saluted with the grand honors.

The Charges to the remaining officers installed (which may be varied at
the pleasure of the Installing Officer, when special occasion requires,)
are as follows:

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

#### TO THE SENIOR GRAND WARDEN.

RIGHT WORSHIPFUL BROTHER: The position which you occupy in the Grand
Lodge-and among the Fraternity is one of no little importance. In the
Grand Lodge, to control practically the admission of all visitors, to
announce specially those who are of rank or eminence, and to aid in the
preservation of order, and at all times to render counsel and advice to
the Grand Master, are high and responsible duties, requiring
circumspection, vigilance, and reflection; but when to these is
superadded the more onerous labor, in conjunction with the Junior Grand
Warden, of diligently preserving the ancient landmarks throughout the
jurisdiction, it then becomes a trust of deep moment to the welfare of
the Craft. Your fitness for the discharge of such a trust undoubtedly
led to your selection for the office by your Brethren, and it will be
your duty and pleasure so to act as to justify their confidence.

In investing you with the jewel of your office, and directing you to the
place of your immediate official action, in the West, I am performing a
grateful duty.

#### TO THE JUNIOR GRAND WARDEN.

RIGHT WORSHIPFUL BROTHER: As the duties of your office and the
qualifications for it are almost identical with those of the Senior
Grand Warden, except as it respects the introduction of visitors, I will
only add to the Charge given to that officer, that

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

you be equally vigilant and circumspect, not only at your station in the
Grand Lodge, but in the broader field of action without, dividing with
him his labors, and taking due care that the great object of your united
solicitude shall remain inviolate.

Accept the jewel of your office, and repair to the South, being ever
watchful, whether in labor or at refreshment, that the *high twelve* of
observation do not find you with your work, and that of the Craft you
superintend, unperformed.

#### TO THE GRAND TREASURER.

RIGHT WORSHIPFUL BROTHER: In intrusting you with the books and funds of
the Grand Lodge, as appertaining to your office, I am but their organ in
placing them in your possession, as one well qualified to keep and
manage them, as your past integrity, accuracy, and prompt business
habits testify, an appreciation of which has been evinced by their
choice of you as Grand Treasurer.

The keys forming the jewel of your office have a twofold significance:
They are instruments to bind as well as to loose; to make fast, as well
as to open. They will never, I am confident, be used by you in any other
manner than the constitutions, laws, rules, and regulations of the Grand
Lodge shall direct.

#### TO THE GRAND SECRETARY.

RIGHT WORSHIPFUL BROTHER: Usage, as well as positive enactments from
time to time, have rendered

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

the duties of the office of Grand Secretary more onerous and varied than
that of any other officer. Brought by his official position more
immediately into communication with the whole body of the Fraternity, it
is requisite that he should possess ability, skill, and industry, to
meet the various demands upon him. Placed in a position where ho holds
almost constant correspondence with our Masonic brethren of every state
and country, upon him devolves, in a large degree, the good name and
credit of the Masonic family of this State. The Fraternity should enable
him to maintain it; ho should strive that it be maintained. Courtesy and
patience are to be elements in his manners and character. Vigilance and
fidelity must also be necessary qualities.

Our constitutions, my Brother, point out to you fully the duties of your
office, and I will not recapitulate them. Your capability for their
prompt and faithful execution has induced your Brethren to confide this
trust to you, and I feel assured that it is well placed.

In investing you with your official jewel, the pens, I am persuaded that
they will make an endearing record, not only to your praise, but to the
welfare of a Craft so largely dependent upon your experience and
integrity.

#### TO THE GRAND CHAPLAIN.

REVEREND AND RIGHT WORSHIPFUL BROTHER: That Holy Book, which is the
chart and text-book of your

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

sacred calling, is also the great light of Masonry, and forever sheds
its benignant rays upon every lawful assemblage of Free and Accepted
Masons. Teach us from its life-giving precepts; intercede for us with
that Divine Majesty which it so fully reveals and unfolds to us; and
warm us by its lessons of infinite wisdom and truth, and you will have
faithfully per formed your sacred functions and fulfilled your important
trust.

It is fitting that an emblem of the sacred volume should be the jewel of
your office, with which I now invest you.

#### TO THE GRAND LECTURER

RIGHT WORSHIPFUL BROTHER: The care and preservation of our ancient
ritual, and the perpetuation of the time-honored landmarks embraced in
it, and which may not be written, devolves upon you. And as that ritual
has enshrined within it, in symbol and allegory, certain great and
essential moral truths, you should be as perfect in the symbolism as in
the mere formula of language which teach us how our rites are to be
administered. As Grand Lecturer, also, you should be Master of the
ceremonial observances of the Fraternity, and give instructions in the
manner of rendering them most striking and effective. You are the
preceptor of the Fraternity, and your deportment should be consistent
with the nature of your office-work. For upon your teachings

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

depend not only the uniformity and perpetuity, but the character and
impressiveness of our rites, and they should be imparted, both by oral
communication and example. On no point are the Craft so punctilious and
exacting as upon the beauty and accuracy of the work and lectures: hence
many eyes will be upon you. A courteous manner, an unwearied patience,
and a diligent application are requisites for your place, and no rash or
innovating hand will be tolerated in your department of labor.

In installing you into office, and presenting your jewel, I am happy to
be enabled to say that your established skill and learning, and your
ability to undergo the constitutional tests, have proved you to be a
Master Workman.

#### TO THE GRAND MARSHAL.

RIGHT WORSHIPFUL BROTHER: The duties of your office require energy,
activity, and quickness of perception. The good order of the Fraternity,
in its general assemblies and processions, depends upon your care,
skill, and assiduity. Possessing these qualifications, you have been
appointed Grand. Marshal, and I now with pleasure install you into
office, and invest you with your appropriate jewel. It denotes command,
as the organ of the Grand Master, to whom you will be near at hand to
execute his orders.

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

#### TO THE GRAND STANDARD-BEARER.

RIGHT WORSHIPFUL BROTHER: Your duty is to carry and uphold the banner of
the Grand Lodge on occasions of ceremony and public procession. The
emblems upon it are as ancient as the march of the children of Israel
from bondage, and the Ark is the symbol of hope and safety. Bear them
well aloft, for the world, as well as the Craft, ever honors them.
Receive the jewel of your office, and let it remind you that you are
never to part with that standard, when under your care, while you have
life to defend it.

#### TO THE GRAND SWORD-BEARER.

RIGHT WORSHIPFUL BROTHER: The sword which you bear is the time-honored
symbol of Justice and Authority. It reminds the beholder of the dignity
of the body whose emblem it is. It is also the guardian and protector of
the standard of the Grand Lodge. Be ever faithful to your trust. Let
this jewel of your office remind you of its nature.

#### TO THE GRAND STEWARDS.

RIGHT WORSHIPFUL BROTHERS: In olden times, your province was to
superintend and provide for the festivals of the Craft, and that duty
still remains to you, although there is rarely occasion for its
exercise. But we are taught that "it is better to go to the house of
mourning, than to the house of feasting," and hence on you has been
appropriately disposed the dispensation

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

of our beneficent charities. That it is a grateful duty, all hearts
testify, and we know that yours most fully responds to it. Receive the
jewels of your office, together with the white rods.

#### TO THE GRAND DEACONS.

RIGHT WORSHIPFUL BROTHERS: As messengers of the Grand Officers, and as
useful assistants in our ceremonies, your respective official positions
are of very great value and importance to the comfort and good order of
the Grand Lodge. Vigilance and zeal are necessary requisites of your
offices, and wo know that you possess them.

As Senior and Junior Deacons of this-Grand Lodge, you are now invested
with the jewels of office, together with these rods, as tokens of your
authority.

#### TO THE GRAND PURSUIVANT.

WORSHIPFUL BROTHER: You are to act as the messenger of the Grand Lodge,
and the herald to announce the approach of visitors and strangers. In so
doing, possess yourself of the necessary information to announce their
rank and position properly, and exercise a sound discretion, so as not
to interfere with its labors. Be cautious and vigilant, that no improper
person may gain admittance. You, also, have in your keeping the clothing
and jewels of the Grand Officers, which you should be careful to keep in
a good condition, and neatly and orderly arranged

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

for use at all times. Receive your emblem of office, and repair to your
station inside the door.

#### TO THE GRAND TILER.

WORSHIPFUL BROTHER: The importance of the duties of your place can not
be overrated. Care and watchfulness are indispensably requisite, and in
all cases, unless thoroughly satisfied with the character and identity
of those desiring admittance, let your doubts prevail. Ours is a
sanctuary, intrusted to you faithfully and vigilantly to guard, and you
have always at hand the means of being fully satisfied. Irreparable
injury might result from a negligent or careless discharge of your duty.
Your station is ever outside the door, and to which you will now repair
with this jewel, and also with this implement of your office. (*Giving a
sword*.)

The several officers being now duly installed, the Installing Officer
will retire, after surrendering the jewel and gavel to the Grand Master.
It may be proper and expedient before doing so, to have an appropriate
ode or piece of music.

*Grand Master*. RT. WORSHIPFUL GRAND MARSHAL.: I now declare the several
officers of the Most Worshipful Grand Lodge of the State of .........
duly installed into office for the ensuing year, in AMPLE form. You will
cause proclamation to be made in the South, West, and East.

The Junior Grand Deacon proclaims in the South, the Senior Grand Deacon
in the West, and the Grand Marshal

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

in the East, each as follows, the Grand Lodge being called up:

By order of the Most Worshipful Grand Master, and by authority of the
Most Worshipful Grand Lodge of Free and Accepted Masons of the State of
......, I proclaim that its Grand Officers are now duly installed in
ample form.

*Response*.—So mote it be!

The Grand Lodge is called down.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Laying Foundation Stones of Public Structures](gar64)
