[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar66)  [Next](gar68) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDMG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*General Ahiman Rezon*, by Daniel Sickels, \[1868\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span> <span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

THE services herein arranged for the Burial of the Dead are adapted for
all the purposes for which ceremonies of that character may be required.
The arrangement is such that any portion of the service—each part being
complete—may be used as occasion requires. It is not expected that the
whole ceremony or can be used at any one time. If the weather should be
stormy, or the body of the deceased taken, for interment, to a distance,
where it would be impossible for the brethren to attend, that portion of
the service set apart for the Lodge-room, or at the house of the
deceased, may be performed.

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

### MASONIC FUNERAL SERVICES:

###### PREPARED BY

##### ROBERT MACOY,

###### AUTHOR OF THE MASONIC MANUAL, BOOK OF THE LODGE, TRUE MASONIC GUIDE, PAST DEPUTY GRAND MASTER, GRAND RECORDER, ETC.

THE CEREMONIES which are observed on the occasion of funerals are highly
appropriate; they are performed as a melancholy Masonic duty, and as a
token of respect and affection to the memory of a departed brother.

#### GENERAL DIRECTIONS.

I. No FREEMASON can be buried with the formalities of the Fraternity,
unless it be at his own request, or that of some of his family,
communicated to the Master of the Lodge of which he died a member;
foreigners or sojourners excepted; nor unless he has received the Master
Mason's degree, and from this restriction there can be no exception.

II\. Fellow-Crafts or Entered Apprentices are not entitled to these
obsequies; nor can they be allowed to unite, as Masons, in the funeral
of a brother.

M. No Lodge, or body of Masons, can unite in the obsequies of a person
not a Mason, without permission of the Grand Master, or consent of the
Grand Lodge.

IV\. The Master of the Lodge, having received notice of the death of a
brother, (the deceased having attained

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

to the degree of Master Mason,) and of his request to be buried with the
ceremonies of the Craft, fixes the day and hour for the funeral, (unless
previously arranged by the friends or relatives of the deceased,) and
issues his command to the Secretary to summon the Lodge. He may invite
as many Lodges as he may think proper, and the members of those may
accompany their officers in form; but the whole ceremony must be under
the direction of the Master of the Lodge of which the deceased was a
member.

V. Upon the death of a sojourner, who had expressed a wish to be buried
with the Masonic ceremonies, the duties prescribed in Article IV. will
devolve upon the Master of the Lodge within whose jurisdiction the death
may occur; and if in a place where there be more than one Lodge, then
upon the Master of the oldest Lodge, unless otherwise mutually arranged.

VI\. Whenever civic societies, or the military, may unite with Masons in
the burial of a Mason, the body of the deceased must be in charge of the
Lodge having jurisdiction. The Masonic services should in all respects
be conducted as if none but Masons were in attendance.

VII\. If the deceased was a Grand or Past Grand officer, the officers of
the Grand Lodge should be invited; when the Master of the Lodge having
jurisdiction, will invite the Grand officer present who has attained the
highest rank to conduct the burial service.

VIII\. The pall-bearers should be Masons, selected by the Master. If the
deceased was a member of a Chapter, Commandery, or Consistory, a portion
of the pall-bearers should be taken from these bodies severally.

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

IX\. The proper clothing for a Masonic funeral is a black hat, black or
dark clothes, black neck-tie, white gloves, and a plain square white
linen or lambskin apron, with a band of black crape around the left arm,
above the elbow, and a sprig of evergreen on the left breast. The
Master's gavel, the Wardens’ columns, the Deacons’ and Stewards’ rods,
the Tiler's sword, the Bible, the Book of Constitutions, and the
Marshal's baton, should be trimmed with black crape, neatly tied with
white ribbon. The officers of the Lodge should, and Past Masters and
Grand Officers may, wear their official jewels.

X. While the body is lying in the coffin, there should be placed upon
the latter a plain white lambskin apron.

XI\. If a Past or Present Grand Master, Deputy Grand Master, or Grand
Warden, should join the procession of a private Lodge, proper attention
must be paid to them. They take place after the Master of the Lodge. Two
Deacons, with white rods, should be appointed by the Master to attend a
Grand Warden; and when the Grand Master or Deputy Grand Master is
present, the Book of Constitutions should be borne before him, a
Sword-Bearer should follow, and the Deacons, with white rods, on his
right and left.

XII\. When the head of the procession shall have arrived at the place of
interment, or where the services are to be performed, the lines should
be opened, and the highest officer in rank, preceded by the Marshal and
Tiler pass through, and the others follow in order.

XIII\. Upon arriving at the entrance of the cemetery, the brethren
should march in open order to the tomb or grave. If the body is to be
placed in the former, the Tiler

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

should take his place in front of the open door, and the lines be spread
so as to form a circle. The coffin should be deposited in the circle,
and the Stewards and Deacons should cross their rods over it. The
bearers should take their places on either side—the mourners at the foot
of the coffin, and the Master and other officers at the head. After the
coffin has been placed in the tomb, the Stewards should cross their rods
over the door, and the Deacons over the Master.—If the body is to be
deposited in the earth, the circle should be formed around the grave,
the body being placed on rests over it; the Stewards should cross their
rods over the foot, and the Deacons the head, and retain their places
throughout the services.

XIV\. After the clergymen shall have performed the religious services of
the Church, the Masonic services should begin.

XV\. When a number of Lodges join in a funeral procession, the position
of the youngest Lodge is at the head or right of the procession, and the
oldest at the end or left, excepting that the Lodge of which deceased
was a member walks nearest the corpse.

XVI\. The procession must return to the Lodge-room in the same order in
which it marched to the grave.

XVII\. A Lodge in procession is to be strictly under the discipline of
the Lodge-room; therefore, no brother can enter the procession or leave
it without express permission from the Master, conveyed through the
Marshal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Service in the Lodge-Room](gar68)
