[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cou00)  [Next](cou02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295S2X6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Cloud of Unknowing*, ed. by Evelyn Underhill, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_ii"></span>

<span id="an_ii-p1"></span><span id="page_5">p. 5</span> <span
id="an_ii-Page_5"></span>

## <span id="an_ii-p1.1"></span>INTRODUCTION

<span id="an_ii-p2"></span> 

<span id="an_ii-p3"></span>THE little family of mystical treatises which
is known to students as “the Cloud of Unknowing group,” deserves more
attention than it has hitherto received from English lovers of
mysticism: for it represents the first expression in our own tongue of
that great mystic tradition of the Christian Neoplatonists which
gathered up, remade, and “salted with Christ’s salt” all that was best
in the spiritual wisdom of the ancient world.

<span id="an_ii-p4"></span>That wisdom made its definite entrance into
the Catholic fold about A.D. 500, in the writings of the profound and
nameless mystic who chose to call himself “Dionysius the Areopagite.”
Three hundred and fifty years later, those writings were translated
<span id="an_ii-p4.1"></span><span id="page_6">p. 6</span> <span
id="an_ii-Page_6"></span> into Latin by John Scotus Erigena, a scholar
at the court of Charlemagne, and so became available to the
ecclesiastical world of the West. Another five hundred years elapsed,
during which their influence was felt, and felt strongly, by the mystics
of every European country: by St. Bernard, the Victorines, St.
Bonaventura, St. Thomas Aquinas. Every reader of Dante knows the part
which they play in the *Paradiso.* Then, about the middle of the 14th
century, England—at that time in the height of her great mystical
period—led the way with the first translation into the vernacular of the
Areopagite’s work. In *Dionise Hid Divinite,* a version of the *Mystica
Theologia,* this spiritual treasure‑house was first made accessible to
those outside the professionally religious class. Surely this is a fact
which all lovers of mysticism, all “spiritual patriots,” should be
concerned to hold in remembrance.

<span id="an_ii-p5"></span>It is supposed by most scholars that <span
id="an_ii-p5.1"></span><span id="page_7">p. 7</span> <span
id="an_ii-Page_7"></span> *Dionise Hid Divinite,* which—appearing as it
did in an epoch of great spiritual vitality--quickly attained to a
considerable circulation, is by the same hand which wrote the *Cloud of
Unknowing* and its companion books; and that this hand also produced an
English paraphrase of Richard of St. Victor’s *Benjamin Minor,* another
work of much authority on the contemplative life. Certainly the
influence of Richard is only second to that of Dionysius in this unknown
mystic’s own work—work, however, which owes as much to the deep personal
experience, and extraordinary psychological gifts of its writer, as to
the tradition that he inherited from the past.

<span id="an_ii-p6"></span>Nothing is known of him; beyond the fact,
which seems clear from his writings, that he was a cloistered monk
devoted to the contemplative life. It has been thought that he was a
Carthusian. But the rule of that austere order, whose members live <span
id="an_ii-p6.1"></span><span id="page_8">p. 8</span> <span
id="an_ii-Page_8"></span> in hermit‑like seclusion, and scarcely meet
except for the purpose of divine worship, can hardly have afforded him
opportunity of observing and enduring all those tiresome tricks and
absurd mannerisms of which he gives so amusing and realistic a
description in the lighter passages of the *Cloud.* These passages
betray the half‑humorous exasperation of the temperamental recluse,
nervous, fastidious, and hypersensitive, loving silence and peace, but
compelled to a daily and hourly companionship with persons of a less
contemplative type: some finding in extravagant and meaningless gestures
an outlet for suppressed vitality; others overflowing with a terrible
cheerfulness like “giggling girls and nice japing jugglers”; others so
lacking in repose that they “can neither sit still, stand still, nor lie
still, unless they be either wagging with their feet or else somewhat
doing with their hands.” Though he cannot go to the length of condemning
these habits as mortal <span id="an_ii-p6.2"></span><span id="page_9">p.
9</span> <span id="an_ii-Page_9"></span> sins, the author of the *Cloud*
leaves us in no doubt as to the irritation with which they inspired him,
or the distrust with which he regards the spiritual claims of those who
fidget.

<span id="an_ii-p7"></span>The attempt to identify this mysterious
writer with Walter Hilton, the author of *The Scale of Perfection,* has
completely failed: though Hilton’s work—especially the exquisite
fragment called the *Song of Angels—*certainly betrays his influence.
The works attributed to him, if we exclude the translations from
Dionysius and Richard of St. Victor, are only five in number. They are,
first, *The Cloud of Unknowing—*the longest and most complete exposition
of its author’s peculiar doctrine—and, depending from it, four short
tracts or letters: *The Epistle of Prayer, The Epistle of Discretion in
the Stirrings of the Soul, The Epistle of Privy Counsel,* and *The
Treatise of Discerning of Spirits.* Some critics have even disputed the
claim of the writer of the *Cloud* to the <span
id="an_ii-p7.1"></span><span id="page_10">p. 10</span> <span
id="an_ii-Page_10"></span> authorship of these little works, regarding
them as the production of a group or school of contemplatives devoted to
the study and practice of the Dionysian mystical theology; but the unity
of thought and style found in them makes this hypothesis at least
improbable. Everything points rather to their being the work of an
original mystical genius, of strongly marked character and great
literary ability: who, whilst he took the framework of his philosophy
from Dionysius the Areopagite, and of his psychology from Richard of St.
Victor, yet is in no sense a mere imitator of these masters, but
introduced a genuinely new element into mediaeval religious literature.

<span id="an_ii-p8"></span>What, then, were his special characteristics?
Whence came the fresh colour which he gave to the old Platonic theory of
mystical experience? First, I think, from the combination of high
spiritual gifts with a vivid sense of humour, keen powers of
observation, a robust common‑sense: <span id="an_ii-p8.1"></span><span
id="page_11">p. 11</span> <span id="an_ii-Page_11"></span> a balance of
qualities not indeed rare amongst the mystics, but here presented to us
in an extreme form. In his eager gazing on divinity this contemplative
never loses touch with humanity, never forgets the sovereign purpose of
his writings; which is not a declaration of the spiritual favours he has
received, but a helping of his fellow‑men to share them. Next, he has a
great simplicity of outlook, which enables him to present the result of
his highest experiences and intuitions in the most direct and homely
language. So actual, and so much a part of his normal existence, are his
apprehensions of spiritual reality, that he can give them to us in the
plain words of daily life: and thus he is one of the most realistic of
mystical writers. He abounds in vivid little phrases—“Call sin a
*lump”:* “Short prayer pierceth heaven”: “Nowhere bodily, is everywhere
ghostly”: “Who that will not go the strait way to heaven, . . . shall go
the soft way to <span id="an_ii-p8.2"></span><span id="page_12">p.
12</span> <span id="an_ii-Page_12"></span> hell.” His range of
experience is a wide one. He does not disdain to take a hint from the
wizards and necromancers on the right way to treat the devil; he draws
his illustrations of divine mercy from the homeliest incidents of
friendship and parental love. A skilled theologian, quoting St.
Augustine and Thomas Aquinas, and using with ease the language of
scholasticism, he is able, on the other hand, to express the deepest
speculations of mystical philosophy without resorting to academic
terminology: as for instance where he describes the spiritual heaven as
a “state” rather than a “place”:

<span id="an_ii-p9"></span>“For heaven ghostly is as nigh down as up,
and up as down: behind as before, before as behind, on one side as
other. Insomuch, that whoso had a true desire for to be at heaven, then
that same time he were in heaven ghostly. For the high and the next way
thither is run by desires, and not by paces of feet.” <span
id="an_ii-p9.1"></span><span id="page_13">p. 13</span> <span
id="an_ii-Page_13"></span>

<span id="an_ii-p10"></span>His writings, though they touch on many
subjects, are chiefly concerned with the art of contemplative prayer;
that “blind intent stretching to God” which, if it be wholly set on Him,
cannot fail to reach its goal. A peculiar talent for the description and
discrimination of spiritual states has enabled him to discern and set
before us, with astonishing precision and vividness, not only the
strange sensations, the confusion and bewilderment of the beginner in
the early stages of contemplation—the struggle with distracting
thoughts, the silence, the dark—and the unfortunate state of those
theoretical mystics who, “swollen with pride and with curiosity of much
clergy and letterly cunning as in clerks,” miss that treasure which is
“never got by study but all only by grace”; but also the happiness of
those whose “sharp dart of longing love” has not “failed of the prick,
the which is God.”

<span id="an_ii-p11"></span>A great simplicity characterises his <span
id="an_ii-p11.1"></span><span id="page_14">p. 14</span> <span
id="an_ii-Page_14"></span> doctrine of the soul’s attainment of the
Absolute. For him there is but one central necessity: the perfect and
passionate setting of the will upon the Divine, so that it is “thy love
and thy meaning, the choice and point of thine heart.” Not by deliberate
ascetic practices, not by refusal of the world, not by intellectual
striving, but by actively loving and choosing, by that which a modern
psychologist has called “the synthesis of love and will” does the spirit
of man achieve its goal. “For silence is not God,” he says in the
*Epistle of Discretion,* “nor speaking is not God; fasting is not God,
nor eating is not God; loneliness is not God, nor company is not God;
nor yet any of all the other two such contraries. He is hid between
them, and may not be found by any work of thy soul, but all only by love
of thine heart. He may not be known by reason, He may not be gotten by
thought, nor concluded by understanding; but He may be loved and <span
id="an_ii-p11.2"></span><span id="page_15">p. 15</span> <span
id="an_ii-Page_15"></span> chosen with the true lovely will of thine
heart. . . . Such a blind shot with the sharp dart of longing love may
never fail of the prick, the which is God.”

<span id="an_ii-p12"></span>To him who has so loved and chosen, and “in
a true will and by an whole intent does purpose him to be a perfect
follower of Christ, not only in active living, but in the sovereignest
point of contemplative living, the which is possible by grace for to be
come to in this present life,” these writings are addressed. In the
prologue of the *Cloud of Unknowing* we find the warning, so often
prefixed to mediaeval mystical works, that it shall on no account be
lent, given, or read to other men: who could not understand, and might
misunderstand in a dangerous sense, its peculiar message. Nor was this
warning a mere expression of literary vanity. If we may judge by the
examples of possible misunderstanding against which he is careful to
guard himself, the almost tiresome reminders that all his remarks are
<span id="an_ii-p12.1"></span><span id="page_16">p. 16</span> <span
id="an_ii-Page_16"></span> “ghostly, not bodily meant,” the standard of
intelligence which the author expected from his readers was not a high
one. He even fears that some “young presumptuous ghostly disciples” may
understand the injunction to “lift up the heart” in a merely physical
manner; and either “stare in the stars as if they would be above the
moon,” or “travail their fleshly hearts outrageously in their breasts”
in the effort to make literal “ascensions” to God. Eccentricities of
this kind he finds not only foolish but dangerous; they outrage nature,
destroy sanity and health, and “hurt full sore the silly soul, and make
it fester in fantasy feigned of fiends.” He observes with a touch of
arrogance that his book is not intended for these undisciplined seekers
after the abnormal and the marvellous, nor yet for “fleshly janglers,
flatterers and blamers, . . . nor none of these curious, lettered, nor
unlearned men.” It is to those who feel themselves called to <span
id="an_ii-p12.2"></span><span id="page_17">p. 17</span> <span
id="an_ii-Page_17"></span> the true prayer of contemplation, to the
search for God, whether in the cloister or the world—whose “little
secret love” is at once the energizing cause of all action, and the
hidden sweet savour of life—that he addresses himself. These he
instructs in that simple yet difficult art of recollection, the
necessary preliminary of any true communion with the spiritual order, in
which all sensual images, all memories and thoughts, are as he says,
“trodden down under the cloud of forgetting” until “nothing lives in the
working mind but a naked intent stretching to God.” This “intent
stretching”—this loving and vigorous determination of the will—he
regards as the central fact of the mystical life; the very heart of
effective prayer. Only by its exercise can the spirit, freed from the
distractions of memory and sense, focus itself upon Reality and ascend
with “a privy love pressed” to that “Cloud of Unknowing”—the Divine
Ignorance of the Neoplatonists—<span id="an_ii-p12.3"></span><span
id="page_18">p. 18</span> <span id="an_ii-Page_18"></span>wherein is
“knit up the ghostly knot of burning love betwixt thee and thy God, in
ghostly onehead and according of will.”

<span id="an_ii-p13"></span>There is in this doctrine something which
should be peculiarly congenial to the activistic tendencies of modern
thought. Here is no taint of quietism, no invitation to a spiritual
limpness. From first to last glad and deliberate work is demanded of the
initiate: an all‑round wholeness of experience is insisted on. “A man
may not be fully active, but if he be in part contemplative; nor yet
fully contemplative, as it may be here, but if he be in part active.”
Over and over again, the emphasis is laid on this active aspect of all
true spirituality—always a favourite theme of the great English mystics.
“Love cannot be lazy,” said Richard Rolle. So too for the author of the
*Cloud* energy is the mark of true affection. “Do forth ever, more and
more, so that thou be ever doing. . . . Do on then fast; let see <span
id="an_ii-p13.1"></span><span id="page_19">p. 19</span> <span
id="an_ii-Page_19"></span> how thou bearest thee. Seest thou not how He
standeth and abideth thee?”

<span id="an_ii-p14"></span>True, the will alone, however ardent and
industrious, cannot of itself set up communion with the supernal world:
this is “the work of only God, specially wrought in what soul that Him
liketh.” But man can and must do his part. First, there are the virtues
to be acquired: those “ornaments of the Spiritual Marriage” with which
no mystic can dispense. Since we can but behold that which we are, his
character must be set in order, his mind and heart made beautiful and
pure, before he can look on the triple star of Goodness, Truth, and
Beauty, which is God. Every great spiritual teacher has spoken in the
same sense: of the need for that which Rolle calls the “mending of
life”—regeneration, the rebuilding of character—as the preparation of
the contemplative act.

<span id="an_ii-p15"></span>For the author of the *Cloud* all human
virtue is comprised in the twin <span id="an_ii-p15.1"></span><span
id="page_20">p. 20</span> <span id="an_ii-Page_20"></span> qualities of
Humility and Charity. He who has these, has all. Humility, in accordance
with the doctrine of Richard of St. Victor, he identifies with
self‑knowledge; the terrible vision of the soul as it is, which induces
first self‑abasement and then self‑purification—the beginning of all
spiritual growth, and the necessary antecedent of all knowledge of God.
“Therefore swink and sweat in all that thou canst and mayst, for to get
thee a true knowing and a feeling of thyself as thou art; and then I
trow that soon after that, thou shalt have a true knowing and a feeling
of God as He is.”

<span id="an_ii-p16"></span>As all man’s feeling and thought of himself
and his relation to God is comprehended in Humility, so all his feeling
and thought of God in Himself is comprehended in Charity; the
self-giving love of Divine Perfection “in Himself and for Himself” which
Hilton calls “the sovereign and the essential joy.” Together these two
virtues should embrace the sum of his responses <span
id="an_ii-p16.1"></span><span id="page_21">p. 21</span> <span
id="an_ii-Page_21"></span> to the Universe; they should govern his
attitude to man as well as his attitude to God. “Charity is nought else
. . . but love of God for Himself above all creatures, and of man for
God even as thyself.”

<span id="an_ii-p17"></span>Charity and Humility, then, together with
the ardent and industrious will, are the necessary possessions of each
soul set upon this adventure. Their presence it is which marks out the
true from the false mystic: and it would seem, from the detailed, vivid,
and often amusing descriptions of the sanctimonious, the hypocritical,
the self‑sufficient, and the self‑deceived in their “diverse and
wonderful variations,” that such a test was as greatly needed in the
“Ages of Faith” as it is at the present day. Sham spirituality
flourished in the mediaeval cloister, and offered a constant opportunity
of error to those young enthusiasts who were not yet aware that the true
freedom of eternity “cometh not with observation.” Affectations of
sanctity, <span id="an_ii-p17.1"></span><span id="page_22">p. 22</span>
<span id="an_ii-Page_22"></span> pretense to rare mystical experiences,
were a favourite means of advertisement. Psychic phenomena, too, seem to
have been common: ecstasies, visions, voices, the scent of strange
perfumes, the hearing of sweet sounds. For these supposed indications of
Divine favour, the author of the *Cloud* has no more respect than the
modern psychologist: and here, of course, he is in agreement with all
the greatest writers on mysticism, who are unanimous in their dislike
and distrust of all visionary and auditive experience. Such things, he
considers, are most often hallucination: and, where they are not, should
be regarded as the accidents rather than the substance of the
contemplative life—the harsh rind of sense, which covers the sweet nut
of “pure ghostliness.” Were we truly spiritual, we should not need them;
for our communion with Reality would then be the direct and ineffable
intercourse of like with like. <span id="an_ii-p17.2"></span><span
id="page_23">p. 23</span> <span id="an_ii-Page_23"></span>

<span id="an_ii-p18"></span>Moreover, these automatism are amongst the
most dangerous instruments of self‑deception. “Ofttimes,” he says of
those who deliberately seek for revelations, “the devil feigneth quaint
sounds in their ears, quaint lights and shining in their eyes, and
wonderful smells in their noses: and all is but falsehood.” Hence it
often happens to those who give themselves up to such experiences, that
“fast after such a false feeling, cometh a false knowing in the Fiend’s
school: . . . for I tell thee truly, that the devil hath his
contemplatives, as God hath His.” Real spiritual illumination, he
thinks, seldom comes by way of these psycho-sensual automatism “into the
body by the windows of our wits.” It springs up within the soul in
“abundance of ghostly gladness.” With so great an authority it comes,
bringing with it such wonder and such love, that “he that feeleth it may
not have it suspect.” But all other abnormal experiences—“comforts,
sounds and <span id="an_ii-p18.1"></span><span id="page_24">p. 24</span>
<span id="an_ii-Page_24"></span> gladness, and sweetness, that come from
without suddenly”—should be set aside, as more often resulting in
frenzies and feebleness of spirit than in genuine increase of “ghostly
strength.”

<span id="an_ii-p19"></span>This healthy and manly view of the mystical
life, as a growth towards God, a right employment of the will, rather
than a short cut to hidden knowledge or supersensual experience, is one
of the strongest characteristics of the writer of the *Cloud;* and
constitutes perhaps his greatest claim on our respect. “Mean only God,”
he says again and again; “Press upon Him with longing love”; “A good
*will* is the substance of all perfection.” To those who have this good
will, he offers his teaching: pointing out the dangers in their way, the
errors of mood and of conduct into which they may fall. They are to set
about this spiritual work not only with energy, but with *courtesy:* not
“snatching as it were a greedy greyhound” at spiritual <span
id="an_ii-p19.1"></span><span id="page_25">p. 25</span> <span
id="an_ii-Page_25"></span> satisfactions, but gently and joyously
pressing towards Him Whom Julian of Norwich called “our most courteous
Lord.” A glad spirit of dalliance is more becoming to them than the grim
determination of the fanatic.

     <span id="an_ii-p20"></span>"Shall I, a gnat which dances in Thy
ray,  
     <span id="an_ii-p21"></span>*Dare* to be reverent.”

<span id="an_ii-p22"></span>Further, he communicates to them certain
“ghostly devices” by which they may overcome the inevitable difficulties
encountered by beginners in contemplation: the distracting thoughts and
memories which torment the self that is struggling to focus all its
attention upon the spiritual sphere. The stern repression of such
thoughts, however spiritual, he knows to be essential to success: even
sin, once it is repented of, must be forgotten in order that Perfect
Goodness may be known. The “little word God,” and “the little word
Love,” are the only ideas which may dwell in the contemplative’s mind.
Anything else splits his attention, and soon proceeds by <span
id="an_ii-p22.1"></span><span id="page_26">p. 26</span> <span
id="an_ii-Page_26"></span> mental association to lead him further and
further from the consideration of that supersensual Reality which he
seeks.

<span id="an_ii-p23"></span>The primal need of the purified soul, then,
is the power of Concentration. His whole being must be set towards the
Object of his craving if he is to attain to it: “Look that *nothing*
live in thy working mind, but a naked intent stretching into God.” Any
thought of Him is inadequate, and for that reason defeats its own end—a
doctrine, of course, directly traceable to the “Mystical Theology” of
Dionysius the Areopagite. “Of God Himself can no man think,” says the
writer of the *Cloud, “*And therefore I would leave all that thing that
I can think, and choose to my love that thing that I cannot think. “The
universes which are amenable to the intellect can never satisfy the
instincts of the heart.

<span id="an_ii-p24"></span>Further, there is to be no wilful choosing
of method: no fussy activity of the surface‑intelligence. The <span
id="an_ii-p24.1"></span><span id="page_27">p. 27</span> <span
id="an_ii-Page_27"></span> mystic who seeks the divine Cloud of
Unknowing is to be surrendered to the direction of his deeper mind, his
transcendental consciousness: that “spark of the soul” which is in touch
with eternal realities. “Meddle thou not therewith, as thou wouldest
help it, for dread lest thou spill all. Be thou but the tree, and let it
be the wright: be thou but the house, and let it be the husbandman
dwelling therein.”

<span id="an_ii-p25"></span>In the *Epistle of Privy Counsel* there is a
passage which expresses with singular completeness the author’s theory
of this contemplative art—this silent yet ardent encounter of the soul
with God. Prayer, said Mechthild of Magdeburg, brings together two
lovers, God and the soul, in a narrow room where they speak much of
love: and here the rules which govern that meeting are laid down by a
master’s hand. “When thou comest by thyself,” he says, “think not before
what thou shalt do after, but forsake as well good thoughts as evil
thoughts, and <span id="an_ii-p25.1"></span><span id="page_28">p.
28</span> <span id="an_ii-Page_28"></span> pray not with thy mouth but
list thee right well. And then if thou aught shalt say, look not how
much nor how little that it be, nor weigh not what it is nor what it
bemeaneth . . . and look that nothing live in thy working mind but a
naked intent stretching into God, not clothed in any special thought of
God in Himself. . . . This naked intent freely fastened and grounded in
very belief shall be nought else to thy thought and to thy feeling but a
naked thought and a blind feeling of thine own being: as if thou saidest
thus unto God, within in thy meaning, ‘That what I am, Lord, I offer
unto Thee, without any looking to any quality of Thy Being, but only
that Thou art as Thou art, without any more.’ That meek darkness be thy
mirror, and thy whole remembrance. Think no further of thyself than I
bid thee do of thy God, so that thou be one with Him in spirit, as thus
without departing and scattering, for He is thy being, and in Him thou
art that thou art; <span id="an_ii-p25.2"></span><span id="page_29">p.
29</span> <span id="an_ii-Page_29"></span>not only by cause and by
being, but also, He is in thee both thy cause and thy being. And
therefore think on God in this work as thou dost on thyself, and on
thyself as thou dost on God: that He is as He is and thou art as thou
art, and that thy thought be not scattered nor departed, but proved in
Him that is All.”

<span id="an_ii-p26"></span>The conception of reality which underlies
this profound and beautiful passage, has much in common with that found
in the work of many other mystics; since it is ultimately derived from
the great Neoplatonic philosophy of the contemplative life. But the
writer invests it, I think, with a deeper and wider meaning than it is
made to bear in the writings even of Ruysbroeck, St. Teresa, or St. John
of the Cross. “For He is thy being, and in Him thou art that thou art;
not only by cause and by being, but also, He is in thee both thy cause
and thy being.” It was a deep thinker as well as a great lover who wrote
this: one <span id="an_ii-p26.1"></span><span id="page_30">p. 30</span>
<span id="an_ii-Page_30"></span> who joined hands with the philosophers,
as well as with the saints.

<span id="an_ii-p27"></span>“That meek darkness be thy mirror.” What is
this darkness? It is the “night of the intellect” into which we are
plunged when we attain to a state of consciousness which is above
thought; enter on a plane of spiritual experience with which the
intellect cannot deal. This is the “Divine Darkness”—the Cloud of
Unknowing, or of Ignorance, “dark with excess of light”—preached by
Dionysius the Areopagite, and eagerly accepted by his English
interpreter. “When I say darkness, I mean a lacking of knowing . . . and
for this reason it is not called a cloud of the air, but a cloud of
unknowing that is betwixt thee and thy God.” It is “a dark mist,” he
says again, “which seemeth to be between thee and the light thou
aspirest to.” This dimness and lostness of mind is a paradoxical proof
of attainment. Reason is in the dark, because love has entered “the
mysterious <span id="an_ii-p27.1"></span><span id="page_31">p. 31</span>
<span id="an_ii-Page_31"></span> radiance of the Divine Dark, the
inaccessible light wherein the Lord is said to dwell, and to which
thought with all its struggles cannot attain.”

<span id="an_ii-p28"></span>“Lovers,” said Patmore, “put out the candles
and draw the curtains, when they wish to see the god and the goddess;
and, in the higher communion, the night of thought is the light of
perception.” These statements cannot be explained: they can only be
proved in the experience of me individual soul. “Whoso deserves to see
and know God rests therein,” says Dionysius of that darkness, “and, by
the very fact that he neither sees nor knows, is truly *in* that which
surpasses all truth and all knowledge.”

<span id="an_ii-p29"></span>“Then,” says the writer of the
*Cloud—*whispering as it were to the bewildered neophyte the dearest
secret of his love—“*then* will He sometimes peradventure send out a
beam of ghostly light, piercing this cloud of unknowing that is betwixt
thee and Him; and show thee some of His <span
id="an_ii-p29.1"></span><span id="page_32">p. 32</span> <span
id="an_ii-Page_32"></span> privity, the which man may not, nor cannot
speak.”

<span id="an_ii-p30"></span>\*                \*               
\*                \*                \*                \*               
\*

<span id="an_ii-p31"></span>Numerous copies of the *Cloud of Unknowing*
and the other works attributed to its writer are in existence. Six
manuscripts of the *Cloud* are in the British Museum: four on vellum
(Harl. 674, Harl. 959, Harl. 2373, and Royal 17 C. xxvii.), all of the
15th century; and two on paper (Royal 17 C. xxvii. of the 16th century,
and Royal 17 D. v. late 15th century). All these agree fairly closely;
except for the facts that Harl. 2373 is incomplete, several pages having
disappeared, and that Harl. 959 gives the substance of the whole work in
a slightly shortened form. The present edition is based upon Harl. 674;
which has been transcribed and collated with Royal 17 C. xxvi., and in
the case of specially obscure passages with Royal 17 C. xxvii., Royal 17
D. v., and Harl. 2373. Obvious errors and omissions have been corrected,
and several <span id="an_ii-p31.1"></span><span id="page_33">p.
33</span> <span id="an_ii-Page_33"></span> obscure readings elucidated,
from these sources.

<span id="an_ii-p32"></span>The *Cloud of Unknowing* was known, and
read, by English Catholics as late as the middle or end of the 17th
century. It was much used by the celebrated Benedictine ascetic, the
Venerable Augustine Baker (1575-1641), who wrote a long exposition of
the doctrine which it contains. Two manuscripts of this treatise exist
in the Benedictine College of St. Laurence at Ampleforth; together with
a transcript of the *Cloud of Unknowing* dated 1677. Many references to
it will also be found in the volume called *Holy Wisdom,* which contains
the substances of Augustine Baker’s writings on the inner life. The
*Cloud* has only once been printed: in 1871, by the Rev. Henry Collins,
under the title of *The Divine Cloud,* with a preface and notes
attributed to Augustine Baker and probably taken from the treatise
mentioned above. This edition is now out of print. The MS. from which it
<span id="an_ii-p32.1"></span><span id="page_34">p. 34</span> <span
id="an_ii-Page_34"></span> was made is unknown to us. It differs widely,
both in the matter of additions and of omissions, from all the texts in
the British Museum, and represents a distinctly inferior recension of
the work. A mangled rendering of the sublime *Epistle of Privy Counsel*
is prefixed to it. Throughout, the pithy sayings of the original are
either misquoted, or expanded into conventional and flavourless
sentences. Numerous explanatory phrases for which our manuscripts give
no authority have been incorporated into the text. All the quaint and
humorous turns of speech are omitted or toned down. The responsibility
for these crimes against scholarship cannot now be determined; but it
seems likely that the text from which Father Collins’ edition was—in his
own words—“mostly taken” was a 17th‑century paraphrase, made rather in
the interests of edification than of accuracy; and that it represents
the form in which the work was known and used <span
id="an_ii-p32.2"></span><span id="page_35">p. 35</span> <span
id="an_ii-Page_35"></span> by Augustine Baker and his contemporaries.

<span id="an_ii-p33"></span>The other works attributed to the author of
the *Cloud* have fared better than this. *Dionise Hid Divinite* still
remains in MS.: but the *Epistle of Prayer,* the *Epistle of
Discretion,* and the *Treatise of Discerning of Spirits,* together with
the paraphrase of the *Benjamin Minor* of Richard of St. Victor which is
supposed to be by the same hand, were included by Henry Pepwell, in
1521, in a little volume of seven mystical tracts. These are now
accessible to the general reader; having been reprinted in the “New
Medieval Library” (1910) under the title of *The Cell of
Self‑knowledge,* with an admirable introduction and notes by Mr. Edmund
Gardner. Mr. Gardner has collated Pepwell’s text with that contained in
the British Museum manuscript Harl. 674; the same volume which has
provided the base‑manuscript for the present edition of the *Cloud.*

<span id="an_ii-p34"></span>This edition is intended, not for the <span
id="an_ii-p34.1"></span><span id="page_36">p. 36</span> <span
id="an_ii-Page_36"></span> student of Middle English, nor for the
specialist in mediaeval literature; but for the general reader and lover
of mysticism. My object has been to produce a readable text, free from
learned and critical apparatus. The spelling has therefore been
modernised throughout: and except in a few instances, where phrases of a
special charm or quaintness, or the alliterative passages so
characteristic of the author’s style, demanded their retention, obsolete
words have been replaced by their nearest modern equivalents. One such
word, however, which occurs constantly has generally been retained, on
account of its importance and the difficulty of finding an exact
substitute for it in current English. This is the verb “to list,” with
its adjective and adverb “listy” and “listily,” and the substantive
“list,” derived from it. “List” is best understood by comparison with
its opposite, “listless.” It implies a glad and eager activity, or
sometimes an energetic <span id="an_ii-p34.2"></span><span
id="page_37">p. 37</span> <span id="an_ii-Page_37"></span> desire or
craving: the wish and the will to *do* something. The noun often stands
for pleasure or delight, the adverb for the willing and joyous
performance of an action: the “putting of one’s heart into one’s work.”
The modern “lust,” from the same root, suggests a violence which was
expressly excluded from the Middle English meaning of “list.”

<span id="an_ii-p35"></span>My heartiest thanks are due to Mr. David
Inward, who transcribed the manuscript on which this version is based,
and throughout has given me skilled and untiring assistance in solving
many of the problems which arose in connection with it; and to Mr. J. A.
Herbert, Assistant‑keeper of Manuscripts in the British Museum, who has
read the proofs, and also dated the manuscripts of the *Cloud* for the
purposes of the present edition, and to whose expert knowledge and
unfailing kindness I owe a deep debt of gratitude.

<span id="an_ii-p36"></span>EVELYN UNDERHILL.

<span id="an_ii-p37"></span><span id="page_39">p. 39</span> <span
id="an_ii-Page_39"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Glossary](cou02)
