[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cou23)  [Next](cou25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295S2X6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Cloud of Unknowing*, ed. by Evelyn Underhill, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_xxv"></span>

<span id="an_xxv-p1"></span> 

### <span id="an_xxv-p1.1"></span>HERE BEGINNETH THE NINETEENTH CHAPTER

<span id="an_xxv-p2"></span> 

<span id="an_xxv-p3"></span>A short excusation of him that made this
book teaching how all contemplatives should have all actives fully
excused of their complaining words and deeds.

<span id="an_xxv-p4"></span>* *

<span id="an_xxv-p5"></span>SOME might think that I do little worship to
Martha, that special saint, for I liken her words of complaining of her
sister unto these worldly men’s words, or theirs unto hers: and truly I
mean no unworship to her nor to them. And God forbid that I should in
this work say anything that might be taken in condemnation of any of the
servants of God in any degree, and namely of His special saint. For me
thinketh that she should be full well had excused of her plaint, taking
regard to the time and the manner that she said it in. For that that she
<span id="an_xxv-p5.1"></span><span id="page_138">p. 138</span> <span
id="an_xxv-Page_138"></span> said, her unknowing was the cause. And no
wonder though she knew not at that time how Mary was occupied; for I
trow that before she had little heard of such perfection. And also that
she said, it was but courteously and in few words: and therefore she
should always be had excused.

<span id="an_xxv-p6"></span>And so me thinketh that these worldly living
men and women of active life should also full well be had excused of
their complaining words touched before, although they say rudely that
they say; having beholding to their ignorance. For why? Right as Martha
wist full little what Mary her sister did when she complained of her to
our Lord; right so on the same manner these folk nowadays wot full
little, or else nought, what these young disciples of God mean, when
they set them from the business of this world, and draw them to be God’s
special servants in holiness and rightfulness of spirit. And if they
wist truly, I daresay that they would neither do nor <span
id="an_xxv-p6.1"></span><span id="page_139">p. 139</span> <span
id="an_xxv-Page_139"></span> say as they say. And therefore me thinketh
always that they should be had excused: for why, they know no better
living than is that they live in themselves. And also when I think on
mine innumerable defaults, the which I have made myself before this time
in words and deeds for default of knowing, me thinketh then if I would
be had excused of God for mine ignorant defaults, that I should
charitably and piteously have other men’s ignorant words and deeds
always excused. And surely else, do I not to others as I would they did
to me. <span id="an_xxv-p6.2"></span><span id="page_140">p. 140</span>
<span id="an_xxv-Page_140"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 20: How Almighty God will goodly answer for all those
that for the excusing of themselves list not leave their business about
the love of Him](cou25)
