[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cou19)  [Next](cou21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295S2X6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Cloud of Unknowing*, ed. by Evelyn Underhill, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_xxi"></span>

<span id="an_xxi-p1"></span> 

### <span id="an_xxi-p1.1"></span>HERE BEGINNETH THE FIFTEENTH CHAPTER

<span id="an_xxi-p2"></span> 

<span id="an_xxi-p3"></span>A short proof against their error that say,
that there is no perfecter cause to be meeked under, than is the
knowledge of a man’s own wretchedness.

<span id="an_xxi-p4"></span>* *

<span id="an_xxi-p5"></span>AND trust steadfastly that there is such a
perfect meekness as I speak of, and that it may be come to through grace
in this life. And this I say in confusion of their error, that say that
there is no perfecter cause of meekness than is that which is raised of
the remembrance of our wretchedness and our before‑done sins.

<span id="an_xxi-p6"></span>I grant well, that to them that have been in
accustomed sins, as I am myself and have been, it is the most needful
and speedful cause, to be meeked under the remembrance of <span
id="an_xxi-p6.1"></span><span id="page_124">p. 124</span> <span
id="an_xxi-Page_124"></span> our wretchedness and our before‑done sins,
ever till the time be that the great rust of sin be in great part rubbed
away, our conscience and our counsel to witness. But to other that be,
as it were, innocents, the which never sinned deadly with an abiding
will and avisement, but through frailty and unknowing, and the which set
them to be contemplatives—and to us both if our counsel and our
conscience witness our lawful amendment in contrition and in confession,
and in making satisfaction after the statute and the ordinance of
all‑Holy Church, and thereto if we feel us stirred and called by grace
to be contemplatives also—there is then another cause to be meeked under
as far above this cause as is the living of our Lady Saint Mary above
the living of the sinfullest penitent in Holy Church; or the living of
Christ above the living of any other man in this life; or else the
living of an angel in heaven, the which never felt—nor shall feel—<span
id="an_xxi-p6.2"></span><span id="page_125">p. 125</span> <span
id="an_xxi-Page_125"></span>frailty, is above the life of the frailest
man that is here in this world.

<span id="an_xxi-p7"></span>For if it so were that there were no perfect
cause to be meeked under, but in seeing and feeling of wretchedness,
then would I wit of them that say so, what cause they be meeked under
that never see nor feel—nor never shall be in them—wretchedness nor
stirring of sin: as it is of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, our Lady Saint Mary,
and all the saints and angels in heaven. To this perfection, and all
other, our Lord JESUS CHRIST calleth us Himself in the gospel: where He
biddeth that we should be perfect by grace as He Himself is by nature.
<span id="an_xxi-p7.1"></span><span id="page_126">p. 126</span> <span
id="an_xxi-Page_126"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16: That by virtue of this work a sinner truly turned and
called to contemplation cometh sooner to perfection than by any other
work; and by it soonest may get of God forgiveness of sins](cou21.md)
