[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cou24)  [Next](cou26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295S2X6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Cloud of Unknowing*, ed. by Evelyn Underhill, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_xxvi"></span>

<span id="an_xxvi-p1"></span> 

### <span id="an_xxvi-p1.1"></span>HERE BEGINNETH THE TWENTIETH CHAPTER

<span id="an_xxvi-p2"></span>* *

<span id="an_xxvi-p3"></span>How Almighty God will goodly answer for all
those that for the excusing of themselves list not leave their business
about the love of Him.

<span id="an_xxvi-p4"></span>* *

<span id="an_xxvi-p5"></span>AND therefore me thinketh, that they that
set them to be contemplatives should not only have active men excused of
their complaining words, but also me thinketh that they should be so
occupied in spirit that they should take little heed or none what men
did or said about them. Thus did Mary, our example of all, when Martha
her sister complained to our Lord: and if we will truly do thus our Lord
will do now for us as He did then for Mary.

<span id="an_xxvi-p6"></span>And how was that? Surely thus. <span
id="an_xxvi-p6.1"></span><span id="page_141">p. 141</span> <span
id="an_xxvi-Page_141"></span> Our lovely Lord Jesus Christ, unto whom no
privy thing is hid, although He was required of Martha as doomsman for
to bid Mary rise and help her to serve Him; nevertheless yet, for He
perceived that Mary was fervently occupied in spirit about the love of
His Godhead, therefore courteously and as it was seemly for Him to do by
the way of reason, He answered for her, that for the excusing of herself
list not leave the love of Him. And how answered He? Surely not only as
doomsman, as He was of Martha appealed: but as an advocate lawfully
defended her that Him loved, and said, “Martha, Martha!” Twice for speed
He named her name; for He would that she heard Him and took heed to His
words. “Thou art full busy,” He said, “and troubled about many things.”
For they that be actives behove always to be busied and travailed about
many diverse things, the which them falleth, first for to have to their
own use, and <span id="an_xxvi-p6.2"></span><span id="page_142">p.
142</span> <span id="an_xxvi-Page_142"></span> sithen in deeds of mercy
to their even-christian, as charity asketh. And this He said unto
Martha, for He would let her wit that her business was good and
profitable to the health of her soul. But for this, that she should not
think that it were the best work of all that man might do, therefore He
added and said: ‘But one thing is necessary.’

<span id="an_xxvi-p7"></span>And what is that one thing? Surely that God
be loved and praised by Himself, above all other business bodily or
ghostly that man may do. And for this, that Martha should not think that
she might both love God and praise Him above all other business bodily
or ghostly, and also thereto to be busy about the necessaries of this
life: therefore to deliver her of doubt that she might not both serve
God in bodily business and ghostly together perfectly‑—imperfectly she
may, but not perfectly—He added and said, that Mary had chosen the best
part; the which should never be taken from <span
id="an_xxvi-p7.1"></span><span id="page_143">p. 143</span> <span
id="an_xxvi-Page_143"></span> her. For why, that perfect stirring of
love that beginneth here is even in number with that that shall last
without end in the bliss of heaven, for all it is but one. <span
id="an_xxvi-p7.2"></span><span id="page_144">p. 144</span> <span
id="an_xxvi-Page_144"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21: The true exposition of this gospel word, 'Mary hath
chosen the best part'](cou26)
