[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cou44)  [Next](cou46.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295S2X6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Cloud of Unknowing*, ed. by Evelyn Underhill, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_xlvi"></span>

<span id="an_xlvi-p1"></span> 

### <span id="an_xlvi-p1.1"></span>HERE BEGINNETH THE FORTIETH CHAPTER

<span id="an_xlvi-p2"></span> 

<span id="an_xlvi-p3"></span>That in the time of this work a soul hath
no special beholding to any vice in itself nor to any virtue in itself.

<span id="an_xlvi-p4"></span>* *

<span id="an_xlvi-p5"></span>DO thou, on the same manner, fill thy
spirit with the ghostly bemeaning of this word “sin,” and without any
special beholding unto any kind of sin, whether it be venial or deadly:
Pride, Wrath, or Envy, Covetyse, Sloth, Gluttony, or Lechery. What recks
it in contemplatives, what sin that it be, or how muckle a sin that it
be? For all sins them thinketh—I mean for the time of this work—alike
great in themselves, when the least sin departeth them from God, and
letteth them of their ghostly peace.

<span id="an_xlvi-p6"></span>And feel sin a lump, thou wottest never
what, but none other thing than <span id="an_xlvi-p6.1"></span><span
id="page_200">p. 200</span> <span id="an_xlvi-Page_200"></span> thyself.
And cry then ghostly ever upon one: a *Sin, sin, sin! Out, out, out!”*
This ghostly cry is better learned of God by the proof, than of any man
by word. For it is best when it is in pure spirit, without special
thought or any pronouncing of word; unless it be any seldom time, when
for abundance of spirit it bursteth up into word, so that the body and
the soul be both filled with sorrow and cumbering of sin.

<span id="an_xlvi-p7"></span>On the same manner shalt thou do with this
little word “God.” Fill thy spirit with the ghostly bemeaning of it
without any special beholding to any of His works—whether they be good,
better, or best of all—bodily or ghostly, or to any virtue that may be
wrought in man’s soul by any grace; not looking after whether it be
meekness or charity, patience or abstinence, hope, faith, or soberness,
chastity or wilful poverty. What recks this in contemplatives? For all
virtues they find and feel in God; for in Him is all <span
id="an_xlvi-p7.1"></span><span id="page_201">p. 201</span> <span
id="an_xlvi-Page_201"></span> thing, both by cause and by being. For
they think that an they had God they had all good, and therefore they
covet nothing with special beholding, but only good God. Do thou on the
same manner as far forth as thou mayest by grace: and mean God all, and
all God, so that nought work in thy wit and in thy will, but only God.

<span id="an_xlvi-p8"></span>And because that ever the whiles thou
livest in this wretched life, thee behoveth always feel in some part
this foul stinking lump of sin, as it were oned and congealed with the
substance of thy being, therefore shalt thou changeably mean these two
words—sin and God. With this general knowing, that an thou haddest God,
then shouldest thou lack sin: and mightest thou lack sin, then shouldest
thou have God. <span id="an_xlvi-p8.1"></span><span id="page_202">p.
202</span> <span id="an_xlvi-Page_202"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 41: That in all other works beneath this, men should keep
discretion; but in this none](cou46.md)
