[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cou49)  [Next](cou51.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295S2X6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Cloud of Unknowing*, ed. by Evelyn Underhill, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_li"></span>

<span id="an_li-p1"></span> 

### <span id="an_li-p1.1"></span>HERE BEGINNETH THE FIVE AND FORTIETH CHAPTER

<span id="an_li-p2"></span> 

<span id="an_li-p3"></span>A good declaring of some certain deceits that
may befall in this work.

<span id="an_li-p4"></span>* *

<span id="an_li-p5"></span>BUT one thing I tell thee, that in this work
may a young disciple that hath not yet been well used and proved in
ghostly working, full lightly be deceived; and, but he be soon wary, and
have grace to leave off and meek him to counsel, peradventure be
destroyed in his bodily powers and fall into fantasy in his ghostly
wits. And all this is along of pride, and of fleshliness and curiosity
of wit.

<span id="an_li-p6"></span>And on this manner may this deceit befall. A
young man or a woman new set to the school of devotion heareth this
sorrow and this desire be read and spoken: how that a man <span
id="an_li-p6.1"></span><span id="page_215">p. 215</span> <span
id="an_li-Page_215"></span> shall lift up his heart unto God, and
unceasingly desire for to feel the love of his God. And as fast in a
curiosity of wit they conceive these words not ghostly as they be meant,
but fleshly and bodily; and travail their fleshly hearts outrageously in
their breasts. And what for lacking of grace and pride and curiosity in
themselves, they strain their veins and their bodily powers so beastly
and so rudely, that within short time they fall either into frenzies,
weariness, and a manner of unlisty feebleness in body and in soul, the
which maketh them to wend out of themselves and seek some false and some
vain fleshly and bodily comfort without, as it were for recreation of
body and of spirit: or else, if they fall not in this, else they merit
for ghostly blindness, and for fleshly chafing of their nature in their
bodily breasts in the time of this feigned beastly and not ghostly
working, for to have their breasts either enflamed with an unkindly heat
of nature <span id="an_li-p6.2"></span><span id="page_216">p. 216</span>
<span id="an_li-Page_216"></span> caused of misruling of their bodies or
of this feigned working, or else they conceive a false heat wrought by
the Fiend, their ghostly enemy, caused of their pride and of their
fleshliness and their curiosity of wit. And yet peradventure they ween
it be the fire of love, gotten and kindled by the grace and the goodness
of the Holy Ghost. Truly, of this deceit, and of the branches thereof,
spring many mischiefs: much hypocrisy, much heresy, and much error. For
as fast after such a false feeling cometh a false knowing in the Fiend’s
school, right as after a true feeling cometh a true knowing in God’s
school. For I tell thee truly, that the devil hath his contemplatives as
God hath His.

<span id="an_li-p7"></span>This deceit of false feeling, and of false
knowing following thereon, hath diverse and wonderful variations, after
the diversity of states and the subtle conditions of them that be
deceived: as hath the true feeling and knowing <span
id="an_li-p7.1"></span><span id="page_217">p. 217</span> <span
id="an_li-Page_217"></span> of them that be saved. But I set no more
deceits here but those with the which I trow thou shalt be assailed if
ever thou purpose thee to work in this work. For what should it profit
to thee to wit how these great clerks, and men and women of other
degrees than thou art, be deceived? Surely right nought; and therefore I
tell thee no more but those that fall unto thee if thou travail in this
work. And therefore I tell thee this, for thou shalt be wary therewith
in thy working, if thou be assailed therewith. <span
id="an_li-p7.2"></span><span id="page_218">p. 218</span> <span
id="an_li-Page_218"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 46: A good teaching how a man shall flee these deceits,
and work more with a listiness of spirit than with any boisterousness of
body](cou51.md)
