[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cou57)  [Next](cou59.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295S2X6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Cloud of Unknowing*, ed. by Evelyn Underhill, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_lix"></span>

<span id="an_lix-p1"></span> 

### <span id="an_lix-p1.1"></span>HERE BEGINNETH THE THREE AND FIFTIETH CHAPTER

<span id="an_lix-p2"></span> 

<span id="an_lix-p3"></span>Of divers unseemly practices that follow
them that lack the work of this book.

<span id="an_lix-p4"></span>* *

<span id="an_lix-p5"></span>MANY wonderful practices follow them that be
deceived in this false work, or in any species thereof, beyond that doth
them that be God’s true disciples: for they be evermore full seemly in
all their practices, bodily or ghostly. But it is not so of these other.
For whoso would or might behold unto them where they sit in this time,
an it so were that their eyelids were open, he should see them stare as
they were mad, and leeringly look as if they saw the devil. Surely it is
good they be wary, for truly the fiend is not far. Some set their eyes
in their heads as they were sturdy <span id="an_lix-p5.1"></span><span
id="page_240">p. 240</span> <span id="an_lix-Page_240"></span> sheep
beaten in the head, and as they should die anon. Some hang their heads
on one side as if a worm were in their ears. Some pipe when they should
speak, as if there were no spirit in their bodies: and this is the
proper condition of an hypocrite. Some cry and whine in their throats,
so be they greedy and hasty to say that they think: and this is the
condition of heretics, and of them that with presumption and with
curiosity of wit will always maintain error.

<span id="an_lix-p6"></span>Many unordained and unseemly practices
follow on this error, whoso might perceive all. Nevertheless some there
be that be so curious that they can refrain them in great part when they
come before men. But might these men be seen in place where they be
homely, then I trow they should not be hid. And nevertheless yet I trow
that whoso would straitly gainsay their opinion, that they should soon
see them burst out in some point; and yet them think that all that ever
they <span id="an_lix-p6.1"></span><span id="page_241">p. 241</span>
<span id="an_lix-Page_241"></span> do, it is for the love of God and for
to maintain the truth. Now truly I hope that unless God shew His
merciful miracle to make them soon leave off, they shall love God so
long on this manner, that they shall go staring mad to the devil. I say
not that the devil hath so perfect a servant in this life, that is
deceived and infect with all these fantasies that I set here: and
nevertheless yet it may be that one, yea, and many one, be infect with
them all. But I say that he hath no perfect hypocrite nor heretic in
earth that he is not guilty in some that I have said, or peradventure
shall say if God vouchsafeth.

<span id="an_lix-p7"></span>For some men are so cumbered in nice curious
customs in bodily bearing, that when they shall ought hear, they writhe
their heads on one side quaintly, and up with the chin: they gape with
their mouths as they should hear with their mouth and not with their
ears. Some when they should speak point with their fingers, either on
their <span id="an_lix-p7.1"></span><span id="page_242">p. 242</span>
<span id="an_lix-Page_242"></span> fingers, or on their own breasts, or
on theirs that they speak to. Some can neither sit still, stand still,
nor lie still, unless they be either wagging with their feet or else
somewhat doing with their hands. Some row with their arms in time of
their speaking, as them needed for to swim over a great water. Some be
evermore smiling and laughing at every other word that they speak, as
they were giggling girls and nice japing jugglers lacking behaviour.
Seemly cheer were full fair, with sober and demure bearing of body and
mirth in manner.

<span id="an_lix-p8"></span>I say not that all these unseemly practices
be great sins in themselves, nor yet all those that do them be great
sinners themselves. But I say if that these unseemly and unordained
practices be governors of that man that doth them, insomuch that he may
not leave them when he will, then I say that they be tokens of pride and
curiosity of wit, and of unordained shewing and covetyse of knowing.
<span id="an_lix-p8.1"></span><span id="page_243">p. 243</span> <span
id="an_lix-Page_243"></span> And specially they be very tokens of
unstableness of heart and unrestfulness of mind, and specially of the
lacking of the work of this book. And this is the only reason why that I
set so many of these deceits here in this writing; for why, that a
ghostly worker shall prove his work by them. <span
id="an_lix-p8.2"></span><span id="page_244">p. 244</span> <span
id="an_lix-Page_244"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 54: How that by virtue of this work a man is governed
full wisely, and made full seemly as well in body as in soul](cou59.md)
