[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cou54)  [Next](cou56) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295S2X6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Cloud of Unknowing*, ed. by Evelyn Underhill, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_lvi"></span>

<span id="an_lvi-p1"></span> 

### <span id="an_lvi-p1.1"></span>HERE BEGINNETH THE FIFTIETH CHAPTER

<span id="an_lvi-p2"></span> 

<span id="an_lvi-p3"></span>Which is chaste love; and how in some
creatures such sensible comforts be but seldom, and in some right oft.

<span id="an_lvi-p4"></span>* *

<span id="an_lvi-p5"></span>AND hereby mayest thou see that we should
direct all our beholding unto this meek stirring of love in our will.
And in all other sweetness and comforts, bodily or ghostly, be they
never so liking nor so holy, if it be courteous and seemly to say, we
should have a manner of recklessness. If they come, welcome them: but
lean not too much on them for fear of feebleness, for it will take full
much of thy powers to bide any long time in such sweet feelings and
weepings. And peradventure thou mayest be stirred for to love God for
them, and that shalt thou feel by this: if thou grumble overmuch <span
id="an_lvi-p5.1"></span><span id="page_231">p. 231</span> <span
id="an_lvi-Page_231"></span> when they be away. And if it be thus, thy
love is not yet neither chaste nor perfect. For a love that is chaste
and perfect, though it suffer that the body be fed and comforted in the
presence of such sweet feelings and weepings, nevertheless yet it is not
grumbling, but full well pleased for to lack them at God’s will. And yet
it is not commonly without such comforts in some creatures, and in some
other creatures such sweetness and comforts be but seldom.

<span id="an_lvi-p6"></span>And all this is after the disposition and
the ordinance of God, all after the profit and the needfulness of
diverse creatures. For some creatures be so weak and so tender in
spirit, that unless they were somewhat comforted by feeling of such
sweetness, they might on nowise abide nor bear the diversity of
temptations and tribulations that they suffer and be travailed with in
this life of their bodily and ghostly enemies. And some there be that
they be so weak in body that they <span id="an_lvi-p6.1"></span><span
id="page_232">p. 232</span> <span id="an_lvi-Page_232"></span> may do no
great penance to cleanse them with. And these creatures will our Lord
cleanse full graciously in spirit by such sweet feelings and weepings.
And also on the tother part there be some creatures so strong in spirit,
that they can pick them comfort enough within in their souls, in
offering up of this reverent and this meek stirring of love and
accordance of will, that them needeth not much to be fed with such sweet
comforts in bodily feelings. Which of these be holier or more dear with
God, one than another, God wots and I not. <span
id="an_lvi-p6.2"></span><span id="page_233">p. 233</span> <span
id="an_lvi-Page_233"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 51: That men should have great wariness so that they
understand not bodily a thing that is meant ghostly; and specially it is
good to be wary in understanding of this word in, and of this word
up](cou56)
