[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cou58)  [Next](cou60) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295S2X6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Cloud of Unknowing*, ed. by Evelyn Underhill, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_lx"></span>

<span id="an_lx-p1"></span> 

### <span id="an_lx-p1.1"></span>HERE BEGINNETH THE FOUR AND FIFTIETH CHAPTER

<span id="an_lx-p2"></span> 

<span id="an_lx-p3"></span>How that by Virtue of this word a man is
governed full wisely, and made full seemly as well in body as in soul.

<span id="an_lx-p4"></span>* *

<span id="an_lx-p5"></span>WHOSO had this work, it should govern them
full seemly, as well in body as in soul: and make them full favourable
unto each man or woman that looked upon them. Insomuch, that the worst
favoured man or woman that liveth in this life, an they might come by
grace to work in this work, their favour should suddenly and graciously
be changed: that each good man that them saw, should be fain and joyful
to have them in company, and full much they should think that they were
pleased in spirit and holpen by grace unto God in their presence. <span
id="an_lx-p5.1"></span><span id="page_245">p. 245</span> <span
id="an_lx-Page_245"></span>

<span id="an_lx-p6"></span>And therefore get this gift whoso by grace
get may: for whoso hath it verily, he shall well con govern himself by
the virtue thereof, and all that longeth unto him. He should well give
discretion, if need were, of all natures and all dispositions. He should
well con make himself like unto all that with him communed, whether they
were accustomed sinners or none, without sin in himself: in wondering of
all that him saw, and in drawing of others by help of grace to the work
of that same spirit that he worketh in himself.

<span id="an_lx-p7"></span>His cheer and his words should be full of
ghostly wisdom, full of fire, and of fruit spoken in sober soothfastness
without any falsehood, far from any feigning or piping of hypocrites.
For some there be that with all their might, inner and outer, imagineth
in their speaking how they may stuff them and underprop them on each
side from falling, with many meek piping words and gestures of devotion:
more looking <span id="an_lx-p7.1"></span><span id="page_246">p.
246</span> <span id="an_lx-Page_246"></span> after for to seem holy in
sight of men, than for to be so in the sight of God and His angels. For
why, these folk will more weigh, and more sorrow make for an unordained
gesture or unseemly or unfitting word spoken before men, than they will
for a thousand vain thoughts and stinking stirrings of sin wilfully
drawn upon them, or recklessly used in the sight of God and the saints
and the angels in heaven. Ah, Lord God! where there be any pride within,
there such meek piping words be so plenteous without. I grant well, that
it is fitting and seemly to them that be meek within, for to shew meek
and seemly words and gestures without, according to that meekness that
is within in the heart. But I say not that they shall then be shewed in
broken nor in piping voices, against the plain disposition of their
nature that speak them. For why, if they be true, then be they spoken in
soothfastness, and in wholeness of voice and of their spirit that <span
id="an_lx-p7.2"></span><span id="page_247">p. 247</span> <span
id="an_lx-Page_247"></span> speak them. And if he that hath a plain and
an open boisterous voice by nature speak them poorly and pipingly—I mean
but if he be sick in his body, or else that it be betwixt him and his
God or his confessor—then it is a very token of hypocrisy. I mean either
young hypocrisy or old.

<span id="an_lx-p8"></span>And what shall I more say of these venomous
deceits? Truly I trow, unless they have grace to leave off such piping
hypocrisy, that betwixt that privy pride in their hearts within and such
meek words without, the silly soul may full soon sink into sorrow. <span
id="an_lx-p8.1"></span><span id="page_248">p. 248</span> <span
id="an_lx-Page_248"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 55: How they be deceived that follow the fervour of
spirit in condemning of some without discretion](cou60)
