[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cou65)  [Next](cou67) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295S2X6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Cloud of Unknowing*, ed. by Evelyn Underhill, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_lxvii"></span>

<span id="an_lxvii-p1"></span> 

### <span id="an_lxvii-p1.1"></span>HERE BEGINNETH THE ONE AND SIXTIETH CHAPTER

<span id="an_lxvii-p2"></span> 

<span id="an_lxvii-p3"></span>That all bodily thing is subject unto
ghostly thing, and is ruled thereafter by the course of nature and not
contrariwise.

<span id="an_lxvii-p4"></span>* *

<span id="an_lxvii-p5"></span>NEVERTHELESS it is needful to lift up our
eyes and our hands bodily, as it were unto yon bodily heaven, in the
which the elements be fastened. I mean if we be stirred of the work of
our spirit, and else not. For all bodily thing is subject unto ghostly
thing, and is ruled thereafter, and not contrariwise.

<span id="an_lxvii-p6"></span>Ensample hereof may be seen by the
ascension of our Lord: for when the time appointed was come, that Him
liked to wend to His Father bodily in His manhood, the which was never
nor never may be absent in His Godhead, then mightily by the virtue of
the <span id="an_lxvii-p6.1"></span><span id="page_271">p. 271</span>
<span id="an_lxvii-Page_271"></span> Spirit God, the manhood with the
body followed in onehead of person. The visibility of this was most
seemly, and most according, to be upward.

<span id="an_lxvii-p7"></span>This same subjection of the body to the
spirit may be in manner verily conceived in the proof of this ghostly
work of this book, by them that work therein. For what time that a soul
disposeth him effectually to this work, then as fast suddenly, unwitting
himself that worketh, the body that peradventure before ere he began was
somewhat bent downwards, on one side or on other for ease of the flesh,
by virtue of the spirit shall set it upright: following in manner and in
likeness bodily the work of the spirit that is made ghostly. And thus it
is most seemly to be.

<span id="an_lxvii-p8"></span>And for this seemliness it is, that a
man—the which is the seemliest creature in body that ever God made—is
not made crooked to the earthwards, as be an other beasts, but upright
to heavenwards. For why? That it <span id="an_lxvii-p8.1"></span><span
id="page_272">p. 272</span> <span id="an_lxvii-Page_272"></span> should
figure in likeness bodily the work of the soul ghostly; the which
falleth to be upright ghostly, and not crooked ghostly. Take heed that I
say upright ghostly, and not bodily. For how should a soul, the which in
his nature hath no manner thing of bodilyness, be strained upright
bodily? Nay, it may not be.

<span id="an_lxvii-p9"></span>And therefore be wary that thou conceive
not bodily that which is meant ghostly, although it be spoken in bodily
words, as be these, up or down, in or out, behind or before, on one side
or on other. For although that a thing be never so ghostly in itself,
nevertheless yet if it shall be spoken of, since it so is that speech is
a bodily work wrought with the tongue, the which is an instrument of the
body, it behoveth always be spoken in bodily words. But what thereof?
Shall it therefore be taken and conceived bodily? Nay, but ghostly, as
it be meant. <span id="an_lxvii-p9.1"></span><span id="page_273">p.
273</span> <span id="an_lxvii-Page_273"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 62: How a man may wit when his ghostly work is beneath
him or without him and when it is even with him or within him, and when
it is above him and under his God](cou67)
