[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cou72)  [Next](cou74.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295S2X6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Cloud of Unknowing*, ed. by Evelyn Underhill, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_lxxiv"></span>

<span id="an_lxxiv-p1"></span> 

### <span id="an_lxxiv-p1.1"></span>HERE BEGINNETH THE EIGHT AND SIXTIETH CHAPTER

<span id="an_lxxiv-p2"></span> 

<span id="an_lxxiv-p3"></span>That nowhere bodily, is everywhere
ghostly; and how our outer man calleth the word of this book nought.

<span id="an_lxxiv-p4"></span>* *

<span id="an_lxxiv-p5"></span>AND on the same manner, where another man
would bid thee gather thy powers and thy wits wholly within thyself, and
worship God there—although he say full well and full truly, yea! and no
man trulier, an he be well conceived—yet for fear of deceit and bodily
conceiving of his words, me list not bid thee do so. But thus will I bid
thee. Look on nowise that thou be within thyself. And shortly, without
thyself will I not that thou be, nor yet above, nor behind, nor on one
side, nor on other.

<span id="an_lxxiv-p6"></span>“Where then,” sayest thou, “shall I <span
id="an_lxxiv-p6.1"></span><span id="page_290">p. 290</span> <span
id="an_lxxiv-Page_290"></span> be? Nowhere, by thy tale!” Now truly thou
sayest well; for there would I have thee. For why, nowhere bodily, is
everywhere ghostly. Look then busily that thy ghostly work be nowhere
bodily; and then wheresoever that that thing is, on the which thou
wilfully workest in thy mind in substance, surely there art thou in
spirit, as verily as thy body is in that place that thou art bodily. And
although thy bodily wits can find there nothing to feed them on, for
them think it nought that thou dost, yea! do on then this nought, and do
it for God’s love. And let not therefore, but travail busily in that
nought with a waking desire to will to have God that no man may know.
For I tell thee truly, that I had rather be so nowhere bodily, wrestling
with that blind nought, than to be so great a lord that I might when I
would be everywhere bodily, merrily playing with all this ought as a
lord with his own.

<span id="an_lxxiv-p7"></span>Let be this everywhere and this <span
id="an_lxxiv-p7.1"></span><span id="page_291">p. 291</span> <span
id="an_lxxiv-Page_291"></span> ought, in comparison or this nowhere and
this nought. Reck thee never if thy wits cannot reason of this nought;
for surely, I love it much the better. It is so worthy a thing in
itself, that they cannot reason thereupon. This nought may better be
felt than seen: for it is full blind and full dark to them that have but
little while looked thereupon. Nevertheless, if I shall soothlier say, a
soul is more blinded in feeling of it for abundance of ghostly light,
than for any darkness or wanting of bodily light. What is he that
calleth it nought? Surely it is our outer man, and not our inner. Our
inner man calleth it All; for of it he is well learned to know the
reason of all things bodily or ghostly, without any special beholding to
any one thing by itself. <span id="an_lxxiv-p7.2"></span><span
id="page_292">p. 292</span> <span id="an_lxxiv-Page_292"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 69: How that a man's affection is marvelously changed in
ghostly feeling of this nought, when it is nowhere wrought](cou74.md)
