[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cou74)  [Next](cou76.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295S2X6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Cloud of Unknowing*, ed. by Evelyn Underhill, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_lxxvi"></span>

<span id="an_lxxvi-p1"></span> 

### <span id="an_lxxvi-p1.1"></span>HERE BEGINNETH THE SEVENTIETH CHAPTER

<span id="an_lxxvi-p2"></span> 

<span id="an_lxxvi-p3"></span>That right as by the defailing of our
bodily wits we begin more readily to come to knowing of ghostly things,
so by the defailing of our ghostly wits we begin most readily to come to
the knowledge of God, such as is possible by grace to be had here.

<span id="an_lxxvi-p4"></span>* *

<span id="an_lxxvi-p5"></span>AND therefore travail fast in this nought,
and this nowhere, and leave thine outward bodily wits and all that they
work in: for I tell thee truly, that this work may not be conceived by
them.

<span id="an_lxxvi-p6"></span>For by thine eyes thou mayest not conceive
of anything, unless it be by the length and the breadth, the smallness
and the greatness, the roundness and the squareness, the farness and the
nearness, and the colour of it. <span id="an_lxxvi-p6.1"></span><span
id="page_296">p. 296</span> <span id="an_lxxvi-Page_296"></span> And by
thine ears, nought but noise or some manner of sound. By thine nose,
nought but either stench or savour. And by thy taste, nought but either
sour or sweet, salt or fresh, bitter or liking. And by thy feeling,
nought but either hot or cold, hard or tender, soft or sharp. And truly,
neither hath God nor ghostly things none of these qualities nor
quantities. And therefore leave thine outward wits, and work not with
them, neither within nor without: for all those that set them to be
ghostly workers within, and ween that they should either hear, smell, or
see, taste or feel, ghostly things, either within them or without,
surely they be deceived, and work wrong against the course of nature.

<span id="an_lxxvi-p7"></span>For by nature they be ordained, that with
them men should have knowing of all outward bodily things, and on nowise
by them come to the knowing of ghostly things. I mean by their works. By
their failings we may, as thus: when we read or hear <span
id="an_lxxvi-p7.1"></span><span id="page_297">p. 297</span> <span
id="an_lxxvi-Page_297"></span> speak of some certain things, and thereto
conceive that our outward wits cannot tell us by no quality what those
things be, then we may be verily certified that those things be ghostly
things, and not bodily things.

<span id="an_lxxvi-p8"></span>On this same manner ghostly it fareth
within our ghostly wits, when we travail about the knowing of God
Himself. For have a man never so much ghostly understanding in knowing
of all made ghostly things, yet may he never by the work of his
understanding come to the knowing of an unmade ghostly thing: the which
is nought but God. But by the failing it may: for why, that thing that
it faileth in is nothing else but only God. And therefore it was that
Saint Denis said, *the most goodly knowing of God is that, the which is
known by unknowing.* And truly, whoso will look in Denis’ books, he
shall find that his words will clearly affirm all that I have said or
shall say, from <span id="an_lxxvi-p8.1"></span><span id="page_298">p.
298</span> <span id="an_lxxvi-Page_298"></span> the beginning of this
treatise to the end. On otherwise than thus, list me not cite him, nor
none other doctor, for me at this time. For sometime, men thought it
meekness to say nought of their own heads, unless they affirmed it by
Scripture and doctors’ words: and now it is turned into curiosity, and
shewing of cunning. To thee it needeth not, and therefore I do it not.
For whoso hath ears, let him hear, and whoso is stirred for to trow, let
him trow: for else, shall they not. <span
id="an_lxxvi-p8.2"></span><span id="page_299">p. 299</span> <span
id="an_lxxvi-Page_299"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 71: That some may not come to feel the perfection of this
work but in time of ravishing, and some may have it when they will, in
the common state of man's soul](cou76.md)
