[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cou78)  [Next](cou80.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295S2X6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Cloud of Unknowing*, ed. by Evelyn Underhill, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_lxxx"></span>

<span id="an_lxxx-p1"></span> 

### <span id="an_lxxx-p1.1"></span>HERE BEGINNETH THE FOUR AND SEVENTIETH CHAPTER

<span id="an_lxxx-p2"></span> 

<span id="an_lxxx-p3"></span>How that the matter of this book is never
more read or spoken, nor heard read or spoken, of a soul disposed
thereto without feeling of a very accordance to the effect of the same
work: and of rehearsing of the same charge that is written in the
prologue.

<span id="an_lxxx-p4"></span>* *

<span id="an_lxxx-p5"></span>AND if thee think that this manner of
working be not according to thy disposition in body and in soul, thou
mayest leave it and take another, safely with good ghostly counsel
without blame. And then I beseech thee that thou wilt have me excused,
for truly I would have profited unto thee in this writing at my simple
cunning; and that was mine intent. And therefore read over twice or
thrice; and ever the ofter the better, and the <span
id="an_lxxx-p5.1"></span><span id="page_309">p. 309</span> <span
id="an_lxxx-Page_309"></span> more thou shalt conceive thereof.
Insomuch, peradventure, that some sentence that was full hard to thee at
the first or the second reading, soon after thou shalt think it easy.

<span id="an_lxxx-p6"></span>Yea! and it seemeth impossible to mine
understanding, that any soul that is disposed to this work should read
it or speak it, or else hear it read or spoken, but if that same soul
should feel for that time a very accordance to the effect of this work.
And then if thee think it doth thee good, thank God heartily, and for
God’s love pray for me.

<span id="an_lxxx-p7"></span>Do then so. And I pray thee for God’s love
that thou let none see this book, unless it be such one that thee think
is like to the book; after that thou findest written in the book before,
where it telleth what men and when they should work in this work. And if
thou shalt let any such men see it, then I pray thee that thou bid them
take them time to look it all over. For peradventure there is some <span
id="an_lxxx-p7.1"></span><span id="page_310">p. 310</span> <span
id="an_lxxx-Page_310"></span> matter therein in the beginning, or in the
midst, the which is hanging and not fully declared there as it standeth.
But if it be not there, it is soon after, or else in the end. And thus
if a man saw one part and not another, peradventure he should lightly be
led into error: and therefore I pray thee to work as I say thee. And if
thee think that there be any matter therein that thou wouldest have more
opened than it is, let me wit which it is, and thy conceit thereupon;
and at my simple cunning it shall be amended if I can.

<span id="an_lxxx-p8"></span>Fleshly janglers, flatterers and blamers,
ronkers and ronners, and all manner of pinchers, cared I never that they
saw this book: for mine intent was never to write such thing to them.
And therefore I would not that they heard it, neither they nor none of
these curious lettered nor unlearned men: yea! although they be full
good men in active living, for it accordeth not to them. <span
id="an_lxxx-p8.1"></span><span id="page_311">p. 311</span> <span
id="an_lxxx-Page_311"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 75: Of some certain tokens by the which a man may prove
whether he be called of God to work in this work](cou80.md)
