[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cou73)  [Next](cou75) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295S2X6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Cloud of Unknowing*, ed. by Evelyn Underhill, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_lxxv"></span>

<span id="an_lxxv-p1"></span> 

### <span id="an_lxxv-p1.1"></span>HERE BEGINNETH THE NINE AND SIXTIETH CHAPTER

<span id="an_lxxv-p2"></span> 

<span id="an_lxxv-p3"></span>How that a man’s affection is marvelously
changed in ghostly feeling of this nought, when it is nowhere wrought.

<span id="an_lxxv-p4"></span>* *

<span id="an_lxxv-p5"></span>WONDERFULLY is a man’s affection varied in
ghostly feeling of this nought when it is nowhere wrought. For at the
first time that a soul looketh thereupon, it shall find all the special
deeds of sin that ever he did since he was born, bodily or ghostly,
privily or darkly painted thereupon. And howsoever that he turneth it
about, evermore they will appear before his eyes; until the time be,
that with much hard travail, many sore sighings, and many bitter
weepings, he have in great part washed them away. Sometime in this
travail him think that it <span id="an_lxxv-p5.1"></span><span
id="page_293">p. 293</span> <span id="an_lxxv-Page_293"></span> is to
look thereupon as on hell; for him think that he despaireth to win to
perfection of ghostly rest out of that pairs Thus far inwards come many,
but for greatness of pain that they feel and for lacking of comfort,
they go back in beholding of bodily things: seeking fleshly comforts
without, for lacking of ghostly they have not yet deserved, as they
should if they had abided.

<span id="an_lxxv-p6"></span>For he that abideth feeleth sometime some
comfort, and hath some hope of perfection; for he feeleth and seeth that
many of his fordone special sins be in great part by help of grace
rubbed away. Nevertheless yet ever among he feeleth pain, but he
thinketh that it shall have an end, for it waxeth ever less and less.
And therefore he calleth it nought else but purgatory. Sometime he can
find no special sin written thereupon, but yet him think that sin is a
lump, he wot never what, none other thing than himself; and then it may
be called the <span id="an_lxxv-p6.1"></span><span id="page_294">p.
294</span> <span id="an_lxxv-Page_294"></span> base and the pain of the
original sin. Sometime him think that it is paradise or heaven, for
diverse wonderful sweetness and comforts, joys and blessed virtues that
he findeth therein. Sometime him think it God, for peace and rest that
he findeth therein.

<span id="an_lxxv-p7"></span>Yea! think what he think will; for evermore
he shall find it *a cloud of unknowing,* that is betwixt him and his
God. <span id="an_lxxv-p7.1"></span><span id="page_295">p. 295</span>
<span id="an_lxxv-Page_295"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 70: That right as by the defailing of our bodily wits we
begin more readily to come to knowing of ghostly things, so by the
defailing of our ghostly wits we begin most readily to come to the
knowledge of God, such as is possible by grace to be had here](cou75)
