[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cou75)  [Next](cou77.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295S2X6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Cloud of Unknowing*, ed. by Evelyn Underhill, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_lxxvii"></span>

<span id="an_lxxvii-p1"></span> 

### <span id="an_lxxvii-p1.1"></span>HERE BEGINNETH THE ONE AND SEVENTIETH CHAPTER

<span id="an_lxxvii-p2"></span> 

<span id="an_lxxvii-p3"></span>That some may not come to feel the
perfection of this work but in time of ravishing, and some may have it
when they will, in the common state of man’s soul.

<span id="an_lxxvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="an_lxxvii-p5"></span>SOME think this matter so hard and so
fearful, that they say it may not be come to without much strong travail
coming before, nor conceived but seldom, and that but in the time of
ravishing. And to these men will I answer as feebly as I can, and say,
that it is all at the ordinance and the disposition of God, after their
ableness in soul that this grace of contemplation and of ghostly working
is given to.

<span id="an_lxxvii-p6"></span>For some there be that without much and
long ghostly exercise may <span id="an_lxxvii-p6.1"></span><span
id="page_300">p. 300</span> <span id="an_lxxvii-Page_300"></span> not
come thereto, and yet it shall be but full seldom, and in special
calling of our Lord that they shall feel the perfection of this work:
the which calling is called ravishing. And some there be that be so
subtle in grace and in spirit, and so homely with God in this grace of
contemplation, that they may have it when they will in the common state
of man’s soul: as it is in sitting, going, standing, or kneeling. And
yet in this time they have full deliberation of all their wits bodily or
ghostly, and may use them if they desire: not without some letting (but
without great letting). Ensample of the first we have by Moses, and of
this other by Aaron the priest of the Temple: for why, this grace of
contemplation is figured by the Ark of the Testament in the old law, and
the workers in this grace be figured by them that most meddled them
about this Ark, as the story will witness. And well is this grace and
this work likened unto that Ark. For right as <span
id="an_lxxvii-p6.2"></span><span id="page_301">p. 301</span> <span
id="an_lxxvii-Page_301"></span> in that Ark were contained all the
jewels and the relics of the Temple, right so in this little love put
upon this cloud be contained all the virtues of man’s soul, the which is
the ghostly Temple of God.

<span id="an_lxxvii-p7"></span>Moses ere he might come to see this Ark
and for to wit how it should be made, with great long travail he clomb
up to the top of the mountain, and dwelled there, and wrought in a cloud
six days: abiding unto the seventh day that our Lord would vouchsafe for
to shew unto him the manner of this Ark‑making. By Moses’s long travail
and his late shewing, be understood those that may not come to the
perfection of this ghostly work without long travail coming before: and
yet but full seldom, and when God will vouchsafe to shew it.

<span id="an_lxxvii-p8"></span>But that that Moses might not come to see
but seldom, and that not without great long travail, Aaron had in his
power because of his office, for to see it in the Temple within the Veil
as <span id="an_lxxvii-p8.1"></span><span id="page_302">p. 302</span>
<span id="an_lxxvii-Page_302"></span> oft as him liked for to enter. And
by this Aaron is understood all those the which I spake of above, the
which by their ghostly cunning, by help of grace, may assign unto them
the perfection of this work as them liketh. <span
id="an_lxxvii-p8.2"></span><span id="page_303">p. 303</span> <span
id="an_lxxvii-Page_303"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 72: That a worker in this work should not deem nor think
of another worker as he feeleth in himself](cou77.md)
