[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31091)  [Next](cc31093) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.lxxxiv"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p1"></span>MATTHEW 10:9-15; MARK 6:8-11; LUKE 9:3-5

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p2"></span><span id="ix.lxxxiv-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
10:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#009)<span
id="ix.lxxxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p3"></span><span id="ix.lxxxiv-p3.1"></span>[Mark
6:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#008)<span
id="ix.lxxxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p4"></span><span id="ix.lxxxiv-p4.1"></span>[Luke
9:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#003)<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p5"></span>**9**.** **Do not provide gold, nor
silver,  <span id="fr_573"></span>[574](#fn_573) nor brass in your
purses, **10**.** **Nor scrip for the journey, nor two coats, nor shoes,
nor staff: for the laborer is worthy of his food. **11**.** **But into
whatsoever city or village you shall enter, inquire what person in it is
worthy, and remain there till you depart. **12**.** **And when you shall
enter a house, salute it. **13**.** **And if the house shall be worthy,
may your peace come upon it: but if it shall not be worthy, may your
peace return to you. **14**.** **And whosoever shall not receive you, or
hear your words, when you go out of that house or city, shake off the
dust of your feet. **15**.** **Verily I say to you, It shall be more
tolerable for the land of Sodom and of Gomorrah in the day of judgment
than for that city.

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p7"></span>**8**.** **And commanded them to take
nothing for the journey, but a staff only; not a scrip, nor bread, nor
money in their girdle: **9**.** **But to be shod with sandals, and not
to wear two coats. **10**.** **And he said to them, Whenever you shall
enter a house, remain there till you depart thence. **11**.** **And
whoever shall not receive you or hear you, when you go out of that
place, shake off the dust which is under your feet for a testimony to
them. Verily I say to you, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and
Gomorroah in the day of judgment than for that city.

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p8"></span>**3**.** **And he said to them, Carry
nothing for the journey, neither a staff, nor a scrip, nor bread, nor
money; and do not have two coats each. **4**.** **And into whatsoever
house you shall enter, remain there, and depart thence. **5**.** **And
whoever will not receive you, when you go out of that city, shake off
even the dust from your feet for a testimony against them.

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p9"></span> 

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p10"></span><span id="ix.lxxxiv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p11"></span>**<span
id="ix.lxxxiv-p11.2"></span>[Matthew
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#009)<span
id="ix.lxxxiv-p11.2"></span>.** *Do not provide.* As the embassy  <span
id="fr_574"></span>[575](#fn_574) was of such a nature, that Christ
wished the disciples to traverse the whole of Judea within a few days,
and immediately to return to him, he forbids to carry luggage with them,
by which this speed may be retarded. Some have ignorantly supposed that
the rule here laid down for the ministers of the word, or for the
apostles, is perpetual. We shall presently meet with a few sentences
which have a more extensive reference: but the present injunctions not
to carry baggage must undoubtedly be restricted to that temporary
commission of which I have already spoken. The whole of the prohibition
of *gold, silver, a scrip,* and two *coats,* which is given by Matthew,
must be read in immediate connection, as is evident from the other two
Evangelists.

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p13"></span>I have therefore chosen to translate
<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p13.1"></span>υὴ κτήσησθε, *do not provide:* for our
Lord simply intended to forbid them to *take any thing for the journey*
They might have *scrips,* and *shoes,* and *a change of coats,* at home;
but that they may be better prepared for the journey, he orders them to
leave every thing that would be burdensome. Such too is the import of
what Mark says, *to be shod with sandals* There is an appearance of
contradiction as to the *staff,* or *stick* for, according to Mark, the
*staff* is allowed, while according to Matthew and Luke it is refused.
But there is an ambiguity in the use of the Hebrew word <span
id="ix.lxxxiv-p13.2"></span>שבט, *(shebet;)* and the Evangelists, though
they wrote in Greek, used the word <span
id="ix.lxxxiv-p13.3"></span>ῥάβδος in various senses. Matthew and Luke
mean by it a *rod* which would be burdensome to the person who carries
it: while Mark means by it a *walking-stick* to support and relieve a
traveler. It is evident, that in making a journey it was customary to
carry a *staff;* and hence those words of Jacob, *With my staff, I
passed over this Jordan,* (<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p13.4"></span>[Ge
32:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#010)<span
id="ix.lxxxiv-p13.4"></span>,) by which he acknowledges that he came
empty and without money into Syria.

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p14"></span><span id="ix.lxxxiv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p15"></span>**10.** *For the laborer is worthy of
his food.* Christ anticipates an objection that might be made: for it
might appear to be a harsh condition to travel through the whole of
Judea without any provisions.  <span id="fr_575"></span>[576](#fn_575)
Accordingly, Christ tells them, that they have no reason to dread that
they will suffer hunger; because, wherever they come, they will at least
be *worthy of their food*  <span id="fr_576"></span>[577](#fn_576) He
calls them *laborers,* not that they resembled ordinary ministers, who
labor in the Lord’s vineyard, and who, by planting and watering, bring
it into a state of cultivation; but merely because they were the heralds
of a richer and more complete doctrine. They did not at that time
receive the office of preaching any farther than to render the Jews
attentive to the preaching of the Gospel.

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p18"></span><span id="ix.lxxxiv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p19"></span>**11.** *Inquire what person in it is
worthy.* Again, they might object that they would be deprived of the
food to which they were entitled, because nobody would acknowledge them
as *laborers* But Christ meets this difficulty also by ordering them to
make *inquiry what person* in each city is *worthy* of the message of
salvation. By these words, he bids them ask, if there are any godly and
upright men, who have some fear and reverence for God, and of whose
readiness to receive instruction good hopes may be entertained, that
they may direct their labors chiefly to them. For, as they were not at
liberty to remain long in any one place, it was proper to begin with
those who, in some respect were better prepared.

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p20"></span>*Remain there till you depart.* This too
has a reference to dispatch: for if they had made a longer stay in any
place, it would have been necessary to change their lodging, that they
might not be too burdensome to any individual. When, therefore, Christ
enjoins them to remain in the house of the person who shall first
receive them, *till they depart* to another city, he intimates that they
must make haste, so that, after having published the Gospel in one city,
they may immediately run to another.

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p21"></span><span id="ix.lxxxiv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p22"></span>**12.** *Salute it.* As they could not
distinguish the devout worshippers of God from despisers, he enjoins
them to address in a friendly manner any family which they may have
occasion to meet. The act of *saluting* is a kind of opening to a
conversation. They had already been warned to look out for persons to
entertain them, whose religious zeal was generally known and believed.
But as it sometimes happens that persons of lofty reputation, when they
are brought to a serious trial, discover their impiety, it was proper
that this rule should be expressly laid down. The meaning therefore is:
“Make trial, when you first enter, whether your entertainers will
cheerfully submit to hear you. Whoever shall willingly embrace your
doctrine, remain in their house, that your salutation may be confirmed.
If any shall reject, depart from them immediately, and, so far as lies
in your power, withdraw your salutation.”

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p23"></span><span id="ix.lxxxiv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p24"></span>**13.** *If it be not worthy.* The
import of this mode of expression may be thus stated, — “As their
ingratitude makes them unworthy to enjoy the blessing of God which you
have supplicated for them, break off every bond of communication.” The
*word peace* refers to the mode of salutation which generally used among
the Jews. As the Hebrew word <span id="ix.lxxxiv-p24.2"></span>שלום,
*(shalom,) peace,* denotes *prosperity,* when they desire that any one
may be well and happy, and that his affairs may succeed to his wish,
they pray that he may have *peace* I do acknowledge that the apostles
brought to men a different kind of peace, but it is too great a
refinement of speculation to make this passage refer to the free
reconciliation which takes place between God and men.

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p25"></span><span id="ix.lxxxiv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p26"></span>**14.** *And whoever will not receive
you.* This awful threatening of punishment against the despisers of the
gospel was intended to animate his disciples, that they might not be
retarded by the ingratitude of the world. He directs the apostles,
indeed, what he wishes them to do if they meet with despisers. But his
principal design was that, wherever their doctrine was rejected, their
well-founded grief and distress might be relieved by consolation, that
they might not fail in the middle of their course. And we see how Paul,
relying on this consolation, boldly sets at naught all the obstinacy of
men, moves on steadily in the midst of hindrances, and boasts that he is

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p27"></span>a sweet savor to God, though he is the
savor of death  
to them that perish, (<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p27.2"></span>[2 Cor.
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016)<span
id="ix.lxxxiv-p27.2"></span>.)

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p28"></span>Now, this passage shows in what
estimation the Lord holds his gospel, and, indeed, as it is an
inestimable treasure, they are chargeable with base ingratitude who
refuse it when offered to them. Besides, it is the scepter of his
kingdom, and therefore cannot be rejected without treating him with open
contempt.

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p29"></span>*Shake off the dust* As the Lord here
recommends the doctrine of the gospel, that all may receive it with
reverence, and terrifies rebels by threatening severe punishment, so he
enjoins the apostles to proclaim the vengeance which he threatens. But
this they cannot do, unless they burn with very ardent zeal to make
known the doctrines which they preach. We must therefore hold that no
man is qualified to become a teacher of heavenly doctrine, unless his
feelings respecting it be such, that he is distressed and agonized when
it is treated with contempt.

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p30"></span>To *shake off the dust from the feet*
was probably a custom then prevalent in Judea, as a sign of execration;
and was intended to declare that the inhabitants of the place were so
polluted, that the very ground on which they trod was infected. That it
was an ordinary custom I conjecture from our Lord’s manner of speaking
of it as a thing well known. This form of execration confirms still more
what I lately mentioned, that no crime is more offensive to God than
contempt of his word: for he does not enjoin them to make use of so
solemn a mode in expressing their detestation of adulterers, or
murderers, or any description of malefactors.

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p31"></span><span id="ix.lxxxiv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p32"></span>*Verily, I say to you* That they may not
imagine this to be an idle bugbear,  <span
id="fr_577"></span>[578](#fn_577) Christ declares that those who reject
the gospel, will receive more severe punishment than the inhabitants of
Sodom. Some view the word *judgment* as referring to the destruction of
Jerusalem. But this is foreign to our Lord’s intention: for it must be
understood as referring to the *general judgment,* in which both must
give their account, that there may be a comparison of the punishments.
Christ mentioned *Sodom* rather than other cities, not only because it
went beyond them all in flagitious crimes, but because God destroyed it
in an extraordinary manner, that it might serve as an example to all
ages, and that its very name might be held in abomination. And we need
not wonder if Christ declares that they will be treated less severely
than those who refuse to hear the gospel. When men deny the authority of
Him who made and formed them, when they refuse to listen to his voice,
nay, reject disdainfully his gentle invitations, and withhold the
confidence which is due to his gracious promises, such impiety is the
utmost accumulation, as it were, of all crimes. But if the rejection of
that obscure preaching was followed by such dreadful vengeance, how
awful must be the punishment that awaits those who reject Christ when he
speaks openly! Again, if God punishes so severely the despisers of the
word, what shall become of furious enemies who, by blasphemies and a
venomous tongue, oppose the gospel, or cruelly persecute it by fire and
sword?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_573"></span>[574](cc31092.htm#fr_573) <span
id="ix.lxxxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p6"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p6.1"></span>Ne
faites provision d'or ni d'argent;” — “make no provision of gold or of
silver.”

<span id="fn_574"></span>[575](cc31092.htm#fr_574) <span
id="ix.lxxxiv-p11.3"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p12"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p12.1"></span>La
commission et ambassade;” — “the commission and einbassy.”

<span id="fn_575"></span>[576](cc31092.htm#fr_575) <span
id="ix.lxxxiv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p16"></span> “<span
id="ix.lxxxiv-p16.1"></span>N'ayans rien de quoy faire leurs despens;” —
“having no means of paying their expenses.”

<span id="fn_576"></span>[577](cc31092.htm#fr_576) <span
id="ix.lxxxiv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p17"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p17.1"></span>Ils
gaigneront bien pour le moins leur nourriture;” — “they will get their
food at least.”

<span id="fn_577"></span>[578](cc31092.htm#fr_577) <span
id="ix.lxxxiv-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p33"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxxiv-p33.1"></span>Afin
qu'il ne semble que ce soit une menace vaine, et (cornroe on dit)
seulement pour faire peur aux petits enfans;” — “that it may not seem as
if it were an idle threatening, and (as we say) only to frighten young
children.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 10:16-20; Luke 12:11-12](cc31093)
