[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31015)  [Next](cc31017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.viii"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p1"></span>LUKE 1:39-45

<span id="ix.viii-p2"></span><span id="ix.viii-p2.1"></span>[Luke
1:39-45](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#039)<span id="ix.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p3"></span>**39**.** **And Mary arising in those days
went into the mountainous parts  <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35)
with haste, into a city of Judah, **40**.** **And entered into the house
of Zacharias, and saluted Elisabeth. **41**.** **And it happened, when
Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe started  <span
id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36) in her womb, and Elisabeth was filled
with the Holy Ghost, **42**.** **And exclaimed with a loud voice, and
said, Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy
womb. **43**.** **And whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord
should come to me? **44**.** **For lo, when the voice of thy salutation
was made  <span id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) in my ears, the babe
started for joy in my womb. **45**.** **And blessed is she who believed:
for there shall be a fulfillment  <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38)
to those things which have been told her by the Lord.  <span
id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39)

<span id="ix.viii-p9"></span> 

<span id="ix.viii-p10"></span><span id="ix.viii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p11"></span>**39.** *And Mary arising* This departure
mentioned by Luke proves that Mary’s faith was not of a transitory
nature: for the promise of God does not fade away with the presence of
the angel, but is impressed upon her mind. The *haste* indicates a
sincere and strong affection. We may infer from it that the Virgin
disregarded every thing else and formed a just estimate of this grace of
God. But it may be inquired, what was her object in undertaking this
journey? It certainly was not made for the mere purpose of inquiry: for
she cherished in her heart by faith the Son of God as already conceived
in her womb. Nor do I agree with those who think that she came for the
purpose of congratulating Elisabeth.  <span
id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) I think it more probable that her object
was, partly to increase and strengthen her faith, and partly to
celebrate the grace of God which both had received.  <span
id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41)

<span id="ix.viii-p14"></span>There is no absurdity in supposing, that
she sought to confirm her faith by a view of the miracle, which had been
adduced to her with no small effect by the angel. For, though believers
are satisfied with the bare word of God, yet they do not disregard any
of his works which they find to be conducive to strengthen their faith.
Mary was particularly bound to receive the assistance which had been
offered, unless she chose to reject what the Lord had freely given to
her. Besides, the mutual interview might arouse both Elisabeth and
herself to higher gratitude, as is evident from what follows. The power
of God became more remarkable and striking by taking in at one view both
favors, the very comparison of which gave no small additional luster.
Luke does not name the city in which Zacharias dwelt, but only mentions
that it belonged to the tribe of Judah, and that it was situated in a
hilly district. Hence we infer that it was farther distant than
Jerusalem was from the town of Nazareth.

<span id="ix.viii-p15"></span><span id="ix.viii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p16"></span>**41.** *When Elisabeth heard* It is
natural that sudden joy, on the part of a pregnant woman, should cause a
motion of the child in her womb; but Luke intended to express an
extraordinary occurrence. No good purpose would be served by involving
ourselves in intricate questions, if the child was aware of the presence
of Christ, or felt an emotion of piety: it is enough for us that *the
babe started* by a secret movement of the Spirit. Luke does not say that
the feeling belonged to the child, but rather intimates that this part
of the Divine operation took place in the mother herself, that *the babe
started in her womb* The expression, she *was filled with the Holy
Ghost,* means that she was suddenly endued with the gift of prophecy to
an unusual extent: for the gifts of the Spirit had not formerly been
wanting in her, but their power then appeared more abundant and
extraordinary.

<span id="ix.viii-p17"></span><span id="ix.viii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p18"></span>**42.** *Blessed art thou* She seems to
put Mary and Christ on an equal footing, which would have been highly
improper. But I cheerfully agree with those who think that the second
clause assigns the reason; for *and* often signifies *because.*
Accordingly, Elisabeth affirms, that her cousin was *blessed* on account
of the blessedness of her child. To carry Christ in her womb was not
Mary’s first *blessedness,* but was greatly inferior to the distinction
of being born again by the Spirit of God to a new life. Yet she is
justly called *blessed,* on whom God bestowed the remarkable honor of
bringing into the world his own Son, through whom she had been
spiritually renewed. And at this day, the blessedness brought to us by
Christ cannot be the subject of our praise, without reminding us, at the
same time, of the distinguished honor which God was pleased to bestow on
Mary, in making her the mother of his Only Begotten Son.

<span id="ix.viii-p19"></span><span id="ix.viii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p20"></span>**43.** *And whence is this to me?* The
happy medium observed by Elisabeth is worthy of notice. She thinks very
highly of the favors bestowed by God on Mary, and gives them just
commendation, but yet does not praise them more highly than was proper,
which would have been a dishonor to God. For such is the native
depravity of the world, that there are few persons who are not
chargeable with one of these two faults. Some, delighted beyond measure
with themselves, and desirous to shine alone, enviously despise the
gifts of God in their brethren; while others praise them in so
superstitious a manner as to convert them into idols. The consequence
has been, that the first rank is assigned to Mary, and Christ is lowered
as it were to the footstool.  <span id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42)
Elisabeth, again, while she praises her, is so far from hiding the
Divine glory, that she ascribes everything to God. And yet, though she
acknowledges the superiority of Mary to herself and to others, she does
not envy her the higher distinction, but modestly declares that she had
obtained more than she deserved.

<span id="ix.viii-p22"></span>She calls Mary *the mother of her Lord*
This denotes a unity of person in the two natures of Christ; as if she
had said, that he who was begotten a mortal man in the womb of Mary is,
at the same time, the eternal God. For we must bear in mind, that she
does not speak like an ordinary woman at her own suggestion, but merely
utters what was dictated by the Holy Spirit. This name *Lord* strictly
belongs to the Son of God “manifested in the flesh,” (<span
id="ix.viii-p22.1"></span>[1Ti
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)<span id="ix.viii-p22.1"></span>,)
who has received from the Father all power, and has been appointed the
highest ruler of heaven and earth, that by his agency God may govern all
things. Still, he is in a peculiar manner the *Lord* of believers, who
yield willingly and cheerfully to his authority; for it is only of “his
body” that he is “the head,” (<span id="ix.viii-p22.2"></span>[Eph.
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#023)<span id="ix.viii-p22.2"></span>.)
And so Paul says, “though there be lords many, yet to us,” that is, to
the servants of faith, “there is one Lord,” (<span
id="ix.viii-p22.3"></span>[1 Cor. 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span id="ix.viii-p22.3"></span>.)
By mentioning the sudden movement of the babe which she carried in her
womb, (ver. 44,) as heightening that divine favor of which she is
speaking, she unquestionably intended to affirm that she felt something
supernatural and divine.

<span id="ix.viii-p23"></span><span id="ix.viii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p24"></span>**45.** *And blessed is she that believed*
It was by a hidden movement of the Spirit, as is evident from a former
statement of Luke, that Elisabeth spoke. The same Spirit declares that
Mary is *blessed* because she *believed,* and by commending Mary’s
faith, informs us generally in what the true happiness of men consists.
Mary was *blessed,* because, embracing in her heart the promise of God,
she conceived and brought forth a Savior to herself and to the whole
which the Judges occupied; as when Cicero proposes to appeal from the
Senate to the popular assembly, ”a subselliis in rem deferre.” Calvin
may have had in his eye such a phrase as “imi subsellii vir,” and his
meaning is fully brought out by his own version, “sur le marchepied.” —
*Ed* world. This was peculiar to her: but as we have not a drop of
righteousness, life, or any other benefit, except so far as the Lord
presents them to us in his Word, it is faith alone that rescues us from
the lowest poverty and misery, and makes us partakers of true happiness.

<span id="ix.viii-p25"></span>There is great weight in this clause, *for
there shall be a fulfillment to those things which have been told her*
The meaning is, faith gives way to the divine promises, that they may
obtain their accomplishment in us. The truth of God certainly does not
depend on the will of men, but God remains always true, (<span
id="ix.viii-p25.1"></span>[Ro 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004)<span
id="ix.viii-p25.1"></span>,) though the whole world—unbelievers and
liars—should attempt to ruin his veracity. Yet, as unbelievers are
unworthy to obtain the fruit of the promises, so Scripture teaches us,
that by faith alone they are powerful for our salvation. God offers his
benefits indiscriminately to all, and faith opens its bosom  <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43) to receive them; while unbelief allows
them to pass away, so as not to reach us. If there had been any unbelief
in Mary, that could not prevent God from accomplishing his work in any
other way which he might choose. But she is called *blessed,* because
she received by faith the blessing offered to her, and opened up the way
to God for its accomplishment; while faith, on the other hand, shuts the
gate, and restrains his hand from working, that they who refuse the
praise due to its power may not feel its saving effect. We must observe
also the relation between the *word* and *faith,* from which we learn
that, in the act of believing, we give our assent to God who speaks to
us, and hold for certain what he has promised to us that he will do. The
phrase, *by the Lord,* is of the same import with an expression in
common use, *on the part of God;* for the promise had been brought by
the angel, but proceeded from God alone. Hence we infer that, whether
God employs the ministrations of angels or of men, he wishes equal honor
to be paid to his Word as if he were visibly descending from heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc31016.htm#fr_35) <span
id="ix.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p4"></span> “<span id="ix.viii-p4.1"></span>In
montana;” — “<span id="ix.viii-p4.2"></span>et s'en alla hastivement aux
montagnes;” — “and went away hastily to the mountains.”

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc31016.htm#fr_36) <span
id="ix.viii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p5"></span> “<span id="ix.viii-p5.1"></span>L'enfant
tressaillit.”

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc31016.htm#fr_37) <span
id="ix.viii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p6"></span> “<span id="ix.viii-p6.1"></span>Facta
est;” — “<span id="ix.viii-p6.2"></span>est parvenue a mes aureilles;” —
“reached my ears.”

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc31016.htm#fr_38) <span
id="ix.viii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p7"></span> “<span
id="ix.viii-p7.1"></span>Complementum erit.”

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc31016.htm#fr_39) <span
id="ix.viii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p8"></span> “<span id="ix.viii-p8.1"></span>Car les
choses qui luy ont este dites par le Seigneur luy seront accomplies.” —
“For the things which were told her by the Lord shall be accomplished to
her.”

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc31016.htm#fr_40) <span
id="ix.viii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p12"></span> “<span
id="ix.viii-p12.1"></span>Gratulandi causa;” — “<span
id="ix.viii-p12.2"></span>pour faire caresse a sa cousine.”

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc31016.htm#fr_41) <span
id="ix.viii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p13"></span> “<span
id="ix.viii-p13.1"></span>Illustrandae ultro citroque gratiae Dei;” —
“<span id="ix.viii-p13.2"></span>de celebrer et magnifier la grace de
Dieu faite a l'une et a l'autre.”

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc31016.htm#fr_42) <span
id="ix.viii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p21"></span> “<span id="ix.viii-p21.1"></span>Christo
velut in subsellium redacto.” <span
id="ix.viii-p21.2"></span>S*ubsellium* *is* evidently not employed here
to convey a shade of the honor belonging to the seats.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc31016.htm#fr_43) <span
id="ix.viii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p26"></span> “<span id="ix.viii-p26.1"></span>Sinum
expandit;” — “<span id="ix.viii-p26.2"></span>mais la foy, par maniere
dire, tend son giron pour les recevoir*;”* — *“*but faith, so to speak,
holds its lap to receive them.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke 1:46-50](cc31017)
