[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31041)  [Next](cc31043) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiv-p1"></span>LUKE 4:16-22

<span id="ix.xxxiv-p2"></span><span id="ix.xxxiv-p2.1"></span>[Luke
4:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#016)<span
id="ix.xxxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiv-p3"></span>**16**.** **And he came to Nazareth, where
he had been brought up, and entered, according to his custom, on the
Sabbath-day, into the synagogue, and rose up to read. **17**.** **And
the book of Isaiah the Prophet was delivered to him, and, having opened
the book, he found the passage where it was written, **18**.** **The
Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me: he hath sent
me to preach the Gospel to the poor, to heal the broken in heart,  <span
id="fr_320"></span>[321](#fn_320) to preach forgiveness to the captives
and sight to the blind, to loose by forgiveness those who are bruised,
**19**.** **To preach the acceptable year of the Lord. **20**.** **Then,
when he had closed the book, he returned it to the minister, and sat
down: and the eyes of all who were in the synagogue were fixed on him.
**21**.** **And he began to say to them, To-day this Scripture hath been
fulfilled in your ears. **22**.** **And all gave him testimony, and
wondered at the discourses of grace which proceeded out of his mouth,
and said, Is not this the son of Joseph?

<span id="ix.xxxiv-p5"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxxiv-p6"></span><span id="ix.xxxiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiv-p7"></span>**16.** *And he came to Nazareth* The
Evangelists are very careful to show by what sort of proofs Christ
became known, a striking instance of which is here related by Luke. By
explaining a passage in Isaiah, and applying it to the instruction which
was immediately required, he turned upon him the eyes of all. *He
entered, according to his custom, into the synagogue* Hence we conclude,
that not only did he address the people in the open streets and
highways, but, as far as he had opportunity, observed the usual order of
the church. We see also that, though the Jews were become very
degenerate, though every thing was in a state of confusion, and the
condition of the church was miserably corrupted, one good thing still
remained: they read the Scriptures publicly, and took occasion from them
to teach and admonish the people.

<span id="ix.xxxiv-p8"></span>Hence also it is evident, what was the
true and lawful method of keeping *the Sabbath.* When God commanded his
people to abstain from working on that day, it was not that they might
give themselves up to indolent repose, but, on the contrary, that they
might exercise themselves in meditating on his works. Now, the minds of
men are naturally blind to the consideration of his works, and must
therefore be guided by the rule of Scripture. Though Paul includes the
*Sabbath* in an enumeration of the shadows of the law, (<span
id="ix.xxxiv-p8.1"></span>[Col
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016)<span id="ix.xxxiv-p8.1"></span>,)
yet, in this respect, our manner of observing it is the same with that
of the Jews: the people must assemble to hear the word, to public
prayers, and to the other exercises of religion. It was for this purpose
that the Jewish Sabbath was succeeded by the Lord’s Day.

<span id="ix.xxxiv-p9"></span>Now, if we make a comparison of dates,
this passage will be sufficient to prove clearly, that the corruptions
of the Papal Hierarchy, in our own time, are more shocking and
detestable than those which existed among the Jews under the high
priesthood of Annas and Caiaphas. For the reading of Scripture, which
was then in use, has not only grown obsolete under the Pope, but is
driven from the churches by fire and sword; with this exception, that
such portions of it, as they think proper, are chanted by them in an
unknown tongue. Christ *rose up to read,* not only that his voice might
be better heard, but in token of reverence: for the majesty of Scripture
deserves that its expounders should make it apparent, that they proceed
to handle it with modesty and reverence.

<span id="ix.xxxiv-p10"></span><span id="ix.xxxiv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiv-p11"></span>**17.** *He found the passage* There is
no doubt that Christ deliberately selected this passage. Some think that
it was presented to him by God;  <span id="fr_321"></span>[322](#fn_321)
but, as a liberty of choice was allowed him, I choose to say that, by
his own judgment, he took this passage in preference to others. Isaiah
there predicts that, after the Babylonish captivity, there will still be
witnesses of the grace of God, who shall gather the people from
destruction, and from the darkness of death, and restore, by a spiritual
power, the Church, which has been overwhelmed by so many calamities. But
as that redemption was to be proclaimed in the name and authority of
Christ alone, he uses the singular number, and speaks in the name of
Christ, that he may more powerfully awaken the minds of the godly to
strong confidence. It is certain, that what is here related belongs
properly to Christ alone, for two reasons: *first,* because he alone was
endued with the fullness of the Spirit, (<span
id="ix.xxxiv-p12.2"></span>[Joh
3:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#034)<span
id="ix.xxxiv-p12.2"></span>,) to be the witness and ambassador of our
reconciliation to God; (and, for this reason, Paul (<span
id="ix.xxxiv-p12.3"></span>[Eph
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#017)<span id="ix.xxxiv-p12.3"></span>)
assigns peculiarly to him, what belongs to all the ministers of the
Gospel, namely, that he, “came and preached peace to them which were
afar off, and to them that were nigh:”) *secondly,* because he alone, by
the power of his Spirit, performs and grants all the benefits that are
here promised.

<span id="ix.xxxiv-p13"></span><span id="ix.xxxiv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiv-p14"></span>**18.** *The Spirit of the Lord is upon
me* These words inform us that, both in his own person and in his
ministers, Christ does not act by human authority, or in a private
capacity, but has been sent by God to restore salvation to his Church.
He does nothing by the suggestion or advice of men, but everything by
the guidance of the Spirit of God; and this he declares, in order that
the faith of the godly may be founded on the authority and power of God.
The next clause, *because he hath anointed me,* is added by way of
explanation. Many make a false boast, that they have the Spirit of God,
while they are destitute of his gifts: but Christ proves by the
*anointing,* as the effect, that he is endued with the Spirit of God. He
then states the purpose for which the graces of the Spirit were bestowed
upon him. It was, *that he might preach the Gospel to the poor* Hence we
conclude, that those, who are sent by God to preach the Gospel, are
previously furnished with necessary gifts, to qualify them for so
important an office. It is, therefore, very ridiculous that, under the
pretense of a divine calling, men totally unfit for discharging the
office should take upon themselves the name of pastors. We have an
instance of this in the Papacy, where mitred bishops, who are more
ignorant than as many asses, proudly and openly vaunt, that they are
Christ’s Vicars, and the only lawful prelates of the Church. We are
expressly informed, that the Lord anoints his servants, because the true
and efficacious preaching of the Gospel, as Paul says, does not lie “in
the enticing words of man’s wisdom,” but in the heavenly power of the
Spirit.

<span id="ix.xxxiv-p15"></span>*To the poor* The prophet shows what
would be the state of the Church before the manifestation of the Gospel,
and what is the condition of all of us without Christ. Those persons to
whom God promises restoration are called *poor,* and *broken,* and
*captives,* and *blind,* and *bruised* The body of the people was
oppressed by so many miseries, that these descriptions applied to every
one of its members. Yet there were many who, amidst their poverty,
blindness, slavery, and death, flattered themselves, or were insensible
to their condition. The consequence was, that few were prepared to
accept this grace.

<span id="ix.xxxiv-p16"></span>And, *first,* we are here taught what is
the design of the preaching of the Gospel, and what advantage it brings
to us. We were altogether overwhelmed by every kind of evils: but there
God cheers us by his life-giving light, to rescue us from the deep abyss
of death, and to restore us to complete happiness. It tends, in no
ordinary degree, to recommend the Gospel, that we obtain from it
inestimable advantage. *Secondly,* we see who are invited by Christ, and
made partakers of promised grace. They are persons, who are every way
miserable, and destitute of all hope of salvation. But we are reminded,
on the other hand, that we cannot enjoy those benefits which Christ
bestows, in any other manner, than by being humbled under a deep
conviction of our distresses, and by coming, as hungry souls, to seek
him as our deliverer: for all who swell with pride, and do not groan
under their *captivity,* nor are displeased with their *blindness,* lend
a deaf ear to this prediction, and treat it with contempt.

<span id="ix.xxxiv-p17"></span><span id="ix.xxxiv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiv-p18"></span>**19.** *To preach the acceptable year of
the Lord* Many think that here the prophet makes an allusion to the
Jubilee, and I have no objection to that view. But it is proper to
observe, that he purposely anticipates a doubt, which might disturb and
shake weak minds, while the Lord held them in suspense, by delaying so
long the promised salvation. He therefore makes the time of redemption
to depend on the purpose, or good pleasure, of God. “In an acceptable
time have I heard thee, and in a day of salvation have I helped thee.”
Paul calls it *the fullness of the time,* (<span
id="ix.xxxiv-p18.1"></span>[Ga
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)<span id="ix.xxxiv-p18.1"></span>,)
that believers may learn not to indulge in excessive curiosity, but to
acquiesce in the will of God, — and that we may rest satisfied with the
conviction, that salvation was manifested in Christ, at the time which
seemed good in the sight of God.

<span id="ix.xxxiv-p19"></span><span id="ix.xxxiv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiv-p20"></span>**20.** *The eyes of all who were in the
synagogue* God touched their hearts, I doubt not, with astonishment,
which made them more attentive, and induced them to listen to Christ,
while he was speaking. For they must have been withheld from opposing
this discourse at the commencement, or breaking it off in the midst,
when they were sufficiently disposed, as we shall see, to treat Christ
with contempt.

<span id="ix.xxxiv-p21"></span><span id="ix.xxxiv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiv-p22"></span>**21.** *Today is fulfilled* Christ did
not merely affirm in a few words, but proved by a reference to facts,
that the time was now come, when it was the will of God to restore his
ruined church. The object of his discourse was, to expound the
prediction clearly to his hearers: just as expositors handle Scripture
in a proper and orderly manner, when they apply it to the circumstances
of those whom they address. He says that it was *fulfilled in their
ears,* rather than *in their eyes,* because the bare sight of the fact
was of little value, if doctrine had not held the chief place.

<span id="ix.xxxiv-p23"></span><span id="ix.xxxiv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiv-p24"></span>**22.** *And all gave testimony to him*
Here Luke draws our attention, first, to the truly divine grace, which
breathed in the lips of Christ; and then presents a lively picture of
the ingratitude of men. Using a Hebrew idiom, he calls them *discourses
of grace,* — that is, *discourses* which manifested the power and
*grace* of the Holy Spirit. The inhabitants of Nazareth are thus
compelled to acknowledge and admire God speaking in Christ; and yet they
voluntarily refuse to render to the heavenly doctrine of Christ the
honor which it deserves. *Is not this the son of Joseph?* Instead of
regarding this circumstance as an additional reason for glorifying God,
they bring it forward as an objection, and wickedly make it a ground of
offense, that they may have some plausible excuse for rejecting what is
said by *the son of Joseph.* Thus we daily see many who, while they are
convinced that what they hear is the word of God, seize on frivolous
apologies for refusing to obey it. And certainly the only reason why we
are not affected, as we ought to be, by the power of the Gospel, is,
that we throw hinderances in our own way, and that our malice quenches
that light, the power of which we are unwilling to acknowledge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_320"></span>[321](cc31042.htm#fr_320) <span
id="ix.xxxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiv-p4"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxiv-p4.1"></span>Pour
guarir ceux qui ont le coeur froisse;” — “to heal those who have the
heart bruised.”

<span id="fn_321"></span>[322](cc31042.htm#fr_321) <span
id="ix.xxxiv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiv-p12"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxiv-p12.1"></span>Aucuns
pensent que par la volonte de Dieu il l'ait recontre sans le chercher.”
— “Some think that, by the will of God, he found it without seeking for
it.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke 4:23-30](cc31043)
