[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31059)  [Next](cc31061) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.lii"></span>

<span id="ix.lii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 6: 1-4

<span id="ix.lii-p2"></span><span id="ix.lii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
6:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#001)<span id="ix.lii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lii-p3"></span>**1**.** **Beware lest ye do your alms
before men, that you may be seen by them: otherwise you have not a
reward with your Father who is in heaven. **2**.** **Therefore, when
thou doest alms, let there not be a sound of trumpets before thee, as
hypocrites do in synagogues and in streets, that they may be glorified
by men. Verily I say to you, They have their reward. **3**.** **But when
thou shalt do alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand
doeth: **4**.** **That thy alms may be in secret, and thy Father, who
seeth in secret, will reward thee openly.

<span id="ix.lii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.lii-p5"></span><span id="ix.lii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lii-p6"></span>**1.** *Beware* In this passage, Christ
exhorts his people to devote themselves sincerely to good works; that
is, to endeavor, with simplicity, to do what is right before God, and
not to make a parade before men.  <span
id="fr_423"></span>[424](#fn_423) A very necessary admonition; for in
all virtues the entrance of ambition is to be dreaded, and there is no
work so laudable, as not to be in many instances corrupted and polluted
by it. Under one class he lays down, by a *synecdoche,* a general
doctrine: for he speaks of *alms* only, as he speaks shortly afterwards
about *prayers:* though some copies, instead of <span
id="ix.lii-p7.2"></span>ἐλεημοσύνην, *alms,* read <span
id="ix.lii-p7.3"></span>δικαιοσύνην*, righteousness,* which is also the
rendering of the old translator. But the difference is of little moment:
for in either way there is no room to doubt, that the design is, to
correct the disease of ambition, when, in doing what is right, we seek
glory from men.

<span id="ix.lii-p8"></span><span id="ix.lii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lii-p9"></span>**2.** *When thou doest alms* He expressly
reproves a long established custom, in which the desire of fame might
not only be perceived by the eye, but felt by the hands. In places where
streets or roads met, and in public situations, where large assemblies
were wont to be held, they distributed alms to the poor. There was
evident ostentation in that practice: for they sought crowded places,
that they might be seen by multitudes, and, not satisfied with this,
added even the sound of trumpets.  <span
id="fr_424"></span>[425](#fn_424) They pretended, no doubt, that it was
to call the poor, as apologies are never wanting: but it was perfectly
obvious, that they were hunting for applause and commendation. Now, when
our service is rendered to the eyes of men, we do not submit our life to
the judgment and approbation of God. Justly, therefore, does Christ say,
that those persons, who exhibit themselves in this manner, *have their
reward:* for they whose eyes are held by such vanity cannot look upon
God.

<span id="ix.lii-p11"></span>For the same reason, all who are desirous
of vain-glory are called *hypocrites.* Profane authors gave the name of
<span id="ix.lii-p11.1"></span>ὑποκριταὶ*, hypocrites,* to those who
personated assumed characters in plays and on the stage; and Scripture
has applied this term to men who are double in heart and insincere.
 <span id="fr_425"></span>[426](#fn_425) There are various kinds of
*hypocrites.* Some, though conscious of being very wicked, impudently
give themselves out for good men before the world, and endeavor to
conceal their vices, of which they have an inward conviction. Others
allow themselves to proceed to such a pitch of audacity, that they
venture to claim even perfect righteousness before God. Others do good,
not from a desire to do what is right, nor on account of the glory of
God, but only to obtain for themselves fame and a reputation for
holiness. This last mentioned class Christ now describes, and he
properly calls them *hypocrites:* for, having no proper object in view
in the performance of good works, they assume a different character,
that they may appear to be holy and sincere worshippers of God.

<span id="ix.lii-p13"></span><span id="ix.lii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lii-p14"></span>**3.** *Let not thy left hand know* By this
expression he means, that we ought to be satisfied with having God for
our only witness, and to be so earnestly desirous to obey him, that we
shall not be carried away by any vanity. It frequently happens, that men
sacrifice to themselves rather than to God. Christ therefore wishes,
that we should not be distracted by indirect thoughts, but go straight
to this object, that we may serve God with a pure conscience.

<span id="ix.lii-p15"></span><span id="ix.lii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lii-p16"></span>**4.** *That thy* *alms may be in secret*
This statement appears to be opposed to many passages of Scripture, in
which we are commanded to edify the brethren by good examples. But if we
attend to the design of Christ, we must not give a more extensive
meaning to the words.  <span id="fr_426"></span>[427](#fn_426) He
commands his disciples to devote themselves to good works purely, and
without any ambition. In order to do this, he bids them turn away their
eyes from the sight of men, and to reckon it enough that their duties
are approved by God alone. Such simplicity of views does not at all
interfere with anxiety and zeal to promote edification: and, indeed, a
little before, he did not expressly forbid them to do good before men,
but condemned ostentation.

<span id="ix.lii-p18"></span>*Thy Father, who seeth in secret* He
silently glances at a kind of folly, which prevails everywhere among
men, that they think they have lost their pains, if there have not been
many spectators of their virtues. He tells them, that God does not need
a strong light to perceive good actions: for those things, which appear
to be buried in darkness, are open to his view. We have no reason,
therefore, to suppose that what escapes the notice, and receives not the
testimony of men, is lost: for “the Lord dwells in the thick darkness,”
(<span id="ix.lii-p18.1"></span>[2Ch
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#001)<span id="ix.lii-p18.1"></span>.) A
most appropriate remedy is thus applied for curing the disease of
ambition, when he reminds us to fix our *eye* on God: for this banishes
from our minds, and will utterly destroy, all vain-glory. — In the
second clause, which immediately follows, Christ reminds us that, in
looking for the reward of good works, we must wait patiently till the
last day, the day of resurrection. *Thy Father,* says he, *shall reward
thee openly* But when? It will be, when the dawn of the last day shall
arise, by which all that is now hidden in darkness shall be revealed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_423"></span>[424](cc31060.htm#fr_423) <span
id="ix.lii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lii-p7"></span> “<span id="ix.lii-p7.1"></span>Sans
chercher la louange des hommes;” —”without seeking the praise of men?”

<span id="fn_424"></span>[425](cc31060.htm#fr_424) <span
id="ix.lii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lii-p10"></span> There is no necessity for giving a literal
acceptation to the *sounding* *of trumpets,* particularly as no trace of
such a practice, so far as we are aware, is to be found in history.
Similar phrases are used, in many languages, to denote, that ostentation
has been carried far beyond the bounds of ordinary propriety. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_425"></span>[426](cc31060.htm#fr_425) <span
id="ix.lii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lii-p12"></span> This is the true etymology of the word,
and rests, not on conjecture, but on historical facts. ̔Ψποκρίνεσθαι was
used in the same sense as the more modern term ἀποκρίνεσθαι,*, to
reply.* An actor was called ὁ ὑποκρινόμενος τῶ χορῶ, *one who replies to
the chorus,* alluding to the form of the ancient dramas. The circuitous
phrase was altered to ̔Ψποκριτὴς*,* which was, for some time, used
occasionally in a good sense, to denote “one who assumed, for a
temporary purpose, a character different from his own;” but came
afterwards to be uniformly used in a bad sense, as denoting “one who
assumed a character which did not belong to him.” It is a curious
instance of the facility with which a word passes, by a few changes,
into a meaning altogether different from what it originally bore; and
may serve to show, how rashly some philologists have maintained, that in
all the successive meanings of a word the generic idea may be traced.
The second will resemble the first, and the third either the first or
the second, and every new meaning will have an analogy to a former one,
from which it has been derived: but it may happen that, ere long, all
traces of the original meaning have disappeared. *To reply* and *to be
insincere* are ideas which have no resemblance. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_426"></span>[427](cc31060.htm#fr_426) <span
id="ix.lii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lii-p17"></span> “<span id="ix.lii-p17.1"></span>Verba
longius trahere non oportet.” In some of the best Latin editions we
find, “<span id="ix.lii-p17.2"></span>verba longius trahere nos
oportet,” which entirely alters the meaning. But the discrepancy of the
reading is set aside by the French version: “<span
id="ix.lii-p17.3"></span>il ne faut point estendre les paroles plus
avant;” — “we must not extend the words farther.” — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 6:5-8](cc31061)
