[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31045)  [Next](cc31047) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxviii-p1"></span>MARK 1:21-28; LUKE 4:31-36

<span id="ix.xxxviii-p2"></span><span id="ix.xxxviii-p2.1"></span>[Mark
1:21-28](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#021)<span
id="ix.xxxviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxviii-p3"></span><span id="ix.xxxviii-p3.1"></span>[Luke
4:31-36](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#031)<span
id="ix.xxxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxviii-p4"></span>**21**.** **And they entered into
Capernaum, and immediately on the Sabbaths, entering into the synagogue,
he taught. **22**.** **And they were astonished at his doctrine; for he
was teaching them, as one invested with authority, and not as the
Scribes. **23**.** **And there was in their synagogue a man liable to an
unclean spirit, who cried out, **24**.** **Saying, Ah! what have I to do
with thee, Jesus of Nazareth? Art thou come to destroy us? I know thee
who thou art, the Holy One of God. **25**.** **And Jesus rebuked him,
saying, Hold they peace, and go out of him. **26**.** **And when the
unclean spirit had torn him, and had cried with a loud voice, he went
out from him. **27**.** **And all were astonished, so that they inquired
among themselves, saying, What is this? What new doctrine is this? for
with authority he commandeth even the unclean spirits, and they obey
him. **28**.** **And immediately his fame went out into every part of
Galilee.

<span id="ix.xxxviii-p5"></span>**31**.** **And he went down to
Capernaum, a city of Galilee, and there he taught them on the
Sabbath-day: **32**.** **And they were astonished at his doctrine: for
his word was accompanied with power. **33**.** **And there was in the
synagogue a man having a spirit of an unclean devil: and he cried out
with a loud voice, **34**.** **Saying, Ah! what have we to do with thee,
Jesus of Nazareth? Art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou
art, the Holy One of God. **35**.** **And Jesus rebuked him, saying,
Holy thy peace, and go out of him. And when the devil had thrown him
down in the midst, he went out of him, and hurt him nothing.
**36**.** **And trembling came upon all, and they talked among
themselves, saying, What speech is this? for with authority and power he
commandeth the uclean spirits, and they go out.

<span id="ix.xxxviii-p6"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxxviii-p7"></span><span id="ix.xxxviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxviii-p8"></span>This demoniac was probably one of that
multitude, which was mentioned, a little before, by <span
id="ix.xxxviii-p8.3"></span>[Mt
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#024)<span
id="ix.xxxviii-p8.3"></span>. Yet the narrative of Mark and Luke is not
superfluous: for they relate some circumstances, which not only present
the miracle in a more striking light, but also contain useful
instruction. The devil dexterously acknowledges, that Christ is *the
Holy One of God,* in order to insinuate into the minds of men a
suspicion, that there was some secret understanding between him and
Christ. By such a trick he has since endeavored to make the Gospel
suspected, and, in the present day, he is continually making similar
attempts. That is the reason why Christ rebukes him. It is, no doubt,
possible, that this confession was violently extorted from him: but
there is no inconsistency between the two suppositions, that he is
forced to yield to the power of Christ, and therefore *cries out* that
he is *the Holy One of God,* — and yet that he cunningly attempts to
shroud in his own darkness the glory of Christ. At the same time, we
must observe that, while he flatters Christ in this manner, he
indirectly withdraws himself from his power, and in this way contradicts
himself. For why was Christ sanctified by the Father, but that he might
deliver men from the tyranny of the devil, and overturn his kingdom? But
as Satan cannot endure that power, which he feels to be destructive to
himself, he would desire that Christ should satisfy himself with an
empty title, without exercising it on the present occasion.  <span
id="fr_343"></span>[344](#fn_343)

<span id="ix.xxxviii-p10"></span>**<span
id="ix.xxxviii-p10.1"></span>[Mark
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#022)<span
id="ix.xxxviii-p10.1"></span>**<span id="ix.xxxviii-p10.2"></span>;
**<span id="ix.xxxviii-p10.3"></span>[Luke
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#032)<span
id="ix.xxxviii-p10.3"></span>.** *And they were astonished at his
doctrine* The meaning of the Evangelists is, that the power of the
Spirit shone in the preaching  <span id="fr_344"></span>[345](#fn_344)
of Christ with such brightness, as to extort admiration even from
irreligious and cold hearers. Luke says, that *his discourse was
accompanied with power,* that is, full of majesty. Mark expresses it
more fully, by adding a contrast, that it was unlike the manner of
teaching of *the Scribes* As they were false expounders of Scripture,
their doctrine was literal and dead, breathed nothing of the power of
the Spirit, and was utterly destitute of majesty. The same kind of
coldness may be now observed in the speculative theology of Popery.
Those masters do indeed thunder out whatever they think proper in a
sufficiently magisterial style; but as their manner of discoursing about
divine things is so profane, that their controversies exhibit no traces
of religion, what they bring forward is all affectation and mere
drivelling: for the declaration of the Apostle Paul holds true, that
*the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power,* (<span
id="ix.xxxviii-p11.2"></span>[1Co
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#020)<span
id="ix.xxxviii-p11.2"></span>.) In short, the Evangelists mean that,
while the manner of teaching, which then prevailed, was so greatly
degenerated and so extremely corrupted, that it did not impress the
minds of men with any reverence for God, the preaching of Christ was
eminently distinguished by the divine power of the Spirit, which
procured for him the respect of his hearers. This is the *power,* or
rather the majesty and *authority,* at which the people were astonished.

<span id="ix.xxxviii-p12"></span><span id="ix.xxxviii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxviii-p13"></span>**<span
id="ix.xxxviii-p13.2"></span>[Luke
4:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#033)<span
id="ix.xxxviii-p13.2"></span>.** *A man having a spirit of an unclean
devil. This* mode of expression, which Luke employs, conveys the idea,
that the man was driven by the impulse of the devil. By the permission
of God, Satan had seized the faculties of his soul in such a manner, as
to drive him not only to speak, but to perform other movements, at his
pleasure. And thus, when the *demoniacs* speak, the devils, who have
received permission to tyrannise, speak in them and by them. The title,
*Holy One of God,* was probably taken from a manner of speaking, which
was, at that time, in ordinary and general use. The Messiah was so
called, because he was to be distinguished and separated from all
others, as endued with eminent grace, and as the Head of the whole
Church.

<span id="ix.xxxviii-p14"></span><span id="ix.xxxviii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxviii-p15"></span>**<span
id="ix.xxxviii-p15.2"></span>[Mark
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#026)<span
id="ix.xxxviii-p15.2"></span>** *When the unclean spirit had torn him*
Luke uses a milder phrase, *when the devil had thrown him down:* but
they agree perfectly as to the meaning; for the design of both was to
show, that the devil went out of the man in a violent manner. He threw
down the unhappy man, as if he had intended to tear him: but Luke says
that the attempt was unsuccessful; for *he hurt him nothing* Not that
the attack was, in no degree whatever, attended by injury, or at least
by some feeling of pain; but that the man was afterwards delivered from
the devil, and restored to perfect health.

<span id="ix.xxxviii-p16"></span><span id="ix.xxxviii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxviii-p17"></span>**<span
id="ix.xxxviii-p17.2"></span>[Luke
4:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#036)<span
id="ix.xxxviii-p17.2"></span>.** *And trembling came upon all* This is
the result of the miracle. They are compelled to acknowledge that there
is in Christ something more than man, and justly trace the glory and
power of the miracle to his doctrine. *What speech is this,* they say,
which even the devils themselves are forced to obey?

<span id="ix.xxxviii-p18"></span><span id="ix.xxxviii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxviii-p19"></span>**<span
id="ix.xxxviii-p19.2"></span>[Mark
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#027)<span
id="ix.xxxviii-p19.2"></span>** *What new doctrine is this?* They call
it *new* doctrine, not by way of reproach, but as an acknowledgment,
that there was something in it unusual and extraordinary. It is not for
the sake of blame, or to lessen its credit, that they speak of it as
*new.* This is rather a part of their admiration, that they pronounce it
to be not common or ordinary. Their only fault lies in this, that they
remain in their state of hesitation,  <span
id="fr_345"></span>[346](#fn_345) whereas the children of God ought to
make increasing progress.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_343"></span>[344](cc31046.htm#fr_343) <span
id="ix.xxxviii-p8.4"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxviii-p9"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxviii-p9.1"></span>Mais
pource que Satan ne pent endurer ceste vertue et puissance, aquelle il
sait estre le destruire et ruiner, il voudroit bien que Christ se
contenant d'un beau titre en l'air, se reposast, et se deportast de luy
rien faire.” — “But because Satan cannot endure that power and might,
which he knows to be to destroy and ruin him, he would rather wish that
Christ, satisfying himself with a fine title in the air, should take
repose, and refrain from doing any thing to him.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[345](cc31046.htm#fr_344) <span
id="ix.xxxviii-p10.5"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxviii-p11"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxviii-p11.1"></span>En
la facon d’enseigner de Jesus Christ;” — “in Jesus Christ's manner of
teaching.”

<span id="fn_345"></span>[346](cc31046.htm#fr_345) <span
id="ix.xxxviii-p19.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxviii-p20"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxviii-p20.1"></span>En
leur doute et estonnement.” — “In their doubt and astonishment.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 8:14-18;Mark 1:29-39;Luke 4:38-44](cc31047)
