[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31049)  [Next](cc31051) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xlii"></span>

<span id="ix.xlii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 5:13-16; MARK 9:49-50; 4:21;  
LUKE 14:34-35; 8:16; 11:33

<span id="ix.xlii-p2"></span><span id="ix.xlii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
5:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#013)<span id="ix.xlii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlii-p3"></span><span id="ix.xlii-p3.1"></span>[Mark
9:49-50](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#049)<span id="ix.xlii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlii-p4"></span><span id="ix.xlii-p4.1"></span>[Luke
14:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#034)<span
id="ix.xlii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlii-p5"></span>**13**.** **Ye are the salt of the earth:
but if salt shall become tasteless,  <span
id="fr_371"></span>[372](#fn_371) with what shall it be salted?  <span
id="fr_372"></span>[373](#fn_372) It is good for nothing farther, than
to be thrown out and trodden down by men. **14**.** **Ye are the light
of the world: a city placed upon a mountain cannot be hid.
**15**.** **Neither do men light a candle, and put it upon a bushel but
upon a candlestick, and it gives light to all who are in the house.
**16**.** **Let your light shine before men, so that they may see your
good works, and may glorify your Father who is in heaven.

<span id="ix.xlii-p8"></span>**49**.** **For every (man) shall be salted
with fire, and every sacrifice shall be salted with salt.
**50**.** **Salt is a good thing: but if salt shall become tasteless,
with what shall it be seasoned? Have salt in yourselves, and cultivate
peace with one another.

<span id="ix.xlii-p9"></span> 

<span id="ix.xlii-p10"></span><span id="ix.xlii-p10.1"></span>[Mark
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#021)<span id="ix.xlii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlii-p11"></span>**21**.** **And he said to them, Is a
candle lighted, that it may be put under a bushel, or under a bed? Is it
not that it may be put on a candlestick?

<span id="ix.xlii-p12"></span>**34**.** **Salt is good: but if salt
shall have become tasteless, with what shall it be seasoned?
**35**.** **It is not useful either for the land  <span
id="fr_373"></span>[374](#fn_373) or for the dunghill: they throw it
out. He who hath ears to hear, let him hear.

<span id="ix.xlii-p14"></span> 

<span id="ix.xlii-p15"></span><span id="ix.xlii-p15.1"></span>[Luke
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#016)<span id="ix.xlii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlii-p16"></span>**16**.** **And no man, when he hath
lighted a candle, covered it with a vessel, or putteth it under a bed,
but putteth it on a candlestick, that those who enter may see the light.

<span id="ix.xlii-p17"></span> 

<span id="ix.xlii-p18"></span><span id="ix.xlii-p18.1"></span>[Luke
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#033)<span id="ix.xlii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlii-p19"></span>**33**.** **No man lighteth a candle, and
putteth it in a hidden place, nor under a bushel, but on a candlestick,
that those who enter may see the light.

<span id="ix.xlii-p20"></span> 

<span id="ix.xlii-p21"></span><span id="ix.xlii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlii-p22"></span>**<span id="ix.xlii-p22.2"></span>[Matthew
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#013)<span
id="ix.xlii-p22.2"></span>.** Ye *are the salt of the earth.* What
belongs to doctrine is applied to the persons to whom the administration
of it has been committed. When Christ calls the apostles *the salt of
the earth,* he means, that it is their office *to salt the earth:*
because men have nothing in them but what is tasteless, till they have
been seasoned with the salt of heavenly doctrine. After having reminded
them to what they are called, he pronounces against them a heavy and
dreadful judgment, if they do not fulfill their duty. The doctrine,
which has been entrusted to them, is shown to be so closely connected
with a good conscience and a devout and upright life, that the
corruption, which might be tolerated in others, would in them be
detestable and monstrous. “If other men are tasteless in the sight of
God, to you shall be given the salt which imparts a relish to them: but
if you have lost your taste, where shall you obtain the remedy which you
ought to supply to others?”

<span id="ix.xlii-p23"></span>Our Lord skillfully pursues his metaphor,
by saying, that other things when they lose their original qualities,
are still useful after they have become corrupted: but that *salt*
becomes even hurtful, and communicates barrenness even to *dunghills.*
 <span id="fr_374"></span>[375](#fn_374) The amount of his statement is,
that it is an incurable disease, when the ministers and teachers of the
word corrupt and render themselves tasteless: for they ought to season
the rest of the world with their salt. This warning is useful, not only
to ministers, but to the whole flock of Christ. Since it is the will of
God that *the earth shall be salted* by his own word, it follows, that
whatever is destitute of this salt is, in his estimation, tasteless, how
much soever it may be relished by men. There is nothing better,
therefore, than to receive the seasoning, by which alone our
tastelessness is corrected. But, at the same time, let those whose
business is to *salt* it beware lest they encourage the world in their
own folly,  <span id="fr_375"></span>[376](#fn_375) and still more, that
they do not infect it with a depraved and vicious *taste.*

<span id="ix.xlii-p26"></span>The wickedness of the Papists is therefore
intolerable:  <span id="fr_376"></span>[377](#fn_376) as if it had been
the design of Christ, to allow the apostles unbounded liberty, and to
make them tyrants of souls, instead of reminding them of their duty,
that they might not swerve from the right path. Christ declares what
sort of men he wishes the teachers of his Church to be. Those who,
without any proper grounds, give themselves out to be apostles,  <span
id="fr_377"></span>[378](#fn_377) hide by this covering all the
abominations which they are pleased to introduce; because Christ
pronounced Peter, and his companions, to be *the salt of the earth.*
They do not, at the same time, consider the sharp and severe reproof
which is added, that, if they become *tasteless,* they are the worst of
all. This sentence is mentioned by Luke in an abrupt manner: but is
introduced there for the same purpose as in this passage, so that it
does not require a separate exposition.

<span id="ix.xlii-p29"></span><span id="ix.xlii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlii-p30"></span>**<span id="ix.xlii-p30.2"></span>[Mark
9:49](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#049)<span
id="ix.xlii-p30.2"></span>.** *Every man shall be salted with fire.* I
have connected these words of Mark with the passage in Matthew which we
have just considered: not that I look upon them to have altogether the
same meaning, or to have been spoken at the same place and time, but
rather to enable the reader to understand better, by means of
comparison, the different applications of the same sentence. According
to Mark’s narrative, our Lord, having spoken of eternal *fire,* (<span
id="ix.xlii-p30.3"></span>[Mr
9:48](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#048)<span id="ix.xlii-p30.3"></span>,)
exhorts his own people, on the contrary, to offer themselves now to God
to be seasoned *with fire and salt,* that they may be devoted
sacrifices,  <span id="fr_378"></span>[379](#fn_378) and that they may
not draw upon themselves, by their sins, that *fire* which is never
extinguished. To be *salted with fire* is an incorrect phrase; but as
*salt* and *fire* possess the same quality of purifying and refining,
Christ applied the same term to both. Such was the occasion on which
this sentiment was uttered. It was, that believers may not refuse to be
purified by *fire* and *salt;* since, without this seasoning, they
cannot be holy to God. He alludes to an enactment of the Law:

<span id="ix.xlii-p32"></span>“Every oblation of thy meat-offering shalt
thou season with salt, neither shalt thou suffer the salt of the
covenant of thy God to be lacking from thy meat-offering: with all thine
offerings thou shalt offer salt,”  
(<span id="ix.xlii-p32.2"></span>[Le
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#013)<span id="ix.xlii-p32.2"></span>.)

<span id="ix.xlii-p33"></span>But now he shows, that believers are
salted by the word of the Gospel, that they may be sanctified.

<span id="ix.xlii-p34"></span>He next adds, *salt is good* This extends
generally to all, whom God has once been pleased to season with his own
word. He exhorts them to retain always their savor. To give the name of
*salt* to what is *salted* is rather a harsh metaphor, but it creates no
doubt as to the meaning. When men have lost, by their carelessness, that
savor which they obtained by the grace of God, there is no farther
remedy. Those who lose their faith, by which they were consecrated to
God, and become without savor, are in a desperate condition: for the
good savor cannot be acquired by any other seasoning. Besides, those who
have become corrupted, by making void the grace of God, are worse than
unbelievers, as *salt* spoils *the land* and the *dunghill*

<span id="ix.xlii-p35"></span><span id="ix.xlii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlii-p36"></span>**<span id="ix.xlii-p36.2"></span>[Mark
9:50](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#050)<span
id="ix.xlii-p36.2"></span>.** *Have salt in yourselves* This word may be
taken in a different sense from what it had in the former verse, as
meaning that seasoning of good odor, which is obtained by faith, or
rather the wisdom of the Spirit. When Paul enjoins, “Let your speech be
always with grace, *seasoned with salt,”* (<span
id="ix.xlii-p36.3"></span>[Col
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#006)<span id="ix.xlii-p36.3"></span>,)
he means, that we ought to be holy, and purified from all profane
follies and corruptions, and filled with spiritual grace, which edifies
all who hear it, and diffuses over them its sweet odor. If this
exposition is adopted, it may be necessary to understand the latter
clause as referring to the mutual peace, which is promoted by that salt.
Yet, as it is more probable, that this last sentence depends on the
former discourse, I think that Christ is exhorting his own people to
maintain the rigor of faith, which may serve also to purify others. “You
must do your endeavor, not only to be *salted within,* but likewise to
*salt* others.” But as salt bites by its sharpness, he immediately
admonishes them to regulate the seasoning in such a manner, that *peace*
may be preserved entire *with one another*

<span id="ix.xlii-p37"></span><span id="ix.xlii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlii-p38"></span>**<span id="ix.xlii-p38.2"></span>[Matthew
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014)<span id="ix.xlii-p38.2"></span>**
*Ye are the light of the world* We are all the children of light, after
having been enlightened by faith, and are commanded to carry in our
hands “burning lamps,” (that we may not wander in darkness,) and even to
point out to others the way of life, (<span
id="ix.xlii-p38.3"></span>[Lu
12:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#035)<span
id="ix.xlii-p38.3"></span>.) But, as the preaching of the Gospel was
committed to the apostles above others, and is now committed to the
pastors of the Church, this designation is given to them, in a peculiar
manner, by Christ. “They are placed in this rank on the condition, that
they shall shine, as from an elevated situation, on all others.”

<span id="ix.xlii-p39"></span>He subjoins two comparisons. *A city
placed on a mountain cannot be concealed;* and *a candle,* when it has
been lighted, is *not usually concealed,* (verse 15.) This means, that
they ought to live in such a manner, as if the eyes of all were upon
them.  <span id="fr_379"></span>[380](#fn_379) And certainly, the more
eminent a person is, the more injury he does by a bad example, if he
acts improperly. Christ, therefore, informs the apostles, that they must
be more careful to live a devout and holy life, than unknown persons of
the common rank, because the eyes of all are directed to them, as to
lighted *candles;* and that they must not be endured, if their devotion,
and uprightness of conduct, do not correspond to the doctrine of which
they are ministers. Mark and Luke appear to apply the comparison in a
different manner: for there Christ gives a general admonition, that they
ought to take particular care, lest any one, trusting to the darkness,
indulge freely in sin, because what is hidden for a time will afterwards
be revealed. But perhaps the discourses related by both of them are
detached from the immediate context.

<span id="ix.xlii-p41"></span><span id="ix.xlii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlii-p42"></span>**16.** *Let your light shine before men*
After having taught the apostles that, in consequence of the rank in
which they are placed, both their vices and their virtues are better
known for a good or bad example, he now enjoins them so to regulate
their life, as to excite all to glorify God. *That they may see your
good works:* for, as Paul tells us, believers must,

<span id="ix.xlii-p43"></span>“provide for honest things, not only in
the sight of God,  
but also in the sight of men,” (<span id="ix.xlii-p43.2"></span>[2Co
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#021)<span id="ix.xlii-p43.2"></span>.)

<span id="ix.xlii-p44"></span>The command, which he gives shortly
afterwards, to seek concealment and a retired situation for their good
works, (<span id="ix.xlii-p44.1"></span>[Mt
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#004)<span id="ix.xlii-p44.1"></span>,)
is intended only to forbid ostentation. In the present instance, he has
quite a different object in view, to recommend to them the glory of God
alone. Now, if the glory of good works cannot be properly ascribed to
God, unless they are traced to him, and unless he is acknowledged to be
their only Author, it is evident, that we cannot, without offering an
open and gross insult to God, extol free will, as if good works
proceeded wholly, or in part, from its power. Again, we must observe,
how graciously God deals with us, when he calls the good works *ours,*
the entire praise of which would justly be ascribed to himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_371"></span>[372](cc31050.htm#fr_371) <span
id="ix.xlii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlii-p6"></span> *“*<span id="ix.xlii-p6.1"></span>*Ou,
s'evente;”* — *“or, is spoiled.”*

<span id="fn_372"></span>[373](cc31050.htm#fr_372) <span
id="ix.xlii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlii-p7"></span> *“*<span id="ix.xlii-p7.1"></span>*Ou, luy
rendra-on sa saveur?”* — *“or, shall its taste be restored to it?”*
(<span id="ix.xlii-p7.2"></span>[Le
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#013)<span id="ix.xlii-p7.2"></span>.)

<span id="fn_373"></span>[374](cc31050.htm#fr_373) <span
id="ix.xlii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlii-p13"></span> “<span id="ix.xlii-p13.1"></span>Il n'est
propre ne (pour mettre) en la terre, ni au fumier.” — “It is not fit
either (to put) on the land, nor on the dunghill.”

<span id="fn_374"></span>[375](cc31050.htm#fr_374) <span
id="ix.xlii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlii-p24"></span> “<span id="ix.xlii-p24.1"></span>Que le
sel estant empire, ne fait mesmes que gaster tout, a quoi qu'on le
mette, tellement qu'il corrompt mesmes les fumiers, et consume toute la
grasse d'iceux.” — “That salt, when it is decayed, does only spoil
everything that it touches: so that it corrupts even dunghills, and
consumes all their fatness.”

<span id="fn_375"></span>[376](cc31050.htm#fr_375) <span
id="ix.xlii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlii-p25"></span> “<span id="ix.xlii-p25.1"></span>De ne
nourrir le monde en sa folie et fadesse;” — “not to nourish the world in
their folly and tastelessness.”

<span id="fn_376"></span>[377](cc31050.htm#fr_376) <span
id="ix.xlii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlii-p27"></span> “<span id="ix.xlii-p27.1"></span>Et
pourtant la malice des Papistes n'est aucunement a supporter, quand ils
n'ont point de honte de couvrir de ces titres leurs Prelats mas-quez,
afin que nul ne presume de rien reprendre en leurs personnes.”— “And
then the malice of the Papists is not at all to be endured, since they
are not ashamed to cover with these titles their masked Prelates, that
no one may presume to reprove any thing in their persons.”

<span id="fn_377"></span>[378](cc31050.htm#fr_377) <span
id="ix.xlii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlii-p28"></span> “<span id="ix.xlii-p28.1"></span>Des gens
qui se vantent a fausses enseignes de tenir le place des apostres.” —
“People who boast, under false colors, of holding the place of
apostles.”

<span id="fn_378"></span>[379](cc31050.htm#fr_378) <span
id="ix.xlii-p30.4"></span>

<span id="ix.xlii-p31"></span> “<span
id="ix.xlii-p31.1"></span>Sacrifices ou offrandes sacrees;” —
“sacrifices or sacred offerings.”

<span id="fn_379"></span>[380](cc31050.htm#fr_379) <span
id="ix.xlii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlii-p40"></span> “<span id="ix.xlii-p40.1"></span>Comme si
tout le monde les regardoit;” — “as if every body were looking at them.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 5:17-19;Luke 16:17](cc31051)
