[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31028)  [Next](cc31030) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xxi"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p1"></span>LUKE 2:22-32

<span id="ix.xxi-p2"></span><span id="ix.xxi-p2.1"></span>[Luke
2:22-32](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#022)<span id="ix.xxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p3"></span>**22. **And after that the days of their
 <span id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186) purification were fulfilled
according to the law of Moses, they brought him to Jerusalem, that they
might present him to the Lord, **23**.** **As it is written in the Law
of the Lord, Every male opening the womb shall be called holy to the
Lord: **24**.** **And that they might offer a sacrifice, according to
what is said in the Law of the Lord, a pair of turtle-doves, or two
young pigeons. **25**.** **And, lo, there was a man in Jerusalem, whose
name was Simeon, and that man was just and devout,  <span
id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187) waiting for the consolation of Israel,
and the Holy Spirit was upon him. **26**.** **And he had received a
revelation  <span id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188) from the Holy
Spirit, that he would not see death before he saw the Lord's Christ.
**27**.** **And he came by the Spirit into the temple.  <span
id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189) And when the parents brought the young
child Jesus, that they might do according to the custom of the Law for
him, **28**.** **He also took him into his arms: and blessed God, and
said, **29**.** **Thou now sendest thy servant away, O Lord, according
to thy word, in peace, **30**.** **For my eyes have seen thy salvation,
**31**.** **Which thou hast prepared before the face of all nations:
**32**.** **A light for the enlightening of the Gentiles, and the glory
of thy people Israel.

<span id="ix.xxi-p8"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxi-p9"></span><span id="ix.xxi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p10"></span>**22.** *And after that the days were
fulfilled* On the fortieth day after the birth, (<span
id="ix.xxi-p10.1"></span>[Lev. 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#002),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#004)<span id="ix.xxi-p10.1"></span>,)
the rite of purification was necessary to be performed. But Mary and
Joseph come to Jerusalem for another reason, to present Christ to the
Lord, because he was the first-born. Let us now speak first of the
purification. Luke makes it apply both to Mary and to Christ: for the
pronoun <span id="ix.xxi-p10.2"></span>αὐτῶν, of *them,* can have no
reference whatever to Joseph. But it ought not to appear strange, that
Christ, who was to be, made a curse for us on the cross,” (<span
id="ix.xxi-p10.3"></span>[Ga 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)<span
id="ix.xxi-p10.3"></span>,) should, for our benefit, take upon him our
uncleanness with respect to legal guilt, though he was “without blemish
and without spot,” (<span id="ix.xxi-p10.4"></span>[1Pe
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#019)<span id="ix.xxi-p10.4"></span>.)
It ought not, I say, to appear strange, if the fountain of purity, in
order to wash away our stains, chose to be reckoned unclean.  <span
id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190) It is a mistake to imagine that this
law of purification was merely political, and that the woman was unclean
in presence of her husband, not in presence of God. On the contrary, it
placed before the eyes of the Jews both the corruption of their nature,
and the remedy of divine grace.

<span id="ix.xxi-p12"></span>This law is of itself abundantly sufficient
to prove original sin, while it contains a striking proof of the grace
of God; for there could not be a clearer demonstration of the curse
pronounced on mankind than when the Lord declared, that the child comes
from its mother unclean and polluted, and that the mother herself is
consequently defiled by childbearing. Certainly, if man were not born a
sinner, if he were not by nature a *child of wrath,* (<span
id="ix.xxi-p12.1"></span>[Eph 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#003)<span
id="ix.xxi-p12.1"></span>,) if some taint of sin did not dwell in him,
he would have no need of purification. Hence it follows, that all are
corrupted in Adam; for the mouth of the Lord charges all with pollution.

<span id="ix.xxi-p13"></span>It is in perfect consistency with this,
that the Jews are spoken of, in other passages, as “holy branches of a
holy root,” (<span id="ix.xxi-p13.1"></span>[Ro
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#016)<span id="ix.xxi-p13.1"></span>:)
for this benefit did not properly belong to their own persons. They had
been set apart, by the privilege of adoption, as an elect people; but
the corruption, which they had by inheritance from Adam, was first in
the order of time  <span id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191) We must,
therefore, distinguish between the first nature, and that special
kindness through a covenant, by which God delivers his own people from
the curse which had been pronounced on all. And the design of legal
purification was to inform the Jews*,* that the pollutions, which they
brought with them into the world at their birth, are washed away by the
grace of God.

<span id="ix.xxi-p15"></span>Hence too we ought to learn, how dreadful
is the contagion of sin, which defiles, in some measure, the lawful
order of nature. I do own that child-bearing is not unclean, and that
what would otherwise be lust changes its character, through the
sacredness of the marriage relation. But still the fountain of sin is so
deep and abundant, that its constant overflowings stain what would
otherwise be pure.

<span id="ix.xxi-p16"></span><span id="ix.xxi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p17"></span>**23.** *As it is written in the Law* This
was another exercise of piety which was discharged by Joseph and Mary.
The Lord commanded, that all the males should be dedicated to him, in
remembrance of their deliverance; because when the angel slew all the
first-born of Egypt, (<span id="ix.xxi-p17.1"></span>[Ex
12:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#029)<span id="ix.xxi-p17.1"></span>,)
he had spared the first-born of Israel.

<span id="ix.xxi-p18"></span>“On the day that I smote all the first-born
in the land of Egypt, I hallowed unto me all the first-born in Israel,
both man and beast: mine shall they be:  
I am the Lord” (<span id="ix.xxi-p18.2"></span>[Nu
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#013)<span id="ix.xxi-p18.2"></span>.)

<span id="ix.xxi-p19"></span>They were afterwards permitted to redeem
their first-born at a certain price. Such was the ancient ceremony: and,
as the Lord is the common Redeemer of all,  <span
id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192) he has a right to claim us as his own,
from the least to the greatest. Nor is it without a good reason, that
Luke so frequently repeats the statement, that Joseph and Mary did what
*was written in the law of the Lord* For these words teach us, that we
must not, at our own suggestion, attempt any thing in the worship of
God, but must obediently follow what he requires in his Word.

<span id="ix.xxi-p21"></span><span id="ix.xxi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p22"></span>**24.** *And that they might offer a
sacrifice* This *sacrifice* belonged to the ceremony of purification;
lest any one should suppose that it was offered for the sake of
redeeming the first-born. When the Evangelist mentions *a pair of
turtle-doves, or two young pigeons,* he takes for granted that his
readers will understand, that Joseph and Mary were in such deep poverty,
as not to have it in their power to offer a lamb. For this exception is
expressly mentioned:

<span id="ix.xxi-p23"></span>“If she be not able to bring a lamb, then
she shall  
bring two turtles, or two young pigeons,” (<span
id="ix.xxi-p23.2"></span>[Le 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#008)<span
id="ix.xxi-p23.2"></span>.)

<span id="ix.xxi-p24"></span>Is it objected, that the Magi had very
recently supplied them with a sufficiency of gold to make the purchase?
I reply: We must not imagine that they had such abundance of gold as to
raise them suddenly from poverty to wealth. We do not read, that their
camels were laden with gold. It is more probable that it was some small
present, which they had brought solely as a mark of respect. The law did
not rigorously enjoin, that the poor should spend their substance on a
sacrifice, but drew a line of distinction between them and the rich, as
to the kind of sacrifices, and thus relieved them from burdensome
expense. There would be no impropriety in saying, that Joseph and Mary
gave as much as their circumstances allowed, though they reserved a
little money to defray the expenses of their journey and of their
household.

<span id="ix.xxi-p25"></span><span id="ix.xxi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p26"></span>**25.** *And, lo, there was a man in
Jerusalem* The design of this narrative is to inform us that, though
nearly the whole nation was profane and irreligious, and despised God,
yet that a few worshippers of God remained, and that Christ was known to
such persons from his earliest infancy. These were “the remnant” of whom
Paul says, that they were preserved “according to the election of
grace,” (<span id="ix.xxi-p26.1"></span>[Ro
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#005)<span id="ix.xxi-p26.1"></span>.)
Within this small band lay the Church of God; though the priests and
scribes, with as much pride as falsehood, claimed for themselves the
title of the Church. The Evangelist mentions no more than two, who
recognised Christ at Jerusalem, when he was brought into the temple.
These were Simeon and Anna. We must speak first of Simeon.

<span id="ix.xxi-p27"></span>As to his condition in life we are not
informed: he may have been a person of humble rank and of no reputation.
Luke bestows on him the commendation of being *just* and *devout;* and
adds, that he had the gift of prophecy: for *the Holy Spirit was upon
him. Devotion* and *Righteousness* related to the two tables of the law,
and are the two parts of which an upright life consists. It was a proof
of his being *a devout man,* that he *waited for the consolation of
Israel:* for no true worship of God can exist without the hope of
salvation, which depends on the faith of his promises, and particularly
on the restoration promised through Christ. Now, since an expectation of
this sort is commended in Simeon as an uncommon attainment, we may
conclude, that there were few in that age, who actually cherished in
their hearts the hope of redemption. All had on their lips the name of
the Messiah, and of prosperity under the reign of David: but hardly any
one was to be found, who patiently endured present afflictions, relying
on the consolatory assurance, that the redemption of the Church was at
hand. As the eminence of Simeon’s piety was manifested by its supporting
his mind in the hope of the promised salvation, so those who wish to
prove themselves the children of God, will breathe out unceasing prayers
for the promised redemption. For we, “have need of patience” (<span
id="ix.xxi-p27.1"></span>[Heb
10:36](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#036)<span id="ix.xxi-p27.1"></span>)
till the last coming of Christ.

<span id="ix.xxi-p28"></span>*And the Holy Spirit was upon him* The
Evangelist does not speak of “the Spirit of adoptions” (<span
id="ix.xxi-p28.1"></span>[Ro 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015)<span
id="ix.xxi-p28.1"></span>,) which is common to all the children of God,
though not in an equal degree, but of the peculiar gift of prophecy.
This appears more clearly from the next verse and the following one, in
which it is said, that he *received a revelation*  <span
id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193) *from the Holy Spirit,* and that, by
the guidance of the same Spirit, *he came into the temple* Though Simeon
had no distinction of public office, he was adorned with eminent gifts,
— with piety, with a blameless life, with faith and prophecy. Nor can it
be doubted, that this divine intimation, which he received in his
individual and private capacity, was intended generally for the
confirmation of all the godly. Jesus is called *the Lord’s Christ,*
because he was *anointed*  <span id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194) by
the Father, and, at the same time that he received the Spirit, received
also the title, of King and Priest. Simeon is said to have come into the
temple by *the Spirit;* that is, by a secret movement and undoubted
revelation, that he might meet Christ.  <span
id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195)

<span id="ix.xxi-p32"></span><span id="ix.xxi-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p33"></span>**29.** *Thou now sendest thy servant away*
From this song it is sufficiently evident, that Simeon looked at the Son
of God with different eyes from the eyes of flesh. For the outward
beholding of Christ could have produced no feeling but contempt, or, at
least, would never have imparted such satisfaction to the mind of the
holy man, as to make him joyful and desirous to die, from having reached
the summit of his wishes. The Spirit of God enlightened his eyes by
faith, to perceive, under a mean and poor dress, the glory of the Son of
God. He says, that he would be sent away *in peace;* which means, that
he would die with composure of mind, having obtained all that he
desired.

<span id="ix.xxi-p34"></span>But here a question arises. If he chose
rather to depart from life, was it amidst distress of mind and
murmuring, as is usually the case with those who die unwillingly, that
Simeon was hurried away? I answer: we must attend to the circumstance
which is added, *according to thy word* God had promised that Simeon
would behold his Son. He had good reason for continuing in a state of
suspense, and must have lived in some anxiety, till he obtained his
expectation. This ought to be carefully observed; for there are many who
falsely and improperly plead the example of Simeon, and boast that they
would willingly die, if this or the other thing were previously granted
to them; while they allow themselves to entertain rash wishes at their
own pleasure, or to form vain expectations without the authority of the
Word of God. If Simeon had said exactly, “Now I shall die with a
composed and easy mind, because I have seen the Son of God,” this
expression would have indicated the weakness of his faith; but, as he
had the *word,* he might have refused to die until the coming of Christ.

<span id="ix.xxi-p35"></span><span id="ix.xxi-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p36"></span>**30.** *For my eyes have seen* This mode
of expression is very common in Scripture; but Simeon appears to denote
expressly the bodily appearance of Christ, as if he had said, that he
now has the Son of God present in the flesh, on whom the *eyes* of his
mind had been previously fixed. By *saving*  <span
id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196) I understand the matter of salvation:
for in Christ are hid all the parts of salvation and of a happy life.
Now if the sight of Christ, while he was yet a child, had so powerful an
effect on Simeon, that he approached death with cheerfulness and
composure; how much more abundant materials of lasting peace are now
furnished to us, who have the opportunity of beholding our salvation
altogether completed in Christ? True, Christ no longer dwells on earth,
nor do we carry him in our arms: but his divine majesty shines openly
and brightly in the gospel, and there do “we all,” as Paul says, “behold
as in a glass the glory of the Lord,” — not as formerly amidst the
weakness of flesh, but in the glorious power of the Spirit, which he
displayed in his miracles, in the sacrifice of his death, and in his
resurrection. In a word, his absence from us in body is of such a
nature, that we are permitted to behold him sitting at the right hand of
the Father. If such a sight does not bring peace to our minds, and make
us go cheerfully to death, we are highly ungrateful to God, and hold the
honor, which he has bestowed upon us, in little estimation.

<span id="ix.xxi-p38"></span><span id="ix.xxi-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p39"></span>**31.** *Which thou hast prepared* By these
words Simeon intimates, that Christ had been divinely appointed, that
all nations might enjoy his grace; and that he would shortly afterwards
be placed in an elevated situation, and would draw upon him the eyes of
all. Under this term he includes all the predictions which relate: to
the spread of Christ’s kingdom. But if Simeon, when holding a little
child in his arms, could stretch his mind to the utmost boundaries of
the world, and acknowledge the power of Christ to be everywhere present,
how much more magnificent ought our conceptions regarding him to be now
that he has been set up as a, “standard to the people,” (<span
id="ix.xxi-p39.1"></span>[Isa
49:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#022)<span id="ix.xxi-p39.1"></span>,)
and has revealed himself to the whole world.

<span id="ix.xxi-p40"></span><span id="ix.xxi-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p41"></span>**32.** *A light for the revelation of the
Gentiles* Simeon now points out the purpose for which Christ was to be
exhibited by the Father before all nations. It was that he might
*enlighten the Gentiles,* who had been formerly in darkness, and might
be *the glory of his people Israel* There is propriety in the
distinction here made between the *people Israel* and the *Gentiles:*
for by the right of adoption the children of Abraham “were nigh” (<span
id="ix.xxi-p41.1"></span>[Eph
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#017)<span id="ix.xxi-p41.1"></span>)
to God, while the *Gentiles,* with whom God had made no “covenants of
promise,” were “strangers” to the Church, (<span
id="ix.xxi-p41.2"></span>[Eph
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#012)<span id="ix.xxi-p41.2"></span>.)
For this reason, *Israel* is called, in other passages, not only the son
of God, but his *first-born,* (<span id="ix.xxi-p41.3"></span>[Jer
31:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#009)<span id="ix.xxi-p41.3"></span>;)
and Paul informs us, that “Jesus Christ was a minister of the
circumcision for the truth of God, to confirm the promises made unto the
fathers” (<span id="ix.xxi-p41.4"></span>[Ro
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#008)<span id="ix.xxi-p41.4"></span>.)
The preference given to *Israel* above the Gentiles is, that all without
distinction may obtain salvation in Christ.

<span id="ix.xxi-p42"></span>*A light for revelation*  <span
id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197) means *for enlightening the Gentiles*
Hence we infer, that men are by nature destitute of light, till Christ,
“the Sun of Righteousness,” (<span id="ix.xxi-p43.3"></span>[Mal
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002)<span id="ix.xxi-p43.3"></span>,)
shine upon them. With regard to *Israel,* though God had bestowed upon
him distinguished honor, yet all his glory rests on this single article,
that a Redeemer had been promised to him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_186"></span>[187](cc31029.htm#fr_186) <span
id="ix.xxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p4"></span> “<span id="ix.xxi-p4.1"></span>Les jours de
la purification d'iceux, *ou, d'icelle, assavoir de Marie,”*(<span
id="ix.xxi-p4.2"></span>[Le 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#006)<span
id="ix.xxi-p4.2"></span>.)—”The days of the purification of them, *or,
of her, namely of Mary,”* (<span id="ix.xxi-p4.3"></span>[Le
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#006)<span id="ix.xxi-p4.3"></span>.)

<span id="fn_187"></span>[188](cc31029.htm#fr_187) <span
id="ix.xxi-p4.4"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p5"></span> “<span id="ix.xxi-p5.1"></span>Craignant
Dieu;” — “fearing God.”

<span id="fn_188"></span>[189](cc31029.htm#fr_188) <span
id="ix.xxi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p6"></span> “<span id="ix.xxi-p6.1"></span>Lequel avoit
este adverti divinement par le Sainct Esprit;” — “who had been divinely
warned by the Holy Spirit”

<span id="fn_189"></span>[190](cc31029.htm#fr_189) <span
id="ix.xxi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p7"></span> “<span id="ix.xxi-p7.1"></span>Icelui
estant meu par le Sainct Esprit, vint au Temple.” — “He, being moved by
the Holy Ghost, came to the Temple.”

<span id="fn_190"></span>[191](cc31029.htm#fr_190) <span
id="ix.xxi-p10.5"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p11"></span> “<span id="ix.xxi-p11.1"></span>Si celuy
qui est la fontaine de toute purete, a voulu estre tenu pour immonde et
souille, afin de laver toutes nos ordures.” — “If he, who is the
fountain of all purity, determined to be reckoned unclean and defiled in
order to wash away our pollutions.”

<span id="fn_191"></span>[192](cc31029.htm#fr_191) <span
id="ix.xxi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p14"></span> “<span id="ix.xxi-p14.1"></span>La
corruption hereditaire procedante d'Adam precedoit un tel bien, et
estoit plus ancienne.” — “The hereditary corruption proceeding from Adam
preceded such a benefit, and was more ancient.”

<span id="fn_192"></span>[193](cc31029.htm#fr_192) <span
id="ix.xxi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p20"></span> “<span id="ix.xxi-p20.1"></span>Veu que le
Seigneur est Redempteur de tout le monde en general;” — “since the Lord
is Redeemer of all the world at large.”

<span id="fn_193"></span>[194](cc31029.htm#fr_193) <span
id="ix.xxi-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p29"></span> “<span
id="ix.xxi-p29.1"></span>Responsum;” — “revelation.”

<span id="fn_194"></span>[195](cc31029.htm#fr_194) <span
id="ix.xxi-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p30"></span> It is scarcely necessary to remind the
reader, that the simple meaning of the Hebrew word *Messiah,* and of the
Greek word *Christ,* is *Anointed;* and that *the Lord's Christ* means
*the Lord's Anointed,*—*a* designation which, as has been already
remarked, (p. 92, note 2,) was familiarly applied to David and his
successors on the throne for many generations, (<span
id="ix.xxi-p30.3"></span>[2Sa
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#021)<span id="ix.xxi-p30.3"></span>;
<span id="ix.xxi-p30.4"></span>[La
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#020)<span id="ix.xxi-p30.4"></span>,)
but was afterwards restricted to “David’s son,” and “David’s Lord,”
(<span id="ix.xxi-p30.5"></span>[Mt
22:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#045)<span id="ix.xxi-p30.5"></span>,)
whom Daniel emphatically calls *the Messiah, the Anointed,* (<span
id="ix.xxi-p30.6"></span>[Dan. 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#026)<span id="ix.xxi-p30.6"></span>.) —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_195"></span>[196](cc31029.htm#fr_195) <span
id="ix.xxi-p30.7"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p31"></span> “<span id="ix.xxi-p31.1"></span>C'est a
dire, par un mouvement secret et certaine revelation du Sainct Esprit,
afin de s'y rencontrer a l'heure que Christ y estoit.” — “That is to
say, by a secret movement and certain revelation of the Spirit, in order
that he might arrive at the hour when Christ was there.”

<span id="fn_196"></span>[197](cc31029.htm#fr_196) <span
id="ix.xxi-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p37"></span> “<span id="ix.xxi-p37.1"></span>La ou nous
avons rendu *Ton salut,* qui voudroit suivre le mot Grec de pres, il
faudroit dire, *Ton Salutaire.”* — *“*Where we have translated *Thy
Salvation,* were we to follow closely the Greek word, we must say, *Thy
Saving.”*—*It* is evident that Calvin viewed σωτήριον, not with most of
our lexicographers, as a noun of the same import with σωτηρία,
*salvation,* but as the neuter of the adjective σωτήριος, which occurs
in a memorable phrase, ἡ χάρις τοῦ Θεοῦ ἡ σωτήριος, (<span
id="ix.xxi-p37.2"></span>Titus 2:11,) rendered in the English version,
*the grace of God that bringeth salvation*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_197"></span>[198](cc31029.htm#fr_197) <span
id="ix.xxi-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p43"></span> “<span id="ix.xxi-p43.1"></span>Lumen ad
revelationem.” — “<span id="ix.xxi-p43.2"></span>La ou nous avons
traduit, *Pour l'esclaircissement,* le mot Grec signifie quelque fois
*Revelation:* mais Simeon vent dire ici, Pour esclairer ou illuminer les
Gentils.” — “Where we have translated, *For the enlightening,* the Greek
word (ἀποχάλυψις) sometimes signifies *Revelation:* but Simeon means
here, To enlighten or illuminate the Gentiles.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke 2:33-39](cc31030)
