[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31056)  [Next](cc31058) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xlix"></span>

<span id="ix.xlix-p1"></span>MATTHEW 5:38-41; LUKE 6:29-30

<span id="ix.xlix-p2"></span><span id="ix.xlix-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
5:38-41](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#038)<span id="ix.xlix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlix-p3"></span><span id="ix.xlix-p3.1"></span>[Luke
6:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#029)<span id="ix.xlix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlix-p4"></span>**38**.** **You have heard that it was
said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth. **39**.** **But I say
to you, Do not resist evil: but whoever, shall inflict a blow on thy
right cheek, turn to him the other also: **40**.** **And to him who
wishes to enter into a law-suit with thee, and to take away thy coat,
allow him thy cloak also: **41**.** **And whoever shall constrain thee
to one mile, go with him two.

<span id="ix.xlix-p5"></span>**29**.** **To him who striketh thee on one
cheek offer also the other, and from him who taketh away thy cloak, do
not forbid thy coat also. **30**.** **And to every one that asketh from
thee give; and from him who takes what are thine, do not ask them again.

<span id="ix.xlix-p6"></span> 

<span id="ix.xlix-p7"></span><span id="ix.xlix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlix-p8"></span>**<span id="ix.xlix-p8.1"></span>[Matthew
5:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#038)<span id="ix.xlix-p8.1"></span>.**
*An eye for an eye. Here* another error is corrected. God had enjoined,
by his law, (<span id="ix.xlix-p8.2"></span>[Le
24:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#020)<span id="ix.xlix-p8.2"></span>,)
that judges and magistrates should punish those who had done injuries,
by making them endure as much as they had inflicted. The consequence
was, that every one seized on this as a pretext for taking private
revenge. They thought that they did no wrong, provided they were not the
first to make the attack, but only, when injured, returned like for
like. Christ informs them, on the contrary, that, though judges were
entrusted with the defense of the community, and were invested with
authority to restrain the wicked and repress their violence, yet it is
the duty of every man to bear patiently the injuries which he receives.

<span id="ix.xlix-p9"></span><span id="ix.xlix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlix-p10"></span>**39.** *Do not resist evil.* There are
two ways of resisting: the one, by warding off injuries through
inoffensive conduct; the other, by retaliation.  <span
id="fr_411"></span>[412](#fn_411) Though Christ does not permit his
people to repel violence by violence, yet he does not forbid them to
endeavor to avoid an unjust attack. The best interpreter of this passage
that we can have is Paul, who enjoins us rather to “overcome evil by
good” (<span id="ix.xlix-p11.2"></span>[Ro
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#021)<span id="ix.xlix-p11.2"></span>)
than contend with evil-doers.  <span id="fr_412"></span>[413](#fn_412)
We must attend to the contrast between the vice and the correction of
it. The present subject is retaliation.  <span
id="fr_413"></span>[414](#fn_413) To restrain his disciples from that
kind of indulgence, he forbids them to render evil for evil. He
afterwards extends the law of patience so far, that we are not only to
bear patiently the injuries we have received, but to prepare for bearing
fresh injuries. The amount of the whole admonition is, that believers
should learn to forget the wrongs that have been done them, — that they
should not, when injured, break out into hatred or ill-will, or wish to
commit an injury on their part, — but that, the more the obstinacy and
rage of wicked men was excited and inflamed, they should be the more
fully disposed to exercise patience.

<span id="ix.xlix-p14"></span>*Whoever shall inflict a blow.* *Julian,*
 <span id="fr_414"></span>[415](#fn_414) and others of the same
description, have foolishly slandered this doctrine of Christ, as if it
entirely overturned the laws of a country, and its civil courts.
*Augustine,* in his fifth epistle, employs much skill and judgment in
showing, that the design of Christ was merely to train the minds of
believers to moderation and justice, that they might not, on receiving
one or two offenses, fail or lose courage. The observation of Augustine,
“that this does not lay down a rule for outward actions,” is true, if it
be properly understood. I admit that Christ restrains our hands, as well
as our minds, from revenge: but when any one has it in his power to
protect himself and his property from injury, without exercising
revenge, the words of Christ do not prevent him from turning aside
gently and inoffensively to avoid the threatened attack.

<span id="ix.xlix-p16"></span>Unquestionably, Christ did not intend to
exhort his people to whet the malice of those, whose propensity to
injure others is sufficiently strong: and if they were to *turn to them
the other cheek,* what would it be but holding out such an
encouragement? It is not the business of a good and judicious
commentator to seize eagerly on syllables, but to attend to the design
of the speaker: and nothing is more unbecoming the disciples of Christ,
than to spend time in cavilling about words, where it is easy to see
what the Master means. But in the present instance, the object which
Christ has in view is perfectly obvious. He tells us, that the end of
one contest will be the beginning of another, and that, through the
whole course of their life, believers must lay their account with
sustaining many injuries in uninterrupted succession. When wrong has
been done them in a single instance, he wishes them to be trained by
this example to meek submission, that by suffering they may learn to be
patient.

<span id="ix.xlix-p17"></span><span id="ix.xlix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlix-p18"></span>**40.** *And to him who wishes to enter
into a law-suit with thee.* Christ now glances at another kind of
annoyance, and that is, when wicked men torment us with law-suits. He
commands us, even on such an occasion, to be so patient and submissive
that, when our *coat* has been *taken away,* we shall be prepared to
give up *our cloak also.* None but a fool will stand upon the words, so
as to maintain, that we must yield to our opponents what they demand,
before coming into a court of law: for such compliance would more
strongly inflame the minds of wicked men to robbery and extortion; and
we know, that nothing was farther from the design of Christ. What then
is meant by *giving the cloak to him* who endeavors, on the ground of a
legal claim,  <span id="fr_415"></span>[416](#fn_415) *to take away our
coat?* If a man, oppressed by an unjust decision, loses what is his own,
and yet is prepared, when it shall be found necessary, to part with the
remainder, he deserves not less to be commended for patience than the
man who allows himself to be twice robbed before coming into court. In
short, when Christians meet with one who endeavors to wrench from them a
part of their property, they ought to be prepared to lose the whole.

<span id="ix.xlix-p20"></span>Hence we conclude, that Christians are not
entirely prohibited from engaging in law-suits, provided they have a
just defense to offer. Though they do not surrender their goods as a
prey, yet they do not depart from this doctrine of Christ, which exhorts
us to bear patiently “the spoiling of our goods,” (<span
id="ix.xlix-p20.1"></span>[Heb
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#034)<span
id="ix.xlix-p20.1"></span>.) It is, no doubt, rare to find a man who
proceeds, with mild and proper feelings, to plead in a court: but, as it
is possible for a man to defend a just cause with a view to the public
advantage, we have no right to condemn the thing in itself, because it
appears to be directed by improper feelings.

<span id="ix.xlix-p21"></span>The different modes of expression which
are employed by Matthew and Luke, make no alteration in the meaning. A
*cloak* is usually of more value than a *coat:* and accordingly, when
Matthew says, that we ought *to give a cloak to him who takes away a
coat,* he means that, after having sustained a smaller loss, we ought to
be prepared to endure a greater. What is stated by Luke agrees with the
ancient proverb, “The coat is nearer than the cloak.”  <span
id="fr_416"></span>[417](#fn_416)

<span id="ix.xlix-p23"></span><span id="ix.xlix-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlix-p24"></span>**<span id="ix.xlix-p24.2"></span>[Luke
6:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#030)<span
id="ix.xlix-p24.2"></span>.** *To every one that asketh of thee.* The
same words, as we shall presently see, are found in Matthew: for it may
readily be inferred from the context, that Luke does not here speak of a
request to obtain assistance, but of actions at law, which bad men raise
for the purpose of carrying off the property of others. *From him who
takes away what are thine, ask them not again.* If it is thought better
to read the two clauses separately, I have no objection: and then it
will be an exhortation to liberality in giving. As to the second clause,
in which Christ forbids us to *ask again* those things which have been
unjustly taken away, it is undoubtedly an exposition of the former
doctrine, that we ought to bear patiently *“*the spoiling of our goods.”
But we must remember what I have already hinted, that we ought not to
quibble about words, as if a good man were not permitted to recover what
is his own, when God gives him the lawful means. We are only enjoined to
exercise patience, that we may not be unduly distressed by the loss of
our property, but calmly wait, till the Lord himself shall call the
robbers to account.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_411"></span>[412](cc31057.htm#fr_411) <span
id="ix.xlix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlix-p11"></span> “<span id="ix.xlix-p11.1"></span>L'une
par laquelle nous empeschons qu'on ne nous outrage, sans mal-faire a
personne de nostre coste: l'autre, par laquelle nous rendons mal pour
mal.” — “The one, by which we prevent attacks from being made on us,
without doing ill to any person on our part: the other, by which we
render evil for evil.”

<span id="fn_412"></span>[413](cc31057.htm#fr_412) <span
id="ix.xlix-p11.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xlix-p12"></span> “<span id="ix.xlix-p12.1"></span>Plustost
que de rendre la pareille a celuy qui nous a mal-fait.” — “Rather than
return the like to him who has done us wrong.”

<span id="fn_413"></span>[414](cc31057.htm#fr_413) <span
id="ix.xlix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xlix-p13"></span> “<span id="ix.xlix-p13.1"></span>Il est
ici parle de la facon de faire de ceux lesquels rendent la pareille a
ceux qui les ont offensez.” — “The subject here spoken of is the manner
of acting of those who render the like to those who have offended them.”

<span id="fn_414"></span>[415](cc31057.htm#fr_414) <span
id="ix.xlix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlix-p15"></span> *Julian,* the Roman Emperor, generally
known by the name of *Julian* *the Apostate.* The inveterate hatred of
this man to the very name of our blessed Savior has gained him a
painfully conspicuous place in ecclesias-tical history. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_415"></span>[416](cc31057.htm#fr_415) <span
id="ix.xlix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlix-p19"></span> “<span id="ix.xlix-p19.1"></span>Sous
couleur de proceder par voye de justice;” — “under pretense of
proceeding by way of justice.”

<span id="fn_416"></span>[417](cc31057.htm#fr_416) <span
id="ix.xlix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlix-p22"></span> “<span id="ix.xlix-p22.1"></span>Que le
saye est plus pres de la chair que le manteau.” — “That the coat is
nearer the flesh than the cloak.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 5:42;Luke 6:34-35](cc31058)
