[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31035)  [Next](cc31037) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xxviii"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 3:7-10; LUKE 3:7-14

<span id="ix.xxviii-p2"></span><span id="ix.xxviii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
3:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007)<span
id="ix.xxviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p3"></span><span id="ix.xxviii-p3.1"></span>[Luke
3:7-14](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#007)<span
id="ix.xxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p4"></span>**7**.** **And when he saw many of the
Pharisees and Sadducees coming to his baptism, he said to them,
Offspring of vipers, who warned you that ye might flee from the wrath to
come? **8**.** **Yield then fruits worthy of repentance. **9**.** **And
think not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham for our fathers: for
I say to you, that God is able to raise, from these stones, children to
Abraham. **10**.** **And now also the axe is laid at the root of the
trees: every tree, therefore, which yieldeth not good fruit, is cut
down, and is thrown into the fire.

<span id="ix.xxviii-p5"></span>**7**.** **He said therefore to the
multitudes, which went out, that they might be baptized by him,
Offspring of vipers, who warned you to flee from the wrath to come?
**8**.** **Yield therefore fruits worthy of repentance. And begin to to
say within yourselves, We have Abraham as our father: for I say to you,
that God is able, from these stones, to raise up children to Abraham.
**9**.** **And now also the axe is laid to the root of the trees: every
tree, therefore, which yieldeth not good fruit, is cut down, and is
thrown into the fire. **10**.** **And the multitudes asked him, saying,
What then shall we do? **11**.** **And he answering saith to them, He
who hath two coats, let him impart to him who hath none; and he who hath
food, let him do in like manner.  <span
id="fr_259"></span>[260](#fn_259) **12**.** **And the publicans also
came, that they might be baptized, and said to him, Master, what shall
we do? **13**.** **And he said to them, Exact no more than what has been
enjoined you. **14**.** **And the soldiers also asked him, saying, And
what shall we do? He saith to them, Do violence to no man, accuse no man
falsely, and be content with your wages.

<span id="ix.xxviii-p7"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxviii-p8"></span><span id="ix.xxviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p9"></span>**<span
id="ix.xxviii-p9.1"></span>[Matthew
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007)<span
id="ix.xxviii-p9.1"></span>.** *And when he saw many of the Pharisees.*
It is here related by Matthew and Luke, that John did not merely preach
repentance in a general manner, but that he also applied his discourse
to individuals. And the manner of teaching will, in point of fact, be
very unprofitable, if instructors do not judiciously inquire what the
season demands, and what belongs to individuals. Nothing can be more
unequal, in this respect, than a constant equality.  <span
id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260) For this reason John, we are told,
addressed the Pharisees and Sadducees with greater severity: because he
saw that their hypocrisy, and swelling pride, rendered them liable to be
more severely censured than the common people. To comprehend more fully
his design, we must understand, that none are more stupid than
hypocrites, who deceive themselves and others by the outward mask of
holiness. While God thunders, on all sides, against the whole world,
they construct a refuge for themselves in their own deceitful fancy; for
they are convinced that they have nothing to do with the judgment of
God. Does any one suppose, that John acted improperly, in treating them
with so much harshness at the first interview? I reply: They were not
unknown to him,  <span id="fr_261"></span>[262](#fn_261) and the
knowledge he had of them was derived, not from acquaintance or
experience, but, on the contrary, from a secret revelation of the
Spirit. It was therefore necessary that he should not spare them, lest
they might return home more inflated with pride. Is it again objected,
that they ought not to have been terrified by such severity of reproof,
because they made a profession, in baptism, that they would afterwards
be different persons from what they had formerly been? The reply is
still easy. Those whose habits of uttering falsehood to God, and of
deceiving themselves, lead them to hold out hypocrisy and pretension,
instead of the reality, ought to be urged, with greater sharpness than
other men, to true repentance. There is an astonishing pertinacity, as I
have said, in hypocrites; and, until they have been flayed by violence,
they obstinately keep their skin.

<span id="ix.xxviii-p12"></span><span id="ix.xxviii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p13"></span>As to the loud and open rebuke, which
was administered to them in presence of all, it was for the sake of
others; and that is the reason why Luke mentions, that it was addressed
to *multitudes,* (<span id="ix.xxviii-p13.2"></span>[Lu
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#007)<span
id="ix.xxviii-p13.2"></span>.) Though the persons whom John reproved
were few in number, his design was to strike terror on all; as Paul
enjoins us to regard it as the advantage of public rebukes, *“*that
others also may fear,” (<span id="ix.xxviii-p13.3"></span>[1Ti
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#020)<span
id="ix.xxviii-p13.3"></span>.) He addresses directly the Pharisees and
Sadducees, and at the same time, addresses, through them, a warning to
all, not to hold out a hypocritical appearance of repentance, instead of
a true affection of the heart. Besides, it was of great importance to
the whole nation to know  <span id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262) what
sort of people the Pharisees and Sadducees were, who had miserably
corrupted the worship of God, wasted the church, and overturned the
whole of religion; — in a word, who had extinguished the light of God by
their corruptions, and infected every thing by their crimes.

<span id="ix.xxviii-p15"></span>It is probable, therefore, that John
publicly attacked the Pharisees, for the benefit of the whole church of
God, that they might no longer dazzle the eyes of simple men by empty
show, or hold the body of the people under oppression by wicked tyranny.
In this respect, it was a remarkable display of his firmness, that
those, who were highly esteemed by others, were not spared on account of
their reputation, but sternly reduced, as they deserved, to their proper
rank. And thus ought all godly instructors to be zealous, not to dread
any power of man, but boldly strive to “cast down every high thing that
exalteth itself” against Christ, (<span id="ix.xxviii-p15.1"></span>[2Co
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#005)<span
id="ix.xxviii-p15.1"></span>.)

<span id="ix.xxviii-p16"></span>If John, the organ of the Holy Spirit,
employed such severity of language in his opening address to those who
voluntarily came to be baptized, and to make a public profession of the
gospel; how ought we now to act towards the avowed enemies of Christ,
who not only reject obstinately all that belongs to sound doctrine, but
whose efforts to extinguish the name of Christ are violently maintained
by fire and sword? Most certainly, if you compare the Pope, and his
abominable clergy, with the Pharisees and Sadducees, the mildest
possible way of dealing with them will be, to throw them all into one
bundle. Those, whose ears are so delicate, that they cannot endure to
have any bitter thing said against the Pope, must argue, not with us,
but with the Spirit of God. Yet let godly teachers beware, lest, while
they are influenced by holy zeal against the tyrants of the Church, they
mingle with it the affections of the flesh. And as no vehemence, which
is not regulated by the wisdom of the Spirit, can obtain the divine
approbation, let them not only restrain their feelings, but surrender
themselves to the Holy Spirit, and implore his guidance, that nothing
may escape them through inadvertency.  <span
id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263)

<span id="ix.xxviii-p18"></span>*Offspring of vipers.* He gives them
this name, instead of simply calling them *vipers,* in order to expose
the envenomed malice of the whole class: for he intended to condemn, not
merely those few persons who were present, but the whole body, and to
charge both sects with producing nothing but serpents. They had vehement
disputes, no doubt, with each other: but all were agreed in despising
God, in a wicked desire to rule, in hatred of sound doctrine, and in a
disgusting mass of numerous crimes.

<span id="ix.xxviii-p19"></span>*Who warned you?* As he had suspicions
of their repentance, he puts the question with doubt and wonder, if it
be possible that they repent sincerely. In this way, he summons them to
the inward tribunal of conscience, that they may thoroughly examine
themselves, and, laying aside all flattery, may institute a severe
investigation into their crimes. *Wrath* is put here, as in many other
places, for the judgment of God: as when Paul says, “The law worketh
wrath,” (<span id="ix.xxviii-p19.1"></span>[Ro
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#015)<span
id="ix.xxviii-p19.1"></span>,) and “Give place to wraths  <span
id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264) ”, (<span
id="ix.xxviii-p20.2"></span>[Ro
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#019)<span
id="ix.xxviii-p20.2"></span>.) He calls it the *wrath to come,* which
hangs over their heads, that they may not indulge in their wonted
carelessness. For, though the wrath of God overflows, and his
chastisements strike, the whole world, hypocrites always entertain the
hope that they will escape. *To flee from the wrath* of God, is here
taken in a good sense, that is, to seek the means of appeasing God, that
he may no longer be angry with us. For a good part of men, in order to
escape the wrath of God, withdraw themselves from his guidance and
authority. But all that the sinner gains *by fleeing* from God, is to
provoke more and more the wrath of God against him.

<span id="ix.xxviii-p21"></span><span id="ix.xxviii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p22"></span>**<span
id="ix.xxviii-p22.2"></span>[Matthew
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#008)<span id="ix.xxviii-p22.2"></span>;
<span id="ix.xxviii-p22.3"></span>[Luke
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#008)<span
id="ix.xxviii-p22.3"></span>.** *Yield therefore fruits worthy of
repentance.* He confirms what I have already said, that the repentance,
which is attested by words, is of no value, unless it be proved by the
conduct: for it is too important a matter to be estimated lightly, or at
random. And so John affirms, that the solemn declaration, which they
made, is not enough, but that, in process of time, their works will make
it evident, whether or not they have seriously repented.  <span
id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265) It ought to be observed, that *good
works* (<span id="ix.xxviii-p23.2"></span>Titus 3:8) are here called
fruits *of repentance:* for *repentance* is an inward matter, which has
its seat in the heart and soul, but afterwards yields its fruits in a
change of life.  <span id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266) But as the
whole of this part of doctrine has been grievously corrupted by Popery,
we must attend to this distinction, that *repentance* is an inward
renewal of the man, which manifests itself in the outward life, as a
tree produces its fruit.

<span id="ix.xxviii-p25"></span><span id="ix.xxviii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p26"></span>**<span
id="ix.xxviii-p26.2"></span>[Matthew
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#009)<span
id="ix.xxviii-p26.2"></span>.** *And think not to say within
yourselves.* **<span id="ix.xxviii-p26.3"></span>[Luke
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#008)<span
id="ix.xxviii-p26.3"></span>.** *And begin not to say within
yourselves.* As the import of both phrases is undoubtedly the same, it
is easy to ascertain what John meant. Till hypocrites are hard pressed,
they either sleep in their sins, or indulge in licentious mirth.  <span
id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267) But when they are summoned to the
tribunal of God, they eagerly seek for some subterfuge or concealment,
or some covering to interpose between God and them. John’s address to
the Pharisees and Sadducees amounts to this: *“*Now that I have sharply
upbraided you, do not, as persons of your stamp are wont to do endeavor
to find a remedy in an empty and deceitful title.”

<span id="ix.xxviii-p28"></span>He thus tears from them the wicked
confidence, by which they had been bewitched. The covenant, which God
had made with Abraham, was employed by them as a shield to defend a bad
conscience: not that they rested their salvation on the person of one
man, but that God had adopted all the posterity of Abraham. Meanwhile,
they did not consider, that none are entitled to be regarded as
belonging to “the seed of Abraham,” (<span
id="ix.xxviii-p28.1"></span>[Joh
8:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#033)<span
id="ix.xxviii-p28.1"></span>,) but those who follow his faith, and that
without faith the covenant of God has no influence whatever in procuring
salvation. And even the little word, *in yourselves,* is not without
meaning: for though they did not boast in words, that they were
Abraham’s children, yet they were inwardly delighted with this title, as
hypocrites are not ashamed to practice grosser impositions on God than
on men.

<span id="ix.xxviii-p29"></span>*God is able.* The Jews flattered
themselves with nearly the same pretenses, as are now brought forward
insolently by the Papists. “There must be some Church in the world;
because it is the will of God that he be acknowledged, and his name
invoked, in the world. But the Church can be nowhere else than among us,
to whom God has entrusted his covenant.”  <span
id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268) This arrogance was chiefly displayed
by the high priests, and by others who had any share of government or
authority. The common people were treated by them as profane and
*“*accursed,*”* (<span id="ix.xxviii-p30.2"></span>[Joh
7:49](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#049)<span
id="ix.xxviii-p30.2"></span>,) and they looked upon themselves as the
holy first-fruits; just as, in our own day, mitred Bishops, Abbots,
Canons, Monks, Sorbonnists, and every description of Priests, glorying
in the proud title of Clergy, regard the Laity with contempt. This
error, of relying too much on the promise of God, John exposes and
refutes, by saying that, though God passes by them, he will not want a
Church.

<span id="ix.xxviii-p31"></span>The meaning of the words, therefore, is:
“God has made an everlasting covenant with Abraham and his seed. In one
point you are mistaken. While you are worse than bastards,  <span
id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269) you imagine that you are the only
children of Abraham. But God will raise up elsewhere a new seed of
Abraham, which does not now appear.” He says in the dative case,
*children To ABRAHAM*, (<span id="ix.xxviii-p32.3"></span>τῶ ᾿Αβραὰμ,)
to inform us, that the promise of God will not fail, and that Abraham,
who relied on it, was not deceived, though his seed be not found in you.
Thus from the beginning of the world the Lord has been faithful to his
servants, and has never failed to fulfill the promise which he made to
them, that he would extend mercy to their children, though he rejected
hypocrites. Some imagine, that John spoke of the calling of the
Gentiles. This appears to me to be without foundation: but as proud men
did not believe it to be possible that the Church should be removed to
another place, he reminds them, that God has in his power ways of
preserving his Church, which they did not think of, any more than they
believed that he could create *children* out of *stones.*

<span id="ix.xxviii-p33"></span><span id="ix.xxviii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p34"></span>**<span
id="ix.xxviii-p34.2"></span>[Matthew
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#010)<span
id="ix.xxviii-p34.2"></span>; <span id="ix.xxviii-p34.3"></span>[Luke
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#009)<span
id="ix.xxviii-p34.3"></span>.** *And now also the axe.* After having
stripped hypocrites of the covering of a vain confidence, John announces
the approaching judgment of God. He had formerly said that, though they
were rejected, God would not want a people: and he now adds, that God is
just about to drive out unworthy persons from the Church, as barren
*trees* are wont to be *cut down.* His statement amounts to this, that
God has already displayed his power for purifying the Church. The grace
of God is never manifested for the salvation of the godly, till his
judgment first appears for the destruction of the world: and for two
reasons; because God then separates his own people from the reprobate,
and because his wrath is kindled anew by the ingratitude of the world.
So that we have no reason to wonder, if the preaching of the gospel and
the coming of Christ laid *the axe* for *cutting down* barren trees, or
if the same causes  <span id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270) daily
advance the wrath of God against the wicked.

<span id="ix.xxviii-p36"></span><span id="ix.xxviii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p37"></span>**<span
id="ix.xxviii-p37.2"></span>[Luke
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#010)<span
id="ix.xxviii-p37.2"></span>** *And the multitudes asked him.* A true
feeling of repentance produces in the mind of the poor sinner an eager
desire to know what is the will or command of God. John’s reply
explains, in a few words, *the fruits worthy of repentance:* for the
world is always desirous to acquit itself of its duty to God by
performing ceremonies; and there is nothing to which we are more prone,
than to offer to God pretended worship, whenever he calls us to
repentance. But *what fruits* does the Baptist here recommend? The
duties of charity, and of the second Table of the Law:  <span
id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271) not that God disregards the outward
profession of godliness, and of his worship; but that this is a surer
mark of distinction, and less frequently leads to mistakes.  <span
id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272) For hypocrites labor strenuously to
prove themselves worshippers of God by the performance of ceremonies, —
paying no regard, however, to true righteousness: for they are either
cruel to their neighbors, or addicted to falsehood and dishonesty.

<span id="ix.xxviii-p40"></span>It was therefore necessary to subject
them to a more homely examination,  <span
id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273) if they are just in their dealings
with men, if they relieve the poor, if they are generous to the
wretched, if they give liberally what the Lord has bestowed upon them.
This is the reason why our Lord pronounces “judgment, mercy, and faith,”
to be “*the weightier matters of the law*,” (<span
id="ix.xxviii-p41.2"></span>[Mt
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#023)<span
id="ix.xxviii-p41.2"></span>,) and Scripture everywhere recommends
“justice and judgment.” We must particularly observe, that the duties of
charity are here mentioned, not because they are of higher value than
the worship of God, but because they testify the piety of men,  <span
id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274) so as to detect the hypocrisy of those
who boast with the mouth what is far distant from the heart.

<span id="ix.xxviii-p43"></span>But it is asked, did John lay this
injunction, in a literal sense, on all whom he was preparing to be
Christ’s disciples, that they should not have *two coats?* We must
observe, first, that this is the figure of speech which is called a
*Synecdoche,* for under one example it comprehends a general rule. Hence
it follows, that we must draw from it a meaning, which corresponds to
the law of charity, as it is laid down by God: and that law is, that
each person should give out of his abundance to supply the wants of the
poor. God does not extort a tax, to be paid “grudgingly or of necessity”
by those who, but for that necessity, would have chosen not to pay it:
“for the Lord loveth a” willing and “cheerful giver,” (<span
id="ix.xxviii-p43.1"></span>[2Co
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#007)<span
id="ix.xxviii-p43.1"></span>.) I make this observation, because it is of
great consequence for men to be convinced, that the portion of their
wealth which they bestow in this manner is a sacrifice pleasing and of
good savor to God, — that “with such sacrifices God is well pleased,”
(<span id="ix.xxviii-p43.2"></span>[Heb
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#016)<span
id="ix.xxviii-p43.2"></span>.)

<span id="ix.xxviii-p44"></span>Those who lay it down as a law, that no
man must have any property of his own, not only make consciences to
tremble, but overwhelm them with despair. With fanatics of this sort,
who obstinately adhere to the literal meaning, it is not necessary that
we should spend much time in refutation. If we are not allowed to have
*two coats,* the same rule will apply to dishes, to salt-cellars, to
shirts, and, in short, to all the furniture of a house. But the context
makes it evident, that nothing was farther from John’s intention than to
overthrow the order of a state. Hence we infer, that all that he
enjoined on the rich was, that they should bestow on the poor, according
to their own ability, what their necessity required.

<span id="ix.xxviii-p45"></span>“Consider to what extent the necessaries
of life, which you enjoy abundantly, are wanted by your neighbors, that
your abundance may be a supply for their want,” (<span
id="ix.xxviii-p45.1"></span>[2Co
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#014)<span
id="ix.xxviii-p45.1"></span>.)

<span id="ix.xxviii-p46"></span>But the more liberty that God allows us,
we ought to be the more careful not to allow ourselves undue liberty.
 <span id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275) Let the necessity of our
brethren affect us powerfully, and let the bounty of God, which is in
our hands, stimulate us to acts of kindness and generosity.

<span id="ix.xxviii-p48"></span><span id="ix.xxviii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p49"></span>**<span
id="ix.xxviii-p49.1"></span>[Luke
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#012)<span
id="ix.xxviii-p49.1"></span>.** *And the publicans*  <span
id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276) *also came. The publicans* are not
only exhorted, in general terms, to repent, but the duties peculiar to
their calling are demanded: for we know that*,* besides the general rule
of the law, each person ought to consider what is required by the nature
of the employment to which he has been called. All Christians, without
distinction, “are taught of God to love one another,” (<span
id="ix.xxviii-p50.2"></span>[1Th
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#009)<span
id="ix.xxviii-p50.2"></span>:) but then there follow particular duties,
which a teacher, for example, is bound to perform towards the Church, —
a magistrate or prince towards the people, and the people, on the other
hand, towards the magistrate, — a husband towards his wife, and a wife
towards her husband, — and finally, children and parents toward each
other. The *Publicans,* viewed as a class, were covetous, rapacious, and
cruel, and often oppressed the people by unjust exactions. In
consequence of this, the Baptist reproves them for those offenses, with
which that class was, for the most part, chargeable, when he commands
them not to go beyond moderation in exacting tribute. At the same time,
we draw this inference, that it is quite as lawful for a Christian man
to receive or levy taxes, as for a magistrate to impose them.

<span id="ix.xxviii-p51"></span>In the same way we must judge about war.
John does not order the soldiers to throw away their arms, and to
relinquish their oath; but he forbids them to pillage the wretched
people under the pretense of their duty as soldiers, to bring false
accusations against the innocent, and to be guilty of extortions, — all
of which crimes the greater part of them were accustomed to practice.
These words obviously contain an approbation of civil government. It is
a piece of idle sophistry to say, that John’s hearers were ignorant
people, and that he gave them nothing more than elementary instructions,
which fell very far short of Christian perfection. John’s office was,
*to make ready a people prepared for the Lord,* (<span
id="ix.xxviii-p51.1"></span>[Lu
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#017)<span
id="ix.xxviii-p51.1"></span>) and there is no doubt that it was entirely
and faithfully performed. Those men are guilty of calumny and sacrilege,
who slander the Gospel, by declaring it to be opposed to human
governments;  <span id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277) as if Christ
destroyed what his heavenly Father sanctioned. But, without the sword,
laws are dead, and legal judgments have no force or authority.
Magistrates require not only an executioner,  <span
id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278) but other attendants, among whom are
the military,  <span id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279) without whose
assistance and agency it is impossible to maintain peace. Still, the
object must be considered. Princes must not allow themselves to sport
with human blood, nor must soldiers give themselves up to cruelty, from
a desire of gain, as if slaughter were their chief business: but both
must be drawn to it by necessity, and by a regard to public advantage.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_259"></span>[260](cc31036.htm#fr_259) <span
id="ix.xxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p6"></span> “<span id="ix.xxviii-p6.1"></span>Qui a
a manger, face la semblable.” — “He who hath to eat, let him do the
like.”

<span id="fn_260"></span>[261](cc31036.htm#fr_260) <span
id="ix.xxviii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p10"></span> “<span id="ix.xxviii-p10.1"></span>Et
n' y a rien plus inegal en cest endroit, que de vouloir garder tousjours
une mesme egalite.” — “And nothing is more unequal, in this respect,
than to wish to maintain always one uniform equality.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[262](cc31036.htm#fr_261) <span
id="ix.xxviii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p11"></span> “<span id="ix.xxviii-p11.1"></span>Je
res ond uil co oissoit bien quelles gens c’estoyent.” — “I reply, that
he knew well what sort of people they were.”

<span id="fn_262"></span>[263](cc31036.htm#fr_262) <span
id="ix.xxviii-p13.4"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p14"></span> “<span
id="ix.xxviii-p14.1"></span>Davantage, tout le peuple avoit grand
interest d'estre advertis quelles gens estoyent les Sadduciens et
Pharisiens.” — “Besides, all the people had a deep interest in being
warned what sort of people the Sadducees and Pharisees were.”

<span id="fn_263"></span>[264](cc31036.htm#fr_263) <span
id="ix.xxviii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p17"></span> “<span id="ix.xxviii-p17.1"></span>Afin
qu'il ne leur eschappe aucun mot inconsiderement, et a la volee;” —
“that no word may escape them inconsiderately, and at random.”

<span id="fn_264"></span>[265](cc31036.htm#fr_264) <span
id="ix.xxviii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p20"></span> “<span id="ix.xxviii-p20.1"></span>Il
fait mention du temps avenir, parce que les hypocrites, tandis que Dieu
les espargne, desprisent hardiment toutes ses menaces, et ne se
resveillent jamais, sinon qu’il frappe dessus a grands coups.” — “He
mentions the future, because hypocrites, so long as God spares them,
despise boldly all his threatenings, and never awake, till he strikes
them with heavy strokes.”

<span id="fn_265"></span>[266](cc31036.htm#fr_265) <span
id="ix.xxviii-p22.4"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p23"></span> “<span id="ix.xxviii-p23.1"></span>Si
leur repentance est vraye, et si c'est it bon escient qu'ils vienent k
luy.” — “If their repentance is true, and if it is in good earnest that
they come to him.”

<span id="fn_266"></span>[267](cc31036.htm#fr_266) <span
id="ix.xxviii-p23.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p24"></span> “<span id="ix.xxviii-p24.1"></span>Par
le changement et amendement de vie;” — “by the change and amendment of
life.”

<span id="fn_267"></span>[268](cc31036.htm#fr_267) <span
id="ix.xxviii-p26.4"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p27"></span> “<span id="ix.xxviii-p27.1"></span>Ils
s'endorment toujours en leurs vices, ou s'egayent comme chevaux
eschappez.” — “They sleep always in their sins, or indulge in merriment,
like horses let loose.”

<span id="fn_268"></span>[269](cc31036.htm#fr_268) <span
id="ix.xxviii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p30"></span> “<span
id="ix.xxviii-p30.1"></span>D'autant que le Seigneur nous a ordonnez
gardiens de son alliance.” — “Because the Lord has appointed us
guardians of his covenant.”

<span id="fn_269"></span>[270](cc31036.htm#fr_269) <span
id="ix.xxviii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p32"></span> “<span id="ix.xxviii-p32.1"></span>Quum
sitis plus quam degeneres.” — “<span id="ix.xxviii-p32.2"></span>Combien
qu' a la verite vous soyez pires que bastards.”

<span id="fn_270"></span>[271](cc31036.htm#fr_270) <span
id="ix.xxviii-p34.4"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p35"></span> “<span id="ix.xxviii-p35.1"></span>Ces
deux choses mesme;” — “these very two things.”

<span id="fn_271"></span>[272](cc31036.htm#fr_271) <span
id="ix.xxviii-p37.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p38"></span> “<span id="ix.xxviii-p38.1"></span>Des
ceuvres de charite comprises en la seconde Table de la Loy;” — “works of
charity included in the second Table of the Law.”

<span id="fn_272"></span>[273](cc31036.htm#fr_272) <span
id="ix.xxviii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p39"></span> “<span id="ix.xxviii-p39.1"></span>Non
pas que Dieu ne requiere aussi une profession externe de son service et
de la crainte de son nom, mais pource que l’autre partie est la marque
la plus certaine pour cognoians, et, laquelle vrals on est le moins
abuse.” — “Not that God does not require also an external profession of
his service and of the fear of his name, but because the other part is
the surest mark to know true penitents, and one in which there is less
risk of deception.”

<span id="fn_273"></span>[274](cc31036.htm#fr_273) <span
id="ix.xxviii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p41"></span> “<span
id="ix.xxviii-p41.1"></span>C'est a dire, ou ils ne peuvent pas si
aisement tromper.” — “That is to say, in which they cannot so easily
deceive.”

<span id="fn_274"></span>[275](cc31036.htm#fr_274) <span
id="ix.xxviii-p41.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p42"></span> “<span id="ix.xxviii-p42.1"></span>De
la crainte de Dieu qui est en l'homme;” — “of the fear of God which is
in man.”

<span id="fn_275"></span>[276](cc31036.htm#fr_275) <span
id="ix.xxviii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p47"></span> “<span
id="ix.xxviii-p47.1"></span>Cependant, tant plus Dieu nous traite
doucement, et nous donne de liberte, tant plus faut-il que nous prenions
garde a ne nous flatter ou lascher par trop la bride.” — “Yet the more
gently God treats us, and the more liberty he gives us, so much the more
ought we to take care not to flatter ourselves, or loose the bridle too
much.”

<span id="fn_276"></span>[277](cc31036.htm#fr_276) <span
id="ix.xxviii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p50"></span> “<span
id="ix.xxviii-p50.1"></span>Peagets;” — “tax-gatherers.”

<span id="fn_277"></span>[278](cc31036.htm#fr_277) <span
id="ix.xxviii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p52"></span> “<span id="ix.xxviii-p52.1"></span>Qui
veulent faire accroire qu'elle n'a rouve point les principautes, empires
et gouvernements qui sont entre les hornroes; — “who wish to make it
believed that it does not approve of the principalities, empires, and
governments, which exist among men.”

<span id="fn_278"></span>[279](cc31036.htm#fr_278) <span
id="ix.xxviii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p53"></span> “<span id="ix.xxviii-p53.1"></span>Un
bourreau;” — “a hangman.”

<span id="fn_279"></span>[280](cc31036.htm#fr_279) <span
id="ix.xxviii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p54"></span> “<span id="ix.xxviii-p54.1"></span>Les
gendarmes.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 3:11-12;Mark 1:7-8;Luke 3:15-18](cc31037)
