[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31033)  [Next](cc31035) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xxvi"></span>

<span id="ix.xxvi-p1"></span>LUKE 2:48-52

<span id="ix.xxvi-p2"></span><span id="ix.xxvi-p2.1"></span>[Luke
2:48-52](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#048)<span id="ix.xxvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxvi-p3"></span>**48**.** **And when they saw him, they
wondered; and his mother said to him, Son, why hast thou done thus to
us? Lo, thy father and I grieving were seeking for thee. **49**.** **And
he saith to them, Why is it that ye were seeking me? Did ye not know
that I must be in those things which belong to my Father?
**50**.** **And they did not understand the discourse which he spoke to
them. **51**.** **And he went down with them, and came to Nazareth. And
he was subject to them: but his mother kept all these words in her
heart. **52**.** **And Jesus made progress in wisdom and age, and in
favor with God and men.

<span id="ix.xxvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxvi-p5"></span><span id="ix.xxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxvi-p6"></span>**48.** *And his mother said to him* Those
who think that the holy virgin spake in this manner, for the purpose of
showing her authority, are, in my opinion, mistaken. It is even
possible, that it was not till they were apart, and the witnesses had
withdrawn, that she began to expostulate with her son, after they had
left the assembly. However that may be, this complaint was not the
result of ambition, but was the expression of grief, which had lasted
three days.  <span id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237) Yet the manner of
her complaint, as if she had received an injury, shows how ready we are
by nature to defend our own rights, even without paying regard to God.
The holy virgin would a thousand times  <span
id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238) rather have died, than deliberately
preferred herself to God: but, in the indulgence of a mother’s grief,
she falls into it through inadvertency. And undoubtedly this example
warns us, how jealous we ought to be of all the affections of the flesh,
and what care we ought to exercise, lest, by being too tenacious of our
rights, and following our own desires, we defraud God of his honor.

<span id="ix.xxvi-p9"></span><span id="ix.xxvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxvi-p10"></span>**49.** *Did ye not know?* Our Lord justly
blames his mother, though he does it in a gentle and indirect manner.
The amount of what he says is, that the duty which he owes to God his
Father, ought to be immeasurably preferred to all human duties; and
that, consequently, earthly parents do wrong in taking it amiss, that
they have been neglected in comparison of God. And hence we may infer
the general doctrine, that whatever we owe to men must yield to the
first table of the law, that God’s authority over us may remain
untouched.  <span id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239) Thus we ought to
obey kings, and parents, and masters,  <span
id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240) but only in subjection to God: that
is, we must not, for the sake of men, lessen or take away any thing from
God. And, indeed, a regard to the superior claims of God does not imply
a violation of the duties which we owe to men.

<span id="ix.xxvi-p13"></span>*In those things which belong to my
Father* This expression intimates, that there is something about him
greater than man. It points out also the chief design of his being sent
into the world, which was, that he might discharge the office enjoined
upon him by his heavenly Father. But is it not astonishing, that Joseph
and Mary *did not understand* this answer, who had been instructed by
many proofs, that Jesus is the Son of God? I reply: Though they were not
wholly unacquainted with Christ’s heavenly origin, yet they did not
comprehend, in every respect, how he was intent on executing his
heavenly Father’s commands: for his calling had not yet been expressly
revealed to them. Mary *kept in her heart* those things which she did
not fully understand. Let us learn from this, to receive with reverence,
and *to lay up* in our minds, (like the seed, which is allowed to remain
for some time under grounds) those mysteries of God which exceed our
capacity.

<span id="ix.xxvi-p14"></span><span id="ix.xxvi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxvi-p15"></span>**51.** *And he was subject to them* It
was for our salvation that Christ took upon him this low estate, — that
the Lord and head of angels voluntarily became *subject to* mortal
creatures. Such was the purpose of God, that Christ should remain, for
some time, under a shadow, beating the name of Joseph. Though this
subjection, on the part of Christ, arose from no necessity which he
could not have avoided, yet, as he had taken upon him human nature on
the condition of being subject to parents, and had assumed the character
both of a man and of a servant, — with respect to the office of
Redeemer, this was his lawful condition. The more cheerfully, on this
account, ought every one to bear the yoke which the Lord has been
pleased to lay upon him.  <span id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_237"></span>[238](cc31034.htm#fr_237) <span
id="ix.xxvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxvi-p7"></span> “<span id="ix.xxvi-p7.1"></span>Mais
l'ennuy et la fascherie qu'elle avoit eue trois jours durant l'a fait
ainsi parler.” — “But the uneasiness and distress, which she had had for
three days, made her speak in this manner.”

<span id="fn_238"></span>[239](cc31034.htm#fr_238) <span
id="ix.xxvi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxvi-p8"></span> “Centies;” — “mille fois.”

<span id="fn_239"></span>[240](cc31034.htm#fr_239) <span
id="ix.xxvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxvi-p11"></span> “<span id="ix.xxvi-p11.1"></span>Que tout
ce qui est deu aux hommes, est au dessous de la premiere Table de la
Loy, et doit tenir le second lieu, afin que toujours Dieu ait sa
puissance et son authorite entiere.” — “That all that is due to men is
below the first Table of the Law, and ought to hold the second plane, in
order that God may always have his power and his authority entire.”

<span id="fn_240"></span>[241](cc31034.htm#fr_240) <span
id="ix.xxvi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxvi-p12"></span> “<span
id="ix.xxvi-p12.1"></span>Dominis;” — “<span
id="ix.xxvi-p12.2"></span>maistres et seigneurs;” — “masters and lords.”

<span id="fn_241"></span>[242](cc31034.htm#fr_241) <span
id="ix.xxvi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxvi-p16"></span> “<span id="ix.xxvi-p16.1"></span>D’autant
plus faut-il que chacun de nous s’assujettisse de bon coeur, st ploye le
col sous le joug auquel il plaira a Dieu de nous soumettre.” — “So much
the more must every one of us submit heartily, and bend the neck under
the yoke, to which it shall please God to subject us.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 3:1-6;Mark 1:1-6;Luke 3:1-6](cc31035)
