[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31070)  [Next](cc31072) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.lxiii"></span>

<span id="ix.lxiii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 7:7-11; LUKE 11:5-13

<span id="ix.lxiii-p2"></span><span id="ix.lxiii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
7:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007)<span id="ix.lxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxiii-p3"></span><span id="ix.lxiii-p3.1"></span>[Luke
11:5-13](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#005)<span
id="ix.lxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxiii-p4"></span>**7**.** **Ask, and it shall be given you:
seek, and ye shall find: knock, and it shall be opened to you.
**8**.** **For every one that asketh receiveth, and he that seeketh
findeth, and to him that knocketh it shall be opened. **9**.** **Is
there any man among you, who, if his son shall ask bread, will give him
a ston? **10**.** **Or if he shall ask a fish, does he offer him a
serpent? **11**.** **If you, then, though you are evil, know to give
good gifts to your children, how much more shall your Father, who is in
heaven, give good things, if you ask them from him?

<span id="ix.lxiii-p5"></span>**5**.** **And he saith to them, Which of
you shall have a friend, and shall go to him at midnight, and shall say
to him, Friend, lend me three loaves: **6**.** **For a friend of mine
hath come, on a journey, to me, and I have nothing to set before him.
 <span id="fr_464"></span>[465](#fn_464) **7**.** **And he from within
answering say, Trouble me not: the door is now shut, and my children are
with me in bed: I cannot rise and give thee. **8**.** **I say to you,
Though he will not rise and give him because he is his friend, yet, on
account of his importunity he will rise and give him as many as he
needeth. **9**.** **And I say to you, Aks, and it shall be given you:
seek, and ye shall find: knock, and it shall be opened to you.
**10**.** **For every one that asketh receiveth, and he that seeketh
findeth, and to him that knocketh it shall be opened. **11**.** **And
what father among you, from whom if his son shall ask bread, will give
him a stone? Or, if a fish, will he for a fish give him a serpent?
**12**.** **Or, if he shall ask an egg, will he offer him a scorpion?
**13**.** **If you, then, though you are evil, know to give good gifts
to your children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy
Spirit to those who ask him?

<span id="ix.lxiii-p7"></span> 

<span id="ix.lxiii-p8"></span><span id="ix.lxiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxiii-p9"></span>**<span id="ix.lxiii-p9.1"></span>[Matthew
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007)<span id="ix.lxiii-p9.1"></span>.**
*Ask, and it shall be given you* It is an exhortation to prayer: and as
in this exercise of religion, which ought to be our first concern, we
are so careless and sluggish, Christ presses the same thing upon us
under three forms of expression. There is no superfluity of language,
when he says, *Ask, seek, knock:* but lest the simple doctrine should be
unimpressive, he perseveres in order to rouse us from our inactivity.
Such is also the design of the promises that are added, Ye *shall find,
it shall be given to you, and it shall be opened* Nothing is better
adapted to excite us to prayer than a full conviction that we shall be
heard. Those who doubt can only pray in an indifferent manner; and
prayer, unaccompanied by faith, is an idle and unmeaning ceremony.
Accordingly, Christ, in order to excite us powerfully to this part of
our duty, not only enjoins what we ought to do, but promises that our
prayers shall not be fruitless.

<span id="ix.lxiii-p10"></span>This ought to be carefully observed.
First, we learn from it, that this rule of prayer is laid down and
prescribed to us, that we may be fully convinced, that God will be
gracious to us, and will listen to our requests. Again, whenever we
engage in prayer, or whenever we feel that our ardor in prayer is not
sufficiently strong, we ought to remember the gentle invitation, by
which Christ assures us of God’s fatherly kindness. Each of us, trusting
to the grace of Christ, will thus attain confidence in prayer, and will
venture freely to call upon God

<span id="ix.lxiii-p11"></span>“through Jesus Christ our Lord, in whom
(as Paul says)  
we have boldness and access with confidence by the faith of him,”  
(<span id="ix.lxiii-p11.3"></span>[Eph.
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#012)<span id="ix.lxiii-p11.3"></span>.)

<span id="ix.lxiii-p12"></span>But, as we are too prone to distrust,
Christ, in order to correct this fault also, repeats the promise in a
variety of words. He uses the metaphor *seek,* because we think, that
those things which our wants and necessities require are far distant
from us — and *knock,* because our carnal senses imagine, that those
things which are not immediately at hand are shut up.

<span id="ix.lxiii-p13"></span><span id="ix.lxiii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxiii-p14"></span>**8.** *For every one that asketh
receiveth* Some think that this is a proverbial saying taken from common
life: but I am more inclined to a different view. Christ presents the
grace of his Father to those who pray. He tells us, that God is of
himself prepared to listen to us, provided we pray to him, and that his
riches are at our command, provided we ask them. These words imply, that
those who are destitute of what is necessary, and yet do not resort to
this remedy for their poverty, are justly punished for their
slothfulness. It is certain, indeed, that often, when believers are
asleep, God keeps watch over their salvation, and anticipates their
wishes. Nothing could be more miserable for us than that, amidst our
great indifference, or—I would rather say—amidst our great stupidity,
God were to wait for our prayers, or that, amidst our great
thoughtlessness, he were to take no notice of us. Nay more, it is only
from himself that he is induced to bestow upon us faith, which goes
before all prayers in order and in time. But as Christ here addresses
disciples, he merely reminds us in what manner our heavenly Father is
pleased to bestow upon us his gifts. Though he gives all things freely
to us, yet, in order to exercise our faith, he commands us to pray, that
he may grant to our requests those blessings which flow from his
undeserved goodness.

<span id="ix.lxiii-p15"></span><span id="ix.lxiii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxiii-p16"></span>**9.** *Is there any man among you?* It
is a comparison from the less to the greater. First, our Lord contrasts
the malice of men with the boundless goodness of God. Self-love (<span
id="ix.lxiii-p16.1"></span>φιλαυτία) renders us malicious: for every man
is too much devoted to himself, and neglects and disregards others. But
this vice yields to the stronger feelings of a father’s love, so that
men forget themselves, and give to their children with overflowing
liberality. Whence comes this, but because God, of *whom the whole
family in heaven and earth is named,* (<span
id="ix.lxiii-p16.2"></span>[Eph
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#015)<span
id="ix.lxiii-p16.2"></span>,) drops into their hearts a portion of his
goodness? But if the little drops produce such an amount of beneficence,
what ought we to expect from the inexhaustible ocean? Would God, who
thus opens the hearts of men, shut his own? Let us also remember that
passage of Isaiah, “Though a mother forget her children,” (<span
id="ix.lxiii-p16.3"></span>[Isa
49:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#015)<span
id="ix.lxiii-p16.3"></span>,) yet the Lord will be like himself,  <span
id="fr_465"></span>[466](#fn_465) and will always show himself to be a
Father.

<span id="ix.lxiii-p18"></span><span id="ix.lxiii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxiii-p19"></span>**11.** *Your Father will give good
things* This is expressly mentioned by Christ, that believers may not
give way to foolish and improper desires in prayer. We know how great
influence, in this respect, is exerted by the excesses and presumption
of our flesh. There is nothing which we do not allow ourselves to ask
from God; and if he does not humor our folly, we exclaim against him.
Christ therefore enjoins us to submit our desires to the will of God,
that he may give us nothing more than he knows to be advantageous. We
must not think that he takes no notice of us, when he does not answer
our wishes: for he has a right to distinguish what we actually need. All
our affections being blind, the rule of prayer must be sought from the
word of God: for we are not competent judges of so weighty a matter. He
who desires to approach God with the conviction that he will be heard,
must learn to restrain his heart from asking any thing that is not
agreeable to his will.

<span id="ix.lxiii-p20"></span>“Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask
amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts.”  
(<span id="ix.lxiii-p20.3"></span>[Jas
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#003)<span id="ix.lxiii-p20.3"></span>)

<span id="ix.lxiii-p21"></span>Instead of *good things (*<span
id="ix.lxiii-p21.1"></span>ἀγαθὰ*)* in the last clause, Luke says *the
Holy Spirit* This does not exclude other benefits, but points out what
we ought chiefly to ask: for we ought never to forget the exhortation,
*Seek first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all other
things shall be added to you,* (<span id="ix.lxiii-p21.2"></span>[Mt
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033)<span
id="ix.lxiii-p21.2"></span>.) It is the duty of the children of God,
when they engage in prayer, to strip themselves of earthly affections,
and to rise to meditation on the spiritual life. In this way, they will
set little value on food and clothing, as compared to the earnest and
pledge of their adoption, (<span id="ix.lxiii-p21.3"></span>[Ro
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015)<span id="ix.lxiii-p21.3"></span>;
<span id="ix.lxiii-p21.4"></span>[Eph
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#014)<span
id="ix.lxiii-p21.4"></span>:) and when God has given so valuable a
treasure, he will not refuse smaller favors.

<span id="ix.lxiii-p22"></span><span id="ix.lxiii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxiii-p23"></span>**<span id="ix.lxiii-p23.2"></span>[Luke
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#005)<span
id="ix.lxiii-p23.2"></span>.** *Which of you shall have a friend, Luke*
adds this comparison, which is not mentioned by Matthew. The general
instruction conveyed by it is this: Believers ought not to be
discouraged, if they do not immediately obtain their desires, or if they
find them difficult to be obtained: for if, among men, importunity of
asking extorts what a person would not willingly do, we have no reason
to doubt that God will listen to us, if we persevere constantly in
prayer, and if our minds do not slacken through difficulty or delay.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_464"></span>[465](cc31071.htm#fr_464) <span
id="ix.lxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxiii-p6"></span> “<span id="ix.lxiii-p6.1"></span>Car un
mien ami m'est venu voir en passant;” — “for a friend of mine has come
to see.”

<span id="fn_465"></span>[466](cc31071.htm#fr_465) <span
id="ix.lxiii-p16.4"></span>

<span id="ix.lxiii-p17"></span> “<span id="ix.lxiii-p17.1"></span>Le
Seigneur ne changera point;” — “the Lord will not change.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 7:12-14; Luke 6:31](cc31072)
