[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31025)  [Next](cc31027) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xviii"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p1"></span>LUKE 2:15-21

<span id="ix.xviii-p2"></span><span id="ix.xviii-p2.1"></span>[Luke
2:15-21](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#015)<span
id="ix.xviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p3"></span>**15**.** **And it happened, after that
the angels departed from them into heaven, that the shepherds then
talked among themselves, Let us pass even to Bethlehem, and let us see
what has happened, which the Lord hath revealed to us. **16**.** **And
they came hastening, and found Mary and Joseph, and the babe laid in the
manger. **17**.** **And when they had seen it, they published concerning
the word which had been told them about this child. **18**.** **And all
who heard wondered about those things which had been told them by the
shepherds. **19**.** **Now Mary kept all these words, laying them up in
her heart.  <span id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164) **20**.** **And the
shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all the things which
they had heard and seen, as it had been told to them. **21**.** **And
after that eight days were fulfilled, that the child might be
circumcised, his name was called JESUS: which had been called by the
angel before he was conceived in the womb.

<span id="ix.xviii-p5"></span> 

<span id="ix.xviii-p6"></span><span id="ix.xviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p7"></span>**15.** *After that the angels departed*
Here is described to us the obedience of the shepherds. The Lord had
made them the witnesses of his Son to the whole world. What he had
spoken to them by his angels was efficacious, and was not suffered to
pass away. They were not plainly and expressly commanded to come to
Bethlehem; but, being sufficiently aware that such was the design of
God, they hasten to see Christ. In the same manner, we know that Christ
is held out to us, in order that our hearts may approach him by faith;
and our delay in coming admits of no excuse.  <span
id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165) But again, Luke informs us, that the
shepherds resolved to set out, immediately after the angels had
departed. This conveys an important lesson. Instead of allowing the word
of God, as many do, to pass away with the sound, we must take care that
it strike its roots deep in us, and manifest its power, as soon as the
sound has died away upon our ears. It deserves our attention, also, that
the shepherds exhort one another: for it is not enough that each of us
is attentive to his own duty, if we do not give mutual exhortations.
Their obedience is still farther commended by the statement of Luke,
that they *hastened,* (ver. 16;) for we are required to show the
readiness of faith.

<span id="ix.xviii-p9"></span>*Which the Lord hath revealed to us* They
had only heard it from the angel; but they intentionally and correctly
say, that *the Lord had revealed* it to them; for they consider the
messenger of God to possess the same authority as if the Lord himself
had addressed them. For this reason, the Lord directs our attention to
himself; that we may not fix our view on men, and undervalue the
authority of his Word. We see also that they reckon themselves under
obligation, not to neglect the treasure which the Lord had pointed out
to them; for they conclude that, immediately after receiving this
intelligence, they must go to Bethlehem to see it. In the same manner,
every one of us, according to the measure of his faith and
understanding, ought to be prepared to follow wheresoever God calls.

<span id="ix.xviii-p10"></span><span id="ix.xviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p11"></span>**16.** *And found Mary* This was a
revolting sight, and was sufficient of itself to produce an aversion to
Christ. For what could be more improbable than to believe that he was
the King of the whole people, who was deemed unworthy to be ranked with
the lowest of the multitude? or to expect the restoration of the kingdom
and salvation from him, whose poverty and want were such, that he was
thrown into a stable? Yet Luke writes, that none of these things
prevented the shepherds from admiring and praising God. The glory of God
was so fully before their eyes, and reverence for his Word was so deeply
impressed upon their minds, that the elevation of their faith easily
rose above all that appeared mean or despicable in Christ.  <span
id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166) And the only reason why our faith is
either retarded or driven from the proper course, by some very trifling
obstacles, is, that we do not look steadfastly enough on God, and are
easily “tossed to and fro,” (<span id="ix.xviii-p12.2"></span>[Eph
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#014)<span
id="ix.xviii-p12.2"></span>.) If this one thought were entirely to
occupy our minds, that we have a certain and faithful testimony from
heaven, it would be a sufficiently strong and firm support against every
kind of temptations, and will sufficiently protect us against every
little offense that might have been taken.

<span id="ix.xviii-p13"></span><span id="ix.xviii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p14"></span>**17.** *They published concerning the
word* It is mentioned by Luke, in commendation of the faith of the
shepherds, that they honestly delivered to others what they had received
from the Lord; and it was advantageous to all of us that they should
attest this, and should be a sort of secondary angels in confirming our
faith. Luke shows also that, in publishing what they had heard, they
were not without success.  <span id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167) Nor
can it be doubted, that the Lord gave efficacy to what they said, that
it might not be ridiculed or despised; for the low rank of the men
diminished their credit, and the occurrence itself might be regarded as
fabulous. But the Lord, who gave them this employment, does not allow it
to be fruitless.

<span id="ix.xviii-p16"></span>That the Lord should adopt such a method
of proceeding as this, — should employ inconsiderable men in publishing
his Word, may not be quite so agreeable to the human mind. But it tends
to humble the pride of the flesh, and to try the obedience of faith; and
therefore God approves of it. Still, though all are astonished, no one
moves a step to come to Christ: from which we may infer, that the
impression made upon them by hearing of the power of God, was
unaccompanied by any devout affection of the heart. The design of
publishing this report was not so much for their salvation, as to render
the ignorance of the whole people inexcusable.

<span id="ix.xviii-p17"></span><span id="ix.xviii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p18"></span>**19.** *Now Mary kept* Mary’s diligence
in contemplating the works of God is laid before us for two reasons;
first, to inform us, that this treasure was laid up in her heart, for
the purpose of being published to others at the proper time; and,
secondly, to afford to all the godly an example for imitation. For, if
we are wise, it will be the chief employment, and the great object of
our life, to consider with attention those works of God which build up
our faith. *Mary* *kept all these things* This relates to her memory.
<span id="ix.xviii-p18.1"></span>Συμβάλλειν signifies *to throw
together*, — to collect the several events which agreed in proving the
glory of Christ, so that they might form one body. For Mary could not
wisely estimate the collective value of all those occurrences, except by
comparing them with each other.

<span id="ix.xviii-p19"></span><span id="ix.xviii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p20"></span>**20.** *Glorifying and praising God*
This is another circumstance which is fitted to be generally useful in
confirming our faith. The shepherds knew with certainty that this was a
work of God. Their zeal in *glorifying and praising God* is an implied
reproof of our indolence, or rather of our ingratitude. If the cradle of
Christ  <span id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168) had such an effect upon
them, as to make them rise from the stable and the manger to heaven, how
much more powerful ought the death and resurrection of Christ to be in
raising us to God? For Christ did not only ascend from the earth, that
he might draw all things after him; but he sits at the right hand of the
Father, that, during our pilgrimage in the world, we may meditate with
our whole heart on the heavenly life. When Luke says, that the testimony
of the angel served as a rule to the shepherds in all that they did,
 <span id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169) he points out the nature of
true godliness. For our faith is properly aided by the works of God,
when it directs everything to this end, that the truth of God, which was
revealed in his word, may be brought out with greater clearness.

<span id="ix.xviii-p23"></span><span id="ix.xviii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p24"></span>**21.** *That the child might be
circumcised* As to circumcision in general, the reader may consult the
Book of Genesis, (<span id="ix.xviii-p24.1"></span>[Ge
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#010)<span
id="ix.xviii-p24.1"></span>.) At present, it will be sufficient to state
briefly what applies to the person of Christ. God appointed that his Son
should be circumcised, in order to subject him to the law; for
circumcision was a solemn rite, by which the Jews

<span id="ix.xviii-p25"></span>were initiated into the observance of the
law.  <span id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170) Paul explains the design,
 <span id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171) when he says, that Christ was

<span id="ix.xviii-p28"></span>“made under the law, to redeem them that
were under the law,”  
(<span id="ix.xviii-p28.2"></span>[Gal.
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#005)<span id="ix.xviii-p28.2"></span>.)

<span id="ix.xviii-p29"></span>By undergoing circumcision, Christ
acknowledged himself to be the slave  <span
id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172) of the law, that he might procure our
freedom. And in this way not only was the bondage  <span
id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173) of the law abolished by him, but the
shadow of the ceremony was applied to his own body, that it might
shortly afterwards come to an end. For though the abrogation of it
depends on the death and resurrection of Christ, yet it was a sort of
prelude to it, that the Son of God submitted to be circumcised.

<span id="ix.xviii-p32"></span>*His name was called JESUS*. This passage
shows, that it was a general custom among the Jews to give names to
their children on the day that they were circumcised, just as we now do
at baptism. Two things are here mentioned by the Evangelist. First, the
name *Jesus* was not given to the Son of God accidentally, or by the
will of men, but was the name which the angel had brought from heaven.
Secondly, Joseph and Mary obeyed the command of God. The agreement
between our faith and the word of God lies in this, that he speaks
first, and we follow, so that our faith answers to his promises. Above
all, the order of preaching the word is held up by Luke for our
commendation. Salvation through the grace of Christ, he tells us, had
been promised by God through the angel, and was proclaimed by the voice
of men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_164"></span>[165](cc31026.htm#fr_164) <span
id="ix.xviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p4"></span> “<span id="ix.xviii-p4.1"></span>Les
ruminant en son coeur;” — “ruminating on them in her heart.”

<span id="fn_165"></span>[166](cc31026.htm#fr_165) <span
id="ix.xviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p8"></span> “<span id="ix.xviii-p8.1"></span>Si nous
sommes paresseux de le faire, toutes les excuses du monde ne nous
serviront de rien.” — “If we are indolent in doing so, all the apologies
in the world will be of no service to us.”

<span id="fn_166"></span>[167](cc31026.htm#fr_166) <span
id="ix.xviii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p12"></span> In the French copy he adds: “<span
id="ix.xviii-p12.1"></span>En sorte que cela ne les empesche point de
recognoistre la hautesse de sa maiste divine.” — “So that it does not
hinder them from acknowledging the height of his divine majesty.”

<span id="fn_167"></span>[168](cc31026.htm#fr_167) <span
id="ix.xviii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p15"></span> “<span id="ix.xviii-p15.1"></span>Ils
n'ont pas perdu leurs peines;” — “they did not lose their pains.”

<span id="fn_168"></span>[169](cc31026.htm#fr_168) <span
id="ix.xviii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p21"></span> “<span id="ix.xviii-p21.1"></span>Si les
petits drapeaux esquels estoit enveloppe l'infant Jesus;”— “if the
little rags in which the child Jesus was wrapped.”

<span id="fn_169"></span>[170](cc31026.htm#fr_169) <span
id="ix.xviii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p22"></span> “<span id="ix.xviii-p22.1"></span>Ad
quam omnia exigerent.” — “<span id="ix.xviii-p22.2"></span>Une reigle, a
laquelle ils ont rapporte tout ce qu'ils voyoyent;” — “a rule by which
they related all that they saw.”

<span id="fn_170"></span>[171](cc31026.htm#fr_170) <span
id="ix.xviii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p26"></span> “<span id="ix.xviii-p26.1"></span>Par
lequel les Juifs protestoyent de se soumettre a l'observation de la
Loy;” — “by which the Jews solemnly declared that they would submit to
the observance of the Law.”

<span id="fn_171"></span>[172](cc31026.htm#fr_171) <span
id="ix.xviii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p27"></span> “<span
id="ix.xviii-p27.1"></span>Finem.” — “<span
id="ix.xviii-p27.2"></span>La fin ou le but de ceste soumission de Jesus
Christ;” —”the end or design of this submission of Jesus Christ.”

<span id="fn_172"></span>[173](cc31026.htm#fr_172) <span
id="ix.xviii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p30"></span> “<span
id="ix.xviii-p30.2"></span>Servum.”—This might have been supposed to be
equivalent to <span id="ix.xviii-p30.3"></span>*ministrum, servant,* had
not the latter clause of the sentence expressly contrasted *freedom*
with the condition of a *slave.* But Calvin settles the point by
rendering it *serf, slave;* by which he evidently means “complete and
degrading subjection.” Paul frequently speaks of the state of the Church
under the law as *bondage,* (<span id="ix.xviii-p30.4"></span>[Gal.
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#003),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#009)<span id="ix.xviii-p30.4"></span>,)
and a *yoke of bondage,* (<span id="ix.xviii-p30.5"></span>[Ga
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#001)<span id="ix.xviii-p30.5"></span>.)
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_173"></span>[174](cc31026.htm#fr_173) <span
id="ix.xviii-p30.6"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p31"></span> See passages referred to in the
preceding note, in which the term *bondage is* applied by an inspired
writer to the ceremonial law — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 2:1-6](cc31027)
