[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31039)  [Next](cc31041) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xxxii"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 4:5-11; MARK 1:13; LUKE 4:5-13

<span id="ix.xxxii-p2"></span><span id="ix.xxxii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
4:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#005)<span id="ix.xxxii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxii-p3"></span><span id="ix.xxxii-p3.1"></span>[Mark
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#013)<span id="ix.xxxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxii-p4"></span><span id="ix.xxxii-p4.1"></span>[Luke
4:5-13](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#005)<span id="ix.xxxii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxii-p5"></span>**5**.** **Then the devil taketh  <span
id="fr_312"></span>[313](#fn_312) him into the holy city, and placeth
him on the pinnacle  <span id="fr_313"></span>[314](#fn_313) of the
temple, **6**.** **And saith to him, If thou art the Son of God, throw
thyself down: for it is written, He will command his angels concerning
thee, and they will carry thee in their hands, lest at any time thou
dash thy foot against a stone. **7**.** **Jesus said to him, Again it is
written, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God. **8**.** **Again, the
devil taketh him to a very high mountain, and pointeth out to him all
the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them; **9**.** **And saith
to him, All these things I will give thee, if, falling down, thou shalt
adore me. **10**.** **Then Jesus saith to him, Depart, Satan, for it is
written, Thou shalt adore the Lord thy God, and him alone thou shalt
worship. **11**.** **Then the devil leaveth him, and lo, angels
approached, and waited on him.

<span id="ix.xxxii-p8"></span>**13**.** **And angels waited on him.

<span id="ix.xxxii-p9"></span>**5**.** **And the devil conducted him to
a high mountain, and showed him all the kingdoms of the world in a
moment. **6**.** **And the devil saith to him, I will give thee this
universal power, and the glory of them: for they have been delivered to
me, and to whomsoever I will, I give it. **7**.** **If, therefore,
bowing down before me, thou shalt worship, all things shall be thine.
**8**.** **And Jesus answering said to him, Go behind me, Satan: for it
is written, Thou shalt adore the Lord thy God, and him alone thou shalt
worship. **9**.** **And he led him to Jerusalem, and placed him on a
parapet of the temple, and said to him, If thou art the Son of God,
throw thyself down hence: **10**.** **For it is written, that he will
command his angels concerning thee, that they may preserve thee:
**11**.** **And that they will support thee with their hands, lest thou
dash thy foot against a stone. **12**.** **And he answering said to him,
It is said, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God. **13**.** **And all
the temptation having been finished, the devil departed from him for a
time.

<span id="ix.xxxii-p10"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxxii-p11"></span><span id="ix.xxxii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxii-p12"></span>**<span
id="ix.xxxii-p12.2"></span>[Matthew
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#005)<span
id="ix.xxxii-p12.2"></span>.** *Then the devil taketh him.* It is not of
great importance, that Luke’s narrative makes that temptation to be the
second, which Matthew places as the third: for it was not the intention
of the Evangelists to arrange the history in such a manner, as to
preserve on all occasions, the exact order of time, but to draw up an
abridged narrative of the events, so as to present, as in a mirror or
picture, those things which are most necessary to be known concerning
Christ. Let it suffice for us to know that Christ was tempted in three
ways. The question, which of these contests was the second, and which
was the third, need not give us much trouble or uneasiness. In the
exposition, I shall follow the text of Matthew.

<span id="ix.xxxii-p13"></span>Christ is said to have been *placed on
the pinnacle of the temple.* It is asked, was he actually carried to
this elevated spot, or was it done in vision? There are many, who
obstinately assert, that the body was really and actually conveyed: for
they consider it to be unworthy of Christ, that he should be supposed to
be liable to the delusions of Satan. But it is easy to dispose of that
objection. There is no absurdity in supposing, that this took place by
the permission of God and the voluntary subjection of Christ; provided
we hold that within, — that is, in his mind and souls, — he suffered no
delusion. What is next added, that *all the kingdoms of the world* were
placed in the view of Christ, — as well as what Luke relates, that he
was carried to a great distance in one moment, — agrees better with the
idea of a vision, than with any other supposition. In a matter that is
doubtful, and where ignorance brings no risk, I choose rather to suspend
my judgment, than to furnish contentious people with an occasion of
debate. It is also possible, that the second temptation did not follow
the first, nor the third the second, in immediate succession, but that
some interval of time elapsed. This is even more probable, though the
words of Luke might lead to the conclusion, that there was no long
interval: for he says, that Christ obtained repose for a time.

<span id="ix.xxxii-p14"></span>But the main question for our
consideration is, what was Satan’s object in this kind of temptation?
That will be best determined, as I have lately hinted, by our Lord’s
reply to Satan. To meet the stratagem of the enemy, and to repel his
attack, Christ interposes, as a shield, these words: *Thou shalt not
tempt the Lord thy God.* Hence it is evident, that the stratagems of the
enemy were intended to induce Christ to exalt himself unduly, and to
rise, in a daring manner, against God. Satan had formerly attempted to
drive Christ to despair, because he was destitute of food, and of the
ordinary means of life. Now, he exhorts him to indulge a foolish and
vain confidences, — to neglect the means which are in his powers, — to
throw himself, without necessity, into manifest danger, — and, as we
might say, to overleap all bounds. As it is not proper for us to be
discouraged, when we are pressed by “the want of all things,” (<span
id="ix.xxxii-p14.1"></span>[De
28:57](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#057)<span
id="ix.xxxii-p14.1"></span>,) but to rely with confidence on God,
neither are we at liberty to raise our crests, or ascend higher than God
permits us. The design of Satan, we have now ascertained, was to induce
Christ to make trial of his divinity, and to rise up, in foolish and
wicked rashness, against God.

<span id="ix.xxxii-p15"></span><span id="ix.xxxii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxii-p16"></span>**6.** *He will charge his angels
concerning thee.* We must observe this malice of Satan, in misapplying a
quotation of Scripture, for the purpose of rendering life deadly to
Christ, and of converting bread into poison. The same kind of stratagem
he continues daily to employ; and the Son of God, who is the universal
model of all the godly, chose to undergo this contest in his own person,
that all may be industriously on their guard against being led, by a
false application of Scripture, into the snares of Satan. And
undoubtedly the Lord grants such a permission to our adversary, that we
may not remain in indolent ease, but may be more careful to keep watch.
Nor ought we to imitate the madness of those who throw away Scripture,
as if it admitted of every kind of interpretation, because the devil
misapplies it. For the same reason, we ought to abstain from food, to
avoid the risk of being poisoned. Satan profanes the Word of God, and
endeavors to torture it for our destruction. But it has been ordained by
God for our salvation; and shall the purpose of God be frustrated,
unless our indolence deprive his word of its saving effect?

<span id="ix.xxxii-p17"></span>We need not dispute long on these
matters. Let us only inquire, what Christ enjoins on us by his example,
which we ought to follow as a rule. When Satan wickedly tortures
Scripture, does Christ give way to him? Does he allow him to seize and
carry off the Scripture, with which he formerly armed himself? On the
contrary, he quotes Scripture in his turn, and boldly refutes Satan’s
wicked slander. Whenever Satan shall cover his deception by Scripture,
and ungodly men shall labor to subvert our faith by the same means, let
us borrow our armor exclusively from Scripture for the protection of our
faith.

<span id="ix.xxxii-p18"></span>Though the promise, *he will charge his
angels concerning thee,* (<span id="ix.xxxii-p18.1"></span>[Ps
91:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#011)<span
id="ix.xxxii-p18.1"></span>,) relates to all believers, yet it belongs
peculiarly to Christ, who is the Head of the whole Church, possesses
authority over angels, and commits to them the charge of us. Satan is
not wrong in proving from this passage, that angels have been given to
Christ, to wait on him, to guard him, and to bear him on their hands.
But the fallacy lies in this, that he assigns a wandering and uncertain
course to that guardianship of angels, which is only promised to the
children of God, when they keep themselves within their bounds, and walk
in their *ways.* If there is any force in that expression, *in all thy
ways,* (<span id="ix.xxxii-p18.2"></span>[Ps
91:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#011)<span
id="ix.xxxii-p18.2"></span>,) the prophet’s meaning is wickedly
corrupted and mutilated by Satan, when he applies it, in a violent and
wild and confused manner, to extravagant and mistaken courses. God
commands us to walk *in our ways,* and then declares that angels will be
our guardians: Satan brings forward the guardianship of angels, for the
purpose of advising Christ to put himself unnecessarily in danger, as if
he would say: “If you expose yourself to death, contrary to the will of
God, angels will protect your life.”

<span id="ix.xxxii-p19"></span><span id="ix.xxxii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxii-p20"></span>**7.** *It is written, Thou shalt not
tempt the Lord thy God.* The reply of Christ is most appropriate. There
is no other way, in which we have a right to expect the assistance
promised in that passage, than when believers humbly submit themselves
to his guidance: for we cannot rely on his promises, without obeying his
commandments. God is *tempted* in many ways: but in this passage, the
word *tempt* denotes the neglect of those means which he puts into our
hands. Those who leave the means which God recommends, and resolve to
make trial of his power and might, act as absurdly as if one were to cut
off a man’s arms and hands, and then order him to work. In short,
whoever desires to make an experiment of the divine power, when there is
no necessity for it, *tempts God* by subjecting his promises to an
unfair trial.

<span id="ix.xxxii-p21"></span><span id="ix.xxxii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxii-p22"></span>**8.** *The devil taketh him to a very
high mountain.* We must keep in mind, what I have already stated, that
it was not owing to any weakness of Christ’s nature, but to a voluntary
dispensation and permission, that Satan produced this effect upon his
eyes. Again, while his senses were moved and powerfully affected by the
glory of the kingdoms which was presented to them, no inward desire
arose in his mind; whereas the lusts of the flesh, like wild beasts, are
drawn, and hurry us along, to the objects which please us: for Christ
had the same feelings with ourselves, but he had no irregular appetites.
The kind of temptation here described was, that Christ should seek, in
another manner than from God, the inheritance which he has promised to
his children. And here the daring insolence of the devil is manifested,
in robbing God of the government of the world, and claiming it for
himself. *All these things,* says he, *are mine,* and it is only through
me that they are obtained.

<span id="ix.xxxii-p23"></span>We have to contend every day with the
same imposture: for every believer feels it in himself and it is still
more clearly seen in the whole life of the ungodly. Though we are
convinced, that all our support, and aid, and comfort, depend on the
blessing of God, yet our senses allure and draw us away, to seek
assistance from Satan, as if God alone were not enough. A considerable
portion of mankind disbelieve the power and authority of God over the
world, and imagine that every thing good is bestowed by Satan. For how
comes it, that almost all resort to wicked contrivances, to robbery and
to fraud, but because they ascribe to Satan what belongs to God, the
power of enriching whom he pleases by his blessing? True, indeed, with
the mouth they ask that God will *give them daily bread,* (<span
id="ix.xxxii-p23.1"></span>[Mt
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#011)<span id="ix.xxxii-p23.1"></span>)
but it is only with the mouth; for they make Satan the distributor of
all the riches in the world.

<span id="ix.xxxii-p24"></span><span id="ix.xxxii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxii-p25"></span>**10.** *Depart, Satan.* Instead of this,
Luke has, *Depart behind me, Satan.* There is no use for speculating
about the phrase, *behind me,* which Christ addressed to Peter, *Go
behind me,* (<span id="ix.xxxii-p25.1"></span>[Mt
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#023)<span
id="ix.xxxii-p25.1"></span>,) as if the same words had not been
addressed to Satan. Christ simply bids him go away;  <span
id="fr_314"></span>[315](#fn_314) and now proceeds with the same kind of
defense as before, employing Scripture as a shield, not of reeds, but of
brass. He quotes a passage from the law, that God alone is to be adored
and worshipped, (<span id="ix.xxxii-p26.2"></span>[Deut.
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013), [Deut.
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#020)<span
id="ix.xxxii-p26.2"></span>.) From the application of that passage, and
from the circumstances in which it is introduced, it is easy to conclude
what is the design of adoration of God, and in what it consists.

<span id="ix.xxxii-p27"></span>Papists deny that God only ought to be
adored; and evade this and similar passages by sophistical arguments.
<span id="ix.xxxii-p27.2"></span>*Latria,* (<span
id="ix.xxxii-p27.3"></span>λατρεία,) they admit, is adoration, which
ought to be given to God alone: but <span
id="ix.xxxii-p27.4"></span>*Dulia,* (<span
id="ix.xxxii-p27.5"></span>δουλεία,) is an inferior kind of adoration,
which they bestow on dead men, and on their bones and statues. But
Christ rejects this frivolous distinction, and claims for God alone
<span id="ix.xxxii-p27.6"></span>προσκύνησις, *worship;* by which he
warns us to attend more to the matter than to expressions, when we have
to do with the worship of God.

<span id="ix.xxxii-p28"></span>Scripture enjoins us to *worship God
alone:* we must inquire, for what end? If a man takes any thing from his
glory, and ascribes it to creatures, this is a heinous profanation of
divine worship. But it is very evident that this is done, when we go to
creatures, to receive from them those good things, of which God desired
to be acknowledged as the only Author. Now, as religion is strictly
spiritual, and the outward acknowledgment of it relates to the body, so
not only the inward worship, but also the outward manifestation of it,
is due to God alone.  <span id="fr_315"></span>[316](#fn_315)

<span id="ix.xxxii-p30"></span><span id="ix.xxxii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxii-p31"></span>**11.** *Then the devil leaveth him.*
Luke expresses more: *when all the temptation had been finished.* This
means, that no truce or relaxation was granted to Christ, till he had
been fully tried by every species of contest. He adds, that Christ was
*left for a season only.* This is intended to inform us, that the rest
of his life was not entirely free from *temptations,* but that God
restrained the power of Satan, so that Christ was not unseasonably
disturbed by him. In like manner, God usually acts towards all his
people: for, after permitting them to be sharply tried, he abates, in
some measure, the violence of the strife, that they may take breath for
a little, and gather courage. What immediately follows, *the angels
waited on him,* I understand as referring to comfort, that Christ might
feel, that God the Father took care of him, and fortified him, by his
powerful assistance, against Satan. For the very solitude might
aggravate the dreariness of his condition, when he was deprived of the
kind offices of men, *and was with the wild beasts,* — a circumstance
which is expressly mentioned by Mark. And yet we must not suppose, that
Christ was ever forsaken by the angels: but, in order to allow an
opportunity for temptation, the grace of God, though it was present, was
sometimes hidden from him, so far as respects the feeling of the flesh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_312"></span>[313](cc31040.htm#fr_312) <span
id="ix.xxxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxii-p6"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxii-p6.1"></span>Le
transporte;” — “conveys him.”

<span id="fn_313"></span>[314](cc31040.htm#fr_313) <span
id="ix.xxxii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxii-p7"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxii-p7.1"></span>Le
pinnacle.”

<span id="fn_314"></span>[315](cc31040.htm#fr_314) <span
id="ix.xxxii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxii-p26"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxii-p26.1"></span>Il
vent seulement le rejetter avec son conseil;” — “he wishes only to
reject him with his advice.”

<span id="fn_315"></span>[316](cc31040.htm#fr_315) <span
id="ix.xxxii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxii-p29"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxii-p29.1"></span>Christ
attribue aussi a Dieu seul l'adoration externe, que les Grecs appellent
προσχύνησις: <span id="ix.xxxii-p29.2"></span>car il use de ce terme qui
signifient proprement *s'agenouiller ET prosterner* par forme de service
divin.” — “Christ ascribes also to God alone the external adoration,
which the Greeks call προσχύνησις: for he employs this term, which
signifies literally to *kneel and bow down,* in a form of divine
service.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 4:12,17;Mark 1:14-15;Luke 3:19-20; 4:14](cc31041)
