[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31046)  [Next](cc31048) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xxxix"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxix-p1"></span>MATTHEW 8:14-18; MARK 1:29-39; LUKE
4:38-44

<span id="ix.xxxix-p2"></span><span id="ix.xxxix-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
8:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#014)<span
id="ix.xxxix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxix-p3"></span><span id="ix.xxxix-p3.1"></span>[Mark
1:29-39](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#029)<span
id="ix.xxxix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxix-p4"></span><span id="ix.xxxix-p4.1"></span>[Luke
4:38-44](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#038)<span
id="ix.xxxix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxix-p5"></span>**14**.** **And when Jesus had come into
Peter’s house, he saw his mother-in-law lying in bed, and afflicted with
fever. **15**.** **And he touched her hand, and the fever left her, and
she arose and waited on them. **16**.** **And when the evening had
approached, they brought to him many demoniacs, and he cast out the
spirits by his word, and healed all that were diseased: **17**.** **That
it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Isaiah the prophet, when he
saith, He hath taken our diseases. **18**.** **And when Jesus had seen
great multitudes around him, he commanded that they should depart to the
other side.

<span id="ix.xxxix-p6"></span>**29**.** **And immediately going out of
the synagogue, they came, with James and John, into the house of Simon
and Andrew. **30**.** **And Simon’s mother-in-law lay afflicted with
fever and immediately they speak to him about her. **31**.** **And
approaching, he raised her, by taking her hand, and the fever
immediately left her, and she waited on them. **32**.** **And in the
evening, when the sun had set, they brought to him all who were
diseased, and who were possessed by devils. **33**.** **And the whole
city was assembled at the door. **34**.** **And hehealed many that were
ill of various diseases, and cast out many devils: and he did not permit
the devils to say that they knew him. **35**.** **And in the morning,
while it was still very dark, Jesus, when he had risen, went out, and
departed into a desert place, and there prayed. **36**.** **And Simon
followed him, as also those who were with him. **37**.** **And when they
had found him, they said to him, All seek thee. **38**.** **And he saith
to them, Let us go into the adjoining villages, that I preach there
also: for on this account I came out. **39**.** **And he preached in
their synagogues in all Galilee, and cast out devils.

<span id="ix.xxxix-p7"></span>**38**.** **And when Jesus had risen out
of the synagogue, he entered into Simon’s house. And Simon’s
mother-in-law was held by a great fever, and they besought him for her.
**39**.** **And standing over her, he rebuked the fever, and the fever
left her: and immediately rising, she waited on them. **40**.** **And
when the sun was setting, all, who had persons laboring under various
diseases, brought them to him: and he, laying hands upon each, healed
them. **41**.** **And the devils went out of many, crying and saying,
Thou art Christ, the Son of God. And, rebuking, he did not permit them
to speak those things, that they knew that he was Christ.
**42**.** **And when it was day, going out, he went into a desert place,
and multitudes sought him: and came even to him, and held him, that he
might not depart from them. **43**.** **To whom he saith, I must also
preach the kingdom of God in other cities: for on this account am I
sent. **44**.** **And he preached in the synagogues of Galilee.

<span id="ix.xxxix-p8"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxxix-p9"></span><span id="ix.xxxix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxix-p10"></span>**<span id="ix.xxxix-p10.2"></span>[Mark
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#029)<span
id="ix.xxxix-p10.2"></span>.** *They came, with James and John, into the
house of Simon and Andrew.* There is reason to conjecture, that Matthew
does not relate this history in its proper order: for Mark expressly
states, that there were only four disciples who attended Christ.
Besides, when he left the synagogue, he went straight to Peter’s house;
which also shows clearly, that Matthew did not observe, with exactness,
the order of time. The Evangelists appear to have taken particular
notice of this miracle; not that, in itself, it was more remarkable, or
more worthy of being recorded, than other miracles, — but because, by
means of it, Christ gave to his disciples a private and familiar
illustration of his grace. Another reason was, that the healing of one
woman gave occasion to many miracles, so that they came to him in great
numbers, from every direction, to implore his assistance. A single word,
in Luke’s narrative, presents to us more strikingly the power which
Christ displayed; for he says, that *Simon’s mother-in-law was held by a
GREAT* *fever.* It was a clearer and more affecting proof of divine
power, that, in a moment, and by a single touch, he removed a strong and
violent disease. He might have done it by the slightest expression of
his will; but he *touched her hand,* **(**<span
id="ix.xxxix-p10.3"></span>[Mt
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#015)<span
id="ix.xxxix-p10.3"></span>**,)** either to mark his affection, or
because he was aware that this sign was, at that time, advantageous: for
we know, that he freely used outward signs, when the time required them.

<span id="ix.xxxix-p11"></span><span id="ix.xxxix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxix-p12"></span>**<span id="ix.xxxix-p12.2"></span>[Luke
4:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#039)<span
id="ix.xxxix-p12.2"></span>.** *He rebuked the fever.* To a person not
well acquainted with Scripture this mode of expression may appear harsh;
but there were good reasons for employing it. *Fevers* and other
diseases, famine, pestilence, and calamities of every description, are
God’s heralds,  <span id="fr_346"></span>[347](#fn_346) by whom he
executes his judgments. Now, as he is said to send such messengers by
his command and pleasure, so he also restrains and recalls them whenever
he pleases. The manner in which he healed them is not mentioned by
Matthew and Mark: but Luke says, that it was by *laying hands on each of
them.* Under the Law, this was a sign of reconciliation; and, therefore,
it was not improperly, or unseasonably, that Christ *laid hands* on
those whom he freed from the curse of God. It was also a solemn rite of
consecration, as will afterwards be more fully explained. But I
interpret Christ’s *laying hands* on the sick, as meaning simply, that
he recommended them to the Father, and thus obtained for them grace and
deliverance from their diseases.

<span id="ix.xxxix-p14"></span><span id="ix.xxxix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxix-p15"></span>**<span
id="ix.xxxix-p15.2"></span>[Matthew
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#017)<span
id="ix.xxxix-p15.2"></span>.** *That it might be fulfilled which was
spoken by Isaiah the prophet.* This prediction has the appearance of
being inappropriate, and even of being tortured into a meaning which it
does not bear: for Isaiah does not there speak of miracles, but of the
death of Christ, — and not of temporal benefits, but of spiritual and
eternal grace. Now, what is undoubtedly spoken about the impurities of
the soul, Matthew applies to bodily diseases. The solution is not
difficult, if the reader will only observe, that the Evangelist states
not merely the benefit conferred by Christ on those sick persons, but
the purpose for which he healed their diseases. They experienced in
their bodies the grace of Christ, but we must look at the design: for it
would be idle to confine our view to a transitory advantage, as if the
Son of God were a physician of bodies. What then? He gave sight to the
blind, in order to show that he is “the light of the world,” (<span
id="ix.xxxix-p15.3"></span>[Joh
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012)<span
id="ix.xxxix-p15.3"></span>.) He restored life to the dead, to prove
that he is “the resurrection and the life,” (<span
id="ix.xxxix-p15.4"></span>[Joh
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#025)<span
id="ix.xxxix-p15.4"></span>.) Similar observations might be made as to
those who were lame, or had palsy. Following out this analogy, let us
connect those benefits, which Christ bestowed on men in the flesh, with
the design which is stated to us by Matthew, that he was sent by the
Father, to relieve us from all evils and miseries.

<span id="ix.xxxix-p16"></span><span id="ix.xxxix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxix-p17"></span>**<span id="ix.xxxix-p17.2"></span>[Mark
1:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#034)<span
id="ix.xxxix-p17.2"></span>.** *He did not permit the devils to speak.*
There might be two reasons why *he did not permit* them: a general
reason, because the time of the full revelation was not yet come; and a
special reason, which we hinted at a little ago, that he refused to
have, as heralds and witnesses of his divinity, those whose praise could
have no other effect than to soil and injure his character. This latter
reason is undoubtedly true: for he must have known, that the prince of
death, and his agents, are in a state of irreconcileable enmity with the
Author of eternal salvation and life.

<span id="ix.xxxix-p18"></span><span id="ix.xxxix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxix-p19"></span>**<span
id="ix.xxxix-p19.2"></span>[Matthew
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#018)<span
id="ix.xxxix-p19.2"></span>** *And when Jesus had seen great multitudes
about him.* Matthew, I have no doubt, touches briefly what the others
explain in a more ample and copious narrative. The other two state a
circumstance, which is not noticed by Matthew that Christ withdrew
privately, for the sake of retirement, *into a desert place,* before it
was daylight. Mark afterwards says, that Peter informed him, *all seek,
thee;* and Luke says, that *multitudes* came to that place. Again,
Matthew says, that *he passed over to the other side,* while the other
two say, that he passed *through all Galilee,* to preach in every place.
But *the other side,* or, *the farther bank, (*<span
id="ix.xxxix-p19.3"></span>τὸ πέραν,) does not, I think, denote what was
strictly the opposite side, but refers to that curvature of the lake,
which was below Capernaum. In this way, he crossed over to another part
of the lake, and yet did not go out of Galilee.

<span id="ix.xxxix-p20"></span><span id="ix.xxxix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxix-p21"></span>**Mark1:38.** *For on this account I came
out.* **<span id="ix.xxxix-p21.2"></span>[Luke
4:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#043)<span
id="ix.xxxix-p21.2"></span>.** *For on this account am I sent.* These
words deserve our attention: for they contain a declaration of his
earnest desire to fulfill his office. But it will perhaps be asked, is
it better that the ministers of the Gospel should run here and there, to
give only a slight and partial taste of it in each place, or that they
should remain, and instruct perfectly the hearers whom they have once
obtained? I reply. The design of Christ, which is here mentioned, was
agreeable to the injunction and call of the Father, and was founded on
the best reasons. For it was necessary that Christ should travel, within
a short period, throughout Judea, to awaken the minds of men, on all
sides, as if by the sound of a trumpet, to hear the Gospel. But on this
subject we must treat more fully under another passage.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_346"></span>[347](cc31047.htm#fr_346) <span
id="ix.xxxix-p12.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxix-p13"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxix-p13.1"></span>Les
sergens de Dieu;” — “God's bailiffs.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark 3:13-19;Luke 6:12-19](cc31048)
