[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31009)  [Next](cc31011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p1"></span>LUKE 1:5-13

<span id="ix.ii-p2"></span><span id="ix.ii-p2.1"></span>[Luke
1:5-13](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#005)<span id="ix.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p3"></span>**5**.** **In the days of Herod, king of
Judea, there was a certain priest named Zacharias, of the course of
Abia; and his wife was of the daughters of Aaron, and her name was
Elisabeth. **6**.** **And they were both righteous before God, walking
in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless.
**7**.** **And they had no child, because Elisabeth was barren, and they
were now both at an advanced age. **8**.** **And it happened, while he
was discharging the priest's office in the order of his course before
God, **9**.** **According to the custom of the priest's office, it fell
to him by lot to burn incense when he went into the temple of the Lord.
**10**.** **And the whole multitude of the people were praying without
at the time of incense. **11**.** **And an angel of the Lord appeared to
him, standing at the right hand of the altar on which the incense was
burning. **12**.** **And Zacharias was troubled when he saw him, and
fear fell upon him. **13**.** **But the angel said to him, Fear not,
Zacharias, for thy prayer is heard: and thy wife Elisabeth shall bear
thee a son, and thou shalt call his name John.

<span id="ix.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.ii-p5"></span><span id="ix.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p6"></span>Luke very properly begins his Gospel with
John the Baptist, just as a person who was going to speak about the
daylight would commence with the dawn. For, like the dawn, he went
before the Sun of Righteousness, which was shortly to arise. Others also
mention him, but they bring him forward as already discharging his
office. Luke secures our respect for him, while he is yet unborn, by
announcing the miracles of divine power which took place at the earliest
period of his existence, and by showing that he had a commission from
heaven to be a prophet, ere it was possible for men to know what would
be his character. His object was that John might afterwards be heard
with more profound veneration, when he should come forth invested with a
public office to exhibit the glory of Christ.

<span id="ix.ii-p7"></span>**5.** *In the days of Herod* This was the
son of Antipater, whom his father elevated to the throne, and labored
with such assiduity and toil to advance, that he was afterwards surnamed
Herod *the Great* Some think that he is here mentioned by Luke, because
he was their first foreign king; and that this was a suitable time for
their deliverance, because the scepter had passed into a different
nation. But they who speak in this manner do not correctly understand
Jacob’s prophecy, (<span id="ix.ii-p7.1"></span>[Ge
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010)<span id="ix.ii-p7.1"></span>,)
in which the advent of the Messiah is promised not merely after the
royal authority had been taken from the Jews, but after it had been
removed from the tribe of Judah. The holy patriarch did not even
intimate that the tribe of Judah would be stripped of its supremacy, but
that the government of the people would steadily remain in it until
Christ, in whose person its permanency would at length be secured. When
the Maccabees flourished, the tribe of Judah was reduced nearly to a
private rank; and shortly afterwards, John, the latest leader of that
race, was slain. But even at that time, its power was not completely
annihilated; for there still remained the Sanhedrim, or Council selected
out of the family and descendants of David, which possessed great
authority, and lasted till the time of Herod, who, by a shocking
slaughter of the judges, revenged the punishment formerly inflicted on
himself, when he was condemned for murder, and forced to undergo
voluntary exile, in order to escape capital punishment.

<span id="ix.ii-p8"></span>It was not, therefore, because he was of
foreign extraction, that the reign of Herod broke the scepter of the
tribe of Judah, (<span id="ix.ii-p8.1"></span>[Ge
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010)<span id="ix.ii-p8.1"></span>;)
but because whatever relics of superior rank still lingered in that
tribe were entirely carried off by his robbery. That its royal dignity
had crumbled down long before, and that by slow degrees its supremacy
had nearly given way, does not imply such a discontinuance as to be at
variance with Jacob’s prophecy. For God had promised two things
seemingly opposite; that *the throne of David* would be eternal, (<span
id="ix.ii-p8.2"></span>[Ps. 89:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#029),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#036)<span id="ix.ii-p8.2"></span>,) and
that, after it had been destroyed, he would raise up its ruins, (<span
id="ix.ii-p8.3"></span>[Am 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#011)<span
id="ix.ii-p8.3"></span>;) that the sway of his kingly power would be
eternal, and yet that there should come forth a rod out of the stem of
Jesse, (<span id="ix.ii-p8.4"></span>[Isa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)<span id="ix.ii-p8.4"></span>.)
Both must be fulfilled. That supremacy, therefore, which God had
bestowed on the tribe of Judah, was suffered by him to be broken down
for a time, that the attention of the people might be more strongly
directed to the expectation of Christ’s reign. But when the destruction
of the Sanhedrim appeared to have cut off the hope of believers,
suddenly the Lord shone forth. Now, it belongs to the arrangement of
history to mark the date of the transaction; but for no light reason did
the word *king* mark, at the same time, the wretchedness of that period,
in order to remind the Jews, that their eyes ought now to be turned to
the Messiah, if they would sincerely keep the covenant of God.

<span id="ix.ii-p9"></span>*Zacharias, of the course of Abia* We learn
from sacred history, (<span id="ix.ii-p9.1"></span>[1 Chr.
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#003),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#031)<span id="ix.ii-p9.1"></span>,)
that the families of the priests were arranged by David in certain
classes. In this matter David attempted nothing contrary to what the law
enjoined. God had bestowed the priesthood on Aaron and his sons, (<span
id="ix.ii-p9.2"></span>[Ex 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#001)<span
id="ix.ii-p9.2"></span>.) The other Levites were set apart to inferior
offices, (<span id="ix.ii-p9.3"></span>[Nu
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#009)<span id="ix.ii-p9.3"></span>.)
David made no change in this respect; but his object was, partly to
secure that nothing should be done in tumult and disorder, partly to
oppose ambition, and at the same time to provide that it should not be
in the power of a few persons, by taking the whole service into their
own hands, to leave the greater number unemployed at home. Now in that
arrangement, *Abijah,* son of Eleazar, held the eighth rank, (<span
id="ix.ii-p9.4"></span>[1Ch 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#010)<span
id="ix.ii-p9.4"></span>.) Zacharias, therefore, belonged to the priestly
family, and to the posterity of Eleazar who had succeeded his father in
the high priest’s office, (<span id="ix.ii-p9.5"></span>[Nu
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#028)<span id="ix.ii-p9.5"></span>.)
In what manner Elisabeth, who was of the daughters of Aaron, could be
Mary’s *cousin,* (v. 36,) I will explain in the proper place. It is
certainly by way of respect that Luke mentions the genealogy of
Elisabeth; for Zacharias was permitted by the law to take to wife a
daughter of any private Levite. From the equal marriage, therefore, it
is evident that he was a man respected among his own rank.

<span id="ix.ii-p10"></span><span id="ix.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p11"></span>**6.** *And they were both righteous before
God* He awards to them a noble testimony, not only that among men they
spent holy and upright lives, but also that they were *righteous before
God* This *righteousness* Luke defines briefly by saying that they
*walked in all the commandments of God* Both ought to be carefully
observed; for, although praise is bestowed on Zacharias and Elisabeth
for the purpose of showing us that the lamp, whose light went before the
Son of God, was taken not from an obscure house, but from an illustrious
sanctuary, yet their example exhibits to us, at the same time, the rule
of a devout and righteous life. In ordering our life, (<span
id="ix.ii-p11.1"></span>[Ps 37:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#023)<span
id="ix.ii-p11.1"></span>,) therefore, our first study ought to be to
approve ourselves to God; and we know that what he chiefly requires is a
sincere heart and a pure conscience. Whoever neglects uprightness of
heart, and regulates his outward life only by obedience to the law,
neglects this order. For it ought to be remembered that the heart, and
not the outward mask of works, is chiefly regarded by God, to whom we
are commanded to look. Obedience occupies the second rank; that is, no
man must frame for himself, at his own pleasure, a new form of
righteousness unsupported by the Word of God, but we must allow
ourselves to be governed by divine authority. Nor ought we to neglect
this definition, that they are *righteous* who regulate their life by
the *commandments* of the law; which intimates that, to the eye of God,
all acts of worship are counterfeit, and the course of human life false
and unsettled, so far as they depart from his law.

<span id="ix.ii-p12"></span>*Commandments* and *ordinances* differ thus.
The latter term relates strictly to exercises of piety and of divine
worship; the latter is more general, and extends both to the worship of
God and to the duties of charity. For the Hebrew word <span
id="ix.ii-p12.1"></span>הקים, which signifies statutes or decrees, is
rendered by the Greek translator <span
id="ix.ii-p12.2"></span>δικαιώματα, *ordinances;* and in Scripture <span
id="ix.ii-p12.3"></span>הקים usually denotes those services which the
people were accustomed to perform in the worship of God and in the
profession of their faith. Now, though hypocrites, in that respect, are
very careful and exact, they do not at all resemble Zacharias and
Elisabeth. For the sincere worshippers of God, such as these two were,
do not lay hold on naked and empty ceremonies, but, eagerly bent on the
truth, they observe them in a spiritual manner. Unholy and hypocritical
persons, though they bestow assiduous toil on outward ceremonies, are
yet far from observing them as they are enjoined by the Lord, and,
consequently, do but lose their labor. In short, under these two words
Luke embraces the whole law.

<span id="ix.ii-p13"></span>But if, in keeping the law, Zacharias and
Elisabeth were blameless, they had no need of the grace of Christ; for a
full observance of the law brings life, and, where there is no
transgression of it, there is no remaining guilt. I reply, those
magnificent commendations, which are bestowed on the servants of God,
must be taken with some exception. For we ought to consider in what
manner God deals with them. It is according to the covenant which he has
made with them, the first clause of which is a free reconciliation and
daily pardon, by which he forgives their sins. They are accounted
*righteous* and *blameless,* because their whole life testifies that
they are devoted to righteousness, that the fear of God dwells in them,
so long as they give a holy example. But as their pious endeavors fall
very far short of perfection, they cannot please God without obtaining
pardon. The righteousness which is commended in them depends on the
gracious forbearance of God, who does not reckon to them their remaining
unrighteousness. In this manner we must explain whatever expressions are
applied in Scripture to the righteousness of men, so as not to overturn
the forgiveness of sins, on which it rests as a house does on its
foundation. Those who explain it to mean that Zacharias and Elisabeth
were righteous by faith, simply because they freely obtained the favor
of God through the Mediator, torture and misapply the words of Luke.
With respect to the subject itself, they state a part of the truth, but
not the whole. I do own that the righteousness which is ascribed to them
ought to be regarded as obtained, not by the merit of works, but by the
grace of Christ; and yet, because the Lord has not imputed to them their
sins, he has been pleased to bestow on their holy, though imperfect
life, the appellation of *righteousness* The folly of the Papists is
easily refuted. With the righteousness of faith they contrast this
righteousness, which is ascribed to Zacharias, which certainly springs
from the former, and, therefore, must be subject, inferior, and, to use
a common expression, subordinate to it, so that there is no collision
between them. The false coloring, too which they give to a single word
is pitiful. *Ordinances,* they tell us, are called *commandments* of the
law, and, therefore, they justify us. As if we asserted that true
righteousness is not laid down in the law, or complained that its
instruction is in fault for not justifying us, and not rather that it is
weak through our flesh, (<span id="ix.ii-p13.1"></span>[Ro
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003)<span id="ix.ii-p13.1"></span>.) In
the commandments of God, as we have a hundred times acknowledged, life
is contained, (<span id="ix.ii-p13.2"></span>[Le
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#005)<span id="ix.ii-p13.2"></span>;
<span id="ix.ii-p13.3"></span>[Mt
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#017)<span id="ix.ii-p13.3"></span>;)
but this will be of no avail to men, who by nature were altogether
opposed to the law, and, now that they are regenerated by the Spirit of
God, are still very far from observing it in a perfect manner.

<span id="ix.ii-p14"></span><span id="ix.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p15"></span>**7.** *And they had no child* By an
extraordinary purpose of God it was appointed that John should be born
out of the common and ordinary course of nature. The same thing happened
with Isaac, (<span id="ix.ii-p15.1"></span>[Ge
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#017)<span id="ix.ii-p15.1"></span>;
<span id="ix.ii-p15.2"></span>[Ge
21:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#001)<span id="ix.ii-p15.2"></span>,)
in whom God had determined to give an uncommon and remarkable
demonstration of his favor. Elisabeth had been barren in the prime of
life, and now she is in old age, which of itself shuts up the womb. By
two hinderances, therefore, the Lord gives a twofold, surprising
exhibition of his power, in order to testify, by stretching out his
hand, as it were, from heaven, that the Prophet was sent by himself,
(<span id="ix.ii-p15.3"></span>[Mal
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001)<span id="ix.ii-p15.3"></span>;
<span id="ix.ii-p15.4"></span>[Joh
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#006)<span id="ix.ii-p15.4"></span>.) He
is indeed a mortal man, born of earthly parents; but a supernatural
method, so to speak, recommends him strongly as if he had fallen from
heaven

<span id="ix.ii-p16"></span><span id="ix.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p17"></span>**9.** *According to the custom of the
priest’s office* The law enjoined that incense should be offered twice
every day, that is, every morning and at even, (<span
id="ix.ii-p17.1"></span>[Exod. 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#008)<span id="ix.ii-p17.1"></span>.) The
order of courses among the priests had been appointed by David, as we
have already explained; and, consequently, what is here stated as to
incense was expressly enjoined by the law of God. The other matters had
been arranged by David, (<span id="ix.ii-p17.2"></span>[1Ch
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#003)<span id="ix.ii-p17.2"></span>,)
that each family might have its own turn, though David ordained nothing
which was not prescribed by the law: he only pointed out a plan by which
they might individually perform the service which God had commanded.

<span id="ix.ii-p18"></span>The word *temple* (<span
id="ix.ii-p18.1"></span>νὰος) is here put for the *holy place;* which
deserves attention, for it sometimes includes the outer court. Now,
Zacharias is spoken of as going into the temple, which none but priests
were permitted to enter. And so Luke says that the people stood
*without,* there being a great distance between them and the altar of
incense; for the altar on which the sacrifices were offered intervened.
It ought to be observed also that Luke says *before God:* for whenever
the priest entered into the holy place, he went, as it were, into the
presence of God, that he might be a mediator between him and the people.
For it was the will of the Lord to have this impressed upon his people,
that no mortal is allowed to have access to heaven, without a priest
going before; nay that, so long as men live on the earth, they do not
approach the heavenly throne, so as to find favor there, but in the
person of the Mediator. Now, as there were many priests, there were not
two of them permitted to discharge, at the same time, the solemn office
of intercession for the people; but they were so arranged in classes,
that only one entered the Holy Place, and thus there was but one priest
at a time. The design of the incense was to remind believers that the
sweet savor of their prayers does not ascend to heaven except through
the sacrifice of the Mediator; and in what manner those figures apply to
us must be learned from the Epistle to the Hebrews.

<span id="ix.ii-p19"></span><span id="ix.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p20"></span>**12.** *Zacharias was troubled* Though God
does not appear to his servants for the purpose of terrifying them, yet
it is advantageous and even necessary for them to be struck with awe,
(<span id="ix.ii-p20.1"></span>[Ps
33:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#008)<span id="ix.ii-p20.1"></span>,)
that, amidst their agitation, they may learn to give to God the glory
due unto his name, (<span id="ix.ii-p20.2"></span>[Ps
29:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#002)<span id="ix.ii-p20.2"></span>.)
Nor does Luke relate only that Zacharias was terrified, but adds that
*fear fell upon him;* intimating that he was so alarmed as to give way
to terror. The presence of God fills men with alarm, which not only
leads them to reverence, but humbles the pride of the flesh, naturally
so insolent that they never submit themselves to God until they have
been overcome by violence. Hence, too, we infer that it is only when God
is absent, — or, in other words, when they withdraw from his presence, —
that they indulge in pride and self-flattery; for if they had God as a
Judge before their eyes, they would at once and unavoidably fall
prostrate. And if at the sight of an angel, who is but a spark of the
Divine light, this happened to Zacharias, on whom the commendation of
*righteousness* is bestowed, what shall become of us miserable
creatures, if the majesty of God shall overwhelm us with its brightness?
We are taught by the example of the holy fathers that those only are
impressed with a lively sense of the Divine presence who shake and
tremble at beholding him, and that those are stupid and insensible who
hear his voice without alarm.

<span id="ix.ii-p21"></span><span id="ix.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p22"></span>**13.** *Fear not, Zacharias* The glory of
God, it ought to be observed, is not so appalling to the saints as to
swallow them up entirely with dread, but only to cast them down from a
foolish confidence, that they may behold him with humility. As soon,
therefore, as God has abased the pride of the flesh in those who believe
in him, he stretches out his hand to raise them up. He acts differently
towards the reprobate; for at whatever time they are dragged before the
tribunal of God, they are overwhelmed by absolute despair: and thus does
God justly reward their vain delights, in which they give themselves up
to the intoxicating antonness of sin. We ought, therefore, to accept
this consolation, with which the angel soothes Zacharias, that we have
no reason to fear, when God is gracious to us. For they are greatly
mistaken who, in order to enjoy peace, hide themselves from the face of
God, whereas we ought to acquaint ourselves with him and be at peace,
(<span id="ix.ii-p22.1"></span>[Job
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#021)<span id="ix.ii-p22.1"></span>.)

<span id="ix.ii-p23"></span>*Thy prayer is heard* Zacharias may seem to
have acted an improper part, and inconsistent with the nature of his
office, if, on entering the Holy Place in the name of all the people, he
prayed as a private man that he might obtain offspring; for, when the
priest sustained a public character, he ought, in forgetfulness as it
were of himself, to offer prayers for the general welfare of the Church.
If we say that there was no absurdity in Zacharias, after performing the
chief part of the prayer, devoting the second part of it to private
meditations about himself, the reply will not be without weight. But it
is hardly probable that Zacharias did, at that time, pray to obtain a
son, of which he had despaired on account of his wife’s advanced age;
nor indeed can any precise moment be drawn from the words of the angel.
I interpret it, therefore, simply that his prayer was at length heard,
which he had poured out before God for a long period. That the desire of
having children, if it be not excessive, is consistent with piety and
holiness, may be gathered from Scripture, which assigns to it not the
lowest place among the blessings of God.

<span id="ix.ii-p24"></span>*Thou shalt call his name John* The name was
given, I think, to the Baptist in order to heighten the authority of his
office. <span id="ix.ii-p24.2"></span>יהוהנן, (<span
id="ix.ii-p24.3"></span>[1Ch 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#015)<span
id="ix.ii-p24.3"></span>,) for which the Greeks employ <span
id="ix.ii-p24.4"></span>᾿Ιωάννης, signifies in Hebrew *the grace of the
Lord* Many suppose that the son of Zacharias was so called, because he
was beloved of God. I rather think that it was intended to recommend not
the grace which God bestowed upon him as a private individual, but that
grace which his mission would bring to all. The force and weight of the
name are increased by its date; for it was before he was born that God
inscribed on him this token of his favor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke 1:14-17](cc31011)
