[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31077)  [Next](cc31079) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.lxx"></span>

<span id="ix.lxx-p1"></span>MATTHEW 8:1-4; MARK 1:40-45; LUKE 5:12-16

<span id="ix.lxx-p2"></span><span id="ix.lxx-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
8:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#001)<span id="ix.lxx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxx-p3"></span><span id="ix.lxx-p3.1"></span>[Mark
1:40-45](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#040)<span id="ix.lxx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxx-p4"></span><span id="ix.lxx-p4.1"></span>[Luke
5:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#012)<span id="ix.lxx-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxx-p5"></span>**1**.** **And when he had come down from
the mountain, great multitudes followed him. **2**.** **And, lo, a
leper, approaching, worshipped him, saying, Lord, if thou art willing,
thou art able to cleanse me. **3**.** **And Jesus, having stretched out
his hand, touched him, saying, I am willing; be thou clean: and
immediately his leprosy was cleansed. **4**.** **And Jesus saith to him,
See that thou do not tell it to any man: but go, show thyself to the
priest, and present the offering which Moses commanded, for a testimony
to them.

<span id="ix.lxx-p6"></span>**40**.** **And a leper came to him,
beseeaching him, and kneeling down to him, and saying to him, If thou
art willing, thou art able to cleanse me. **41**.** **And Jesus, having
compassion, stretched out his hand, and touched him, and said to him, I
am willing; be thou clean. **42**.** **And when he had spoken,
immediately the leprosy departed from him, and he was cleansed.
**43**.** **And threatening him,  <span
id="fr_486"></span>[487](#fn_486) he immediately sent him away;
**44**.** **And he said to him, See that thou say nothing to any man:
but go, show thyself to the priest, and present for thy cleansing those
things which Moses commanded, for a testimony to them. **45**.** **But
he, having gone out, began to publish many things, and to blaze abroad
the matter, so that Jesus could no longer enter openly into cities, but
was without in desert places: and they came to him from every quarter.

<span id="ix.lxx-p8"></span>**12**.** **And it happened, while he was in
a certain city, lo, a man full of leprosy: and when he had seen Jesus,
he fell down on his face, and besought Jesus, saying, Lord, if thou art
willing, thou art able to cleanse me. **13**.** **And having stretched
out his hand, he touched him, saying, I am willing; be thou clean: and
immediately the leprosy departed from him. **14**.** **And he commanded
him that he should not tell it to any man, but saith, Go, show thyself
to the priest, and present for thy cleansing as Moses commanded, for a
testimony to them. **15**.** **But still more did the report spread
about him, and great multitudes assembled, to hear him, and to be healed
by him of their infirmities. **16**.** **And he sought retirement in the
deserts, and prayed.

<span id="ix.lxx-p9"></span> 

<span id="ix.lxx-p10"></span><span id="ix.lxx-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxx-p11"></span>**<span id="ix.lxx-p11.2"></span>[Matthew
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#001)<span id="ix.lxx-p11.2"></span>.**
*And when he had come down from the mountain* Matthew now returns to the
course of the history. He had formerly said, that Christ *went up into a
mountain,* (verse 1) then he threw, as it were, into one heap, many
leading points of the doctrine of Christ; and now he adds that, about
the time when he preached on the mountain, he healed a certain *leper*
The same event is related by *Mark* and *Luke,* though they do not
mention the time. It was a striking display of the divine power of
Christ, that, by his word alone and a touch of his hand, he suddenly
cleansed the man’s leprosy. Now, though *leprosy* was a different kind
of disease from *elephantiasis,*  <span
id="fr_487"></span>[488](#fn_487) (<span
id="ix.lxx-p12.2"></span>ἐλεφαντίασις,) it is plain enough that it was
difficult to cure. When it had continued long and become deeply seated,
it rarely happened that any person recovered. Granting that physicians
might, by their professional skill, have given some relief, it is
manifest that there was nothing human about this miracle.

<span id="ix.lxx-p13"></span><span id="ix.lxx-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxx-p14"></span>**2.** *Approaching, worshipped* What is
the meaning of the verb <span id="ix.lxx-p14.1"></span>προσκυνεῖν, which
is rendered in the Latin version, *adorare,* to *adore* or *worship,*
may be easily learned from this passage. For the exposition of it we may
rely on the other two Evangelists, of whom *Mark* says, that he *fell on
his knees,* and *Luke,* that *he fell down on his face* The outward
gesture of *kneeling* was exhibited by the leper as a token of
reverence. Now we know, that such marks of respect were in general use
among the Jews, as the people of the East are more addicted to that kind
of ceremonies. Many people accordingly think, that the leper did not
intend to render to Christ divine worship,  <span
id="fr_488"></span>[489](#fn_488) but gave him a respectful salutation
as a distinguished prophet of God.

<span id="ix.lxx-p16"></span>I enter into no dispute as to the feelings
which moved the leper to pay reverence to Christ. But I look at what he
attributed to him, that he *was able to cleanse him, if he were willing*
By these words he declared, that he acknowledged a divine power in
Christ: and when Christ replies, *I am willing,* he shows that he
claimed more for himself than belongs to man. He who, by the mere
expression of his will, restores health to men, must possess supreme
authority. Whether the leper believed that Christ was the Son of God, or
that he had received this power in the same manner as Moses and the
other prophets, he entertains no doubt that he held in his hand, and in
his power, the gift of healing. True, he speaks conditionally, *if thou
art willing, thou art able* But this is not inconsistent with that
certainty of faith, which God demands in our prayers: for men ought not
to expect more than God promises. The leper had not learned by any
inspired communication, or any promise of God, what Christ would do. It
would have been improper in him, therefore, to go beyond these limits
for though we sometimes read that certain persons prayed without any
condition, we ought to believe that they were guided by special
movements of the Spirit,  <span id="fr_489"></span>[490](#fn_489) which
must not be taken for a general rule. I am not even certain if we are at
liberty to say, strictly speaking, that the leper offered a prayer. He
only declares, that he is so fully convinced of the power of Christ, as
to entertain no doubt that it is in his power to cure leprosy; and then
presents himself to be healed, but uncertain as to the result, because
he did not yet know the *will* of Christ.  <span
id="fr_490"></span>[491](#fn_490)

<span id="ix.lxx-p19"></span><span id="ix.lxx-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxx-p20"></span>**3.** *Having stretched out his hand, he
touched* Under the Law, the *touch* of a *leper* was infectious; but as
Christ possesses such purity as to repel all filth and defilement, he
does not, by touching, either pollute himself with leprosy, or become a
transgressor of the law. When he took upon him our flesh, he did not
only deign to touch as with his hand, but was united to one and the same
body with ourselves, that we might be *flesh of his flesh,* (<span
id="ix.lxx-p20.1"></span>[Ge 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#023)<span
id="ix.lxx-p20.1"></span>.) Nor did he only stretch out his arm to us,
but descended from heaven even to hell, and yet contracted no stain from
it, but, retaining his innocence, took away all our impurities, and
sprinkled us with his holiness. By his word alone he might have healed
the *leper;* but he applied, at the same time, the touch of his hand, to
express the feeling of compassion. Nor ought this to excite our wonder,
since he chose to take upon him our flesh, that he might cleanse us from
our sins. *The stretching out of his hand* was therefore an expression
and token of infinite grace and goodness. What we indolently read, and
coldly pass by, cannot be duly weighed without great astonishment. The
Son of God was so far from disdaining to talk to a leper, that he even
*stretched out his hand to touch* that uncleanness.

<span id="ix.lxx-p21"></span><span id="ix.lxx-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxx-p22"></span>**4.** *And Jesus saith to him, See that
thou tell it not to any one* Some persons, by way of excusing the
*leper,* think that Christ did not seriously forbid him to publish the
miracle, but rather gave him an additional excitement to do so. Others
more justly consider the reason of the prohibition to have been, that
the full “time was not yet come,” (<span id="ix.lxx-p22.3"></span>[Joh
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#006)<span id="ix.lxx-p22.3"></span>.) I
do acknowledge, that to have suppressed this miracle would have been
improper: but our Lord had a particular reason for wishing that the
report of it should not be immediately spread, or, at least, not by the
*leper* The *leper* was so far from deserving praise for the disorderly
exhibition of his regard, that he ought, in my opinion, to be condemned
for not obeying Christ’s injunction. If he wished to express his
gratitude to him to whom he was indebted for his cure, no better method
could have been found than *obedience,* which God prefers to all
*sacrifices,* (<span id="ix.lxx-p22.4"></span>[1Sa
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022)<span id="ix.lxx-p22.4"></span>,)
and which is the origin and foundation of lawful worship. This example
shows us, that those who allow themselves to be guided by inconsiderate
zeal act improperly, because the more eager they are to please God, the
greater progress do they make in rebellion to his commands.

<span id="ix.lxx-p23"></span>*Show thyself to the priest* As the
ceremonies of the law had not yet been repealed, Christ did not wish
that they should be despised or neglected. Now, God had commanded in the
law that, if any man had been cleansed from leprosy, he should present
himself to the priest with a sacrifice of thanksgiving, (<span
id="ix.lxx-p23.1"></span>[Le 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#002)<span
id="ix.lxx-p23.1"></span>.) The design  <span
id="fr_491"></span>[492](#fn_491) was, that the priest, by his decision,
might attest the benefit received from God; and that the person who had
been healed might give an expression of his gratitude. Christ,
therefore, by sending the leper *to the priest,* proves that he had no
other object in view than to display the glory of God. The *showing to
the priest* was for the purpose of examination, and the *offering* was
the expression of thanksgiving. He wishes that the priests should
examine the man, to make the divine favor manifest and undoubted; and
that the *leper,* on the other hand, should acknowledge that God had
healed him. Meanwhile, as I have just mentioned, he commands them to
observe the ceremonies prescribed by the law, till the time when it
should be repealed.

<span id="ix.lxx-p25"></span>The attempt of the Papists to produce this
passage, as an authority for their own *confession,*  <span
id="fr_492"></span>[493](#fn_492) is highly foolish. *Leprosy,* they
allege, is put allegorically for *sin;* and *the priests,* who are
consecrated by the Pope, are the judges of spiritual leprosy.  <span
id="fr_493"></span>[494](#fn_493) Even granting that this authority was
conferred on the priests under the law, for the purpose of informing the
people, that all their cleanness, and the decision respecting it,
depended on the priesthood, still this is impiously claimed for
themselves by the Popish priests. All the honor that belonged to the
ancient priests is now claimed by Christ alone as his own. He alone is
appointed to be the judge of spiritual leprosy, and entitled to receive,
from those who have been cured, the offering for their cleansing. Under
the law, a sacrifice was employed as the seal of cleanness, because
satisfaction made by the shedding of blood is the only way in which men
are cleansed. To transfer to another that right, which God has declared
to be the prerogative of his own Son, is a detestable sacrilege. When
the ministers of the Gospel, by the command of Christ, declare to
sinners that they are cleansed from their sins, this must not be
tortured into the pretended jurisdiction, which the priests imagine, of
pronouncing a decision about leprosy.  <span
id="fr_494"></span>[495](#fn_494)

<span id="ix.lxx-p29"></span><span id="ix.lxx-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxx-p30"></span>**<span id="ix.lxx-p30.2"></span>[Matthew
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#004)<span id="ix.lxx-p30.2"></span>;
<span id="ix.lxx-p30.3"></span>[Mark
1:44](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#044)<span id="ix.lxx-p30.3"></span>.**
*For a testimony to them* Some consider *testimony* to mean here a law
or statute, as it is said in the Book of Psalms, God laid down this
*“*for a testimony to Israel,” (<span id="ix.lxx-p30.4"></span>[Ps
122:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#004)<span id="ix.lxx-p30.4"></span>.)
But this appears to me to be a poor exposition: for I have no doubt that
the pronoun *to them* refers to the priests.  <span
id="fr_495"></span>[496](#fn_495) Christ said this, in my opinion, with
a view to the present occurrence: for this miracle was afterwards to be
a sufficiently clear proof for convicting them of ingratitude. There is
nothing inconsistent with this in the command which Christ gave to the
leper to maintain silence: for he did not intend that the remembrance of
the miracle which he had wrought should remain always buried. When the
leper, at the command of Christ, came into the presence of the priest,
this was *a testimony to them,* which would render them inexcusable, if
they refused to receive Christ as the minister of God; and would, at the
same time, take away occasion for slander, since Christ did not neglect
a single point of the law. In a word, if they were not past cure, they
might be led to Christ; while, on the other hand, so solemn a testimony
of God was sufficiently powerful to condemn them, if they were
unbelievers.

<span id="ix.lxx-p32"></span><span id="ix.lxx-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxx-p33"></span>**<span id="ix.lxx-p33.2"></span>[Mark
1:45](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#045)<span id="ix.lxx-p33.2"></span>.**
*So that Jesus could no longer enter openly into cities* Hence we learn
the reason why Christ did not wish the miracle to be so soon made known.
It was that he might have more abundant opportunity and freedom for
teaching. Not that his enemies rose against him, and attempted to shut
his mouth, but because the common people were so eager to demand
miracles, that no room was left for doctrine. He wished that they would
all be more attentive to the word than to signs. Luke accordingly says,
that *he sought retirement in the deserts* He avoided a crowd of men,
because he saw, that he would not satisfy the wishes of the people,
without overwhelming his doctrine by a superfluity of miracles.  <span
id="fr_496"></span>[497](#fn_496)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_486"></span>[487](cc31078.htm#fr_486) <span
id="ix.lxx-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxx-p7"></span> “<span id="ix.lxx-p7.1"></span>Et l'ayant
menace;” — “and having threatened him.”

<span id="fn_487"></span>[488](cc31078.htm#fr_487) <span
id="ix.lxx-p11.3"></span>

<span id="ix.lxx-p12"></span> “The burning ulceration, with which the
great adversary of man afflicted the venerable patriarch Job, (<span
id="ix.lxx-p12.1"></span>[Job 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#007)<span
id="ix.lxx-p12.1"></span>,) is generally understood to be the
*elephantiasis,* or leprosy of the Arabians; and derives its name from
its rendering the skin of the patient, like that of an *elephant,*
scabrous and dark-colored, and furrowed all over with tubercles,
loathsome alike to the individual and to spectators.”—*(Horne’s
Introduction,* vol. iii. p. 328.) This quotation is made, because it
seemed proper that a word of comparatively rare occurrence, which Calvin
uses, should be defined, and its origin explained; and because that
useful work, from which we have quoted, was at hand. Many of the most
important topics embraced by the “Introduction to the Critical Study and
Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures” have since been handled by writers of
greater learning and research. Yet it would be ungrateful not to
acknowledge that, at the time of its appearance, it supplied an
important *desideratum,* that it probably led the way to other
treatises, and that, as a popular and miscellaneous book of reference on
Biblical literature, it is not yet superseded. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_488"></span>[489](cc31078.htm#fr_488) <span
id="ix.lxx-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxx-p15"></span> “<span id="ix.lxx-p15.1"></span>De faire a
Christ un honneur appartenant a Ia majeste divine;” — “to do to Christ
an honor belonging to the divine majesty.”

<span id="fn_489"></span>[490](cc31078.htm#fr_489) <span
id="ix.lxx-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxx-p17"></span> “<span id="ix.lxx-p17.1"></span>Qu'il y a
eu en tels personnages des mouvemens singuliers, et inspirations
particulieres du S. Esprit;” — “that there were in such persons singular
movements, and peculiar inspirations of the Holy Spirit.”

<span id="fn_490"></span>[491](cc31078.htm#fr_490) <span
id="ix.lxx-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxx-p18"></span> “<span id="ix.lxx-p18.1"></span>Le vouloir
de Christ sur sa requeste;” — “the will of Christ as to his request.”

<span id="fn_491"></span>[492](cc31078.htm#fr_491) <span
id="ix.lxx-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxx-p24"></span> “<span id="ix.lxx-p24.1"></span>Le but de
ce commandement;” — “the end of that commandment.”

<span id="fn_492"></span>[493](cc31078.htm#fr_492) <span
id="ix.lxx-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxx-p26"></span> Those who wish to make themselves
acquainted with Calvin's views on the whole subject of what the Papists
call *auricular confession,* will find them stated in the *Institutions
of the Christian Religion* (B. III. c. iv. sec. 19.) — *Ed*

<span id="fn_493"></span>[494](cc31078.htm#fr_493) <span
id="ix.lxx-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxx-p27"></span> “<span id="ix.lxx-p27.1"></span>Doivent
avoir le jugement et la cognoissance de la ladrerie spirituelle;” —
“ought to have the judgment and discernment of spiritual leprosy.”

<span id="fn_494"></span>[495](cc31078.htm#fr_494) <span
id="ix.lxx-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxx-p28"></span> “<span id="ix.lxx-p28.1"></span>De
discerner entre ladrerie et ladrerie;” — “of distinguishing between
leprosy and leprosy.”

<span id="fn_495"></span>[496](cc31078.htm#fr_495) <span
id="ix.lxx-p30.5"></span>

<span id="ix.lxx-p31"></span> According to the view which Calvin
rejects, the words, *which Moses commanded for a testimony to them,*
mean, “which Moses delivered *to them,* that is, to the people of
Israel, as a divine ordinance.” The view which he adopts may be more
clearly brought out by a different arrangement of the words. *Present,
for a testimony* to them, that is, “to the priests,” *the offering which
Moses commanded*. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_496"></span>[497](cc31078.htm#fr_496) <span
id="ix.lxx-p33.3"></span>

<span id="ix.lxx-p34"></span> “<span id="ix.lxx-p34.1"></span>Que quant
et quant il ne fist tant de miracles, que cela les empescheroit de bien
penser a la doctrine;” — “without doing so many miracles as to prevent
them from thinking properly about his doctrine.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 8:5-13;Luke 7:1-10](cc31079)
