[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31047)  [Next](cc31049) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xl"></span>

<span id="ix.xl-p1"></span>MARK 3:13-19; LUKE 6:12-19

<span id="ix.xl-p2"></span><span id="ix.xl-p2.1"></span>[Mark
3:13-19](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#013)<span id="ix.xl-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xl-p3"></span><span id="ix.xl-p3.1"></span>[Luke
4:12-19](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#012)<span id="ix.xl-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xl-p4"></span>**13**.** **And he went up into a mountain,
and called to him whom he would: and they came to him. **14**.** **And
he appointed twelve to be with him, and send them forth to preach,
**15**.** **And to have powers of healing diseases, and of casting out
devils. **16**.** **And to Simon he gave the name Peter. **17**.** **And
James th son of Zebedee, and John, the brother of James: and he gave
them the names of Boanerges, which is, The sons of thunder.
**18**.** **And Andrew, and Philip, and Bartholomew, and Matthew, and
Thomas, and James (son) of Alpheus, and Thaddeus, and Simon the
Canaanite, **19**.** **And Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him.

<span id="ix.xl-p5"></span>**12**.** **And it happened in those days, he
went out into a mountain to pray, and he spent the whole night in prayer
to God. **13**.** **And when it was day, he called his disciples, and
chose twelve from among them, whom he also called Apostles:
**14**.** **Simon, whom he also called Peter, and Andrew his brother,
James and John, Philip and Bartholomew, **15**.** **Matthew and Thomas,
James (son) of Alpheus, and Simon, who is called Zelotes,
**16**.** **And Judas (brother) of James, and Judas Iscariot, who also
was the traitor. **17**.** **And going down with them, he stood in a
plain, and a multitude of his disciples, and a very great multitude of
people out of all Judea and Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre
and Sidon. **18**.** **Who had come to hear him, and to be healed from
their diseases, and those who were tormented by unclean spirits were
healed. **19**.** **And the whole multitude sought to touch him, for
virtue went out of him, and healed all.

<span id="ix.xl-p6"></span> 

<span id="ix.xl-p7"></span><span id="ix.xl-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xl-p8"></span>**<span id="ix.xl-p8.2"></span>[Mark
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#013)<span id="ix.xl-p8.2"></span>.**
*And he went up into a mountain.* By this election he does not yet
ordain them to be *Apostles,* to enter immediately into the discharge of
their office, but merely admits them to enjoy his private instructions
 <span id="fr_347"></span>[348](#fn_347) with a view to the apostleship.
Commentators have fallen into a mistake here, by confounding those
passages with the tenth chapter of the Gospel by Matthew. For the plain
meaning of the words is, that they are only destined to a future
commission, the bestowal of which is recorded by Matthew; and Mark and
Luke will be found afterwards relating, in its proper place, the mission
which Matthew there describes. And we need not wonder, if their heavenly
Master chose to train and accustom them gradually to so arduous an
employment: for, even by a long course of instruction, their ignorance
could not be corrected.

<span id="ix.xl-p10"></span>Both the Evangelists say, that Christ *went
up into a mountain.* Luke explains the cause to have been, that he might
*pray* with greater freedom in his retirement, which he was accustomed
to do frequently, as is evident from other passages. Now, this example
ought to be regarded by us as a perpetual rule, to begin with prayer,
when we are about to choose pastors to churches: otherwise, what we
attempt will not succeed well. And certainly our *Lord* prayed, not so
much on his own account, as to lay down a rule for us. We are deficient
in prudence and skill; and though our sagacity were of the highest
order, nothing is more easy than to be deceived in this matter. Granting
that we were in no danger of mistake, if the Lord does not regulate our
affections, with what force, or rather violence, shall we be carried
away  <span id="fr_348"></span>[349](#fn_348) by favor and
prepossession, or hatred or ambition? Besides, though the election were
conducted in the very best manner, all will be unsuccessful, unless the
Lord take under his guidance those who are elected, and furnish them
with the necessary gifts. “What then?” it will be said, “did not Christ
earnestly implore the Father to preside in the election?” This I readily
acknowledge, and I have also to state, that this was a declaration and
acknowledgment of his care for his Church. Accordingly, he did not pray
to the Father in the ordinary manner, but *spent the whole night in
prayer.* But if he, who was full of the Holy Spirit, (<span
id="ix.xl-p11.2"></span>[Joh 3:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#034)<span
id="ix.xl-p11.2"></span>,) implored the Father, with such ardor and
earnestness, to preside in the election, how much greater need have we
to do so?

<span id="ix.xl-p12"></span>*He called to him whom he would.* By this
expression, I have no doubt, Mark conveys to us the instruction, that it
was to the unmixed grace of Christ, and not to any excellence of their
own, that they were indebted for receiving so honorable an office: for,
if you understand him to say, that those were chosen, who were more
excellent than others, this will not apply to Judas. The meaning,
therefore, is the apostle-ship was not bestowed on account of any human
merits; but, by the free mercy of God, persons, who were altogether
unworthy of it, were raised to that high rank; and thus was fulfilled
what Christ says on another occasion, *“Ye* have not chosen me, but I
have chosen you,” (<span id="ix.xl-p12.1"></span>[Joh
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#016)<span id="ix.xl-p12.1"></span>.)
To the same effect Paul frequently speaks, extolling the purpose of God
in bestowing on him the apostleship, (<span id="ix.xl-p12.2"></span>[Eph
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#007)<span id="ix.xl-p12.2"></span>;
<span id="ix.xl-p12.3"></span>[Col
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#025)<span id="ix.xl-p12.3"></span>.)

<span id="ix.xl-p13"></span>But here many questions arise. *First*, why
did our Lord deliberately choose Judas, who, he perfectly knew, was
unworthy of the honor, and would be his betrayer? *Secondly*, why did
God, after being so earnestly supplicated by his Son, and as if he had
given a refusal to Christ, permit a base and wicked man to find his way
to the highest rank in his Church?  <span
id="fr_349"></span>[350](#fn_349) *Thirdly*, why did he resolve that the
first-fruits  <span id="fr_350"></span>[351](#fn_350) of his Church
should be stained by so foul a disgrace? *Fourthly*, how came it, that
Jesus Christ, knowingly and willingly, preferred Judas to honest and
faithful ministers?

<span id="ix.xl-p16"></span>The first objection is met by the following
reply. Our Lord expressly intended to prevent future offenses, that we
may not feel excessive uneasiness, when unprincipled men occupy the
situation of teachers in the Church, or when professors of the Gospel
become apostates. He gave, at the same time, in the person of one man,
an instance of fearful defection,  <span
id="fr_351"></span>[352](#fn_351) that those who occupy a higher rank
may not indulge in self-complacency. At the same time, with regard to
the second question, we do not admit that our Lord suffered a refusal.
 <span id="fr_352"></span>[353](#fn_352) This answer will serve also for
the third question. At the very beginning, it was judged proper to give
an early demonstration of the future state of the Church, that weak
persons might not stumble on account of the fall of a reprobate; for it
is not proper, that the stability of the Church should depend on men.
With regard to the last objection, Christ did not prefer Judas to devout
and holy disciples, but raised him to an eminence from which he was
afterwards to fall, and thus intended to make him an example and
instruction to men of every condition and of every age, that no one may
abuse the honor which God has conferred upon him, and likewise that,
when even the pillars fall, those who appear to be the weakest of
believers may remain steady.

<span id="ix.xl-p19"></span><span id="ix.xl-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xl-p20"></span>**<span id="ix.xl-p20.2"></span>[Luke
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#013)<span id="ix.xl-p20.2"></span>.**
*Whom also he named Apostles.* This may be explained in two ways: either
that, at a subsequent period, when he introduced them into their office,
he gave them this name, — or that, with a view to their future rank, he
bestowed on them this title, in order to inform them why they were
separated from the ordinary class, and for what purpose they were
destined. The latter view agrees well with the words of Mark: for he
says, that Christ *appointed twelve to be with him, and to send them
forth to preach. He* intended to make them his companions, that they
might afterwards receive a higher rank: for, as I have already
explained, when he says, *to be with him, and to send them forth to
preach,* he does not mean that both were to take place at the same time.

<span id="ix.xl-p21"></span><span id="ix.xl-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xl-p22"></span>**<span id="ix.xl-p22.2"></span>[Mark
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#016)<span id="ix.xl-p22.2"></span>.**
*And to Simon he gave the name Peter.* Though all Christians must be
living *stones*  <span id="fr_353"></span>[354](#fn_353) , of the
spiritual temple, yet Christ gave this name peculiarly to Simon,
according to the measure of grace which he intended to bestow upon him.
This is not inconsistent with the shameful weakness which he manifested
in denying his Lord: for this title showed his invincible power and
steadiness, which continued till his death. Yet it is absurd in the
Papists to infer from this, that the Church is founded on him, as will
afterwards be more fully explained, **(**<span
id="ix.xl-p23.2"></span>[Mt 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018)<span
id="ix.xl-p23.2"></span>**.)** Christ called the sons of Zebedee *sons
of thunder,* because he was to give them a powerful voice, that they
might *thunder* throughout the whole world.  <span
id="fr_354"></span>[355](#fn_354) And that thunder is heard, in the
present day, from the mouth of John. As to his brother, there can be no
doubt that, so long as he lived, he shook the earth. The word has been
corrupted: for the full pronunciation would be <span
id="ix.xl-p24.2"></span>בני רגש, *(Benae-regesh;)*  <span
id="fr_355"></span>[356](#fn_355) but the changes which words undergo in
passing into other languages are well known.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_347"></span>[348](cc31048.htm#fr_347) <span
id="ix.xl-p8.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xl-p9"></span> “<span id="ix.xl-p9.1"></span>Pour ses
disciples et escoliers domestiques;” — “for his disciples and private
scholars.”

<span id="fn_348"></span>[349](cc31048.htm#fr_348) <span
id="ix.xl-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xl-p11"></span> “<span id="ix.xl-p11.1"></span>Destournez
et transportez hors du droit chemin;” — “turned and carried away out of
the right road.”

<span id="fn_349"></span>[350](cc31048.htm#fr_349) <span
id="ix.xl-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xl-p14"></span> “<span id="ix.xl-p14.1"></span>Pourquoy
Dieu estant prie et requis si ardemment par son Fils, asouffert qu'un
mechant et mal-heureux traitre fust eleve au rang le plus honorable de
son Eglise, comme si Jesus Christ n'eust point este exauce?” — “Why did
God, when entreated and requested so earnestly by his Son, permit a
wicked and unhappy traitor to be elevated to the most honorable rank in
his Church, as if Jesus Christ had not been listened to?”

<span id="fn_350"></span>[351](cc31048.htm#fr_350) <span
id="ix.xl-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xl-p15"></span> “<span id="ix.xl-p15.1"></span>Les premices
et premier commencement de son Eglise;” — “the first-fruits and first
beginning of his Church.”

<span id="fn_351"></span>[352](cc31048.htm#fr_351) <span
id="ix.xl-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xl-p17"></span> “<span id="ix.xl-p17.1"></span>Un
revoltement et cheute horrible;” — “a dreadful rebellion and fall.”

<span id="fn_352"></span>[353](cc31048.htm#fr_352) <span
id="ix.xl-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xl-p18"></span> “<span id="ix.xl-p18.1"></span>Cependant
nous ne dirons pas que Christ a este esconduit, veu que le pere par un
conseil admirable, mettant un diable en la compagnie d’onze Anges, a
toutesfois tellement modere l’issue, que la cheute de cestuy-la a
plustost conferme que non pas esbranle la foyde son Eglise.” — “Yet we
will not say that Christ was refused, since the Father, by a wonderful
purpose, putting a devil into the company of eleven angels, has, at the
same time, so guided the result, that the fall of this man, instead of
shaking, has rather confirmed, the faith of his Church.”

<span id="fn_353"></span>[354](cc31048.htm#fr_353) <span
id="ix.xl-p22.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xl-p23"></span> This alludes to the Greek word Πέτρος,
*(Peter,)* which literally signifies *a stone.* We shall afterwards find
(<span id="ix.xl-p23.1"></span>[Mt
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018)<span id="ix.xl-p23.1"></span>)
that our Lord makes express reference to the meaning of the name. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_354"></span>[355](cc31048.htm#fr_354) <span
id="ix.xl-p23.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xl-p24"></span> “<span id="ix.xl-p24.1"></span>Afin qu’ils
tonnassent par tout le monde en preschant;” — “in order that they might
thunder throughout the whole world in preaching.”

<span id="fn_355"></span>[356](cc31048.htm#fr_355) <span
id="ix.xl-p24.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xl-p25"></span> Philologists have been a good deal
perplexed by this word. There is even some difficulty in settling the
Greek orthography: for conflicting manuscripts present us with the
various forms of Βοανηργές, Βοανεργής, and Βοανεργείς. The name is
unquestionably of Hebrew origin. Some of the derivations, which have
been given, are so far-fetched as not to deserve refutation. There is
plausibility in Jerome's hypothesis, that it comes from <span
id="ix.xl-p25.1"></span>רעם, (Ragam,) *thunder.* But the substitution of
final, ς for μ has never been satisfactorily explained. Admitting that
ές or ής, is a Greek termination, the absence of the final and radical
*Mem* (<span id="ix.xl-p25.2"></span>ם) is too violent a supposition.
After many trials, scholars are pretty nearly agreed, that they must
return to the derivation which is suggested by our author, and which
some writers have illustrated and defended by a considerable array of
learning. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 5:1-12;Luke 6:20-26](cc31049)
