[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31068)  [Next](cc31070) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.lxi"></span>

<span id="ix.lxi-p1"></span>MATTHEW 7:1-5; MARK 4:24; LUKE 6:37-42

<span id="ix.lxi-p2"></span><span id="ix.lxi-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
7:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001)<span id="ix.lxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxi-p3"></span><span id="ix.lxi-p3.1"></span>[Mark
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#024)<span id="ix.lxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxi-p4"></span><span id="ix.lxi-p4.1"></span>[Luke
6:37-42](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#037)<span id="ix.lxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxi-p5"></span>**1**.** **Judge not, that you may not be
judged. **2**.** **For with what judgment you judge you shall be judged,
and with what measure you measure, it shall be measured to you again.
**3**.** **And why seest thou the straw, which is in thy brother’s eye,
and perceivest not the beam which is in thine eye? **4**.** **Or how
shall thou say to thy brother, Allow me to pull the straw out of thine
eye, and, behold, a beam is in thine eye? **5**.** **Hypocrites, cast
out first the beam out of thine eye, and then thou shall see clearly,
that thou mayest pull out the straw from they brother’s eye.

<span id="ix.lxi-p6"></span>**24** With what measure you measure, the
same shall be measured to you.

<span id="ix.lxi-p7"></span>**37**.** **Judge not, and you shall not be
judged: condemn not, and you shall not be condemned: forgive, and it
shall be forgiven to you. **38**.** **Give, and it shall be given to
you. Good measure, and pressed down, and shaken together, and running
over, shall they give into your bosom: for the same measure, with which
you measure, shall be measured again to you. (Again.) **41**.** **And
why seest thou a straw in thy brother’s eye, and perceivest not a beam
which is in thine own eye? **42**.** **Or how will thou be able to say
to thy brother, Brother, allow me to pull out the straw which is in
thine eye, while thou seest not the beam which is in thine eye?
Hypocrite, cast out first the beam out of thine eye, and then thou shalt
see clearly, that thou mayest cast out the straw which is in thy
brother’s eye.

<span id="ix.lxi-p8"></span> 

<span id="ix.lxi-p9"></span><span id="ix.lxi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxi-p10"></span>**<span id="ix.lxi-p10.2"></span>[Matthew
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001)<span id="ix.lxi-p10.2"></span>.**
*Judge not* These words of Christ do not contain an absolute prohibition
*from judging,* but are intended to cure a disease, which appears to be
natural to us all. We see how all flatter themselves, and every man
passes a severe censure on others. This vice is attended by some strange
enjoyment: for there is hardly any person who is not tickled with the
desire of inquiring into other people’s faults. All acknowledge, indeed,
that it is an intolerable evil, that those who overlook their own vices
are so inveterate against their brethren. The Heathens, too, in ancient
times, condemned it in many proverbs. Yet it has existed in all ages,
and exists, too, in the present day. Nay, it is accompanied by another
and a worse plague: for the greater part of men think that, when they
condemn others, they acquire a greater liberty of sinning.

<span id="ix.lxi-p11"></span>This depraved eagerness for biting,
censuring, and slandering, is restrained by Christ, when he says, *Judge
not*. It is not necessary that believers should become blind, and
perceive nothing, but only that they should refrain from an undue
eagerness to *judge:* for otherwise the proper bounds of rigor will be
exceeded by every man who desires to pass sentence on his brethren.
There is a similar expression in the Apostle James, *Be not many
masters,* (<span id="ix.lxi-p11.1"></span>[Jas
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#001)<span id="ix.lxi-p11.1"></span>.)
for he does not discourage or withdraw believers from discharging the
office of teachers, but forbids them to desire the honor from motives of
ambition. To *judge,* therefore, means here, to be influenced by
curiosity in inquiring into the actions of others. This disease, in the
first place, draws continually along with it the injustice of condemning
any trivial fault, as if it had been a very heinous crime; and next
breaks out into the insolent presumption of looking disdainfully at
every action, and passing an unfavourable judgment on it, even when it
might be viewed in a good light.

<span id="ix.lxi-p12"></span>We now see, that the design of Christ was
to guard us against indulging excessive eagerness, or peevishness, or
malignity, or even curiosity, in *judging our* neighbors. He who
*judges* according to the word and law of the Lord, and forms *his
judgment* by the rule of charity, always begins with subjecting himself
to examination, and preserves a proper medium and order in his
*judgments*. Hence it is evident, that this passage is altogether
misapplied by those persons who would desire to make that moderation,
which Christ recommends, a pretence for setting aside all distinction
between good and evil. We are not only permitted, but are even bound, to
condemn all sins; unless we choose to rebel against God himself, — nay,
to repeal his laws, to reverse his decisions, and to overturn his
judgment-seat. It is his will that we should proclaim the sentence which
he pronounces on the actions of men: only we must preserve such modesty
towards each other, as to make it manifest that he is the only *Lawgiver
and Judge,* (<span id="ix.lxi-p12.1"></span>[Isa
33:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#022)<span id="ix.lxi-p12.1"></span>.)

<span id="ix.lxi-p13"></span>*That you may not be judged* He denounces a
punishment against those severe judges, who take so much delight in
sifting the faults of others. They will not be treated by others with
greater kindness, but will experience, in their turn, the same severity
which they had exercised towards others. As nothing is dearer or more
valuable to us than our reputation, so nothing is more bitter than to be
condemned, or to be exposed to the reproaches and infamy of men. And yet
it is by our own fault that we draw upon ourselves that very thing which
our nature so strongly detests, for which of us is there, who does not
examine too severely the actions of others; who does not manifest undue
rage against slight offenses; or who does not peevishly censure what was
in itself indifferent? And what is this but deliberately to provoke God,
as our avenger, to treat us in the same manner. Now, though it is a just
judgment of God, that those who have judged others should be punished in
their turn, yet the Lord executes this punishment by the instrumentality
of men. Chrysostom and others limit this statement to the present life:
but that is a forced interpretation. Isaiah threatens (<span
id="ix.lxi-p13.1"></span>[Isa
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#001)<span id="ix.lxi-p13.1"></span>)
that *those who have spoiled others shall be spoiled.* In like manner,
our Lord means, that there will be no want of executioners to punish the
injustice and slander of men with equal bitterness or severity. And if
men shall fail to receive punishment in this world, those who have shown
undue eagerness in condemning their brethren will not escape the
judgment of God.

<span id="ix.lxi-p14"></span><span id="ix.lxi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxi-p15"></span>**<span id="ix.lxi-p15.2"></span>[Luke
6:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#037),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#038)<span id="ix.lxi-p15.2"></span>.**
*Forgive, and it shall be forgiven to you. Give, and it shall be given
to you.* This promise, which is added by Luke, means, that the Lord will
cause him, who is indulgent, kind, and just to his brethren, to
experience the same gentleness from others, and to be treated by them in
a generous and friendly manner. Yet it frequently happens, that the
children of God receive the very worst reward, and are oppressed by many
unjust slanders; and that, to when they have injured no man’s
reputation, and even spared the faults of brethren. But this is not
inconsistent with what Christ says: for we know, that the promises which
relate to the present life do not always hold, and are not without
exceptions. Besides, though the Lord permits his people, when innocent,
to be unjustly oppressed and almost overwhelmed, he fulfils what he says
in another place, that “their uprightness shall break forth as the
morning,”  <span id="fr_463"></span>[464](#fn_463) (<span
id="ix.lxi-p16.2"></span>[Isa
58:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#008)<span id="ix.lxi-p16.2"></span>.)
In this way, his blessing always rises above all unjust slanders. He
subjects believers to unjust reproaches, that he may humble them, and
that he may at length maintain the goodness of their cause. It ought
also to be taken into the account, that believers themselves, though
they endeavor to act justly towards their brethren, are sometimes
carried away by excessive severity against brethren, who were either
innocent, or not so greatly to be blamed, and thus, by their own fault,
provoke against themselves a similar judgment. If they do not receive
g*ood measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running over,* though
this is chargeable on the ingratitude of the world, yet they ought to
acknowledge that it was partly deserved: for there is no man who is so
kind and indulgent as he ought to be towards his brethren.

<span id="ix.lxi-p17"></span><span id="ix.lxi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxi-p18"></span>**<span id="ix.lxi-p18.2"></span>[Matthew
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#003)<span id="ix.lxi-p18.2"></span>.**
*And why seest thou the straw?* He expressly touches upon a fault, which
is usually found in hypocrites. While they are too quick-sighted in
discerning the faults of others, and employ not only severe, but
intentionally exaggerated, language in describing them, they throw their
own sins behind their back, or are so ingenious in finding apologies for
them, that they wish to be held excusable even in very gross offenses.
Christ therefore reproves both evils: the excessive sagacity, which
arises from a defect of charity, when we sift too closely the faults of
brethren, and the indulgence by which we defend and cherish our own
sins.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_463"></span>[464](cc31069.htm#fr_463) <span
id="ix.lxi-p15.3"></span>

<span id="ix.lxi-p16"></span> In the French version our Author quotes a
similar passage from the book of Psalms, (<span
id="ix.lxi-p16.1"></span>[Ps 37:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#006)<span
id="ix.lxi-p16.1"></span>;) “and he shall bring forth thy righteousness
as the light, and thy judgment as the *noon-day* *”* — *Ed*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 7:6](cc31070)
