[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31051)  [Next](cc31053) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xliv"></span>

<span id="ix.xliv-p1"></span>MATTHEW 5:20-22

<span id="ix.xliv-p2"></span><span id="ix.xliv-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
5:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#020)<span id="ix.xliv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xliv-p3"></span>**20**.** **For I say to you, That, unless
your righteousness shall be more abundant  <span
id="fr_386"></span>[387](#fn_386) than that of the Scribes and the
Pharisees, you shall not enter  <span id="fr_387"></span>[388](#fn_387)
into the kingdom of heaven. **21**.** **You have heard that it was said
to the ancients,  <span id="fr_388"></span>[389](#fn_388) Thou shalt not
kill: and he who shall kill shall be liable to judgment.  <span
id="fr_389"></span>[390](#fn_389) **22**.** **But I say to you, That
every one who is angry with his brother shall be liable to judgment: and
he who shall say to his brother, Racha, shall be liable to the council:
and he who shall say, Fool, shall be liable to the hell of fire.  <span
id="fr_390"></span>[391](#fn_390)

<span id="ix.xliv-p9"></span> 

<span id="ix.xliv-p10"></span><span id="ix.xliv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xliv-p11"></span>**<span id="ix.xliv-p11.1"></span>[Matthew
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#020)<span
id="ix.xliv-p11.1"></span>.** *Unless your righteousness shall be more
abundant. He* takes a passing notice of *the Scribes,* who were laboring
to throw a stain on the doctrine of the Gospel, as if it were the ruin
of the Law. True, he does not reason on this subject, but only points
out briefly, that nothing has less influence over their minds than zeal
for the law. “They pretend, that their hostility to me arises from their
strong desire, that the law should not be violated. But their life makes
it evident, how coldly they observe the law, — nay more, how unconcerned
they are about mocking God,  <span id="fr_391"></span>[392](#fn_391)
while they boast before men of an assumed and hypocritical
righteousness.” This is the view which the most of commentators give of
the passage.

<span id="ix.xliv-p13"></span>But it deserves inquiry, whether he does
not rather blame the corrupted manner of teaching, which *the Pharisees
and Scribes* followed in instructing the people. By confining the law of
God to outward duties only, they trained their disciples, like apes, to
hypocrisy.  <span id="fr_392"></span>[393](#fn_392) They lived, I
readily admit, as ill as they taught, and even worse: and therefore,
along with their corrupted doctrine, I willingly include their
hypocritical parade of false righteousness. The principal charge brought
by Christ against their doctrine may be easily learned from what follows
in the discourse, where he removes from the law their false and wicked
interpretations, and restores it to its purity. In short, the objection
which, as we have already said, was unjustly brought against him by the
Scribes, is powerfully thrown back on themselves.

<span id="ix.xliv-p15"></span>We must bear in mind, what we have
mentioned elsewhere, that the Pharisees are added to the Scribes by way
of enlarging on what he had said: for that sect had, above all others,
obtained a reputation for sanctity. It is a mistake, however, to
suppose, that they were called *Pharisees* on account of *division,*
 <span id="fr_393"></span>[394](#fn_393) because they *separated*
themselves from the ordinary class, and claimed a rank peculiar to
themselves. They were called <span id="ix.xliv-p16.2"></span>פרושים,
that is, *Expounders,*  <span id="fr_394"></span>[395](#fn_394) because
they were not satisfied with the bare letter, but boasted of being in
possession of a key to open up hidden meanings. Hence arose an immense
mass of errors, when they assumed magisterial authority, and ventured,
according to their wicked fancy and their equally wicked pride, to
thrust forward their own inventions in place of Scripture.

<span id="ix.xliv-p18"></span><span id="ix.xliv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xliv-p19"></span>**21.** *You have heard that it was said.*
This sentence, and those which immediately follow, are connected with
what we have just considered: for our Lord explains more fully, by
minute instances, by what tortuous methods  <span
id="fr_395"></span>[396](#fn_395) the Pharisees debase the law, so that
their righteousness is mere filth. It is a mistake, however, to suppose
that this is an <span id="ix.xliv-p20.2"></span>ἐπανόρθωσις*,* or
*correction*  <span id="fr_396"></span>[397](#fn_396) of the Law, and
that Christ raises his disciples to a higher degree of perfection, than
Christ could raise a gross and carnal nation, which was scarcely able to
learn first principles. It has been a prevailing opinion, that the
beginning of righteousness was laid down in the ancient law, but that
the perfection of it is pointed out in the Gospel. But nothing was
farther from the design of Christ, than to alter or innovate any thing
in the commandments of the law. There God has once fixed the rule of
life which he will never retract. But as the law had been corrupted by
false expositions, and turned to a profane meaning, Christ vindicates it
against such corruptions, and points out its true meaning, from which
the Jews had departed.

<span id="ix.xliv-p22"></span>That the doctrine of the law not only
commences, but brings to perfection, a holy life, may be inferred from a
single fact, that it requires a perfect love of God and of our neighbor,
(<span id="ix.xliv-p22.1"></span>[De
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#005)<span id="ix.xliv-p22.1"></span>;
<span id="ix.xliv-p22.2"></span>[Le
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#018)<span
id="ix.xliv-p22.2"></span>.) He who possesses such a love wants nothing
of the highest perfection. So far as respects the rules of a holy life,
the law conducts men to the goal, or farthest point, of righteousness.
Accordingly, Paul declares *the law* to be *weak,* not in itself, but in
our *flesh,* (<span id="ix.xliv-p22.3"></span>[Ro
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003)<span id="ix.xliv-p22.3"></span>.)
But if Moses had given nothing more than the first lessons of true
righteousness, how ridiculous would have been that appeal!

<span id="ix.xliv-p23"></span>“I call heaven and earth to record this
day against you, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and
cursing: therefore choose life, that ye may live,” (<span
id="ix.xliv-p23.1"></span>[De
30:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#019)<span
id="ix.xliv-p23.1"></span>.)

<span id="ix.xliv-p24"></span>Again,

<span id="ix.xliv-p25"></span>“And now, Israel, what doth the Lord thy
God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, and to walk in all
his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul?” (<span id="ix.xliv-p25.1"></span>[De
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#012)<span
id="ix.xliv-p25.1"></span>.)

<span id="ix.xliv-p26"></span>Vain and deceitful, also, would have been
that promise, “The man that doeth them shall live in them,” (<span
id="ix.xliv-p26.1"></span>[Le
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#005)<span id="ix.xliv-p26.1"></span>;
<span id="ix.xliv-p26.2"></span>[Ro
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#005)<span id="ix.xliv-p26.2"></span>;
<span id="ix.xliv-p26.3"></span>[Ga
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#012)<span id="ix.xliv-p26.3"></span>.)

<span id="ix.xliv-p27"></span>That Christ, on the other hand, intended
to make no correction in the precepts of the law, is very clear from
other passages: for to those who desire to enter into life by their good
works, he gives no other injunction, than to, *keep the commandments* of
the law, (<span id="ix.xliv-p27.1"></span>[Mt
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#017)<span
id="ix.xliv-p27.1"></span>.) From no other source do the Apostles, as
well as Christ himself, draw the rules for a devout and holy life. It is
doing a grievous injury to God, the author of the Law, to imagine that
the eyes, and hands, and feet alone, are trained by it to a hypocritical
appearance of good works, and that it is only in the Gospel that we are
taught to love God with the heart. Away, then, with that error, “The
deficiencies of the law are here supplied by Christ.” We must not
imagine Christ to be a new legislator, who adds any thing to the eternal
righteousness of his Father. We must listen to him as a faithful
expounder, that we may know what is the nature of the law, what is its
object, and what is its extent.

<span id="ix.xliv-p28"></span>It now remains for us to see, what Christ
condemns in the Pharisees, and in what respect his interpretation of it
differs from their glosses. The amount of it is, that they had changed
the doctrine of the law into a political order, and had made obedience
to it to consist entirely in the performance of outward duties. Hence it
came, that he who had not slain a man with his hand was pronounced to be
free from the guilt of murder, and he who had not polluted his body by
adultery was supposed to be pure and chaste before God. This was an
intolerable profanation of the law: for it is certain, that Moses
everywhere demands the spiritual worship of God. From the very nature of
the law we must conclude, that God, who gave it by the hand of Moses,
spoke to the hearts, as well as to the hands and to the eyes. True, our
Lord quotes the very words of the law; but he does so in accommodation
to the view which was generally taken of them by the people. “Till now,
*the scribes* have given you a literal interpretation of the law, that
it is enough, if a man keep his hands from murder and from acts of
violence. But I warn you, that you must ascend much higher. *Love is the
fulfilling of the law,* (<span id="ix.xliv-p28.1"></span>[Ro
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#010)<span
id="ix.xliv-p28.1"></span>;)and I say that your neighbor is injured,
when you act towards him otherwise than as a friend.” The latter clause
which he quotes, *he who kills shall be liable to the judgment,*
confirms what I said a little before, that Christ charges them with
turning into a political scheme the law of God, which had been given for
the government of the heart.

<span id="ix.xliv-p29"></span><span id="ix.xliv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xliv-p30"></span>**22.** *But I say to you* His reply is
not opposed to the command of Moses, (<span
id="ix.xliv-p30.1"></span>[Ex
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#013)<span id="ix.xliv-p30.1"></span>;
<span id="ix.xliv-p30.2"></span>[Le
24:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#021)<span id="ix.xliv-p30.2"></span>;
<span id="ix.xliv-p30.3"></span>[Nu
35:16](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#016)<span
id="ix.xliv-p30.3"></span>;) but to the interpretation usually put upon
it by the scribes. Now, as the Pharisees boasted of antiquity, (for it
is always the custom to plead the prescription of a long period in
defense of errors,)  <span id="fr_397"></span>[398](#fn_397) Christ
reminds the people of his authority, to which all antiquity ought justly
to give way. Hence we conclude, that truth is of greater weight than
custom or the number of years.

<span id="ix.xliv-p32"></span>*He who shall say to his brother* Christ
assigns three degrees of condemnation besides the violence of the hands;
which implies, that this precept of the law restrains not only the
hands, but all affections that are opposed to brotherly love. “Those who
shall only be angry with their brethren, or treat them with haughty
disdain, or injure them by any reproach, are murderers.” Now, as it is
certain that the word *Racha* occupies an intermediate place between
*anger* and openly reproachful language, I have no doubt that it is an
interjection of contempt or disdain. Though Christ adjudges *to the hell
of fire* none but those who break out into open reproach, we must not
suppose, that he declares *anger* to be free from a similar punishment;
but, alluding to earthly judgments, he assures them that God will judge
and punish even concealed *anger.*  <span
id="fr_398"></span>[399](#fn_398) But, as he who manifests his
indignation by bitter language goes farther than this, Christ says, that
that man will be held guilty by the *whole heavenly council,* that he
may receive severer punishment.

<span id="ix.xliv-p34"></span>Those, again, who break out into
reproaches are adjudged *to the hell of fire:* which implies, that
hatred, and every thing that is contrary to love, is enough to expose
them to eternal death, though they may have committed no acts of
violence. <span id="ix.xliv-p34.1"></span>Γἔεννα (*hell*) is, beyond all
question, a foreign word. <span id="ix.xliv-p34.2"></span>גיא (*Ge*) is
the Hebrew word for a valley. Now, “the valley of Hin-nom” was infamous
for the detestable superstition which was committed in it, because there
they sacrificed their children to idols, (<span
id="ix.xliv-p34.3"></span>[2Ch
33:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#006)<span id="ix.xliv-p34.3"></span>.)
The consequence was, that holy men, in order to excite stronger hatred
of that wicked ungodliness, used it as the name for *hell,* that the
very name might be dreaded by the people as shocking and alarming. It
would appear that, in the time of Christ, this was a received way of
speaking, and that *hell* was then called by no other name than
*gehenna, (*<span id="ix.xliv-p34.4"></span>γέεννα*,)* the word being
slightly altered from the true pronunciation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_386"></span>[387](cc31052.htm#fr_386) <span
id="ix.xliv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xliv-p4"></span> “<span id="ix.xliv-p4.1"></span>Si votre
justice n'outrepasse;” — “if your righteousness does not go beyond.”

<span id="fn_387"></span>[388](cc31052.htm#fr_387) <span
id="ix.xliv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xliv-p5"></span> “<span id="ix.xliv-p5.1"></span>Vous
n'entrerez nullement, *ou*, jamais;” — “you shall not at all enter,
*or,* you shall *never* enter.”

<span id="fn_388"></span>[389](cc31052.htm#fr_388) <span
id="ix.xliv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xliv-p6"></span> “<span id="ix.xliv-p6.1"></span>Aux
anciens.”

<span id="fn_389"></span>[390](cc31052.htm#fr_389) <span
id="ix.xliv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xliv-p7"></span> “<span id="ix.xliv-p7.1"></span>Sera digne
d'estre puni par jugement;” — “shall be worthy of being punished by
judgment.”

<span id="fn_390"></span>[391](cc31052.htm#fr_390) <span
id="ix.xliv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xliv-p8"></span> “<span id="ix.xliv-p8.1"></span>Sera digne
d'estre puni par la gehenne du feu;” — “shall be worthy of being
punished by the gehenna of fire.”

<span id="fn_391"></span>[392](cc31052.htm#fr_391) <span
id="ix.xliv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xliv-p12"></span> “<span id="ix.xliv-p12.1"></span>Comme
ils se moquent de Dieu sans en faire conscience.” — “How they mock God,
without making conscience of it.”

<span id="fn_392"></span>[393](cc31052.htm#fr_392) <span
id="ix.xliv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xliv-p14"></span> “<span id="ix.xliv-p14.1"></span>Ils
accoustumoyent leurs disc p es k ne hypocrisle, et en faisoyent des
singes.” — “They accustomed their disciples to a hypocrisy, and made
apes of them.”

<span id="fn_393"></span>[394](cc31052.htm#fr_393) <span
id="ix.xliv-p15.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xliv-p16"></span> “<span id="ix.xliv-p16.1"></span>De
division, ou separation;” — “of division, or separation.”

<span id="fn_394"></span>[395](cc31052.htm#fr_394) <span
id="ix.xliv-p16.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xliv-p17"></span> Among a host of opinions as to the origin
of the name *Pharisees,* there is room to doubt if Calvin has hit upon
the true etymology. There are two roots: <span
id="ix.xliv-p17.2"></span>פרׂש *(paras,) to spread out,* with *Sin* for
the final letter, — and <span id="ix.xliv-p17.3"></span>פרׁש *(parash,).
to explain, to separate,* with *Schin.* Both have been pressed into the
service. The former is chiefly quoted in support of an allusion to our
Lord's description of them, that *they make broad their phylacteries,*
(<span id="ix.xliv-p17.4"></span>[Mt
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#005)<span id="ix.xliv-p17.4"></span>.)
But the latter root has been more fertile in suggestions. *John
Alberti,* no mean authority, in his <span
id="ix.xliv-p17.5"></span>*Glossarium Grcecurn,* (under <span
id="ix.xliv-p17.6"></span>[Lu
11:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#038)<span
id="ix.xliv-p17.6"></span>,) defines Φαρισαῖος, to be διακεχωρισμένος,
*separated,* and quotes the Septuagint as employing that participle
(<span id="ix.xliv-p17.7"></span>[Eze
34:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#012)<span id="ix.xliv-p17.7"></span>)
for, <span id="ix.xliv-p17.8"></span>נפרׁשות the principhal participle
of <span id="ix.xliv-p17.9"></span>פרׁש, *(parash.)* From *Hesychius* he
gives synonyms of like import, — Φαρισαῖος, ἀφωρισμένος, μεμερισμένος,
καθαρός As to the last of those terms, καθαρός, the learned *Vitringa,*
to whom *Alberti* also refers, has copiously illustrated its meaning in
a passage, which has been often quoted as embodying the proud challenge
of the Pharisee, *Stand by: for I am holier than thou,* (<span
id="ix.xliv-p17.10"></span>[Isa
65:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#005)<span id="ix.xliv-p17.10"></span>
*)* — *Suidas* unhesitatingly defends the same idea of *separation.* His
definition is as follows: Φαρισαῖοι οἱ ἑρμηνευόμενοι ἀφωρισμένοι, παρὰ
τὸ μερίζειν καὶ ἀφορίζειν ἑαυτοὺς τῶν ἄλλων ἁπάντων, εἴς τε τὸ
καθαρώτατον τοῦ βίου, καὶ ἀκριβέστατον, καὶ εἰς τὰ τοῦ νόμου ἐντάλματα*.
“Pharisees,* — *which* means *separated,* on account of their *dividing*
and *separating* themselves from all others, to the greatest purity and
strictness of life, and to the prescriptions of the law.” — Calvin's
derivation is from the same root, and is certainly ingenious. That sect,
we know, boasted of a rigid adherence to the law, though it may be
questioned whether profound skill in *exposition* was claimed by all its
members. Many of them might think that this belonged to the Scribes as a
professional matter. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_395"></span>[396](cc31052.htm#fr_395) <span
id="ix.xliv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xliv-p20"></span> “<span id="ix.xliv-p20.1"></span>Comment
les Phariseens avoyent deprave la Loy par leurs expositions tortues;” —
“how the Pharisees had debased the law by their crooked expositions.”

<span id="fn_396"></span>[397](cc31052.htm#fr_396) <span
id="ix.xliv-p20.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xliv-p21"></span> “<span id="ix.xliv-p21.1"></span>Une
correction ou amplification de la Loy;” — “a correction or enlargement
of the Law.”

<span id="fn_397"></span>[398](cc31052.htm#fr_397) <span
id="ix.xliv-p30.4"></span>

<span id="ix.xliv-p31"></span> “<span id="ix.xliv-p31.1"></span>Pour
maintenir et defendre les erreurs ou abus en la matiere de la religion;”
— “to maintain and defend errors or abuses in matters of religion.”

<span id="fn_398"></span>[399](cc31052.htm#fr_398) <span
id="ix.xliv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xliv-p33"></span> “<span
id="ix.xliv-p33.1"></span>L'indignation secrette qu'on aura eue en son
coeur contre le frere;” —”the secret indignation which they shall have
had in their heart against their brother.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 5:23-26;Luke 12:58-59](cc31053)
