[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gothic](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vkk01)  [Next](vkk03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002B3YD5C/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Vampire, His Kith and Kin*, by Montague Summers, \[1928\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

# INTRODUCTION

IN all the darkest pages of the malign supernatural there is no more
terrible tradition than that of the Vampire, a pariah even among demons.
Foul are his ravages; gruesome and seemingly barbaric are the ancient
and approved methods by which folk must rid themselves of this hideous
pest. Even to-day in certain quarters of the world, in remoter districts
of Europe itself, Transylvania, Slavonia, the isles and mountains of
Greece, the peasant will take the law into his own bands and utterly
destroy the carrion who--as it is yet firmly believed--at night will
issue from his unhallowed grave to spread the infection of vampirism
throughout the countryside. Assyria knew the vampire long ago, and he
lurked amid the primaeval forests of Mexico before Cortes came. He is
feared by the Chinese, by the Indian, and the Malay alike; whilst
Arabian story tells us again and again of the ghouls who haunt
ill-omened sepulchres and lonely cross-ways to attack and devour the
unhappy traveller.

The tradition is world wide and of dateless antiquity. Travellers and
various writers upon several countries have dealt with these dark and
perplexing problems, sometimes cursorily, less frequently with
scholarship and perception, but in every case the discussion of the
vampire has occupied a few paragraphs, a page or two, or at most a
chapter of an extensive and divaricating study, where other
circumstances and other legends claimed at least an equal if not a more
important and considerable place in the narrative. It maybe argued,
indeed, that the writers upon Greece have paid especial attention to
this tradition, and that the vampire figures prominently in their works.
This is true, but on the other band the treatise of Leone Allacci, *De
Graecorum hodie quorundam opinationibus*, 1645, is of considerable
rarity, nor are even such volumes as Father François Richard's *Relation
de ce qui s'est passé de plus remarquable a Sant-Erini*, 1657, the
*Voyage au Levant* (1705)

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

of Paul Lucas, and Tournefort's *Relation d'un Voyage du Levant* (1717),
although perhaps not altogether uncommon and certainly fairly well known
by repute, generally to be met with in every library. The study of the
Modern Greek Vampire in Mr. J. G. Lawson's *Modern Greek Folklore and
Ancient Greek Religion* has, of course, taken its place as a classic,
but save incidentally and in passing Mr. Lawson does not touch upon the
tradition in other countries and at other times, for this lies outside
his purview.

Towards the end of the seventeenth century, and even more particularly
during the first half of the eighteenth century when in Hungary,
Moravia, and Galicia, there seemed to be a veritable epidemic of
vampirism. the report of which was bruited far and wide engaging the
attention of curia and university, ecclesiastic and philosopher, scholar
and man of letters, journalist and virtuoso in all lands, there appeared
a large number of academic theses and tractates, the majority of which
had been prelected at Leipzig, and these formally discussed and debated
the question in well-nigh all its aspects, dividing, sub-dividing,
inquiring, ratiocinating upon the most approved scholastic lines. Thus
we have the monographs of such professors as Philip Rohr, whose
"Dissertatio Historico-Philosophica" *De Masticatione Mortuorum* was
delivered at Leipzig on 16 August, 1679, and issued the same year from
the press of Michael Vogt; the Dissertatio de *Uampyris Seruiensibus* of
Zopfius and van Dalen, printed at Duisburg in 1733; and the *De
absolutione mortuorum excommunicatorum* of Heineccius, published at
Helmstad in 1709. Of especial value are Michael Ranft's *De Masticatione
Mortuorum in Tumulis Liber*, Leipzig, 1728, and the *Dissertatio de
Cadaueribus Sanguisugis*, Jena, 1732, of John Christian Stock. These
dissertations, however, are extremely scarce and hardly to be found,
whilst even so encyclopaedic a bibliography as Caillet does not include
either Philip Rohr, Michael Ranft, or Stock, all of whom should therein
assuredly have found a place. In this connexion must not be omitted the
*De Miraculis Mortuorum*, Leipzig, Kirchner, 1670, and second edition,
Weidmann, 1687, a treatise by Christian Frederic Garmann, a noted
physician, who was born at Mersebourg about 1640 and who practised with
great repute at Chemnitz. Garmann discusses many curious details and
continued to amass so vast a collection of notes that after his

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

death there was published in 1709 at Dresden by Zimmerman a very much
enlarged edition of his work, "exornatum, diu desideratum et expetitum,
beato autoris obitu interueniente."

During the eighteenth century the tradition of the Vampire was dealt
with by two famous authors, of whom both concentrated upon this as their
main theme, that is to say by Dom Augustin Calmet, O.S.B., in his
*Dissertations sur les Apparitions des Anges, des Démons et des Esprits
et sur les revenants et vampires de Hongrie, de Bohême, de Moravie, e de
Silésie*, Paris, 1740, and by Gioseppe Davanzati, Archbishop of Trani
and Patriarch of Alexandria, in his *Dissertazione sopra I Vampire*,
Naples, 1774. As I have very fully considered both these important works
they require no more than a bare mention here.

Of a later date we find in French a few books such as the *Histoire des
Vampires* (1820) of the enormously prolific Collin de Plancy, the
*Spectriana* (1817) and *Les ombres sanglantes* (1820) of J. p. R.
Cuisin, and Gabrielle de Paban's *Histoire des Fantômes et des Demons*
(1819) and *Démoniana* (1820), but these with many more of that class
and epoch, although they are sometimes written not without elegance and
industry and one may here and there meet with a curious anecdote or
local legend, will not, I think, long engage the consideration and
regard of the more serious student.

In English there is a little book entitled *Vampires and Vampirism* by
Mr. Dudley Wright, which was first published in 1914; second edition
(with additional matter), 1924. It may, of course, be said that this is
not intended to be more than a popular and trifling collection and that
one must not look for accuracy and research from the author of *Roman
Catholicism and Freemasonry*. However that may be, it were not an easy
task to find a more insipid olio than *Vampires and Vampirism*, of which
the ingredients, so far as I am able to judge, are most palpably derived
at second, and even at third hand. Dom Calmet, sometimes with and
sometimes without acknowledgement, is frequently quoted and continually
misunderstood, In what the "additional matter" of the second edition
consists I cannot pretend to say but I have noticed that the same
anecdotes are repeated, *e.g.* on p. 9 we are told the story of a
shepherd of "Blow, near Kadam, in Bohemia," and the relation is said to
be taken (*via* Calmet, it is plain,)

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

from "De Schartz \[rather Charles Ferdinand de Schertz\], in his *Magia
Postuma*, published at Olmutz in 1706." On p. 166 this story, as given
by "E. p. Evans, in his interesting work on the *Criminal Prosecution
and Capital Punishment of Animals*," is told of "a herdsman near the
town of Cadan," and dated 1337. Pages 60-62 are occupied with an
Oriental legend related by "Fornari, in his *History of Sorcerers*," by
which is presumably intended the *Histoire curieuse et pittoresque des
sorciers . . . Revue et augmentée par Fornari*, Paris, 1846, and other
editions, a book usually catalogued under Giraldo, as by Caillet and
Yve-Plessis, although the latter certainly has a cross-reference to
Fornari. In greater detail Mr. Dudley Wright narrates this legend which
be has already told (pp. 60-62), on pp. 131-137. Such repetition seems
superfluous. In the Bibliography we have such entries as "Leo Allatius,"
*Encyclopaedia Britannica*"; "Frazer's Golden Bough," Nider's
*Formicarius*," "Phlegon's *Fragments*," "William of Newbury," all of
which are not merely unscholarly and slovenly, but entirely useless from
the point of view of reference. I also remark blunders such as "Philip
Rehrius," "Nicolas Ramy's *Demonolatrie*," "Rymer's *Varney the
Vampire*." Who Rymer might be I cannot tell. *Varney the Vampire* was
written by Thomas Preskett Prest.

It may, I think, not unfairly be claimed that the present work is the
first serious study in English of the Vampire, and kindred traditions
from a general, as well as from a theological and philosophical point of
view. I have already pointed out that it were impossible to better such
a chapter as Mr. J. C. Lawson has given us in his *Modern Greek
Folklore* and *Ancient Greek Religion*, a book to which as also to
Bernhard Schmidt's *Das Volksleben der Neugriechen und das Hellenische
Alterthum*, I am greatly indebted. But any wider survey of the vampire
tradition will soon be found o demand an examination of legend, customs,
and history which extend far beyond Greece, although in such an inquiry
the beliefs and practice of modern Greece must necessarily assume a
prominent and most material significance.

In the present work I have endeavoured to set forth what might be termed
"the philosophy of vampirism," and however ghastly and macabre they may
appear I have felt that here one must not tamely shrink from a careful
and detailed consideration

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

of the many cognate passions and congruous circumstances which--there
can be no reasonable doubt--have throughout the ages played no
impertinent and no trivial but a very vital and very memorable part in
consolidating the vampire legend, and in perpetuating the vampire
tradition among the darker and more secret mysteries of belief that
prevail in the heart of man.

In many countries there is thought to be a close connexion between the
vampire and the werewolf, and I would remark that I have touched upon
this but lightly as I am devoting a separate study to the werewolf and
lycanthropy.

*The Vampire, his Kith and Kin* will be shortly followed by *The Vampire
in Europe*, in which work I have collected and treat of numerous
instances of vampirism old and new, concretely illustrating the
prevalence and phases of the tradition in England and Ireland, in
ancient Greece and Rome as well as in modern Greece, in Hungary and
Bohemia, in Jugo-Slavia, Russia, and many other lands. In this volume
will be found related in detail such famous cases as that of Arnold
Paul, Stanoska Sovitzo, Millo the Hungarian, the vampires of Temeswar,
Kisilova, Buckingham, Berwick, Melrose Abbey, Croglin Grange, and many
more.

A survey of "The Vampire in Literature" which I attempt in Chapter V of
the present volume has not, to the best of my belief, been usefully
essayed by any English writer. I cannot hope that my purview is
complete, for I feel confident that several pieces must inevitably have
escaped me. Here too one is faced with the question what to notice and
what to exclude. Vampirism is so wide a term that in some senses it
might arguably be held to cover no small range of ghost stories and
witch sagas where the victims peak and pine and waste away until they
fall into an early grave. The choice is bound to be somewhat arbitrary,
and so open to censure and objections, both on account of inclusions and
omissions, and, superficially at least, these criticisms will hardly
seem a little rigid and unfair. There is one vampire story, an excellent
fiction and admirably discoursed, which I heard very many years ago, and
which I believe is in print, but it has till now completely baffled all
my recent explorations. I have no doubt that some of my readers will
know the tale.

The Bibliography has offered its own difficulties with

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

reference to the choice of books for inclusion, and a certain amount of
selection seemed inevitable. I have, I hope, duly listed the majority of
those works which deal with the Vampire and the vampire tradition at any
length, or which even if they devote but a few pages to the Vampire have
given the subject serious and scholarly consideration. The denizens of
Grub Street, ever busily agog, have from time to time attempted to
scribble something on sorcery, on the invisible world, on occult crafts,
and of late they seem to have been especially pretentious and prolific.
I am well aware that in a number of trivial and catch-penny compositions
it may be found that actually more space has been devoted to the vampire
than is afforded in several of the volumes I mention, important studies
which cover a fairly wide range in travel, in folk-lore, in demonology.
Whilst, obviously enough, all the titles I include have by no means the
same value even the least remarkable owns a particular reason to justify
its presence. Under fiction it seemed to me that one should cast the net
a little wider, and accordingly--on account of its very rarity if for no
other reason--I have found a place for so poor a book as Smyth Upton's
*The Last of the Vampires*, and what is more a rampant tract such as
*The Vampyre* (1858) is not excluded. It will be remarked that many of
the books to which I refer in my chapters and whence I quote are not to
be found in this Bibliography as they lie something outside its scope.
Moreover to rehearse books of reference and the standard authors seemed
entirely superfluous.

During the course of a long and arduous task I have been much helped by
the kindly and valuable suggestions of many friends amongst whom I must
particularly mention Mrs. Agnes Murgoçi, the late Chevalier W. H.
Grattan Flood, Dr. Havelock Ellis, Dr. Rouse, Mr. Edward Hutton, Mr. W.
J. Lawrence, and Mr. N. M. Penzer. I am especially grateful to Dr. R.
Campbell Thompson for generous permission to quote at length the
exorcisms from his classic works upon Babylonian demonology and Semitic
magic. Both Mr. G. Willoughby-Meade and his publishers have put me under
great obligations by allowing me so extensively to use his work *Chinese
Ghouls and Goblins*, Constable and Co., 1928.

I cordially thank my friend Mr. Laurence Housman for giving me leave to
reproduce his drawing "Cauchemar," as also

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

Messrs. Macmillan for a similar permission with regard to the
illustration of Malay vampires, which originally appeared in Dr. W. W.
Skeat's *Malay Magic*.

The little cylinder delineated upon the cover of the book is a
reproduction from the Revue d'Assyriologie, vol. VII, and represents a
Babylonian vampire. The original is in the Louvre collections.

IN FESTO B.M.V. del Divino Aiuto.  
                  1928.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. The Origins of the Vampire](vkk03.md)
