[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ssm04)  [Next](ssm06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

### CHAPTER II

# RELIGIONS

Mu's RELIGION.--It is fairly well established that all religions have a
common origin. Let us see what that source was.

The first records of religion are more than 70,000 years old. They tell
us that a body of trained masters from Mu, called Naacals, were carrying
to her various colonies and colonial empires copies of the Motherland's
Sacred Inspired Religion. These Naacals formed in each country colleges
for the teaching of the priestcraft religion, and the sciences. The
priesthoods that were formed in these colleges in turn taught the
people. There is a very interesting ancient writing about the Chaldis,
as the colleges were called in Babylonia. It says: "Everyone was
welcome, be he prince or slave. Directly they passed into the temple,
they were equal, for they stood in the presence of the Heavenly Father,
the Father of them all, and here they became brothers in fact. No
payment was charged; all was free."

Throughout the colonies and colonial empires these teachings were known
as the Sacred Mysteries, a name that has persisted down to the present.
In the \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

Orient they were also called the Books of the Golden Age. In later
times, I find among Maya and Egyptian writings that the Sacred Mysteries
were only entrusted to the high priesthood and the heir apparent to the
throne.

Clement of Alexandria wrote: "The Sacred Mysteries are only entrusted to
high priests and the heir apparent to the throne." This I find was not
exactly true. Many of the Greek Philosophers who went to Egypt were
entrusted with the Sacred Mysteries, among them being Solon, Plato,
Pythagoras and Thales.

From various Naacal writings, sometimes called Neferit, and translations
of the Sacred Inspired Writings, I shall try to outline the First
Religion and show how it was taught to primitive man.

Religion started at a very early period in man's history; evidently when
he could not understand anything that was abstrusely expressed.
Apparently it was found necessary for explanation to use object lessons,
symbols, where sight would supply the absence of words. I find the
earliest symbols were of an elementary character, plain lines and simple
geometrical figures. I refer to a date prior to 70,000 years ago, for
according to the records man was so far advanced at that time that he
was mastering the most intricate vignettes, tableaux, et cetera, which
today puzzle our great scientists.

Evidently religion was originally taught in stages.

First: Man was taught that there was a Supreme \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

Being, Infinite and All Powerful. That it was the Creator who created
all things above and below. That man was created by this Almighty Being
and having been created by Him, was his son-that this Almighty was man's
Heavenly Father.

Second: When man was created the Creator placed within the body of man a
spirit or soul which never died but continued on through eternity.

Third: When man was created it was ordained that his material body
should return to the earth from which it was taken. When this material
body died it released the soul which went into the world beyond, there
to wait until it was called upon to occupy another material body.

Apparently, as soon as his primitive mind could grasp the facts, he was
taught that his soul was given a task. This task was for the soul to
rule the material body by overcoming material desires. When this was
accomplished his soul would be called back to the Great Source, and
forever afterwards live in perfect joy and happiness.

He was taught that one material life was so short that the soul could
not overcome all of the material desires, so it was ordained that his
soul should come into many bodies until the task was accomplished; that
these reincarnations were the salvation of his soul.

Fourth: It was thoroughly instilled into his mind that the Heavenly
Father was *The Great Love* and that this great love ruled the Universe
and never died. \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

He was taught that the love of the Heavenly Father was far greater than
the love of his earthly father, who was only a reflection of his
Heavenly Father. Therefore he should always approach his Heavenly Father
without fear or dread and in perfect confidence and love, knowing that
loving hands were being held out to receive him when he came.

Fifth: He was taught that all mankind were created by the same Heavenly
Father; therefore all mankind were his brothers and sisters, and should
be treated as such in all his dealings with them.

Sixth: Finally he was taught his duties on earth, how he should live to
prepare himself to become fit to pass into the world beyond when he was
called. He was especially reminded that he must follow the paths of
Truth, Love, Charity, Chastity, with perfect love and confidence in his
Heavenly Father.

From this short and inadequate sketch it is shown that the fundamental
principles of the first religion of man were: *The Fatherhood of God and
the Brotherhood of Man*.

Judging from the various religious teachings of the Sacred Inspired
Writings, the phrase "Brotherhood of Man" is not meant to convey the
idea that all men are to, look upon each other as blood brothers. It
would seem to me that this phrasing is symbolical or used as an example
for explanation. I think our modern example better explains the meaning
to the mind of present man, namely, "Do unto others as you would have
them

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

do unto you." This seems to be confirmed by the forty-two questions in
the Osirian Ritual. If we all followed this "Golden Rule" no discord
could arise among mankind and the world would be in a virtual bond of
brotherhood.

Again, I think the meaning of the word "charity" is not fully
comprehended today. It refers to the soul rather than to the material
part of man. Not only material charitable actions, such as feeding the
hungry and clothing the naked, but it includes good and charitable
thoughts of others. We should think ill of no one but try to help them
overcome their failings. The great Master, Jesus, gave us an example of
this.

SYMBOLS.--Throughout his teachings early man was constantly reminded
that no symbol, however sacred, was to be worshipped in any way; that
symbols were used only to enable him to concentrate his mind solely on
the Deity and the particular subject of his supplication. By keeping his
eyes on the symbol, other objects were excluded from his vision.

Symbols in our churches would not be amiss today, at least in some
cases. On one occasion my seat in church was directly behind the pew of
a wealthy broker. Every time the congregation knelt in prayer this
pillar of the church, for he was one of them, drew from the shelf a book
bound as a prayer book. When he opened it I saw that it was a ledger
with rows of figures in debit and credit columns. These he went up and
down with his finger, all the time mumbling something so that

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

those around him thought he was earnest in prayer. Were his thoughts of
God? The symbol he was using guided him to the material-not the
spiritual.

THEOLOGY.--The religion of Mu had no theologies or dogmas. Everything
was taught in the simplest, most comprehensive language, a language that
even the most unschooled mind could grasp.

Theologies and dogmas crept into religion after the submergence of the
Motherland. With her destruction, her controlling influences were gone.
Confusions in religion then began, and exist in full force today. Anyone
considering present-day religion can see that it is in the process of
crumbling, that it is only a question of time when it will be a mass of
ruins. Then, when these ruins are cleared away, there will arise a new
and purer conception of spiritual things. Religion cannot die until man
has attained the perfection ordained for him.

Our present religious state is not a new condition. Twice before,
religion has fallen to the ground through theologies and their
consequences. Out of the ashes new religions have arisen. Out of the
ashes of present religions a new one will also arise. "He whom the gods
destroy they first make mad." Madness in the form of bigotry, impossible
theologies, and other errors exists today.

WHY PAST RELIGIONS HAVE FALLEN.--At various times in the history of man
unscrupulous priesthoods have caused the downfall of religion by
introducing into it vicious systems of theology made up of inventions,

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

extravagances and immorality; omissions and false and vicious
translations from the Sacred Inspired Religion of Mu from which all
religions have sprung.

These systems were invented by priesthoods for the purpose of inspiring
superstitious fears in the hearts of the people, to ensnare them, body
and soul, into slavery to the priesthood. Having accomplished this, it
did not take long for these priesthoods to acquire wealth and become all
powerful. This was vividly illustrated in Egypt, where the Priests of
Ammon not only gained the riches of the country but seized the throne as
well. When, however, they started to control the military, the soldiers
revolted and at the point of the spear drove them down into Ethopia,
where they were prevented from returning to Egypt. The accumulation and
concentration of wealth invariably ruins a country. There are at least a
dozen historical records of it.

The first great outrage to religion I have found historically recorded
occurred in Atlantis 22,000 years ago. It is referred to as
"extravagances in the priestly teachings." The great master, Osiris,
dispelled these extravagances and reinstated the original religion of
the Fatherhood of God and Brotherhood of Man. As a monument to the
memory of this great master, Religion was named after him.

THE OSIRIAN RELIGION.--When Thoth of Atlantis founded the colony on the
Nile Delta, Egypt's history began. Thoth built the first temple at Saïs
and there taught Religion as purged by Osiris 6,000 years before.

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

At the destruction of Mu, Ra Mu, the King and High Priest of the
Motherland, addressed the pleading crowds, saying:

"You shall all die together, you and your servants and your riches. From
your ashes new nations shall arise and if they forget they are superior,
not because of what they put on but what they put out, the same will
befall them."

The foregoing indicates that the people had strayed from the teachings
of the church, become materialistic and forgotten God, not that they had
been led astray by the priests. It would appear that they were dropping
the spiritual for the material: they were amassing riches and forgetting
God. This would seem to be corroborated in a previous statement, where
Ra Mu is quoted as saying:

"Did I not predict all this?"

It was the priesthood of Egypt that caused the cataclysmic wave of false
gods, idolatry and spiritual [degradation](errata.htm#0) to sweep over
the land. So well did they effect their nefarious designs that priestly
orders throughout the world were drawn into the vortex contributing to
religion's spiritual downfall. This started over 5,000 years ago, and
the prostituted Osirian religion has now long passed into the discard.
Many of its extravagances have, however, persisted down to present times
and are found embodied in our religious conceptions.

The Egyptians were the first to teach the worship of symbols, a thing
strictly forbidden in the Ancient Religion. \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

Thus began idolatry. The next step was the invention of a devil whom
they called Set. For this malevolent being they imagined a domain which
they called Hell.

The extravagances of their description of this domain had no bounds, and
one wonders how any sane person could have accepted them. According to
these teachings, it was a place of everlasting flames, of burning
brimstone that never died. Cast into these sulphurous flames, the Soul
remained scorching for all eternity.

The soul of man is a spirit. No element can touch or come in contact
with a spirit. Sulphur is an element. Therefore, it cannot come in
contact with a spirit, for a spirit is negative to all elementary
matter. Even if it were not, the forces of the spirit are so much higher
than those of heat that the spirit could repel it.

I shall next show how the devil himself managed to put in an appearance.
The claim was made that the devil was an archangel, fallen from the ways
of grace, and cast from heaven into hell. The four archangels are only
another vestment for the Four Great Primary Forces, or as Max Müller
calls it, "a new disguise." As the Great Primary Forces still exist,
working and controlling the Universe as of old, it is clear that none
have fallen, as the story of Lucifer would have us believe.

It was thus the Egyptian priesthood dragged the beautiful, pure Osirian
Religion into the mud, the religion with which Egypt commenced her
history 10,000 years before, causing the nation itself to fall and
become

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

the slave of foreign conquerors. Before the Egyptian invention, a devil
was unknown. Man had been taught there were two influences attending him
here on earth--a material influence emanating from his earthly body, and
a spiritual influence that came from his soul. His spiritual influence
had the power to overcome the material, and it was his destiny that it
should eventually dominate. It might, however, take many incarnations
before this was accomplished, after which his soul would return to the
Great Source.

Hindu priests, always quick to adopt anything of material advantage to
themselves, followed Egypt in the debauchery of religion. An obstacle
that had first to be overcome, however, was their Naacal teachers. These
were unwavering in their adherence to the teachings of the First
Religion. So the Brahminical priests started to persecute the Naacals,
eventually driving them into the snow-capped mountains of the North.
When these holy men were disposed of, the debauch commenced.

Not wishing to borrow their devil from the Egyptians, the Brahmin
priests invented one of their own and called him Siva (pronounced
Sheva).

From the time Siva was grafted into the Hindu religion, history shows
that the Hindus fell from the high pinnacle of civilization which had
been theirs since the period of the Motherland. A little history will
verify this assertion:

Universal History and M. D. Voltaire--A. D. 1758. Vol. 3, Page 13.

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

"The school of the ancient gynosophists was still subsisting in the
great city of Benares on the banks of the Ganges. There the Brahmins
cultivated the *Sacred Language* which they called *Hanferit*, and look
upon it as the most ancient of all languages. \[The Naacal writings are
in what is here called Hanferit.\]

"They admit of Genii, like the primitive Persians. They *tell* their
*disciples* that symbols are made only to fix the attention of the
people and are different *emblems* of the Deity. But as this sound
theology *would turn to no profit*, they concealed it from the people.
\[And taught what produced superstitious awe and fear.\]

"Be that as it may, the *Indians were no longer* that people of
*superior knowledge* into whose country the *ancient Greeks used to
travel for instruction*."

India was the cradle of the Greek Philosophy. Up to 500 B. C. the Greeks
were going to India for learning. When they commenced going I do not
know--possibly a thousand years before.

W. Robertson, "An Historical Disquisition of India," Pub. 1794, Page
274.

"The Brahmins, it is well known, *borrowed* religion, *as well as all
other sciences* of civilization, *from the highly civilized Nagas*, whom
afterwards they *relentlessly persecuted*."

One of the inventions of the Hindu priests was that Man was first
created a grass, then a fish, passed into an amphibian, then a reptile,
from a reptile into a mammal, and from this became a man. They also
maintained

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

that everything is a part of God and that all things put together are
God. And yet this same priesthood says that idolatry is a sin. Let us
analyze this.

Idolatry is a sin. The worship of idols made of wood and stone is
idolatry. The worship of God is not idolatry. As the wood and stone are
parts of God, the worship of wood and stone would be worshipping parts
of God: therefore there is no such thing as idolatry, since whatever is
worshipped is a part of God. What can be more fantastic than this? Yet I
find the same conception in one of our religious sects today, and they
call themselves Christians. Did Jesus ever utter such inconceivable
nonsense?

The Brahminical priests did their work well, for they enslaved the
people and froze their brains. But India is today awakening. She is
casting off her priestly shackles and has started to regain her enviable
place among nations, to regain her old religion and civilization. And
she will again stand in the proud position from which she was dragged
down. The Untouchables will no longer be Untouchables, but will receive
their place as brothers in the land. But the Hindus must remember that
they are *only emerging*, the top of the Cross is not clear of the
water.

Some few thousand years ago the Priesthoods generally put the coping
stone of horrors on religion--they instituted the horrible practice of
human sacrifice. This addition caused consternation and enhanced the
fear of the people in all lands. No one knew but he might be

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

the next to be stretched upon the bloody stone, or, be shrouded in the
flames of the fiery furnace. Fear and dread reigned supreme. These human
sacrifices have supposedly disappeared from what is termed "civilized
peoples." But have they? Is not human life sacrificed today under
another guise? And what about present-day religions and people? The only
difference from now and 3,000 years ago is a thicker veneer over our
savagery.

The Church of Rome has a bloody page disfiguring its record by the
Inquisition.

The Protestant Church has a great blot on her escutcheon with the
burning of witches.

The Mohammedan Church was born with the sword, has lived by the sword,
and will die by the sword--blood covers every page of its history.

Have Christians been following the teachings of the Great Master, Jesus,
who preached only kindness and brotherly love? Certainly not! They have
been following the cruel lust for blood bred of fanaticism and bigotry.
Are we, ourselves, any better today? I think not. Our lust for blood
causes us to hang, shoot and electrocute in the name of the law. What
law? Not God's, for His law says, "*Thou shalt not kill*." With all our
great professions of civilization we still remain savages at heart, and
I have known many savages who are more truly civilized than we are. We
erect towering buildings, make horrible wars on one another because of
greed for power and wealth. Is this civilization, or mere

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

display? Coat a pig with gold and the pig still remains a pig. The gold
is only a veneer; the pig still exists in its original form. Our
civilization is simply a veneer hiding our real selves--neither our
hearts nor characters are affected by it for we are what we are.

I shall now show by Mu's Cosmogonic Diagram what the First Religion of
Man was--the Sacred Inspired Religion of Mu.

MU'S COSMOGONIC DIAGRAM.--The Cosmogonic Diagram of Mu was the mother of
all the various cosmogonic diagrams found throughout the world. All
subsequent diagrams were based on that of the Motherland.

Inventions, alterations, additions in lines to adapt them to new
meanings, made nightmares of them all.

One of the most prominent additions in the Hindu, Babylonian, Assyrian,
Chaldean and Egyptian was the addition of a hell. This hell is shown in
various diagrams as a small circle below the main figure, the outside of
the circle symbolizing the Universe, which was putting it far away from
the earth. As the devil was unknown in Mu, no hell appears in her
cosmogonic diagram.

DECIPHERING MU'S DIAGRAM.--In Mu the novice was taught to learn the
diagram thoroughly and repeat what was written upon it as his spiritual
convictions. just as children are taught the Bible today, the children
of lost Mu were instructed in this diagram.

THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE DIAGRAM.--In the center

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

 

<span id="img_04100"></span>

[![&lt;I&gt;Mu's Cosmogonic Diagram&lt;/I&gt;](tn/04100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/04100.jpg)  
*Mu's Cosmogonic Diagram*  

 

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

is a circle within two crossed and interwoven triangles. Being
interwoven or interlaced, these triangles form but one figure.

These two triangles are enclosed within a second circle, thus leaving
twelve divisions.

Beyond this circle is a third, leaving a space between the two.

On the outside of this third circle are 12 scallops. Falling from the
outside of the scallops is a ribbon which has 8 divisions.

THE MEANINGS OF THESE FIGURES.--The central circle is a picture of the
Sun and the symbol of the Deity whose abode is Heaven.

The twelve divisions, formed by the crossing of the two triangles, are
the gates to Heaven where dwells the Heavenly Father. These gates
symbolize virtues, the twelve great earthly virtues, which man must
possess before he can enter the gates, among them being Love, Hope,
Charity, Chastity, Faith, et cetera. Love stands at the head of the
list.

The space between the second and third circles is the world beyond,
which the soul must pass through to reach the gates of Heaven.

The twelve scallops on the outside of the outer circle are the gates to
the world beyond and symbolize the twelve great earthly temptations
which must be overcome by the material body, before the soul can pass
through these gates to the world beyond.

The ribbon with the eight divisions symbolizes the

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

 

<span id="img_04300"></span>

[![&lt;I&gt;The Babylonian Cosmogonic Diagram&lt;/I&gt;](tn/04300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/04300.jpg)  
*The Babylonian Cosmogonic Diagram*  

 

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

eight roads to Heaven and tells what man's actions and thoughts must be
to ascend to the gates of the world beyond. Put into present language
the foregoing would read:

THE BELIEF.--I believe there are eight roads to travel to reach Heaven
(mentioning them). My soul will first arrive after travelling these
roads at the gates to the world beyond. To enter these my soul must show
that my earthly body overcame the twelve great earthly temptations
(mentioning them). Having shown that it had done so, my soul will be
allowed to Pass into the world beyond. This I must traverse until I
reach the gates of Heaven. Here my soul must prove that my earthly body
possessed the twelve great virtues (mentioning them). Having shown that
it did, my soul will then be passed through the gates into Heaven to the
Throne of Glory, where sits the Heavenly Father waiting to receive it.

Have we anything today in any of our religions and religious sects that
will compare with this beautiful conception so simply worded?

This was the Religion of Mu, the Motherland, and the First Religion of
Man.

JESUS AND THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION.--Jesus was a Master, the greatest and
most proficient who has ever been on earth.

Jesus did not teach a new religion; he simply taught the First Original
Religion as it is written in the Sacred and Inspired Writings of Mu.

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

 

<span id="img_04500"></span>

[![&lt;I&gt;The Chaldean Cosmogonic Diagram&lt;BR&gt; The Sri
Santara&lt;/I&gt;](tn/04500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/04500.jpg)  
*The Chaldean Cosmogonic Diagram  
The Sri Santara*  

 

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

The Lord's Prayer, the greatest work of its kind ever penned or spoken,
is to be found in the Sacred Writings of Mu. Jesus condensed the ancient
text to suit the language of his day. He compacted the whole of the
material parts of religion into a few short sentences, leaving out
nothing that was vital to man's salvation. The religion taught by Jesus
has been called the Christian Religion, yet not five per cent of those
who profess to follow His teachings do so; the other ninety-five per
cent are following the supposed teachings of the apostles made up by a
conclave of priests years after Jesus and his apostles had taken the
long journey. This they called the Athenasian Creed. They borrowed the
name Christian for their headline.

The teachings of this religion today include some of the extravagances
the priesthood of Egypt grafted into the Osirian Religion, which are so
contrary to actual teachings of Jesus they are deplorable. Theologies
and bigotry, to which may be added supreme obstinacy, are tolling the
death knell of the Christian religion. The priesthoods of this religion
condemn the falling away of the world from the churches. This is easily
understood by anyone who will trouble to think. But thinking priesthoods
seem never to have existed. While they are bitterly complaining of this
"falling away from the church," as they call it, the priesthood has only
itself to blame. The public is receiving a higher education than
heretofore. People are beginning to think for themselves.\[paragraph
continues\]

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

 

<span id="img_04700"></span>

[![&lt;I&gt;The Hindu Cosmogonic Diagram&lt;/I&gt;](tn/04700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/04700.jpg)  
*The Hindu Cosmogonic Diagram*  

 

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

Thinking shows them the impossible theories and beliefs that are being
handed out to them, and the bigotry attending it all. With higher
education their reasoning powers will not allow them to accept it, so
they simply keep away from it.

Are people becoming irreligious? No! On the contrary, they are becoming
more religious. The heart craves truth, a knowledge of the Loving
Heavenly Father. Offer people a plain, untrammelled service of
simplicity and truth and no church will be big enough to hold all those
who will attend.

There is, however, a crisis in the Church today. How long before the
structure will fall? It is crumbling fast and soon will form a heap of
ruins on the ground.

With the atmosphere cleared, the Original Religion will return--the
religion that places the spiritual above the material, that teaches the
Love of the Heavenly Father, and makes a true brotherhood of man, as it
did during the life of the Motherland.

I have stated that we still retain in our present religions some of the
inventions and extravagances grafted into religion by the unscrupulous
priesthood. They still persist, they have never been cleansed from our
present day religions. I shall mention some; to mention all would fill
volumes.

THE DEVIL AND HELL.--The origin and date already given.

VIRGIN BIRTH.--The origin of this is to be found in

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

the Sacred Writings of Mu. It appears in the Fifth Command of The
Creation:

"From these cosmic eggs life came forth as commanded."

In a subsequent table explaining the commands in creation, cosmic eggs
are referred to as "the virgins of Life." The sentence reads: "Hol Hu
Kal." Translated into English it reads: Hol--closed; Hu--virgin womb;
and Kal--to open. Free reading: To pierce or open the virgin womb; and,
by permissible extension: To pierce or open the virgin womb of life.

For this reason the ancients called the waters "the mother of life"; for
up to this period of the earth's history, no life had appeared. Life,
therefore, first appeared in the waters. The advent of life had opened
the virgin womb in the waters.

Later, The Four Great Creative Forces which emanate from the Deity had
the additional name of Gods bestowed upon them.

Being the *First Known* commands or executors of the commands of the
Creator, they were called of virgin birth to correspond with the
teachings of the Sacred Writings regarding earthly life--thus the
*First* life either of the Gods or nature was the result of Hol Hu Kal.

Upon this ancient conception modern priesthoods (within the last two
thousand years) have invented virgin births and immaculate conceptions
for various men

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

that have lived, as an example, Masters. The Priesthoods have made the
Great Master, Jesus, of virgin birth and, forgetting themselves, give
his pedigree and family tree back to David.

Our learned scholars are not to be surpassed by any priesthoods. They
tell us that all ancient Kings were of virgin birth because they were
"Sons of the Sun." These Kings claimed nothing of the kind. "Son of the
Sun" was a title bestowed on the rulers or emperors of a colonial empire
by Mu, the Empire of the Sun and Suzerain of the whole world.

Heretofore I have stated that Jesus did not teach a new faith but the
Original Religion of Man.

My old friend, the Rishi, never tired of talking of the Great Master,
Jesus. One day he said to me: "The Lord's Prayer, as the Christians call
it, is the greatest masterpiece of phraseology and condensation ever
written, for it embodies the whole of the ancient religion in a few
short paragraphs. Take, for instance, the beginning, 'Our Father which
art in Heaven.' In these six words many points in the ancient religion
are covered. It first tells us that we are His children; therefore all
mankind are brothers and sisters. "Forgive us our trespasses as we
forgive others that trespass against us." These simple words tell us our
duty one to the other, and that we should love one another like brothers
and sisters. Again 'Our Father' tells us that we should approach Him as
we would our earthly father, with love and confidence. "Give us this day
our daily bread" is another

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

wonderful sentence and far-reaching. It tells us that we should avoid
greed and the craving to amass wealth and depend on Him for our daily
needs. He will care for us, thus leaving us free to amass spiritual
wealth without anxiety about the material.

"You will notice, my son, our temple has no wealth nor have those
connected with it any wealth. We depend entirely on what the Heavenly
Father sends us day by day through the people. Our faith in Him is
implicit, so he never allows us to want." And so he could go on through
every sentence of the Lord's Prayer.

Another favorite sentence in the Lord's Prayer to comment on was: "*Lead
us not into temptation*." This, he said, "was unquestionably a
mistranslation of the Master's words and, no doubt, was unintentional,
arising from careless reading." He then went on: "Let us reason it out.
In one of the paragraphs it is shown that the Heavenly Father is the
*All Powerful*, for it says: 'For Thine is the Kingdom, the *Power* and
the Glory.' Here it is shown that the supposed leader into temptation is
the All Powerful. Therefore, being All Powerful, He cannot fail; and who
is the All Powerful? Our kindly Heavenly Father whose love is so great
it rules the universe. Could He forget His great love and set a trap for
a son's downfall? Impossible!

"I think the words of the Master, correctly translated, would be: '*Let*
us not be led into temptation'; for in the Sacred Writings we find: 'O
Heavenly Father, let not temptation overtake or surround us. If it

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

does, deliver us from it.' These are the reasons why I feel that the
words of the Great Master have been unintentionally misquoted or
mistranslated."

He told me that one of the cardinal themes of the Great Master, Jesus,
was re-incarnation, something almost entirely omitted in our Biblical
account of Him, also in our religious services.

He told me many legends about Jesus that permeated Oriental lore, one of
which he said was universal and told everywhere. The scene is laid in
Lahore where Jesus was staying with one, Ajainin, who was one of Jesus'
pupils.

One day Jesus and Ajainin were sitting in the porch of the temple and
while sitting there a band of wandering minstrels entered the court and
began to play. Their music was very rich and delicate, and Jesus
remarked:

"Among the highest of the land we have no sweeter music than that which
these uncouth children of the jungles bring to us."

Ajainin asked: "Whence do they get this talent? In one short life they
surely could not acquire such perfection of voice and such knowledge of
harmony and time."

Jesus answered: "Men call them prodigies. They are no prodigies; all
things result from natural laws. These people are not young; a thousand
years would not suffice to give them such divine expressions and such
purity of voice. Ten thousand years ago these people had mastered
harmony. In days of old they trod the busy

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

thoroughfares of life and caught the melody of the voices of nature.
They have come again to learn still other lessons from the varied notes
of nature."

When walking one evening with the Rishi, talking on the subject of the
many religions of today and the work of Christian missionaries, he
related a tale that was popular among the native priesthood about a poor
benighted Hindu and a Christian missionary.

"A missionary asked one of his native flock what he thought of religion
having so many sects? The poor Hindu answered: Religions are like the
fingers on the hand. How are we to tell which is right? There was once a
dispute among the fingers of the hand as to which was entitled to
preëminence.

"The thumb said, I ought to have the preëminence for it is plain none of
you can do anything without me.

"Ah I said the first finger, What is more important than pointing out
the way? This is my office. I ought to have the preëminence.

"I, said the second finger, rest my claims on mathematical principles.
When you hold the hand upright which finger is the tallest? I am;
therefore I ought to have the preëminence.

"No, said the third finger, for although it is something to point out
the way, and mathematics are strong, there is one thing stronger, and
that is love. When you put the symbol of love upon the hand, it is on
the third finger. Therefore the supremacy is mine.

"Hear me, too, said the little finger, it is true I

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

am small and you are large. Mathematics are strong and love is stronger.
But there is one thing above all these and that is worship. When you
approach God, I am the finger you choose to present nearest in your
prayers. For then you press your hands together, lift them up and hold
them thus. Therefore, I should have the preëminence."

And the old Rishi turned to me with a smile, saying: "What is your
comment, my son?" The poor, benighted Hindu's philosophy nonplussed me.
So I leave it to my readers to supply it.

On one occasion the old Rishi informed me that temple legends stated:
"Jesus, during his sojourn in the Himalayan monastery, studied the
contents of the Sacred Inspired Writings, the language, the writing and
the Cosmic Forces of the Motherland."

That Jesus was a Master of the Cosmic Forces, with a perfect knowledge
of the Original Religion, is manifest in the Books of the New Testament;
but it is not there shown that he understood the language of Mu. His
acquaintance with it is proved by his last words when nailed to the
Cross: "*Eli, Eli, lama sabac tha ni*."

This is not Hebrew nor any tongue that was spoken in Asia Minor during
the life of Jesus. It is the pure tongue of the Motherland, badly
pronounced and spelt in the New Testament. It should have been spelt,
read and pronounced: "*Hele, hele, lamat zabac ta ni*."

Translation:

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

Hele--I faint. *Hele*--I faint; *lamat zabac ta ni*--darkness is coming
over my face.

I do not stand alone on this translation. The late Don Antonio Batres
Jaurequi, a prominent Maya scholar of Guatemala, in his book, "History
of Central America," says: "The last words of Jesus on the Cross were in
Maya, the oldest known language." He says they should read, "Hele, Hele,
lamah sabac ta ni." Put in English: "Now I am fainting; the darkness
covers my face." Thus we virtually agree on all material points. The
slight differences are easily explained.

Jaurequi spells the word "lama*h*." I spell it "lama*t*." He spells the
word "*s*abac." I spell it "*z*abac." This difference is brought about
by the translations coming from two different lines of colonization.
Mine comes from the Naga-Maya of Eastern Asia; Jaurequi's comes from the
modern Maya of Central America. The two, taken from vastly distant parts
of the earth, agree in all material points.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Symbols of the Deity and his Attributes](ssm06)
