[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ssm09)  [Next](ssm11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

### CHAPTER VII

# SACRED SYMBOLS CONNECTING NORTH AMERICA TO MU

SLABS FROM PATAMBO.--These two slabs were found by William Niven in an
ancient grave on the banks of the river Rio del Oro in the state of
Guerraro, Mexico. They are not the work of a very ancient civilization
like those of Chimalpa, Remedios et cetera. This civilization occupied
Mexico *less* than 12,000 years ago as is shown by the inscription on
one of the tablets, "returned to the region of darkness" which was
*submerged* Mu.

Their actual age I cannot estimate. Each slab has a top and bottom
division. The divisions are formed by a carved line running horizontally
across the face of the slab near its center. The central figure in each
of the top divisions is a conventional, symbolical head of Quetzalcoatl
the bearded or feathered serpent, the symbolic serpent of the Creator in
one part of Mu, and corresponds with Naga or Narayana the seven-headed
serpent of Oriental countries.

The ancient peoples of North America had various names for their Serpent
of Creation. The Quiches, called it Gucumatz, the serpent covered with
feathers.\[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

 

<span id="img_19000"></span>

[![&lt;I&gt;Sculptured Slab A&lt;/I&gt;.](tn/19000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/19000.jpg.md)  
*Sculptured Slab A*.  

Found by William Niven in a grave at Rio del Oro near Placeres del Oro,
state of Guerrero, Mexico. Size--28 inches long, 18 inches wide and 2
inches thick.

 

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

The Mayas called it Ac le Chapat, the plumed or feathered serpent. The
Quetzals, the first of men who trod the soil of America called it
Quetzalcoatl, the bearded serpent.

The Pueblo Indians of Arizona and New Mexico, even at the present time,
call it Quetzalcoatl, the bearded serpent, thus showing that many
thousands of years ago there was an intimate religious connection
between the Pueblo Indians and this past civilization which dwelt in the
valley of Rio del Oro, Mexico. An interesting question arises. Were they
intimately connected by blood? Or were they even the same people? The
Quetzals, the first people to arrive in America, took their name from
this serpent in the Motherland just as the Oriental Nagas took their
name from Naga, their serpent of creation.

These two slabs have far reaching significance. They are filled with
hieratic letters from the alphabet of Mu. I can find nothing on these
slabs to even intimate by what name these people were known.

Slab A. Upper Division. The central figure of the upper division of this
slab consists of portions of the head of a symbolical serpent called
Quetzalcoatl, the bearded, also the feathered serpent. A very important
detail in the head are the eyes. This part of the carving is too
mutilated to make anything out of it. The *beard* of the serpent is
prominent and intact; this alone is sufficient to say to what serpent it
belongs.

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

The mouth is an oblong square in the form of the hieratic letter M.

Evidently the nose and eyebrows are formed by a pair of serpents in the
act of gliding away, leaving for some reason.

The head is resting on the hieratic letter U, the symbol of an abyss,
deep down, et cetera.

The ends of the U are bent outwards ending with the symbol of the sun as
*Kin*, not Ra, thus showing that it is the earth referred to and not
heaven. The bottom part of this division assumes the form of an urn,
symbolizing the body of the earth. The U opening at the top symbolizes
the abyss. Within this urn are two glyphs, squares pointing downward
with the symbol, "lost light," engraved upon them (literal
translation--The light has gone forth from the day).

Slab A. Lower Division. This division symbolizes a grave where the body
is lying in rest and darkness as shown by the pointer glyphs. In the
upper division the pointer indicated downward, the direction taken by
the body. Here the pointer is changed to horizontal.

The design of this lower division is the two halves of a head placed
back to back with each other. The eyes are again formed of the sun as
Kin, the celestial orb, again telling us that this tableau refers to the
earth, not to heaven.

Beneath the eyes are two conventional mouths in the form of the hieratic
letter M. This form of M was used both by the Mayas and Egyptians.

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

Within these mouths is another hieratic letter, the letter N, which was
the alphabetical symbol of the Serpent of Creation. This symbol is
universal throughout the ancient world.

The American Serpent of Creation is adorned with either feathers or a
beard, the Oriental with seven heads, but in all cases, wherever found,
an adorned serpent is the symbol of the Creator and Creation and among
all ancient peoples the hieratic letter N was its alphabetical symbol.
Thus we find here in America, the same symbol used as in the Orient.

Slab A. The Legend. Quetzalcoatl, the Creator, the Bearded Serpent
called him, and his soul passed on to the region of darkness (submerged
Mu) there to await the call from the great serpent for re-incarnation.

Slab. B. Slab B, like Slab A, has two divisions, an upper and a lower.
These two slabs are so intimately connected that they may be looked upon
as belonging to the same legend--Life and Death. Slab A symbolized Death
and B, Life.

Upper Division. The central figure in this tableau is also the
conventional head of the Bearded Serpent, Quetzalcoatl. In this drawing
the action of the two serpents forming the nose and eyebrows differ from
that in Slab A. Instead of gliding away, they are here shown with their
heads bent towards the eyes. The double tongue of the serpents is
curving around the eye, not striking it. Their tongues form the symbol
for speech, so they are giving a command.

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

 

<span id="img_19400"></span>

[![&lt;I&gt;Sculptured Slab B&lt;/I&gt;.](tn/19400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/19400.jpg.md)  
*Sculptured Slab B*.  

 

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

Above and surrounding the head is the hieratic diphthong letter, Dz, a
glyph with three steps, which symbolizes the three steps to the throne.

In the right hand lower corner of the slab the margin forms another Dz
with the addition Am. It now reads Dzam, translated--He who sits upon
the throne. At the foot of the throne is the monotheistic symbol of the
Creator. Consequently, it is He, the Creator, who sits upon the throne.

The head, as in Slab A, rests over an urn having also an opening at the
top in the form of U. This urn has an ornamental border composed of a
string or succession of the hieratic letter N. This appears to me to
form a strong adjective. Within the body of the urn which symbolizes the
body of the earth are two glyphs, symbolizing darkness, i. e. the region
of darkness, submerged Mu.

Lower Division. In the lower division of Slab B we find the exact
opposite of Slab A. Here we find the two halves of the head brought
together again and joined with opened, light-seeing eyes. This
symbolizes the soul and body being joined together again, the
re-incarnation. This face is twice repeated, the second forming the
adjective to the accomplishment. The mouth in both faces is the oblong
square, the symbol of Mu, thus saying that it is in Mu that the
re-incarnation has taken place.

This is identically the same conception as the Egyptian where the soul
returns to "Amenti," "The region

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

of darkness," "The domain of Osiris," "Submerged Mu." It was also the
conception of the Mayas of Yucatan, as it is in some Oriental countries
today.

On each side of the lower division there are symbolical borders. The
border on the left is composed of the third glyph of the letter H in
Mu's alphabet and extends from the top to the bottom of the division. On
the right hand border at the top is the hieratic letter H, the symbol of
the Sacred Four.

The various symbols on the right hand border read: "the great serpent,
who created all things. He who sits upon the throne. He who embodies the
Sacred Four."

The Legend. When Quetzalcoatl, the Bearded Serpent, the Creator, he who
sits upon the throne, whose Four Great Commands evolved law and order
out of chaos, calls--the eyes of those closed in sleep are opened, the
time of their re-incarnation has arrived. They answer the call of the
Great Serpent and come forth into a new day.

Note. The glyphs on these slabs show an intimate connection between
these people and the ancient Mayas of Yucatan. They were also closely
connected with the people of Arizona and New Mexico. The cosmogony of
all three is identical.

QUETZAL AND QUETZACOATL.--A popular misconception is that the sun was
worshipped by the ancients. A parallel misconception exists about
Quetzal and Quetzalcoatl.

Quetzals was the name of the first people whose feet

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

trod the soil of America, who were a blond race with light flaxen hair.
Their last king was called Quetzal. They derived their name Quetzals
from their chief symbol for the commands of the Creator, the serpent,
Quetzalcoatl.

Quetzalcoatl is a feathered and winged serpent. In the Motherland to the
South of the Quetzals were a people whose corresponding symbol was the
Cobra-de-Capella, which they called Naga. They were known as the Nagas.
They gave their Naga seven heads to correspond with the Seven Commands"
or mental planes of creation. The early settlers in North America,
coming, generally, from the northern parts of the Motherland, made the
feathered serpent their symbol.

In the ancient Quiche Maya sacred book, the *Popol Vuh*, which was
written in Guatemala, the Quetzalcoatl is referred to as "the serpent
covered with feathers" and the symbol of Creation.

In Guatemala, where the Popol Vuh was written, legends permeate the
country, in which Quetzal is referred to as "the last king of the blond
white race" which occupied Central America and Southern Mexico.

Among the Mayas of Yucatan of later date I find that two different
serpents were used to symbolize the creative commands: the Naga, the
seven-headed serpent which they called Ac-la-Chapat, and the
Quetzalcoatl, which they called kukul-khan. Kukul comes out of two words
of the language of Mu, kuk--a feather and ul--

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

covered with, coated with et cetera, a free reading is, "covered with
feathers."

The Aztecs as usual made a scramble out of the two words Quetzal and
Quetzalcoatl, and after being thoroughly scrambled they turned the pan
over, and out came Quetzalcoatl as the god. Then to add to the mix-up
they gave this serpent-man, or god, a son, which they called Tescat, who
was to be an avenger, for having taken the land from the Quetzals and
driven them out of the country.

With this combination the Aztec priesthood instilled terror into the
hearts of the people throughout the land. Their teachings were that the
only way to appease Tescat was by human sacrifices. Thus human
sacrifices were introduced by this vile priesthood, rivers of blood
flowed throughout the land.

All People, even the king, lived in dread of the priesthood for no one
knew but that he or she might be the next to be stretched upon the
bloody stone. Thus the priesthood gained their point. They held control
of life and property throughout the land.

In an old Spanish book written about the time of Cortez it says that:
"when Cortez invaded Mexico more than 50,000 human sacrifices were
carried out annually." As these old Spanish writers were not very
accurate about what they wrote this passage of theirs should be
discounted. It might have been more or it might have been less. All one
can say is an immense number were sacrificed.

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

The Oriental Dragon is only a conventional Quetzalcoatl. I find that
when either Naga or Quetzalcoatl is shown by any and all ancient peoples
it is invariably in some conventional form. The forms of Quetzalcoatl
are, none of them, anything like the serpent itself, except in being
feathered.

The dragon is probably the most grotesque of all. Among the North
American Indians I have never found the Naga, and only a few of the
tribes have the feathered or plumed serpent, so far as I have yet
learned.

Is Quetzalcoatl a mythical serpent? No, it is not. Quetzalcoatl is a
feathered flying serpent, and the most venomous ever recorded: for,
within two minutes, and apparently almost suddenly, the victim falls to
the ground dead after being struck. The reptile is of a very peculiar
shape, having a body about the size of a duck or small goose. The real
serpent part of it is its head and neck, which, in the one I refer to
extended about five feet from the body. The head is very broad, flat and
V shaped, like most of our known venomous serpents. Apparently it had no
snake-like tail, but in its place a tuft of short feathers. From the
head to the body the neck is covered with short hair-like feathers. The
general color of the neck and body is almost white, thickly mottled with
grey; the upper wing feathers are very long and droop like the bird of
paradise. These have a prismatic sheen. Their flight is very clumsy, and
then they can only fly a very short distance, a few

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

yards. Apparently they have great difficulty in settling on the branch
of a tree. A soft-nosed bullet from a 30-30 so mashed and cut the one
referred to that it is pretty difficult to describe it accurately. The
meeting of this reptile ended in a triple tragedy. The Indians would go
no farther, so the explorer returned.

It is said by the Indians that the Quetzalcoatl is to be *occasionally*
found back in the swampy deep unexplored forests of Yucatan and
Guatamala, but is very scarce.

Niven's Mexican tablets show that over 12,000 years ago Quetzalcoatl was
used as a symbol by the people who occupied the Valley of Mexico at that
time.

THE ORIGIN OF THE RED INDIAN.--I will now make a short review of the
North American Indians, showing that nearly, if not all of our Red
Indian Brothers, have among themselves vast numbers of Mu's original
Sacred Symbols, retaining almost identically the same meanings they
conveyed in Mu. These supplemented with their astounding legends show us
clearly that the North American Indians came to America from Mu in
*boats*.

Times without number, it has been scientifically recorded that the North
American Indians came to America from Asia via the old Bering Land
Bridge. They neither came from Asia nor did they use the Bering Land
Bridge, and from their own legends and writings I shall show from where
they actually came and how they came to America.

The trouble with our scientists in the past has been that when they came
across anything they could neither

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

comprehend nor understand, they cordially agreed that "It came from Asia
via the Bering Land Bridge." Being thus agreed, it became orthodox
science.

Our American scientists were not alone in piling up scientific
accusations against Asia. The European scientists have splendidly
seconded their American cousins in this respect. But the Europeans had
no dear old bridge to carry their woes, so they dumped them on the
Caucasian plains, the boundary line between Eastern Europe and Asia,
saying: "It came from somewhere in

the mountains of Central Asia." Then this became orthodox science. The
Caucasian Plain myth like the Bering Land Bridge dream has broken up.
The European scientists have turned their venom on Africa, and are
accusing it of the most unheard of things. That is no business of ours,
we have our own troubles to account for our Red-Skin Brothers. We cannot
deny that they are here, and that they were here when we first came to
America to make it our home; so they must originally have come from
somewhere, but where? I am going to commence with the Indians down in
Arizona and New Mexico, then work my way up through our Western States
to British Columbia and Alaska. My keystone will be--two Indian
*writings, not legends, written by the Indians themselves*. These
writings tell us of their origin and where they came from to America,
*also*, how they came.

In Arizona, New Mexico, Colorado, Nevada, Utah, et cetera, are various
tribes of Pueblo Indians. They

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

have many legends and traditions about their ancient past. During the
short time I spent among them in Arizona and New Mexico they told me
many of their legends. At a ceremonial dance I was astonished to see
that the blanket of the Chief was covered with the Sacred Symbols of the
Motherland, Mu. One symbol in particular attracted my attention, as it
was identically like the central figure of the Hindu Cosmic Diagram, the
Sri Santara. It is also the same as the Motherland's, with one
exception. In the Motherland's Diagram the Twelve Gates to the World
Beyond, are symbolized by twelve scallops. The Pueblos like the Hindus
have symbolized theirs by twelve triangle points.

It is needless to say that when I read the symbols which appeared on the
Chief's blanket, and told them their meanings, which were what they
understood themselves, it was the open sesame for me to their hearts. I
became at once a brother.

They have a legend, "That far, far back, they did not live in America,
but in a land in the direction of the setting Sun, across the great
waters. That their forefathers came from this land to America in boats."

They have a very complicated legend about the great flood. It varies a
great deal in minor details by different narrators, but in all essential
points it is the same.

Many of their present day words are to be found in Mu's vocabulary.
Also, many of their other words have their roots in words of the Mother
tongue.

Certain symbols persist from the north of Yucatan in

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

Mexico to Nevada, Utah and Colorado, which leads one to believe that at
one time all this area was occupied by Pueblos or near relatives.

Having come to America from the Motherland in boats it shows that the
Pueblos have been in America more than 12,000 years, the approximate
date of Mu's destruction.

When they came to America they were a very highly educated, civilized
people. Their legends show that they knew more about geology than our
scientists did fifty years ago.

Why do we find them in the state they are today? The answer is the old,
old, tale of mountain raising. When the mountains were raised, the earth
went through a period of volcanic upheavals and workings such as she had
never known before nor since. The outside parts of the earth's crust
were literally torn to pieces. They were then forced up into ridges by
the volcanic gases beneath; rocks were hurled and thrown from ridge to
ridge, covering the valleys between. The earthquakes shook all cities
and buildings into ruins, burying tens of millions of human beings in
the débris.

Then to complete the destruction, the most violent volcanic outbursts
followed. Fire, rocks, lava and smoke were belched forth burying the
whole of the surrounding country with these ejections. Few of the people
in the regions of the rising mountains escaped with their lives, a few
here and there only.

An Oriental legend states that nearly a billion of

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

 

<span id="img_20400"></span>

[![](tn/20400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/20400.jpg.md)

 

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

lives were lost in Asia during the raising of the Asiatic mountains. In
America stands a lava flow twenty-six feet thick and nearly thirty miles
long. This is from one out of many surrounding craters. I find no record
of the loss of life in America, it was, however, great.

After the mountains went up destroying most of the people and their
country, the surviving Pueblos, to carry on, had to resort to primitive
methods, so that they could only carry down by legends a few details of
their great past.

Nevada. The following symbols have been found carved upon the rocks of
Nevada. Some of them were etched before the mountains were raised on
which they now stand, others were written after the mountains had gone
up. There are two distinct dates when these writings were made. Those
that were etched after the mountains went up are much more recent than
those which were written before the mountains were raised. Probably
thousands of years intervened between the two.

Among these Nevada writings there are three very distinct sets.

1\. This is a symbol of the rising sun. Universal throughout the world.

2\. Symbol of the setting sun. Universal throughout the world.

3\. Symbol of the sun at his meridian. Universal throughout the world.

4\. Symbol of the Sacred Four. The Four Great \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

Primary Forces. Universal throughout the world. S. Symbol of the sun as
Ra. Universal throughout the world. This is the earliest pattern of the
Sun as Ra.

6\. The plain colored disk without rays symbolizes that the sun has sunk
below the horizon and is giving no light to the land.

7\. A colored disk with three feathers appearing above symbolizes: First
the plain disk--darkness--Second the three feathers symbolizes Mu. A
free reading--Mu is in the region of darkness, no light shines upon her,
she is dead, submerged.

8\. This an open cross within a circle and reads U luumil Kin. The land
of the sun. The empire of the sun. The sun is here called Kin, not Ra.
Kin was the name of the sun as the celestial orb, not the symbol. Note
the difference in the two crosses No. 4 and this. No. 4 is a solid cross
and this is an open one.

9\. The hieratic letter A, Naga pattern symbolizing the great ruler, the
Creator, the Deity.

10\. This is another symbol of the Sacred Four, one of the steps towards
the swastika in its evolution. This symbol superseded No. 4. It is now
two steps from the swastika.

11\. This is a little vignette saying that Mu lies beyond the horizon
across the great water. The serpent is Khan the great water. The Arc is
the symbol of the horizon and the three feathers is one of Mu's symbols.
Her numeral symbol--three.

12\. I am unable to give this.

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

13\. This is an inscription reading Chi-po-ze, which translated reads:
"A mouth opened, fires came forth with vapours, the pillars gave way,
the land went down."

14\. A serpent unadorned, the symbol for water. This might have been a
guide post pointing the way to water.

15\. One of the glyphs of the letter H in the Motherland's alphabet.

16\. This symbol was called by the ancients the Mysterious Writing. Its
import is the same as the Cardinal number i.

17\. The tree and the Serpent. I have given the origin and meaning of
this.

18\. This reads: The great ruler--The empire of the sun.

19\. This symbolizes the contour of some land with two islands adjacent.

20\. This glyph is the Life Symbol. It appears hundreds of times in the
Egyptian Book of the Dead. An exact duplication of this glyph will be
found at the base of the Naos or Chair of Osiris. There it is many times
repeated. Book of the Dead, Chapter 125.

21\. This is the bud of a lotus flower. The floral symbol of Mu. The
sacred flower among all ancient peoples.

22\. An Uighur Symbol. Gone down from the sight of the sun.

23\. An Uighur symbol, Mehen--Man.

24\. The original symbol for the Sacred Four. Found

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

in the Sacred Inspired Writings of Mu. This symbol was universal
throughout the world.

25\. The ancient symbol for water. Universal throughout the world.

26\. The hieratic letter U. Symbol for an abyss, a deep hole, a valley.
Universal throughout the world.

27\. This is a guide telling the way to a temple which is dedicated to
the Sacred Four.

28\. An Uighur symbol. I cannot give the meaning.

29\. An Uighur symbol, the letter X.

3o. An Uighur symbol for hard.

31\. An Uighur symbol, heaven above earth.

32\. An Uighur pattern of the feather, symbol for Truth. Universal
throughout the world.

33\. One of the glyphs for the letter N in the alphabet of the
Motherland.

34\. A human hand, not a symbol.

35\. The ancient symbol for the active and passive elements in nature.
Universal throughout the world.

36\. An Uighur symbol, fires of the underneath.

37\. An Uighur pattern of the symbol for multitudes. The Egyptians
reversed the leaf, having the stem on top.

38\. An outline of an animal, not a symbol.

39\. The skin of an animal, not a symbol.

40\. Tracks of an animal, not a symbol.

41\. An animal's head, not a symbol.

42\. One of the glyphs of the letter H in the alphabet of the
Motherland.

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

A. B. C. D. E. are symbols perfectly new to me. I have no key whereby I
can read them: and there are not enough out of which to form a key.

In this collection of Nevada symbols, there is a great mix-up of Naga
and Uighur characters. They show, however, a very close connection with
the ancients of both Yucatan and the people who wrote Niven's Stone
tablets.

There are two distinct eras of writings, written by neither Naga, Uighur
nor Yucatan Maya, probably one or two of the ten tribes of the
Motherland, who were in close proximity with all three in the
Motherland.

Among the Klamath Indians of Oregon there are to be found several
legends--one about a great flood. In Washington and British Columbia
among the Kooteney Indians they have a legend stating that, "their
forefathers came to America from the Land of the Sun." Land of the Sun
and Empire of the Sun were the common names for Mu before she was
submerged.

Upon one of their ceremonial dresses I found a border with the hieratic
letter M, Mu's alphabetical symbol. Prominently resting over the left
breast of the wearer was an emblem, an eight-rayed Sun, the central
figure of Mu's escutcheon.

The Sun was a pale yellow, the rays of a warm pinkish red with their
points a pale blue. Blue was Mu's symbolic color.

I think this symbol in conjunction with their legend clearly proves that
the forefathers of the Kooteney \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

 

<span id="img_21000"></span> ![&lt;I&gt;Ornament on a ceremonial
blanket&lt;BR&gt; Koteney Indian, British
Columbia&lt;/I&gt;](img/21000.jpg.md)  
*Ornament on a ceremonial blanket  
Koteney Indian, British Columbia*

<span id="img_21001"></span> ![&lt;I&gt;Fan with Mu's symbol, eight
pointed sun&lt;BR&gt; Gilbert Islands&lt;/I&gt;](img/21001.jpg.md)  
*Fan with Mu's symbol, eight pointed sun  
Gilbert Islands*

 

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

Indians originally came from Mu; also that they themselves are aware of
the fact.

I will now take a leaf out of the history of the Haiden Indians of Queen
Charlotte Island, near Alaska. The leaf is a totem pole, one of the
prettiest and one of the most interesting totem poles I have ever seen.
The pole is capped with a large eagle-like looking bird which is called
the *Thunder Bird*. Extending nearly the whole length of the pole is a
symbolical fish which is called the *Killer Whale*. About half-way
between the head and tail of the fish stands a man who is thrusting a
spear into the back of the fish. This man is called the *Steel-headed
Man*.

A very wise, wizened old Chief, who thoroughly understood the legends of
his people, kindly explained the symbols on the pole as follows: "The
winged creature that crowns the pole is the *Thunder
Bird--representative of the Creator*.

"Lightning is the winking of the Thunder Bird's sharp eyes, and thunder
is the flapping of its wings. Rain is the spilling of water from a huge
lake in the middle of its immense back. The talons of the bird are
fastened in the tail of the Killer Whale."

This is all symbolical; let us see what it all means. First the bird is
a representative of the Creator. From other ancient writings this
statement is elucidated by saying the Bird symbolizes the Forces which
carried out the commands of the Creator-- His executors in creation.
Birds as symbols for the Creative Forces are

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

common throughout the world. The Thunder Bird appears to be the
universal symbol among the Indians of our Northwest. Thunder, lightning,
rain, et cetera, are ascribed to the Thunder Bird. This is again true,
the Thunder Bird being the executive of the Supreme Power. The natural
phenomena result from the workings of what we call nature, and nature is
the will of the Supreme. Bird Symbols for the Four Great Creative Forces
are found in Mexico, Central America,

Egypt, Assyria, Babylonia, India, among the Hittites, et cetera, in fact
among all ancient people, so that the Thunder Bird follows in line with
the rest.

The Killer Whale is the symbol for ocean waters among the North American
Indians of our Northwest. Most of the ancients used an unadorned serpent
to symbolize the waters which they called Khanab. The name Killer Whale
was probably given to it, on account of its drowning the 64,000,000
millions of people when the Motherland Mu was submerged.

The Steeled-headed Man. I will now resume the old Chief's
description--"The man piercing the back of the Killer Whale is the
Steel-headed Man. In the days of the great flood the Steel-headed man
was the leader of all men, and much beloved by the Thunder Bird, the
Thunder God and all other gods. When the flood swept over the face of
the earth the gods feared for the life of the Steeled-headed man whom
they miraculously changed into a Steeled-headed salmon."

There again we have a great symbolism. It says the \[paragraph
continues\]

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

Steel-headed man was the leader or governor of all men. This clinches
the point that the Steel-headed man was the symbol of Mu among the
Haiden Indians. Ancient literature is permeated with sayings that "Mu
was the ruler of all mankind," "Mu rules the earth," and in the Maya
book, the Codex Cortesianus, Mu is referred to as "The Great Ruler,"
"The Great Ruler exists no longer," et cetera.

I will again return to the Chief's description: "During the days of the
flood, the transformed leader of men lived in the waters of the Minkish
River. He gathered the posts and timber for his dwelling, but found he
lacked strength to do the building. Then the Thunder Bird appeared
before the Steel-headed man in a crashing and rumbling of Thunder. The
Thunder Bird lifted his god mask and revealed a human face to the
Steel-headed man, 'I am as human as you' said the bird, 'and I will put
up the timbers for you. There shall I stay with you to set up your tribe
and be your protector for ever.' Then with four claps of thunder, the
bird caused to appear a group of warriors who sprang out of the crashing
din full armed. They with the Steel-headed man were the nucleus from
which the Haiden people grew."

There we have a myth so covering a legend that it becomes hard to
extract the legend from the myth.

Steel and Steel-headed Salmon were names unknown in America, up to a few
hundred years ago.

At this point there is also an omission in the legend. \[paragraph
continues\]

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

How did the Steel-headed Salmon become a man again? How did the group of
warriors arrive, and where did they come from? There is no mention of
women without whom the tribe could not be formed.

In many of the Oriental pictures of emigrants leaving Mu by boat, they
are pictured as fish jumping along on the surface of the water. Was the
Steel-headed man one of these jumping fishes?

In completing the reading of the totem pole the old Chief said that the
base told the tale of:

The Killer Whale and the Sea Lion. "The Sea Lion was helping a warrior
to save his wife from the Killer Whale (drowning) when he was overcome
and struck down by the Killer Whale (the waters). He was saved and
restored to his family by Kolus the protecting god of the household. The
Sea Lion was made a member of the tribe and married the warrior
princess, the daughter of the Steel-headed man." The Sea Lion was
unquestionably a man of another tribe whose totem was the Sea Lion. In
ancient times it was usual to call a man by the name of his totem.

One of the most extraordinary picture writings I have ever come across
is a painted tableau depicting the submersion of Mu, and one of two
pictures--only that I have found depicting the submersion of Mu. The
other is the Egyptian. The picture has three archaeological
divisions:--*Top*--A serpent with a plume of feathers on its head.
*Middle*--The Thunder Bird with its talons embedded in the body of the
Killer Whale. *Bottom*--The \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

Killer Whale covered with symbols. This tableau comes from the Nootka
Indians who live on the west coast of Vancouver Island, British
Columbia, Canada.

While there are hundreds of writings telling of the destruction of Mu,
also various compound symbols forming vignettes in the ancient Maya
writings, throughout the world I have only found two tableaux or
pictures showing the manner of her destruction, the Egyptian and now the
Nootka Indian. There is, however, a marked difference in the two. The
Egyptian depicts Mu falling into an abyss of fire, while the Nootka
Indian depicts her as being submerged and covered with water. Two phases
in her destruction and both correct.

The three divisions are deciphered as follows:

Top. The Serpent. This serpent has a plume of feathers on its head, it
is therefore an adorned serpent, the well known Quetzalcoatl of the
Mayas, and the symbol of the Deity as the Creator among the northern
people of Mu. Thus the picture commences by saying that the Creator is
dominating what is proceeding below.

Middle. The Thunder Bird. Thunder Bird legends permeate the tales of the
Indians of the Northwest. Birds were one of the symbols, symbolizing the
four great Primary Forces which are the executors of the Deity's
commands. Birds were the favored symbol to express these Forces in the
Northern parts of Mu,

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

while to the south crosses were more frequently used. While Birds were
not the favorite symbol in the more southern parts of Mu, yet, as I have
said before, they were not excluded by any of the ancient peoples.

Bottom. The Killer Whale. This division is the crux of the whole
picture--the top and middle amounts to but a preliminary setting.

The Killer Whale is purely a conventional fish, just a symbol. The eye
is made out of the compound symbol mother and land which, conjoined,
reads Motherland. The pupil is a solid black square symbolizing
darkness, therefore the Motherland is in darkness.

The neck is shown as broken, with the symbol, abyss and magnetic Forces,
falling from the wings of the Thunder Bird (the Four Great Forces) into
the broken neck, thus showing that it is subsidiary forces coming from
the Primary that is accomplishing the destruction '

Within the mouth is the symbol for flowing water, at the end of the
mouth a passageway is shown, beyond this passage way is the hieratic
letter U, the alphabetical symbol for an abyss, thus saying the
Motherland has been carried down into an abyss of water. Directly
following the abyss is the Uighur numeral four, four bars. On the
backbone is the Naga form of number four, four circles or disks. The
number four was the numeral symbol for the Four Great Primary Forces.
Above the backbone are five bars, the Uighur way of writing five. Five
was the numeral symbol of the full or monotheistic godhead.

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

Legend. Thus repeating within the fish what was said by top and middle
figures. The whole as a legend would read: the Creator ordered or
commanded the submergence of Mu. His executors the Four Primary Forces
proceeded to carry out the command by dispatching subsidiary Forces to
do the work. These caused the land to sink and the waters to cover over
the sunken land.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. The Mound Builders Of North America](ssm11.md)
