[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](srp04)  [Next](srp06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

# CHAPTER II.

## MYTHOLOGY.

### SECTION I.--THE OLD GODS.

AT some remote period, of which very little is known with certainty, but
when, it may be supposed, what are now the various Slavonic peoples
spoke the same tongue and worshipped the same gods, some kind of
mythological system, in all probability, prevailed among them, of which
only a few fragments have come down to the present day. Among these
relics of an almost forgotten past, by no means the least important are
the songs which have been preserved by the people in their different
dialects, handed down as a precious heirloom from one generation to
another, and watched over with a jealous care which has prevented them
from entirely losing their original characteristics. In ancient times
they seem to have belonged to some great mass of national poetry, some
collection of Slavonic Vedas, in which the religious teaching of the day
was embodied. Of it, as a whole, there can now be formed only a dim
conception, but of several of its separate features it is possible to
gain at least some idea by studying and piecing together the fragments
of popular poetry

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

which exist, more or less abundantly, in every land that is inhabited by
a Slavonic population. Each land has its own songs now, but there is
such a strong family likeness between all these memorials of old times
as clearly points to a common origin, whether they come from the shores
of the Baltic or of the Adriatic, whether they form the heritage of the
"Orthodox" Russian or Servian, or of the "Catholic" Pole or Czekh. It is
mainly with the songs which are still current in modern Russia that it
is proposed to deal at present, but almost every inference that may be
deduced from their testimony, with reference to the old days of
heathenism, can be supported also by that of their kin among the
Slavonic brethren of the Russians, as well as among their Lettic
cousins.

Before entering upon the subject of these songs it will be as well to
say a few prefatory words about the mythological system which they
illustrate--to attempt to sketch the principal features of the religious
worship of the old Slavonians, and to convey some idea of the process by
which the venerable deities whom they adored have, in the course of
time, become transformed into the capricious and often grotesque beings
with whom the superstition of the Russian peasant peoples the spiritual
world. The task is not one which can be completed in a satisfactory
manner, for there is a lack of precise information on the subject, and
the writers who claim to pronounce upon it with authority not seldom
differ among themselves. But it is to be hoped that the

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

remarks which are about to be made here will, at least, help to render
intelligible the fragmentary songs which are to follow them.

The Slavonians--says Solovief, in the introduction to his "History of
Russia"--remember nothing about their arrival in Europe, though
tradition still speaks--even if history be silent--of their early
sojourn along the banks of the Danube, and of their being compelled to
move thence, under the pressure of some hostile force, apparently
towards the north-east. So thick are the clouds which hang over this
period of their history, that it is difficult to obtain any thing like a
clear view of what was happening before some of their number built
Novgorod on the shores of Lake Ilmen, and others founded, near the
conflux of the Dyesna and the Dnieper, what was to become the chief city
of South Russia, and gave it the name of Kief.

About the time of the foundation of that city, the country adjacent to
the Dnieper seems to have been inhabited chiefly by two great tribes,
the Drevlyáne, or Foresters \[*Drevo* = a tree\], and the Polyáne, or
Field-people \[*Pole* = a field\], of whom the latter were, as might be
supposed from their name, the milder and more civilized. Of the
Drevlyáne the old chroniclers have spoken with great harshness, but
those writers may have been somewhat biassed by their theological hatred
of stiff-necked idolators.

The religion of the Eastern Slavonians--among whom may fairly be
included the ancestors of at least a great part of the present
Russians--appears

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

to have been founded, like that of all the other Aryan races, upon the
reverence paid, on the one hand to the forces of nature, on the other to
the spirits of the dead. They seem to have worshipped the sun, the moon,
the stars, the elements, and the spirits whom they connected with the
phenomena of the storm, personifying the powers of nature under various
forms, and thus creating a certain number of deities, among whom the
supremacy was, sooner or later, attributed to the Thunder-God, Perun.

These Eastern Slavonians seem to have built no regular temples, and--in
striking contrast with the Lithuanians, not to speak of some of the
Western Slavonians--they appear not to have acknowledged any regular
class of priests. Their sacrifices were offered up under a
tree--generally an oak--or beside running water, and the sacred rites
were performed by the Elders, or heads of family communities. The modern
Russian word for "family," *Sem'ya*--it should be observed--originally
had the same meaning as *Suprugi*, man and wife. The word which supplied
its place was *Rod*, which meant family in its widest sense, including
the whole of a man's relatives, his Clan, as it were, or *Gens* <span
id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_67). The chief of the *Rod* exercised the
functions of priest, king, and judge. Prophets seem to have existed in
the persons of certain wizards--*Volkhvui*--of whom very little is
known, but who probably resembled to a considerable degree the Finnish
Conjurors.

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

The cultus of ancestors formed an important part of the religious system
of the old Slavonians, who attributed to the souls of the dead passions
and appetites like to those which sway the living, and who attached
great importance to the manifestation of respect for the spirits of
their forefathers, and especially for that of the original founder of
the family. The worship of the Slavonic Lares and Penates, who were, as
in other lands, intimately connected with the fire burning on the
domestic hearth, retained a strong hold on the affections of the people,
even after Christianity had driven out the great gods of old; but the
spiritual beings to whom reverence was paid gradually lost their
original dignity, until at last the majestic form of the household
divinity became degraded into that of the Domovoy--the house-spirit in
whom the Russian peasant still firmly believes, the Brownie, or
Hobgoblin, who once haunted our own firesides.

Such are the most salient points of the old Slavonic mythology. We will
now examine it a little more in detail, commencing with the ideas
attached by the early inhabitants of Russia to those solar gods who are
supposed by many eminent scholars to have originally held higher rank
than the wielder of the Thunderbolt, Perun <span
id="fr_68"></span>[2](#fn_68).

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

The most ancient among these deities is said to have been Svarog,
apparently the Slavonic counterpart of the Vedic Varuna and the Hellenic
Ouranos. His name is deduced by Russian philologists from a root
corresponding with the Sanskrit *Sur*--to shine, and is compared by some
of them with the Vedic *Svar*, and the later word *Svarga*, heaven.

The Sun and the Fire are spoken of as his children; the former under the
name of Dazhbog, the latter under that of Ogon'. According to an old
saying, Svarog is given to repose, deputing to his children the work of
creation and the task of ruling the universe <span
id="fr_69"></span>[3](#fn_69).

That Dazhbog was the Sun seems clear, and it appears to be proved that
he was identical with Khors, who is sometimes spoken of as a different
personage. The word *Dazh* is said to be the adjectival form of *Dag*
\[Gothic, *Dags*, German, *Tag*\], so that Dazhbog is equivalent to
Day-God. That the

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

word *Bog* stands for God is already well known, as also that it
"reappears among us in the form of Puck, Bogy, and Bug <span
id="fr_70"></span>[4](#fn_70)."

That Ogon', Fire, \[pronounced Agón, = Agni\], was considered the son of
Svarog, the Heaven, is supposed to be proved by the evidence of a
thirteenth century writer, who says <span id="fr_71"></span>[5](#fn_71)
of the Slavonians, "They pray to Ogon', whom they call Svarozhich," or
Svarog's son--the "Zuarasici" mentioned by Dietmar. We shall see, a
little farther on, how many traces still appear to exist, in the speech
and the customs of the modern Russians, of the worship once paid to
Ogon', and on his account to the domestic hearth, or to the stove which
eventually took its place--a worship which was closely connected with
that of which the spirits of ancestors were the objects.

We now come to the deity who ultimately became the supreme god of the
Slavonians--Perun, the Thunderer. In dealing with him we shall by no
means be treading upon certain ground, but we shall at least have
escaped from the limbo to which the lapse of' time has assigned the
dimly-seen form of Svarog.

Russian mythologists identify the name of Perun with that of the Vedic
Parjanya. Whether the latter was an independent deity, or whether his
name was merely an epithet of Indra, does not appear to be certain, nor
are philologists agreed as to whether

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

Parjanya means "the rain" or "the thunderer;" but "it is very probable
that our ancestors adored, previously to the separation of the Aryan
race, a god called Parjana, or Pargana, the personification of the
thundering cloud, whom they believed to rouse the thunder-storm, to be
armed with the lightning, to send the rain, to be the procreator of
plants, and the upholder of justice. Afterwards the Græco-Italian
nation, bent on the adoration of Dyaus, forgot him entirely; the Aryans
of India and the Teutonic tribes continued to worship him as a
subordinate member of the family of the gods, but the Letto-Slavonians
raised him to the dignity. of a supreme leader of all other
deities <span id="fr_72"></span>[6](#fn_72)."

In the hymns addressed to Parjanya in the Rig Veda he is called "the
thunderer, the showerer, the bountiful, who impregnates the plants with
rain," and it is said that "Earth becomes (fit) for all creatures when
Parjanya fertilizes the soil with showers <span
id="fr_73"></span>[7](#fn_73)." Sometimes "he strikes down the trees"
and destroys "the wicked (clouds)," at others he "speaks a wonderful
gleam-accompanied word which brings refreshment <span
id="fr_74"></span>[8](#fn_74)," and gives birth "to plants for man's
enjoyment."

The description of Parjanya is in all respects

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

applicable to the deity worshipped by the different branches of the
Slavo-Lettic family under various names, such as the Lithuanian
*Perkunas*, the Lettish *Perkons*, the Old Prussian *Perkunos*, the
Polish *Piorun*, the Bohemian *Peraun*, and the Russian *Perun* <span
id="fr_75"></span>[9](#fn_75).

According to a Lithuanian legend, known also to other Indo-European
nations, the Thunder-God created the universe by the action of
warmth--*Perkunas wis iszperieje*. The verb *perieti* (present form
*periu*) means to produce by means of warmth, to hatch, to bear, being
akin to the Latin *pario*, and the Russian *parit'* <span
id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76).

In Lithuania Perkunas, as the God of Thunder, was worshipped with great
reverence. His statue is said to have held in its hand "a precious stone
like fire," shaped "in the image of the lightning," and before it
constantly burnt an oak-wood fire. If the fire by any chance went out,
it was rekindled by means of sparks struck from the stone. His name is
not

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

yet forgotten by the people, who say, when the thunder rolls, *Perkúns
grumena*, and who still sing *dainos* <span
id="fr_77"></span>[2](#fn_77) in which he is mentioned. In one of those
a girl who is mourning for the loss of her flowers is asked,--

Did the north wind blow,  
Or did Perkunas thunder or send lightnings?

In another it is told how when

The Morning Star held a wedding-feast,  
Perkunas rode through the doorway,  
Struck down the green oak.

And in a third the following myth is related about the marriage of the
Moon, a male deity in the Slavo-Lettic languages:--

The Moon wedded the Sun  
In the first spring.  
The Sun arose early  
The Moon departed from her.  
The Moon wandered alone,  
Courted the Morning Star.  
Perkunas greatly wroth  
Cleft him with a sword.  
"Wherefore dost thou depart from the Sun?  
Wandering by night alone?  
Courting the Morning Star?"  
Full of sorrow \[was his\] heart <span id="fr_78"></span>[3](#fn_78).

Among the kindred Livonians a feast used to be celebrated at the
beginning of Spring, during which

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

the following prayer is said to have been uttered by the officiating
priest:--

"Perkons! father! thy children lead this faultless victim to thy altar.
Bestow, O father, thy blessing on the plough and on the corn. May golden
straw with great well-filled ears rise abundantly as rushes. Drive away
all black haily clouds to the great moors, forests, and large deserts,
where they will not frighten mankind; and give sunshine and rain, gentle
falling rain, in order that the crops may thrive <span
id="fr_79"></span>[4](#fn_79)!"

Among many of the Western Slavonians the name of this thunder-god is
still preserved under various forms in the speech of the people. The
White-Russian peasant to this day uses such expressions in his wrath as
"Perun smite thee!" and the Slovaks have retained a curse, "May Parom
show thee his teeth!" that is to say, "May the lightning strike
thee <span id="fr_80"></span>[5](#fn_80)!"

In a most valuable collection of Lettish songs, recently published at
Wilna, in Lett and Russian, there occur several allusions to Perkons,
either regarded as the thunder-god or as the thunder itself. In one we
are told that--

Father Perkons  
Has nine Sons:  
Three strike, three thunder,  
Three lighten.

Another states that--

Perkons drove across the sea,  
In order to marry beyond the sea:

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

Him the Sun followed with a dowry  
Bestowing gifts on all the woods:  
To the Oak a golden girdle,  
To the Maple motley gloves.

And a third addresses the Thunderer as follows:--

Strike, O Perkons, the spring  
To the very depths--  
In it the Sun's daughter yesterday was drowned  
While washing golden goblets <span id="fr_81"></span>[6](#fn_81).

According to a Polish tradition, the mother of the thunder is called
Percunatele, a name which is applied in part of Russian Lithuania as an
epithet of the Virgin Mary, who is called Panna \[Lady\] Maria
Percunatele. In the Government of Vilna the second of February is
devoted to the *Presvyataya Mariya Gromnitsa*, the Very Holy Mary the
Thunderer, and during service on that day the faithful stand in church
holding lighted tapers, the remains of which they keep by them during
the rest of the year, lighting them before their holy pictures from time
to time when storms impend <span id="fr_82"></span>[7](#fn_82).

In "Great-Russia," or Russia proper, the name of Perun has disappeared
from the memory of the common people, and it has left scarcely any
traces behind. Only two Russian localities, says Schöpping, bear names
which seem to be derived from his, and one of them is in Kief, and the
other in the Government

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

of Novgorod, both places directly under Varangian influence--his theory
being that the Scandinavian rulers of Russia were the chief promoters of
the worship of Perun <span id="fr_83"></span>[8](#fn_83). In their
treaties with the Greeks they swore by Perun and Volos, and some
commentators have supposed that the former was the peculiar deity of the
Scandinavian rulers, and the latter that of their Slavonic subjects. At
all events, Volos has retained his hold on the memory of the Russian
peasants, while Perun has become forgotten, and his attributes have been
transferred to the Prophet Elijah and various Christian Saints <span
id="fr_84"></span>[9](#fn_84).

The descriptions we have of the appearance presented by the statues of
Perun all come from the west and south-west. In Kief, it is said, he had

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

a statue of which the trunk was of wood, while the head was of silver,
with moustaches of gold, but little more is known about it, except that
it bore among its weapons a mace. White-Russian traditions, says
Afanasief, describe Perun as tall and well-shaped, with black hair, and
a long golden beard. He rides in a flaming car, grasping in his left
hand a quiver full of arrows, and in his right a fiery bow. Sometimes he
flies abroad on a great millstone, which is supported by the
mountain-spirits who are in subjection to him, and who, by their flight,
give rise to storms. Perun, in many respects, corresponds with Thor, and
one of the points of similarity is the mace which he bears, answering to
Thor's hammer, Mjölnir, the name of which may be compared with the
Russian words for a hammer and for lightning, *molot* and
*molniya* <span id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_85). Ukko, also, the Finnish
Thunder-God, has his hammer, and the Lithuanians used to pay special
honour to a great hammer with which a certain giant--perhaps
Perkunas--had freed the Sun from imprisonment.

In the Spring, according to a White-Russian tradition, Perun goes forth
in his fiery car, and crushes with his blazing darts the demons, from
whose wounds the blood is sometimes described as streaming forth. That
is to say, the lightning pierces the clouds at that season of the year,
and causes them to pour forth rain.

The myth is one which the Slavonians doubtless

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

brought with them from some such climes as those in which "anxious
multitudes watch the gradual gathering of the sky, as day by day the
long array of clouds enlarges; but there is no rain until a rattling
thunderstorm charges through their ranks, and the battered clouds are
forced to let loose their impetuous showers. 'This,' says the Veda, 'is
Indra, who comes loud shouting in his car, and hurls his thunderbolt at
the demon Vritra.'" <span id="fr_86"></span>[2](#fn_86)

After Perun's statue at Kief had been flung into the Dnieper by St.
Vladimir, and that at Novgorod had been cast into the Volkhof <span
id="fr_87"></span>[3](#fn_87), and the people who used to worship him
had accepted just so much of Christianity as left them what the
chronicler called "two-faithed," then his attributes were transferred to
a number of the personages whom the new religion brought into honour. In
the minds of most of the people he became changed into the Prophet Ilya,
or Elijah, from whose fiery chariot the lightnings

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

flashed and the thunders pealed as they had done in days of yore from
that of Perun. The fame of his battles with the demons survived. in the
legends about the Archangel Michael, the conqueror of the powers of
darkness, and other traditions relating to him may be traced in stories
told about the Apostle Peter, or about Yury the Brave, our own St.
George <span id="fr_88"></span>[4](#fn_88).

Perun's bow is sometimes identified with the rainbow, an idea which is
known also to the Finns. From it, according to the White-Russians, are
shot burning arrows, which set on fire all things that they touch. In
many parts of Russia (as well as of Germany) it is supposed that these
bolts sink deep into the soil, but that at the end of three or seven
years they return to the surface in the shape of longish stones of a
black or dark grey colour--probably belemnites, or masses of fused
sand--which are called thunderbolts, and considered as excellent
preservatives against lightning and conflagrations. The Finns call them
Ukonkiwi--the stone of the thunder-god Ukko, and in Courland their name
is Perkuhnsteine, which explains itself <span
id="fr_89"></span>[5](#fn_89).

In some cases the flaming dart of Perun became, in the imagination of
the people, a golden key. With it he unlocked the earth, and brought to
light its concealed treasures, its restrained waters, its captive founts
of light. With it also he locked away in safety fugitives who wished to
be put out of the

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

power of malignant conjurors, and performed various other good offices.
Appeals to him to exercise these functions still exist in the spells
used by the peasants, but his name has given way to that of some.
Christian personage. In one of them, for instance, the Archangel Michael
is called upon to secure the invoker behind an iron door fastened by
twenty-seven locks, the keys of which are given to the angels to be
carried to heaven. In another, John the Baptist is represented as
standing upon a stone in the Holy Sea \[i. e. in heaven\], resting upon
an iron crook or staff, and is called upon to stay the flow of blood
from a wound, locking the invoker's veins "with his heavenly key." In
this case the myth has passed into a rite. In order to stay a violent
bleeding from the nose, a locked padlock is brought, and the blood is
allowed to drop through its aperture, or the sufferer grasps a key in
each hand, either plan being expected to prove efficacious. As far as
the key is concerned, the belief seems to be still maintained among
ourselves.

According to the mythologists, Perun's golden key is the lightning with
which in spring he rends the winter-bound earth and lets loose the
frozen streams--offices more usually performed by the sun--or pierces
the clouds, and frees the rains which are imprisoned in those airy
castles. These spring rains have always been looked upon as specially
health-giving, and from that idea, as some commentators suppose, arose
the myth of the Water of Life which figures in the folk-lore of so many
different races.

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

The Slavonic tales, like those with which we are more familiar, abound
in accounts of how a dead hero is restored to life by means of this
precious liquid, which is sometimes brought by the Whirlwind, the
Thunder, and the Hail, sometimes by their types the Raven, the Hawk, the
Eagle, and the Dove. But they differ from most of the similar stories in
this respect. They have two species of what is called the "strong" or
the "heroic" water. The one is called "the dead water" (*mertvaya
voda*); the other the "living \[or vivifying\] water" (*zhivaya voda*).
When the "dead water" is applied to the wounds of a corpse it heals
them, but before the dead body can be brought to life, it is necessary
to sprinkle it with the "living water." When that has been done, the
corpse first shudders and then sits up, usually remarking "How long I
have been asleep <span id="fr_90"></span>[6](#fn_90)!"

In other stories the representative of Perun recovers gems or treasures
which evil spirits have hidden away within mountains or under deep
waters--\[that is to say, he brings out the lights of heaven from behind
the dark veil of winter, or from out of the depths of the cloud-sea?\]
Sometimes, however, it is Perun who dies, and then remains lying veiled
in a shroud \[of fog?\] or floating over dark

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

waters in a coffin \[of cloud, until the spring recalls him to life?\].

As among other peoples, so among the Slavonians, the oak was a sacred
tree, and was closely connected with the worship of the thunder-god. The
name dub, which is now confined to the oak, originally (like the Greek
*drus*) meant a tree or wood, as may be seen in such words as *dubina*,
a cudgel. Afterwards it was used to designate the hardest and most
long-lived among trees, and that which was consecrated to the Thunderer,
the oak. Its name in Servian is *grm*, or *grmov*, a form which is
evidently akin to the Russian onomatopœic word *grom*, the thunder. As
has already been stated, the fire which burnt before the statue of
Perkunas was fed with oak-wood, and so profoundly did the old
Lithuanians respect their sacred oaks, which they carefully hedged
around, that, when they accepted Christianity, they protested against
those trees being hewn down, even when they consented to their idols
being overthrown.

The ideas which were associated with the fern in other lands are current
also in Russia. At certain periods of the year it bursts into golden or
fiery blossoms, but they disappear almost instantaneously, for evil
spirits swarm thickly around them, and carry them off. Whoever can
gather these flowers will be able to read the secrets of the earth, and
no treasures can be concealed from him. But to obtain them is a
difficult task. The best way is to take a cloth on which an Easter cake
has been blessed, and the knife with which the cake has been cut, and
then go into

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

the forest on Easter Eve, trace a circle with the knife around the fern,
spread out the cloth, and sit down within the circle, with eyes steadily
fixed upon the plant. Just at the moment when the words "Christ is
arisen!" are sung in the churches, the fern will blossom. The watcher
should then seize it and run home, having covered himself with the
cloth, and taking care not to look behind him. When he has reached home
he should cut his hand with the knife and insert the plant into the
wound. Then all secret things will become visible to him <span
id="fr_91"></span>[7](#fn_91).

The fern-gatherer must remain in the magic circle until he has secured
the flowers, otherwise the demons will pull him to pieces. They do all
they can to prevent his obtaining the fiery blossoms, attempting to
overcome him by a magic sleep, and causing the earth to rock, lightning
to flash, thunder to roar, flames to surround the intruder, so that
success is rare. These magic blossoms, which appear on St. John's day at
Midsummer, as well as on Easter-day, are called among the Croats, says
Afanasief, by the name of *Perenovo Tsvetje*, or Perun's Flower <span
id="fr_92"></span>[8](#fn_92).

The lightning was endowed by ancient fancy with the faculty of sight,
and the flash of the summer lightning, when it gleams for a moment
across the

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

heavens, and then hides itself behind the dark clouds, is still
associated by the people in many places with the winking of an eye. Thus
the Little-Russians call the summer lightning *Morgavka* \[*morgat'* =
to wink\], and say as they look at it, "*Morgni, Morgni, Morgavko!*"
"Wink, wink, Morgavko!" The stories of the Bohemians and Slovaks tell of
a giant named Swifteye, whose ardent glances set on fire all that they
regard, so that he is compelled to wear a bandage over his eyes; and the
Russian stories describe a wondrous Ancient with huge eyebrows and
enormously long eyelashes. So abnormal has been their growth, that they
have darkened his vision, and when he wishes to gaze upon "God's world,"
he is obliged to call for a number of powerful assistants, who lift up
his eyebrows and eyelashes with iron pitchforks. In Servia he appears in
the form of the Vii, a mysterious being, whose glance reduces not only
men, but even whole cities, to ashes. Nothing can be concealed from his
eyes when they are open, but they are almost always covered by their
closely adhering lids, and by his bushy brows. When his eyelids have
been lifted by the aid of pitchforks, his stare is as fatal as was that
of Medusa. This wielder of baleful regards is supposed to have been one
of the many forms under which the popular fancy personified the
lightning--his basilisk glance, so rarely seen, being the flash which
remains bidden by the clouds, till the time comes for it to make
manifest its terrible strength.

There is a well-known Lithuanian story, in which

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

Perun occupies an intermediate place between that of a deity and of a
demon. According to it a young Carpenter once went roaming about the
world with Perkun and the Devil. Perkun thundered and flashed
lightnings, so as to keep off beasts of prey, the Devil hunted, and the
Carpenter cooked. After a time they built a hut, and lived in it, and
began to till the land and to grow vegetables. All went well for a
while, but at last a thief took to stealing their turnips. The Devil and
Perkun successively tried to catch the thief, but only got well thrashed
for their pains. Then the Carpenter undertook the task, providing
himself beforehand with a fiddle. The music he drew from this instrument
greatly pleased the thief, who appeared in the form of a *Laume*, or
supernatural hag, and besought a music-lesson. The Carpenter, under the
pretence of making her fingers more fit for fiddling, induced her to
place them in a split tree-stump, from which he knocked out a wedge, and
so captured her. Before he let her go he made her promise not to return,
and took away her iron waggon, and the whip with which she had
belaboured his comrades.

Time passed by and the three companions agreed to separate, but could
not decide who should occupy the hut. At last they settled that it
should belong to that one of their number who succeeded in frightening
the two others. First, the Devil tried his hand, and raised such a storm
that he drove Perkun out of the house. But the Carpenter held out
bravely, praying and singing psalms all night. Next Perkun

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

put forth all his terrors, and frightened the Devil horribly by his
thunder and lightning, but the Carpenter still held his own. Last of all
the Carpenter set to work. In the middle of the night up he drove in the
Laume's waggon, cracking her whip, and uttering the words he had heard
her use while she was stealing turnips.. Immediately away flew both the
Devil and Perkun, and the Carpenter was left in possession of the
house <span id="fr_93"></span>[9](#fn_93).

The statue of Perun, at Kief, stood upon a piece of rising ground, on
which were set up also the images of several other gods-Khors, Dazhbog,
Stribog, Simargla, and Mokosh. Of these Khors and Dazhbog are supposed,
as has already been observed, to have been two forms of one deity, the
Sun-god, and Stribog was the God of Winds. Of the others very little
indeed is known. Simargla is generally taken to be a corruption of Sim
and Regl, the names of two deities who are so shrouded in obscurity that
one commentator--in default of all trustworthy evidence--has had
recourse to a somewhat rash comparison of their names with those of the
Assyrian gods mentioned in the Second Book of Kings \[ch. xvii. ver.
30\]: "And the men of Cuth made Nergal, and the men of Hamath made
Ashima <span id="fr_94"></span>[1](#fn_94)." In pursuance of a similar
idea Mokosh has been taken to be a female deity, and has been likened to
Astarte. But these are the wildest of conjectures. The name

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

of Stribog, the God of the Winds, is derived from a word *Stri* (= the
air, or a certain state of the atmosphere), and may still be recognized
in various geographical designations, such as Stribog's Lake (*Stribozhe
Ozero*), etc.

On the other deities known to the Western Slavonians there is no
occasion to dwell at present, for they do not figure in the popular
prose or poetry of Russia. Some of their names are probably synonyms,
and it will be sufficient to say of such forms as Svyatovit, Radigast,
and Yarovit that Professor Sreznyevsky considers them as different
appellations of the Sun-god, preserved by various Slavonic races. The
belief attributed to the Western Slavonians in the warring principles of
good and evil, in Byelbog, the White God, the representative of
light--and in Chernobog, the Black God, the representative of
darkness--is supposed by some writers to have once been common to the
whole Slavonic family, the Russians included, for geography has
preserved the names of the antagonistic deities in divers places. In
Russia, for instance, there are the Byeluie Bogi, near Moscow, the
Troitsko-Byelbozhsky Monastery in the diocese of Kostroma, and
Chernobozh'e, in the Porkhof district. Among the White-Russians the
memory of Byelbog is still preserved in the traditions about Byelun.
That mythical personage is represented as an old man with a long white
beard, dressed in white, and carrying a staff in his hand, who appears
only by day, and who assists travellers to find their way out of the
dark forests.

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

He is the bestower of wealth and fertility, and at harvest time he often
appears in the corn-fields, and assists the reapers. The adjective
*byeloi* or *byely* \[from a root *byel* or *bil*\] which now means
white, originally meant bright, as appears from such expressions as
*byely svyet*, or *byely den*, the white (i.e. bright) light or day. In
the same sense of the word the moon is often spoken of as "white," and
the horses are "white" which draw the chariot of the sun <span
id="fr_95"></span>[2](#fn_95). The intimate connexion between Byelbog
and the Light-god Bäldäg \[Baldur, etc.\] has been pointed out by Jacob
Grimm (*Deutsche Mythologie*, p. 203).

In the Russian songs several other mythological names occur, but many of
them are supposed to be merely special designations either of Perun or
of Dazhbog--of the thunder or of the sun--such as Tur, Ovsen', Yarilo,
etc. These may be left to be dealt with as they occur, but there are two
names which are very often mentioned, and about which some discussion
has arisen--those of Lado and Lada. Of these it may be as well to say a
few words.

One writer has gone so far as to maintain that Lado and Lada are merely
two of the meaningless refrains that occur in Russian songs <span
id="fr_96"></span>[3](#fn_96). But the generally received idea is that
Lado was a name for the Sun-god, answering to Freyr, and that Lada was
the Slavonic counterpart of Freyja, the goddess of the spring

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

and of love. In Lithuanian songs Lada is addressed as "*Lada, Lada, dido
musu deve*!" "Lada, Lada, our great goddess!" And the epithet *dido*, or
great, may account for the form *Did-Lado*, which frequently occurs in
the Russian songs. One Lithuanian song distinctly couples the name of
Lado with that of the sun. A shepherd sings, "I fear thee not, O wolf!
The god with the sunny curls will not let thee approach. Lade, O
Sun-Lado!" In one of the old chronicles Lado is mentioned as "The God of
marriage, of mirth, of pleasure, and of general happiness," to whom
those who were about to marry offered sacrifices, in order to secure a
fortunate union. And nearly the same words are used about Lada, on the
authority of an old tradition. In the songs of the Russian people the
words *lado* and *lada*, are constantly used as equivalents, in the one
case for lover, bride groom, or husband, and in the other for mistress
bride, or wife. *Lad* means peace, union, harmony, as in the proverb,
"When a husband and wife have *lad*, they don't require also *klad* (a
treasure)." After the introduction of Christianity the reverence that
was originally paid to Lada became transferred to the Virgin Mary. On
that account it is that the Servians call her "Fiery Mary," and speak of
her in their songs as the sister of Elijah the Thunderer, that is
Perun <span id="fr_97"></span>[4](#fn_97).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_67"></span>[83:1](srp05.htm#fr_67) Solovief, *Istoriya
Rossii*, I. 317.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[84:2](srp05.htm#fr_68) The following extract
from Mr. Talboys Wheeler's description of the religion of the "Vedic
people" ("History of India," I. 8) seems to be perfectly applicable to
the primitive Slavonians. "Their Gods appear to have been mere
abstractions: personifications of those powers of nature on whom they
relied for good <span id="page_85">p. 85</span> harvests. But from the
very first there appears to have been some confusion in these
personifications, which led both to a multiplicity of deities, and the
confounding together of different deities."

<span id="fn_69"></span>[85:3](srp05.htm#fr_69) Buslaef, "On the
Influence of Christianity on the Slavonic Language," p, 50. Afanasief,
"Poetic Views of the Slavonians about Nature," I. 64, 65. Solovief
decidedly identifies Perun with Svarog, See his "History of Russia," I.
82, 322. Buslaef, in his "Historical Sketches," says "The epoch of Perun
and Volos . . . was preceded by another, one common to all the
Slavonians--the epoch of Svarozhich, who among us in the East received
the name of Dazhbog."--*Ist. Och.* II. 364. I shall not refer in this
chapter to the celebrated epic "On the Expedition of Igor," as I wish to
reserve that poem for a future occasion.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[86:4](srp05.htm#fr_70) G. W. Cox's "Mythology
of the Aryan Nations," II. 364.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[86:5](srp05.htm#fr_71) In the *Slovo nyekoego
Khristolyubtsa*.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[87:6](srp05.htm#fr_72) Dr. G. Bühler, in an
excellent article "On the Hindu God 'Parjanya,'" contained in the
"Transactions of the Philological Society," 1859, pt. 2, pp. 154-168.
See also his essay on the same subject in vol. i. of Benfey's *Orient
und Occident*.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[87:7](srp05.htm#fr_73) "Rig Veda," v. 83. Prof.
Wilson's translation.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[87:8](srp05.htm#fr_74) "Rig Veda," V. 63. Dr.
Bühler's translation.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[88:9](srp05.htm#fr_75) According to Dr. Bühler
the word *Perkuna* is "exactly equivalent to a Sanskrit Parjana, to
which the affix *ya* was added without change of signification." With
respect to the absence of the *k* in the Slavonic forms of the name he
says, "This elision may perhaps be attributed to the position of the
*r*. As a group of consonants formed by *rk* or *rg* would be in
disharmony with the phonetic rules established in the Slavonic
languages, and the usual transposition of the liquid was not effected,
an unusual remedy only could hinder the violation of the laws of the
language."--Phil. Soc. Trans, 1859, p. 164. See also the *Deutsche
Mythologie*, 156.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[88:1](srp05.htm#fr_76) Afanasief, P. V. S. I.
249.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[89:2](srp05.htm#fr_77) *Dainà* (plur. *Dainos*)
is a Lithuanian word for a song. It is not used, however, in the case of
a song of a serious or religious cast, which bears a special name.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[89:3](srp05.htm#fr_78) Nesselmann's
*Littauische Volkslieder*, No. 2.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[90:4](srp05.htm#fr_79) Quoted by Dr. Bühler
from Lasicius, *De Diis Samogitarum*. I have not as yet succeeded in
verifying the quotation.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[90:5](srp05.htm#fr_80) Afanasief, P. V. S. I.
251.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[91:6](srp05.htm#fr_81) *Pamyataniki
Latuiskskago Narodnago Tvorchestva*, etc., p. 315, 316 ("Memorials of
Lettish Popular Poetry," collected and edited by Ivan Sprogis), Wilna,
1868.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[91:7](srp05.htm#fr_82) Schöpping's R. N. p.
195.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[92:8](srp05.htm#fr_83) Buslaef, however, a far
higher authority, holds (*Ist. Och.* I. 360) "that Perun was a generally
worshipped Slavonic deity long before the division of the Slavonians
into their Eastern and Western branches."

<span id="fn_84"></span>[92:9](srp05.htm#fr_84) The following facts will
serve to show how treacherous is the ground on which the antiquarian has
to tread while endeavouring to discover such remains as may elucidate
the early history of Slavonic Mythology. The name of the god Zuarasici,
or Suarasici, mentioned by Dietmar, was misprinted in Wagner's edition
Luarasici. Led astray by this mistake, Schafarik, one of the most
erudite of Slavonic scholars, wrote the name Lua-Razic, and explained it
as meaning Lion-King. Afterwards, however, when the spelling was
corrected, he saw that the name was merely a slightly altered form of
Svarozhich. More unfortunate were the mistakes mentioned by Schöpping
(R. N. p. 16), which derived a god Uslyad, or "Golden Moustaches," from
a couple of words describing the personal appearance of Perun, and
evolved a mysterious deity called Dazhb, or Dashuba, out of a
common-place contraction of Dazhboga, the genitive case of Dazhbog, the
Day-God.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[93:1](srp05.htm#fr_85) Deutsche Mythologie,
1171.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[94:2](srp05.htm#fr_86) Mrs. Manning's "Ancient
India," II. 16.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[94:3](srp05.htm#fr_87) "The people of Novogorod
formerly offered their chief worship and adoration to a certain idol
named Perun. When subsequently they received baptism., they removed it
from its place, and threw it into the river Volchov; and the story goes,
that it swam against the stream, and that near the bridge a voice was
heard, saying, 'This for you, O inhabitants of Novogorod, in memory of
me;' and at the same time a certain rope was thrown upon the bridge.
Even now it happens from time to time on certain days of the year, that
this voice of Perun may be heard, and on these occasions the citizens
run together and lash each other with ropes, and such a tumult arises
therefrom, that all the efforts of the Governor can scarcely assuage
it."--Herberstein, Mr. Major's translation, Vol. II. p. 26.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[95:4](srp05.htm#fr_88) Afanasief, "Poetic
Views," I. 251, 771.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[95:5](srp05.htm#fr_89) Afanasief, "Poetic
Views," I. 248. Grimm, *Deutsche Mythologie*, 164.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[97:6](srp05.htm#fr_90) In the Rámáyana, the
monkey-chief, Hanuman, is sent to the Himalayas to fetch four different
kinds of herbs, of which the first restore the dead to life, the second
drive away pain, the third join broken parts, and the fourth cure all
the wounds inflicted by Indrajit's arrows.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[99:7](srp05.htm#fr_91) According to a tradition
preserved in the Government of Kherson. Afanasief, P. V. S. II. 379.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[99:8](srp05.htm#fr_92) A number of similar
traditions about the fern, gleaned from German sources, will be found,
in an English dress, in Mr. W. K. Kelly's " Curiosities of Indo-European
Tradition and Folk-lore," pp. 181-200.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[102:9](srp05.htm#fr_93) Schleicher, Litauische
Märchen, 141-5.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[102:1](srp05.htm#fr_94) See the Russian
"Journal of the Ministry of National Enlightenment," 1841, II. 37-39,
41-43.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[104:2](srp05.htm#fr_95) Afanasief, P. V. S. I.
92-96.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[104:3](srp05.htm#fr_96) Tereshchenko, V. 56.
His merits as a compiler, and his demerits as a critic, have been ably
pointed out by Kavelin, *Collected Works*, IV. 3-20.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[105:4](srp05.htm#fr_97) Afanasief, P. V. S. I.
227-229, and 483.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section II.--Demigods and Fairies](srp06)
