[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](srp10)  [Next](srp12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

# CHAPTER VI.

### SORCERY AND WITCHCRAFT.

THE ideas which were prevalent among the heathen Slavonians with respect
to the life beyond the grave, and their belief in the close communion of
mortals with the inhabitants of the spiritual world, are of themselves
sufficient to account for the wide-spread and deeply rooted belief in
the supernatural powers of necromancers and other dealers in magic, the
remains of which are to this day very plainly manifest in Russia. But
when, in addition to these causes, we consider the great influence which
the Finnish races have had upon the Slavonic in the Northeast of
Europe--the Finns being, of all European peoples, the most addicted to
conjuring--we ought not to wonder at the fact that the Russians used to
be no less remarkable for a steadfast faith in the powers of sorcery and
witchcraft than were our own forefathers. Nor is it unintelligible--the
isolation of villages, and the dearth of education being taken into
account--why their descendants, the peasants who now till the soil of
Russia, should be as prone to superstition, as responsive to the
influence of the imagination, as obedient to the impulse of a morbid

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

fancy, as those benighted Orientals of whom Mr. Tylor tells us, who
still believe in spirit-rappings, and planchette-writings, and
wizard-elongations <span id="fr_259"></span>[1](#fn_259). Much time and
space would be needed by any one who should undertake to describe the
relies of the magical arts of their ancestors which the Russian peasants
still preserve. At present I propose to give merely the briefest
possible sketch of the history of witchcraft in Russia, as illustrative
of some of the songs sung by the people, and of a branch of Russian
folk-lore which is closely connected with the popular poetry, the
*zagovórui*, or spells--prefacing it with a few remarks upon the
*zagádki*, or riddles, in which the people delight so much, and to which
in old days a high degree of importance was attached.

Except at one period of the year, the propounding or guessing of riddles
is looked upon merely as an amusement by the Russian peasantry, but
during the *Svyatki*, the Christmas festivals, it resumes something of
its old dignity, and to some extent claims to be performed as a duty of
an almost religious character. For in olden times the *zagádka*, the
"sense riddle," as Mr. Tylor calls it \[*gadát'* = to guess\], was, in
the Slavonic, as in other lands, an enigma fraught with mythical
meaning, an oracular utterance, clothed in dark language, but full of
enlightenment to those who rightly understood it. And therefore the
*zagádki* which have come down to our time, corrupt and mutilated as
their present forms in many cases are,

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

frequently serve to throw light upon the mythological ideas of the old
Slavonians, often yield us fragments of their mythological language. For
to many of the *zagádki* may be applied the expression used by Professor
Max Müller in speaking of certain proverbs, that they are "chips of
mythology." They originally were condensed. myths, as it were, or at
least mythical formulas, and by their means a number of cosmical myths
have been preserved in compact forms, unnoticed by the casual observer,
but easily to be recognized by the experienced eye. In them an
illiterate peasantry have unconsciously preserved the views about "God's
world" current among their remote ancestors, the questions which daring
speculators in far-off ages had asked and had tried to answer with
reference to the great forces of nature <span
id="fr_260"></span>[2](#fn_260). It was on account of this close
connexion between the *zagádka* and the myth, that the propounding of
riddles was attributed by the Slavonians to such mythical beings as the
Russian Rusalkas or the Servian Vilas; all of whom were supposed to be
thoroughly versed in enigmatical lore, and who treated the unfortunate
mortals who could not read their riddles aright with as scant courtesy
as was shown by the Sphinx to the travellers who preceded Œdipus.

The oldest *zagádki* seem to have referred to the elements and the
heavenly bodies, finding likenesses to them in various material shapes.
In some of what appear to be the most ancient of their number,

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

the sun is compared to a dish of butter, which suffices for the whole
world; or the crescent moon to "a crust of bread hanging in a larder,
which the dogs bark at but cannot reach;" or the stars to "peas
scattered about a mat." In a Lithuanian *zagádka* the sky is likened to
"a sieve full of nuts;" and the same idea is found in one of its Slovak
cousins, in which there is also mentioned one very big nut which is the
moon. Of a more poetic nature are those Russian *zagádki*, in which the
stars are likened to a fiery inscription on the surface of the sky, as,
for instance,--

"There is inscribed a writing on blue velvet, and to read that writing
is given neither to priests nor to deacons, nor to wise moujiks <span
id="fr_261"></span>[3](#fn_261)."

Equally poetic is that Slavonic version of "Humpty Dumpty," in which a
golden ship \[the moon\], sailing across the \[heavenly\] sea, crumbles
into fragments \[the stars\], which neither princes nor priests can put
together again. A somewhat similar idea is conveyed by the tradition
shared by the Russians with many other nations, that God uses the old
moons to make stars of.

Among the animals which figure in the *zagádki*, the horse and the cow
occupy prominent places. Sometimes \[as the moon\] the horse traverses
the \[celestial\] sea without wetting its hoofs; sometimes \[as the
thunder\] it tears along, making the earth

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

tremble beneath it. A black cow frequently represents the night, and a
white one the day, as in the following instance:--

"A black cow has overthrown the whole world but a white cow has set it
up again."

Birds also are frequently mentioned. Sometimes the night as--

"A bird has waved her wino., and shut out all light with a single
feather."

Sometimes the stars move like "a bevy of swans," or the sun stands afar
off in the heavens, as--

"Sits on an ancient oak a. bird which neither king nor queen nor maiden
fair can seize."

And sometimes fire appears in the guise of "a red cock"--an idea
expressed also in the popular saying, to set the red cock free," i. e.
to light the fire.

But perhaps the most interesting of the mythical *zagádki* are those in
which the sun and moon, the dawn, the thunder, and the storm, are
likened to human beings. In some of them the dawn \[*Zaryá*\] is
represented as a fair maiden who has lost her keys. The moon takes no
notice of them, but the sun picks them up. The keys are, of course, the
dew, which the moonlight does not affect, but the sunbeams dry up. In
one variant they are lost by the Zaryá when she shuts the \[heavenly\]
gates. In this case she probably is the after-glow of sunset, which is
called in Russian the *vechérnaya* (or evening); *zaryá*.

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

Here is one of the many forms of this *zagádka*:--

"The fair maiden, the Dawn, went wandering through the forest, and
dropped her keys. The moon saw them, but said nothing. The sun saw them,
and lifted them up."

Sometimes the moon is a shepherd and the stars are his sheep, or they
are goats which hide when they see the dawn:--

There were goats crossing a bridge. They saw the dawn, and plunged into
the water."

The following about fire, earth, and water, is a fair specimen of a
large but common-place class:--

There are three brothers. The first eats, and is never full. The second
drinks, and is never satisfied. The third plays, and is never tired of
playing."

The next is a poetic, though not a novel personification of day and
night:--

"A sister goes to pay a brother a visit. But he hides himself from his
sister <span id="fr_262"></span>[4](#fn_262)."

An idea closely akin with that of the dialogue in the Rig Veda, in which
the Night implores her brother \[the Day\] to make her his wife, but he
refuses, saying, "They have called it sin that a brother should marry
his sister."

Finally, we may quote an enigmatic description of death, which, in its
allusions at least, is thoroughly Slavonic:--

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

In the ocean-sea,  
On the island Buyán,  
Sits the bird Yustritsa.  
She boasts and brags  
That she has seen all,  
Has eaten much of all.  
She has seen the Tsar in Moscow,  
The king in Lithuania,  
The elder in his cell,  
The babe in his cradle.  
And she has not eaten that  
Which is wanting in the sea <span id="fr_263"></span>[5](#fn_263).

Of the *zagádki* which do not seem to have any claim to be considered
mythological, many may appear, at first sight, nonsensical; but that is
generally either because their readers are unaware of the similarity
between certain objects mentioned in them which was apparent to their
framers, or because, in the course of time, some of their words have
been unconsciously altered by their reciters. For instance, it would be
difficult to find the meaning of this dark saying,--

"The ox in the cattle-shed has a haycock on his horns, but his tail is
out of doors in the woman's hands,"

did we not know that the *ukhvat*, or oven-fork, is often spoken of as
"the horned one." In this instance a woman is holding it by the handle,
while its horns support a pot taken from the oven.

The same, difficulty would be met with in comprehending the following
enigma:--

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

"The bay mare went about the field, came to us--is come into our hands,"

were we not aware that the sieve therein alluded to is made of
horsehair, and that a part has been taken by the enigmatist for the
whole.

As specimens of verbal corruption may be quoted the following riddles
about a besom, and a comb. The *vyenik*, a whisk or besom, is supposed
to be described in the words,--

"Hither Mitya, thither Mitya, and went under the bench."

There seems to be no sense in calling a besom Demetrius \[*Dimítry*,
dim. *Mitka* and so *Mitya*\], but the saying is made reasonable by
reading--

"Hither swept \[*mete* or *metyó*\], thither swept, and went under the
bench."

One of the uses of a comb--one to which the Russian peasant,
unfortunately, too often has good reason for turning that instrument--is
alluded to in the saying "Tsar Kostyantin \[Constantine\] drives horses
across a fence." The metaphor is, in other respects, only too
intelligible, but why should a comb be named Constantine? The
explanation is clear when the Little-Russian variants are consulted, as
for instance the enigmatical statement that "The toothed *kostyan* drove
pigs over a hill"--*kostyan*, or *kostyanoy*, meaning "made of bone"
\[*kost'* = bone\], and so being an epithet thoroughly applicable to a
comb. In the Great-Russian riddle for the rational *kostyan*, has been
substituted the like-sounding

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

but quite meaningless name of *Kostyantin*, (dim. *Kostya*)
Constantine <span id="fr_264"></span>[6](#fn_264).

Among the Russian peasantry these riddles have always enjoyed great
popularity. Khudyakof has printed a collection of them, 1705 in number,
in the sixth volume of the "Ethnographical Collection \[*sbórnik*\]" of
the Russian Geographical Society, and has prefixed to it a valuable
essay containing much information on the subject. Among other things, he
mentions that, in the Government of Pskof, on the occasion of a
marriage, the bridegroom and his friends are not allowed to enter the
bride's cottage until they have answered all the riddles her friends
propound to them; and in one of the villages in the Yaroslaf Government,
on similar occasions, a bargain, of which the bride is the subject, is
concluded between the *Druzhka*, or groomsman, and the "seller of the
bride"--riddles, answered by gestures instead of in words, taking the
place of coin.

The Oriental tales about riddles, which spread so widely during the
middle ages, were fully appreciated in Slavonic lands; many of them,
indeed, so impressed the popular mind, that to this day the Russian
peasants retain among their own stories some of those which they
borrowed, centuries ago, about such foreign personages as Solomon and
the Queen of Sheba, or the Sultan whom a Croatian version of a familiar
tale represents as ordering a supposed Abbot to solve three
problems--the last being

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

"What am I thinking," to which the answer is, "You think I am the Abbot,
but I am really the cook." Of more interest than such avowedly borrowed
stories are those in which, not Oriental potentates, but Russian
historical characters, such as Ivan the Terrible or Peter the Great, are
introduced. In one of these, for instance, a number of tribute--bearing
kings and princes propound certain riddles to Ivan the Terrible,
offering to pay him twelve barrels of gold if he finds them out, on the
condition that if he is unable to solve them he is to lose his throne.
By the aid of an old man, to whom he promises one of the barrels, the
Tsar is enabled to give the requisite answers, but he afterwards cheats
his benefactor by filling two thirds of the barrel with sand. His device
is at once seen through by the sage, who says to the dishonest monarch,
"Thou hast introduced treason into orthodox Russia, and thou wilt never
be able to root it out <span id="fr_265"></span>[7](#fn_265)."

Still more interesting are the riddle-stories belonging to the class of
old Slavonic skazkas, tales which have formed part of the heritage of
the people from time immemorial. In a Russian version of a wide-spread
story, a princess says to her father, "Permit me, my father, to guess
riddles: if I guess any one's riddles, let his head be cut off."

Her request being granted, various suitors set conundrums, and lose
their heads. At last the inevitable Iván-Durák, Iván the Foolish, the
Slavonic

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

"Boots," the youngest of the stereotyped "Three Brothers," enters the
perilous lists. On his way to the palace he sees a horse in a cornfield,
and drives it out with a whip, saying, "Here's a riddle!" A little
farther on he kills a snake with a lance, and makes a similar
observation. When he is confronted with the princess he says to her, "As
I came to you I saw by the roadside what was good; and in the good was
good, so I set to work and with what was good I drove the good from the
good. The good fled from the good out of the good." The puzzled princess
pleads a headache, and postpones the unriddling till the next day. It
arrives, and Iván favours her with his second enigma.

"As I came to you, I saw on the way what was bad, and I struck the bad
with a bad thing, and of what was bad the bad died."

Whereupon the Princess accepts Iván <span
id="fr_266"></span>[8](#fn_266).

In a manifestly mythical story a Slavonic Penelope \[the Earth?\] who is
constantly annoyed "by suitors, is sitting at table with them one day,
when she sees the glasses every now and then dashed from their lips by
an unseen hand. She guesses in a moment that her Ulysses \[the Sun, or
the Thunder-god, whom winter has long kept away?\] has returned, wearing
the invisible-rendering cap which she had given him. Looking out of
window, she sees that "in the garden all the tree-tops are budding," and
so, feeling sure that her surmise is

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

correct, she immediately propounds a riddle to her suitors.

"I had a self-acting casket with a golden key. I lost the key and
despaired of finding it, but now that key has come back of its own
accord. Whosoever guesses this riddle, him will I marry."

The "Tsars and Tsaréviches, Kings and Princes," long rack their "wise
heads" over the *zagádka*, but they cannot make it out. Then the Queen
exclaims, "Show thyself, my dear love!" and her husband doffs his cap;
"takes her by the white hands, and kisses her sweet lips."

"Here is my riddle," then cries the Queen: "The casket am I, and the
golden key is my true husband." So the suitors had to drive away
home <span id="fr_267"></span>[9](#fn_267).

By way of conclusion I will give one of the numerous songs, the theme of
which is the *zagádka*.

A maiden fair was strolling in a garden,  
Gathering rosy flow'rets was the maiden.  
By that way a merchant's son came driving.  
"Now may God be with thee, beauteous maiden,  
God be with thee, rosy flow'rets gathering!"  
"Many thanks! O merchant's son! Thanks many!"  
"Shall I ask thee riddles, beauteous maiden?  
Six wise riddles shall I ask thee?"  
"Ask them, ask them, merchant's son,  
Prithee ask the six wise riddles."  
"Well then, maiden, what is higher than the forest?  
Also, what is brighter than the light?  
Also, maiden, what is thicker than the forest?  
Also, maiden, what is there that's rootless?

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

Also, maiden, what is never silent?  
Also, what is there past finding out?"  
"I will answer, merchant's son, will answer,  
All the six wise riddles will I answer.  
Higher than the forest--is the moon,  
Brighter than the light--the ruddy sun.  
Thicker than the forest--are the stars.  
Rootless is, O merchant's son, a stone.  
Never silent, merchant's son, the sea,  
And God's will is past all finding out."  
"Thou hast guessed, O maiden fair, guessed rightly,  
All the six wise riddles hast thou answered.  
Therefore now to me shalt thou be wedded,  
Therefore, maiden, shalt thou be the merchant's wife <span
id="fr_268"></span>[1](#fn_268)."

The *zagádka* has now completely lost the venerable character it once
possessed, being degraded from the lofty realm of mythological
philosophy to the humble field of popular amusement; but time has not
dealt so hardly with the relic of heathenism to which we will next turn
our attention, the *Zagovór*, the Slavonic Spell, Rune, or Incantation.
The riddles belonged to the people in general, and no one had any
special interest in maintaining their accuracy, and handing them down to
posterity intact. But the spells were the peculiar property of a small
body of sorcerers, who watched over them with jealous care, and
delivered them to their successors as precious heirlooms from which
nothing was to be taken away, for the whole virtue of the *zagovór*
depended upon its absolute correctness. If any change was made in its
wording its pronouncer became as power--

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

less to kill or to cure as was Groa when, in her joy at recovering her
husband, she forgot the Runes which would have loosened the stone from
Thor's head <span id="fr_269"></span>[2](#fn_269), or as the Finnish
deity in the Kalewala, Wäinamöinen, when he was unable to remember the
magic words that would have stanched his flowing blood <span
id="fr_270"></span>[3](#fn_270), and so was obliged to bleed on till an
old wizard with a stronger memory came to his aid. In order not to be
placed in so unpleasant a predicament the Russian sorcerers--of whom
more will be said farther on--used frequently to commit their spells to
writing. Some of these manuscripts still exist, but none of them, it is
said, can be referred to an earlier period than the eighteenth century;
for, until the time of Peter the Great, the Church and the State agreed
in strongly objecting to sorcerers, and when they burnt them they
unfortunately burnt their manuscripts also  <span
id="fr_271"></span>[4](#fn_271).

Among the old Slavonians, as among all other peoples, spoken words were
supposed to possess certain magical powers. In their figurative language
the lips and the teeth are often spoken of as locks, of which the key is
the tongue. When that has once unloosened them, out shoots the word,
like an arrow from a bow, and it is capable of flying straight to, and
acting directly upon, the object at which it is aimed by its utterer. "A
word is not a sparrow," says a Russian proverb; "once let it fly out,
you will

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

never catch it again <span id="fr_272"></span>[5](#fn_272)." In olden
times countless magical formulas, for good or for evil, seem to have
been known to those persons who were originally styled "Wise Men" and
"Wise Women," and afterwards wizards and witches. Many of these spells
have come down to our times--for the sorcerer's occupation is not yet
gone in Russia, though his class only exists now where it formerly
flourished--and large collections of them have been formed by various
careful gleaners in the field of folk-lore.

The name under which these spells are generally known is that of
*zagovórui*. As "*sprechen*, *singen*, become *besprechen*, *besingen*,
*schwören* *beschwören*, jurare *conjurare*, cantare *incantare*,
etc. <span id="fr_273"></span>[6](#fn_273)," so the Russian *govorít'*,
"to speak," becomes *zagovórít'*, one of the meanings of which is to
conjure, to utter a spell or *zagovór*--a form of words in which, though
now written as prose, there is always rhythm, and sometimes rhyme. In
primeval times the *zagovórui* may have been mere prayers \[*mólvit'* =
to speak, *molítva* = a prayer\], which, as years went by, degenerated
into spells. At first sacred hymns bless and implore the gods; at a
later period they demand from them (*zaklinayut*) what their utterers
desire, and are known as spells, *zaklinániya* or *zagovórui* <span
id="fr_274"></span>[7](#fn_274).

These spells were no doubt originally preceded by

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

rites, but the rite long ago stiffened into a verbal formula. The
*zagovór* generally begins with a narrative, in which often occur highly
poetic descriptions of nature. The utterer goes forth "in the early
morn" to "the open field;" there he bows to all four quarters, but
eventually turns his face "to the eastern side;" he washes himself in
the morning dew, dries himself in the sunlight, and becomes "clothed
with the clouds," and "girdled with the countless stars." Sometimes he
strikes the stars, which are represented as silver nails, or covers
himself with the brazen heaven. Then he addresses himself to the
elements, asking the earth--Mother Earth, bright with flowers and full
of vigorous life--to make his life bright and vigorous; asking the
strong blue sea to strengthen him, and the wild winds to brace his
courage, and the stars--the eyes of heaven--to make his eyesight
keen <span id="fr_275"></span>[8](#fn_275).

As regards the world-wide custom of turning towards the east before
praying, it will be enough to say that it still prevails in many parts
of Russia among the peasantry, who are also of the opinion that it is
from the East that sick people must look for alleviation of their
complaints. 1n Bohemia it used to be required of persons who were about
to take an oath, that they should do so looking eastward, appealing, as
it were, to the rising sun. And a similar idea lay at the root of the
custom of pronouncing the *zagovór*, in most cases, at the hour of

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span>

sunrise. Sometimes, however, these spells were probably intended to be
uttered at other hours, at moonrise, for instance. To this day the
Russian peasant, when he sees the new moon, will say,--

"Young moon God give thee strong horns and me good health!"

As the stars, also, are frequently addressed in the *zagovórui*, it is
very likely that some of the spells were spoken at night, and others may
have been meant to accompany the sunset or the gloaming.

The spells were originally uttered in a loud, clear voice. Now-a-days
many of them are always whispered, a practice which may have been
derived from the Finnish sorcerers, who have had so great an influence
on Russian superstition, or it may have gradually crept in as the
subject of conjuring assumed more and more the character of something
secret and forbidden. The addresses to the elements, the celestial
luminaries, and the various forces of nature, which they contain, were
of old the prayers with which the heathen Slavonian worshipped his
elementary gods, and were meant to be, as it were, "spoken on the
house-top," not whispered in the secrecy of the closet. And so still in
the muttered speech of the rustic who desires to be freed from some
trivial annoyance, or to be gratified by some small gain, may be heard
the echo of the words with which his far-off pagan ancestor greeted the
return of day, or watched the sinking of the western sun, or " blessed
the kindly light" of the "gleaming moon" and the "many stars," or

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

acknowledged the past aid, and implored the future assistance of those
heavenly beings whom he adored--beings to whom, perhaps, in immemorial
times, when what are now the many Aryan nations formed but one people,
his and our ancestors offered their simple worship somewhere far away in
Central Asia.

"Dost thou hear, O Sky? dost thou see, O Sky?" cries the peasant of
to-day, addressing the Svarog, the Ouranos, the Varuna of old religion.
"O ye bright Stars! descend into the marriage-cup, and in my cup let
there be water from a mountain spring. O thou fair Moon! bow down to my
*klyet'*, \[kind of store-room\]. O thou free Sun! dawn upon my
homestead. O ye Stars! deliver me, the servant of God so and so, from
drink! O Moon, turn me from drink! O Sun, draw me from drink!"

"O righteous Sun! do thou in my foes, my rivals, my opposers, in the
powers that be, and public officials, and in all people of godly mouth
and heart, parch up evil thoughts and deeds, so that they may not rise
up, may not utter words baleful for me!"

Or, addressing the *zaryá*, the dawn and gloaming,

"Ho, thou morning *zaryá*, and thou evening *zaryá*! fall upon my rye,
that it may grow up tall as a forest, stout as an oak!"

"Mother *zaryá* \[apparently twilight here\] of morning and evening and
midnight! as ye quietly fade away and disappear, so may both sicknesses
and sorrows in me, the servant of God, quietly fade and disappear--those
of the morning, and of the evening, and of the midnight!"

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

Here is an address spoken by a lover to the winds. In the ocean sea, on
the island Buyan \[i. e. in the cloud-island sailing over the heavenly
sea?\] there live three brothers, three winds: the first northern, the
second eastern, and the third western. Waft, O winds, bring on the
servant of God (such and such a maiden) sorrow and dreariness
\[*sukhota* = dryness\], so that without me she may not be able to spend
a day nor pass an hour!"

The force of the *zagovór* sometimes depends upon the assistance of the
heavenly and other bodies adjured, as may be seen from the following
spell to prevent swarming bees from wandering afar <span
id="fr_276"></span>[9](#fn_276).

"I take a bee, I place it in the hive. But it is not I who place thee
there; the white stars place thee; the horned moon, the red sun, they
place thee and keep thee still."

When heathenism was dethroned by Christianity, these ancient adjurations
were so far altered, that for the names of the elementary deities were
substituted those of the Saviour, the Virgin Mary, the Apostles, and
various saints and martyrs. Sometimes the old and the new names occur
together, as we have seen is often the case in the mythical songs; but
there are also instances in which, while the archaic form of the
*zagovór* is preserved, its tone has become to all appearance thoroughly
Christian; so that it has even found its way, under the heading
*Molítvui*, or prayers,

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>

into the church books called *trebniki*, both Russian and Servian, of
the 15th-17th centuries <span id="fr_277"></span>[1](#fn_277). This is a
different case from that of the well-known poem of the Merseburg MS., in
which a spell intended to cure a lame horse is preceded by an account of
how, as Baldr rode through a wood in company with other Teutonic
deities, his horse met with a sprain; a poem which, in this instance,
has preserved its heathen complexion intact, although it figures in a
copy of "*Hrabani expositio super missam*," but is generally found in as
Christian a tone as that of the Norse--

Jesus reed sig til hede, *etc*.,

or our own--

The lord rade,  
And the foal slade, *etc*. <span id="fr_278"></span>[2](#fn_278)

The copyist in the case of the Merseburg MS. may have wished to stand
well with the old powers as well as with the new, but in many of the
variants of the spell its heathen character had probably been forgotten.
The mixed nature of these superstitious formulas is best shown, perhaps,
in some of those preserved by the wilder sects which discredit the
Russian *Raskól*, or general body of dissenters from the Established
Church, and are too often carelessly identified with the respectable
though bigoted body of Old Believers, the Russian Nonconformists. Here
is a specimen of the strange adjurations in

<span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

use among the *Skoptsui*, the most fanatical, in all probability, of the
Raskolniks who now exist in Russia:--

"Forgive me, O Lord; forgive me, O holy Mother of God; forgive me, O ye
Angels, Archangels, Cherubim and Seraphim, and all ye heavenly host!
Forgive, O sky; forgive, O damp-mother-earth; forgive, O sun; forgive, O
moon; forgive, ye stars; forgive, ye lakes, ye rivers and hills;
forgive, all ye heavenly and earthly elements <span
id="fr_279"></span>[3](#fn_279)!"

In this case it is easy to see that the alteration which has taken place
is one of heterogeneous combination, not of corruption or decay.

After the old prayers had passed into spells, their magical properties
were often supposed to be automatic, no longer depending on the aid of
the divinities they invoked, but acting, for good or for evil, by the
force of their own inherent attributes. *Zagovórui* of this nature
generally end with the phrase, "My word is firm!" or "My word will not
pass away for ever!" or,--

"May my words be sticky and tough, firmer than stone, stickier than glue
or resin, salter than salt, sharper than a self-cutting sword, tougher
than steel. What is meant, that shall be fulfilled <span
id="fr_280"></span>[4](#fn_280)!"

It has already been mentioned that the mouth is defined in metaphorical
language as a lock--the

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

Russians use padlocks to a great extent--of which the tongue is the key.
That idea is expressed in the following termination of a *zagovór*:--

"For these words of mine \[my\] lips and teeth \[are\] a lock; my
tongue, the key. And I will fling the key into the sea \[but\] remain
thou lock in the mouth!"

Here is one of a slightly different nature:--

"I, the servant of God, <span id="fr_281"></span>[5](#fn_281) will make
fast thrice nine locks. I take out from the thrice nine locks the thrice
nine keys. I fling those keys into the clear ocean-sea; and from that
sea will come out a golden-finned, copper-scaled pike, and will swallow
my seven-and-twenty keys, and will sink into the depth of the sea. And
no one shall catch that pike, or find out the seven-and-twenty keys, or
open the locks, or do hurt to me the servant of God <span
id="fr_282"></span>[6](#fn_282)!"

The range attributed to the force of the *zagovór* is as wide as that
with which the *Lieder* and *Runen* used to be credited, and the Russian
spell was supposed to be fully capable of performing most of, if not
all, the actions of which, in speaking of its Teutonic equivalents,
Jacob Grimm has given so long a list <span
id="fr_283"></span>[7](#fn_283), or which

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

used to be claimed as the effect of the songs of Odin. These were,
apparently, mythical in their origin, but the figurative language of the
spell has been interpreted literally at a later period. In some of the
Russian zagovórs, however, remarks Afanasief, their mythical character
is still plainly visible, and he quotes, in illustration, two spells
against toothache. The first is as follows:--

"O thou young moon! test the dead and the living: the teeth of one who
is dead, do they ache? Not at all ache the teeth of one dead, \[whose\]
bones are tanned, \[whose\] teeth are mute .... Grant, O Lord, that the
teeth of me, the servant of God, may become mute, may never ache!"

The other spell must be three times pronounced by its utterer while he
bites at the portal of the church:--

"As this stone is firm, so may my teeth also become stony--harder than
stone!"

In the first spell, says Afanasief, the sufferer, who wishes his teeth
to be mute as in death, addresses the moon, remembering the ancient
character of a ruler in the land of the dead, which it, as the nightly
luminary, used to bear. In the second, his appeal to the stone of the
church portal is supposed to be a reference to that of which in older
days the stone was a symbol, the hammer of Thor or Perun, which could
turn all things into stone-the hard-hitting thunderbolt <span
id="fr_284"></span>[8](#fn_284). But all this seems very doubtful.

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

But in order to convey an idea of the peculiar nature of the *zagovórs*,
it will be necessary to give some specimens of those among their number
which are of the greatest length, and which contain most mythical
allusions--those for which the Russians proudly claim a greater fulness
and a more poetic colouring than is generally to be found in the
Teutonic Runes. Before doing so, however, I will quote the following
short spell. in order to introduce, in connexion with each other, two
names about which some remarks must presently be made, the "island
Buyan," and the "white stone Alatuir." Here is a specimen of the
numerous *zagovórs* used for the cure of cuts, stabs, etc:--

"In the sea, in the ocean, on the island, on Buyan, lies the white
burning stone Alatuir. On that stone Alatuir there sits a fair maiden, a
masterful sewer. She holds a steel needle, threads it with a silken
thread, of reddish-yellow hue, and sews together bloody wounds. I charm
the servant So-and-so from cuts. Steel, stand aloof, and thou., blood,
cease to flow <span id="fr_285"></span>[9](#fn_285)!"

I will not dwell at present on the mystic stone, Alatuir, but it should
be mentioned, in order that an allusion in the next *zagovór* may be
intelligible, that from the elysian isle of Buyan comes *toská*, grief
or longing. This may at first sight appear to be a strange dweller in
what is represented as a land of eternal light and life. But the longing
here alluded

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

to is that which springs from love, and leads to marriage, and therefore
it is that it derives its origin from the same source as beings
associated with all that is bright and joyous. Here is--

A ZAGOVÓR TO GIVE A GOOD YOUTH A LONGING FOR A FAIR MAIDEN.

I, the servant of God ---------, stand still, uttering a blessing.

I, crossing myself, go from the room to the door, from the courtyard to
the gates.

I go out into the open field, to the eastern side. On the eastern side
stands an *izbá* \[cottage or room\], in the middle of the *izbá* lies a
plank, under the plank is the LONGING.

The Longing weeps, the Longing sobs, waiting to get at the white light.
The white light, the fair sun, waits, enjoys itself, and rejoices.

So may He wait longing to get to me, and \[having done so\] may he enjoy
himself and rejoice! And without me let it not be possible for him to
live, nor to be, nor to eat, nor to drink; neither by the morning dawn,
nor by the evening glow.

As a fish without water, as a babe without its mother, without its
mother's milk, cannot live, so may he, without me, not be able to live,
nor to be, nor to eat, nor to drink; neither by the morning dawn, nor by
the evening glow; neither every day, not at mid-day, nor under the many
stars, nor together with the stormy winds. Neither under the sun by day,
nor under the moon by night.

Plunge thyself, O longing I gnaw thy way, O longing, into his breast,
into his heart; grow and increase in all his veins, in all his bones,
with pain and thirst for me <span id="fr_286"></span>[1](#fn_286)!

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

In some *zagovórs* the longing is said to spring from underneath the
stone Alatuir, whence it is borne on the wings of seventy-seven aerial
beings called both birds and winds. In some cases its bearers are styled
"The Three Brothers," in others "The Seven Brothers," who are implored
"to gather together from all the white world the griefs of widows, of
orphans, and of little children." In some of the charms a lover
addresses to fire and storm the following appeal: "Take from me my
longing; carry it away, and do not drop it, but make it enter into such
and such a female heart." In one of the zagovórs three mystic smiths are
mentioned, who assist in forging hooks, by which one person can be
"attached" to another.

In a Siberian *zagovór* a "Fiery Snake" is invoked for the kindling of
amorous longing. With this idea may be compared the popular belief, that
with the beginning of every January--that is, at the end of the festival
in honour of the return of the sun towards summer--the Fiery Snake
begins to fly, enters into the *izbá* through the chimney, turns into "a
brave youth," and steals by magic the hearts of fair maidens. In one of
the Servian songs, a girl who has been carried off by a fiery snake
calls herself his "true love."

All this, says a bold mythologist, is explained by the fact that in
mythical language the Fiery Snake is one of the forms of the lightning.
The blooming Earth, fructified by the rains poured forth during the
first spring storms, is turned in the myth into

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

the bride of the Fiery Snake. But the wedder of nature became looked
upon at a later period as the patron of weddings among the children of
men; and so the inducing of love-pangs naturally became ascribed to the
Fiery Snake.

Sometimes the powers of darkness are represented as having to do with
the creation of amorous desire. Some of the *zagovórs* begin, "rise up
without uttering a blessing," and they go on to invoke "the demon
Sanchak," and sometimes the "longing" is borne on the wings of
seventy-seven demons, instead of as many winds. But all this is said to
be of a later date. Originally, however, there was opposed to the fiery
snake and the vivifying winds a malignant "spirit of the whirlwind"
\[*dukh-vikhor'*\], which congealed instead of melting, and was invoked
by evil conjurors in order to produce coldness between man and wife.

Some of the charms are meant to preserve men from drunkenness, which the
sun, the moon, and the stars are called upon to keep away; others to
gain the good will of a superior, or to ensure safety during a campaign.
Here is a specimen of the latter class:--

The red sun has come forth from beyond the Caspian Sea, the moon has
gone up into the blue sky, the clouds have drawn together from afar, the
dark-blue birds have met in the stone-built city.

Within that stone-built city did my mother bear me, and while bearing me
thus did she speak:--

Be thou, my child, sound and unhurt, whether by guns, or by arquebuses,
or by arrows, whether

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

by wrestlers, or by boxers. May the champions not challenge thee, nor
smite thee with weapons of war; neither piercing thee with lance or
spear, nor cleaving thee with halbert or hatchet, nor crushing thee with
ail axe, nor stabbing thee with a knife.

"May the old delude thee not, may the young men do thee no harm; but
mayst thou be before them as a hawk, and may they be as thrushes. And
may thy body be firmer than stone, thy shirt than iron, thy breast than
the stone Alatuir.

And mayst thou at home be a good father, abroad a brisk youth, in war a
brave soldier; in the outer world a source of pleasure, in the upper
chamber of the maidens an ornament, at the nuptial feast \[a guest\]
without a trace of guile; and \[mayst thou live\] with thy father and
mother in peace, with thy wife in concord, with thy children in
harmony."

But perhaps the most interesting, and certainly the most poetic of the
spells, are those which are intended for the relief of sufferers from a
longing that is of a different nature from that produced by amorous
impulse, for the solace of friends and relatives who have been torn
asunder, and especially of parents who have been deprived of children.
As a specimen of those may be taken the following

ZAGOVÓR AGAINST THE GRIEF OF A MOTHER ON PARTING WITH A BELOVED CHILD.

I have sobbed away the day--I his own mother, the servant of God--in the
lofty parental *terem* \[upper chamber\], from the red morning dawn,
looking out into the open field towards the setting of my red sun, my
never-enough-to-be-gazed-on child. There I remained sitting till the
late evening glory, till the damp dews, in longing and in woe. But at
length

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

I grew weary of grieving, so I considered by what spells I could charm
away that evil, funereal grief.

I went into the open field, I carried with me the marriage cup, I took
out the betrothal taper, I fetched the wedding kerchief, I drew water
from the well beyond the mountains. I stood in the midst of the thick
forest, I traced an unseen line, and I began to cry with a piercing
voice,--

I charm my never-enough-to-be-gazed-on child, over the marriage cup,
over the fresh water, over the nuptial kerchief, over the betrothal
taper. I bathe my child's pure face with the nuptial kerchief, I wipe
his sweet lips, his bright eyes, his thoughtful brow, his rosy cheeks.
With the betrothal taper I light up his long kaftan, his sable cap, his
figured girdle, his stitched shoes, his ruddy curls, his youthful face,
his rapid gait.

"Be thou, O my never-enough-to-be-gazed-on child, brighter than the
brilliant sun, softer than a spring day, clearer than fountain water,
whiter than virgin wax, firmer than the fiery stone Alatuir.

"I avert from thee the terrible devil, I drive away the fierce
whirlwind, I keep thee away from the one-eyed Lyeshy \[or wood-spirit\],
from the stranger Domovoy \[i. e. from the house-spirit of another
family\], from the evil Vodyany \[or water-spirit\], from the witch of
Kief, and from her evil sister of Murom, from the beckoning Rusalka,
from the thrice-accursed Baba Yagá, from the flying Fiery Snake. I wave
away from thee the prophetic raven and the croaking crow, I screen thee
from Koshehei-Yadun, from the wily enchanter, from the spell-weaving
wizard, from the daring magician, from the blind soothsayer, from the
hoary witch.

And thou, my child, by night and at midnight, through all hours and at
the half-hours, on the highway and the byway, when sleeping and when
waking be thou concealed by my abiding, words from hostile

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

powers and from unclean spirits, preserved from untimely death and from
misfortune and from woe, saved from drowning when on the water, and kept
from burning when amid the flames.

"And should thy hour of death arrive, do thou, my child, remember our
caressing love, our unsparing bread-and-salt, and turn towards thy
well-loved birth-place, bend thy brow to the ground before it with seven
times seven salutations, take leave of thy kith and kin, and fall into a
sweet, unbroken slumber.

"And may my words be stronger than water, higher than the mountains,
heavier than gold, firmer than the fiery stone Alatuir, more powerful
than heroes.

"And he who tries to beguile or to cast a spell over my child, may he be
shut up beyond the mountains of Ararat, in the lowest gulfs of hell, in
boiling pitch, in burning flame. And may his spells be for him no
spells, his deceit be no deceiving, and his guile lead to no
beguiling <span id="fr_287"></span>[2](#fn_287)."

We will now return for a time to the "Isle of Buyan," and the "White
Stone Alatuir."

Far away amid the ocean waves, according to Slavonic tradition, lies the
isle called Buyán, one of the many forms of the *Rai*, or Paradise, of
which mention has already been made, the Slavonian counterpart of that
happy land which figures in the mythology of all the Aryan nations. In
that eastern isle is the home of the sun, which goes there every evening
after it has set, to rise from it again with the return of morning. In
Buyan are collected, says

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

Afanasief, all the mighty forms of the spring-tide storms, all the
mythical personifications of thunder, wind, and tempest. There are to be
found "the Snake older than all snakes, and the prophetic Raven, elder
brother of all ravens," and the Bird, the largest and oldest of all
birds, with iron beak and copper claws, and the Mother of Bees, eldest
among bees. That is to say, continues Afanasief, there lies the
Lightning Snake, and broods the Tempest Bird, and swarm the Thunder Bees
who bless the longing earth with the honey of rain <span
id="fr_288"></span>[3](#fn_288).

On Buyán, also, stands a dripping oak, under which lies the snake
Garafena \[perhaps a corruption of *Goruinich*, Son of the Mountain, the
name usually borne by the snake of the Russian fable\], and there sits
the divine maiden, *Zaryá* \[the Dawn, or the Spring-tide Sun, or a
Thunder-goddess?\]. Thither turned the Old Slavonian with prayers,
entreating the gods to preserve him from wounds and from diseases, to
inspire him with martial courage, to

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

bless him with success in love, in hunting and fishing, and in household
affairs.

On Buyán is found the white stone Alatuir, the name and the nature of
which have been discussed at some length by various Slavonic scholars,
who have not, however, entirely dispelled the mystery which hangs about
them. The *zagovórs* generally describe it as lying on the Buyan isle,
but sometimes they merely say, "On the sea, on the ocean, lies the fiery
stone <span id="fr_289"></span>[4](#fn_289)." From under it flow rivers
of healing. On it originally was wont to sit either a "fair maiden who
sewed up bleeding wounds"--supposed to be the Dawn, or the bird Stratim,
the meaning of whose name has not yet been discovered--or some other
mythical being. But under the influence of Christian ideas the locality
of the stone was altered, and with it the character of its occupants.
Sometimes, for instance, we find a spell in which the stone has been
transferred to the neighbourhood of the river Jordan, and over it rises
"a golden church," or a throne of gold occupied by "the Lord Himself,"
or by "the Holy Mother of God," or by one of the Apostles, or by some
member of the heavenly host. Or near it stands a sacred grove composed
perhaps of cypresses--the cypress having been the tree of which the
cross was made--or a golden staircase up which the Archangel Michael is
ascending to heaven. But whatever else has been changed, the idea of
warm, blazing light is always connected with the stone. "Look, wife,

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

on the blue sea," says a husband in a national song, when leaving his
wife for ever; "when the fiery white stone grows cold, then will I come
home;" meaning that he will never return. Sometimes, instead of the
epithet "fiery white," the designation *kip* \[*kipyet'* = to boil,
foam, seethe, etc.\] is applied to the stone.

Various suggestions have been made with regard to the etymology of the
word Alatuir. One writer compares it with the Greek *êlektron*, the,
Russian *yantar* \[amber\], and another with *alabastros*, each
supporting his argument by the fact that the word he suggests represents
something specially bright. The alabaster theory seems to have fallen to
the ground, but the identity of the words *alatuir* and *yantar* seems
to be generally admitted, though it is difficult to see, as Afanasief
remarks, why such magical properties should have been attributed by the
Old Slavonians to amber <span id="fr_290"></span>[5](#fn_290). It may be
that, as Buyan seems to have been turned from an epithet into a proper
name, so Alatuir may, in the course of time, have changed its meaning,
which possibly was at first "amber-like."

And now it is time that we should turn from the spell to its
wielder--that having gained some familiarity

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>.

with the language of Sorcery, we should make the acquaintance of the
Sorcerer himself. And having done so, it may be worth our while to trace
his spiritual pedigree, to test his own claims, and those of his
predecessors, to magic power, and to attempt to account for the
readiness with which, century after century, those claims were admitted.
Such an investigation will lead us back to the region whence we started,
for if we perseveringly trace backwards up the stream of time the
ancestral line of that poor creature, the Sorcerer of to-day, we shall
find ourselves at last in the presence of those ill-defined but still
majestic shapes of gods, under which the fanciful reverence of the
heathen Slavonians seems to have personified the powers of nature.

But a little time ago every Russian village had its wizard, almost as a
matter of course, and to this day it is said there is not a hamlet in
the Ukraine that is not reported to keep its witch. In the vicinity of
the great cities the supernatural, as revealed by the professors of the
black art, may have lost its attractive hold upon the popular mind; but
out in the open country the *Koldún* still holds his own, the *Vyéd'ma*
still retains her power <span id="fr_291"></span>[6](#fn_291). To him
and to her the rustics still have recourse in their troubles, still

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

trustfully turn for such advice and aid as may enable them to obtain
blessings and ward off evils. They are supposed to be able to look into
the future, and to decipher the hidden meaning of omens and auguries; to
possess charms which will cure the diseases of the body and calm the
troubles of the mind; and even to be capable of controlling the
elements, of bestowing the gift of fertilizing rain, or of ruining by
the curse of drought or storm. The faith, in short, which was once
professed in every European land, and which was the cause in them of so
many thousands of terrible deaths, is still held in Russia, where,
however, it has seldom assumed the virulent aspect which it used to wear
farther west.

In Russia, as in many other lands, the common people look upon diseases
as evil spirits, to be driven away by purification with fire and water,
and so the

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

popular practice of physic is founded on a theory of fumigations,
washings, and sprinklings, attended by exorcisms of various kinds. Some
of the strangest of the magical practices to which the peasants have
recourse are those which they employ as a defence against the attacks of
the malignant beings whom they identify with the cholera, the small-pox,
and the cattle-plague. Of some of these rites an account will presently
be given. Against the evil influence of an angry house-spirit, or of
nightmares and other baleful demons, the Wise Men and Women contend in
various ways, all highly prized by the peasants: they keep away fevers
from a house by washing the lintels of its doorways, and by performing
certain magical rites in the fields they prevent insects and other
vermin from hurting the crops., For the success of a wedding, the
presence of the wizard is in many places considered indispensable <span
id="fr_292"></span>[7](#fn_292). His duty is to preserve the young
couple and their friends from the attacks of hostile magicians; and so,
in the Government of Perm, the bride is always attended by a
*znákharka*, and the bridegroom by a *znákhar'* who goes in front of the
bridal procession, and anxiously pries around, whispering to himself the
while. The people imagine that he is contending with the evil spirit
which pursues newly-married persons, and attempts to

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

ensnare them. In some districts, when a wedding is being celebrated, all
the doors and windows are carefully shut, and even the chimney is
stopped up, to prevent malicious witches from flying in, and doing the
bride or bridegroom an injury.

As in other countries, so in Russia, according to the opinion of the
peasants, wizards and witches are greatly addicted to stealing the dew
and the rain. These they either hoard or pour forth at their discretion.
Thus, for instance, there is a story in South Russia of a wizard who
could control the elements. Once, in harvest-time, a storm-cloud was
seen moving towards the fields where he and his fellow-villagers were at
work. They hurried homewards, but he stopped where he was, saying there
would be no rain, though all the sky was black with clouds. Presently
there gallops up to him a black rider on a, black horse. "Let go!" he
cries imploringly to the wizard, who refuses to do so. The clouds take a
lighter hue, and the peasants this time look for a hail storm. Up rides
a second horseman, "all white and on a white steed," and cries, "Let go,
please do!" "No, I won't," replies the wizard. "Do let go; there's no
holding out!" exclaims the white rider. At last the wizard sends him on
to the other side of the corn-field, where in a little time a hail-storm
comes pelting down <span id="fr_293"></span>[8](#fn_293).

With whirlwinds, also, the wizards have a great

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

deal to do. The Russian peasant generally attributes such winds to the
wild dances in which the devil indulges when celebrating his marriage
with a witch; but sometimes, he thinks, a wizard is being whirled about
in the "dust-spouts" which may be seen in summer in the open plains. And
so if a sharp knife be thrown with good aim at one of them, it will fall
to the ground streaming with blood. There is a Little-Russian story of a
peasant who flung his hatchet at one of these revolving columns, in
which it stuck, "just as if it were in a tree," and by which it was
carried off into space. Some little time afterwards the peasant, while
making a journey, happened to spend a night in a cottage, the owner of
which lay ill in bed, having cut himself, said his family, with a
hatchet. As the guest lay down to sleep, he caught sight of something
gleaming under a bench, and recognized it as the hatchet he had lost.
Immediately he knew that he had wounded a wizard, so in fear of his life
he fled from the cottage into the darkness <span
id="fr_294"></span>[9](#fn_294). When our sailors fire cannon at
waterspouts they, of course, do so for purely philosophical reasons.

In Little-Russia the witches are reported to steal from the sky its rain
and dew, which they carry off in pitchers and bags, and hide in their
cottages. A long time ago one of their number, it is said, did this to
such an extent that not a single rain-drop fell in a whole summer.
Having to go out one day, she

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

gave strict orders to the girl whom she left in charge of the house not
to meddle with the pitcher which stood in the corner. But no sooner had
she disappeared, than the girl opened the pitcher and peeped in. Nothing
was to be seen inside, only a voice was heard coming from it, "Now there
will be rain!" The frightened girl ran to the door, and, sure enough,
the rain was coming down "just as if it were rushing out of a tub." The
witch came running home, and closed the pitcher, when the rain stopped
in a moment. "If the pitcher had stood open a little longer," she said
to the girl, "the whole of the village would have been drowned <span
id="fr_295"></span>[1](#fn_295)." In some versions of the same story the
witch forbids certain tubs to be touched. When they are opened by an
inquisitive visitor they are found to be full of frogs, toads,
water-snakes, and other vermin, which set up a strange croaking and
crawl away in different directions. Immediately the blue sky turns
black, and a terrible storm arises, only to be quelled by the return of
the witch, and the restoration of the toads and their companions to
their prison-tubs.

In some places, and especially in Little-Russia, the witches are
supposed to steal and hide away, not only the rain and dew, but even the
moon and stars. With particular eagerness they attempt to do so during
the festivals of *Kolyáda* and of *Kupála*, \[i. e. at the times of the
winter and the summer solstice\], when the principal gatherings of
unclean spirits and

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

their families take place. There was once a village, they say in the
Chernigof Government, in which there lived as many as a thousand
witches, and they went on clearing the sky of stars until there were
none left "to light up our sinful world." Then God sent St. Andrew \[one
of the Christian successors of Perun\], who struck with his mace, and
that wicked village sank into the earth, the place it had occupied
becoming a swamp <span id="fr_296"></span>[2](#fn_296). Akin to these
witches must have been the heroine of the following spell:--

The maiden fair  
Through the forest went.  
Evil she muttered,  
Herbs she collected,  
Roots she extracted,  
The moon she stole,  
The sun she ate.  
Aroynt her, hag!  
Aroynt her, witch <span id="fr_297"></span>[3](#fn_297)!

In Russia, as elsewhere, the objects by means of which a sorceress flies
through the air are those which are connected with the domestic
hearth--the brooms and besoms used for sweeping up ashes, and the
equivalents for our tongs, poker, and shovel. A Russian witch always
keeps by her a supply of water which has been boiled together with the
embers of a kupála pyre, or Midsummer bonfire. When she wants to fly she
sprinkles herself with this, or she rubs herself under the armpits and
the

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

knees with an ointment, the chief ingredient of which is the magical
herb *tirlich*, or gentian. Sometimes witches cleave the air in the
cauldrons wherein they prepare their magic broths, or, like the Baba
Yagás, they skim along in mortars, sweeping away their traces with a
broom.

The witches generally hold their meetings on "bald hills," though in
Servia they haunt threshing-floors for this purpose. And their chief
gatherings take place three times a year; at springtide, and at the
periods of the summer and winter solstice. According to Sakharof the
witches begin to seek their trysting-place on the 26th of December. On
the 1st of January they wander about with unclean spirits, and on the
3rd, returning from their wanderings, they take to milking cows. In
Ruthenia it is believed that on the Feast of the Annunciation \[March
25, the day on which spring subdues winter\], witches and vampires are
born. On St. George's day \[April 23\], and on the "Kupála-night" \[June
24--both days originally consecrated to Perun\] wizards and witches
collect on a bare hill, and there hold diabolical orgies. Sometimes they
may be followed thither. In the Ukraine they tell how a certain soldier
happened to see a witch, in whose house he lodged, preparing herself for
flight. After she had gone he followed her example, and was immediately
caught up, through the chimney, into the sky and on to the "bare hill."
There he watched the revels for some time. At last his landlady caught
sight of him, and immediately told him

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

to be gone, if he valued his life, without a moment's delay. "Here is a
good steed," she cried; "mount and be off." Away he was borne home by
the good steed, which he tethered at the end of his journey. The next
morning he saw that the tether was attached to a log.

It is unnecessary to go into the details of these meetings of witches
and wizards, for they differ but little from those of such assemblies as
the well-known Walpurgisnacht and other Teutonic gatherings of demons
and their earthly associates. In Russia, as in other lands, the
connexion between sorcerers and devils is very close, and when a wizard
is about to die, evil spirits enter into him, and tear his life out with
terrible agonies. With him all nature seems to suffer. The earth
shudders, the winds howl, the wild beasts roar, and flocks of crows and
ravens, or rather of evil spirits in their forms, throng the roof and
chimney of the house, seize the soul of the dying wizard or witch, and,
with wild cries, bear it away to the other world.

Among the defensive weapons employed against [witchcraft](errata.htm#5),
some of the most important are the different objects connected with the
domestic hearth, or supposed to refer in some way to the lightning. Thus
a *kochergá*, or stove-rake, if suspended at the door of a cottage, will
prevent any wizard who may have gained admittance from getting out
again. As in Germany, on the first nights in May, so in Russia, on the
eve of the Epiphany, says Afanasief, crosses may be seen chalked on
every door and window.

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

These are to keep of witches, who fear every symbol of the Thunder-god's
hammer, as, for instance, the sallow, the aspen-stake, and the fern. If
any one takes a willow or aspen-twig with him to matins on Easter day,
say the peasants in the Poltava Government, and looks at the
congregation through it, he will see all the wizards and witches among
them turned upside down <span id="fr_298"></span>[4](#fn_298). In the
Chernigof Government it is believed that if, on the last day of the
*Máslyanitsa* any one takes a piece of cheese, wraps it up, and carries
it about with him during the whole of Lent, then on Easter eve the
witches of his village will appear to him, and ask for cheese.

To a wizard who dealt in *náuzui*, or amulets, \[*úzui* = ties; *úzel* =
a knot; *úzit'* = to tighten\], was given in old times the names of
*Náuznik* or *Uzol'nik*. These amulets generally consisted of various
materials, such as herbs, roots, embers, salt, bats' wings, heads and
skins of snakes, etc., which were tied up in small packets, and hung
round the neck. Sometimes a spell was written on a piece of paper which
was attached to the pectoral cross worn by Russians. After the
introduction of Christianity, incense \[*ládon*\] entered so largely
into the composition of these amulets that they received from it the
general designation of *ládonki*. These amulets are still in great
request among the peasants, especially among those who have to undertake
long and hazardous journeys. In olden days it seems to have been
customary to

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

take young children to a witch, who provided them with suitable amulets.

The efficacy of these tied or knotted amulets depended to a great extent
upon the magical force of their knots. To these knots frequent reference
is made in the spells. Here is one, for instance, intended to guarantee
its employer against all risk of being shot:--

"I attach five knots to each hostile, infidel shooter, over arquebuses,
bows, and all manner of warlike weapons. Do ye, O knots, bar the shooter
from every road and way, lock fast every arquebuse, entangle every bow,
involve all warlike weapons, so that the shooters may not reach me with
their arquebuses, nor may their arrows attain to me, nor their warlike
weapons do me hurt. In my knots lies hid the mighty strength of
snakes--from the twelve-headed snake <span
id="fr_299"></span>[5](#fn_299)." With such a spell as this it was
supposed that the insurgent chief, Stenka Razín, had rendered himself
proof against shot and steel.

Sometimes the amulet is merely a knotted thread. A skein of red wool
wound round the arms and legs is supposed to ward off agues and fevers;
and nine skeins, fastened round a child's neck are deemed a preservative
against scarlatina. In the Tver Government a bag called *vyázlo* is
fastened round the neck of the cow which walks before the rest of a
herd, in order to keep off wolves. Its force binds the maw of the wild
beast \[*vyazát'* = to bind\]. In accordance with a similar

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

idea, a padlock is carried three times round a herd of horses, before
they are allowed to go afield in the spring, he who carries it locking
and unlocking it as he goes, while these magical words are being
uttered, "I lock from my herd the mouths of the grey wolves with this
steel lock." After the third round the padlock is finally locked, and
then, when the horses have gone off, it is hidden away somewhere till
late in the autumn, when the time comes for the herd to return to winter
quarters. In this case the "firm word" of the spell is supposed to lock
up the mouths of the wolves. The Bulgarians have a similar method of
protecting their cattle against wild beasts. A woman takes a needle and
thread after dark, and sews together the skirt of her dress. A child
asks her what she is doing, and she tells him she is sewing up the ears,
eyes, and jaws of the wolves, so that they may not hear, see, or bite
the sheep, goats, pigs, and calves. In the Smolensk Government, when
cattle are being driven afield on St. George's day, the following spell
is used:--

"Deaf man, deaf man, dost thou hear us?"

"I hear not."

"God grant that the wolf may not hear our cattle!"

"Cripple, cripple, canst thou catch us?"

"I cannot catch."

"God grant that the wolf may not catch our cattle!"

"Blind man, blind man, dost thou see us?"

"I see not."

"God grant that the wolf may not see our cattle <span
id="fr_300"></span>[6](#fn_300)!"

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

Sometimes the amulet locks away hurtful things from a man's body. A net,
from its affluence of knots, was always considered very efficacious
against sorcerers; and therefore, in some places, when a bride is being
dressed in her wedding attire, a fishing-net is flung over her, to keep
her out of harm's way. With a similar intention the bridegroom and his
companions are often girt with pieces of net, or at least with
tight-drawn girdles, for before a wizard can begin to injure them he
must undo all the knots in the net, or take off the girdles. The girdle,
with which the idea of a snake is frequently connected, has some mystic
sympathy with its wearer, and therefore the peasants in some parts
believe, that if a sick man's girdle be taken off, and thrown on the
highway, whoever picks it up and puts it on will have its former
wearer's diseases transferred to himself <span
id="fr_301"></span>[7](#fn_301). The knotted surface of a harrow (made
of interwoven branches) gives it great power against witchcraft. The
best way to catch a witch is to hide under a harrow, and angle for her
with a bridle.

Russian cows have always been as liable as those of other countries to
be drained of their milk by witches. During the Christmas *Svyatki* the
peasants object to letting their cattle leave the cow-sheds, for fear of
attacks from the powers of darkness. On the 3rd of January the witches
return from their Sabbath in a state of ravenous hunger, and are to be
debarred from the cow-sheds only by means of a church taper

<span id="page_391">p. 391</span>

attached to the doors. Crosses chalked upon the eve of the Epiphany are
also very useful. On St. Vlas's \[Blasius's\] day \[Feb. 11\] it is
necessary to sprinkle the flocks and herds with holy water, for at that
time, in Little-Russia at least, werewolves, in the shape of dogs and
black cats, suck the cows, mares, and ewes, and slaughter their male
companions. On St. George's day in April, and again during Whitsun and
Trinity weeks, the danger is no less to be dreaded. At Midsummer
bonfires are made of nettles, etc., and the horned cattle are driven
through the flame, in order to keep off wizards and witches, who are
then ravenous after milk. On the 30th of July witches frequently milk
cows to death, dying themselves afterwards of a surfeit.

A witch can milk a cow from a great distance. In order to do so she
sticks a knife into a plough, a post, or a tree: the milk trickles along
the edge of the knife, and continues to do so till the cow's udder is
emptied. On the eves of St. George's day, Whit-Sunday, and Midsummer
day, witches go out at night without clothing, and cut chips from the
doors and gates of farmyards. These they boil in a milk-pail, and so
charm away the milk from those farms. Careful housewives are in the
habit of examining their doors, and of smearing any new gashes they find
in them with mud, which frustrates the plans of the milk-stealers. In
such cases the witches climb the wooden crosses by the wayside and cut
chips from them, or lay their hands on stray wooden wedges. Then they
stick into a post in the cattle-sheds, and

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

press them with their fingers till milk flows from them freely, as from
a cow's udder. As in Germany, so in Russia, witches often bear
milk-pails on their heads. In Lusatian Wendish a witch is called
*Khodojta* \[*doit'* = to milk\], from her nefarious dealings with her
neighbours' cows.

As a farmer's cows are exposed to the attacks of the witch, so are his
crops to those of the wizard, who sometimes takes a handful of ears of
corn, bends them down to the ground, and ties them together with a
string; or he twists them round toward the west, the quarter with which
is connected the idea of death, and fastens them in that position. This
ceremony, which is done only with malicious intent, is of course
entirely different from the somewhat similar rite styled "the plaiting
of the beard of Volos." \[See [p. 231](srp08.htm#page_231).\] The
wizard's proceeding is called making a *zakrút*. \[*zakrutít'* = to
twist\]. The old church books called *trebniki* contain prayers intended
to be employed against the *zakrút*. After they had been said, it was
formerly the custom to pull it out with a church cross, and so to
deprive it of its power to do harm. Now-a-days it is customary to hire
the services of a friendly wizard, who cuts an aspen-stake, splits it
asunder, and pulls out the enchanted ears with it. Afterwards the
*zakrút* is set on fire with a holy taper, and the aspen-stake is driven
into the spot it had occupied, the latter proceeding giving rise to
terrible pains inside the hostile wizard <span
id="fr_302"></span>[8](#fn_302).

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

Besides destroying crops and cattle, the dealers in magic were supposed
to be able to bring disease and death upon mankind. The Kashoubes along
the Baltic still attribute most illnesses to sorcery, and in former days
such an explanation of plagues, and murrains, and other evils of a like
nature, seems to have been generally accepted. The Russian peasants
believe. that wizards and witches can bring destruction on men as well
as beasts, letting loose on their enemies evil spirits, which manifest
themselves in hiccoughs, ravings, and fits, or wreaking their vengeance
upon them by means of poison. The victim who accepts a beverage from the
hands of a witch, will perhaps swallow with it the "Fever-Sisters" or
other demons of torment, who will become transformed within him into
snakes, toads, or mice, and will suck dry his veins, and bring him, amid
prolonged agonies, to the grave. Sometimes, instead of sending evil
spirits to torment a man internally, a witch is supposed to change him
by night into a horse, and ride him over hill and dale until he is all
but dead with fatigue--an idea of which Gogol has made excellent use in
his story of the *Vy*. At other times she is believed to ride on his
spirit, while his body sleeps. In that case he finds himself utterly
exhausted the next day, though he knows nothing about what has been done
to him.

As a general rule, however, wizards and witches are supposed to destroy
their victims by means of poison distilled from herbs and roots. The
girl who poisoned her brother by mistake, when she merely intended to

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

kill the lover who had offended her--as described in a song already
quoted-probably belonged to the same class as the wilfully murderous
sister of the following weird story:--

A brave youth splintered chips.  
A fair maiden gathered the chips,  
Gathered and set them on the fire,  
Baked snakes and distilled poison.  
The sister thought her brother to kill.  
Into the midst of the court she went,  
Filled a cup betimes,  
Offered it to her brother dear.  
"Sister, be thou the first to drink."  
"Brother, I drank when pouring forth,  
Wishing good health to thee."  
A drop fell on the horse's mane,  
The horse's mane began to burn.  
Down from his good steed leaped the youth,  
Drew from its sheath his sabre keen,  
Struck off his sister's head.  
"No sister true of mine art thou,  
But a snake from under a log."  
Faggots he piled in the midst of the court,  
And her body white he burnt,  
Till nought but ashes remained.  
Her dust he scattered across the plain;  
No voice would he suffer to mourn <span id="fr_303"></span>[9](#fn_303).

Sometimes the poisoning is supposed to be effected on a large scale, as
when an epidemic is introduced by means of unholy science. In that case
recourse is had to magic, to counteract the designs of the malicious
sorcerer. The rites which are performed by the Russian peasants in order
to ward off an attack

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

of the cattle-plague are very striking, whether they are intended to
prove efficacious against an evil spirit invoked by a human will, or one
that acts of its own accord. In olden days, it is said, when such a
disease broke out in Ruthenia, it was customary to seize some old woman
who was suspected of dealing in magic, and to bury her alive, or to
fling her into a river, having previously fastened her up in a sack
along with a cock, a dog, and a black cat. After that it was expected
that the epidemic would disappear. Not long ago, an opinion was
expressed by the peasants, that if the first cholera patient were to be
buried alive, the disease would lose its power. In some villages a hole
is dug in the earth at the precise spot on which the first victim to
cattle-plague has fallen, and in it they bury its remains, with a live
dog, cat, and cock fastened to its tail. The Commune recompenses the
owner of the dead beast for the loss of its hide. In the Nijegorod
Government the Siberian Plague is supposed to be kept at a distance by
ashen stakes being driven into the ground at crossways, and the remains
of a dog, calcined for the purpose, being scattered about the village.
Sometimes, when a murrain is dreaded, the assembled peasants drive their
herds overnight into some farmyard, and keep watch over them till morn.
Then the cattle are counted, and if a beast which no one claims is found
among them, it is looked upon as the Cow Death in person, and is
immediately burnt alive. Sometimes the popular fancy personifies the Cow
Death under the form of a haggard old

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

woman, against whose attacks various precautions of a heathenish kind
are taken. When a village is alarmed lest such a murrain should fall
upon its herds, the men are all ordered to shut themselves up in their
cottages. Then the women meet together, clad only in white shifts,
having their hair hanging loose about their shoulders--in striking
resemblance to the Prophetesses of heathen times--and provided with the
various utensils connected with the hearth, such as brooms, shovels, and
the equivalents for pokers and tongs. In some places, also, they carry
scythes and sickles, and other instruments used in their daily
avocations, but this seems to be an innovation of later date. The oldest
woman among them is then yoked to a plough, and she must draw it three
times round the whole of the village, the rest of the party following
after her, and singing the songs set apart for such occasions. It is
supposed that the malignant spirit whom they recognize in the
cattle-plague will be unable to cross the lines thus traced by the
plough, or to get at the cattle, which, during the ceremony, have been
kept shut up within the village. Here is one of their songs, many of
which are quite unpresentable:--

From the ocean-from the deep sea  
There have come out twelve maidens.  
They have gone on their way, by no short road,  
Up to the steep, the high mountains,  
To the three old Elders . . .  
"Get ready the white oak tables  
Sharpen the knives of steel,  
Make hot the boiling cauldrons,

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

Cleave, cut unto death,  
Every life under the heavens!"

The Elders comply with the request of the Twelve Maidens, and all living
things are put to death. Then,--

In those boiling cauldrons,  
Burns with an inextinguishable fire  
Every life beneath the heavens.  
Around the boiling cauldrons  
Stand the old Elders;  
The old Elders sing  
About life, about death,  
About the whole human race.  
The old Elders give  
To the whole world long lives.  
But on the other, on evil Death,  
The old Elders fix  
A great curse.  
The old Elders promise  
Eternal life  
To all the human race <span id="fr_304"></span>[1](#fn_304).

The Three Elders, says Orest Miller, are evidently beneficent
divinities, but it is not clear who the Twelve Sisters are. They are
often mentioned in exorcisms, many of which are intended to be used as a
protection against the attacks of these "Evil Shakers," as they are
called; shakers of mankind, that is to say. Sometimes each one has her
own name, that of some special disease. In the exorcisms preserved in
writing, most of which show evident signs of having been submitted to
Christian influences, these weird sisters are called the Daughters of
Herod.

<span id="page_398">p. 398</span>

[Tereshchenko](errata.htm#6), in his description of the *Opakhivanie*,
the ploughing rite to plough\] used as a preservative against the
cattle-plague, gives a few additional details. In the villages of which
he speaks, the procession is headed by a young girl who carries the
image of St. Blasius--Vlas, the Christian representative of the old
Slavonic deity Volos, the patron-god of cattle <span
id="fr_305"></span>[2](#fn_305). Behind her walk the rest of the female
villagers, those in the front row carrying besoms and handfuls of hay
and straw. Next comes an old woman, riding on a broomstick, her locks
dishevelled, a single shift her only covering: around her are several
women and girls with stove-irons. The third row is composed of women who
shout, dance, gesticulate, and beat frying pans. A number of old women,
bearing lighted fir-splinters, form a circle around a widow, who wears a
horse-collar round her neck and nothing else, and the old woman yoked to
the plough. In front of each farmyard the procession halts, while its
members knock at the gates, and, amid the din of beaten pots and pans,
exclaim "Ai, Ai! cut, hew the Cow Death! Ai, Ai! cut, hew! There she
goes! Ai, Al!" If a dog or a cat happens to rush out it is killed on the
spot, being taken for the cattle-plague in person.

Another rite, of an equally heathenish nature, is considered efficacious
against various epidemics. The female inhabitants of a village heap up
two piles of

<span id="page_399">p. 399</span>

refuse at midday, one at each end of the street, and set them on fire at
midnight. To one of these bonfires the girls, in white shifts, with
loosely flowing hair, drag a plough, one of their number following the
rest and carrying a holy picture. To the other bonfire a black cock is
taken by the older women--who wear black petticoats and dirty
shifts--and carried three times round the flames. Then one of the women
seizes it, and runs away with it to the other end of the village, the
rest following and screeching "Ah! Ai! Atu! disappear, perish, black
disease!" When she reaches the glowing heap at the other end, she flings
the bird into it. While it is burning, the girls, after heaping dry
leaves on the fire, take hands and dance round it, repeating "Perish,
disappear, black disease!" The women then drag the plough three times
round the village <span id="fr_306"></span>[3](#fn_306).

Near Mtsensk, in the Government of Orel, the Cow Death procession is
headed by three girls who carry a picture of St. Vlas, with a taper
burning in a lanthorn before him, or a censer containing live coals and
incense. After them walk three widows, and in some places three
soldiers' wives. As they go round the village they sing,--

Death, O thou Cow Death!  
Depart from our village,  
From the stable, from the court!  
Through our village  
Goes holy Vlasy,  
With incense, with taper,  
With burning embers.

<span id="page_400">p. 400</span>

We will consume thee with fire,  
We will rake thee with the stove-rake,  
We will sweep thee up with the broom,  
And we will stuff thee with ashes.  
Come not to our village!  
Meddle not <span id="fr_307"></span>[4](#fn_307) with our cows,  
Nut-brown, chestnut, star-browed,  
White-teated, white uddered,  
Crumpled-horned, one-horned!

After them follow the other women, one dragging a plough which another
directs, and a third riding on a broomstick, while the others carry, and
strike together, various utensils, chiefly of iron. The rest of their
proceedings resemble those which have already been described, but their
narrator adds that "if a man falls in their way, they set upon him
furiously. It has often occurred that the man thus met has not at a
cheap rate made good his escape from them <span
id="fr_308"></span>[5](#fn_308)."

One of the stories about the Cow Death relates that--

A peasant was driving from a mill, at a late hour. Towards him comes
crawling an old woman and says,--

"Give me a lift, grandfather!

"Where to?"

"There, my own, to the village you're going to yourself."

"And who are you, grandmother?

"A doctoress, my own; I doctor cows."

<span id="page_401">p. 401</span>

"And where have you been doctoring?"

"Why I've been doctoring at Istomina's, but they're all dead there. What
was to be done? They didn't call me in till a little time ago, and I
couldn't manage to stop the thing."

The peasant gave the woman a seat on his cart, and drove off. Coming to
a cross road he could not remember the way, and by this time it had
begun to grow dark. Uttering a prayer, the peasant took off his hat and
crossed himself. In a moment there was no old woman to be seen!

Turning into a black dog, she ran into the village. Next day three cows
died in the outside farm; the peasant had brought the Cow Death
there <span id="fr_309"></span>[6](#fn_309).

Under such circumstances, according to Tereshchenko, instances of
voluntary immolation have been known. In a village attacked by an
epidemic, "the men and women have been known to cast lots, and the
person on whom the lot fell has been buried alive in a pit, along with a
cock and a black cat."

In the month of February, according to the Russian peasants, the Cow
Death wanders through the villages in the guise of a hideous old woman,
withered and starved in aspect, bearing a rake in her hands. Sometimes,
however, as we have seen, she takes the form of a black dog or cow, and,
among the Slovenes, of a mottled calf. In the Tomsk Government the
Siberian murrain is represented as a tall, shaggy man, with hoofs
instead of feet, who usually lives among the hills. The Bulgarians have
a tradition that when the cattle-plague, or the smallpox, wishes to
depart from a village, she appears to

<span id="page_402">p. 402</span>

some one in his sleep, and orders him to convey her to such and such a
place. The person thus designated takes bread smeared with honey, salt,
and a flask of wine, and leaves them, before sunrise, at the appointed
spot. After this the epidemic disappears, having accompanied the bearer
of the food out of the village.

The rites which serve to keep away the cattle-plague are supposed to be
efficacious against the Cholera also. In Ruthenia that disease is
personified as an old woman, with a hideous face disfigured by
suffering. In the Vladímir Government she bears the name of the Dog
Death. In Little-Russia it is affirmed that "she wears red boots," that
she can walk on water, that she is perpetually sighing, and that at
night she haunts villages, exclaiming, "Woe was; Evil will be." In
whatever house she passes the night, there she leaves not one soul
alive. In some villages they think that the Cholera comes "from beyond
the sea," and that she is one of three sisters, all clad in white
shrouds. Once a peasant, going into a town, gave a lift to two of the
sisters in his cart, on which they sat, "holding on their knees bundles
of bones. One of them was going to slay in Kharkof, and the other in
Kief <span id="fr_310"></span>[7](#fn_310)."

One of the strangest superstitions about disease is that which is
connected with small-pox. In some places the Russian peasants hold that
it is sinful to

<span id="page_403">p. 403</span>

vaccinate children, such a deed being equivalent to impressing upon them
"the seal of Antichrist." Moreover it is believed that whoever dies of
smallpox "will walk in the other world in golden robes." For this belief
even the professional wizards can give no reason, grounding their faith
entirely on tradition. Professor Buslaef accounts for it in the
following manner:--The modern Greeks, he says, personify small-pox in
the guise of a supernatural female being, and the Servians call her
*bogine*, or goddess. And the ancient Greeks knew of a spectral creature
called Alphitô (ἀλφιτώ), "a spectre, or bugbear with which nurses
frightened children"--*Liddell and Scott*), a name supposed to be akin
to that of the German *Elbe*, or the English *Elves*. The kindred word
*Alphos* (ἀλφός) also meant a skin disease, apparently a form of
leprosy. Professor Buslaef thinks that the small-pox was originally
represented as a female being with whom was connected the idea of
whiteness or light, and that from that idea arose the notion of her
victims being clad, after death, in bright or golden robes.

The power of dealers in magic to transform themselves or their victims
into various shapes is widely spread in Russia, and plays an important
part in the popular mythology of the country. A person thus changed
bears the name of *óboroten* \[*oborotít'* = to turn\], or, when changed
into a wolf, of *volkodlák* \[*volk* = wolf, *dlaka* = a tuft of hair,
and so a hide <span id="fr_311"></span>[8](#fn_311)\].

<span id="page_404">p. 404</span>

Werewolf stories are so well known among all nations <span
id="fr_312"></span>[9](#fn_312), that it is unnecessary to give a
detailed account of the proceedings of the Russian *volkodlaki*. But it
may be as well to mention that the collection of laws, etc. called the
*Kormchaya Kniga* states that in these transformed beings the people
used to see no mere mortals, but "chasers of the clouds." Afanasief
connects them with the *okrutniki*, or maskers disguised as various
animals, who used to participate in the religious games of the Old
Slavonians, and who still, though their original signification is
forgotten, play a part in the rustic festivals at springtide, and
Christmas. So strong an odour of heathenism still hangs about them, that
the peasants think the wearing of a mask at the Christmas *Svyatki* is a
sin, one which can be expiated only by bathing in an icehole, after the
benediction of the waters.

Connected with the idea of transformation is the belief, common among
the Russian peasantry, that all witches have tails, and all wizards have
horns, and that a werewolf may be known by the bristles which grow under
his tongue. Such dealers in sorcery take various shapes, but generally,
says Afanasief, those of the animals known as symbols of the cloud and
the storm. In the Ukraine witches

<span id="page_405">p. 405</span>

assume a canine form; their long teats trail on the ground, a fact on
which Afanasief lays stress, remarking that the bosom, udder, or teat,
was a well-known mythological synonym for a rain-cloud. Cats are
generally thought uncanny in Slavonic countries, the Russian peasants
believing that evil spirits enter into them during storms, and the
Bohemians holding that a black cat at the end of seven years becomes
either a witch or a devil <span id="fr_313"></span>[1](#fn_313). The owl
is considered to be of a demoniacal nature, while the dove is so pure
and holy that no witch is able to assume its form.

Of all living creatures, magpies are those whose shapes witches like
best to take. The wife of the false Demetrius, according to popular
poetry, escaped from Moscow in the guise of a magpie. As a general rule,
no such bird is to be seen in that city, its race having been solemnly
cursed by the Metropolitan Alexis, on account of the bad behaviour of
the witches who often assumed its plumage. At the present day the
peasants often gibbet a dead magpie, just as our gamekeepers do, but it
is in order to scare away witches from stables and cow-sheds. Besides
changing into the birds and beasts, of which mention has been made,
Russian witches often assume the forms of stones, hay-cocks, or balls of
thread--that is to say, observes Afanasief, of various objects
mythologically connected with clouds.

<span id="page_406">p. 406</span>

Here is a specimen of a *zagovór* to be employed by a wizard who desires
to turn into a werewolf---

"In the ocean sea, on the island Buyan, in the open plain, shines the
moon upon an aspen stump, into the green wood, into the spreading vale.
Around the stump goes a shaggy wolf; under his teeth are all the horned
cattle; but into the wood the wolf goes not, in the vale the wolf does
not roam. Moon, moon! golden horns! Melt the bullet, blunt the knife,
rot the cudgel, strike fear into man, beast, and reptile, so that they
may not seize the grey wolf, nor tear from him his warm hide. My word is
firm, firmer than sleep or the strength of heroes <span
id="fr_314"></span>[2](#fn_314)."

In this spell, says Buslaef <span id="fr_315"></span>[3](#fn_315), the
aspen stump is mentioned because a buried werewolf or vampire has to be
pierced with an aspen stake. The expression that the wolf has all the
horned cattle in or under his teeth resembles the proverb now applied to
St. George, "What the wolf has in his teeth, that Yegory gave"--St.
George, or Yegory the Brave, having taken the place which was once
filled by the heathen god of flocks, the Old Slavonic Volos. And the
warm hide of the werewolf is in keeping with his designation
*Volkodlak*, from *dlaka*, a shaggy fell.

There is, of course, a great difference between the voluntary and the
involuntary undergoers of transformation. Dealers in the black art who
have

<span id="page_407">p. 407</span>

turned themselves into wolves are, for the most part, ravenous
destroyers of all that falls in their way, but people who have been made
wolves against their will seldom disgrace their human nature. Such
gentle werewolves as these attach themselves to men, and by tears and
deprecatory pawings attempt to apologize for their brutal appearance.
Unless driven beyond endurance by hunger, they never slay and eat, and
when they must kill a sheep, they seek one belonging to some other
village than that in which they used to live. There once was a youth,
says a Polish tradition, who was loved by a witch, but he scorned her
affection. One day he drove into the forest to out firewood, but no
sooner had he swung his axe in the air than his hands turned into wolf's
paws, and in a short time his whole body bristled with shaggy hair. He
ran to his cattle, but they fled in terror; he tried to call them back,
but his voice had become a mere howl. In another instance a witch turned
one of her neighbours into a wolf, and he stated, after he had regained
his former shape, that during the period of his transformation he made
friends with a real wolf, and often went out hunting with him, but that
he never forgot that he was really a man, though he had lost the faculty
of articulate speech. The White-Russians have a tradition that once,
when a wedding party were thoroughly enjoying themselves, they were all
transformed by some hostile magician--the bridegroom and the other men
into wolves, the bride into a cuckoo, and the rest of the women into
magpies.

<span id="page_408">p. 408</span>

Ever since that time the metamorphosed bride has flown about seeking for
and lamenting her. lost bridegroom, and moistening the hedges with the
"Cuckoo's tears," which we less poetically style "Cuckoo's spittle."

In order to produce such an effect as this on a wedding party, the
hostile wizard, it is generally believed, must girdle each member of it
with a leather strap or piece of bast, over which unholy spells have
been whispered. According to a Ruthenian story, however, a witch once
gained her end by simply rolling up her girdle, and hiding it beneath
the threshold of the cottage in which the wedding festivities were being
held. Every one who stepped across it immediately became a wolf. In
order to effect the cure of an involuntary werewolf, it is necessary
either to strip off his hide, or to remove the magic girdle or other
amulet which has reduced him into his brute state. In one of the Russian
stories a black dog behaves in so reasonable a manner, that the people
to whom it has attached itself take it to a wizard for relief. Acting
upon his advice, they heat a bath as hot as possible, and scald the
dog's skin off. No sooner is this done than the dog turns into a young
man belonging to a neighbouring village, whom an old sorceress had
bewitched <span id="fr_316"></span>[4](#fn_316).

Witches and wizards constantly metamorphose people by the touch of a
magic wand, stick, or whip.

<span id="page_409">p. 409</span>

Sometimes, however, even this is not essential. In Ruthenia, at least,
it is believed that a wizard, if he only knows a man's baptismal name,
can transform him by a mere effort of will, and therefore a man should
conceal his real name, and answer to a fictitious one. Such a power as
this is supposed by the Russian peasantry to have been employed upon one
occasion by the Apostles Peter and Paul. As they were passing over a
bridge one day, "a bad woman and her husband," who had agreed to
frighten the holy travellers, and had dressed themselves up in
sheepskins turned inside out, ran at them, roaring like bears. "Then the
Apostles said, 'Go on roaring from this time forward and for ever!' and
at that very instant the mockers were turned into bears <span
id="fr_317"></span>[5](#fn_317)."

More terrible even than the werewolf, but closely connected with him, as
well as with the wizard and the witch, is the dreaded Vampire. It is in
the Ukraine and in White-Russia--so far as the Russian Empire is
concerned--that traditions are most rife about this ghastly creation of
morbid fancy. There vampires are supposed to be such dead persons as in
their lifetime were wizards, witches, and werewolves; or people who
became outcasts from the Church and its rites, by committing suicide,
for instance, or by drinking themselves to death; or heretics and
apostates, or victims of a parental curse. The. Little-Russians, on the
other hand, attribute the birth of a

<span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

vampire to an unholy union between a witch and a werewolf or a devil.

The name itself has never been satisfactorily explained. In its form of
*vampír* \[South-Russian *upuír*, anciently *upír*\], it has been
compared with the Lithuanian *wemptî* = to drink, and *wempti*,
*wampiti* =to growl, to mutter, and it has been derived from a root *pî*
\[to drink\] with the prefix *u* = *av*, *va*. If this derivation is
correct, the characteristic of the vampire is a kind of
blood-drunkenness. In accordance with this idea the Croatians call the
vampire *pijawica*; the Servians say of a man whose face is coloured by
constant drinking, that he is "blood-red as a vampire;" and both the
Servians and the Slovaks term a hard drinker a *vlkodlak*. The Slovenes
and Kashubes call the vampire *vieszcy*, a name akin to that borne by
the *witch* in our own language as well as in Russian. The Poles name
him *upior* or *upir*, the latter being his designation among the Czekhs
also.

"There is a whole literature of hideous vampire stories, which the
student will find elaborately discussed in Calmet," says Mr. Tyler
\["Primitive Culture II., 175\], who thinks that "vampires are not mere
creations of groundless fancy, but causes conceived in spiritual form to
account for the specific facts of wasting disease." Some writers,
however, of whom Afanasief is one, explain the vampire stories
mythologically. Of their explanations some account will presently be
given.

In the opinion of the Russian peasant vampires,

<span id="page_411">p. 411</span>

as well as witches, exert a very baneful influence on the weather. To
them, and to werewolves, are attributed the presence of storms,
droughts, famines, cattle-plagues, and similar evils. Where such unholy
beings wander, one woe succeeds another. But worse than their evil
effect upon the weather--one which they produce in common with the
spirits of all persons who have died by violence--worse than their
attacks upon cattle, are their terrible dealings with mankind. As a
specimen of the Russian vampire stories, the following, heard in the
Tambof Government, may be taken:--

A peasant was driving past a grave-yard, after it had grown dark. After
him came running a stranger, dressed in a red shirt and a new jacket,
who cried,--

"Stop I take me as your companion."

"Pray take a seat."

They enter a village, drive up to this and that house. Though the gates
are wide open, yet the stranger says, "Shut tight!" for on those gates
crosses have been branded. They drive on to the very last house: the
gates are barred, and from them hangs a padlock weighing a score of
pounds; but there is no cross there, and the gates open of their own
accord.

They go into the house; there on the bench lie two sleepers--an old man
and a lad. The stranger takes a pail, places it near the youth, and
strikes him on the back; immediately the back opens, and forth flows
rosy blood. The stranger fills the pail full, and drinks it dry. Then he
fills another pail with blood from the old man, slakes his brutal
thirst, and says to the peasant,--

"It begins to grow light! lot us go back to my dwelling."

<span id="page_412">p. 412</span>

In a twinkling they found themselves at the graveyard. The vampire would
have clasped the peasant in its arms, but luckily for him the cocks
began to crow, and the corpse disappeared. The next morning, when folks
came and looked, the old man and the lad were both dead <span
id="fr_318"></span>[6](#fn_318).

According to the Servians and Bulgarians, unclean spirits enter into the
corpses of malefactors and other evilly-disposed persons, who then
become vampires. Any one, moreover, may become a vampire, if a cat jumps
across his dead body while it lies in the cottage before the funeral,
for which reason a corpse is always carefully watched at that time. In
some places the jumping of a boy over the corpse is considered as fatal
as that of a cat. The flight of a bird above the body may also be
attended by the same terrible result; and so may--in the Ukraine--the
mere breath of the wind from the Steppe <span
id="fr_319"></span>[7](#fn_319).

The bodies of vampires, of wizards, and of witches, as well as those of
outcasts from the Church, and of people cursed by their parents, are
supposed not to decay in the grave, for "moist mother-earth" will not
take them to herself. There is a story in the Saratof Government of a
mother who cursed her son, and after his death his body remained free
from corruption for the space of a hundred years. "At last he was dug
up, and his old mother, who was still alive, pronounced his pardon; and
at that very moment the corpse crumbled into dust <span
id="fr_320"></span>[8](#fn_320)."

<span id="page_413">p. 413</span>

Every one knows that when a vampire's grave is opened no trace of death
is found upon its body, its cheek being rosy and its skin soft; and that
the best way to destroy the monster is to drive a stake through it, when
the blood it has been sucking will pour forth from the wound. The
Servian method of discovering its grave may not be so well known.
According to Vuk Karadjic <span id="fr_321"></span>[9](#fn_321) it is
customary to take an immaculately black colt, and drive it through the
churchyard. Over the vampire's grave it will refuse to pass. The whole
village then turns out, the vampire is dug up, pierced with a
white-thorn stake. and committed to the flames.

It is worthy of remark that the stake with which the vampire's corpse is
pierced must be driven into it by a single stroke. A second blow would
reanimate it. This idea is frequently referred to in the Russian
*skazki* and other Slavonic stories, in which it is customary for the
hero to be warned that he must strike his enemy the snake, or other
monster, once only. A repetition of the blow would be certain to prove
fatal to himself.

Sometimes, instead of blood-sucking vampires, heart-devouring witches
trouble the peasant's repose. A Mazovian story relates how a certain
hero was long renowned for courage. But at last one night a witch struck
him on the breast with an aspen twig as he lay asleep; his breast
opened, and out of it she took his heart, and inserted a hare's heart in
its

<span id="page_414">p. 414</span>

place. The hero awoke a trembling coward, and remained one till the day
of his death. Another Polish story of a similar nature tells how a witch
substituted a cock's heart for that of a peasant. From that time forward
the unfortunate man was always crowing <span
id="fr_322"></span>[1](#fn_322). Sometimes the witches did not eat the
hearts they stole, but merely exposed them to a magic fire so as to
create love-longings in the breasts from which they had been taken. The
idea still survives, as Jacob Grimm remarks, in our expressions of
"giving" or "stealing one's heart <span
id="fr_323"></span>[2](#fn_323)."

A fondness for human flesh is attributed to ogrelike beings all over the
world, so there is nothing remarkable in the depraved appetites of the
supernatural man-eaters of the Slavonic tales. Somewhat singular,
however, is one group of stories in which a dead wizard or witch is
described as coming to life at midnight, and desiring to eat the person
who is watching beside the bier. The body has generally been enclosed in
a coffin, secured with iron bands, and conveyed to the church in which
the watcher has to read aloud from Holy Writ above it all night long. As
the clock strikes twelve a mighty wind suddenly arises, the iron bands
give way with a terrible crash, the coffin-lid falls off, and the corpse
leaps forth, and with a screech rushes at the doomed watcher, of whom,
as a general rule, nothing remains next morning but bare bones. His only
chance of escape is to trace a magic circle around him on the

<span id="page_415">p. 415</span>

floor, and to remain within it, holding in his hand a hammer, the
ancient weapon of the thunder-god. Here is one of the stories of this
class from the Kharkof Government. "Once, in the days of old, there died
a terrible sinner. His body was taken into the church, and the sacristan
was told to read psalms over him. The sacristan took the precaution to
catch a cock, and carry it with him. At midnight, when the dead man
leaped from his coffin, opened his jaws wide, and rushed at his victim,
the sacristan gave the bird a pinch. The cock uttered his usual crow,
and that very moment the dead man fell backwards to the ground a numb,
motionless corpse <span id="fr_324"></span>[3](#fn_324)."

It would be easy to quote many stories of this kind, for Slavonic
folk-lore abounds in them, but I will not do so now, preferring to
devote such space as remains to me to a brief sketch of the history of
Russian witchcraft. What has been said will probably give some idea of
the wizards and witches of modern times; the following remarks may serve
to convey a similar idea of those of a remoter period.

In very distant times, it is supposed, the Slavonians, like many other
peoples, placed great faith in the power of certain spells to rule the
elements, to turn away storms, and to provide sunlight or rain according
as either might be requisite; they even deemed such utterances necessary
in order that the day might succeed to the night, and the summer follow
the winter. These charms were then known only to

<span id="page_416">p. 416</span>

professed seers. At first the persons who were acquainted with them were
looked upon merely as exceptionally wise people.. A *koldún*--afterwards
a wizard in the bad sense of the word--was originally, as we have seen,
a kind of priest. For even if the Old Slavonians recognized no separate
caste of priests, at all events, as time passed by, there arose a
special class of men and women who preserved the secret of composing
such charms and incantations as were held to sway the seen and the
unseen world. The hoarders of this mystical lore were generally old men,
but the gift of divination was usually ascribed to women, and especially
to young maidens, the volition of whose fresh, pure minds was supposed
to exercise a magic influence over the forces of nature.

But when Christianity drove out the Slavonic deities, all the old
dealings with the spirit-world were declared illicit, and those who were
versed in them fell into dishonour. The *Koldún* became a mere conjuror
or wizard, who by his spells realized unholy gains, and the *Vyeshchaya
Zhená*, the Divining Woman or Prophetess, turned into the feared and
hated *Vyéd'ma*, or witch. Their nature and their occupation became
equally degraded.. the witches, for instance, for private gain milking
their neighbours' cows; whereas, in old times, they milked the heavenly
cows-i.e. they drew down rain from the clouds-for the general good. As
in pagan days many sacrifices were offered up on high places, especially
at three fixed times in the year, so in after-days it was supposed that
often on mountain

<span id="page_417">p. 417</span>

tops, and especially at those very times, the wizards and witches held
unholy revels, characterized by just such music, dancing, and feasting
as used to accompany the heathen festivals <span
id="fr_325"></span>[4](#fn_325); as the smoke of other sacrifices
formerly rose to heaven from the domestic hearth, so witches came to be
associated with the various implements connected with the hearth, and
were supposed to ride on the broom or the oven-fork, and to soar into
the air through the stovepipe or the chimney <span
id="fr_326"></span>[5](#fn_326).

It has been mentioned already, that although the wizard and the wise
woman were generally respected in heathen times, yet there were
occasions when they sank in the estimation of the people, who sometimes
even carried their disrespect so far as to bury them alive in sacks,
each attended by a dog, a cat, and a cock. But if they were liable to
such treatment, it seems to have been only at times when the popular
judgment was unhinged by some great calamity, such as a drought or a
pestilence. As a general rule they stood high in the opinion of the
masses, and their exaltation was attended by material advantages, so
that it is scarcely to be wondered at that they watched the progress of
the new religion with particularly unfavourable eyes, and did all that
they could to impede it. On the other hand, the Christian hierarchy set
them down as "devilish vessels," by the aid of which Satan was enabled
to prolong his unwelcome resistance.

<span id="page_418">p. 418</span>

The introduction of Christianity by St. Vladímir was not allowed to take
place without a struggle. The inhabitants of Novgorod, for instance,
broke into revolt, and those of Rostof, about the year 1070, put St.
Leontius to death, and forced the Bishops Theodore and Hilarion to fly
for their lives. Still more closely connected with the subject of the
present chapter is the fact that, during the eleventh century, several
risings against Christianity were instigated by dealers in magic. Thus
in 1071 a wizard appeared in Kief, and prophesied that at the end of
five years the Dnieper would flow backwards, and that the Russian and
the Grecian lands would change places. Certain "ignorant persons," says
the chronicler, gave heed to his words, but "the faithful" laughed at
him, saying, "the devil plays with thee for thy ruin;" and in truth the
wizard disappeared one night and left no trace behind. Another wizard,
also, who appeared at Rostof in 1091, soon perished, and at Byeloozero
two warlocks were seized by an armed force, and put to death, their
corpses being left a prey to the beasts of the forest. At Novgorod,
during the rule of Prince Glyeb, an insurrection was stirred up by a
wizard, who gave out that he would publicly walk across the river
Volkhof. Many of the townspeople took his side, and wanted to kill their
bishop; but that courageous prelate put on his robes, seized a cross,
and called upon the faithful to follow him. So the people were divided
into two bodies, the Prince and his *drujina*, or military companions,
following

<span id="page_419">p. 419</span>

the bishop, while the common herd sided with the wizard. Then the Prince
hid an axe under his dress, and drew near to the wizard, and asked him--

"Knowest thou what will happen in the morning, and in the evening?"

"I know all things," answered the wizard.

"Knowest thou what is going to take place now?"

"I shall perform great wonders."

At this point of the argument the Prince drew out his axe, and struck
the wizard with such force that he immediately fell dead. Whereupon the
people gave up all faith in him, and went quietly home <span
id="fr_327"></span>[6](#fn_327).

Even after the adherents of heathenism had given up what they saw was a
hopeless struggle, and Christianity had become the recognized religion
of the Russian people, the old gods retained a hold, if not upon the
affections, at least upon the fears of those "ignorant persons" who
formed the great mass of the rural population. What had occurred at an
earlier period in many other European lands was now repeated in Russia.
Many a peasant who went publicly to church, privately worshipped the
ancient objects of his allegiance, the old pagan rites being long kept
up in sequestered nooks within dense forests, or by the side of lonely
streams. At the same time, in Russia, as in other countries, even the
"faithful" proselytes of the new religion could not at once forget the
teaching of the old, so they retained a mass of familiar traditions,
chiefly of a mythical nature, but they substituted in them for the names
of

<span id="page_420">p. 420</span>

their elementary gods and demigods, others which they took from the
calendar of the Church. The consequence was a confusion of ideas which
justified the epithet "two-faithed" which an old ecclesiastical writer
bestowed upon the Russian people.

The superior clergy did all they could to remedy what they naturally
considered a serious evil, levelling from time to time severe
denunciations against the believers in "conjurors, witches, and
wizards," and the performers of "demoniacal rites." In the twelfth
century, the Metropolitan Ioann ordered that no practiser of magic
should be allowed to participate in the sacraments of the church. The
book of laws called the *Kormchaya Kniga*, according to a copy dated
1282, inflicted a six years' exile from church on persons addicted to
"pagan practices," such as dealings in witchcraft and the like, and
similar restrictions were laid on the indulgence of a leaning towards
spiritualism by a series of ecclesiastical ordinances. But it was in
vain that St. Cyril rebuked his flock for having recourse in illness to
"accursed women," and that the Metropolitan Photius, in 1410, besought
his clergy to "induce their congregations to abstain from "listening to
fables, and frequenting wicked women." The wizards and witches held
their own, just as the people, in spite of the remonstrances of their
pastors, continued the "satanic games," attended by dance and song,
which had come down to them from their heathen ancestors.

The clergy were more successful in their attacks on the books of a
superstitious nature, mostly of

<span id="page_421">p. 421</span>

Byzantine origin, which they placed upon their Index. Many of these, of
which Afanasief gives a full account, extending over six pages, were
destroyed by Orthodox fire, and with them not a few of the persons whose
property they were. In 1227, for instance, a chronicler relates how four
wizards were burnt to death at Novgorod. In 1411 the people of Pskoff
burnt "twelve divining women," probably because a deadly epidemic was
then ravaging the country. Sometimes, however, witches were only
beheaded, or, as we have already seen, buried alive in a sack with
various animals. Ivan the Terrible greatly harassed the dealers in
magic, but, if tradition is to be believed, they had their revenge. In
the winter of 1584 a comet appeared which the Tsar, whose health was
fast failing, took to be a sign of his approaching death. In order to
obtain more certain information on this point, he appealed to the
sorcery which he had tried to exterminate, sixty wizards from the north
of Russia being brought together for his convenience in Moscow. There
every attention was paid them, but in spite of this they prophesied that
he would die on the 18th of March. On the morning of that day he felt
himself stronger than usual, so he sent to tell the wizards that he
intended to put them to death as false prophets. But they, probably
remembering the celebrated Ides of March, received his message with
contempt; and their behaviour was justified by the fact that the Tsar
was soon afterwards seized by a fit in the middle of a game of chess,
and died before he had time to carry out his intention.

<span id="page_422">p. 422</span>

This story is an evident fable, but the sufferings of persons accused of
witchcraft in Russia are proved by incontestable evidence. The number of
such victims to the superstitious terror of the civil and religious
authorities seems to have been small, compared with that of the
multitudes who perished in other lands, but the story of their martyrdom
is sufficiently sad. At one time we find Iván the Terrible slowly
roasting one of his generals, Prince Mikhail Vorotuinsky, in order to
extort from him a confession of having attacked the royal health through
the agency of "whispering women." In vain did the unfortunate sufferer
protest his innocence. The Tsar listened to his agonized expressions,
and then raked the coals nearer to his victim with his curved staff. At
another time we read of cruel sufferings undergone by persons charged
with having bewitched members of the royal family by means of magic
practices brought to bear upon the traces of their footsteps. At various
times we meet with accounts of the executions of men and women from whom
confessions of dealing in magic had been wrung by torture. One of these,
a woman named Fedosia who was put to death in 1674, declared her
innocence on the scaffold, saying that she had accused herself only
because she could not endure her torments. The annals of the law courts
contain numerous cases of persons accused of having thrown others into
convulsions, or at least of having afflicted them with hiccoughs. These
convulsions were sometimes fictitious, being assumed for the

<span id="page_423">p. 423</span>

purpose of ruining an enemy by a charge of witchcraft. Even at the
present day in the north of Russia, says Afanasief, the hiccough is
supposed to be a demon inflicted on the sufferer by means of sorcery,
and persons afflicted with epilepsy and St. Vitus's dance are regarded
as the victims of hostile enchantments, and are called *klikushi*. As
late as the year 1815 a charge of this kind was brought before a legal
tribunal in the Pinejsk district. A peasant named Mikhail Chukharef was
accused of afflicting his cousin, Ofimiya Lobanova, with "an evil
spirit" in the shape of a hiccough. The accused pleaded guilty, stating
that he had, after removing the cross he wore round his neck, whispered
a certain spell over salt. The formula he used was as follows:--"Lodge
in such and such a person, ye hiccough-pains! tear and torture him to
the end of time! As this salt shall dry up, so may that man also dry
up!" and the salt thus enchanted was to be scattered on the road along
which the intended victim had to pass. The court sentenced Chukharef to
undergo thirty-five blows of the knout, as well as "a public church
penance <span id="fr_328"></span>[7](#fn_328)."

In 1715 Peter the Great gave orders that in future *klikushi*, or
"possessed people," should be subjected to an examination, so as to find
out whether they were really "possessed," or were only feigning
"possession" (*klikushestvo*)--as did a certain Varvara Loginova, a
carpenter's wife in St. Petersburg,

<span id="page_424">p. 424</span>

who, after accusing a number of persons of having bewitched her,
ultimately confessed, in 1714, to having been an impostor throughout. In
1770, in the Yarensk district of the Government of Vologda, several
persons were accused of having bewitched certain girls and women, and
were flogged till they confessed their guilt. One of the women of their
number stated in her confession how she had acted on her
victims--namely, by means of worms which the devil had given her. Some
of these worms she produced, and her judges forwarded them to the
Senate. On examination these diabolical worms turned out to be simple
maggots,--whereupon the Senate ordered the "possessed woman" to be
flogged, turned the provincial judges out of their seats, and gave
orders that in future similar complaints were not to be listened
to <span id="fr_329"></span>[8](#fn_329).

But though the law has long ceased to examine such charges, they still
command attention among the peasantry. The belief in vampires, also,
retains its hold upon the popular mind, and the old custom of digging up
those among the dead who are suspected of unfavourably affecting the
weather is to this day observed, it is said, in remote localities. While
the Slavonians were heathens they all seem to have been in the habit of
resorting to this practice, and even after they had accepted
Christianity they retained their original theories with respect to the
influence of the dead upon the elements.

<span id="page_425">p. 425</span>

In the thirteenth century Serapion, Bishop of Vladímir, was obliged to
utter sharp reproofs of those superstitious men who would not allow the
bodies of drowned or suffocated persons to rest in their graves, but
exhumed them on the ground that they caused drought and scarcity; and in
the sixteenth century a similar reprimand was considered necessary by
Maxim the Greek. The false Demetrius was suspected by the people of
dealing in witchcraft, and when, after his burial in the early part of
May, 1606, a strong frost set in, hurtful to cornfields, gardens and
orchards, they attributed it to his demoniacal influence. His dead body
had been exposed for three days to public view, stretched on a table
along with a reed-pipe, a mask, and a bagpipe, objects generally
associated with jugglers and "transformers;" and it had afterwards been
buried in one of the "poor-houses," the winter receptacles of the bodies
of the unknown and friendless dead. Thence the populace tore his
remains, and having consumed them with fire, mingled his ashes with
gunpowder, and shot them from guns into the air. It is but a little time
ago, if common report may be believed, that the peasants. of any
district in which a drought had long prevailed were in the habit of
digging up the corpse of some person who had died from excess of drink,
and of sinking it in the nearest swamp or lake, with the full belief
that this proceeding would ensure the fall of rain. About three years
ago the prospect of a bad harvest, caused by continual drought, induced
the peasants

<span id="page_426">p. 426</span>

of a village in the Tarashchansk district to have recourse to the
following means of procuring better weather. They dug up the body of a
Raskolnik, or Dissenter, who had died in the previous December, and had
been buried in the village graveyard. Some of the party then beat it
about the head, exclaiming, "Give us rain!" while others poured water
upon it through a sieve. Then they put it back into the coffin and
restored it to its resting-place <span id="fr_330"></span>[9](#fn_330).
All that can be said in excuse of such a practice as this is, that it is
not as bad as that which so long prevailed in England, as well as in
other lands, of testing a woman suspected of witchcraft by flinging her
into a pond or river. The Servians are said still to keep up the
practice, and it is asserted that among the Ruthenians bordering on
Hungary a witch was drowned in this manner as late as 1827. But, as has
already been remarked, sad as are the records of the sufferings
inflicted among Slavonic nations upon the victims of a fear of
witchcraft, they are far less tragic than those which tell of the
thousands upon thousands of innocent persons whom a similar fear, in
lands tenanted by Teutonic and Latin races, condemned to torture and to
death. The Russian peasant sometimes murdered in his blind wrath; the
legal tribunals of his country too often behaved with dull cruelty; but
neither among the populace nor on the bench does there ever seem to have
been found so persistent a murderer as our own Hopkins

<span id="page_427">p. 427</span>

the Witchfinder, nor can any Russian laws on the subject of witchcraft
be fairly charged with the cold-blooded malignity which characterizes
the pages of the "Malleus Maleficarum."

From the dreary picture of fanaticism and superstition offered by the
records of trials for witchcraft--always so monstrously terrible,
whether they took place in Russia or in any other land--it is a relief
to turn to the speculations in which some comparative mythologists have
indulged, while endeavouring to account for the belief which gave rise
to those trials; a belief of world-wide extent and of the most venerable
antiquity. Disinclined to accept such theories as that supported by Mr.
Tylor, who considers that "witchcraft is part and parcel of savage
life <span id="fr_331"></span>[1](#fn_331)," and apparently looks upon
the belief in it rather as the rank growth of an untilled soil than as
the decayed form of one of the results of ancient mythological
culture--preferring to trace back such stories as those of witches who
feloniously milk their neighbours' cows to the poetic ideas of the
primeval Aryans about storms and clouds, rather than to explain them by
a partnership in the superstitions of the most degraded of African and
American savages--these writers have applied to witchcraft traditions
another system of explanation, a similar one to that which has restored
to order and meaning so many of the apparently wild and irrational myths
of old religion.

<span id="page_428">p. 428</span>

A considerable part of the twenty-sixth chapter of that work of
Afanasief's which has been so frequently quoted in these pages, is
devoted to an attempt to prove that the wizards and witches of modern
days are, as a general rule, the representatives of the priests and the
priestesses, or the "wise men" and "wise women," of pagan times; and
also that the greater part of the superstitious ideas now connected with
them are remnants or survivals of a mythical system, in which were
expressed, in figurative language, the views of the ancient Slavonians
about the forces of nature, the strife of the elements. Whether his
arguments are or are not conclusive, I leave to more competent critics
to decide. It will be sufficient here to mention a few of their most
striking points.

The *Koldún* and *Vyed'ma* he considers--whether in their modern forms
of wizard and witch, or in their old capacities of priest and
prophetess--as types of certain atmospheric forces or phenomena, and as
the human inheritors of a reverence originally paid to the demons of
cloud-land. Therefore it is, in his opinion, that they are supposed to
direct the storm-cloud, to guide the whirlwind, to dispense the rain and
hail, to be able to steal the dew or to hide the lights of heaven, to
love to glide above the surface of the earth, to gather on the bare
hill-side, to whirl to and fro in a wild dance, and to change at will
from one form to another; therefore it is that dealers in magic are
mentioned in old Slavonic documents as
"cloud-compellers"--*oblakoprogonniki* 

<span id="page_429">p. 429</span>

\[*óblako* = cloud, *gonyát'* = to chase\], a word closely associated
with the epithet of Zeus, *nephelêgeretês* <span
id="fr_332"></span>[2](#fn_332).

The steeds on which wizards and witches make their aerial journeys are
of a nature to suggest some connexion with the element of fire, either
as burning on the domestic hearth or as flashing across the vault of
heaven. Such are, according to Russian traditions--closely akin in this
respect to those of Teutonic or Lettic extraction--the broom (in its
different forms of *metlá*, *pomelá*, and *vyénik*), the poker
(*kochergá*), the tongs (*ukhvát* = oven-fork), the shovel (*lopáta*),
and the rake (*grábli*). On these the wizard or witch flies fast,
resembling in rapid course the swift winds which sweep the, clouds from
the sky, or rake them together in masses which at times are rent by the
fiery dart of the lightning. So closely are some of these implements
still associated in parts of Russia with the storm, that the peasants
often try to frighten away an ominous cloud by flinging a frying-pan out
of doors, together with a broom, a shovel, or a poker.

Sometimes Russian traditions represent witches as riding to the
Midsummer festival, not only on wooden or metal instruments, but also on
actual horses. These, as well as all the other animals with which the
popular fancy associated dealers in magic, are supposed to have been
meant, in mythical language, for types of the cloud and the storm. The

<span id="page_430">p. 430</span>

wolf, the cat, and the snake constantly figure in Russian stories as the
associates of the witch or the Yaga Baba, and the cock, the well-known
symbol of fire, plays in them an important part.

The wizards of Russian storyland are usually represented as old men with
long beards and flashing eyes, and the witches--like the German
*Hexen*--either as hideous old hags, or as young and fair damsels; just
as in ancient times the clouds were depicted, in the language of poetry,
as bearded demons, or as female forms, whether nymph-like or haggard.
According to Russian tradition, a witch, when she gathers dew, or milks
cows, or performs any other unholy deed, is always clothed in a long
white shift, and has her hair loosely flowing over her shoulders. In
this array she strongly resembles the Vilas, Rusalkas, and other fairy
beings of aqueous nature, whose occupation it so often is to spin and
weave, producing filmy textures which seem not unlike the clouds which
now veil, and now melt away before the sunlight. As not only by spinning
and by weaving, but also by other womanly employments, such as washing,
milking, and the like, were the actions of the elementary forces of
nature represented in ancient mythical language; so at last it became
usual to associate women rather than men with the idea of commanding the
elements; and thus it was more usually a witch than a wizard who was
supposed to be on terms of familiarity with the inhabitants of the
invisible world <span id="fr_333"></span>[3](#fn_333).

<span id="page_431">p. 431</span>

Of all these womanly employments that of milking is the most prominent,
and, according to some commentators, the most evidently mythical. The
vulgar witch of to-day steals the milk from the earthly cows of her
neighbour; her prototype was wont to milk the heavenly cows, that is to
say, to draw the rain from the clouds. In the Government of Kief, it is
affirmed that witches by night, when good folks sleep, "go out of doors,
wearing long shifts and with dishevelled hair, trace a line with their
hands round the starry sky, and eclipse the moon with clouds (or steal
it); then, on the approach of a storm, they betake themselves to milking
the cloud-cows themselves, and milk them so violently that from their
teats, together with milk, there begins to flow blood (another metaphor
for rain) <span id="fr_334"></span>[4](#fn_334)." In some villages,
also, the witches are said to chase the moon into a cow-shed, and there
to milk cows by her light; and the Bulgarians have a tradition to the
effect that sorceresses can take the moon (*luná*) out of the sky, which
accounts for lunar eclipses, and that she is then turned into a cow,
which they milk, thus eventually obtaining such butter as heals
otherwise incurable wounds.

In a similar manner, according to Afanasief, the stories about
werewolves and other transformed creatures, and also about vampires, may
be accounted for. As the clouds shift their plastic shapes, now "backed
like a weasel," and now resembling a

<span id="page_432">p. 432</span>

whale, so the mythical beings, under whose forms the philosophy of our
ancestors personified the forces of nature, were originally supposed to
undergo rapid metamorphoses; and the power of similar transformation was
eventually attributed to the human beings who, in many respects,
replaced them in popular belief. Thus, in the Ukraine, there lingers a
tradition that a werewolf who is touched with a pitchfork or a flail
immediately resumes his human form: this is explained as meaning that
the thunder-god strikes a blow with his mace \[the lightning\], which
tears the wolf's hide from his opponent \[or disperses the cloud\] <span
id="fr_335"></span>[5](#fn_335).

In the case of vampires, their sucking of blood is explained by
Afanasief in the same manner as the draining of milk by witches. When
winter condemns all nature to a temporary death, the thunder-god and the
spirits of the storm sleep a sleep like that of death in their
cloud-coffins. But with the return of spring they assume renewed life,
and draw rain from the clouds, or, in mythical language, suck blood from
sleepers <span id="fr_336"></span>[6](#fn_336). According to this
[system](errata.htm#7) of interpretation, some glimmering may be
obtained, he thinks, of the original meaning of what, if taken
literally, seems a needlessly improbable story--that of the vampire
father who eats all his daughters but one; her escape being effected by
her throwing off, as she runs, various portions of her dress, each of
which her too fond parent has to tear up and then restore to its

<span id="page_433">p. 433</span>

original form, before he can recommence his furious pursuit.

Whether these explanations are sound or not, they have at least the
merit of ingenuity. Moreover, it would be a relief to our feelings if we
could succeed in resolving the werewolves, vampires, and other
demoniacal creatures, who have so long made night hideous, into not only
harmless, but even beneficent elements--recognizing in their laidly
lineaments the shapely features of the mythical beings under whose forms
our Aryan ancestors personified the powers of nature. But before
indulging in the pleasure of a belief in such desirable transformations,
it may be as well at least to remember the existence of very different
hypotheses on the subject. Even if we do not altogether agree with Mr.
Fergusson <span id="fr_337"></span>[7](#fn_337), that none of the
serpents and dragons, none of the dwarfs and magicians and such like
creatures, are of Aryan extraction,--that "all the fairy mythology, in
fact, of the East and West, belongs to the Turanian races,"--yet we may
find, in his and in similar arguments, reason enough to make us pause
before considering the opposite theory conclusively made out.

And if it would be hazardous to form rapid conclusions with respect to
our own familiar fairies, still more dangerous would it be to decide
hastily in the case of foreign demigods and demons. Great caution is
requisite on the part of every one who undertakes to evolve a
mythological system from a mass of

<span id="page_434">p. 434</span>

popular traditions. In no case is such caution more urgently demanded
than in that of a student who has to deal with materials of so mixed a
nature, and of so doubtful an extraction, as are the songs and stories
of the Russian people.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Of that people I trust I have not conveyed an unfavourable idea. The
nature of my work has led me to speak frequently of their foibles, to
dwell at length upon their superstitions. But it is not by such
weaknesses as these, which are to some extent common to all mankind,
that we ought to judge of a peasantry who have always been signally
remarkable for family affection, for reverence towards age, for sympathy
with misfortune--who have retained for centuries, even under the
pressure of that system of slavery which has but recently been
overthrown, so keen a sense of loyalty, so warm a love for their native
land.

In one of the most popular of the Russian stories--a Slavonic variant of
a world-wide tale--the hero sits for thirty years beside his father's
hearth, a helpless cripple, incapable of active life. But, at the end of
that time, he is not only cured by two mystic personages, disguised as
beggars, to whom he has given a draught of water, but he is endowed by
them with gigantic strength. So, when he has risen from his lowly couch,
he goes forth into the world, a noble

<span id="page_435">p. 435</span>

conqueror, overcoming infidels, and slaying monsters, and freeing
Christian prisoners, and in all ways succouring the needy and the
oppressed. In the career of Ivan Muromets--this Slavonic counterpart of
the Norse *Askepot*--the Russian people are said to have long
recognized, in accordance with a vague tradition, a symbol of their own
national life. For centuries, the story ran, they were doomed to remain
inactive and despised. But the time would come, it proceeded to say (if
reliance can be placed upon a somewhat improbable report), when they
would shake off their lethargy, and put on irresistible might, and enter
upon a warlike progress through the world, conquering and to conquer.

It may be that the prophecy is destined to receive a fulfilment, but one
of a peaceful nature. The common people of Russia may, figuratively be
said to have lain long among the ashes. For nearly ten times the thirty
years of the tale the great mass of the population was "fastened to the
soil," debarred by law from anything like continuous progress. Now, at
last, thanks to the unwearied efforts of what was once but a small body
of statesmen, thanks, above all, to the forethought and the courage of
the present Emperor, the land has been freed from the plague of slavery,
and the millions whom its deadening influence had benumbed have the
prospect opened out before them of a wider and a higher existence. They
may be destined, like the long crippled Ivan Muromets, to mighty
struggles terminating in decisive victories. But the struggles may

<span id="page_436">p. 436</span>

perhaps be of the nature of those by which the labourer and the artisan
work out their honest livelihood; the victories may prove of that
priceless order by which men, having overcome their own besetting sins,
emancipate themselves from a moral thraldom which is by no means less
degrading than a physical servitude.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_259"></span>[346:1](srp11.htm#fr_259) "Primitive Culture,"
I. 131-141.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[347:2](srp11.htm#fr_260) Afanasief, P. V. S.
I. 25.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[348:3](srp11.htm#fr_261) Afanasief, P. V. S.
I. 52. An interesting account of the riddle among savages is given by
Mr. E. B. Tylor, " Primitive Culture," I. pp. 81-85.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[350:4](srp11.htm#fr_262) See Prof. Max
Müller's " Lectures on the Science of Language," Second Series, p. 510.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[351:5](srp11.htm#fr_263) Sakharof, I. ii. 91.
For *Buyán*, see *infra*, [p. 374](#page_374).

<span id="fn_264"></span>[353:6](srp11.htm#fr_264) Afanasief, P. V. S.
I. 23.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[354:7](srp11.htm#fr_265) Afanasief, Skazki,
VIII. 435-459.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[355:8](srp11.htm#fr_266) Afanasief, *Skazki*,
II. No. 20.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[356:9](srp11.htm#fr_267) Afanasief, *Skazki*,
VIII. 147.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[357:1](srp11.htm#fr_268) Quoted by Prof.
Buslaef as a song heard in Moscow.--*Istor. Ocherki*, I. 33.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[358:2](srp11.htm#fr_269) *Deutsche
Mythologie*, 348, 1197.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[358:3](srp11.htm#fr_270) *Castren, Finnische
Mythologie*, p. 249.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[358:4](srp11.htm#fr_271) Afanasief, P. V. S.
I. 45.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[359:5](srp11.htm#fr_272) Afanasief, P. V. S.
I. 404.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[359:6](srp11.htm#fr_273) *Deutsche
Mythologie*, 1173.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[359:7](srp11.htm#fr_274) Afanasief, P. V. S.
I. 414, who refers to Prof. Kuhn's remarks, \[*Herabkunft des Feuers*,
p. 147\], as to how the power of prayer as a personification in the
Brahma<u>n</u>aspatis takes Indra's place, and the personified worship
destroys dragons, etc.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[360:8](srp11.htm#fr_275) Orest, Miller,
*Opuit*. I. 73.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[363:9](srp11.htm#fr_276) Zagovórs about bees
are very common. In the *Deutsche Mythologie*, 1190, J. Grimm says that
as he has met with no German *Bienensegen*, he will quote a Latin one.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[364:1](srp11.htm#fr_277) Afanasief, P. V. S.
I. 420, from whose pages the greater part of this account is condensed.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[364:2](srp11.htm#fr_278) *Deutsche
Mythologie*. pp. 1180-1183.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[365:3](srp11.htm#fr_279) Quoted by Afanasief
from Nadezhdin's *Report on the Skoptsui Heresy*, one of the many
valuable documents, it may be worth remarking, reprinted in London by
the late Alexander Hertsen at the "Free Russian Press."

<span id="fn_280"></span>[365:4](srp11.htm#fr_280) Afanasief, P. V. S.
I. 120.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[366:5](srp11.htm#fr_281) In these spells the
words "servant of God" are intended to be followed by the name of the
utterer, or of some other person.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[366:6](srp11.htm#fr_282) *Loc. cit.* p. 422.
With these Zagovór-terminations may be compared the ending of a Parsee
*Patet* from the Khordah-Avesta (Bleek's translation, p. 171)--"This
heavenly Patet (or confession-formulary) shall be a fast brazen wall
like as the earth is broad, the mountains high, the heavens strong, that
it may keep the gate of hell fast in bonds," *etc*.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[366:7](srp11.htm#fr_283) *Deutsche
Mythologie*, p. 1176.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[367:8](srp11.htm#fr_284) P. V. S. I. 426.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[368:9](srp11.htm#fr_285) Sakharof, I. ii. 27.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[369:1](srp11.htm#fr_286) Sakharof, I. ii. p.
34, No. 62.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[374:2](srp11.htm#fr_287) Sakharof, I. ii. 19.
Every one who is interested in the subject of spells should read
Professor Kuhn's excellent article on *Indische und germanische
Segenssprüche* in the 13th vol. of the *Zeitschrift für vergleichende
Sprachfarschung*.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[375:3](srp11.htm#fr_288) The word Buyán was
originally, says Afanasief, an epithet only of the fabled isle, but
afterwards it became looked upon as its name. Even now, instead of
*Buyán-ostrof* is written *buevoi-ostrof*. The root *bui* is synonymous
with *yary*, which includes ideas of what is burning, ardent,
passionate, fruitful, vernal, etc. The verb *buyat'* means to grow
luxuriantly. The adjective *buiny*, when applied to fields, is
equivalent to fruitful, etc.; when to the wind, it means stormy, etc.;
and when to a hero's head, it stands for bold, daring, etc. \[P. V. S.
II. 131\]. Some connexion between Buyán and the grave may be suspected
from the fact that *bui* and *buivishche* mean the fenced-in ground
around a church, in which the dead used to be buried, and *buevo* is a
name for a cemetery. \[P. V. S. II. 140.\]

<span id="fn_289"></span>[376:4](srp11.htm#fr_289) The epithet *goryuch*
means inflammable, easily set on fire.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[377:5](srp11.htm#fr_290) P. V. S. II. 148,
149. In a note to this passage (III. 800, 801) Afanasief remarks, "The
Russian alatuir and the Greek ἤλεκτρον are derived from a root which in
Sanskrit is found under the form *ark* ( = αλκ), to flash, to emit rays
(*a<u>r</u>k-as* = light, the sun, crystal, etc.: ἠλέκ-τωπ = the sun, i.
e. the Shining One, ἤλεκτρον = shining metal (a mixture of gold and
silver)"--and so = *Alatuir* in its form *latuir* or *lak-tuir*. Dahl in
his great dictionary looks on *yantar* as a Tartar form of *êlektron*.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[378:6](srp11.htm#fr_291) Of the numerous names
for the wizard and the witch, those of *Vyédun* and *Vyéd'ma*, springing
as they do from a root *vyed*, answering to the Sanskrit *vid*, mean
people who know, having exactly the same primary signification as two
other terms applied to them, *Znákhar'* and *Znákharka* (*znat'* = to
know). Of another like couple of synonyms, *Koldún* and *Koldún'ya*, the
root has not <span id="page_379">p. 379</span> yet been satisfactorily
made out. Professor Sreznievsky thinks that the *Koldún* was anciently
the sacrificer to the gods, for in Croatian *Kaldovati* means to offer a
sacrifice, and a *Kaldovants* is a priest.

Besides these names there are those of the *Charóvník* or *Charodyéets*
(fem. *Charóvnítsa*, etc.), the dealer in *chárui*, spells or magic; of
the *Kudésnik* (fem. *Kudésnitsa*), the worker of wonders, (chudesá =
kudesá); and finally of the *Volkhv* (fem. *Vlkhva*, *Volkhvitka*), a
term which was used by Nestor as a synonym of *Kudésnik*, and which
Professor Buslaef considers as having had the same meaning as
*zhrets*,--a heathen priest, deriving *Volkhv* from a root akin to the
Sanskrit *valg* =to shine, and *zhrets* from *zhryeti*, to burn, and
comparing *Vlkhva* with the like-meaning Scandinavian name of *völva*,
*völa*, *vala*.--See Afanasief, P. V. S. I. 405-409, III. 423-426; and
Buslaef, O Vliyanii Khristianstva, pp. 21-24.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[380:7](srp11.htm#fr_292) By the peasantry, of
course. Their superiors in social rank are said to have been wont in
former days to lay equal stress on the presence of a general. Satirists
declared that the confectioner who contracted for the wedding-breakfast
always asked his customers whether they supplied "their own generals."

<span id="fn_293"></span>[381:8](srp11.htm#fr_293) A Bohemian version of
this story is given by Grohmann, *Aberglauben ... aus Böhmen, etc*., p.
31.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[382:9](srp11.htm#fr_294) Afanasief, P. V. S.
III. 448.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[383:1](srp11.htm#fr_295) Afanasief, P. V. S.
III. 450.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[384:2](srp11.htm#fr_296) Afanasief, P. V. S.
III. 455.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[384:3](srp11.htm#fr_297) Afanasief, P. V. S.
III. 456.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[387:4](srp11.htm#fr_298) Afanasief, P. V. S.
III. 497.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[388:5](srp11.htm#fr_299) Afanasief, P. V. S.
III. 434.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[389:6](srp11.htm#fr_300) Afanasief, P. V. S.
III. 437.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[390:7](srp11.htm#fr_301) A similar belief is
said to be still prevalent in England.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[392:8](srp11.htm#fr_302) Afanasief, P. V. S.
III. 516.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[394:9](srp11.htm#fr_303) Sakharof, I. iii.
202.--See also *supra*, [p. 23](srp04.htm#page_23).

<span id="fn_304"></span>[397:1](srp11.htm#fr_304) Orest Miller,
*Opuit*, I. 10.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[398:2](srp11.htm#fr_305) See *supra*, [p.
251](srp08.htm#page_251).

<span id="fn_306"></span>[399:3](srp11.htm#fr_306) Tereshchenko, VI. 41.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[400:4](srp11.htm#fr_307) *Chur*--here
translated "meddle not is now an exclamation, or a word meaning a border
or boundary, but was once the name of a friendly deity resembling the
Roman Terminus.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[400:5](srp11.htm#fr_308) *Ethnograf. Sbornik*,
VI. Mezhof's article, pp. 63-65.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[401:6](srp11.htm#fr_309) Tereshchenko, VI. 42.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[402:7](srp11.htm#fr_310) Afanasief, P. V. S
III. 114-116. A number of similar superstitions are given in the
*Deutsche Mythologie*, art. *Pest*, pp. 1133-1141.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[403:8](srp11.htm#fr_311) This is Afanasief's
explanation (P. V. S. III. 527). Dahl suggests *volk* and *kúdla*, the
latter word signifying something shaggy, <span id="page_404">p.
404</span> a hide, etc. The Great-Russian *volkodlák* becomes, says
Afanasief, in Little-Russian *vovkulak*, in Bohemian *wlkodlak*, in
Servian *vukodlak* in Dalmatian *vakudluk*, in Bulgarian *vrkodlak*, in
Lett *wilkats*.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[404:9](srp11.htm#fr_312) A long list of
references is given by Mr. Tylor in his "Primitive Culture," I. 279-284.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[405:1](srp11.htm#fr_313) There is a Bohemian
tradition, however, that the devil invented mice in order to destroy
"God's corn," whereupon God created the cat.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[406:2](srp11.htm#fr_314) Sakharof, I. ii. 28.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[406:3](srp11.htm#fr_315) *Istor. Ocherki*, I.
36.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[408:4](srp11.htm#fr_316) Afanasief, P. V. S.
III. 549-553.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[409:5](srp11.htm#fr_317) Afanasief, P. V. S.
III. 552.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[412:6](srp11.htm#fr_318) Afanasief, P. V. S.
III. 558.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[412:7](srp11.htm#fr_319) Afanasief, P. V. S.
in. 559-568.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[412:8](srp11.htm#fr_320) Afanasief, P. V. S.
III. 565.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[413:9](srp11.htm#fr_321) Quoted by Afanasief,
P. V. S. III. 576.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[414:1](srp11.htm#fr_322) Afanasief, P. V. S.
III. 571.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[414:2](srp11.htm#fr_323) *Deutsche
Mythologie*, 1035.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[415:3](srp11.htm#fr_324) Afanasief, P. V. S.
III. 584.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[417:4](srp11.htm#fr_325) Afanasief, P. V. S.
483.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[417:5](srp11.htm#fr_326) Orest Miller,
*Opuit*, etc. I. 67-69.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[419:6](srp11.htm#fr_327) Afanasief, P. V. S.
III. 596-599.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[423:7](srp11.htm#fr_328) Quoted from
Maksimof's "Year in Siberia," by Afanasief, P. V. S. III. 66.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[424:8](srp11.htm#fr_329) Afanasief, P. V. S.
III. 637.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[426:9](srp11.htm#fr_330) Afanasief, P. V. S.
III. 572-574.

<span id="fn_331"></span>[427:1](srp11.htm#fr_331) " Primitive Culture,"
I. 125.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[429:2](srp11.htm#fr_332) The word occurs in
the *Kormchaya Kniga*--in a copy dated A.D. 1282--and in the
*Domostroi*.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[430:3](srp11.htm#fr_333) Afanasief, P. V. S.
III. 466-469.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[431:4](srp11.htm#fr_334) P. V. S. II. 488.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[432:5](srp11.htm#fr_335) Afanasief, P. V. S.
III. 556.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[432:6](srp11.htm#fr_336) Afanasief, P. V. S.
III. 564.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[433:7](srp11.htm#fr_337) Tree and Serpent
Worship, p 73.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix A: Bibliography](srp12)
