[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wott01)  [Next](wott03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JPJQ/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Wisdom of the Talmud*, by Ben Zion Bokser, \[1951\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

### Introduction

<span class="smallcaps">The literature</span> of the Talmud represents
approximately a thousand years of Jewish thought. Its foundations were
laid by the work of Ezra during the middle of the fourth century B.C.E.,
in the community of the returned exiles from Babylonia, who inaugurated
the second Jewish commonwealth in Palestine. Its period of greatest
productivity came in the centuries that followed the disastrous Jewish
war against Rome in 70 C.E. The Talmud is not an independent literature
however. It proceeds instead as a supplement to the Bible. The Bible
remained the fundamental source of belief and practice in Judaism, but
the Talmud was its authoritative exposition and implementation.

The position of the Talmud in Jewish life has been paramount. It was
studied zealously by young and old alike, who found in it the
authoritative word concerning the true meaning of Scripture. The lighter
side of the Talmud, its parables, its ethical aphorisms, its legendary
tales, delighted the common people. The more serious side, the subtle
discussions of law, were a welcome outlet for the intellectual interests
of the learned.

The Talmud itself became a subject for new commentaries and
super-commentaries. Its study commenced in the elementary grades of the
Jewish school, and it continued, in ever more subtle techniques of
analysis, into the highest grades of the rabbinical academies. The love
for the Talmud among the Jewish masses finally created an institution of
popular adult education—the voluntary study group that met on Sabbath
and holiday afternoons, and weekday evenings, to enable the busy layman
to continue his interest in Talmudic literature.

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

The most crucial element in the discussions of the Talmud is centered in
law. For law figured prominently in the Bible, and the Talmud mirrors
faithfully the text on which it is based. But the Talmud is not a code.
It records varying opinions on law as on life, without always offering
decisions as to which was to be deemed authoritative for posterity. The
legal discussions of the Talmud are, however, an invaluable source book
on Jewish law, for they preserve all the varying trends in the
interpretation of Biblical legislation. They likewise preserve a record
of new developments in the law by which the Jewish community ordered its
life.

The codification of Jewish law was to be a labor of later generations.
Utilizing Talmudic discussions as their authority, a group of
distinguished scholars, most of them active during the Middle Ages,
endeavored to codify the rabbinic law. The most widely used of these
works is the Shulhan Aruk by Joseph Karo (1488–1575). This code above
all gained popular acceptance, especially in Central and Eastern Europe.
But such distinguished teachers of Judaism as R. Moses Iserles, Solomon
Luria, Mordecai Jaffe, Samuel Edels and Yom Tob Lippman Heller, did not
hesitate to dispute the authority of the Shulhan Aruk. Even as late as
the eighteenth century Rabbi Elijah ben Solomon, the Gaon of Wilno,
though he had written a valuable commentary on the Shulhan Aruk, did not
hesitate on occasion to ignore it and to decide cases on the basis of an
original weighing of precedents and circumstances, in the light of the
original discussions in the Talmud.

The rise of the Talmud to its dominant role in Jewish life was not
without challenge. Its authority was rejected by a group of Babylonian
Jews, led by a certain Anan ben David, in the middle of the eighth
century. They organized a sect known as the Karaites (from Kara, the
study of Scripture), which sought to center Judaism on the sole
authority of the Bible. Fierce polemics developed between the Karaites
and the Rabbinites, as the defenders of Talmudic authority were

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

called. The Karaites have persisted as a small sect, and several
thousand of them still exist in scattered communities in various parts
of the world. A Karaite settlement of some five hundred souls has
recently been started in the State of Israel, all of them immigrants
from Cairo, Egypt. They have been included in Israel's current effort to
"ingather the exiles", and they have been recognized as an independent
community, free to order life in accordance with its own distinctive
interpretations of Judaism.

The non-Jewish world has given the Talmud a mixed reaction. In the
Middle Ages, when religious disputations were popular, the Talmud became
a frequent subject of controversy. The Talmud was subjected to a variety
of criticisms. Because the Talmud had permitted itself to adapt old
institutions that they might be more relevant to the needs of a later
age, it was charged with the falsification of the Bible. Because the
Talmud often speaks in parables, it was disparaged as absurd, as
abounding in fairy tales. Because the Talmud reflects a healthy respect
for bodily life and speaks with frankness about sex, contrary to the
asceticism of the Middle Ages, it was denounced as sensuous and
unspiritual.

Perhaps the most serious charge against the Talmud was that it is
irreverent toward the beliefs and practices of the Church. The Talmud
arose during the epoch when Christianity began its secession from
Judaism, and when the Christians were looked upon as dissident Jews.
Against that background there must have been extensive controversy
between the adherents of traditional Judaism and the advocates of the
new doctrine. The Talmud generally avoids polemics; but some echoes of
that controversy survived in the Talmud, principally a prayer against
sectarianism, the prayer *Velamalshinim*, as it is known in the present
Jewish liturgy. This now became a cause of serious charges against
Judaism, above all against its revered classic, the Talmud.

The animosity toward the Talmud was often instigated by renegades from
Judaism who exhibited the convert's customary

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

zeal by a vilification of the faith they had deserted. The apostate
Nicholas Donin laid before Pope Gregory IX the charge that the Talmud
was a pernicious and blasphemous work. The Pope responded with an order
to seize all copies of the Talmud for an inquiry into their content. In
consequence of this agitation twenty-four cartloads of Hebrew books and
manuscripts were publicly burned in Paris on June 17, 1242. In the
sixteenth century there were six burnings of Talmudic books, in 1553,
1555, 1559, 1566, 1592 and 1599. A Christian censorship of Hebrew books
was instituted in 1562. Most editions of the Talmud now extant still
carry the censor's assurance that these volumes are free of "offensive"
material.

There were voices in the Jewish community that spoke out in defense of
the Talmud. Some defended the particular passages of the Talmud which
had been attacked. Others addressed themselves to the larger issue
involved—they spoke out boldly for religious freedom. One of the most
courageous pleas for freedom came from Rabbi Judah Loew of Prague
(1512–1609). After analyzing the usual charges against the Talmud in
detail and refuting them, he adds: "One ought not reject the words of an
opponent. It is preferable to seek them out and study them. Thus shall a
person arrive at the … full truth. Such words should not be suppressed.
For every man of valor who wants to wrestle with another and to show his
strength is eager that his opponent shall have every opportunity to
demonstrate his real powers. But what strength does he show when he
forbids his opponent to defend himself and to fight against him?
Therefore it is wrong to suppress anyone who wants to speak against
religion and to say to him: 'Do not speak thus'. The very converse is
true. This itself weakens religion. Suppose the Talmudists did speak
against Christian doctrine, expressing publicly what was in their
hearts. Is this an evil thing? Not at all. It is possible to reply to
them … The conclusion of the matter is

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

that it would be most unworthy to suppress books in order to silence
teachers …"<span id="an_r_00_1"></span>[1](wott11.htm#an_n_00_1)

The rise of modern anti-Semitism gave fresh impetus to the attacks
against the Talmud. The father of the modern calumnies upon the Talmud
was the German polemicist, John Andreas Eisenmenger (1654–1704).
Eisenmenger offered to suppress his work, *Entdecktes Judentum* (Jewry
Unmasked), for a consideration of 30,000 florins, but the Jews refused
to be blackmailed into paying this sum. The book has been described as
"a collection of scandals" by the *Allgemeine Deutsche Bibliographie*,
an official encyclopaedia of German bibliography published by the German
Imperial Academy of Science in 1876. "Some passages," the appraisal
continues, "are misinterpreted; some distorted; others are insinuations
based on one-sided inferences."<span
id="an_r_00_2"></span>[2](wott11.htm#an_n_00_2)

The most spectacular campaign against the Talmud was led by August
Rohling (1839–1931), a professor of Hebrew Antiquities at the University
of Prague. His *Der Talmudjude* (The Talmud Jew) went through 17
editions, reaching a circulation of 200,000 copies in Austria alone.
Rohling repeatedly prefaced his slanderous material with the offer of
1,000 Taler "if Judah managed to get a verdict from the German
Association of Orientalists that the quotations were fictitious and
untrue." The challenge was taken up by Joseph S. Bloch, Rabbi at
Florisdorf and later a member of the Austrian Parliament, who offered
3,000 Taler if Rohling could prove that he was able to read a single
page of the Talmud chosen at random by Rohling himself. Accusing Rohling
of ignorance and perjury, Bloch dared him to bring a libel suit. Because
of his professional standing, Rohling could not evade the issue and
finally charged Bloch with libel before a Vienna magistrate.

The court was anxious to make a thorough study of the subject and
requested the Rector of the University of Vienna, Hofrat Zscholk, and
the German Association of Orientalists, to appoint two experts. It
conceded to Rohling's request that

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

both these experts be "full-blooded" Christians. Professor Theodor
Noeldeke of the University of Strassburg and Professor August Wuensche
of Dresden, were selected. From time to time additional experts were
called in. After two and a half years, the report was ready. The trial
was to start November 18, 1885, but before the hearings began, Rohling,
afraid of an open exposure, withdrew all his charges. The court
sentenced him to pay the cost of the trial and, disgraced, he was
retired from his university post. The entire story of this dramatic
encounter is told by Rabbi Bloch in his *Israel and the Nations*.

Another such Talmud "authority" was Aaron Briman, alias Dr. Justus. He
was born a Jew and had aspirations for a career as a Jewish scholar. But
when he lost face with the Jewish community for deserting his wife and
children, he became a Protestant. Subsequently, he became a Catholic and
then a Protestant again, and finally tried to return to Judaism. Toward
the end of his career he once again joined the Catholic Church. His
principal work, published anonymously, was *Der Judenspiegel* (The
Mirror of the Jew), a compilation of a hundred laws taken from the
Shulhan Aruk and purporting to show the Jewish animosity toward
Christians. In a book about the Cabbala, which Briman subsequently wrote
under his true name, he said that the whole anti-Semitic literature,
including the *Judenspiegel* (his own work!) had been written by stupid
and ignorant men. In 1885 he was sentenced by a Vienna court to a long
term in prison and expulsion from Austria for forgery of documents.
Professor Franz Delitzsch, the famous Protestant theologian, pronounced
the *Judenspiegel* "a concoction of damnable lies". Following his
expulsion Briman took up medical studies in Paris. These same forgeries
of Justus-Briman were later published by another adventurer, Jacob
Ecker, who offered them as his own work under the title *The Hundred
Laws of the Jewish Catechism*.

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

Czarist Russia made its contribution to this gallery of literary
swindlers in the person of the notorious Justin Pranaitis, a Catholic
clergyman. His monograph, *The Christian in the Jewish Talmud*, was
based on the works of Eisenmenger and Rohling. To create the impression
of authenticity he cites many passages in the original Hebrew and
Aramaic, but they are all lifted from Eisenmenger, errors and misprints
included. By identifying as references to Christians and Christianity
such epithets in the Talmud as *am ha-aretz* (literally, a peasant, but
more generally, an illiterate person), *akum* (pagan or idol
worshipper), *apikoros* (epicurean but applied to heretics generally)
and *kuthim* (the Samaritans), he "proves" widespread prejudice on the
part of the Talmud toward Christianity.

In spite of his office as a Catholic clergyman, Pranaitis became
involved in the course of a checkered career in a series of financial
scandals. A picture in a frame which he wanted gilded at the workshop of
a certain Avanzo in Petersburg was accidentally damaged; whereupon he
tried to extort 3,000 rubles from the owner of the shop on the alleged
ground that the picture had been painted by the 17th century artist,
Murillo, and that it was part of the collection of Cardinal Gintovt.
Both allegations were later proved false. On another occasion he was
charged by the board of a local Catholic welfare society in his home
parish at Tashkent with misappropriating the sum of 1,500 rubles.

It was in 1912 during the trial of Beiliss on the ritual murder libel
that Pranaitis drew world notoriety upon himself by offering his
services as an expert for the prosecution. When confronted by the bulls
of Popes Innocent IV and Clement XIV which denounced ritual murder
charges against Jews as libels and slander and which called upon
Christians to desist from the staging of ritual murder trials, Pranaitis
denied the genuineness of the documents. Cardinal Merry del Val, the
Papal Secretary of State, examined the originals at the Vatican and
certified that they were genuine. Beiliss

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

was, of course, acquitted, but the prosecution remunerated the star
"expert" with 500 rubles.

Pranaitis died on January 29, 1917. It took more than a month for the
Czarist government to issue the permit for the removal of his body from
Petersburg to Tashkent. Objections had to be overcome of local officials
in Tashkent who were anxious to avoid a public demonstration at his
funeral and urged an inconspicuous burial in Petersburg.<span
id="an_r_00_3"></span>[3](wott11.htm#an_n_00_3)

Nazi Germany produced a flood of new material vilifying the Talmud. With
the pretense of scholarly objectivity which characterized the technique
of all Hitler's professors, they produced impressive volumes, but all
serving the cause of their master's big lie. Walter Forstat, one of the
Nazi "experts" on the Talmud, unblushingly admits in the introduction to
his *Die Grundlagen des Talmud* (The Basic Principles of the Talmud,
Breslau, 1935), that in writing his book he had really forged a
political weapon. "In issuing this work," he writes, "our purpose is
purely political … As a political tract it is necessarily one-sided. It
therefore deals with Talmudic law only where it may prove helpful in
illuminating the attitude of Germany to Jewry."

These diatribes against Talmudic literature produced a reaction, and
some of the noblest works in appreciation of the Talmud were written by
non-Jews. Johann von Reuchlin and his circle of Christian Hebraists
carried on a staunch campaign in the sixteenth century in defense of
Hebrew books. The libels of August Rohling were answered by the famous
Protestant theologian, Franz Delitzsch, in his work *Was D. Aug. Rohling
beschworen hat and beschwoeren will* (What D. Aug. Rohling Has Sworn to
and Is Prepared to Swear to, Leipzig, 1883). Among the more recent
statements in vindication of the Talmud is the very lucid study by Rev.
A. H. Dirksen, "The Talmud and Anti-Semitism", in the January 1939 issue
of the *Ecclesiastical Review*, a publication of the Catholic University
of America, and the pamphlet, *A Fact About the Jews*, written by the
famous Catholic

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

scholar, Joseph N. Moody, and distributed by the Paulist Fathers. A more
elaborate study of the Talmud was written by the Polish Catholic
scholar, Thadeus Zaderecki. He began his researches in the Talmud under
the inspiration of anti-Semitic libels, but what he learned made him
into an admirer of this great literature. His work *The Talmud in the
Crucible of the Centuries* is a brilliant appreciation of the moral
values of Talmudic literature and a refutation of the libels against it,
especially those of Rohling and Pranaitis.<span
id="an_r_00_4"></span>[4](wott11.htm#an_n_00_4)

Talmudic literature went through a long and varied development. The
earliest layer of the Talmud is the *Mishnah*, a product of Palestinian
scholarship and written in a clear, lucid Hebrew. The later expository
supplement, known as the Gemara, which elucidates the Mishnahic text,
was developed during the third, fourth and fifth centuries, when the
center of Jewish population was shifting from Palestine to Babylonia.
Paralleling the Palestinian *Gemara* there also arose a Babylonian
*Gemara*, produced by the newer academies of Babylonia. Both *Gemaras*
were written in the Aramaic vernaculars then current in Babylonia and
Palestine.

The Talmud has survived in both traditions, the Babylonian and the
Palestinian. In their essential procedures and in their underlying
doctrines the two Talmuds are similar. But there are some significant
differences between them, reflecting in many instances the differing
conditions under which the two communities carried on their work. Thus
the Palestinians felt themselves in their own country and they regarded
the Roman authorities as exercising their power without moral sanction.
They therefore ruled the publicans who, as tax collectors, had
collaborated with the enemy, as reprobates, and they refused to extend
any credence to their testimony in a court of law. The Babylonians, on
the other hand, demanded scrupulous adherence to the law of the land,
and the tax collector was for them only a civil servant performing his
duty, who was as honorable as any other man.

It was in its Babylonian version that the Talmud became

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

so influential a force in Jewish life. The Palestinian Talmud. on the
other hand, made but a slight impression on the Jewish world. The
circumstances that led to a preference for the Babylonian Talmud have
been variously defined. The Babylonian academies functioned under
conditions of greater stability and peace and the discussions which
emanated from them reveal a greater measure of lucidity and order. What
was perhaps more decisive, however, was the fact that the Babylonian
Jewish community had overshadowed the Jewish community of Palestine as a
center of culture and world influence. As Dr. Louis Ginzberg puts it:
"The Babylonians were more successful in establishing the authority of
their Talmud in European countries. This success was largely due to the
fact that Babylonia, under the rule of the Abbasids, became the center
of Arabic culture, and consequently of Jewish culture, since the
majority of Jews then lived in Islamic countries."<span
id="an_r_00_5"></span>[5](wott11.htm#an_n_00_5)

There is a splendid English translation of the Mishnah, published in
1933, by Reverend Herbert Danby, Canon of Christ Church and Regius
Professor of Hebrew at the University of Oxford, England. There is a
German translation of the Babylonian Talmud by Lazarus Goldschmidt. The
Palestinian Talmud is available in a French translation by M. Schwab.
The Soncino Press in London has recently published a new translation of
the Babylonian Talmud in English under the very competent editorship of
Dr. I. Epstein.

Among the well-known studies of Talmudic literature in English is the
*Introduction to the Talmud and Midrash* by Hermann Strack, prominent
Protestant theologian and professor at the University of Berlin, and
*Talmud and Apocrypha* by the well-known British scholar, the Reverend
I. Travers Herford, and also the short but popularly written essay by
Arsene Darmesteter, *The Talmud*. An accurate and exhaustive survey of
the world outlook of Talmudic Judaism is available in the monumental
work, *Judaism in the First Centuries of the Christian Era*, by the
eminent Protestant

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

scholar and Professor of Religion at Harvard University, the late George
Foot Moore. A brief digest of the contents of the Talmud, with copious
quotations, is available in A. Cohen's *Everyman's Talmud*. A short
history of Talmudic times is available in the essay by Judah Goldin,
*The Period of the Talmud*, in Volume I of *The Jews*, edited by Dr.
Louis Finkelstein.

A splendid study of the Palestinian Talmud is offered us in Dr. Louis
Ginzberg's recent work, *Pirushim ve-Hidushim b’Yirushalmi* (A
Commentary on the Palestinian Talmud, N. Y. 1941). Its three volumes
cover the first four chapters of the tractate Berakot, but its extended
notes, and an introductory essay in Hebrew and English, offer invaluable
insight into the general nature of the Palestinian Talmud and its
relationship to the parallel literature which emanated from the
Babylonian academies.

The present work attempts to clarify the relationship between the Bible
and the Talmud and to trace the forces that continued to inspire the
growth of the new literature and that gave it its remarkable popularity
in the history of Judaism. It also endeavors to portray the culture of
the Talmud through the citation of representative passages. The
literature of the Talmud is vast, and the rabbis who composed it often
differed in their thoughts. Our characterization of Talmudic culture
cannot therefore be exhaustive, but it is hoped that the spirit of the
larger work is nevertheless conveyed through these citations.

The material in this work is addressed to the general reader and not
primarily to the scholar. The footnotes have therefore been reduced to a
minimum. Crucial discussions are documented, but no attempt was made to
subject the sources to textual criticism. Historical material which
appears in standard works on the subject is drawn on freely, without the
citation of the specific sources.

I am grateful to Dr. Louis Finkelstein, President of the Jewish
Theological Seminary of America, who has been a

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

constant source of inspiration and encouragement in my studies. Dr.
Louis Ginzberg, with whom I studied the Talmud at the Seminary, remained
a friend and guide throughout the years, and I am grateful to him for
invaluable help. I am indebted also to Rabbis Max Arzt, Michael Higger,
Gershon Cohen and a number of other friends who were helpful in the
solution of many individual problems in this study. I am also thankful
to Mesdames Estelle Horowitt, Sara Jerome, and Bessie Katzman for typing
the manuscript, and to Mr. Jesse Fuchs for help in proofreading. Finally
I express my indebtedness to my wife for her suggestions, advice and
criticism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Talmud as Literature](wott03)
