[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wott02)  [Next](wott04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JPJQ/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Wisdom of the Talmud*, by Ben Zion Bokser, \[1951\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

### The Talmud as Literature

<span class="smallcaps">In the library</span> of the world's literary
classics, a place of special distinction belongs to the approximately
forty volumes which are designated collectively by the name "Talmud".
Formidable in size, written in a difficult Aramaic, elusive in many of
its discussions, the Talmud has long been an enigma to many. Can the
average reader get some idea of what this vast literature is all about,
of the men who produced it, of the ideas which inspired them? Can we
open a window to permit the modern reader to behold the world of the
Talmud, its culture, its way of life?

The authors of the Talmud did not look upon their teaching as an
esoteric doctrine, suited only for the few. They sought to reach all
men. They sought to reach the common people no less than the
professional scholars. The traditional system of Jewish education began
the study of the Talmud in the middle grades of the elementary school,
and continued it, on ever deeper levels of analysis, to the academies of
highest learning. And one of the objectives of that educational system
was to cultivate in the student a taste for the Talmud that was to make
of its study his avocation throughout life. Its very name—Talmud derives
from the Hebrew *lomed* which means study—suggests that it was meant to
be a rich and fruitful field of knowledge and research. The prize of the
knowledge of the Talmud can be found, but it requires toil; it requires
disciplined study. Those who are ready to pursue it with the necessary
diligence will find awaiting them a treasury of rare wisdom to reward
their labors.

The Talmud came into being as a supplement to Biblical Judaism. It was
intended to bridge the gap between the Bible and life. It was a new
creation of the Jewish people

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

in response to the facts of a changing world that could no longer be
guided by the simple word as enunciated in the Biblical text.

#### THE BIBLE REQUIRES SUPPLEMENTATION

The Bible continues to command the reverent loyalty of Jews, and of
countless others who have learnt to look upon it as the embodiment of
their basic religious beliefs and moral ideals. But the very effort to
make Biblical religion the basis of human living exposes its
insufficiency—at least for those who live in another milieu than the one
in which the Bible took form.

The Biblical text often needs clarification. The Bible, for instance,
allows the termination of marriage through divorce, without, however,
defining the grounds for divorce, the procedure by which it was carried
out, or the fate that was to befall the children of the dissolved
family. The Bible similarly prohibits work on the seventh day of the
week, but it does not define what is meant by work. Are we to infer that
writing a letter, marketing or preparing food is to be construed as
work? Must the country's armed services go off duty on the Sabbath? Was
the priest to halt his Temple duties, and must the rabbi suspend
teaching and preaching? Was healing the sick work, and must it be
discontinued on the Sabbath? The answers to these questions must have
been common knowledge at the time Biblical law was formulated, but in
the course of the centuries that body of unrecorded knowledge was
forgotten, and those provisions of the Bible were, therefore, in need of
clarification.

The Bible, moreover, could not have anticipated the specific solutions
to the many varied problems created by the altered circumstances of a
changing Jewish society. The Bible forbids idolatry as a major sin. When
the Jews were drawn into the Roman Empire, they were confronted with the
civic duty enforced among all Roman subjects of worshipping

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

the emperor. Were they to yield, or incur the consequences of
disobedience to Rome? The ritual for initiating a proselyte into Judaism
included the offering of a sacrifice at the Temple of Jerusalem, but how
was that to be carried out after 70 C.E. when the Temple was destroyed?
That was no academic problem, for in the first century, large numbers of
pagans continued to join the synagogue throughout the Roman world.
Indeed, how was Jewish religious life generally to be conducted after
the fall of the Temple, when so much of traditional Jewish piety had
centered in the sacrificial cult and the various ceremonies surrounding
it?

The changes in Jewish society which necessitated the supplementation of
the Bible were not only political; they were also cultural and social.
The law that decreed "an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth" (Ex.
21:23), as a principle in the punishment of crime, represented justice
at the time of its enactment, but it seemed morally reprehensible to
sensitive men of a later generation. The prohibition of lending money on
interest implies a primitive agricultural economy, where money is
generally borrowed for the purchase of necessary tools or consumer
goods. It is however, incompatible with the complex requirements of a
commercio-industrial economy which depends on investments and banking.
Similarly, reflecting the rural society to which it originally addressed
itself, the Bible has no explicit provision for a legal instrument
validating a commercial transaction. In the absence of a specifically
formulated law, local custom or *minhag*, as it was called, often
developed to take its place. It is clear, however, that the law could
not abdicate to popular improvisation. If the law was to discipline
life, it had to be enriched and supplemented with new provisions, to
keep pace with a changing world.

Biblical narratives, too, present various theological, historical and
linguistic problems that had to be coped with, if people were to master
Biblical study, and continue to find in Scripture a source for guidance
and authority in their

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

religious life. How, for example, was the Biblical appraisal of the
world as "very good" (Genesis 1:31), to be reconciled with the
experiences of evil and death, and the repeated disasters to men
championing good causes? With whom did God consult when He was quoted as
saying, "Let us make man in our image" (Genesis 1:26)? Does that mean
that there are several divine powers, or that God is corporeal and
endowed with a concrete image? If Moses was responsible for the writing
of the Biblical text, how explain the last eight verses of Deuteronomy,
which describe his death and extol the quality of his leadership?

The Bible, finally, had not exhausted the creative genius of the Jewish
people. The same creative powers which produced those literary
masterpieces of the Bible remained alive in the Jewish community and
continued to stir men to see new visions and to incarnate them in new
creations of culture.

The Bible never became obsolete. Elements of abiding truth shine through
all its pronouncements, even when they bear upon them some of the
limitations of the people who labored to give the Bible literary form,
and of the age in which it arose. But the Bible needed a commentary to
close the gap formed by the passing of generations. People who have
revered the Bible as the revealed will of God, and have sought to live
by its mandate, have therefore generally felt the need of writing
commentaries on it. The most imposing of these commentaries is the vast
literature of the Talmud.

The characterization of the Talmud as a commentary on the Bible
describes the circumstances of its origin, as well as its essential
quality. But we must understand the term "commentary" in its broadest
sense. It is more than a new exposition of an old document. It is also
an original new creation, a means by which the voices of a new age speak
out in their discoveries of new truth. That they are willing to speak
through a commentary to an older work dramatizes their sense of unbroken
continuity with their own past and their acceptance of the Bible as the
all-sufficient work for

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

human guidance in the world. The Talmud is thus of value both as
literature of Biblical clarification, and as the depository of the newer
cultural achievements within the Jewish people during the years in which
it took form.

The Talmud is primarily concerned with law, because the Jews looked upon
the legislation in the Bible as its most important element. But the
Talmud is also rich in many copious discussions in the field of
religion, ethics, social institutions, history, folk-lore and science.
Thus we define the Talmud as an encyclopedia of Jewish culture; in form,
a supplement to the Bible, and in its contents, a summation of a
thousand years of intellectual, religious and social achievements of the
Jewish people.

#### THE SANCTIONS FOR BIBLICAL SUPPLEMENTATION

The supplementation of the Bible, in its rich flowering in the
literature of the Talmud, was a daring process. It was conceived as a
means of fulfilling the law, but it often proceeded in bold new
channels. It was in a sense a confession that God's "word" is in some
sense not final, and that man must step in to adapt it to the world.
Adaptation is akin to change. Dare man "adapt" the word of God? Is it
not presumptuous for man to supplement a work through which the Lord
hath spoken? The Bible itself seems explicitly to warn against it.
Deuteronomy 4:2 speaks out against any tampering with the word of God:
"Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, nor shall ye take
aught from it."

The seeming presumption in supplementing the word of God was destined to
be an issue on which conservative and progressive schools of thought
debated in Judaism. But the spokesmen for supplementation found ample
justification for their labor in the hallowed texts of the Bible itself.
For the Bible apparently sensed the need of supplementation, and even
projected an institution to accomplish it.

An elaborate system of higher and lower courts was established

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

by Moses, while the Israelites were still in the desert, upon the
recommendation of his father-in-law, Jethro; and a supreme court was
projected as well, to resolve all legal problems which the lower courts
could not pass upon. As Deut. 17:8–12 phrases it: "If there arise a
matter too hard for thee in judgment … then shalt thou arise and come
unto the priests and the Levites, and unto the judge that shall be in
those days; and thou shalt inquire and they shall declare unto thee the
sentence of judgment. According to the law which they shall teach thee …
thou shalt do …" Every branch of doctrine and law, in other words,
seemed to be included in the sphere of authority granted to judicial
bodies for clarification and adjustment.

The teachers who supplemented the Bible did not limit themselves to
interpretations. At times they promulgated new enactments. But even here
they did not inaugurate a revolutionary movement in Judaism. A careful
analysis of the historical books of the Bible indicated that Jewish
authorities in the past had, under certain circumstances, suspended the
procedures of Biblical law. Thus the Bible (Deut. 17:6) requires two
witnesses to [establish](errata.htm#1.md) the fact of culpable crime; no
one was to be found guilty of crime on the basis of his own confession,
without corroborating evidence. But Joshua (Joshua 7:24, 25) executed a
soldier by the name of Achan when he confessed violating the orders of
the commanding general not to loot the city of Jericho after its capture
by the Jews. What can explain the conduct of Joshua, except that it was
a time of war and martial law superseded the normal judicial procedure?
The prophet Elijah, too, seems to have allowed himself to modify
traditional law. He offered sacrifices on Mt. Carmel (I Kings 18), when,
according to Biblical legislation, all sacrifices were confined to the
central sanctuary in Jerusalem. Apparently the opportunity of
discrediting the priesthood of Baal seemed to him sufficient reason to
modify the traditional procedure of worship. And did not King Solomon
suspend the fast on a Day of Atonement

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

in order to hold the dedication of the Temple which he had built in
Jerusalem?<span id="an_r_01_1"></span>[1](wott11.htm#an_n_01_1.md)

It is thus clear that in an emergency traditional law could be suspended
for specified or unspecified periods of time. What was justified in the
past constituted precedent for the future—if not to abrogate the law, at
least to suspend it pending periods of emergency. Even Deut. 4:2, "Ye
shall not add unto the word which I command you, nor shall ye take aught
from it", was transmuted, through interpretation, into a sanction for
the adjustment of tradition. *The word which I command* you was not
taken as a reference to the Bible, but to the final formulation of
tradition by later authorities. Contemporary authorities in every age,
acting in their best judgment, whether to reaffirm or to revise
traditional law, represent the ultimate source of guidance in life; and
the general public was not to "add" or "take aught" from their
decisions.

All these considerations crystallized into the realization that the
ultimate authority to guide life cannot be a written text, but the
living interpreters of those texts, the custodians of religious
leadership in every generation. In the words of the famous Talmudist
Rabbi Jannai: "If the Torah had been given in fixed and immutable
formulations, it could not have endured. Thus, Moses pleaded with the
Lord, 'Master of the Universe, reveal unto me the final truth in each
problem of doctrine and law.' To which the Lord replied, 'There are no
pre-existent final truths in doctrine or law; the truth is the
considered judgment of the majority of authoritative interpreters in
every generation.' …"<span
id="an_r_01_2"></span>[2](wott11.htm#an_n_01_2.md)

The legal powers of a generation's duly authorized interpreters of
tradition were looked upon as a function of their office, regardless of
their individual merits in piety or scholarship. As a well-known
Talmudic homily expounded it: "When the most insignificant person is
appointed leader over the community, he is to be treated as the most
eminent of persons. It is said, 'Thou shalt come unto the priests, the

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Levites, and unto
the judge that shall be in those days' (Deut. 17:9). Could it possibly
enter your mind that a person would go to a judge who was not in his
days! The meaning is that you are to be guided by a contemporary
authority, whoever he be. As Scripture puts it (Eccles. 7:10), 'Say not,
How was it that the former days were better than these.'"<span
id="an_r_01_3"></span>[3](wott11.htm#an_n_01_3.md)

There is a beautiful rabbinic parable which dramatizes man's complete
sovereignty in the development of what we may call the supplementary
Torah. On one occasion a fierce debate ensued between Rabbi Eliezer and
his colleagues on a complicated problem of law. Rabbi Eliezer continued
to cite a variety of arguments but his colleagues remained unconvinced.
Finally he invoked divine intervention to corroborate his opinion. "'If
the law is in accordance with my view,' he exclaimed, 'may this carob
tree offer testimony' (by a divine miracle). The carob tree moved a
hundred (or, as others related, 400) cubits from its place. They replied
to him: 'No proof can be cited from a carob tree.' Thereupon he
exclaimed, 'If the law is in accordance with my views, may this stream
of water offer testimony.' The stream moved backward from its normal
course. They replied to him: 'No proof can be cited from
water-channels.' Then he exclaimed, 'If the law is in accordance with my
views, may the walls of this Academy offer testimony.' The walls of the
Academy began caving in and were already on the point of collapsing when
Rabbi Joshua rebuked them, 'If the students of the Torah contend with
one another what concern is it of yours?' Out of respect for Rabbi
Joshua they did not collapse, but out of respect for Rabbi Eliezer they
remained aslope. Finally Rabbi Eliezer pleaded, 'If the law is in
accordance with my views, may testimony be offered from the heavens
above.' Whereupon a heavenly voice announced, 'What have you against
Rabbi Eliezer? The law is in accord with his views.' Rabbi Joshua at
once rose to his feet and announced, 'It is not in heaven' (Deut.
30:12). What did he mean by this? Said R. Jeremiah: That the Torah had
already been

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

given at Mt. Sinai; we pay no attention to heavenly voices, because Thou
hast long since written at Sinai, 'After the majority must one incline'
(Ex. 23:2). R. Nathan met Elijah and asked him: What did the Holy one
blessed be He do in that hour? He laughed with joy, he replied, saying,
'My sons have defeated me, my sons have defeated me.'" The Torah was
given to men and human minds interpreting the Torah in accordance with
their best judgments alone define what is or what is not law.<span
id="an_r_01_4"></span>[4](wott11.htm#an_n_01_4.md)

#### THE METHOD OF MIDRASH HALAKAH

For Judaism the most important portion of the Bible is law and one
branch of the supplement to the Bible likewise deals with law. It is in
part an attempt to clarify Biblical prescriptions and, through analysis,
to deduce general legal principles that would be applicable in new
situations. Such Bible analysis was designated by the Hebrew name
*midrash*, which may be translated as probing. It was a probing for
explanations, provisions and meanings that did not appear on the surface
reading of a text but which might be there implicitly, to be discovered
through diligent study and research. The midrashic probing of law is
technically known as *midrash halakah*, the term *halakah* possibly
being derived from a root which means to walk, and therefore,
appropriately designating law which charts a way of life.

Frequently this *midrash* defines more precisely the mandate of the
Biblical law. Thus the rabbis asked, "What is the meaning of the text,
'The fathers shall not be put to death for the children, neither shall
the children be put to death for the fathers'? (Deut. 24:16) If its
intention is to teach that fathers should not be put to death for a sin
committed by children, and vice versa, behold it is explicitly stated,
'Every man shall be put to death for his own sin!' (*ibid*) The meaning
must therefore be: 'Fathers shall not be put to death by the evidence of
children', and vice versa."<span
id="an_r_01_5"></span>[5](wott11.htm#an_n_01_5.md)

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

The *midrash halakah* was, however, equally concerned with discovering
in these Biblical provisions, the generalizations that would offer
guidance in new situations. This may well be illustrated by the
interpretations of Deut. 24:6 and Exodus 21:26, 27. Deuteronomy 24:6
specifies "No man shall take the mill or the upper millstone as pledge;
for he taketh a man's life to pledge." This law is specific in its
application, but it was clearly designed to protect the poor debtor in
his possession of domestic utensils, indispensable in the preparation of
food. It was, therefore, generalized to apply to "all tools used in the
preparation of food." Similarly the law in Exodus 21:26, 27 provides:
"If a man smite the eye of his servant and destroy it, he shall let him
go free for his eye's sake. And if he smite out his servant's tooth, he
shall let him go free for his tooth's sake." The specifications, eye and
tooth, are seen in their common general aspects as vital irreplaceable
bodily organs; and the same law is therefore applied to the mutilation
of any organ in a slave's body, which is enough to send him to
liberty.<span id="an_r_01_6"></span>[6](wott11.htm#an_n_01_6.md)

There were times when the midrash could not discover Biblical precedents
and it became necessary to legislate, to add to or abrogate traditional
laws. The post-Biblical festival of Hanukkah, as well as the
organization of the synagogue and the ritual of worship surrounding it,
are examples of adjustment in traditional law through the process of
legislation. So is the decree suspending all religious observances
during the Hadrianic persecutions of Judaism (135 C.E.), except the laws
forbidding idolatry, murder and adultery. There were many legislative
decrees in the field of civil law, too: the extension of poor relief to
poor pagans, the provision that only the least desirable parcels of real
estate be taken from orphans in payment of debts, and the institution of
universal elementary education in the first century before the common
era.

The legislative adjustment of law was described as a *takanna*, an
enactment, or *gezera*, a decree. These decrees

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

and enactments were promulgated by individuals or corporate bodies that
exercised authority at the particular time. Such legislation has been
attributed to Moses, Joshua, David, Solomon, Ezra, as well as to the
various subsequent heads of the Sanhedrin, which combined both the
supreme judicial as well as legislative powers of the Jewish people.

This legislation did not have the status of Biblical amendments.
Conceived as a divinely revealed document, the Torah could not be
altered by the hands of men. But this legislation was harmonized with
the Torah through a similar technique of midrashic probing which
discovered in the Torah itself the sanctions for change.

Occasionally the old law was merely circumvented so that, in a technical
sense, its mandate remained intact. This is illustrated by Hillel's
reform which did away with the cancellation of debts every seventh year,
as provided for in Deut. 15:1–3. This law proved a serious barrier to
the development of Jewish trade and commerce. People refused to extend
credits and loans for fear that their debts would not be repaid before
the general cancellation time. Hillel's remedy, called *prosbul*, was
the execution of a document which designated the court as the collection
agent, and stipulated that the usual law of debt cancellation on the
Sabbatical year shall not apply to this particular loan. The court was
not included in the provisions of the Biblical law and was, therefore,
technically free to carry on collections until the complete liquidation
of the debt.<span id="an_r_01_7"></span>[7](wott11.htm#an_n_01_7.md)

It was similarly through the circumvention that the rabbis reformed the
Biblical code of criminal law. There had developed among the rabbis a
strong abhorrence of capital punishment. The Bible, of course,
recognized a wide variety of crimes for which the death penalty was to
be inflicted. Instead of abrogating the Biblical law, the rabbis
circumvented it. They limited capital punishment to circumstances which
made it practically inoperative. They ruled out all circumstantial
evidence, no matter how convincing. They

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

went beyond the Biblical requirement of two eye-witnesses to the crime.
The two witnesses were expected to have warned the culprit of the
criminality and legal consequences of his projected act; and the
criminal was expected to have defied the warning with the assertion that
he refuses to be deterred by them!<span
id="an_r_01_8"></span>[8](wott11.htm#an_n_01_8.md)

But the midrash, through an ingenious technique of reinterpretation,
discovered sanctions for the formal abrogation of old laws as well. Thus
the law which decrees that a criminal be punished "an eye for an eye"
(Ex. 21:24) was shown to be but an application of the general principle
that the punishment must be proportionate to the crime. For, as one
rabbi explained, suppose a blind man injured the eye of another person,
how shall the law be applied? Clearly there was only one
way—compensation; the Biblical injunction is carried out by making the
compensation commensurate with the injury. The new legislation
universalized this rule of compensation. The Biblical application of the
principle was taken as contingent and therefore dispensable, but the
principle itself lived on in the new law.

Similarly the institution of the Sabbath was appraised as a means of
enhancing human life. Where, therefore, the observance of the Sabbath
endangered an individual's existence, it was obviously to be
disregarded, for in the words of Rabbi Jonathan ben Joseph, "The Sabbath
is delivered in your hand and not you in its hand." The Babylonian
teacher Samuel grounded this ruling on the verse: "And he shall live by
them" (Lev. 18:5). The commandments of the Torah were to be the means of
enhancing life, not for destroying it. This reinterpretation has been
traced to the time of the Maccabean revolution against the
Syrian-Greeks. The prevailing observance of the Sabbath had endangered
the national cause; the enemy simply delayed military operations until
the Sabbath when the Jews would not resist. The modification of the law
superseded temporarily the accustomed

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sabbath
observance, but its essential purpose was vindicated in the national and
religious liberation that followed.

This interpretation is of course applicable to all law, for it is the
purpose not only of the Sabbath, but of all law, to enhance human life;
and all law must therefore be superseded where the broader interests of
life demand it. As one rabbi, ingeniously rendering the ambiguous verse
in Psalm 119:126 expressed it: "When it is time to do for the sake of
the Lord, they voided Thy Torah."<span
id="an_r_01_9"></span>[9](wott11.htm#an_n_01_9.md)

#### THE METHOD OF MIDRASH HAGGADAH

The supplementary Torah also deals with the non-legal aspects of
tradition, with the doctrines and values which are equally an integral
part of Judaism. It seeks to clarify various historical, theological,
and ethical assertions of the Torah, to rationalize them in the light of
current knowledge and prevailing moral ideals, and to derive from them
the generalizations that can inspire, guide, and edify life, in the
existing conditions under which men lived. The non-legal branch of the
supplementary Torah is called *haggadah*, meaning utterances; and the
interpretive analysis of the *haggadah* has been designated as *midrash
haggadah*.

The following citations will illustrate the nature and function of the
*midrash haggadah*. Genesis 12:5 declares: "And Abram took Sarai his
wife, and Lot his brother's son, and all their substance that they
gathered, and the souls that *they had made* in Haran; and they went
forth to go into the land of Canaan." Rabbi Elazar bar Zimra offered the
following comment on this: "If all people in the world should attempt to
create a single insect they would be unable to breathe the breath of
life into it, and here it is said *and the souls that they had made in
Haran*. What Scripture really refers to is the proselytes they won to
their way of life. And why does Scripture use the term *made* for the
winning of proselytes? It is to teach us that whoever draws a pagan

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

close to himself and influences him to become a proselyte, it is as
though he had begotten him. And why does not Scripture use the singular
*he had made*, instead of the plural, *they had made?* R. Huna suggested
that it refers to both Abraham and Sarai. He made proselytes among the
men, and she among the women."

The rabbis speculated as to why the Book of Nehemiah was denied an
independent place in the Holy Scriptures, but was incorporated into the
Book of Ezra (this was the arrangement in the Biblical canon which was
accepted at that time). The answer they offered is "Because he thought
of his own welfare; as it is said 'Think upon me my God for good' (Neh.
5:19). Another reason is that he spoke disparagingly about his
predecessors; as it is said, 'But the former governors that had been
before me were chargeable unto the people and had taken of their bread
and wine, beside forty shekels of silver.'" The discussion of the
authorship of the different books of the Bible also led to the question
who composed the last eight verses in Deuteronomy, which describe the
death of Moses, and they were ascribed by some to the disciple of Moses,
Joshua.<span id="an_r_01_10"></span>[10](wott11.htm#an_n_01_10.md)

*Midrash haggadah* is frequently a defense of traditional doctrines
against the challenge of contemporary skepticism. On one occasion Rabban
Gamaliel was challenged: "You rabbis declare that wherever ten people
assemble to worship, the Divine Presence abides amongst them. How many
presences of God are there?" Gamaliel called his interrogator's servant
and struck him. "Why didst thou allow the sun to enter and heat the home
of your master?" "But the sun shines all over the world," the servant
protested. Rabban Gamaliel drew the point of the analogy. "If the sun
which is only one of the million myriads of God's servants, can be in
every part of the world, how much more so can the Divine Presence
radiate throughout the universe?"

On another occasion Gamaliel was taunted, "Your God is a thief, because
it is written, 'The Lord caused a deep

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

sleep to fall upon Adam and he slept; and He took one of his ribs'"
(Gen. 2:21). In this instance Gamaliel's daughter volunteered the
answer. "Thieves," she related, "broke into our house during the night
and stole our silver goblet but left a golden one behind." "Would that
such a thief visited me every day," the skeptic exclaimed. "Was it not a
splendid thing then for the first man when a single rib was taken from
him and a mate was supplied to him in its stead?" she retorted.

Midrashic probing was similarly utilized in the new formulations of
doctrine. This is well illustrated in the famous homily on the theme of
human equality. Probing into all the implications of the verse "Ye shall
therefore keep My statutes and Mine ordinances, which if a man do he
shall live by them" (Lev. 18:5), one teacher asked: "Whence may it be
demonstrated that a pagan, when he conforms to the moral law of the
Torah, becomes the equal of a High priest in Israel? From the words,
'which if a *man* do he shall live by them', the term man being
universal and referring equally to Jew and pagan. Similarly it is said
'This is the law of *mankind*, Lord God' (2 Samuel 7:19, a possible
rendition of the original Hebrew)—it is not stated, 'This is the law of
priests, Levites and Israelites, but the more inclusive term *the law of
mankind*.' In similar manner, too, Scripture does not say, 'Open the
gates, that priests, Levites, and Israelites may enter,' but, 'Open the
gates that a righteous *goy* keeping faithfulness may enter' (Is.
26:2)—*goy* means a people or nation generally, Jewish or pagan. And
again, it does not say, 'This is the gate of the Lord, Priests, Levites
and Israelites shall enter into it', but 'the *righteous* shall enter
it', which is more universal (Ps. 118:20). Likewise, it does not say,
'Rejoice in the Lord, O ye priests, Levites and Israelites', but,
'Rejoice in the Lord, O ye *righteous*' (Ps. 33:1). And finally it does
not say, 'Do good, O Lord, to the priests, Levites and Israelites,' but
'unto the good' (Ps. 125:4), which clearly refers to good men among all
nations. It is

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

thus abundantly demonstrated that even a pagan, provided he adheres to
the moral discipline of the Torah is the equal of the highest ranking
priest in Israel."<span
id="an_r_01_11"></span>[11](wott11.htm#an_n_01_11.md)

#### THE MIDRASH AS LITERATURE

The earliest literary form we have of the supplementary Torah is the
Midrash, which proceeds through a deduction of law or opinion through
Biblical interpretation, and it is organized as a running commentary on
the books of the Bible. It includes *halakah* and *haggadah* in
accordance with the varying contents of the respective books in the
Bible. A number of these early *Midrashim* have been preserved to our
day. The best known are the Midrash on Exodus, *Mekilta*, the Aramaic
for measure, rule or norm; the Midrash on Leviticus, *Sifra*,
abbreviated from *Sifra de-be Rab*, the Book of the School; and the
Midrash on Numbers and Deuteronomy, *Sifre*, similarly abbreviated from
*Sifre de-be Rab*, the Books of the Schools. All these books were
composed in the early part of the second century, by teachers who for
the most part remained anonymous but who functioned in the great academy
of Torah studies which was established in Jabneh after Jerusalem's fall
in 70 C.E.

The following citations illustrate the method of the Midrash and the
results in halakah and haggadah achieved by it. When the Israelites on
their way out of Egypt found themselves in the difficult position
between the pursuing hosts of Pharaoh and the menacing waters of the Red
Sea, Moses turned to God in impassioned prayer. But the Lord responded
with a sharp rebuke: "Wherefore criest thou unto me? Speak unto the
children of Israel, that they go forward" (Exodus 14:15). Rabbi Eliezer
elaborates on this: "Thus did God speak unto Moses: 'Moses, my children
are in great distress; they are hemmed in by the sea on one side and the
pursuing enemy on the other. And yet you stand and indulge in prolonged
prayer. Wherefore criest thou unto me? There

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

are occasions when it is proper to prolong and there are occasions
necessitating action when prayer is to be abbreviated.'"

Another revealing example is offered us in the comment on Exodus 18:12.
This Biblical verse reports: "And Jethro, Moses’ father-in-law, took a
burnt offering and sacrificed for God; and Aaron came and all the elders
of Israel to eat bread with Moses’ father-in-law before God." The rabbis
wondered why Moses was not mentioned in the episode, and they inferred:
"He must have stood by to wait on them and serve them. In doing this he
followed the precedent of father Abraham who personally waited on the
three angels who came to him in the disguise of itinerant strangers.
Similarly, when Rabban Gamaliel arranged a banquet in honor of his
fellow scholars, he stood by personally to wait on them and serve them.
Some felt reticent, regarding it as improper that they be waited on by
the head of the Sanhedrin. But Rabbi Joshua reassured them, 'Let him
serve. There is the precedent of a greater man than he who served the
three angels who came to him posing as pagan Arabs.'"

Another illustration of the midrashic method may be found in the
rabbinic discussion of Exodus 20:18. "'And the people stood afar off;
but Moses drew near unto the thick darkness where God was.' What was
responsible for this unique distinction accorded Moses? His humility, as
it is written (Nu. 12:3) 'and the man Moses was very humble'. The
general inference suggested by this verse is that whoever is of a humble
spirit will in the end experience the presence of God, as Isaiah (57–16)
also suggests, 'I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that
is of a contrite and humble spirit …' But he that is proud and arrogant
renders the land unclean and causes the withdrawal of God's presence, as
it is written, 'Every one that is proud in heart is an abomination to
the Lord' (Proverbs 16:5), the very phrase used in Deuteronomy 7:26 to
describe idolatry."

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

The following citation is a good example of the midrashic analysis of
the Bible for the derivation of law, "'And if a man come presumptuously
upon his neighbor, to slay him with guile; thou shalt take him from Mine
altar, that he may die' (Exodus 21:14). The verse obviously excluded
from the prescribed punishment those who cannot be said to have acted
with presumption, such as one who is deaf and dumb, an imbecile or a
moron … the physician accidently causing death while working for the
patient's recovery or the executioner inflicting death under the order
of the court."

The following selection from the Sifre shows the same methodology as the
above. "'And it shall come to pass, if ye shall hearken diligently unto
My commandments … to love the Lord your God' (Deut. 11:13). One may be
tempted to say, 'I will study the Torah so that I become rich, that I
may be called master, that I may receive rewards in the world to come'.
It is for this reason that the verse emphasizes, *to love the Lord your
God;* whatever you do, let it be only with the motivation of true
love."<span id="an_r_01_12"></span>[12](wott11.htm#an_n_01_12.md)

The Midrash was particularly suited for preaching purposes. In following
the continuous text of the Bible it enabled the preacher to draw his
lesson each week from the Scriptural lesson designated for that
particular Sabbath. For the scholar it was also an advantage to see in
each instance how a particular law or moral utterance is traced to its
Biblical source. From the standpoint of those interested in law,
however, the Midrash is an awkward literary form. Relevant legal
material is scattered throughout the Biblical books. The presentations
are long and involved. The formulation of law is constantly interrupted
by haggadah, by historical, theological or homiletical discussions. Nor
was the Midrash a convenient depository for enactments and ordinances
promulgated without specific reference to Scriptural derivations. There
was obviously a need for a work of literary reorganization that would
separate halakah from haggadah, that would reduce the law to simple
succinct statements,

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

systematically organized along thematic lines, and that would include,
also, independent legal traditions which the Talmudic supplementers
inherited from the past.

#### THE MISHNAH

The next product in this process of literary creativity is the Mishnah,
a term derived from *shanah*, which means to repeat or study. This
Mishnah in the form that we have it today is a product of the scholarly
editorship of Rabbi Judah the Prince, and his Palestinian disciples who
were active in the 3rd century. But there were other Mishnah collections
which paved the way for their labors, going in some instances back to
the 1st century. In this final product the language is a clear and lucid
Hebrew; the statements are succinct and the principle of organization is
subject matter. There are six main sections to the Mishnah which are in
turn subdivided into an aggregate of 63 tractates. The tractate is
subdivided into chapters and the chapter into individual paragraphs or
*Mishniot*.

The six main sections to the Mishnah are called Sedarim, orders, derived
from the fact that each section represents an orderly arrangement of the
laws on its particular subject. The six Sedarim are *Zeraim*, *Moed*,
*Nashim*, *Nezikin*, *Kodashim*, *Toharot*. *Zeraim*, or seeds, deals
with agriculture; appended to it is the all important tractate *Berakot*
which deals with prayer. *Moed*, festivals, deals with the Sabbath,
holidays, fasts and feasts of the Jewish calendar. *Nashim*, which means
women, discusses marriage, divorce and other phases of family life.
*Nezikin*, injuries, deals with civil and criminal law. *Kodashim*, Holy
Things, discusses the sacrificial cult and other details of the Temple
service. The last section, *Taharot*, cleanliness, deals with all
questions of ritual purity.

The stylistic and methodological character of the Mishnah is well
illustrated by the following selections: Mishnah Gittin 9:3, 4

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

discusses inadequately executed documents of divorce: "Three kinds of
bills of divorce are invalid, yet if she married again the offspring is
legitimate; one that a man wrote with his own hand but there were no
witnesses to it; one to which there were witnesses but which bore no
date; and one which bore the date but had one witness only. Lo, these
three bills of divorce are invalid, yet if she married again the
offspring is legitimate. Rabbi Eliezer says: Even though it was not
signed by witnesses yet was delivered before witnesses, it is valid, and
she may exact her *Ketubah* from mortgaged property; for the witnesses
sign only as a precaution for the general good."

Mishnah Baba Batra 5:1 discusses the transfer of property: "If a man
sold a ship, he has sold also the mast, the sail, the anchor, and all
the means for steering it; but he has not sold the slaves, the
packing-bags, or lading. But if he had said, 'It and all that is in it',
all these are sold also. If a man sold a wagon he has not sold the
mules; if he sold the mules he has not sold the wagon. If he sold the
yoke he has not sold the oxen, and if he sold the oxen he has not sold
the yoke. Rabbi Judah says: The price makes it manifest: thus if one
said to him, 'Sell me thy yoke for 200 zuz', it is manifest that no yoke
costs 200 zuz. But the sages say: The price is no proof."

The procedure in courts of law is described in Mishniot Sanhedrin 1:1
and 3:7. It reads thus: “Cases concerning theft or personal injury are
judged by three (judges); claims for full damages or half-damages,
two-fold restitution, or fourfold or five-fold restitution, and (claims
against) the violator, the seducer and him that hath brought an evil
name (must be judged) by three, so says Rabbi Meir. But the other sages
say that the latter should be judged by twenty-three, for there may
arise therefrom a capital case …

“When the judges reached their decision they brought in the suitors. The
chief among the judges says, 'Thou, such-a-one, art not guilty', or
'Thou, such-a-one, art guilty'. And

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

whence do we know that after one of the judges has gone forth he may not
say, 'I declare him not guilty and my fellows declare him guilty; but
what may I do, for my fellows outvoted me?' Of such a one it is written,
*Thou shalt not go up and down as a talebearer among thy people* (Lev.
19:16); and it also says, *He that goeth about as a talebearer revealeth
secrets, but he that is a faithful spirit concealeth the matter*”
(Proverbs 11:13).

Mishnah Abot 5:7 offers a precious insight into the kind of character
prized by the rabbis: "There are seven marks of the clod and seven of
the wise man. The wise man does not speak before one that is greater
than he is in wisdom; and he does not break in upon the words of his
fellow; and he is not hasty in making answer; he asks what is relevant
and makes answer according to the halakah, and he speaks on the first
point first and on the last point last, and of what he has heard no
tradition he says, 'I have not heard'; and he admits the truth, and the
opposite of these are the marks of the clod."

#### THE TOSEFTA

The Mishnah as finally compiled was a milestone in the history of
tradition. It was the summation, the climax of centuries of intellectual
labors. It was welcomed particularly by the Jewish community in
Babylonia since it offered them religious guidance without necessary
recourse to the academies of Palestine. But the process of judicial
creativity did not cease with the creation of the Mishnah. Because of
its very brevity, the statements in the Mishnah required constant
amplification and interpretation. Moreover a great deal of material was
omitted altogether, whether because the editors of the Mishnah did not
consider it important or because they felt they had already covered it
in another form. Such material was technically known as "Baraita",
outside, that is, relevant data left outside the Mishnah text.

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> For a scholarly
grasp of the full range of tradition it was, however, invaluable.

The shortcomings of the Mishnah must have been recognized in the very
generation that produced it; the Tosefta, meaning *supplement*, compiled
apparently during the same period that saw the reaction of the Mishnah,
frequently offers essential amplifications to the Mishnaic text, as well
as, of course, certain independent material. The Tosefta's function as a
supplement to the Mishnah is well illustrated by a comparison of Mishnah
Shekalim 1:1, and Tosefta Shekalim 1:1. Thus the Mishnah: "On the first
day of the month of Adar announcements are made concerning the payment
of the annual half-shekel due to the Temple Treasury (Exodus 30: 13 ff).
… And on the fifteenth day of that month the roads are repaired …"
Apparently presupposing the Mishnah, the Tosefta merely amplifies: "On
the fifteenth day of that month emissaries of the court attend to the
repairing of the roads, which have become damaged in the rainy season."
Without the Mishnah we should indeed remain in the dark as to what the
Tosefta meant by *on the* 15*th day of that month*. It is only by
drawing on the information of the Mishnah that we may identify *on the*
15*th day of that month* as referring to the month of Adar.

#### THE GEMARA

The most important supplement to the Mishnah is the *Gemara*, created
after the completion of the Mishnah in the third century. Derived from
the Aramaic *gemar* and meaning study or teaching, the Gemara exists in
two versions, both in the Aramaic vernaculars current respectively among
the Jews of Palestine and Babylonia. For in post-Mishnaic times, the
Jewish community in Babylonia had overtaken Palestine as a center of
Jewish learning, and the Babylonian schools developed a parallel
supplement to the Mishnah,

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

which indeed proved even more influential than the Palestinian
supplement. Frequently the same teachers are represented in both
Gemaras, for there was a constant interchange of visits among the
Palestinian and Babylonian rabbis and the academies in each country were
fully informed on the work being done by their sister academies in the
other country. Not all tractates of the Mishnah are supplemented by the
Gemara—only those that were of interest to the teachers that created the
Gemara. The Palestinian Gemara, frequently called Yerushalmi or
Jerusalem Gemara, supplements thirty-nine tractates; the Babylonian only
thirty-six and a half. In scope, however, the latter is three times as
large as the former, the Babylonian Gemara being more elaborate and more
copious in its expositions.

In its discussions the Gemara introduces citations from the Tosefta, the
various Midrashim, the records of old customs, legislative enactments
and ordinances, haggadic discourses and ethical observations. A tendency
to digress and interpolate various *obiter dicta* in halakah and
haggadah has, in addition, enriched the Gemara with a vast store of
anecdotes, parables and folk lore. The Gemara is thus the most
comprehensive of all the texts in the supplementary Torah. The Mishnah
and Gemara, as an integrated text, taken together comprise the Talmud.

The following Talmudic selections illustrate the style and method of the
Gemara and its supplementary relations to the Mishnah. The Mishnah
declares: "Seven days before the Day of Atonement the High Priest was
removed from his home and confined to the office of the counsellors …
They delivered to him elders from the elders of the court and they read
before him (throughout the seven days) from the ritual of the day. They
said to him, Sir High Priest, read yourself with your own mouth,
perchance you have forgotten or perchance you have never learnt …"

To this declaration of the Mishnah there now follows a Gemara
supplement: "It is understandable that they assume

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

he may have forgotten, but would a High Priest ever be appointed if he
had never learnt? Has it not been taught: The Torah describes the High
Priest as *the priest that is highest among his brethren* (Lev. 21:10,
14), which means that he must excel his colleagues in vigor, in
personality, in wisdom, and in financial independence … R. Joseph
explained: This is no difficulty. The one characterization refers to the
High Priests who functioned in the First Temple. The other refers to the
corrupt High Priests who held office in the Second Temple. As is
illustrated in the report of Rab Assi: A *tarkubful* of *dinars* did
Martha, the daughter of Boethus give as a bribe to King Jannai (a
general designation in the Talmud for Hasmonean or Herodian rulers) to
nominate Joshua b. Gamala as one of the High Priests."

From the same tractate is also drawn the following Mishnah: "A sick
person is fed (on the Day of Atonement) at the word of experts, and if
no experts are there one feeds at his own wish till he says: 'Enough'".
And there follows immediately the vital supplement of the Gemara: "Rabbi
Jannai explained: If the patient says, I need food and the physician
says that he does not, we hearken to the patient. What is the reason?
*The heart knoweth its own bitterness* (Prov. 14:10). But isn't it
self-evident? We might have assumed that the physician's knowledge,
being more authentic, ought to carry greater weight. If the physician
says that he needs food, while the patient says that he does not, we
heed the physician. Why? There is always the fear that the patient may
be in stupor."<span id="an_r_01_13"></span>[13](wott11.htm#an_n_01_13.md)

Here is another Mishnah: "If debris falls on someone and it is doubtful
whether or not he is there or whether he is alive or dead, one should
open the heap of debris to rescue him, even on the Sabbath." The Gemara
supplement follows: "One must remove debris to save a life on the
Sabbath, and the more zealous one is in doing so the more praiseworthy
he is; and one need not seek permission from religious authorities. How
so? If one saw a child … fall into a pit,

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

he breaks loose one segment (of the entrenchment) and pulls it up—the
faster the better; and he need not obtain permission from religious
authorities. … If he saw a door closing upon an infant thereby
frightening or endangering the infant, he may break it so as to get the
child out—the faster the better; and he need not obtain permission from
religious authorities. … One may extinguish or isolate the flames in the
case of a fire—the sooner the better; and he need not obtain permission
from the religious authorities.

"Rabbi Ishmael, Rabbi Akiba and Rabbi Eleazar b. Azariah were once on a
journey, with Levi ha-Saddar and Rabbi Ishmael, the son of Rabbi Eleazar
following them. This question was asked of them: 'Whence do we know that
in the event of danger to human life all laws of the Sabbath are
superseded?' Rabbi Ishmael answered and said: '*If a thief be found
breaking in*' (Ex. 22:1), it is permissible to kill him in self-defense,
though the shedding of blood pollutes the land and causes the divine
spirit to depart from Israel. If the defense of life takes precedence
over another life—that of the burglar—it certainly takes precedence over
the Sabbath. … Rabbi Simeon b. Menasya said, 'And the children of
*Israel shall keep the Sabbath*' (Ex. 31:16). The Torah obviously
implied: 'Suspend for his sake one Sabbath, so that he may keep many
Sabbaths.' Rab Judah said in the name of Samuel: 'If I had been there, I
should have suggested a more convincing explanation. The Torah appraises
its rules of life with *He shall live by them* (Lev. 18:5), implying
clearly that one must not thwart life because of them.' Raba said: 'The
other explanations may be refuted but that of Samuel is
irrefutable'".<span id="an_r_01_14"></span>[14](wott11.htm#an_n_01_14.md)

Our final illustration is taken from the field of civil law. The Mishnah
provides: "If a person found something in a shop, it belongs to him;
should it have been between the counter and the shopkeeper, it belongs
to the latter. If he found it in front of a money-changer, it belongs to
him; should it have been between the form (on which the coins

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

are displayed) and the money-changer, it belongs to the latter. If a
person purchased fruits from his fellow or the latter sent him fruits,
and he found coins among them, they belong to him; but should they have
been tied in a bundle, he must advertise."

The Mishnah's discussion of found property evoked the following story
from the teachers of the Gemara: "Alexander of Macedon visited King
Katzya, who displayed to him an abundance of gold and silver. Alexander
said to him, 'I have no need of your gold and silver. My only purpose is
to see your customs, how you act and administer justice.' While they
were engaged in conversation, a man came before the king with a case
against his fellow from whom he had bought a field with its scrap-heap
and in it discovered a bundle of coins. The purchaser contended, 'I
bought the heap but not the treasure hidden in it' and the vendor
asserted, 'I sold the heap and all it contained.' While they were
arguing together, the king turned to one of them and asked, 'Have you a
son?' 'Yes,' he replied. He asked the other, 'Have you a daughter?' and
he answered, 'Yes'. 'Let them marry and give them the treasure', was the
king's decision. Alexander began to laugh, and Katzya inquired, 'Why do
you laugh? Did I not judge well? Suppose such a case happened with you,
how would you have dealt with it?' He replied, 'I would have put them
both to death and confiscated the treasure.' 'Do you, then, love gold so
much?' said Katzya. He made a feast for him at which he was served with
golden cutlets and golden poultry. 'I do not eat gold,' he exclaimed;
and the king retorted, 'A curse alight upon you! If you do not eat gold,
why do you love it so intensely?' He continued to ask, 'Does the sun
shine in your country?' 'Certainly,' was the reply. 'Does rain descend
in your country?' 'Of course.' 'Are there small animals in your
country?' 'Of course'. 'A curse alight upon you! you only live, then, by
the merit of those animals!'"<span
id="an_r_01_15"></span>[15](wott11.htm#an_n_01_15.md)

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

#### THE ORAL TORAH AND THE TALMUD

All these literary productions of the academies in Palestine and
Babylonia from the close of the Biblical canon to the close of the fifth
century comprise the supplementary Torah. This includes the various
midrashim; the Tosefta; the Mishnah and the Gemara, or, taken together,
the Talmud. It has generally been called the Oral Torah because for
centuries it was expounded and transmitted orally. Individual students
probably employed notes to aid their memories, but none of these
compilations were officially edited until a considerably later date. The
Palestinian Talmud came to an end some time in the 5th century as a
result of the general decline of the Jewish community in Palestine,
marked by the abolition of the office of patriarch, as the head of the
Jewish community was called, in 425 C.E. The Babylonian Talmud was
concluded toward the end of the same century, for in Babylonia, too,
Jewish life was declining, following the persecution of Jews under the
Sassanian Kings Yezdegerd II (438–457) and Peroz (459–484). The final
edition of the supplementary Torah in the volumes of the Talmud as we
have them today, brought to a close one of the most creative epochs in
the history of Jewish tradition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Forerunners of the Talmud](wott04.md)
