[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wott09)  [Next](wott11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JPJQ/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Wisdom of the Talmud*, by Ben Zion Bokser, \[1951\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span> <span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

### Human Wisdom in the Talmud

<span class="smallcaps">The world</span> outlook of the rabbis is often
an elaboration of some revered utterance by a Biblical writer or some
other master of tradition; occasionally it is the fruit of some new
inspiration that has carried its recipient into the ranks of the
creative builders of Jewish thought. There is, however, an additional
force that is represented in their pronouncements—it is the common human
wisdom, which men have always distilled out of the general experiences
of life.

#### DREAMS AND THE SUBCONSCIOUS

The rabbis were shrewd observers of human nature in action. They were
aware of the subtle life of the mind, recognizing that conscious
experience is only a phase of a larger world in which we have our being.
The rabbis were of course far away from the insights of modern
psychology. Yet they recognized fully that the subconscious performs its
delicate operations—as in dreams for instance—out of the materials
furnished by the conscious, out of the hopes and fears that agitate the
mind in normal life.

The Talmud cites a variety of notions concerning the significance of
dreams. Among them is the recognition that dreams are nothing but
elaborations of thoughts dwelt upon in hours of consciousness. Thus R.
Samuel ben Nahman on behalf of R. Jonathan said: "Dreams are
representations of thoughts on which one continues to meditate in one's
wakefulness." This conception of dreams is forcefully presented in a
reported conversation between the Roman emperor and Rabbi Joshua ben
Hananiah: "'You claim to be wise men,'

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

the emperor said to the rabbi. 'Tell me then what I shall see in my
dream.' He replied, 'You will see the Persians (Parthians) enslaving
you, despoiling you and making you pasture unclean animals with a golden
staff.' The emperor continued to reflect on this all day and at night
dreamed of it." The same Talmudic text records a similar experience on
the part of the Parthian king, Shapur, with Samuel as the rabbi
suggesting the subject of the dream.

The rabbis recognized that dreams are often pure fancy. Yet they felt
that even in the seemingly incomprehensible dreams there are vital
references to conscious experience. They sought a key to unravel the
veiled allusions of our dreams which employ a language of symbols that
need interpretation.

The interpretation of dreams was popular among the Talmudists. But they
suggested that often it is the interpretation which becomes suggestive
to the conscious mind of hopes or fears, which then condition the
direction of our lives. The rabbis therefore cautioned people not to
become unduly disturbed by dreams: "Dreams have no importance for good
or ill."<span id="an_r_08_1"></span>[1](wott11.htm#an_n_08_1.md)

#### THE HEART IS SOVEREIGN

The rabbis were impressed with the profoundly important role that
emotions play in life. The heart, which they looked upon as the seat of
emotion, was regarded by them the principal source of control over all
human actions. "All of man's bodily organs are dependent on the heart,"
was a Talmudic dictum. It is the heart therefore which may be said to
carry responsibility for whatever we do in life. Thus one rabbinic
comment offers us the sweeping generalization: "The heart sees, hears,
speaks, walks, falls, stands, rejoices, hardens, softens, grieves,
fears, is broken, is haughty … persuades, errs, fears, loves, hates,
envies, searches, reflects. …"

The rabbis prized highly the ability of some people to control

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

their emotions. To control one's emotions and to bring life under the
directing voice of reason was regarded by the rabbis as the mark of true
heroism. "Who is a hero?" one rabbi asked in the ethical treatise Abot.
His reply was: "He who controls his passion."

#### HABIT AND CHARACTER

The Talmud abounds with statements which clearly recognize the dominant
role of habit in human conduct. Character is to a large extent a pattern
of behavior formed by habit. Our conduct is always conditioned by the
chain of preceding actions, which predispose us to one way of life or
another. "A good deed," according to the ethical treatise Abot, "leads
to another good deed, and the consequence of one transgression is
another transgression."

Habit is a mighty fortification of the good life. For once we habituate
ourselves to noble living, the normal bent of our character will incline
us toward the right deed in the particular situation confronting us. And
any attempt to deviate from what has become the norm for our life, will
be met with inner resistance. But the rabbis warned that a pattern of
behavior once formed, is not necessarily of permanent duration, and that
the sensitivity to these deviations from the norm will gradually wane,
as the act is repeated. As the Talmud puts it: "When one transgresses a
commandment and repeats the offense he feels no further restraint."

The rabbis consequently urged caution in behavior, warning people
against even seemingly trivial slips in conduct. These slips are grave,
for they predispose man to a course from which he may find it difficult
to turn back. "He who violates a seemingly trivial statute will
eventually violate a weighty one." The only sound advice is thus
constant vigilance: "Avoid even a minor transgression lest it lead you
to a major one."<span id="an_r_08_2"></span>[2](wott11.htm#an_n_08_2.md)

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

#### A MAN WEARS MANY MASKS

The Talmudists recognized that human character is often hidden beneath
appearances, and that men may simulate virtues they do not really
possess. But they suggested situations which will reveal what is
intrinsic in man. Pretense, they explained, will disappear in situations
involving money matters, in moments of anger or by the way a man takes
his liquor. As R. Ilai tersely phrased it: "You can recognize a person's
real character by his wine cup (koso), his purse (kiso), and his anger
(kaaso)."

The discussions of the rabbis reveal the recognition of the immense
power which the craving for material possessions exercises over people:
"No man departs from this world with half his cravings satisfied. When
he has attained a hundred, he desires two hundred."

The rabbis commented sadly on the tendency of people to cultivate
well-to-do friends, and then to desert them when they suffer a reversal
in fortune. "At the gate of the enterprising shop, there are many
friends and brothers. At the gate of a shop in decline there are neither
brothers, nor friends." Raba was even more pointed in his observation:
"When the ox is fallen the knife is sharpened."<span
id="an_r_08_3"></span>[3](wott11.htm#an_n_08_3.md)

The tendency of people to hide beneath a mask of pretense and
falsification creates an element of uncertainty in every human
relationship. It leads to deceit, and to the incompatible claims of
litigants. The rabbis therefore sought a clue to the workings of the
human mind which would enable us to probe through the false claim and to
discover the true facts in a given situation. The Talmud records a
number of principles which guided them in their deliberations.

It was taken for granted that a squatter's occupancy of any property
would normally be challenged by its rightful owner within a three-year
period of time. And if no such challenge developed in that time, the
occupant may be presumed to be there by right, even though he might not
have any documentary

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

evidence to establish his rights. A liar was always presumed to
fabricate the lie that would be to his greatest advantage. Greater
credence was therefore to be placed to a plea yielding a lesser
advantage than what was possible under the circumstances. It was assumed
that falsification was less likely when the claimants confronted each
other. Another important presumption was that a person does not normally
pay his debts until they fall due. A person was assumed to be blind to
his own shortcomings.

The application of these "presumptions" concerning human nature was at
times challenged by the rabbis. For these are not iron-clad rules
inexorably at work in all instances. Many a man may deviate from common
procedure. This is clearly indicated in the following discussion: "Resh
Lakish laid down the ruling: If a lender stipulates a date for the
repayment of a loan, and the borrower pleads (when the date of payment
arrives) that he paid the debt before it fell due, his word is not
believed. It is enough if a person pay when his debts fall due. Abaye
and Raba both concur in saying that it is not unusual for a man to pay a
debt before it falls due; sometimes he happens to have money, and he
says to himself, 'I will go and pay him, so that he may not trouble
me.'"

The rabbis were fully aware of individual differences among people, and
they often sought some indication of the mind of the particular parties
involved in a litigation. This is well illustrated in the following
case: "A certain Ronya had a field which was enclosed on all four sides
by the fields of Rabina. The latter fenced them and said to him: 'Pay me
toward what I have spent for fencing.' He (Ronya) refused. Then he
asked, 'Pay toward the cost of a cheap fence of sticks.' But Ronya again
refused. He continued, 'Then pay me toward the cost of a watchman.'
Ronya still refused. Then one day Rabina saw Ronya gathering dates, and
he said to his manager, 'Go and snatch a cluster of dates from him.' He
went to take them, but Ronya shouted at him. Whereupon

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Rabina said, 'You
show by this (shouting) that you are pleased with the fence. If it is
only goats (you are afraid of), does not your field need guarding?' He
replied, 'A goat can be driven off with a shout.' But he said, 'Don't
you require a man to shout at it?' He appealed to Raba who said to him,
'Go and accept his last offer …'" (to pay toward the cost of a
watchman).<span id="an_r_08_4"></span>[4](wott11.htm#an_n_08_4.md)

#### ON THE PSYCHOLOGY OF WOMEN

The Talmud quotes many proverbs that deal with the power of the sexual
attractions of men and women. "No one is immune to the ravages of an
illicit attraction." "There is only one real cause of jealousy among
women—sex appeal." The Talmud recognized a woman's love for finery and
personal adornment. "A woman is concerned principally with her
appearance," one Talmudist observed. "And the greatest pleasure a man
can give his wife is to clothe her in fine garments."

The love of self-adornment among women is more elaborately treated in
the following passage: "These are the treatments of women—treating the
eyes with kohl, curling the hair into ringlets, and rouging the face.
The wife of R. Hisda used to adorn the face of her daughter-in-law. R.
Huna ben Hinena once sat in the presence of Rab Hisda and, observing his
wife apply the beauty treatment on her daughter-in-law, said, 'It is
only permitted in the case of a young woman, not an old one.' He
replied, 'By God, it is even permitted in the case of your mother and
grandmother, and even if she stood on the brink of the grave; for as the
proverb put it, "At sixty or at six, a woman runs after the sound of the
timbrel."'"<span id="an_r_08_5"></span>[5](wott11.htm#an_n_08_5.md)

The rabbis record other observations on the psychology of women: "God
endowed a woman with keener judgment than man"; "women are
compassionate"; women are "querulous

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

and garrulous"; women have an affinity for the occult and they go in
"for witchcraft."<span id="an_r_08_6"></span>[6](wott11.htm#an_n_08_6.md)

The rabbis recognized the subtle influences of a woman in directing the
life of her husband. This is told dramatically in the Midrash: "A pious
man had been married to a pious woman but, being childless, they were
divorced. He then went and married a wicked woman, and she made him
wicked. The divorced woman proceeded and married a wicked man and she
made a good man out of him. It thus follows that everything depends upon
the woman."<span id="an_r_08_7"></span>[7](wott11.htm#an_n_08_7.md)

The same Midrash tells another tale which extols modesty as a woman's
noblest virtue, at the same time alluding to common weaknesses in a
woman's character. The text on which this homily is based is Gen. 2:21,
where it is told that Eve was formed from one of Adam's ribs: "God
deliberated from which part of man to create woman. He said, 'I must not
create her from the head that she should not carry herself haughtily;
nor from the eye that she should not be too inquisitive; nor from the
ear, that she should not be an eavesdropper; nor from the mouth that she
should not be too talkative; nor from the heart that she should not be
too jealous; nor from the hand that she should not be too acquisitive;
nor from the foot that she should not be a gadabout; but from a hidden
part of the body that she should be modest.'"<span
id="an_r_08_8"></span>[8](wott11.htm#an_n_08_8.md)

#### EDUCATION AND HUMAN NATURE

The psychological notions of the Talmudists had their most fruitful
application in the field of education. The rabbis recognized individual
differences among students, and they demanded that the educational
process reckon with those differences. Some of these differences are
discussed in the ethical treatise *Abot:* "There are four types among
students. One comprehends readily but forgets readily—his advantage is
nullified by his disadvantage; one is slow to comprehend

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

but also slow to forget—his disadvantage is nullified by his advantage;
one comprehends readily and forgets slowly—his is a good portion; one is
slow to comprehend and quick to forget—this is a bad portion."

Another classification, also cited in the treatise Abot, deals with the
relative reactions of students to knowledge given them: "There are four
types among those who sit before the wise: the sponge, the funnel, the
strainer, and the sieve. Some are like the sponge which absorbs
everything; some are like the funnel which takes in at one end and lets
out at the other; some are like the strainer which allows the wine to go
out and retains the dregs; some are like the sieve which lets out the
bran and retains the fine flour."

A more fundamental differentiation of students, on the basis of
aptitude, is given in the Midrash: "Said R. Judan ben Samuel, 'The
Torah, given by the Eternal, was offered us only in relative measure …
Some quality for the study of Bible; some for the Mishnah; some for the
Talmud; some for Aggadah; and some for all of these.'"<span
id="an_r_08_9"></span>[9](wott11.htm#an_n_08_9.md)

A variety of other material in educational psychology is scattered in
the writings of the Talmud. The importance of motivation and interest in
education is recognized in the comment of Rabbi Judah the Prince: "A
person can learn only those portions of the Torah which his heart
desires." A combination of teacher's aloofness with a friendly interest
in his students is demanded in the aphorism: "Always push the student
away with the left hand and draw him near with the right." Teachers were
urged to lay great stress on repetition. Rabbi Elazar was said to repeat
his lesson four times. Students were urged to study out loud and place
themselves in a position where they could see their teacher, for the
added impression would aid to comprehension. Teachers were urged to be
concise in speech and to present their material without ambiguities,
which mislead students. The Talmud recommends group study, which allows
for discussion, out of which comes greater clarity and a firmer grasp of
the material

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

studied. Humility was regarded as a prerequisite to a growth in
knowledge, while arrogance was branded as its deadliest enemy.<span
id="an_r_08_10"></span>[10](wott11.htm#an_n_08_10.md)

#### AIDS TO MEMORY

The rabbis were conscious of the danger of forgetting what had been
learned at great effort. Written reference works were not plentifully
available in the age before printing. They therefore created a system of
mnemonic devices as an aid to memory.

A common memory aid was a well-known quotation from the Bible or some
other classical text. Thus the Mishnah enumerated the feasts of Roman
paganism not in their 'seasonal order, as might have been expected. It
mentions them in the reverse order, the later feast being cited earlier.
The verse in Ps. 139:5 "Thou hast set me behind and before" is suggested
as a mnemonic for this procedure: what should have been "behind" is
listed "before".

A frequently used mnemonic is a word formed from the initial letters of
crucial terms that figure in the theme to be remembered. Thus the
Talmud, in describing the preparation of the High Priest for the solemn
Day of Atonement service, at which he was to officiate, adds that he was
to confine himself to a special diet for seven days. A mnemonic is
suggested to help us remember the foods which were to be avoided. These
foods were citron (athrog), eggs (bezim), and old wine (yayin yashan).
The initial letters in the Hebrew words denoting these foods were
joined, forming the word ABY. According to another opinion his diet was
also to exclude fat meat (basar shamen). By the same process of joining
initial letters, and now including the word for fat meat (basar shamen),
the word ABBY was formed. By the simple device of remembering ABY and
ABBY we are given a clue to a readier recollection of the High Priest's
diet. To cite the Talmudic text: "Symachus said in the name of R. Mari:
One does not feed him either Aby, and some say, neither Abby

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> … Aby, i.e.,
Athrog (ethrog, citron), nor Bezim (eggs), nor Yayin yashan (old wine).
And according to others no Abby, i.e., neither Athrog (ethrog), nor
Bezim, nor Basar shamen (fat meat), nor Yayin yashan."

The mnemonic occasionally consists of a key word taken from the passage
that is to be fixed in memory. A good illustration of this appears in
the following passage:—"(Mnemonic: Hear, And Two, Seven, Songs,
Another). There was a man who used to say: Happy is a man who *hears*
abuse of himself and ignores it, for a hundred evils pass him by. …
Again there was a man who used to say: Do not be surprised if a thief
goes unhanged for *two* or three thefts; he will be caught in the end. …
Another used to say: *Seven* pits lie open for the good man (but he
escaped); for the evil-doers there is only one, into which he falls. …
Yet another used to say: Let him who comes from a court that has taken
from him his (ill-begotten) cloak sing his *song* (of relief) and go his
way. … *Another* used to say: When love was strong, we could have made
our bed on a sword-blade; now that our love has grown weak, a bed of
sixty cubits is not large enough for us. …" The words listed in
parentheses as the mnemonic are taken from each of the aphorisms in the
passage. The word was to be a key to recall the text of the
aphorism.<span id="an_r_08_11"></span>[11](wott11.htm#an_n_08_11.md)

#### PARABLES AND PROVERBS

The rabbis utilized parables to illustrate more vividly certain truths
that they were eager to convey to their people. Scattered throughout
rabbinic literature, these illustrations deal with a multitude of
diverse themes. They clothe abstract ideas with concreteness, bringing
them within greater comprehension by the human mind.

The masters of parable found many suggestions for their labors in the
metaphors of the Bible. God is often spoken of in the Bible as King. He
is king of the universe and more

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

specifically, of Israel. This suggested many parables which explain
God's ways with His creatures by reference to a king's relationship with
his subjects. Israel is characterized as the Lord's first-born, and this
is further clarified by stories of a king who had a dearly beloved son.
The Biblical allusions to Israel as the bride of God upon whom He
lavishes His love and who on occasions proves faithless to Him, inspired
a series of parables about the relations of a king and the woman of his
love. The story of the prophet Jonah's flight from God was further
clarified by the story of the servant who sought to flee his
master.<span id="an_r_08_12"></span>[12](wott11.htm#an_n_08_12.md)

The parables cited in the Talmud are for the most part centered in the
moralistic sections of the literature. They are relatively absent in the
discussions of law. By its very nature, the parable directs itself to
the popular mind, which it seeks to impress by its homespun wisdom,
rather than by formal analysis. Law was the field of interest of the
scholarly community. The moralistic portions of the Talmud, on the other
hand, spoke more directly to the common people.

Parables were occasionally employed in the current polemics of the
rabbis against paganism. Thus Rabban Gamaliel had been asked why God's
wrath is always spoken of as directed against idolators, rather than the
idols. He replied by means of a parable: "A king had a son, who
possessed a dog that he named after his royal father; and whenever he
was about to take an oath he used to say 'By the life of the dog, the
father.' When the king heard of it, at whom did he feel indignant?
Against the dog or against his son? Surely against the son."<span
id="an_r_08_13"></span>[13](wott11.htm#an_n_08_13.md)

Some Talmudic illustrations are fables in which animals, and
occasionally plants act and speak like human beings, their experiences
serving as an allegory for human life. Thus the experience of the fox in
the vineyard is made to suggest the well-known truth that earthly
possessions are ultimately futile since we cannot take them with us when
we pass to the great beyond. The Babylonian teacher, Geniba, developed

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

this fable in a comment in Ecclesiastes 5:14: "As he came forth of his
mother's womb, naked, shall he return; as he came, so shall he go." On
this Geniba commented: "This might be compared to a fox who found a
vineyard which was fenced round on all sides, but it had one small hole
in it. He sought to enter but he could not. What did he do? He fasted
three days until he became thin and emaciated. Then he entered through
the hole, and he ate and grew sleek. When he wished to leave, he could
not get through that hole. He then fasted another three days until he
again grew thin and emaciated and reduced to his former state, and then
he went forth. On leaving he turned and gazed at the place, saying: 'O
vineyard, vineyard, how goodly art thou, and how goodly is the fruit
which thou producest; all thy produce is beautiful and praiseworthy, but
what enjoyment have I had from thee? In the state in which one enters
thee, one must leave thee'. Even so it is with the world."

Rabbi Meir is said to have employed three hundred fables in which the
fox is offered as the instructor of wisdom. Only three of these have
remained. Some of the fables of the Talmud show marked similarity to the
fables of Aesop and the Indian moralist Kybises, but many are without
parallel in other literatures.<span
id="an_r_08_14"></span>[14](wott11.htm#an_n_08_14.md)

Some Talmudic illustrations are taken directly from human experience.
Situations are projected in which the lesson to be taught seemed
pointedly obvious, leading to its readier acceptance in the case dealt
with by the rabbis.

The need for constant readiness to meet one's Maker is elaborated in a
striking parable by Rabban Johanan ben Zaccai: "A king once invited his
servants to a banquet without indicating the precise time when it would
be given. Those who were wise remembered that things are always ready in
a king's palace, and they arrayed themselves and sat by the palace gate
attentive for the call to enter, while those who were foolish continued
their customary occupations, saying: 'A banquet requires great
preparation.' When the king suddenly

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

called his servants to the banquet, those who were wise appeared in
clean raiment and well adorned, while those who were foolish entered in
soiled and ordinary garments. The king took pleasure at the wise, but
was full of anger at those who were foolish, saying that those who had
come prepared for the banquet should sit down and eat and drink, but
those who had not properly arrayed themselves should remain standing and
look on."<span id="an_r_08_15"></span>[15](wott11.htm#an_n_08_15.md)

The Talmud cites a parable which was employed by Rabbi Zera in a funeral
oration, to answer the challenge of R. Abin's death, at the untimely age
of twenty-eight: "A king had a vineyard in which he employed many
laborers, one of whom demonstrated special aptitude and skill. What did
the king do? He took this laborer from his work, and strolled through
the garden conversing with him. When the laborers came for their wages
in the evening, the skillful laborer also appeared among them and he
received a full day's wages from the king. The other laborers were angry
at this and protested: 'We have toiled the whole day, while this man has
worked but two hours; why does the king give him the full wage, even as
to us?' The king said to them: 'Why are you angry? Through his skill he
has done in two hours more than you have done all day'. So it is with R.
Abin ben Hiyya. In the twenty-eight years of his life he has attained
more in the Torah than others attain in 100 years."<span
id="an_r_08_16"></span>[16](wott11.htm#an_n_08_16.md)

The use of parable to offer consolation in bereavement is illustrated
even more strikingly by the story concerning Beruria, wife of Rabbi
Meir: "Their two sons died suddenly while Rabbi Meir was at the academy
on a Sabbath afternoon. She put them on the bed and covered them with a
sheet. In the evening Rabbi Meir returned and asked for the boys. She
told him that they had gone to the academy. He protested that he had not
seen them there. She gave him the cup of wine and he recited the prayers
for the departure of the Sabbath. Then he asked once more: 'Where are
our two sons?' She said to him: 'Perhaps they have gone out somewhere,

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

but they will surely return soon.' Then she served him food and he ate.
After he had eaten, she said to him: 'My master, I have a question to
ask.' He said to her: 'What is your question?' She said to him: 'O my
master, the other day someone came and left in my charge a treasure, but
now he has come to claim it. Shall I return it or not?' He said to her:
'Is there any question about the duty of returning property left in
safekeeping to its owner?' She said to him: 'I did not want to return it
without your knowing it.' Then she took him by the hand and led him to
the room where the boys lay, and she placed him before the bed. She
removed the sheet and he beheld the two boys lying dead on the bed. He
began to cry. … Then she told him: 'Did you not tell me that we must
return the treasure to its owner?' So it is. 'The Lord hath given and
the Lord hath taken, may the name of the Lord be blessed forever.' Said
Rabbi Hanina: By means of that parable she comforted him and his mind
became resigned to his sorrow."<span
id="an_r_08_17"></span>[17](wott11.htm#an_n_08_17.md)

The rabbis found an important source of illustrations in the phenomena
of nature, where they often found parallels to the phenomena of human
life. The man of learning but without the necessary complement of
character is compared by the rabbis to a tree laden with many heavy
branches but insufficiently rooted in the earth; it lacks the sturdiness
to withstand the storms ravaging the world. This illustration is quoted
in the Ethics of the Fathers in the name of Rabbi Elazar ben Azarish:
"He whose wisdom exceeds his works, to what may he be compared? To a
tree whose branches are many, but whose roots are few; and the wind
comes and plucks it up and overturns it upon its face. … But he whose
work exceeds his wisdom, to what may he be compared? To a tree whose
branches are few, but whose roots are many, so that even if all the
winds in the world come and blow upon it, it cannot be stirred from its
place, as it is said, 'And he shall be as a tree planted by the waters;
and that spreadeth out its roots by the river, and shall not perceive
when heat

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

cometh, but his leaf shall be green; and he shall not be troubled in the
year of drought, neither shall he cease from yielding fruit.'" (Jer.
17:8).

The illustrations of the Talmud are often directed to the explanation of
a Biblical text even as they seek to reinforce independent comments of
the rabbis. Thus in accounting for the divine command which directed
Abraham to leave his kin and his native land to proceed on the fateful
journey to Canaan one rabbi cites the illustration of a flask of
perfume: "As a flask of perfume that is hidden away in a corner gives
forth no fragrance but must be poured forth to yield its fragrance, so
was Abraham at the time when the Lord commanded him 'Go thee out of thy
land and out of thy kindred' (Gen. 12:1). 'Abraham, Abraham', God
exhorted him, 'you are a person of many noble deeds and commandments.
Wander about in the world and your name will become exalted in my
world.' Thus what does the verse say after the directive to set out on
the journey? 'And I shall make of thee a great nation" (Gen. 12:2).<span
id="an_r_08_18"></span>[18](wott11.htm#an_n_08_18.md)

Another source for Talmudic illustrations were proverbs, often drawn
from popular culture. In concise and pithy formulations, often ironic in
tone and peppered with humor, proverbs are copiously represented
throughout Talmudic literature, and they drive home their points with a
finality that no formal argument could possibly attain.

We cite here some Talmudic proverbs. Their meaning is generally
self-evident, and there is no need to elucidate them by a commentary. "A
person prefers one measure of his own to nine measures of his neighbor";
"Tell part of a person's praise in his presence and all of it in his
absence"; "Heed your physician and you will not need him"; "The walls
have ears, the woods have ears"; "Words follow the promptings of the
heart"; "If the sword then not the book, if the book then not the
sword"; "Who is a hero? He who can curb his passions"; "Who is wise? He
who learns from all men"; "Don't consider the vessel, but what is in
it";

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "If your wife is
short in stature, bend down and whisper to her"; "When the shepherd
strays, the sheep stray after him"; "Much happens through childishness,
much happens through wine"; "If Tobias sinned, shall Sigood be
punished?"; "Silence becomes the wise, and surely the foolish".<span
id="an_r_08_19"></span>[19](wott11.htm#an_n_08_19.md)

As a rule, the proverb is not stated independently. It is offered as
additional support of some lesson that has been expounded. The following
citations illustrate this: "Moses and Aaron once walked along, with
Nadab and Abihu behind them, and all Israel following in the rear. Then
Nadab said to Abihu, 'O that these old might die, so that you and I
might become the leaders of our generation!' But the Holy One blessed be
He said unto them, 'We shall see who will bury whom.' R. Papa said: Thus
men say: 'Many an old camel is laden with the hides of the younger
ones.'" The alleged conversation of Nadab and Abihu is a rabbinic
suggestion as to what Scripture might have meant by the statement that
those two had merited death because they had offered "strange fire
before the Lord." (Lev. 10:1).

The identical procedure is involved in the following citation: "*The
vision of Obadiah. Thus said the Lord concerning Edom* (Obadiah 1:1).
Why particularly Obadiah against Edom? … Ephraim Makshaah, the disciple
of Rabbi Meir, said on Rabbi Meir's authority that Obadiah was an
Edomite proselyte; and thus people say, 'From the very forest itself
comes the handle of the axe that fells it.'"<span
id="an_r_08_20"></span>[20](wott11.htm#an_n_08_20.md)

The rabbis did not see themselves as pioneers in the use of parable and
proverb. Both appear in the Bible, principally in the writings which
have been ascribed to King Solomon. They therefore commended Solomon for
his contributions to this important phase of tradition. Solomon, they
said, was the perfect teacher in that by means of parables, he adapted
his truth to the understanding of those whom he taught. The parable, the
rabbis generalized, is to abstract truth what a thread is for a
labyrinth, or a trail in a thick and dark forest, or a handle to a cask
of fruit or to a demijohn

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

of boiling water, or a rope and bucket to a deep well of fresh, cold
water. "Disdain it not, the parable", they added. "Remember that when a
pearl of great worth is lost, we search after it with a candle that
costs but the smallest coin. So the lowly parable takes us home to the
great teachings of the Torah."<span
id="an_r_08_21"></span>[21](wott11.htm#an_n_08_21.md)

In the style of their utterance no less than in the doctrine which they
proclaimed, the rabbis regarded themselves not as innovators, but as
expositors of the Scriptural word. Thus the line of development between
Bible and Talmud runs clear and unbroken. In itself a vast body of
literature, the Bible was also the seed for a new process of growth. And
the Talmud has remained its most impressive consummation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Notes](wott11.md)
