[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tcr06)  [Next](tcr08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930985/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*True Christian Religion*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1771\], tr. by John
C. Ager \[1906\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### True Christian Religion

<span class="margnote"><span id="301.">301.</span></span>

THE THIRD COMMANDMENT. REMEMBER THE SABBATH DAY TO KEEP IT HOLY SIX DAYS
SHALT THOU LABOR AND DO ALL THY WORK; BUT THE SEVENTH DAY IS THE SABBATH
OF JEHOVAH THY GOD. This is the third commandment, as may be seen from
Exod. 20:8-10, and Deut. 5:12-14. In the natural sense, which is the
sense of the letter, it means that six days are for man and his labors,
and the seventh for the Lord and rest for man from the Lord. In the
original tongue Sabbath signifies rest. With the children of Israel the
Sabbath, because it represented the Lord, was the sanctity of
sanctities, the six days representing His labors and conflicts with the
hells, and the seventh His victory over them, and consequent rest; and
as that day was a representative of the close of the whole of the Lord's
work of redemption, it was holiness itself. But when the Lord came into
the world, and in consequence representations of Him ceased, that day
became a day of instruction in Divine things, and thus also a day of
rest from labors and of meditation on such things as relate to salvation
and eternal life, as also a day of love towards the neighbor. That it
became a day of instruction in Divine things is evident from this, That
on that day the Lord taught in the temple and in synagogues (Mark 6:2;
Luke 4:16, 31, 32: 13:10) And that He said to the man who was healed,
Take up thy bed and walk and to the Pharisees that it was lawful for His
disciples on the Sabbath day to pluck the ears of corn and eat (Matt.
12:1-9; Mark 2:23-28; Luke 6:1-6; John 5:9-19), each of these
particulars signifying in the spiritual sense instruction in doctrinals.
That that day was made also a day of love towards the neighbor is
evident from what the Lord did and taught on that day (Matt. 12:10-14;
Mark 3:1-9; Luke 6:6-12; 13:10-18; 14:1-7; John 5:9-19; 7:22, 23; 9:14,
16). From all this it is evident why the Lord said, That He is Lord also
of the Sabbath (Matt. 12:8; Mark 2:28; Luke 6:5); and because He said
this, it follows that that day was a representative of Him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="302.">302.</span></span>

In the spiritual sense, this commandment signifies man's reformation and
regeneration by the Lord, "the six days of labor" signifying his warfare
against the flesh and its lusts, and at the same time against the evils
and falsities that are in him from hell, and "the seventh day"
signifying his conjunction with the Lord, and regeneration thereby. That
man's spiritual labor continues as long as that warfare lasts, but when
he is regenerated he has rest, will be shown in what is to be said
hereafter in the chapter on Reformation and Regeneration, especially
under the following sections there: (1) Regeneration is effected in a
manner analogous to that in which man is conceived, carried in a womb,
born, and educated (2) The first act in the new birth is called
reformation, which belongs to the understanding; and the second is
called regeneration, which belongs to the will and therefrom to the
understanding. (3) The internal man is to be reformed first, and through
that the external. (4) Then a conflict arises between the internal and
the external man, and the one that conquers rules the other. (5) The
regenerate man has a new will, and a new understanding; and so forth.
The reformation and regeneration of man are signified by this
commandment in the spiritual sense, because they coincide with the
labors and combats of the Lord with the hells, and with His victory over
them, and the rest that followed. For the Lord reforms and regenerates
man and renders him spiritual in the same manner in which He glorified
His Human and made it Divine; and this is the meaning of the command to
"follow Him." That the Lord had combats, which are called "labors," is
evident from Isa. 53 and 58; and that like things are called "labors" in
reference to men, from Isa. 65:23; Apoc. 51:2, 3.

<span class="margnote"><span id="303.">303.</span></span>

In the celestial sense, this commandment means conjunction with the
Lord, followed by peace, because of protection from hell. For the
Sabbath signifies rest, and in this highest sense, peace; therefore the
Lord is called the Prince of Peace, and He also calls Himself "Peace,"
as is evident from the following passages: Unto us a Child is born, unto
us a Son is given; and the government shall be upon His shoulders; and
His name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, God, Mighty, Father of
eternity, Prince of Peace. Of the increase of His government and peace
there shall be no end (Isa. 9:6, 7). Jesus said, Peace I leave with you,
My peace I give unto you (John 14:27). Jesus said, These things have I
spoken unto you that in Me ye may have peace (John 16:33). How beautiful
upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that
publisheth peace; saying, Thy King reigneth (Isa. 52:7). Jehovah will
deliver my soul in peace (Ps. 55:18). Jehovah's work is peace; and the
labor of righteousness rest and security forever that My people may
abide in a habitation of peace, and in tents of security, in quiet
resting-places (Isa. 32:17. 18). Jesus said to the seventy whom He sent
forth, Into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace be to this
house; and if a son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon him
(Luke 10:6, 8; Matt. 10:12-14). Jehovah will speak peace unto His
people. Righteousness and peace have kissed each other (Ps. 85:8, 10).
When the Lord Himself appeared to His disciples, He said, Peace be unto
you (John 20:19, 21, 28). Moreover, the state of peace into which men
are to come from the Lord is treated of in Isa. 65, 66 and elsewhere;
and those will come into that state, who are received into the New
Church which the Lord is establishing at this day. What peace is in its
essence, which is the peace in which the angels of heaven and those who
are in the Lord are, may be seen in the work on Heaven and Hell (n.
284-290). From all this it is also evident why the Lord called Himself
"Lord of the Sabbath," that is, of rest and peace.

<span class="margnote"><span id="304.">304.</span></span>

Heavenly peace, which, in respect to the hells, is that evils and
falsities shall not rise up from them and break forth, may be compared
in many respects with natural peace; as with peace after war, when
everyone is secure from enemies and is safe in his own city and home and
living in his own fields and garden. This is as the prophet said when he
spoke naturally of heavenly peace: They shall sit every man under his
vine and under his fig-tree, and none shall make them afraid (Micah 4:4;
Isa. 65:21-23). It may also be compared to recreations of mind and to
rest after severe labor, and to the consolation felt by mothers after
childbirth, when their parental love (called storge) manifests its
delights. It may also be compared with serenity after tempests, black
clouds, and thunders; also with spring, after a terrible winter has
passed, and with the gladdening influences from the new growths in the
fields and the blossoming in the gardens, meadows, and woods; and again
with the state of mind experienced by those who, after storms and
dangers on the sea, reach a port and set foot on the longed-for land

<span class="margnote"><span id="305.">305.</span></span>

THE FOURTH COMMANDMENT. HONOR THY FATHER AND THY MOTHER, THAT THY DAYS
MAY BE PROLONGED, AND THAT IT MAY BE WELL WITH THEE UPON THE EARTH. So
reads this commandment in Exod. 20:12; Deut. 5:16. In the natural sense,
which is that of the letter, "to honor thy father and thy mother" means
to honor parents, to be obedient to them, to be devoted to them, and to
return thanks to them for the benefits they confer, which are that they
provide food and clothing for their children, and so introduce them into
the world that they may act in it as civil and moral persons; and
introduce them also into heaven by means of the precepts of religion,
thus providing both for their temporal prosperity and their eternal
happiness. All this parents do from a love which they have from the
Lord, in whose stead they act. In a relative sense it means that if
parents are dead, guardians should be honored by their wards. In a
broader sense, to honor the king and magistrates, is meant by this
commandment, since these provide for all in general the necessities
which parents provide in particular. In the broadest sense this
commandment means that men should love their country, since it supports
and protects them, therefore it is called fatherland from father. But to
country, king, and magistrates honor must be rendered by parents and by
them be implanted in their children.

<span class="margnote"><span id="306.">306.</span></span>

In the spiritual sense, "to honor father and mother" means to reverence
and love God and the church. In this sense, God who is the father of
all, is meant by "father" and the church by "mother." In the heavens
little children and the angels know no other father and no other mother,
since they are there born anew of the Lord through the church. Therefore
the Lord says: Call no man your father on the earth; for one is your
Father, who is in the heavens (Matt. 23:9). This was said with reference
to children and angels in heaven, and not of children and men on earth.
The Lord teaches the same thing in the common prayer of the Christian
churches, "Our Father who art in the heavens, hallowed be Thy name." In
the spiritual sense, "mother" means the church, because as a mother on
earth nourishes her children with natural food; so does the church
nourish her children with spiritual food, and this is why the church is
frequently called "mother" in the Word, as in Hosea: Plead with your
mother; she is not my wife, and I am not her husband (2:2, 6). In
Isaiah: Where is the bill of your mother's divorcement, whom I have put
away? (50:1; Ezek. 16:46; 19:10). And in the Gospels: Jesus stretched
forth His hand towards Ills disciples, and said, My mother and My
brethren are these who hear the Word of God and do it (Matt. 12:48-50;
Mark 3:33-36; Luke 8:21; John 19:25-27).

<span class="margnote"><span id="307.">307.</span></span>

In the celestial sense, "father" means our Lord Jesus Christ, and
"mother" the communion of saints, which means the Lord's church spread
throughout the whole world. That the Lord is the Father, is evident from
the following passages: Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given.
His name is God, Mighty, Father of eternity, Prince of Peace (Isa. 9:6).
Thou art our Father; Abraham knoweth us not and Israel doth not
acknowledge us; Thou art our Father, our Redeemer from everlasting is
Thy name (Isa. 63:16). Philip said, show us the Father; Jesus saith unto
him, He that seeth Me seeth the Father; how sayest thou then, Show us
the Father? Believe Me that I am in the Father, and the Father in Me
(John 14:8-11; also 12:45). That "mother" in this sense means the Lord's
church, is evident from the following passages: I saw the holy city, New
Jerusalem, made ready as a bride adorned for her husband (Apoc. 21:2).
The angel said to John, Come hither, I will show thee the bride, the
wife of the Lamb; and he showed me the city, the holy Jerusalem (Apoc.
21:9, 10). The time of the marriage of the Lamb is come, and His wife
hath made herself ready: Blessed are they that have been called unto the
marriage supper of the Lamb (Apoc. 19:7, 9). (See also Matt. 9:15; Mark
2:19, 20; Luke 5:34, 36; John 3:29; 19:25-27.) That "the New Jerusalem"
means the New Church which the Lord is at this day establishing, may be
seen in the Apocalypse Revealed (n. 880, 881); this church, and not the
preceding, is the wife and the mother in this sense. The spiritual
offspring which are born from this marriage are the goods of charity and
the truths of faith; and those who are in these from the Lord, are
called "sons of the marriage," "sons of God," and "born of God."

<span class="margnote"><span id="308.">308.</span></span>

It must he kept in mind that a Divine-heavenly sphere of love
continually goes forth from the Lord toward all who embrace the doctrine
of His church, who are obedient to Him, as children are to their father
and mother in the world, who devote themselves to Him, and who wish to
be fed, that is, instructed by Him. From this heavenly sphere a natural
sphere arises, which is one of love towards infants and children. This
is a most universal sphere, affecting not only men, but also birds and
beasts and even serpents; nor animate things only, but also things
inanimate. But that the Lord might operate upon these even as upon
spiritual things, He created a sun to be in the natural world like a
father, the earth being like a mother. For the sun is like a common
father and the earth like a common mother from the marriage of which all
the vegetation that adorns the surface of the earth is produced. From
the influx of that heavenly sphere into the natural world, come the
marvelous developments of vegetation from seed to fruit, and again to
new seed. It is from this also that many kinds of plants turn, as it
were, their faces to the sun during the day, and turn them away when the
sun sets. It is from this also that there are flowers that open at the
rising of the sun and close at his setting. It is from this also that
the song-birds sing sweetly at the early dawn, and likewise after they
have been fed by their mother earth. Thus do all these honor their
father and mother. They all bear testimony that in the natural world the
Lord provides through the sun and the earth all necessities both for
animate and inanimate things. Therefore it is said in David: Praise ye
Jehovah from the heavens; praise ye Him, sun and moon; praise Him from
the earth, ye dragons and all deeps; praise Him, fruitful trees and all
cedars; beasts and all cattle; creeping things and flying fowl; kings of
the earth and all peoples; young men and maidens (Ps. 148:1-12); and in
Job: Ask, I pray, the beasts and they shall teach thee; or the fowls of
the air, and they shall tell thee; or the shrub of the earth, and it
shall teach thee; and the fishes of the sea shall declare unto thee. Who
doth not know from all these things that the hand of Jehovah hath
wrought this? (Job 12:7-9). "Ask and they will teach," signifies to
observe, study, and judge from these things that the Lord Jehovah
created them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="309.">309.</span></span>

THE FIFTH COMMANDMENT. THOU SHALT NOT KILL. In the natural sense, this
commandment "Thou shalt not kill" means not to kill a man, and not to
inflict upon him any wound from which he may die, also not to maim his
body. It means also not to inflict any deadly harm upon his name and
fame, since with many fame and life go hand in hand. In a broader
natural sense, murder means enmity, hatred, and revenge, which breathe
slaughter; for in them murder lies concealed as fire in wood under
ashes. Infernal fire is nothing else; hence the expressions, to be
inflamed with hatred, to burn with revenge. These passions are murder in
intention, not in act; but if fear of the law or of retaliation and
revenge were removed from them, they would break forth into act,
especially if there is treachery or ferocity in the intention. That
hatred is murder, is evident from these words of the Lord: Ye have heard
that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not kill; and whosoever
shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment. But I say unto you, that
whosoever is angry with his brother rashly shall be in danger of the
judgment. But whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be in
danger of the council, and whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in
danger of the hell of fire (Matt. 5:21, 22). This is because whatever
pertains to the intention pertains also to the will, and so essentially
to the deed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="310.">310.</span></span>

In the spiritual sense, murder means all modes of killing and destroying
the souls of men, which modes are various and manifold, as for example,
turning men away from God, religion, and Divine worship by insinuating
scandalous thoughts against these, or by inducing such persuasions as
cause aversion and even abhorrence. Such murderers are all the devils
and satans in hell, with whom those in this world who violate and
prostitute the sanctities of the church are in conjunction. Those who
destroy souls by falsities are meant by the king of the abyss, who is
called "Abaddon" or "Apollyon," that is, the Destroyer (Apoc. 9:11); and
in the prophetic Word \[those whom they destroy\] are meant by "the
slain," as in the following passages: Thus said Jehovah God, Feed the
flock of slaughter which their possessors have slain (Zech. 11:4-5, 7).
We are killed all the day long; we are counted as a flock for the
slaughter (Ps. 44:22, 23). Jacob shall cause them that come to take
root. Is he slain according to the slaughter of them that are slain by
him? (Isa. 27:6, 7). The thief cometh not but to steal and to kill the
sheep; I am come that they may have life and abundance (John 10:10).
(Besides elsewhere, as in Isa. 14:21; 26:21; Ezek. 37:9; Jer. 4:31;
12:3; Rev. 9:4, 5; 11:7.) And therefore the devil is called: A murderer
from the beginning (John 8:44).

<span class="margnote"><span id="311.">311.</span></span>

In the celestial sense, to kill means to be rashly angry with the Lord,
to hate Him, and to wish to blot out His name. It is said of such that
they crucify the Lord, and this they would do, as the Jews did, if He
were to come again into the world as before. This is meant by: A Lamb
standing as though it had been slain (Rev. 5:6; 13:8). Also by the
Lord's being crucified (Rev. 11:8; Heb. 6:6; Gal. 3:1).

<span class="margnote"><span id="312.">312.</span></span>

The nature of man's internal, unless it is reformed by the Lord, has
been made evident to me from seeing the devils and satans in hell; for
they have it constantly in mind to kill the Lord; and as they cannot do
this they are in the endeavor to kill those who are devoted to the Lord;
but not being able, as men are in the world, to do this, they make every
effort to destroy their souls, that is, to destroy faith and charity in
them. With such, essential hatred and revenge appear like lurid and
glowing fires-hatred like a lurid fire, and revenge like a glowing
fire-yet these are not fires, but appearances. The cruelties of their
hearts sometimes appear above them in the air like contests with angels
and their slaughter and overthrow. Such direful mockeries arise from
their wrath and hatred against heaven. Moreover, at a distance, these
same spirits appear like wild beasts of every kind, as tigers, leopards,
wolves, foxes, dogs, crocodiles, and all kinds of serpents; and when
they see gentle animals in representative forms, they rush upon them in
fantasy and strive to tear them in pieces. They came to my sight like
dragons standing near women with whom there were little children, whom
they were endeavoring, as it were, to devour (according to what is
recorded in the twelfth chapter of Revelation); but these were nothing
else than representations of hatred against the Lord and His New Church.
That men in the world who wish to destroy the Lord's church are like
these spirits is not evident to their companions; and for the reason
that their bodies, through which they practice the moralities, absorb
and conceal these things. But to the angels, who behold their spirits
and not their bodies, they appear in forms like those of the devils
above described. Who could have known such things had not the Lord
opened the sight of some one, and given him the ability to look into the
spiritual world? Otherwise, would not these, together with other most
important matters, have lain concealed from man for ever?

<span class="margnote"><span id="313.">313.</span></span>

THE SIXTH COMMANDMENT. THOU SHALT NOT COMMIT ADULTERY. In the natural
sense, this commandment means not only not to commit adultery, but it
refers also to willing and doing obscene things and thinking and
speaking about lascivious things. That merely to lust is to commit
adultery, is evident from the Lord's words: Ye have heard that it was
said by them of old time, Thou shalt not commit adultery. But I say to
you, that everyone that looketh on another man's wife to lust after her,
hath committed adultery with her already in his heart (Matt. 5:27, 28).
The reason of this is that when lust enters the will it becomes, as it
were, deed; for allurement enters into the understanding only, but into
the will, intention; and the intention of a lust is a deed. But more on
this subject may be seen in the work on Marriage Love and Scortatory
Love (Amsterdam, 1768), which treats, On the Opposition of Marriage to
Scortatory Love (n. 423-443); On Fornication (n. 444-460); On Adulteries
and the Different Kinds and Degrees of Adultery (n. 478-499); On the
Lust of Defloration (n. 501-505); On the Lust for Variety (n. 506-510);
On the Lust of Violation (n. 511, 512); On the Lust of Seducing
Innocences (n. 513, 514); On the Imputation of Scortatory Love and of
Marriage Love (n. 523-531). All of these things are meant by this
commandment in the natural sense.

<span class="margnote"><span id="314.">314.</span></span>

In the spiritual sense, "to commit adultery" means to adulterate the
goods of the Word and to falsify its truths. That "to commit adultery"
means this also, has been hitherto unknown, because the spiritual sense
of the Word has been hitherto concealed. That such is the meaning in the
Word of "to commit adultery," "to adulterate," and "to commit whoredom"
is evident from the following passages: Run ye to and fro through the
streets of Jerusalem, and seek if ye can find a man that executeth
judgment, and seeketh the truth. When I had fed them to the full, they
committed adultery (Jer. 5:1, 7). In the prophets of Jerusalem I have
seen a horrible stubbornness in adulterating and walking in a lie (Jer.
23:14). They have wrought folly in Israel, and have committed whoredom,
and have spoken My Word falsely (Jer. 29:23). They committed whoredom,
because they have left Jehovah (Hos. 4:10). I will cut off the soul that
turneth unto them that have familiar spirits and unto the wizards, to go
a whoring after them (Lev. 20:6). A covenant shall not be made with the
inhabitants of the land, lest they go a whoring after their gods (Ex.
34:16). Because Babylon adulterates and falsifies the Word more than
others, she is called the great harlot, and it is said of her in the
Apocalypse: Babylon hath given all nations to drink of the wine of the
anger of her fornication (Apoc. 14:8). The angel said, I will show unto
thee the judgment of the great harlot; with whom the kings of the earth
committed whoredom (Apoc. 17:1, 2). For He hath judged the great harlot
that corrupted the earth with her whoredom (Apoc. 19:2). Because the
Jewish nation had falsified the Word, it was called by the Lord: An
adulterous generation (Matt. 12:39; 16:4; Mark 8:38); And the seed of
the adulterer (Isa. 57:3). There are many other passages where
"adulteries" and "whoredoms" mean adulterations and falsifications of
the Word (as in Jer. 3:6, 8; 13:27; Ezek. 16:15, 16, 26, 28, 29, 32, 33;
23:2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 14, 16, 17; Hos. 5:3; 6:10; Nahum 3:4).

<span class="margnote"><span id="315.">315.</span></span>

In the celestial sense, "to commit adultery" means to deny the holiness
of the Word, and to profane it. This meaning follows from the preceding
spiritual meaning, which is to adulterate its goods and to falsify its
truths. The holiness of the Word is denied and profaned by those who in
heart ridicule all things of the church and of religion, for in the
Christian world all things of the church and of religion are from the
Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="316.">316.</span></span>

There are many causes which make a man to seem chaste, not only to
others but also to himself, when, in fact, he is wholly unchaste; since
he does not know that when a lust occupies the will it is a deed and
cannot be removed except by the Lord after repentance. A man is not made
chaste by abstaining from doing, but by abstaining from willing because
it is a sin when the doing is possible. Just so far as anyone abstains
from adulteries and whoredoms, solely from fear of the civil law and its
penalties; from fear of the loss of reputation and thus of honor; from
fear of the diseases arising from them; from fear of the wife's
upbraidings at home, and the consequent intranquillity of life; from
fear of the vengeance of the husband and relatives, or of being beaten
by their servants; or because of avarice, or any infirmity caused by
disease or abuse or age or any other cause of impotence; even if he
abstains on account of any natural or moral law, and not at the same
time on account of spiritual law; he is nevertheless inwardly an
adulterer and a fornicator. For he nonetheless believes that adulteries
and whoredoms are not sins, and therefore he does not in his spirit make
them unlawful before God; and thus in spirit he commits them, even if he
does not commit them in the body before the world; and in consequence,
when after death he becomes a spirit he speaks openly in favor of them.
Furthermore, adulterers may be compared to covenant-breakers who violate
compacts; also to the satyrs and priapi of the ancients, who roamed in
forests, crying out, "Where are there virgins, betrothed maidens, and
wives, to sport with?" Moreover, in the spiritual world adulterers
actually appear like satyrs and priapi. They may also be compared to
rank he-goats, or to dogs that run about the streets, looking about and
smelling for female dogs to satiate their lasciviousness; and so on.
When they become husbands their virility may be likened to the
blossoming of tulips in spring, which in a month lose their flowers and
wither.

<span class="margnote"><span id="317.">317.</span></span>

THE SEVENTH COMMANDMENT. THOU SHALT NOT STEAL. In the natural sense,
this commandment means, according to its letter, not to steal or to rob
or to commit piracy in time of peace; and in general, not to take away
anyone's goods secretly or under any pretext. It also extends to all
impostures and illegitimate gains, usuries, and exactions; and again to
frauds in paying taxes and duties and in discharging debts. Laborers
transgress this commandment when they do their work unfaithfully and
deceitfully; merchants, when they practice deceit in their merchandise,
in weight, in measure, and in their accounts; officers, when they deduct
from the soldiers' wages; judges, when they give judgment for
friendship, reward, relationship, or others reasons, preventing law and
evidence, and so depriving others of the goods which they rightfully
possess.

<span class="margnote"><span id="318.">318.</span></span>

In the spiritual sense, to steal means to deprive others of the truths
of their faith, which is done by means of falsities and heresies.
Priests, who minister solely for gain or from a lust for honor, and
teach what they see or might see from the Word to be untrue, are
spiritual thieves, since they take away from the people the means of
salvation, which are the truths of faith. Such are called thieves in the
Word, in the following passages: He that entereth not by the door into
the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a
robber. The thief cometh not but to steal, and to kill, and to destroy
(John 10:1, 10). Lay not up treasures upon earth, but in heaven, where
thieves do not come and steal (Matt. 6:19, 20). If thieves come to thee,
if robbers by night, how art thou cut off; will they not steal what is
enough for them? (Obad. verse 5). They shall run to and fro in the city;
they shall run upon the wall, they shall climb up upon the houses; they
shall enter in at the windows like a thief (Joel 2:9). They have
committed falsehood, and the thief cometh in, and the troop spreadeth
itself without (Hos. 7:1).

<span class="margnote"><span id="319.">319.</span></span>

In the celestial sense, thieves mean those who take away from the Lord
His Divine power; also those who claim for themselves His merit and
righteousness. These, even if they adore God, still do not trust in Him
but only in themselves, and also do not believe in God, but only in
themselves.

<span class="margnote"><span id="320.">320.</span></span>

Those who teach what is false and heretical and persuade the common
people that it is true and orthodox, although they read the Word, and
from it may know what is false and what is true, also those who by
fallacies confirm falsities of religion and seduce men thereby, may be
compared to impostors and their impostures of all kinds; and because
such impostures are in the spiritual sense essentially thefts, such
persons may be compared to counterfeiters who strike false coins and
gild them or give them outwardly the color of gold, and pass them for
pure coins; then again to those who know how to cut and polish crystals
skillfully and harden them, and who sell them for diamonds; also to men
who carry apes or monkeys, clothed like men and with veiled faces on
horses or mules through cities, and proclaim that these are noblemen of
an ancient stock. They are also like those who put on false faces
smeared with paints of various colors, over the living and natural face,
concealing its beauty; and they are also like men who exhibit selenite
and mica, which shine as if from gold and silver, and try to sell them
as coming from veins that are very precious. They may also be likened to
those who by theatricals lead men away from true Divine worship, or from
churches to playhouses. Those who establish all kinds of falsity,
regarding truths as of no moment, and who discharge priestly functions
solely for gain and a lust for honor, being thus spiritual thieves, may
be likened to those thieves who carry keys wherewith they can open the
door of any house; also to leopards and eagles, that with sharp eyes
search for the fattest prey.

<span class="margnote"><span id="321.">321.</span></span>

THE EIGHTH COMMANDMENT. THOU SHALT NOT BEAR FALSE WITNESS AGAINST THY
NEIGHBOR. "Bearing false witness against the neighbor," or testifying
falsely, means, in the natural sense nearest to the letter, to act the
part of a false witness before a judge, or before others not in a court
of justice, against one who is rashly accused of any evil, and to
support the accusation by the name of God or anything else that is holy
or by one's personal influence and the strength of his personal
reputation. In a wider natural sense this commandment forbids all kinds
of lies and hypocrisies in civil life which look to an evil end; also
traducing and defaming the neighbor, to the injury of his honor, name,
and fame, on which the man's whole character depends. In the widest
natural sense, the commandment forbids plots, cunning devices, and
premeditated evils against anyone, which spring from various sources, as
enmity, hatred, revenge, envy, emulation, and the like. For these evils
conceal within them the bearing of false witness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="322.">322.</span></span>

In the spiritual sense, "bearing false witness" means to persuade that
falsity of belief is true belief and evil of life is good of life, and
the reverse, doing this from purpose, not from ignorance; that is, doing
this after one has learned what is true and good, not before; for the
Lord says: If ye were blind, ye would have no sin; but now ye say, We
see; therefore your sin remaineth (John 9:41). In the Word this kind of
falsehood is called a "lie" and the intent is called "deceit," as in the
following passages: We have made a covenant with death, and with hell we
have made vision, for we have made a lie our trust, and in falsehood
have we hid ourselves (Isa. 28:15). This is a rebellious people, lying
sons, they will not hear the law of Jehovah (Isa. 30:9). From the
prophet even unto the priest everyone worketh a lie (Jer. 8:10). The
inhabitants speak a lie, their tongue is deceitful in their mouth (Micah
6:12). Thou wilt destroy them that speak a lie; Jehovah abhorreth the
man of deceit (Ps. 5:6). They have taught their tongue to speak a lie;
their habitation is in the midst of deceit (Jer. 9:5, 6). Because a
"lie" means what is false, the Lord says: That when the devil speaketh a
lie, he speaketh from his own (John 8:44). ("A lie" signifies what is
false, and false speaking, in the following places also: Jer. 23:14, 32;
Ezek. 13:6-9; 21:29; Hos. 7:1; 12:1; Nahum 3:1; Ps. 120:2, 3).

<span class="margnote"><span id="323.">323.</span></span>

In the celestial sense, bearing false witness means blaspheming the Lord
and the Word, thus banishing truth itself from the church; for the Lord
is the Truth itself, as likewise the Word. On the other hand, to bear
witness in this sense, means to speak the truth, and testimony means the
truth itself. For this reason the Decalogue is called the "testimony"
(Exod. 25:16, 21, 22; 31:7, 18; 32:15, 16; 40:20; Lev. 16:13; Num. 17:4,
7, 10). And because the Lord is the truth itself, He says of Himself,
that He bears witness, That the Lord is the very truth (John 14:6; Rev.
3:7, 14); And that He bears witness, and witnesses of Himself (John
3:11; 8:13-19; 15:26; 18:37, 38).

<span class="margnote"><span id="324.">324.</span></span>

Those who speak falsities from deceit or purposely, uttering them in a
tone imitative of spiritual affection (and still more if they mingle
with them truths from the Word, which are thus falsified), were by the
ancients called sorcerers (on whom see the Apocalypse Revealed, n. 462),
also pythons, and serpents of the tree of the knowledge of good and
evil. These falsifiers, liars, and deceivers may be likened to men who
talk to those they hate in a bland and friendly manner, and while
talking hold behind them a dagger with which to kill. They may also be
likened to those who poison their swords and thus attack their enemies;
or to those who mix hemlock with water, or who poison with wine and
sweetmeats. They may also be likened to handsome and seductive harlots
infected with venereal diseases; to stinging shrubs, which when brought
near to the nostrils, hurt the olfactory fibers; to sweetened poisons;
and also to ordure, which when dried emits in autumn a fragrant odor.
Such are described in the Word by leopards (see the Apocalypse Revealed,
n. 572).

<span class="margnote"><span id="325.">325.</span></span>

THE NINTH AND TENTH COMMANDMENTS. THOU SHALT NOT COVET THY NEIGHBOR'S
HOUSE; THOU SHALT NOT COVET THY NEIGHBOR'S WIFE, NOR HIS MANSERVANT NOR
HIS MAIDSERVANT, NOR HIS OX, NOR HIS ASS, NOR ANYTHING THAT IS THY
NEIGHBOR'S. In the catechisms now in use, this commandment is divided
into two, one forming the ninth, which is, "Thou shalt not covet thy
neighbor's house;" and the other the tenth, which is, "Thou shalt not
covet thy neighbor's wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor
his ox, nor his ass, nor anything that is thy neighbor's." As these two
commandments constitute one thing, and in Exod. 20:17; Deut. 5:21, one
verse, I have undertaken to treat of the two together; not wishing them
to be joined together as one commandment, but rather that as heretofore
they be kept separate as two, since the commandments are called (in the
Hebrew) the Ten Words (Ex. 34:28; Deut. 4:13; 10:4).

<span class="margnote"><span id="326.">326.</span></span>

These two commandments have relation to all the preceding ones, and
teach and enjoin not only that evils must not be done, but also that
they must not be lusted after, consequently that evils pertain not
solely to the external man, but also to the internal; since he who
refrains from doing evils and yet lusts to do them, still does them. For
the Lord says: If anyone lusts after another's wife, he has committed
adultery with her already in his heart (Matt. 5:27, 28); and the
external man becomes internal, or acts as one with the internal, only
when lusts have been removed. This also the Lord teaches, saying: Woe
unto you, scribes and Pharisees; for ye cleanse the outside of the cup
and of the platter, but within they are full of extortion and excess.
Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse first the inside of the cup and platter,
that the outside may be clean also (Matt. 23:25, 26). And the same is
taught throughout that chapter. The internals which are Pharisaical, are
lusts after the things that are forbidden to be done in the first,
second, fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth commandments. It is known that
when the Lord was in the world, He taught the internal things of the
church, and these internal things are not to lust after evils; and He so
taught in order that the internal and external man may make one. This is
the being born anew, of which the Lord spoke to Nicodemus in the third
chapter of John; and no man can be born anew or be regenerated, and
consequently become internal, except from the Lord. That these two
commandments may have relation to all the preceding ones, inasmuch as
the things forbidden therein are not to be lusted after, the house is
first mentioned, after the wife, then the manservant, maidservant, ox,
and ass, and lastly, everything that is the neighbor's. For the house
involves all that follows, since it includes the husband, wife,
manservant, maidservant, ox and ass. Again, the wife, who is next
mentioned, involves all that follows; for she is the mistress as the
husband is the master in the house; the manservant and maidservant are
beneath these, the ox and the ass beneath the latter, and last of all
come all things that are below or without, which means everything that
is the neighbor's. Evidently therefore, in these two commandments all
the preceding, both in general and in particular, are regarded, both in
a broad and a restricted sense.

<span class="margnote"><span id="327.">327.</span></span>

In the spiritual sense, these two commandments forbid all lusts that are
contrary to the spirit, thus all that are contrary to the spiritual
things of the church, which relate chiefly to faith and charity; for
unless lusts are subdued, the flesh let loose would rush into every
wickedness. For it is known from Paul, That the flesh lusteth against
the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh (Gal. 5:17); and from
James: Each man is tempted by his own lust when he is enticed; then the
lust, when it hath conceived, beareth sin; and sin, when it is
completed, bringeth forth death (James 1:14, 15); again from Peter, That
the Lord reserves the unrighteous unto the day of judgment, to be
punished; but chiefly them that walk after the flesh in lust (2 Peter
2:9, 10). In short, these two commandments understood in the spirit
sense relate to all things that have before been presented in the
spiritual sense, that they must not be lusted after; so likewise, to all
that has been before presented in the celestial sense; but to repeat all
these things is unnecessary.

<span class="margnote"><span id="328.">328.</span></span>

The lusts of the flesh, the eye, and the other senses, separated from
the lusts, that is, from the affections, the desires, and the delights
of the spirit, are wholly like the lusts of beasts, and consequently are
in themselves beastlike. But the affections of the spirit are such as
angels have, and therefore are to be called truly human. For this
reason, so far as anyone indulges the lusts of the flesh, he is a beast
and a wild beast; but so far as one satisfies the desires of the spirit,
he is a man and an angel. The lusts of the flesh may be compared to
shriveled and dried up grapes and to wild grapes; but the affections of
the spirit to juicy and delicious grapes, and also to the taste of the
wine that is pressed from them. The lusts of the flesh may be compared
to stables where there are asses, goats, and swine; but the affections
of the spirit to stables where there are noble horses, and sheep and
lambs; and they differ as an ass and a horse, a goat and a sheep, a lamb
and a pig; in general, as dross and gold, as limestone and silver, as
coral and rubies, and so on. Lust and the deed are connected like blood
and flesh, or like flame and oil; for lust is within the deed, as air
from the lungs is in breathing or in speaking, or as wind in the sail
when the vessel is in motion, or as water on the wheel that gives motion
and action to machinery.

<span class="margnote"><span id="329.">329.</span></span>

THE TEN COMMANDMENTS OF THE DECALOGUE CONTAIN ALL THINGS THAT BELONG TO
LOVE TO GOD, AND ALL THINGS THAT BELONG TO LOVE TOWARD THE NEIGHBOR. In
eight of the commandments of the decalogue, the first, second, fifth,
sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth, there is nothing said of love
to God and love toward the neighbor; since it is not said that God
should be loved, that His name should be hallowed, that the neighbor
should be loved and consequently that he should be dealt with sincerely
and uprightly. It is only said, "Thou shalt have no other God before
Me;" "Thou shalt not take the name of God in vain;" "Thou shalt not
kill;" "Thou shall not commit adultery;" "Thou shalt not steal;" "Thou
shalt not bear false witness;" "Thou shalt not covet what belongs to thy
neighbor;" that is in general, that evil, either against God or the
neighbor, is not to be cherished in will or thought, nor to be done. The
reason why such things as relate directly to love and charity are not
commanded, but only such things as are opposed to them are forbidden, is
that so far as man shuns evils as sins, so far does he will the goods
that pertain to love and charity. That the prime thing of love to God
and the neighbor is not to do evil, and the second to do good, will be
seen in the chapter on Charity. \[2\] There are two opposite loves, the
love of desiring and doing good, and the love of desiring and doing
evil; this latter is infernal and the other is heavenly; for all hell is
in the love of doing evil, and all heaven in the love of doing good.
Since then, man is born into all kinds of evil, and therefore from birth
inclines to what pertains to hell, and since he cannot enter heaven
unless he is born again or regenerated, it is necessary that evils,
which belong to hell, should be removed before he can desire goods,
which are heavenly. For no one can be adopted by the Lord until he is
separated from the devil. But how evils are removed and man is brought
to do good, will be shown in the two chapters, on Repentance, and on
Reformation and Regeneration. \[3\] That evils must be put away, before
the good that a man does becomes good in the sight of God, the Lord
teaches in Isaiah: Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your
doings from before mine eyes; \[cease to do evil\], learn to do well,
then though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow;
though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool (Isaiah.
1:16-18). The following, in Jeremiah, is similar: Stand in the gate of
Jehovah's house, and proclaim there this Word, Thus said Jehovah of
Hosts, the God of Israel, Amend your ways and your doings; trust ye not
in lying words, saying, The temple of Jehovah, the temple of Jehovah,
the temple of Jehovah, is this \[that is, the church\]. Will ye steal,
murder, and commit adultery, and swear through falsehood, and then come
and stand before Me in this house, which is called by My name, and say,
We are delivered, when ye are doing all these abominations? Is this
house become a den of robbers? Behold, even I have seen it, saith
Jehovah (7:2-4, 9-11). \[4\] That before washing or purification from
evils prayer to God is not heard is also taught in Isaiah: Jehovah
saith, Ah sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, they have gone
away backward. When ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes
from you; yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear (1:4, 15).
That love and charity follow when by shunning evils what is commanded in
the Decalogue is done is evident from the Lord's words in John: Jesus
said, He that hath My commandments and keepeth them, he it is that
loveth Me and he that loveth Me shall be loved of My Father; and I will
love him, and will manifest Myself to him: and We will make our abode
with him (14:21, 23). By commandments here the commandments of the
Decalogue are particularly meant, which are that evils must not be done
or lusted after, and that the love of man to God and the love of God
toward man then follow as good follows when evil is removed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="330.">330.</span></span>

It has been said that so far as man shuns what is evil he wills what is
good. This is so because evils and goods are opposites; for evils are
from hell and goods from heaven; therefore so far as hell, that is,
evil, is removed, so far heaven approaches and man looks to good. That
this is so is very manifest from the eight commandments of the Decalogue
when so viewed; thus, (i.) So far as one refrains from worshiping other
gods, so far he worships the true God. (ii) So far as one refrains from
taking the name of God in vain, so far he loves what is from God. (iii.)
So far as one refrains from the wish to commit murder, or to act from
hatred and revenge, so far he wishes well to his neighbor. (iv. ) So far
as one refrains from a wish to commit adultery, so far he wishes to live
chastely with a wife. (v.) So far as one refrains from a wish to steal,
so far he pursues sincerity. (vi.) So far as one refrains from a wish to
bear false witness, so far he wishes to think and say what is true. (7
and 8) So far as one refrains from coveting what belongs to the
neighbor, so far he wishes the neighbor to enjoy his own. From all this
it is evident that the commandments of the Decalogue contain all things
of love to God and love towards the neighbor. Therefore Paul says: He
that loveth another, hath fulfilled the law. For this, Thou shalt not
commit adultery, Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt
not bear false witness, Thou shalt not covet; and if there be any other
commandment, it is summed up in this saying, Thou shalt love thy
neighbor as thyself. Love worketh no ill to the neighbor; therefore love
is the fulfillment of the law (Rom. 13:8-10). To this must be added two
canons for the service of the New Church: (i.) That no one can of
himself shun evils as sins and do good that is good in the sight of God;
but that so far as anyone shuns evils as sins, so far he does good, not
of himself, but from the Lord. (ii.) That man ought to shun evils as
sins and to fight against them as if of himself; but if one shuns evils
for any other reason than because they are sins he does not shun them,
but only prevents their appearance before the world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="331.">331.</span></span>

Good and evil cannot exist together, and so far as evil is put away good
is regarded and felt as good, for the reason that there exhales from
everyone in the spiritual world a sphere of his love which spreads
itself round about and affects, and causes sympathies and antipathies.
By these spheres the good are separated from the evil. That evil must be
put away before good can be recognized, perceived, and loved, may be
compared to many things in the natural world; for example: one cannot
visit another who keeps a leopard and a panther shut up in his chamber
(himself living safely with them because he feeds them), until those
wild beasts have been removed. \[2\] Who that is invited to the table of
a king and queen does not before he goes wash his hands and face? Or who
enters the bridal chamber with his bride after marriage before he has
washed himself wholly, and clothed himself with wedding garments? Who
does not purify ores by fire, and separate the dross, before he obtains
the pure gold and silver? Who does not separate the tares from the wheat
before putting it into his granary? Who does not thresh the bearded
chaff from his barley, before he gathers it into his house? \[3\] Who
does not skim off raw meat in cooking before it becomes eatable and
placed upon the table? Who does not beat the worms from the leaves of
the trees in his garden, lest the leaves be devoured and the fruit
thereby destroyed? Who does not dislike dirt in his chambers and halls,
and cleanse them, especially when a prince or the espoused daughter of a
prince is expected to arrive? Who loves and wishes to marry a maiden who
is full of disease, and covered with pimples and blotches, however she
may paint her face, dress splendidly, and labor by the charms of her
conversation to move him by the enticements of love? \[4\] Man himself
ought to purify himself from evils, and not wait for the Lord to do this
without his cooperation. Otherwise he would be like a servant going to
his master, with his face and clothes befouled with soot and dung, and
saying, "Master, wash me." Would not his master say to him, "You foolish
servant, what are you saying? See, there are water, soap, and a towel;
have you not hands of your own and the power to use them? Wash
yourself." So will the Lord God say, "These means of purification are
from Me, and your ability to will and do are also from Me; therefore use
these My gifts end endowments as your own, and you will be purified;"
and so on. That the external man is to be cleansed, but by means of the
internal the Lord teaches in the twenty-third chapter of Matthew from
beginning to end.

<span class="margnote"><span id="332.">332.</span></span>

To this shall be added four Memorable Relations. First: I once heard
loud shouts, which seemed to gurgle up from the lower regions through
waters, one toward the left, crying, "O how just!" another toward the
right, "O how learned!" and a third from behind, "O how wise!" And as
the thought came to me, whether even in hell there are just, learned and
wise persons, I had a desire to see whether there were or not; and it
was said to me from heaven, "You shall see and hear." And having in
spirit left the house I saw before me an opening; and approaching it,
and looking down, I saw a ladder by which I descended. And when I was
below I saw plains covered with shrubbery intermixed with thorns and
nettles; and I asked whether this was hell. They said, "This is the
lower earth, which is just above hell." Then following the order of the
shouts, I went first toward the cry, "O how just!" and I saw an assembly
of those who in the world had been judges, and who had been influenced
by friendship and bribes; then toward the second cry, "O how learned!"
and I saw an assembly of those who in the world had been reasoners; then
toward the third cry, "O how wise!" and I saw an assembly of those who
in the world had been conformers. From these latter I turned to the
first, where the judges were who had been influenced by friendship and
bribes and who were proclaimed just; and I saw at the side as it were an
amphitheater built of brick and roofed with black tiles; and I was told
that in that was their Tribunal. On the north side there were three
entrances to it and on the west three, but none on the south and east,
an indication that their decisions were not decisions of justice, but
arbitrary. \[2\] In the center of the amphitheater was a fireplace, into
which the servants attending the fire were throwing pitch-pine dipped in
sulfur and bitumen, the light from which, flickering upon the plastered
walls, presented images of birds of evening and night. But this
fire-place, and the flickering of the light from it forming such images
were representations of their decisions, that they were able to color
the facts in any case, and give them an appearance according to their
own prepossessions. \[3\] Half an hour afterwards I saw old men and
young men clad in gowns and cloaks enter, and removing their caps, take
seats beside the tables to sit in judgment. And I heard and perceived
how skillfully and ingeniously, out of regard for friendship, they
turned and twisted their decisions into seeming justice; and this they
did to such an extent that they did not see their injustice to be
anything but justice, or what is just to be anything but unjust. Such
persuasions concerning these matters shone from their faces and were
heard in the tones of their voices. There was then granted me
enlightenment from heaven, whereby I had a perception of each
particular, whether it was in accordance with justice or not; and I saw
how industriously they veiled over injustice, and made it look like
justice, and selected from the laws that which favored them, to which
they bent the matter in question, and by skilful reasonings put all else
aside. After their decisions had been given, they were announced without
to their clients, friends, and partisans, and these, to return the
favor, cried out for a long distance, "O how just! O how just!" \[4\]
After this I talked about these with the angels of heaven, and told them
some of the things that I had seen and heard. And the angels said, "Such
judges seem to others to be gifted with the keenest intellectual vision,
when in fact they do not see the least particle of justice or equity. If
you take away their friendship for anyone, they sit in judgment like
statues, and merely say, 'I grant it; I agree to this, or to that.' This
is because all their decisions are prejudiced, and their prejudice with
partiality follows the case from beginning to end; consequently they see
nothing in it but their friend's interest; at everything opposed to
this, they look askance, viewing it with piratical glances, and if they
take it up again they involve it in reasonings as spiders entangle their
captives in their webs and devour them. Therefore it is that when they
do not follow the thread of their prejudice, they see nothing of what is
right. They have been examined as to whether they were able to see, and
they were found unable. The inhabitants of your world will be astonished
at this fact, but tell them that this is a truth that has been
investigated by the angels of heaven. Because they see nothing of
justice, we in heaven do not think of them as men, but as monstrous
images of men, the heads of which are formed of what pertains to
friendship, the breasts of what pertains to injustice, the hands and
feet of what pertains to confirmation, and the soles of the feet of what
pertains to justice; and if this is unfavorable to their friends, they
cast it under foot and trample upon it. \[5\] But what they are, viewed
in themselves, you shall see, for their end is near." And lo, the ground
suddenly gaped, the tables fell one upon another, and the men, together
with the whole amphitheater, were swallowed up, cast into caverns, and
imprisoned. I was then asked if I wished to see them there; and behold,
they appeared with faces like polished steel; their bodies from the neck
to the loins looked like sculptured work clothed with leopard skins, and
their feet like serpents. And I saw the law books which had lain upon
their tables turned into playing-cards; and now instead of acting as
judges they were hired to make cinnabar into paint for besmearing the
faces of harlots, and turning them into beauties. Having seen all this,
I wished to visit the other two assemblies, one composed of mere
reasoners and the other of mere confirmers. But I was told to wait a
while, and angel companions would be given me from a society most nearly
above those spirits, and that through them light would be given me from
the Lord, and I would see marvelous things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="333.">333.</span></span>

Second Memorable Relation: After a while I heard again from the lower
earth the exclamations I had heard before, "O how learned! O how
learned!" And I looked about to see who were present, and behold the
angels were there who occupied the heaven directly above those who
cried, "O how learned!" To these I spoke about the shouting, and they
said, "Those learned spirits are such as merely reason whether a thing
is so or is not, and who rarely think that it is so. Therefore they are
like winds that come and go, like bark around hollow trees, and like
nutshells without a kernel; or like a rind about fruit without pulp; for
their minds are devoid of interior judgment, and are merely united with
the bodily senses; unless therefore the senses themselves decide, they
are able to form no conclusions. In a word, they are merely sensual, and
we call them Reasoners. They are so called because they never come to a
conclusion about anything, but take up whatever they hear and dispute as
to whether it is so or not, with unceasing contention. They love nothing
better than to attack truths, and tear them to pieces by bringing them
into disputation. These believe themselves to be more learned than all
others in the world." \[2\] Having heard this, I asked the angels to
conduct me to them; and they led me to a cave, from which steps
descended to the lower earth. We went down, following the cry, "O how
learned!" And behold, several hundred spirits stood in one place,
stamping upon the ground. Wondering at this, I asked why they thus stood
and stamped the ground with their feet, adding, that they might make a
hole in it with their feet. At this the angels smiled and said, "They
appear so to stand still, because their thought on any subject is never
that it is so, but only whether it is so or not, and thus it is a matter
of dispute; and as they never get beyond this in their thought, they
appear as never advancing, but only as treading and wearing on one
spot." The angels also said, "Those who come from the natural world into
this and hear that they are in another world form themselves into
companies in many places and ask where heaven is, where hell is, and
where God is. And when they have been told they begin to reason,
dispute, and contend about whether there is a God. This they do, because
in the natural world at the present day, there are so many naturalists,
who, whenever religion is talked about, bring the subject into dispute,
both among themselves and with others; and the discussion of this
question rarely terminates in an affirmation of belief that there is a
God. Afterwards these persons associate themselves more and more with
the wicked, which is done because no one can do any good from the love
of good, except from God." \[3\] After this I was conducted to that
assembly, and behold, there appeared to me men handsomely clothed and
with faces not unbecoming; and the angels said, "These so appear in
their own light; but if the light of heaven flows in, both their faces
and their garments are changed." And when the light of heaven was
admitted, they appeared with dusky faces and clothed in coarse black
garments; but this light being withdrawn, they appeared as before.
Presently I talked with some of the assembly, and said, "I heard from
the throng about you the shout, 'O how learned!' It may therefore be
permissible to have a conversation with you on matters of the most
learned nature." They replied, "Say what you please; we will give you a
satisfactory answer." And I asked, "What kind of religion is necessary
for the salvation of man?" They answered, "We will divide this question
into several; and until these are decided we can give no reply. The
investigation will proceed as follows: (1) Is religion anything? (2) Is
there such a thing as salvation or not? (3) Is one religion more
efficacious than another? (4) Is there a heaven and a hell? (5) Is there
is an eternal life after death? besides other questions." I asked about
the first question, Is religion anything? and they began to discuss it
with a host of arguments. I begged of them to refer it to the assembly.
They did; and the general response was, that this proposition required
so much investigation that it could not be finished before evening. I
asked them whether they could finish it within a year. One of them
replied, that it could not be finished in a hundred years. I answered,
"Meanwhile you are without religion; and as salvation depends on this,
you are without any idea of salvation or any belief in it or hope of
it." He replied, "Must it not first be shown whether there is such a
thing as religion, and what it is, and whether it is anything? If it is,
it must be also for the wise; if not, it must be for the vulgar only. It
is known that religion is called a bond; but for whom is it a bond? If
for the vulgar only in reality it is not anything; but if for the wise
also, then it is something." \[4\] Hearing this, I said, "You are
anything but learned, because you are able to think only whether a thing
is so or not, and bandy it from one side to the other. How can a man be
learned unless he knows something for a certainty and advances in the
knowledge of it as a man walks, step by step, thus gradually attaining
to wisdom? Otherwise you do not even touch truths with the tip of your
finger, but you remove them further and further out of sight. Therefore
to reason merely as to whether a thing is so or not, is to reason about
the fit of a cap or shoe without ever trying it on. What then comes of
this but that you do not know whether anything is a reality, or is only
an idea, thus whether there is such a thing as salvation, or eternal
life after death, whether one religion is better than another, or
whether there is a heaven and a hell? On these subjects you cannot think
at all so long as you stick at the first step, and tread the ground
there, instead of bringing forward one foot after the other, and going
on. Have a care for your selves lest your minds, while standing thus
outside the door of judgment, grow hard within and become like pillars
of salt." So saying I withdrew, while they from indignation threw stones
after me. They then appeared to me like graven images in which there is
nothing of human reason. I asked the angels of the lot of such; and they
said that the lowest of them were sent down into the deep, into a desert
there, and are compelled to carry packs; and then, as they are unable to
evolve anything from reason, they gabble and talk nonsense, and at a
distance they appear like asses carrying burdens.

<span class="margnote"><span id="334.">334.</span></span>

Third Memorable Relation: After this, one of the angels said, "Follow me
to the place where they shout, "O how wise!" and you will see monsters
of men; you will see faces and bodies that are human, and yet they are
not men." "Are they beasts, then?" I asked. He replied, "They are not
beasts, but beastmen; for they are those who are utterly unable to see
whether truth is truth or not, and yet can make whatever they wish seem
true. With us, such are called Confirmers." We followed the shouting,
and came to the place; and behold, an assembly of men, and around about
them a throng, and in the throng some of noble birth, and when these
heard them prove whatever they themselves were saying and uphold it with
so manifest a concurrence, they turned around and shouted, "O how wise!"
\[2\] But the angel said to me, "Let us not go among them, but call one
of the assembly to us." And we called one out and withdrew with him, and
talked over various subjects; and had confirmed them one by one until
they seemed to be perfectly true. We asked him whether he could confirm
things contrary to each other; and he said he could just as well as the
others. He then said openly and from his heart, "What is truth? Is there
anything true in the nature of things, other than what man makes true?
Say what you please and I will make it true." I said, "Make this true
that faith is the all of the church." And this he did so dexterously and
skillfully that the learned bystanders admired and applauded. I then
asked him to make it true that charity is the all of the church; and he
did so; and then that charity is no part of the church; and he so
clothed and decorated both statements with appearances that the
bystanders would look at each other, and say, "Is he not wise?" I then
said, "Do you not know that to live well is charity, and to believe well
is faith? Does not he who lives well also believe well? Thus does not
faith belong to charity and charity to faith? Do you not see that this
is true?" He answered, "I will make it true, and I shall see." This he
did and said, "I see it now." But immediately he made the contrary true,
and then he said, "I see that this is true also." At this we smiled and
said, "Are they not contraries? How can two contraries both be true?"
Becoming angry at this, he said, "You are wrong; both are true, inasmuch
as there is nothing true but what man makes true." \[3\] There was one
standing near who in the world had been an ambassador of the highest
grade. He was astonished at this and said, "I acknowledge that something
like this goes on in the world, nevertheless you are insane. Make it
true, if you can, that light is darkness, and that darkness is light."
He answered, "I can do that easily. What are light and darkness but
states of the eye? Is not light turned to shade when the eye turns from
sunlight, as also when a man fixes his eye intently upon the sun? Who
does not know that the state of the eye is then changed, and that
therefore light appears as shade? And again, when the former state of
the eye returns, this shade appears as light. Does not the owl see the
darkness of night as the light of day, and the light of day as the
darkness of night, and even the sun itself as an opaque and dusky globe?
If a man had eyes like an owl's what would he call light and what
darkness? What then is light but a state of the eye? And if light is
only a state of the eye, is not light darkness and darkness light?
Therefore both statements are true." \[4\] But as this confirmation
confounded some, I said, "I have noticed that this confirmer does not
know that there is a true light and a fatuous light, and that both kinds
seem to be light; yet the fatuous light in reality is not light, but
compared to true light is darkness. An owl is in fatuous light; for
within its eyes there is a passion for tearing birds to pieces and
devouring them, and this light causes its eyes to see at night,
precisely like those of cats, whose eyes in cellars look like lighted
candles. It is the fatuous light arising within their eyes from the
passion for tearing mice to pieces and devouring them, which produces
this effect. Evidently, therefore, the light of the sun is true light,
and the light of greed is fatuous light." \[5\] After this, the
ambassador asked the confirmer to make it true that a raven is white and
not black. He answered, "That also I can easily do." And he said, "Take
a needle or a razor, and open the quills and feathers of a raven; then
remove the quills and feathers, and look at the raven's skin; is it not
white? What is the blackness that surrounds it, but a shade, from which
we must not judge of the color of the raven? For proof that black is
only a shade, consult those skilled in the science of optics, and they
will tell you that if you grind a black stone or black glass to fine
powder, you will see that the powder is white." But the ambassador said,
"Does not the raven appear to the sight to be black?" The confirmer
answered, "Are you, who are a man, willing to consider a subject from
appearances? You may indeed say according to the appearance that a raven
is black but you cannot think so. As for example you may say according
to the appearance, that the sun rises and sets; but as you are a man you
cannot think so, because the sun is motionless and the earth moves. It
is the same with a raven. The appearance is an appearance. Say what you
will, a raven is totally white; it even becomes white when it grows old;
this I have seen." After this the bystanders looked at me; therefore I
said, "It is true that the quills and feathers of a raven partake of
whiteness inwardly; so does its skin; but this is the case not only with
ravens but all the birds in the universe as well; and everyone
distinguishes birds by their apparent colors; if this were not done, we
might say that every bird is white, which would be absurd and
meaningless." \[6\] Then the ambassador asked him whether he could make
it true that he was himself insane; and he answered, "I can, but I do
not wish to do so. Who is not insane?" Finally, they asked him to say
from his heart whether he was jesting, or really believed that there is
nothing true but what man makes true; and he said, "I swear that I
believe it." Afterwards this universal confirmer was sent to the angels,
who examined his character; and after the examination they said that he
did not possess a single grain of understanding, because in him
everything above the rational was closed, and only that below the
rational was open; above the rational there is spiritual light, and
below the rational natural light; and this light in man is such that by
it he can confirm whatever he pleases. When spiritual light does not
flow into natural light, man does not see whether any truth is a truth,
nor, therefore, whether any falsehood is a falsehood; these must be seen
from spiritual light in natural light, and spiritual light is from the
God of heaven, who is the Lord. Therefore this universal confirmer is
neither man nor beast, but is a beast-man. \[7\] I asked the angels
about the lot of such, whether they could be with the living, since man
has life from spiritual light, and from this comes his understanding.
They said that such, when they are alone, are unable to think at all and
therefore to speak, but stand dumb like automatons and as it were in a
deep sleep; but that they wake up the moment their ears catch anything.
They added that those who are inmostly wicked become such; into these
spiritual light from above cannot flow, but only something spiritual
from the world from which they derive their faculty of confirming. \[8\]
When this had been said I heard a voice from the angels who examined
him, saying, "From what you have heard form a universal conclusion."
This was the conclusion: That the ability to confirm whatever one
pleases is not an indication of understanding; but the ability to see
that truth is truth, and that falsehood is falsehood, and to confirm it
is an indication of understanding. After this, I looked toward the
assembly where the confirmers were standing with the crowd about them
crying, "O how wise!" And lo! a dusky cloud enveloped them, and in the
cloud owls and bats were flying. And it was told me, "The owls and bats
that are flying in the cloud were correspondences and therefore
appearances of their thoughts; because in this world confirmations of
falsities to such an extent that they seem to be truths, are represented
under the form of birds of night, whose eyes are illumined within by a
fatuous light, whereby they see objects in darkness as in light. Such
fatuous spiritual light do those have who confirm falsities until they
seem like truths, and who afterward believe them to be truths. All such
have a sort of backward sight, but no forward sight."

<span class="margnote"><span id="335.">335.</span></span>

Fourth Memorable Relation: Once when I awakened from sleep in the
morning twilight, I saw as it were specters before my eyes in various
shapes; and afterward when it was daylight I saw fatuous lights of
different forms; some like sheets of paper filled with writing and
folded again and again, so that they looked like falling stars which in
their descent vanished in the air; and some like open books, some of
which shone like little moons, and some burned like candles; among these
were some books that ascended to a great height and there perished, and
others that fell down to the earth and there crumbled to dust. From
these appearances I conjectured that there were those standing below
these meteors who dispute about imaginary matters, which they deem of
great importance; for in the spiritual world such phenomena appear in
the atmospheres from the reasonings of those standing below. And
presently the sight of my spirit was opened, and I saw a number of
spirits whose heads were wreathed with leaves of laurel, and their
bodies clothed with flowered gowns, which signified that they were
spirits who in the natural world had been famed for erudition. As I was
in the spirit, I approached and mingled with the assembly. I then heard
that they were bitterly and hotly disputing about connate ideas, whether
any such were inherent in man from birth, as in beasts. Those who were
in the negative turned away from those in the affirmative, and at length
they stood apart from each other like the ranks of two armies ready to
fight sword in hand; but as they had no swords, they fought with the
points of words. \[2\] But suddenly an angelic spirit stood in their
midst, and speaking with a loud voice said, "At a short distance from
you I heard that you were engaged in hot dispute about connate ideas,
whether they are inherent in men as in beasts; but I tell you, that men
have no connate ideas, and that beasts have no ideas at all. You are
therefore quarreling about nothing, or as the saying is, about goats'
wool, or the beard of Time." Hearing this, they were all enraged and
shouted, "Put him out; he talks contrary to common sense." But when they
tried to put him out they saw that he was encompassed with heavenly
light which they could not break through; for he was an angelic spirit.
They therefore drew back and moved a little way from him; and when the
light had been indrawn, the angel said to them, "Why are you angry?
First listen, and put together the reasons I shall offer, and form a
conclusion from them yourselves. I foresee that those among you who
excel in judgment will accede, and will calm the tempests that have
arisen in your minds." At these remarks they said, though still in an
indignant tone, "Speak then, and we will listen." \[3\] So the angel
began and said, "You believe that beasts have connate ideas; and this
you have inferred from the fact that their actions seem to proceed from
thought; and yet they have no thought whatever, and ideas are only
predicable of thought. Furthermore, it is a characteristic of thought
that those who think act in this or that manner for this or that
purpose. Consider therefore, whether the spider which weaves its web
with such perfect art thinks in its little head, I will stretch out my
threads in this way, and bind them together with cross-threads, so that
my web may not be blown asunder by a violent rush of air; at the inner
ends of the threads, which shall form the center of the web, I will
prepare a seat for myself, where I shall feel whatever touches my web,
and run at once to the spot; so that if a fly gets in, he shall be
entangled, and I will rush upon him instantly and bind him fast, and he
shall serve me for food. Or again, does a bee think in his little head,
I will fly abroad; I know where there are fields in bloom; and there I
will get wax from the flowers, and will suck honey from them; and with
the wax I will build compact rows of little cells in such a way that I
and my companions can go in and out easily, as if by streets; then I
will store in them abundance of honey, enough even for the coming
winter, so that we may not die - and other marvelous things, in which
they not only vie with the political and economical prudence of man, but
even surpass it (see above, n. 12)? \[4\] Again, does the hornet think
in his little head, I and my companions will build for ourselves a
little house of thin paper, the walls of which we will make within like
a labyrinth; and in the inmost we will prepare a kind of forum to which
there shall be a way of ingress and of egress, contrived with such art
that no living creature except those belonging to our own family, shall
find the way to the inmost place where we are assembled? Again, does the
silkworm, while it is a grub, think in its little head, Now is the time
for me to prepare to spin silk, so that when it is spun, I may fly
forth, and in the air, into which I could not ascend before, may sport
with my equals and provide myself a posterity? Or do other worms so
think, when they creep about the walls, and become nymphs, aureliae,
chrysalides, and finally butterflies? Has a fly any idea about having
congress with another in some one place and not another? \[5\] It is the
same with larger animals as it is with these smaller ones; with birds
and feathered creatures of all kinds when they pair, build their nests,
lay their eggs therein, sit on them, hatch their young, provide food for
them, care for them until they can fly, and then drive them from the
nests as if they were not their own offspring; besides many other
things. It is the same also with the beasts of the earth, with serpents
and with fishes. Who among you cannot see from the above statements that
the spontaneous acts of these creatures do not flow from any thought, of
which alone ideas can be predicated? The error that beasts have ideas
has come from no other source than a persuasion that they think equally
with men, and that speech alone makes the difference between them."
\[6\] After this, the angelic spirit looked around, and as he saw them
still hesitating whether or not beasts have thought, he continued his
discourse, and said, "I perceive that from those actions of brute
animals that are similar to human actions, there still clings to you the
fanciful idea that they possess thought. I will tell you, therefore, the
source of those actions. Every beast, every bird, every fish, reptile,
and insect has its own natural, sensual, and corporeal love, the abode
of which is its head and the brains there; through their brains the
spiritual world flows into their bodily senses immediately, and through
them determines their actions; this is the reason why their bodily
senses are much more exquisite than those of men. That influx from the
spiritual world is what is called instinct; and it is called instinct
because it exists without the mediation of thought. There are also
things accessory to instinct that arise from habit. But their love,
through which comes from the spiritual world their determination to
action, is a love solely for nutrition and propagation, not for any
knowledge, intelligence, or wisdom, by means of which the love in men is
gradually developed." \[7\] That man has no connate ideas, is manifestly
evident from the fact that he has no connate thought; and where there is
no thought there are no ideas; for they belong mutually to each other.
This may be inferred from new-born infants, in that they can do nothing
but suck and breathe. Their being able to suck is not from anything
connate, but from a continual sucking in the mother's womb; and they are
able to breathe because they are alive, for this is a universal of life.
Even their bodily senses are in the utmost obscurity, and from this they
gradually work their way out by means of objects; and in like manner
their powers of motion by habitual exercise. And as they gradually learn
to utter words and pronounce them at first without any idea, there
springs up in them some obscure element of fancy; and as this grows
clearer an obscure element of imagination is born, and from that, of
thought. Along with the forming of this state ideas spring forth, which,
as before said, make one with thought; and from no thought, thought is
developed by instruction. While, therefore, men have ideas, they are not
connate, but are formed, and from them flow their speech and actions.
That nothing is connate with man except a capacity to know, to
understand, and to be wise, as also an inclination to love not only
these things but also the neighbor and God, may be seen in the Memorable
Relation above (n. 48), and also in some Memorable Relations further on.
After this I looked around and saw Leibnitz and Wolff near at hand, who
were attending closely to the reasoning advanced by the angelic spirit.
Leibnitz then drew near and expressed his concurrence; but Wolff went
away both denying and affirming, for he did not excel in interior
judgment as Leibnitz did.

<span class="margnote"><span id="336.">336.</span></span>

CHAPTER 6 FAITH From the wisdom of the ancients came forth this tenet,
that the universe and each and all things therein relate to good and
truth; and thus that all things pertaining to the church relate to love
or charity and faith, since everything that flows forth from love or
charity is called good, and everything that flows forth from faith is
called true. Since then charity and faith are distinguishably two, and
yet make one in man, that he may be a man of the church, that is, that
the church may be in him, it was a matter of controversy and dispute
among the ancients, which one of the two should be first, and which
therefore is by right to be called the firstborn. Some of them said that
truth is first and consequently faith; and some good, and consequently
charity. For they saw that immediately after birth man learns to talk
and think, and is thereby perfected in understanding, which is done by
means of knowledges, and by this means he learns and understands what is
true; and afterwards by means of this he learns and understands what is
good; consequently, that he first learns what faith is, and afterward
what charity is. Those who so comprehended this subject, supposed that
the truth of faith was the firstborn, and that good of charity was born
afterwards; for which reason they gave to faith the eminence and
prerogative of primogeniture. But those who so reasoned overwhelmed
their own understandings with such a multitude of arguments in favor of
faith, as not to see that faith is not faith unless it is conjoined with
charity, and that charity is not charity unless conjoined with faith,
and thus that they make one, and if not so conjoined, neither of them is
anything in the church. That they do completely make one, will be shown
in what follows. \[2\] But in these prefatory remarks I will show
briefly how or in what respect they make one; for this is important as
throwing some light on what follows. Faith, by which is also meant
truth, is first in time; while charity, by which is also meant good, is
first in end; and that which is first in end, is actually first, because
it is primary, therefore also it is the firstborn, while that which is
first in time, is not actually first, but only apparently so. But to
make this understood, it shall be illustrated by comparisons with the
building of a temple, and of a house, the laying out of a garden, and
the preparation of a field. In the building of a temple, the first thing
in time is to lay the foundation, erect the walls and put on the roof;
then to put in the altar and rear the pulpit; while the first thing in
end is the worship of God therein, for the sake of which the preceding
work is done. In the building of a house, the first thing in time is to
build its outside parts, and also to furnish it with various articles of
necessity; while the first thing in end is a suitable dwelling for the
man and the others who are to constitute his household. In the laying
out of a garden, the first thing in time is to level the ground, prepare
the soil, and plant trees in it and sow in it the seeds of such things
as will be of use; while the first thing in end is the use of its
products. In the preparation of a field, the first thing in time is to
smooth, plough and harrow it, and then to sow it; while the first thing
in end is the crop; thus again, use. From these comparisons anyone may
conclude what is essentially first. Does not everyone who wishes to
build a temple or a house, or to lay out a garden, or cultivate a field,
first intend some use? And does he not continually keep this in his mind
and meditate upon it while he is procuring the means to it? We therefore
conclude that the truth of faith is first in time, but that the good of
charity is first in end; and that this latter, because it is primary, is
actually the firstborn in the mind. \[3\] But it is necessary to know
what faith is, what charity is, each in its essence; and this cannot be
known unless each is divided into separate propositions - faith into its
own, and charity into its own. Faith shall therefore be treated under
the following heads: 1. Saving faith is faith in the Lord God the
Savior, Jesus Christ. 2. The sum of faith is that he who lives well and
believes rightly, is saved by the Lord. 3. Man acquires faith by going
to the Lord, learning truths from the Word, and living according to
them. 4. An abundance of truths cohering as if in a bundle, exalts and
perfects faith. 5. Faith without charity is not faith, and charity
without faith is not charity, and neither has life except from the Lord.
6. The Lord, charity, and faith make one, like life, will, and
understanding in man; and if they are divided, each perishes, like a
pearl reduced to powder. 7. The Lord is charity and faith in man, and
man is charity and faith in the Lord. 8. Charity and faith are together
in good works. 9. There is a true faith, a spurious faith, and a
hypocritical faith. 10. In the evil there is no faith. These shall now
be explained separately.

<span class="margnote"><span id="337.">337.</span></span>

I. SAVING FAITH IS FAITH IN THE LORD GOD THE SAVIOR, JESUS CHRIST.
Saving faith is faith in God the Savior, because He is God and Man, and
He is in the Father and the Father in Him; thus they are one; therefore
those who go to Him, at the same time go to the Father also, thus to the
one and only God, and there is no saving faith in any other. That men
ought to believe or have faith in the Son of God, the Redeemer and
Savior, conceived from Jehovah, born of the virgin Mary, and called
Jesus Christ, is evident from the commands so frequently repeated by Him
and afterwards by His apostles. That faith in Him was commanded by
Himself, is clearly evident from the following passages: Jesus said,
This is the will of the Father who sent Me, that everyone who beholdeth
the Son and believeth in Him, should have eternal life; and I will raise
him up at the last day (John 6:40). He that believeth in the Son hath
eternal life but he that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but
the wrath of God abideth on him (John 3:36) That whosoever believeth in
the Son should not perish, but have eternal life for God so loved the
world that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in
Him should not perish, but have eternal life (John 3:15, 16). Jesus
said, I am the Resurrection and the Life; he that believeth in Me shall
never die (John 11:25, 26). Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that
believeth in Me hath eternal life. I am the bread of life (John 6:47,
48). I am the bread of life; he that cometh to Me shall not hunger, and
he that believeth in Me shall never thirst (John 6:35). Jesus cried,
saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto Me and drink; he that
believeth in Me, as the Scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow
rivers of living water (John 7:37, 38). They said to Jesus, What must we
do, that we may work the works of God? Jesus answered, This is the work
of God, that ye believe in Him whom He hath sent (that is, the Father)
(John 6:28, 29). While ye have light, believe in the light, that ye may
be sons of light (John 12:36). He that believeth in the Son of God is
not judged; but he that believeth not hath been judged already because
he hath not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God (John
3:18). These things are written that ye may believe that Jesus is the
Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye may have life in His name
(John 20:31). Unless ye believe that I am, ye shall die in your sins
(John 8:24). Jesus said, When the Comforter, the Spirit of truth, is
come, He will convict the world respecting sin, and righteousness, and
judgment; respecting sin, because they believe not in Me (John 16:8, 9).

<span class="margnote"><span id="338.">338.</span></span>

That the faith of the apostles was no other than a faith the Lord Jesus
Christ, is evident from many passages in their Epistles, from which I
will present only the following: I live; yet no longer I, but Christ
liveth in me but what I now live in the flesh, I live in faith which is
in the Son of God (Gal. 2:20). Paul testified, Both to Jews and to
Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ (Acts
20:21). He who brought Paul out said, What must I do to be saved? And he
said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, thus shalt thou be saved, and
thy house (Acts 16:30, 31). He that hath the Son hath the life and he
that hath not the Son of God, hath not the life. These things have I
written unto you that believe in the name of the Son of God; that ye may
know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may believe in the name of
the Son of God (1 John 5:12, 13) We who are Jews by nature, and not
sinners of the Gentiles, yet knowing that a man is not justified by the
works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have
believed in Jesus Christ (Gal. 2:15, 16). Because theirs was a faith in
Jesus Christ, and also because faith is also from Him, they called it
the faith of Jesus Christ, as in the passage just quoted (Gal. 2:16),
and in the following: The righteousness of God, through the faith of
Jesus Christ unto all and upon all them that believe that He may justify
him who is of the faith of Jesus (Rom. 3:22, 26). Having the
righteousness which is from the faith of Christ, the righteousness which
is from God by faith (Phil. 3:9). He that keepeth the commandments of
God, and the faith of Jesus (Apoc. 14:12). Through the faith which is in
Christ Jesus (2 Tim. 3:15). In Jesus Christ is faith working through
love (Gal. 5:6). From all this it can be seen what kind of faith is
meant by Paul in the saying now so often quoted in the church: Therefore
we conclude that a man is justified by faith apart from the works of the
law (Rom. 3:28); namely, that it is not a faith in God the Father, but
in His Son, still less a faith in three Gods in order, in one from whom,
in another for the sake of whom, and in a third through whom \[comes
salvation\]. It is believed in the church, that its tripersonal faith is
meant by Paul in that saying, for the reason that the church, during
fourteen centuries, or ever since the Nicene Council, has acknowledged
no other faith, and consequently has known no other, and has therefore
believed this to be the one only faith, and that no other is possible.
So wherever the word faith occurs in the New Testament that faith is
supposed to be meant, and to it everything there has been applied;
therefore the only saving faith, which is a faith in God the Savior, has
perished; and in consequence so many fallacies and so many paradoxes
adverse to sound reason have crept into the doctrines of the church. For
every doctrine of the church that will teach and point out the way to
heaven or to salvation depends on faith; and so many fallacies and
paradoxes having crept into that faith, as before said, it became
necessary to proclaim the dogma, that the understanding must be kept in
subjection to faith. But since in that saying of Paul (Rom. 3:28) the
term faith does not mean faith in God the Father but faith in His Son;
and works of the law do not there mean the works of the law of the
Decalogue, but the works of the Mosaic law for the Jews (as is plain
from subsequent verses there, and also from like passages in the Epistle
to the Galatians, 2:14, 15), that foundation stone of the present faith
is gone, and with it falls the temple built upon it, like a house
sinking into the earth and leaving only the top of its roof above
ground.

<span class="margnote"><span id="339.">339.</span></span>

Men ought to believe, that is, have faith, in God the Savior Jesus
Christ, because that is a faith in a visible God within whom is the
invisible; and faith in a visible God, who is at once Man and God,
enters into a man; for faith in its essence is spiritual but in its form
is natural; consequently with man such a faith becomes
spiritual-natural. For anything spiritual, in order to be anything with
man, must have a recipient in the natural. The naked spiritual does
indeed enter into man, but it is not received; it is like the ether,
which flows in and out producing no effect, for to produce an effect
there must be perception and consequent reception, both of these in his
mind; and no such reception is possible with man except in his natural.
But on the other hand merely natural faith, or faith destitute of a
spiritual essence, is not faith, but only persuasion or knowledge. In
externals persuasion emulates faith; but since there is in its internals
no spirituality, neither is there anything saving in it. Such is the
faith of all who deny the Divinity of the Lord's Human; such was the
Arian faith, and such also is the Socinian faith, because both reject
the Lord's Divinity. What is faith without an object toward which it is
determined? Is it not like gazing into the universe, where the sight
falls, as it were, into vacuity and is lost? It is like a bird flying
beyond the atmosphere into the ether, where, as in a vacuum, it ceases
to breathe. The abiding of this faith in man's mind may be compared to
that of the winds in the wings \[halls?\] of Aeolus, or of light in a
falling star. It rises like a comet with a long tail, and like it passes
over and disappears. \[2\] In a word, faith in an invisible God is
actually blind, since the human mind fails to see its God; and the light
of that faith, not being a spiritual-natural faith, is a fatuous light;
which light is like that of the glow-worm, or like that seen above
marshes or sulphurous glebes at night, or like the phosphorescence of
rotten wood. From that light nothing comes except what pertains to
fantasy, which creates a belief that the apparent is the real, when yet
it is not. Faith in an invisible God shines with no other light than
this, especially when God is thought to be a Spirit, and spirit is
thought to be like ether. What follows but that man regards God as he
does the ether? Consequently he seeks God in the universe; and when he
does not find Him there, he believes the nature of the universe to be
God. This is the origin of the prevailing naturalism of the day. Did not
the Lord say, That no one ever heard the Father's voice or saw His
shape? (John 5:37); and also, That no man hath seen God at any time, but
that the only begotten Son who is in the bosom of the Father hath
revealed Him (John 1:18). No man hath seen the Father, save He who is
with the Father, He hath seen the Father (John 6:46). Also that no one
cometh unto the Father, but through Him (John 14:8). Furthermore, That
He who sees and knows Him sees and knows the Father (John 14:7-12).
\[3\] But faith in the Lord God the Savior is different; He, being God
and Man, can be approached and be seen in thought. Faith in Him is not
indeterminate, but has an object from which and to which it proceeds and
when once received is permanent, as when anyone has seen an emperor or
king, as often as the fact is recalled the image returns. That faith's
sight is like one's seeing a bright cloud, and in the midst of it an
angel who invites the man to him, so that he may be raised up into
heaven. Thus does the Lord appear to those who have faith in Him; He
draws near to every man so far as man recognizes and acknowledges Him,
which he does, so far as he knows and keeps the Lord's commandments,
which are, to shun evils and do good; and at length the Lord comes into
man's house, and together with the Father who is in Him, makes His abode
with man, according to these words in John: Jesus said, He that hath My
commandments and keepeth them, he it is that loveth Me; and he that
loveth Me shall be loved of My Father, and I will love him and will
manifest Myself to him and We will come unto him and make Our abode with
him (14:21, 23). The foregoing was written in the presence of the Lord's
twelve apostles, who were sent to me by the Lord while I was writing it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="340.">340.</span></span>

II\. THE SUM OF FAITH IS THAT HE WHO LIVES WELL AND BELIEVES RIGHTLY IS
SAVED BY THE LORD That man was created for eternal life, and that every
man may inherit it provided he lives according to the means of salvation
prescribed in the Word, is admitted by every Christian, and by every
heathen who possesses religion and sound reason. Nevertheless, the means
of salvation are manifold, although they each and all have relation to
living well and believing rightly, thus to charity and faith, for living
well is charity, and believing rightly is faith. These two general means
of salvation are not only prescribed in the Word but are imposed as
commandments, and as they are commanded, it follows that by means of
them man can procure for himself eternal life from the power implanted
in him and given to him by God; and so far as man uses that power and at
the same time looks to God, so far God makes it effective in converting
everything of natural charity into spiritual charity, and everything of
natural faith into spiritual faith; thus God makes dead charity and
faith to be alive, and the man also. \[2\] There are two things that
must coexist, before man can be said to live well and believe rightly.
In the church these two are called the internal and the external man.
When the internal man's will is right and the external acts rightly, the
two make one, the external \[acting\] from the internal and the internal
through the external, thus man from God and God through man. But on the
other hand, if the internal man's will is evil and yet the external acts
rightly, they both act none the less from hell; for the man's willing is
from hell, and his doing is hypocritical; and in all hypocrisy his
willing which is infernal, is interiorly concealed like a snake in the
grass or a worm in a flower. \[3\] The man who knows that there is an
internal and an external man, and who also knows what they are, and that
the two can act as one actually, and can also act as one apparently; and
who knows, moreover, that the internal man lives after death, and the
external is buried, possesses in potency the arcana both of heaven and
of the world in abundance. And he who conjoins these two men in himself
in good becomes happy to eternity; while he who divides them, and still
more he who conjoins them in evil, becomes unhappy to eternity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="341.">341.</span></span>

Under the belief that the man who lives well and believes aright is not
saved, and that God is able freely and at pleasure to save and damn whom
He will, the man who is lost may justly accuse God of unmercifulness and
severity, and even of cruelty, and may even deny that God is God. He may
also claim that in His Lord God has spoken unmeaning things, and has
commanded things of no importance, or that are trifling. Or again, if
the man who lives well and believes aright is not saved, he may also
accuse God of violating His covenant, which He made on Mount Sinai and
wrote with His finger upon the two tables. That God cannot but save
those who live according to His commandments and have faith in Him, is
evident from the Lord's words (in John 14:21-24); and anyone in
possession of religion and sound reason can confirm himself in this,
when he reflects that God who is unceasingly in man and who gives him
life and also the ability to understand and love, must needs love him
who lives well and believes aright, and must needs conjoin Himself with
him by love. Is not this inscribed by God on every man and every
creature? Can a father and mother reject their children, or a bird or
beast its young? Not even tigers, panthers, or serpents can do this. For
God to do otherwise would be contrary to the order into which He is and
according to which He acts, and also contrary to the order into which He
created man. Since then, it is impossible for God to damn anyone who
lives well and believes aright, so on the other hand it is impossible
for Him to save anyone who lives wickedly and therefore believes what is
false; this too is also contrary to order, and therefore contrary to
God's omnipotence, which can proceed only in the path of justice; and
the laws of justice are truths that cannot be changed. For the Lord
says: It is easier for heaven and earth to pass away, than for one
tittle of the law to fall (Luke 16:17). This can be seen by anyone who
knows anything about the essence of God, and man's freedom of will. For
example, Adam was at liberty to eat of the tree of life, and also of the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil. If he had eaten of the tree or
trees of life only, would it have been possible for God to expel him
from the garden? I believe that it would not. But after he had eaten of
the tree of the knowledge of good and will, would it have been possible
for God to retain him in the garden? Again I believe that it would not;
likewise that God cannot cast into hell an angel that has been received
into heaven, neither introduce into heaven a condemned devil. That
neither of these can He do from His Divine omnipotence, may be seen
above in the section on the Divine Omnipotence (n. 19-70).

<span class="margnote"><span id="342.">342.</span></span>

In the preceding section (n. 336-339), it is shown than saving faith is
faith in the Lord God the Savior Jesus Christ. But the question arises,
What is the first principle of faith in Him? The answer is, The
acknowledgement that He is the Son of God. This was the first principle
of faith, which the Lord revealed and announced when He came into the
world. For unless men had first acknowledged that He was the Son of God,
and thus God from God, in vain would He Himself and His Apostles after
Him have preached faith in Him. Now as the case is somewhat similar at
the present day - but with those who think from their selfhood, that is,
solely from the external or natural man, saying to themselves, How could
Jehovah God beget a Son, and how can a man be God? - it is necessary to
confirm and establish from the Word this first principle of faith. For
this reason the following passages are quoted: The angel said to Mary,
Thou shalt conceive in thy womb and bring forth a Son, and shalt call
His name Jesus. He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the
Most High. And Mary said unto the angel, How shall this be, seeing I
know not a man? And the angel answered, The Holy Spirit shall come upon
thee, and the power of the Most High shall overshadow thee therefore
that which is to be born of thee shall be called Holy, the Son of God
(Luke 1:31-35.) When Jesus was being baptized, there came a voice out of
heaven, saying, This is My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased (Matt.
3:16, 17; Mark 1:10, 11; Luke 3:21, 22). Again when Jesus was
transfigured, there also came a voice out of heaven, saying, This is My
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye Him (Matt. 17:5; Mark
9:7; Luke 9:35). \[2\] Jesus asked His disciples, saying, Who do men say
that I am? Peter answered, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living
God. And Jesus said, Blessed art thou, Simon son of Jonah. I say unto
thee, that upon this rock I will build my church (Matt. 16:13-18). The
Lord said that upon this rock, that is, upon the truth and the
confession that He is the Son of God, He would build His church; for
"rock" signifies truth, and also the Lord in respect to Divine truth. So
with those who do not confess this truth that He is the Son of God, the
church is not; therefore it is said above, that this is the first
principle of faith in Jesus Christ, and thus is faith in its origin.
John the Baptist saw and bare witness that this is the Son of God (John
1:34). The disciple Nathanael said to Jesus, Thou art the Son of God;
thou art the King of Israel (John 1:49). The twelve disciples said, We
have believed that Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God (John
6:69). He is called the only begotten Son of God, and the only begotten
from the Father, who is in the bosom of the Father (John 1:14, 18;
3:16). Jesus Himself confessed before the high priest, that He was the
Son of God (Matt. 26:63, 64; 27:43; Mark 14:61, 62; Luke 22:70). They
that were in the ship came and worshiped Jesus, saying, Of a truth thou
art the Son of God (Matt. 14:33). The eunuch who wished to be baptized,
said to Philip, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God (Acts
3:37). Paul, when he was converted, preached Christ, that He was the Son
of God (Acts 9:20). Jesus said, The hour cometh, when the dead shall
hear the voice of the Son of God; and they that hear shall live (John
5:25). He that believeth not hath been judged already, because he hath
not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God (John 3:18).
These are written that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son
of God; and that believing ye may have life in His name (John 20:31).
These things have I written unto you who believe in the name of the Son
of God that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may
believe in the name of the Son of God (1 John 5:13). We know that the
Son of God is come, and hath given that we may know Him that is True,
and we are in Him that is True, in His Son Jesus Christ. This is the
true God and eternal life (1 John 5:20). Whosoever shall confess that
Jesus is the Son of God, God abideth in him and he in God (1 John 4:15).
(Again elsewhere, as in Matt. 8:29; 27:40, 43, 54; Mark 1:1; 3:11;
15:39; Luke 8:28; John 9:35; 10:36; 11:4, 27; 19:7; Rom. 1:4; 2 Cor.
1:19; Gal. 2:20; Eph. 4:13; Heb. 4:14; 6:6; 7:3; 10:29; 1 John 3:8;
5:10; Apoc. 2:18.) There are also many passages where He is called "Son"
by Jehovah, and where He calls Jehovah God His Father, as in this:
Whatever the Father doeth, that the Son doeth also; as the Father
raiseth up the dead and quickeneth them, even so doth the Son; that all
may honor the Son, even as they honor the Father; as the Father hath
life in Himself, even so gave He to the Son to have life in Himself
(John 5:19-27). So in many other passages. And again in David: I will
declare the decree; Jehovah hath said unto Me, Thou art My Son; this day
have I begotten Thee. Kiss the Son, lest He be angry, and ye perish in
the way, for His anger will soon be kindled. Blessed are all they that
put their trust in Him (Ps. 2:7, 12). \[3\] From the foregoing now comes
this conclusion, that everyone who wishes to be truly a Christian and to
be saved by Christ, ought to believe that Jesus is the Son of the living
God. He who does not believe this, but only that He is the Son of Mary,
implants in his mind various ideas respecting Him, which are injurious
and destructive to that salvation (On which see above, n. 92, 94, 102).
Of such it may be said, as of the Jews, That instead of a royal crown,
they place upon His head a crown of thorns, and also give Him vinegar to
drink, and they cry out, If thou art the Son of God, come down from the
cross (Matt. 27:29, 34, 40). Or as the devil, the tempter, said, If thou
art the Son of God, command that these stones become bread or, If thou
art the Son of God, cast thyself down (Matt. 4:3, 6). Such profane His
church and temple, and make it a den of robbers. These are they who make
the worship of Him like the worship of Mohammed, and do not distinguish
between true Christianity, which is the worship of the Lord, and
naturalism. They may be compared to men riding in a carriage or coach
over thin ice, and the ice breaks under them, and they sink, and they,
with their horses and vehicle, are covered by the icy water. They may
also be likened to men who make a little boat of woven reeds and rushes,
daubing it with pitch that it may hold together, and in it put out to
sea; but there the cohesiveness of the pitch is destroyed, and they are
choked by the waters of the sea and swallowed up and are buried in its
depths.

<span class="margnote"><span id="343.">343.</span></span>

III\. MAN ACQUIRES FAITH BY GOING TO THE LORD, LEARNING TRUTHS FROM THE
WORD, AND LIVING ACCORDING TO THEM. Before proceeding to show how faith
originates, namely, by going to the Lord, learning truths from the Word,
and living according to them, it is necessary first to set forth the
summaries of faith, from which may be gained the general idea that runs
through the several parts; for thus what is taught not only in this
chapter on Faith, but also in those on Charity, Free Will, Repentance,
Reformation, and Regeneration, and on Imputation, will be more clearly
comprehended; for faith enters into all parts and each part of a system
of theology, as blood flows into the members of the body and vivifies
them. What the present church teaches respecting faith is known in the
Christian world generally, and particularly in its ecclesiastical class;
for the books treating solely of faith and faith alone fill the
libraries of the doctors of the church, and almost nothing beyond this
is regarded as properly theological at the present day. But before what
the present church teaches respecting its faith is taken up, considered
and examined (which will be done in an Appendix), the general principles
which the New Church teaches respecting its faith shall be presented.
They are the following:

<span class="margnote"><span id="344.">344.</span></span>

The Esse of the Faith of the New Church is: 1. Confidence in the Lord
God the Savior Jesus Christ. 2. A trust that he who lives well and
believes aright is saved by Him. The Essence of the Faith of the New
Church is: Truth from the Word. The Existence of the Faith of the New
Church is: l. Spiritual sight. 2. Accordance of Truths. 3. Conviction.
4. Acknowledgment inscribed on the mind. The States of the Faith of the
New Church are: l. Infantile faith, adolescent faith, adult faith 2.
Faith in genuine truth and faith in appearances of truth. 3. Faith of
the memory, faith of reason, faith of light. 4. Natural faith, spiritual
faith, celestial faith. 5. Living faith, and faith founded on miracle.
6. Free faith, and forced faith. The Form itself of the Faith of the New
Church, in its universal view, and its particular view, may be seen
above (n. 2, 3).

<span class="margnote"><span id="345.">345.</span></span>

As the constituents of spiritual faith have been presented in a summary,
so also shall those of merely natural faith, which in itself is a
persuasion counterfeiting faith, and a persuasion of what is false,
which is called heretical faith. It may be designated as follows: l.
Spurious faith, in which falsities are mixed with truths. 2.
Meretricious faith from truths falsified, and adulterous faith from
goods adulterated. 3. Closed or blind faith, which is a faith in things
mystical that are believed, although it is not known whether they are
true or false, or whether they are above reason or contrary to it. 4.
Wandering faith, which is a faith in several Gods. 5. Purblind faith,
which is a faith in some other than the true God, and among Christians
in any but the Lord God the Savior. 6. Hypocritical or Pharisaic faith,
which is a faith of the lips and not of the heart. 7. Visionary and
distorted faith, which is falsity made to appear like truth by ingenious
confirmation of it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="346.">346.</span></span>

It has been said above that faith, as to its existence in man, is
spiritual sight. Now as spiritual sight which is the sight of the
understanding, and thus of the mind, and natural sight which is the
sight of the eye and thus of the body, mutually correspond, every state
of faith may be compared with some state of the eye and its sight-a
state of faith in what is true with every normal state of eyesight, and
a state of faith in what is false with every perverted state Of
eyesight. Let us compare then the correspondences of these two kinds of
sight, mental and bodily, as to their perverted states. Spurious faith,
in which falsities are mixed with truths, may be compared to that
disease of the eye and consequently of the sight, called white specks on
the cornea, which produces dimness of sight. Meretricious faith which
comes from truths falsified, and adulterous faith which is from goods
adulterated, may be compared to that disease of the eye and consequently
of the sight, called glaucoma, which is a drying up and hardening of the
crystalline humor. Closed or blind faith, which is a faith in things
mystical that are believed, although it is not known whether they are
true or false, or whether they are above reason or contrary to it, may
be compared to the disease of the eye called gutta serena or amaurosis,
which is a loss of sight while the eye still looks as though it saw
perfectly, which arises from an obstruction of the optic nerve. Erratic
faith, which is a faith in several Gods, may be compared to the disease
of the eye called cataract, which is a loss of vision, arising from a
stoppage between the sclerotic coat and the uvea. Purblind faith, which
is a faith in any other than the true God, and among Christians in any
but the Lord God the Savior, may be compared to the disease of the eye
called strabismus. Hypocritical or Pharisiac faith, which is a faith of
the lips and not of the heart, maybe compared to atrophy of the eye, and
consequent loss of sight. Visionary and distorted faith, which is
falsity made to appear like truth by an ingenious confirmation of it,
may be compared to the disease of the eye called nyctalopia, which is
seeing in darkness from an illusive light.

<span class="margnote"><span id="347.">347.</span></span>

As to the formation of faith: it is effected by man's going to the Lord,
learning truths from the Word, and living according to them. First:
Faith is formed by man's going to the Lord, because faith that is faith,
or that is a saving faith, is from the Lord and in the Lord. That it is
from the Lord is evident from His words to His disciples: Abide in Me,
and I in you for apart from Me, ye can do nothing (John 15:4, 5). That
it is faith in the Lord, is evident from the passages presented in
abundance (n. 337, 338), to the effect that men ought to believe in the
Son. Since then faith is from the Lord and in the Lord, it may be said
that the Lord is faith itself, for its life and essence are in Him, and
thus from Him. \[2\] Secondly: Faith is formed by man's learning truths
from the Word, because faith in its essence is truth; for all things
that enter into faith are truths; consequently faith is nothing but a
complex of truths shining in the mind of man; for truths teach not only
that man ought to believe, but also in whom he ought to believe, and
what he ought to believe. Truths ought to be taken from the Word,
because all truths that conduce to salvation are in the Word, and there
is efficacy in them because they are given by the Lord, and are
therefore inscribed on the whole angelic heaven; consequently when man
learns truths from the Word, he comes into communion and consociation
with angels beyond what he knows. Faith destitute of truths like grain
without inner substance, which when ground yields nothing but bran;
while faith from truths is like useful grain, which when ground yields
flour. In a word, the essentials of faith are truths; and if truths do
not reside in and constitute the faith, it is only like the shrill sound
of a whistle; but when they do reside in and constitute it, faith is
like a voice of glad tidings. \[3\] Thirdly: Faith is formed by man's
living according to truths, because spiritual life is life according to
truths, and truths do not actually live until they are in deeds. Truths
abstracted from deeds are merely matters of thought, and unless they
become of the will also, are only in the entrance to the man, and thus
are not inwardly in him; for the will is the man himself, and the
thought is so far the man, in quantity and quality, as it adjoins the
will to itself. He who learns truths and does not practice them, is like
one who sows seed in a field and does not harrow it in; and consequently
the seed becomes swollen by the rain and is spoiled. But he who learns
truths and practises them, is like one who sows the seed and covers it,
and the rain causes it to grow to a crop and to be of use for food. The
Lord says: If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them (John
8:17) And again: He that was sown upon the good ground, this is he that
heareth the Word and giveth heed; who also beareth fruit and bringeth
forth (Matt. 13:23); also: Everyone that heareth these My words, and
doth them, I will liken him unto a prudent man, who built his house upon
a rock. And everyone that heareth these My words and doeth them not,
shall be likened unto a foolish man, who built his house upon the sand
(Matt. 7:24, 26). All words of the Lord are truths.

<span class="margnote"><span id="348.">348.</span></span>

From the foregoing it is clear that there are three things by which
faith is formed in man; first by going to the Lord; secondly, by
learning truths from the Word; and thirdly, by living according to them.
Now as these are three things, and one not the same as another, it
follows that they can be separated; for a man may go to the Lord, and
not know any but historical truths respecting God and the Lord; also a
man may know truths from the Word in abundance, and yet not live
according to them. But in the man in whom these three things are
separated, that is, in whom one is apart from the other, there is no
saving faith. Saving faith arises when the three are conjoined, and
becomes such as the conjunction is. Where these three things are
separated, faith is like a sterile seed, which when dropped in the earth
moulders into dust. But where the three are conjoined, faith is like a
seed in the ground which grows up to a tree, and the fruit of it is
according to their conjunction. Where these three things are separated,
faith is like an egg which contains no prolific principle; but where
they are conjoined, faith is like an egg that can produce a beautiful
bird. The faith of those in whom these three things are separated, may
be likened to the eye of a fish or of a crab when cooked; but the faith
of those in whom the three are conjoined, may be likened to an eye
translucent from the crystalline humor even to and through the uvea of
the iris. Separated faith is like a picture drawn in dark colors on a
black stone; but conjoined faith is like a picture drawn in beautiful
colors on a transparent crystal. The light of a separated faith may be
compared to that of a firebrand in the hand of a traveller at night;
while the light of a conjoined faith may be compared to that of a
blazing torch which when waved about shows plainly each step of the way.
Faith without truths is like a vine bearing wild grapes; but faith from
truths is like a vine bearing clusters full of noble wine. Faith in the
Lord destitute of truths may be compared to a new star appearing in the
expanse of heaven, which in time grows dim; but faith in the Lord
together with truths may be compared to a fixed star, which remains
constant. Truth is the essence of faith; therefore, as the truth is,
such is the faith; without truths it is a wandering faith, but with them
it is fixed. Moreover, faith from truths shines in heaven like a star.

<span class="margnote"><span id="349.">349.</span></span>

IV\. AN ABUNDANCE OF TRUTHS COHERING, AS IF IN A BUNDLE, EXALTS AND
PERFECTS FAITH. From the conception of faith that prevails at the
present day it cannot be seen that faith in its compass is a complex of
truths, still less that man can contribute anything toward acquiring
faith for himself; and yet faith in its essence is truth; for it is
truth in its own right, and as truth can be acquired so also can faith.
Who cannot go to the Lord if he will? Who cannot collect truths from the
Word if he will? And every truth in the Word and from the Word, gives
light; and truth in light is faith. The Lord who is Light itself, flows
into every man; and in everyone in whom there are truths from the Word,
He causes truths to shine and thus to become truths of faith. And this
is what the Lord teaches in John: That they should abide in Him, and His
words in them (15:7). The Lord's words are truths. But to make it
properly understood that an abundance of truths cohering as if in a
bundle exalts and perfects faith, the consideration of the subject shall
distributed under the following heads: (1) Truths of faith may be
multiplied to infinity. (2) They are disposed into series, thus, as it
were, into bundles. (3) According to their abundance and coherence faith
is perfected. (4) However numerous truths are and however diverse they
appear, they make one from the Lord, who is the Word, the God of heaven
and earth, the God of all faith, the God of the vineyard or the church,
the God of faith, light itself, the truth, and life eternal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="350.">350.</span></span>

\(1\) The Truths of Faith maybe multiplied to Infinity. This is evident
from the fact that the wisdom of the angels of heaven increases to
eternity. Moreover, the angels say that there is no end to wisdom, as
its source is no other than Divine truths analytically distributed into
forms by means of light flowing in from the Lord. Such human
intelligence as is truly intelligence is from no other source. Divine
truth may be multiplied to infinity, because the Lord is Divine truth
itself, or truth in its infinity, and He draws all men to Himself; but
as angels and men are finite they can follow the current of the
attraction only according to their measure, although the force of the
attraction persists to infinity. The Lord's Word is a great deep of
truths from which comes all angelic wisdom, although to the man who
knows nothing of its spiritual and celestial meanings, it appears like
the water in a pitcher. The multiplication of the truths of faith to
infinity may be compared to the seed of men, from one of whom may be
propagated families to ages of ages. The proliferation of the truths of
faith may be compared to the proliferation of seeds in a field or a
garden, which may be propagated to myriads of myriads and perpetually.
In the Word "seed" means nothing but truth, "field" means doctrine, and
"garden" wisdom. The human mind is like soil, in which spiritual and
natural truths are implanted like seeds and may be endlessly multiplied.
Man derives this from the infinity of God, who is perpetually in man
with His heat and light, and the faculty of generating.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 351-400](tcr08)
