[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tcr09)  [Next](tcr11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930985/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*True Christian Religion*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1771\], tr. by John
C. Ager \[1906\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### True Christian Religion

<span class="margnote"><span id="451.">451.</span></span>

All charity that is not conjoined with faith in one God in whom is a
Divine trinity, is spurious like the charity of the present church, the
faith of which is a faith in successive order in three persons of the
same Divinity, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; and being a faith in three
persons, each one of whom is a self-subsistent God, it is a faith in
three Gods. To such a faith charity may be joined (as has been done by
its supporters), but never can be conjoined; and the charity that is
only joined to faith is merely natural, and not spiritual, and is
therefore a spurious charity. The same is true of the charity of many
other heresies, as the charity of those who deny a Divine trinity and
thus approach God the Father only, or the Holy Spirit only, or both of
these apart from God the Savior. To the faith of such, charity cannot be
conjoined, or when conjoined or joined to it it is a spurious charity.
It is called spurious, because it is like the offspring of an
illegitimate bed, or like the son of Hagar born to Abraham, who was cast
out of the house (Gen. 21:10). Such charity is like fruit upon a tree
where it has not grown, but has been fastened to it with a needle; and
it is like a carriage to which horses are fastened only by the reins in
the driver's hands, and when they spring forward, they drag the driver
from his seat, and leave the carriage behind.

<span class="margnote"><span id="452.">452.</span></span>

But hypocritical charity is the charity of those who in their churches
and private dwellings humble themselves almost to the floor before God,
devoutly pour forth long prayers, put on a holy expression of
countenance, kiss images of the cross and the bones of the dead, and
kneel beside sepulchres and there with their mouths mutter words of holy
veneration for God, and yet in their heart they are thinking of being
themselves worshiped and seeking to be adored as divinities. It is such
as these whom the Lord describes in the following words: When thou doest
alms, sound not a trumpet before thee, as the hypocrites do in the
synagogues and in the streets, that they may have glory of men. And when
thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the hypocrites, who love to pray
standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that they
may be seen of men (Matt. 6:2, 5). Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! For ye shut up the kingdom of heaven before men; for ye
enter not in yourselves, neither do ye suffer those to enter who wish to
enter. Woe unto you, hypocrites! For ye compass sea and land to make one
proselyte and when he is made, ye make him twofold more a son of hell
than yourselves. Woe unto you, hypocrites! For ye make clean the outside
of the cup and of the platter, but within they are filled with extortion
and excess (Matt. 23:13, 15, 25). Well hath Isaiah prophesied of you,
hypocrites, saying, This people honoreth Me with their lips, but their
heart is far from Me (Mark 7:6). Woe unto you, hypocrites! For ye are as
graves which appear not, and the men that walk over them know it not
(Luke 11:44). Beside other passages. Such are like flesh without blood,
like crows and parrots taught to repeat the words of a psalm, and like
birds taught to sing the tune of a sacred hymn; and the sound of their
voice is like that of a bird-catcher's whistle.

<span class="margnote"><span id="453.">453.</span></span>

But dead charity is the charity of those whose faith is dead; since the
charity is such as the faith is. That they make one, has been shown in
the chapter on Faith. That the faith of those who are without works is
dead, appears from the Epistle of James (2:17, 20). Furthermore, faith
is dead in those who do not believe in God; but believe in living and
dead men, and who worship images as holy in themselves, as the gentiles
formerly did. The offerings of those who are in such a faith, which for
the sake of salvation they bestow upon their miracle-working images, as
they call them, including these offerings among works of charity, are
precisely like the gold and silver that are put in the urns and
monuments of the dead; they are even like the meat given to Cerberus, or
the fee paid to Charon for ferriage to the Elysian fields. But the
charity of those who believe that there is no God, but only nature
instead, is neither spurious, hypocritical, nor dead; it is no charity
at all, because it is not joined to any faith, and cannot be called
charity, since the quality of charity is determined by faith. Such
charity, viewed from heaven, is like bread made of ashes, a cake made of
fishes' scales, or fruit made of wax.

<span class="margnote"><span id="454.">454.</span></span>

XVII\. THE FRIENDSHIP OF LOVE AMONG THE EVIL IS INTESTINE HATRED OF EACH
OTHER. It has been shown above that every man has an internal and an
external, and that his internal is called the internal man and his
external the external man. To this may be added, that the internal man
is in the spiritual world, and the external in the natural world. Man
was so created in order that he might be associated with spirits and
angels in their world, and might thereby be able to think analytically,
and after death be transferred from his own world to another. By the
spiritual world both heaven and hell are meant. As the internal man is
in company with spirits and angels in their world, and the external man
with men, it is evident that man can be affiliated both with the spirits
of hell and with the angels of heaven. By this capacity and power man is
distinguished from beasts. Man is essentially \[in se\] such as he is in
his internal man, not such as he is in his external, for the internal
man is his spirit, and this acts through the external. The material body
with which his spirit is clothed in the natural world, is an accessory
for the sake of procreation and for the sake of the formation of the
internal man; for the internal man is formed in the natural body as a
tree in the soil, or as seed in fruit. More on the internal and external
man may be seen above (n. 401).

<span class="margnote"><span id="455.">455.</span></span>

But what the evil man is as to his internal man, and what the good man
is as to his, may be seen from the following brief description of hell
and heaven, for the evil man's internal is conjoined with the devils in
hell, and the good man's with angels in heaven. Hell from its loves is
in the delights of all evils, that is, in the delights of hatred,
revenge, murder, plunder and theft, of railing and blasphemy, of denial
of God and profanation of the Word. Such delights lurk in lusts upon
which man does not reflect. These lusts blaze in these delights like
lighted torches; and are what is meant in the Word by infernal fire. But
the delights of heaven are the delights of love towards the neighbor and
of love to God. \[2\] Inasmuch as the delights of hell are opposite to
the delights of heaven, there is between them a great interspace, into
which the delights of heaven flow from above, and those of hell from
beneath. While man is living in the world he is in the middle of this
interspace, in order that he may be in equilibrium, and thus in a state
of freedom to turn either to heaven or to hell. This interspace is what
is meant by "the great gulf fixed" between those who are in heaven and
those who are in hell (Luke 16:26). \[3\] From this it can be seen what
the friendship of love is among the evil, namely, that in their external
man it is posturing and mimicry and pretenses of morality, in order that
they may spread their nets and discover opportunities for gratifying
their loves' delights, with which their internal man is on fire. Nothing
but fear of the law and consequent fears for their reputation and life
withholds them and restrains their actions. Consequently their
friendship is like a spider in sugar, a viper in bread, a young
crocodile in a cake of honey, or a snake in the grass. \[4\] Such is the
friendship of the evil with everyone. But among those confirmed in evil,
such as thieves, robbers, and pirates, friendship is intimate so long as
they are with one mind bent on acquiring plunder; for they then embrace
each other like brothers, enjoy themselves with feasting, singing, and
dancing, and conspire to destroy others; yet each one within himself
regards his companion as one enemy regards another; this, too, is what a
cunning robber sees and fears in his fellow. Evidently, therefore, among
such there is no friendship, but intestine hatred. 455a. Any man who has
not openly connected himself with evildoers and committed robberies, but
has led a civil moral life for the sake of various uses as ends, and yet
has not curbed the lust residing in his internal man, may suppose that
his friendship is not of such a nature. Nevertheless, from many
exemplifications in the spiritual world, it has been granted me to know
with certainty that it is such, in different degrees, with all who have
rejected faith and despised the holy things of the church, regarding
those as nothing to them, but only for the common herd. In some of these
the delights of infernal love have lain hidden like fire in smoldering
logs covered with bark; in some like coals under ashes; in some like
waxen torches that blaze up when fire is applied to them; and in others
in other ways. Such is every man who has rejected from his heart the
things of religion. The internal man of such is in hell; but being
ignorant of this because of their pretended morality in externals so
long as they live in the world they acknowledge no one as their neighbor
except themselves and their own children; they regard others either with
contempt-and then they are like cats lying in wait for birds in their
nests-or with hatred, and then they are like wolves when they see dogs
that they may devour. These statements are made to show from its
opposite what charity is.

<span class="margnote"><span id="456.">456.</span></span>

XVIII\. THE CONJUNCTION OF LOVE TO GOD AND LOVE TOWARDS THE NEIGHBOR It
is known that the Law promulgated from Mount Sinai was written upon two
tables, one of which related to God and the other to men; that in the
hands of Moses they were one table, the writing on the right side of
which related to God, and that on the left to men; and that when so
presented to the eyes of men the writing on both sides was seen at the
same time, thus one side was in view of the other, like Jehovah talking
to Moses and Moses to Jehovah, face to face, as it is written. This was
done in order that the tables so united might represent the conjunction
of God with men, and the reciprocal conjunction of men with God; and
this is why the written law was called a Covenant and a Testimony,
"covenant" signifying conjunction, and "testimony" life according to the
compact. These two tables so united exhibit the conjunction of love to
God with love towards the neighbor. The first table includes all things
pertaining to love to God, which are, primarily, that man should
acknowledge the one God, the Divinity of His Human, and the holiness of
the Word, and that God is to be worshiped through the holy things that
proceed from Him. That this table includes these things is evident from
the explanation, in chapter five, of the commandments of the Decalogue.
The second table includes all things pertaining to love towards the
neighbor, its first five commandments all things pertaining to action,
which are called works, and the last two all things pertaining to the
will, thus to charity in its origin; for in these it is said, "Thou
shalt not covet," and when man does not covet what belongs to his
neighbor, he wishes well to him. That the ten commandments of the
Decalogue contain all things pertaining to love to God and all things
pertaining to love towards the neighbor, may be seen above (n. 329-331);
where it is also shown that there is a conjunction of the two tables in
those who are in charity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="457.">457.</span></span>

It is different with those who merely worship God, and do not at the
same time do good works from charity. These are like those who violate
covenants. It is different again with those who divide God into three
and worship each one separately; and still different with those who do
not approach God in His Human; these are such As enter not by the door,
but climb up some other way (John 10:1, 9). It is also different with
those who from confirmation deny the Lord's Divinity. With all of these
there is no conjunction with God, and therefore no salvation; and their
charity is nothing but spurious charity, and this does not effect
conjunction by the face, but by the side or back. \[2\] How conjunction
is effected shall be told in a few words. With every man God flows into
man's knowledge of Him with acknowledgment of Him, and at the same time
flows in with His love towards men. The man who receives in the former
way only, and not in the latter, receives that influx in the
understanding and not in the will, and remains in knowledge of God
without an interior acknowledgment of God; and his state is like that of
a garden in winter. But the man who receives in both ways, receives the
influx in the will and from that in the understanding, thus in the whole
mind, and he has an interior acknowledgment of God which vivifies in him
the knowledges of God; and his state is like that of a garden in spring.
\[3\] Conjunction is effected by charity, because God loves every man,
and as He cannot do good to man immediately, but only mediately through
men, He inspires men with His own love, as He inspires parents with love
for their children; and the man who receives that love has conjunction
with God, and from God's love loves his neighbor; and in him God's love
is within man's love towards the neighbor, and produces in him the will
and the ability. \[4\] Moreover, as man does nothing that is good unless
it appears to him that the ability, the will, and the doing are from
himself, this appearance is granted him; and when he does good from
freedom as if of himself, it is imputed to him, and is accepted as the
reciprocation by which conjunction is effected. This is like active and
passive, and that cooperation of the passive which is effected from the
active in the passive. It is also like will in doing, and like thought
in words, the soul operating from the inmost into both. It is also like
effort in motion; and like the prolific in seed, which from the interior
operates in the juices through which the tree grows even to fruit, and
through fruit produces new seed. It is also like light in precious
stones which is reflected according to the texture of the parts,
producing various colors, belonging apparently to the stones, but in
fact to the light.

<span class="margnote"><span id="458.">458.</span></span>

This makes clear the origin and the nature of the conjunction of love to
God and love towards the neighbor, as being the influx of God's love for
men, the reception of which by man and his cooperation therewith being
love towards the neighbor. In a word, conjunction is effected in
accordance with this saying of the Lord: At that day ye shall know that
I am in My Father, and ye in Me, and I in you (John 14:20). Also
according to this, He that hath My commandments and keepeth them, he it
is that loveth Me, and I will love him, and will manifest Myself unto
him; and We will make abode with him (John 14:21-23). All of the Lord's
commandments have relation to love towards the neighbor, and in a word
they are not doing evil to the neighbor, but doing good to him. That
those who do this love God and God loves them, is in accordance with
these words of the Lord. Because such is the conjunction of these two
loves, John says: He that keepeth the commandments of Jesus Christ
abideth in Him and He in him. If a man say, I love God, but hateth his
brother, he is a liar; for he that loveth not his brother whom he hath
seen, how can he love God whom he hath not seen? And this commandment
have we from Him, That he who loveth God should love his brother also (1
John 3:24; 4:20, 21).

<span class="margnote"><span id="459.">459.</span></span>

To this the following Memorable Relations shall be added. First: I saw
at a distance five gymnasia, each encompassed by a different kind of
light; the first by a flame colored light, the second by a yellow light,
the third by a white light, the fourth by a light intermediate between
that of noon and evening, the fifth was hardly visible, standing as if
shrouded by the shades of evening. And on the roads I saw some on
horseback, some in carriages, some walking, and some running and
hurrying towards the first gymnasium, which was enveloped in the flamy
light. Seeing this, I was seized and impelled by a strong desire to go
there and to hear what was under discussion. Therefore I quickly got
ready and joined company with those hastening to the first gymnasium,
and entered with them; and behold! there was a large assembly, part of
which moved off to the right and part to the left, to seat themselves on
benches near the walls. Before me I saw a low pulpit, in which stood one
who filled the office of president, having a staff in his hand, a cap on
his head, and a robe tinted with the flame-colored light of the
gymnasium. \[2\] When the people had assembled, he spoke aloud and said,
"Brethren, you will today discuss the question, What is charity? Each
one of you can understand that charity is spiritual in its essence, and
natural in its practices." Immediately one of those on the first bench
on the left, on which those who were reputed wise were sitting, arose
and beginning to speak, said, "It is my opinion that charity is morality
inspired by faith." This he corroborated thus: "Who does not know that
charity follows faith, as a waiting-maid follows her mistress, and that
the man who has faith obeys the law, and thus practises charity so
spontaneously that he is unaware that it is the law and charity
according to which he is living? For if he did this knowingly, and at
the same time thought of salvation as his end, he would pollute holy
faith with his selfhood \[proprium\] and thus impair its efficacy. Is
not this in accordance with the dogma of our church?" And he looked
towards those sitting beside him, among whom were some of the regular
clergy, and they nodded assent. \[3\] "But what," he said, "is
spontaneous charity but morality into which everyone is initiated from
infancy, and which is therefore in itself natural, but becomes spiritual
when inspired by faith? Who, from the moral life of men, can distinguish
whether they have faith or not, for every man lives morally? But God
alone, who implants and seals faith, recognizes and distinguishes. I
therefore assert that charity is morality inspired by faith; and that
such morality, owing to the faith in its bosom, is saving, while all
other morality brings no salvation, because it claims merit. Thus all
those who mix together charity and faith, that is, all who conjoin them
inwardly instead of connecting them outwardly, lose their oil; for to
mix and join these together would be like putting into the carriage with
a primate the servant who stands behind, or like introducing the porter
into the dining-hall, and seating him at the table with a nobleman."
\[4\] After this another rose up from the first bench on the right, and
said, "It is my opinion that charity is piety inspired by commiseration.
This opinion I corroborate as follows: That nothing has such effect in
propitiating God as piety arising from a humble heart; and piety prays
unceasingly for God to bestow faith and charity; and the Lord says: Ask,
and it shall be given you (Matt. 7:7);and because both are given, they
are both in that piety. I say that charity is piety inspired by
commiseration; for all devout piety commiserates, for piety so moves the
heart of man that he groans, and what is that but commiseration? This
indeed recedes after we have prayed, but it comes back when we pray
again; and when it returns there is piety in it, and thus there is piety
in charity. Our priests ascribe all things that promote salvation to
faith, and nothing to charity. What then remains but piety praying
fervently for both? When I have read the Word I have been able to see
nothing else than that faith and charity are the two means of salvation.
But when I have consulted the ministers of the church I have heard that
faith is the only means, and that charity is nothing. And then it has
seemed to me that I was on the sea, in a ship that was drifting between
two rocks; and when I feared that the ship would be broken to pieces, I
betook myself to a boat and sailed away. My boat is piety; and piety,
moreover, is profitable for all things." \[5\] After him another, from
the second bench on the right, arose and said, "It is my opinion that
charity is doing good to everyone, virtuous and vicious alike; and this
opinion I corroborate as follows: What is charity but goodness of heart?
And a good heart wishes good to everyone, to the virtuous and the
vicious alike. And the Lord has said, that good ought to be done even to
our enemies. Therefore, when you withhold charity from anyone, does not
charity on that side become null, and thus like a man who has lost one
foot, and goes hopping on the other? A vicious man is a man equally with
a virtuous one, and charity regards a man as a man; if he is vicious,
what is that to me? It is with charity as with the heat of the sun,
which vivifies beasts, both fierce and gentle, wolves as well as sheep,
and causes trees to grow, both good and bad, and the thorns as well as
the vine." So saying he took in his hand a fresh grape, and said, "It is
with charity as it is with this grape; divide it, and all its contents
run out." He divided it, and out they ran. \[6\] After this speech
another from the second bench on the left, arose and said, "It is my
opinion that charity is to serve by every means one's relatives and
friends, which I corroborate thus: Who does not know that charity begins
with oneself, since everyone is neighbor to himself? Therefore charity
goes forth from oneself through grades of nearness first to brother and
sister, and from these to kinsmen and relatives; and thus the
progression of charity is self-limited. Those who are beyond its limits
are strangers, and strangers are not interiorly recognized, and thus are
as aliens to the internal man. But those related by blood and birth are
joined together by nature, and friends by custom, which is a second
nature, and these become the neighbor in that way. Charity unites also
another to itself from within, and so from without, and those not united
from within may be called companions merely. Do not all birds recognize
their own kindred, not by their plumage but by the sound they make, and
when they are near, by the sphere of life exhaled from their bodies?
This affection for kindred and consequent conjunction is called in birds
instinct; while the same affection in men, when it is for those nearest
to them, is truly an instinct of human nature. What except blood causes
homogeneity? This a man's mind, which is also his spirit, feels, and, as
it were, smells. In this homogeneity and consequent sympathy the essence
of charity consists. But heterogeneity, on the contrary, from which
antipathy springs, is, as it were, not blood, and therefore not charity.
And as habit is second nature, and this also causes homogeneity, it
follows that charity is also doing good to one's friends. When one comes
from the sea into some port and finds that it is a foreign country, the
language and customs of whose inhabitants he is unacquainted with, is he
not, as it were, out of himself, feeling none of the joy of love toward
them? But if he finds himself in his own country with whose language and
customs he is familiar, he is, as it were, within himself, and then
feels a joy arising from love, which is the joy of charity." \[7\] Then
from the third bench on the right another arose, and speaking with a
loud voice, said: "It is my opinion that charity is giving alms to the
poor, and assisting the needy. This surely is charity, for the Divine
Word so teaches, the statements of which admit of no contradiction. What
is giving to the rich and the possessors of abundance but vain glory, in
which there is no charity but only a looking for return? And in this
there can be no genuine affection of love towards the neighbor, but only
spurious affection, which is effective on earth but not in heaven.
Therefore want and poverty ought to be relieved, because into this no
idea of recompense enters. In the city where I lived, and where I knew
who were virtuous and who were not, I observed that all of the virtuous,
when they saw a beggar in the street, would stop and give him alms;
while the non-virtuous, seeing a beggar beside them, would pass him by
as if blind to his presence and deaf to his voice. And who does not know
that the virtuous have charity, and the non-virtuous have not? He who
gives to the poor and relieves the needy, is like a shepherd who leads
hungry and thirsty sheep to pasture and water; while he who gives only
to those who are rich and possess abundance, is like one who devotes
himself to the prosperous or presses food and drink upon those who are
intoxicated." \[8\] After him arose another, from the third bench on the
left, and said: "It is my opinion that charity is building hospitals,
infirmaries, orphans' homes, and asylums, and supporting them by
contributions. This I corroborate by the fact that such beneficences and
aids are public, and are many leagues beyond private benefactions;
consequently charity becomes richer and more replete with good, as the
good is multiplied by the number aided, and the reward hoped for from
the promises of the Word become more abundant, for as one ploughs and
sows, so he reaps. Is not this giving to the poor and relieving the
needy in an eminent degree? Does not one thereby secure worldly fame and
praises in the humble voice of gratitude from those helped? Does not
this exalt the heart, and with it the affection that is called charity,
even to the highest point? The rich, who do not walk the streets, but
ride, cannot notice and hand pennies to those sitting at the sides of
the streets by the wall of the houses; but they make their contributions
of such a kind as to serve many at once. But lesser persons who walk the
streets and have not stores of wealth, may do otherwise." \[9\] Hearing
this, another from the same bench quickly drowned the voice of the first
with his louder voice, saying: "Let not the rich, however, exalt the
munificence and excellence of their charity over the pittance that one
poor man gives to another; for we know that everyone in what he does
acts according to what is suitable to his person, whether he is a king
or a magistrate, a commander or an attendant. For charity, viewed in
itself, is not estimated by the excellence of the person, and
consequently of the gift, but by the amplitude of the affection that
prompts it; so that a menial giving one penny may do so from a larger
charity than the great man who gives or bequeaths an immense sum. This
is in accordance with these words: Jesus saw the rich men casting their
gifts into the treasury; He saw also a certain poor widow casting in
thither two mites and He said, of a truth I say unto you, that this poor
widow hath cast in more than they all (Luke 21:1-3). \[10\] After these
one arose from the fourth bench on the left, and said: "It is my opinion
that charity is to endow churches, and to do good to their ministers;
which I confirm by this, that he who does so meditates upon what is holy
and acts from what is holy in his own mind, and moreover, that this
sanctifies his gifts. Charity demands this, because it is in itself
holy. Is not all worship in churches holy? For the Lord says, Where two
or three are gathered together in My name, there am I in the midst of
them (Matt. 18:20); and the priests His servants conduct the worship.
From this I conclude that the gifts which are bestowed upon ministers
and churches are superior to those bestowed upon other persons and for
other objects. Moreover, there is given to a minister the power to
bless, whereby he also sanctifies those gifts; and after that there is
nothing that expands and rejoices the mind more than to look upon one's
gifts as so many holy shrines." \[11\] Then one from the fourth bench on
the right arose and spoke as follows: "It is my opinion that the old
Christian brotherhood is charity. This I confirm by the fact that every
church that worships the true God begins in charity the same as the
early Christian church did. Because charity unites minds and makes one
out of many, the members of that church called themselves brethren-but
brethren in Jesus Christ their God. But because they were then
surrounded by barbarous nations whom they feared, they established a
community of property, which enabled them to enjoy themselves together
in harmony, and at the same time conversed together daily at their
meetings about the Lord God their Savior Jesus Christ, and at their
dinners and suppers about charity; hence their brotherhood. But after
those times, when schisms began to spring up, and finally the abominable
Arian heresy arose, which with many swept away the idea of the Divinity
of the Lord's Human, charity decayed and their brotherhood was
dissolved. It is true that all who worship the Lord in truth and keep
His commandments are brethren (Matt. 23:8), but brethren in spirit; and
as it is unknown at this day what any man is in spirit, for men to call
each other brethren is of no account. A brotherhood of faith alone, and
still less a brotherhood of faith in any other God than the Lord God the
Savior, is not a brotherhood, because in that faith there is no charity,
which is what makes brotherhood. I therefore conclude that the old
Christian brotherhood was charity. But that was, and now is not; yet I
prophesy that it will return." When he had said this, a flame-colored
light appeared through the eastern window, and tinged his cheeks, at the
sight of which the assembly were amazed. \[12\] Finally one arose from
the fifth bench on the left, and asked permission to add his
contribution to the remarks of the last speaker. When this had been
granted, he said, "It is my opinion that charity is to forgive everyone
his trespasses. This opinion I have drawn from the customary saying of
those who approach the Holy Supper; for some then say to their friends,
'Forgive me what I have done amiss;' thinking that they have thus
discharged all the duties of charity. But I have thought in my own mind
that this is nothing but a painted picture of charity, not the real form
of its essence; for this is said both by those who do not forgive, and
by those who make no effort to follow charity; and such are not included
in the Prayer which the Lord Himself taught, Father, forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us. For trespasses
are like ulcers, within which, if they are not opened and healed,
diseased matter collects, which infects the neighboring parts, and
creeping about like a serpent, turns the blood everywhere into such
matter. It is the same with trespasses against the neighbor, which,
unless removed by repentance and by a life according to the Lord's
commandments, remain and devour; while those who, without repentance,
merely pray to God to forgive their sins, are like the inhabitants of a
city, who, being infected with a contagious disease, go to the chief
magistrate and say, Sir, heal us; and he would answer, How can I heal
you? Go to a physician, find out what medicines you need, get them for
yourselves from an apothecary and take them, and your health will be
restored. So the Lord will say to those who pray for the forgiveness of
their sins without actual repentance. Open the Word, and read what I
have spoken in Isaiah: Ah, sinful nation, laden with iniquity. When ye
spread forth your hands, I hide Mine eyes from you; yea, when ye make
many prayers, I do not hear. Wash you, put away the evil of your doings
from before Mine eyes cease to do evil; learn to do well, and then shall
your sins be removed and forgiven (Isa. 1:4, 15-18)." \[13\] When all
this had taken place, I raised my hand, and asked them to permit me,
although a stranger, to offer my opinion also. The president proposed
this, and consent being given, I spoke as follows: "It is my opinion
that charity is to act with judgment from a love of justice in every
employment and office, but from a love derived from no other source than
the Lord God the Savior. All that I have heard from those sitting upon
the benches, both on the right and on the left, are eminent examples of
charity; but, as the president of this assembly stated, at first,
charity in its origin is spiritual, but in its flowing forth is natural;
and natural charity, if it is inwardly spiritual, appears to the angels
transparent like a diamond; but if not inwardly spiritual, and therefore
purely natural, it appears to the angels like a pearl that resembles the
eye of a cooked fish. \[14\] "It is not for me to say, whether the
eminent examples of charity which you have presented in order, are
inspired by spiritual charity or not; but I can say what the spiritual
that ought to be in them, must be, that they may be natural forms of
spiritual charity. The spiritual itself of these is this, that they be
done with judgment from a love of justice; that is, that in the exercise
of charity man should see clearly whether he is acting from justice, and
this he sees from judgment. For a man may do evil by deeds of
beneficence; and by what appear to be evil deeds he may do good. For
example: One who gives to a needy robber the means wherewith to buy a
sword, by a beneficent act is doing evil; although the robber in begging
the money did not tell what he would do with it. So again, if one
rescues a robber from prison and shows him the way to a forest, saying
to himself, It is not my fault that he commits robbery; I have given
succor to the man. Take as another example, one who feeds an idler, and
prevents his being compelled to work, saying to him, Go into a chamber
in my house, and lie in bed; why should you weary yourself? Such a one
favors idleness. Or again, take one who promotes relatives and friends
with dishonest inclinations to offices of honor, wherein they can plot
many kinds of mischief. Who cannot see that such works of charity do not
proceed from any love of justice combined with judgment? \[15\] On the
other hand, a man may do good through what appear to be evil deeds. Take
as an example a judge who acquits an evil-doer because he sheds tears,
pours out words of piety, and begs the judge to pardon him because he is
his neighbor. But in fact a judge performs a work of charity when he
decrees the man's punishment according to the law; for he thus guards
against the man's doing further evil and being a pest to society, which
is the neighbor in a higher degree, and he prevents also the scandal of
an unjust judgment. Who does not know also, that it is good for servants
to be chastised by their masters, or children by their parents, when
they do wrong? The same is true of those in hell, all of whom are in the
love of doing evil. They are kept shut up in prisons, and when they do
evil are punished, which the Lord permits for the sake of their
amendment. This is so because the Lord is justice itself, and does
whatever He does from judgment itself. \[16\] From all this it can be
seen clearly, why, as just said, spiritual charity is done with judgment
from a love of justice, and yet from a love derived from no other source
than the Lord God the Savior. This is because all good of charity is
from the Lord; for He says, He that abideth in Me and I in him, the same
beareth much fruit; for apart from Me ye can do nothing (John 15:5).
Also that He has all power in heaven and on earth (Matt. 28:18); and all
love of justice with judgment is from no other source than the God of
heaven, who is justice itself, and the source of all man's judgment
(Jer. 23:5; 33:15). \[17\] From all this we may conclude that all that
has been said about charity from the benches on the right and left,
namely, That charity is morality inspired by faith; That it is piety
inspired by commiseration; That it is doing good alike to the virtuous
and the vicious; That it is to serve by every means one's relatives and
friends; That it is giving to the poor and assisting the needy; That it
is building infirmaries and supporting them by contributions; That it is
endowing churches and doing good to their ministers; That it is the old
Christian brotherhood; That it is to forgive everyone his trespasses;
all these are eminent examples of charity when they are done with
judgment from a love of justice. Otherwise they are not charity, but are
merely like brooks separated from their fountains, or like branches torn
from their tree; because genuine charity is to believe in the Lord and
to act justly and rightly in every employment and office. Therefore he
who from the Lord loves justice and practises it with judgment, is
charity in its image and likeness." \[18\] When this had been said there
was silence, such as comes to those who from their internal man, but not
as yet in the external, see and acknowledge that something is true. This
I perceived from their faces. But I was then suddenly removed out of
their sight, returning from the spirit into my material body; for the
natural man, because of his being clothed with a material body, is not
visible to any spiritual man, that is, to a spirit or angel, nor they to
him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="460.">460.</span></span>

Second Memorable Relation: Once when looking about in the spiritual
world I heard something like the gnashing of teeth, also a kind of
beating, and mingled with these a grating sound, and I asked what they
were. The angels who were with me said: "They are fraternities, which
are called by us debating clubs, where they dispute with each other.
Their disputations sound at a distance in this way, but near at hand
their disputations only are heard." Drawing near, I saw huts built of
reeds plastered together with mud. I wished to look in through a window
(not being permitted to enter through the door, because light would then
flow in from heaven and produce confusion), but there was no window. But
just then a window was made suddenly on the right side, and then I heard
them complaining that they were in darkness. Presently a window was made
on the left side, that on the right being closed, and then the darkness
was gradually dispelled, and they appeared to themselves to be in their
proper light. Afterward I was permitted to enter by the door and listen.
In the center there was a table, and benches round about; yet to me they
all seemed to be standing on the benches and disputing bitterly with
each other about faith and charity; one party maintained that faith is
the essential of the church, and the other, charity. Those who made
faith the essential thing, said: "By faith do we not deal with God, and
by charity with man? Therefore is not faith heavenly, and charity
earthly? Is it not by means of heavenly things that we are saved, and
not by means of earthly things? Again, cannot God bestow faith from
heaven, because it is heavenly, and must not man acquire charity for
himself, because it is earthly? And what man acquires for himself does
not pertain to the church, and thus is not saving. Therefore can anyone
be justified before God by the works that are called the works of
charity? Believe us, that we are not only justified but also sanctified
by faith alone if our faith is not defiled by a sense of merit arising
from works of charity;" and so on. \[2\] But those who made charity the
essential of the church sharply refuted these arguments, saying:
"Charity is saving, and not faith. Does not God hold all men dear, and
desire the good of all? How can God effect this good except through men?
Does God merely give us the power to talk to men about matters of faith,
and not the power to do for them what charity requires? Do you not see
that your saying that charity is earthly is absurd? Charity is heaven,
and because you do not do the good of charity, your faith is earthly.
How do you receive your faith except like stocks or stones? You say, by
hearing the Word. But how can the Word operate merely by being heard,
and how upon a stock or a stone? It may be that you are quickened,
yourselves being wholly unconscious of it. But what is the quickening,
except that you are able to say that faith alone justifies and saves?
And what faith is, and what kind of faith is saving, you do not know."
\[3\] Then one arose who by the angel conversing with me was called a
syncretist. He took off his cap and placed it on the table, but hastily
put it on his head again, because he was bald. He said: "Listen to me;
you are all wrong. It is true that faith is spiritual, and charity is
moral, but still they are conjoined; and they are conjoined by means of
the Word, and thus by means of the Holy Spirit, and by their effect
which may be called obedience, although man has no more part whatever in
it because when faith is brought in man knows no more about it than a
statue. I have long meditated on these subjects, and I have at length
discovered that man may accept from God a faith that is spiritual, but
he can no more be moved by God to a charity that is spiritual than a
stock." \[4\] When this was said those who were in faith alone
applauded, but those who were in charity hissed; and these, being
indignant, said; "Listen, friend; you do not know that there is
spiritual moral life and merely natural moral life-spiritual moral life
with those who do good from God and yet as if of themselves, and merely
natural moral life with those who do good from hell, and yet as if of
themselves." \[5\] I said that the disputation sounded like the gnashing
of teeth, also like a kind of beating mingled with a grating sound. The
disputation that sounded like the gnashing of teeth was from those who
made faith the one only essential of the church; the beating was from
those who made charity the one only essential; and the mingled grating
sound was from the syncretist. The tones of their voices were so heard
at a distance, because they had all when in the other world been given
to disputation, and had not shunned any evil, and therefore had not done
any good that was from a spiritual source. Moreover, they were wholly
ignorant that the all of faith is truth and the all of charity is good;
that truth without good is not truth in spirit, and that good without
truth is not good in spirit; and thus that each constitutes the other.

<span class="margnote"><span id="461.">461.</span></span>

Third Memorable Relation I was once carried away in spirit to the
southern quarter of the spiritual world, and into a certain paradise
there; and I saw that this paradise excelled all that I had before
surveyed. This was because a garden signifies intelligence, and because
all those who are pre-eminent in intelligence are conveyed to the south.
The garden of Eden, in which were Adam and his wife, has no other
significance; so their expulsion therefrom involved expulsion from
intelligence, and thus also from integrity of life. While I was walking
in this southern paradise, I noticed certain persons sitting under a
laurel eating figs. I turned to them and asked them for some figs, which
they gave me; and lo, in my hand the figs became grapes. As I wondered
at this, an angelic spirit who stood near me said, "The figs became
grapes in your hand because figs by correspondence signify the goods of
charity and of faith therefrom in the natural or external man, while
grapes signify the goods of charity and of faith therefrom in the
spiritual or internal man; and this has happened to you because you love
spiritual things; for in our world all things occur and come forth, and
are also changed, in accordance with correspondences." \[2\] Then
suddenly there came upon me a desire to know how man can do good from
God, and yet do it altogether as if of himself. I therefore asked those
who were eating the figs how they understood the matter. They said that
they could understand it only in this way, that God effects this
inwardly in man and through man when he is ignorant of it; because if
man were conscious of it, and in that state were to do good, he would do
only apparent good, which inwardly is evil. "For all that goes forth
from man goes forth from his own \[proprium\], and this is evil from
birth; and how can good from God and evil from man be conjoined, and
thus conjointly go forth into act? What is man's own in matters
pertaining to salvation constantly breathes forth a sense of merit, and
so far as it does this, it detracts from the Lord His own merit; and
this is the height of injustice and impiety. In a word, if the good
which God works in man, were to inflow into man's willing and thence
into his doing, the good would assuredly be defiled and also profaned,
and this God never permits. Man can think, indeed, that the good he does
is from God, and can say that it is essentially God's; but still that it
is so we do not comprehend." \[3\] Then I opened my mind and said, "You
do not comprehend this because you think from appearance, and thought
confirmed from appearance is fallacy. To you there is such appearance
and consequent fallacy because you believe everything that a man thinks
and wills and does and says therefrom, is in himself, and consequently
from himself, when in fact there is no part of them in him except the
state to receive what inflows. Man is not life in himself, but an organ
receptive of life. The Lord is life in Himself, as He says in John: As
the Father hath life in Himself, so hath He given to the Son to have
life in Himself (5:26 besides elsewhere, as in John 11:25; 14:6, 19).
\[4\] "There are two things that constitute life, namely, love and
wisdom, or what is the same thing, the good of love and the truth of
wisdom. These flow in from God, and are received by man as if they were
his; and because they are so felt by man they go forth from man as if
they were his. Their being so felt by man is the Lord's gift, to the end
that what flows in may affect man, and so be received and remain. But
inasmuch as all evil likewise flows in, not from God but from hell, and
is received with delight (because man is such an organ by birth), so
good is received from God only in proportion as evil is removed by man
as if of himself; and this is done by repentance coupled with faith in
the Lord. \[5\] That love and wisdom, charity and faith, or, more
generally speaking, the good of love and charity, and the truth of
wisdom and faith, flow in, and that what flows in appears in man to be
wholly his own, and thus goes forth from his own, all this can clearly
be seen from the sense of sight, of hearing, of smell, of taste, and of
touch. All things that are felt in the organs of those senses flow into
those organs from without and are felt within them. It is the same in
the organs of the internal senses, with the sole difference that
spiritual things, which are not manifest, flow into the former. In a
word, man is an organ receptive of life from God; consequently, so far
as he refrains from evil, he is a recipient of good. "The power to
refrain from evil the Lord gives to every man, because He gives him the
power to will and to understand; and whatever man does from his will in
accord with his understanding, or, what is the same, from freedom of
will in accord with reason of the understanding, is permanent. It is by
means of this that the Lord brings man into a state of conjunction with
Himself, and in that state reforms, regenerates, and saves him. \[6\]
"The life that flows into man is life that goes forth from the Lord,
which life is also called the Spirit of God, and in the Word the Holy
Spirit, and this life is said to enlighten and vivify man, and even to
work in him. But his life is varied and modified according to the
organization induced by means of his love. You may also know that all
the good of love and charity, and all the truth of wisdom and faith flow
in, and are not in man \[originally\]. This may be known from the fact
that he who thinks that there is anything of the kind in man by creation
must needs conclude at last that God has infused Himself into man, and
thus that men are partly gods; and yet those who so think from faith
become devils, and with us smell like corpses. \[7\] "Furthermore, what
is man's action but the mind acting? For what the mind wills and thinks
it does and says by means of its organ the body; so when the mind is led
by the Lord, action and speech are also led by Him; and these are by Him
when man believes in Him. If this were not so, explain, if you can, why
the Lord, in thousands of places in His Word, has commanded man to love
his neighbor, to perform the good works of charity, to bear fruit like a
tree, and to keep the commandments, and all this that he may be saved.
And again, why He has said that man shall be judged according to his
deeds or works, those who do good to heaven and life, and those who do
evil to hell and death. How could the Lord have said such things, if all
that goes forth from man must need be a matter of merit, and therefore
evil? Be it known to you, then, that if the mind is charity, the action
is charity also; but if the mind is faith alone, which is faith separate
from spiritual charity, the action also is that faith." \[8\] Hearing
this, those sitting under the laurel said, "That you have spoken rightly
we comprehend, and yet do not comprehend." I replied, "You comprehend
that I have spoken rightly from the general perception that man has from
the influx of light from heaven when he hears any truth; but your
failure to comprehend is from the self-perception that man has from the
influx of light from the world. In wise men these two kinds of
perception, internal and external, or spiritual and natural, make one.
You also can make them one if you look to the Lord and put away evils."
Because they understood this, I plucked some twigs from a vine and
handed them to them, saying, "Do you believe that this is of me, or of
the Lord?" They said that it was from me, but of the Lord. And lo, the
twigs put forth grapes in their hands. But as I withdrew I saw under a
green olive tree around which a vine had entwined itself, a cedar table
on which there was a book. I looked and lo, it was a book written by me,
entitled Arcana Coelestia and I said that it was fully shown in that
book that man is not life but an organ receptive of life; also that life
cannot be created and when so created be in man, any more than light in
the eye.

<span class="margnote"><span id="462.">462.</span></span>

Fourth Memorable Relation: Looking toward the seashore in the spiritual
world, I saw a splendid dockyard. I went near and looked into it, and
behold, there were large and small vessels, and in them merchandise of
every kind, and on benches there were sitting boys and girls
distributing the merchandise to all who wanted it. And they said, "We
are waiting to see our beautiful tortoises, which will soon rise up out
of the sea to us." And behold, I saw both large and small tortoises, on
the shells and scales of which sat young tortoises looking toward the
surrounding islands. The paternal tortoises had two heads, a large one
covered over with a shell like the shells on their bodies, which gave
them a reddish hue, and a small one, such as tortoises have; this they
drew back into the forepart of the body, and also, in some unseen way,
inserted into the larger head. But I kept my eyes on the large red head;
and I saw that it had a face like the face of a man, and it talked with
the boys and girls on the seats and licked their hands. Then the boys
and girls patted them, and gave them food and dainties, and also costly
things, such as silk for clothing, thyine-wood for tables, purple for
decorations, and scarlet for coloring. \[2\] Seeing these things, I
wished to know what they represented, as I knew that all things that
appear in the spiritual world are correspondences, and represent the
spiritual things pertaining to affection and to thought therefrom. They
then spoke to me from heaven and said, "You yourself know what the
dockyard represents, and the ships, and the boys and girls that are on
them; but you do not know what the tortoises signify." And they said,
"The tortoises represent such of the clergy there as altogether separate
faith from charity and its good works, affirming in themselves, that
there is clearly no conjunction of these, but that the Holy Spirit,
through man's faith in God the Father on account of the merit of the
Son, enters into man, and purifies his interiors even to his own will;
out of which they make a sort of oval plane; and they claim that when
the operation of the Holy Spirit comes near this plane, it bends itself
around it towards the left and does not touch it at all; so that the
inner or higher part of man's nature is for God, and the outer or lower
part for man; consequently nothing that man does, whether good or evil,
is apparent to God - not the good, because this is a matter of merit,
nor the evil, because it is evil, for if either of these were to appear
to God, man would perish because of it. And this being so, man is at
liberty to will and think and say and do whatever he pleases, provided
he is discreet before the world." \[3\] I asked whether they also
asserted that man is permitted to think of God as not omnipresent and
omniscient. They answered from heaven that this is permitted, for the
reason that in a man who has acquired faith, and has been purified and
justified thereby, God does not look at anything pertaining to his
thought and will, and that he still retains in his inner bosom, or in
the higher region of his mind or nature, the faith that he had received
in the act of faith, it being sometimes possible for that act to return
without man's being conscious of it. "These are the things represented
by the small head, which they draw into the forepart of the body, and
insert into the larger head when they are talking with the laity, for
with them they do not talk from the small head, but from the large one,
which in appearance is provided in front with a human face; and with
them they talk from the Word about love, charity, good works, the
commandments of the Decalogue, and repentance, selecting from the Word
almost everything that is there said on these subjects. But in so doing
they insert the small head into the large one, and from this they
understand inwardly in themselves that none of these things are to be
done for the sake of God and salvation, but only for the sake of public
and private good. \[4\] And inasmuch as they talk about these subjects
from the Word, especially about the Gospel, the operation of the Holy
Spirit, and salvation, in a pleasing and elegant manner, they seem to
their hearers to be handsome men and the wisest in all the world. This
is why, as you saw, costly and precious things were given them by the
boys and girls who sat upon the benches in the vessels; also why you saw
them represented as tortoises. In your world they are but little
distinguished from others, except by this, that they imagine themselves
the wisest of men, and laugh at others, even at those who entertain a
like doctrine of faith but are not in these mysteries. They carry with
them on their clothing a certain mark by which they make themselves
distinguishable from others." \[5\] He who was talking to me said, "I
will not tell you what their sentiments are respecting other matters of
faith, such as election, freedom of choice, baptism, and the holy
supper, which are of such a nature that they do not divulge them; but we
in heaven know what they are. But because they are such in the world,
and because no one is allowed after death to think one thing and say
another, and therefore they can then do no otherwise than speak from the
insanities of their thoughts, they are regarded as insane and are
expelled from societies, and finally sent down to the bottomless pit
spoken of in Revelation (9:2). There they become corporeal spirits, and
look like the mummies of the Egyptians. For a callousness has been
induced upon the interiors of their minds, owing to the barrier they had
interposed when they were in the world. The infernal society composed of
them borders upon the infernal society from the Machiavelians, and they
pass indiscriminately from one to the other, and call each other
fellow-members. But they go back because there is a difference between
them, arising from the fact that there has been with them some religious
principle respecting the act of justification by faith, while the
Machiavelians have no religious principle at all." \[6\] After I had
seen them expelled from societies and collected together to be cast
down, I saw a vessel flying in the air with seven sails, and therein
officers and sailors dressed in purple clothing and having splendid
laurels on their caps, and shouting, "Lo, we are in heaven; we are
purple-robed doctors of the highest degree, since of all the wise men
among the clergy in Europe we are the heads." I wondered what this
meant, and was told that they were images of pride and of the visionary
thoughts called fantasies, which spring from those who before appeared
as tortoises, but these had now been cast out of the societies as insane
and gathered into one body and now stood together in one place. I then
wished to speak with them, and therefore went to the place where they
were standing and saluted them, and said, "Are you those who have
separated the internals of men from their externals, and who have
separated the operation of the Holy Spirit, as being in faith, from its
cooperation with man outside of faith, and thus you have separated God
from man? Have you not thus not only removed charity itself and the
works of charity from faith, as many others of the learned clergy have
done, but also faith itself from man as to its manifestation before God?
\[7\] But I pray you, which do you prefer, that I should speak to you on
this matter from reason, or from Holy Scripture?" They said, "Speak
first from reason." And I spoke as follows, "How can the internal man
and external man be separated? Who does not see or cannot see from
common perception, that all of man's interiors go forth and are
continued into his exteriors, and even into his outermosts, in order to
work out their effects and produce their works? Are not internals for
the sake of externals, that they may terminate in them and find
permanence in them, and so come forth, nearly the same as a column rests
upon its base? You can see that unless there were a continuation and
thus a conjunction, outermosts would dissolve and pass away like bubbles
in the air. Who can deny that the interior operations of God in man are
myriads of myriads and of these man knows nothing? And what need is
there of his knowing about them, provided he knows about the outermosts,
in which, with his thought and will, he is together with God? \[8\] But
this shall be illustrated by an example. Does man understand the
interior operations of his speech, as how the lungs draw in the air, and
fill the little vessels with it, and the bronchial tubes, and the lobes;
how they send out the air into the trachea, and there turn it into
sound; how that sound is modified in the glottis with the aid of the
larynx; and how the tongue then articulates it, and the lips complete
the articulation that it may become speech? Do not all these interior
operations, of which man knows nothing, exist for the sake of the
outermost, which is that man may have power to speak? Remove or separate
one of these internals from its continuity with the outermosts, and
could man speak any more than a stock? \[9\] Take another example. The
two hands are the outermosts of man. Do not the interiors, which are
continued thither, come from the head through the neck, also through the
chest, the shoulders, the arms, and the forearms? And there are the
innumerable muscular textures, innumerable battalions of motor fibers,
innumerable combinations of nerves and blood-vessels, and the many bony
articulations with their ligaments and membranes. What does a man know
about these things? And yet the working of his hands is from each and
all of them. Suppose that these interior parts were to turn back to the
right or left near the elbow, instead of continuing onward, would not
the hand drop down from the forearm and rot like something torn away
from the body and deprived of life? If you will believe it, it would be
with the hand as it would be with the body if the man were beheaded. It
would be precisely the same with the human mind and its two lives, the
will and the understanding, if the Divine operations, which are those of
faith and charity, were to cease half way and not pass by a continuous
course even to the man himself. Clearly man would then be not merely a
brute, but a rotten stick. All this is in accordance with reason. \[10\]
Furthermore, if you will listen, it is also in accordance with the
Sacred Scripture. Does not the Lord say, Abide in Me, and I in you. I am
the Vine and ye are the branches. He that abideth in Me, and I in him,
the same beareth much fruit (John 15:4, 6). Is not the fruit the good
works which the Lord does through man, and man does of himself from the
Lord? The Lord also says, That He stands at the door and knocks, and
that He comes in to him that opens, and sups with him, and he with Him
(Rev. 3:20). Does not the Lord give pounds and talents to man to trade
with and profit by, and as man profits by them, does He not give him
eternal life? (Matt. 25:14-30; Luke 19:13-26). And again: That He gives
wages to every man according to the labor done in His vineyard (Matt.
20:1-16). These are but a few passages. Pages might be filled from the
Word on this subject, that man ought to bear fruit like a tree, to do
according to the commandments, to love God and the neighbor, and so
forth. \[11\] But I am aware that your self-intelligence is unable to
hold to anything such as it is in itself, that is in common with these
things from the Word, for although you give utterance to it, your ideas
pervert it. And you cannot do otherwise, because you remove from man
everything belonging to God as to communication and conjunction. What
then remains but to remove all that pertains to worship also?" Afterward
these spirits appeared to me in the light of heaven, which discloses and
manifests the character of everyone. And they did not then appear as
they did before, in a ship in the air, as if in heaven; neither were
they clad in purple robes and crowned with laurel, but in a sandy place,
in garments of rags, and girt about the loins with network like fishers'
nets, through which their nakedness was visible. And then they were sent
down to the society bordering on that of the Machiavellians.

<span class="margnote"><span id="463.">463.</span></span>

CHAPTER 8. FREEDOM OF CHOICE. I. Before the doctrine of the New Church
respecting freedom of choice can be properly set forth, it is necessary
to premise what the present church teaches on that subject in its
dogmatic books, for unless this is done a man who has sound sense and
religion may believe that it is not worth while to write anything new
about it. For he would say to himself, "Who does not know that man has
freedom of choice in spiritual things? Otherwise, why should priests
preach that men should believe in God, should be converted, should live
according to the precepts in the Word, should fight against the lusts of
the flesh, and should make themselves new creatures?" and so on. Thus he
cannot but think within himself that all this would be mere empty words,
if there were no freedom of choice in matters of salvation, and that to
deny it would be folly, because contrary to common sense. Nevertheless
that the present church stands opposed to freedom of choice and banishes
it from its temples, may be seen from the following extracts from the
book called the Formula Concordiae, which the evangelical churches swear
allegiance to. That a like teaching and therefore a like belief
respecting freedom of choice prevails with the Reformed, and likewise
throughout the entire Christian world, and thus in Germany, Sweden,
Denmark, England and Holland, is evident from their dogmatic books. The
extracts that follow are taken from the Formula Concordiae, the Leipsic
edition of 1756.

<span class="margnote"><span id="464.">464.</span></span>

\(i\) "The doctors of the Augsburg Confession assert, that owing to the
fall of our first parents, man is so thoroughly corrupt, that in
spiritual matters, which have regard to our conversion and salvation, he
is by nature blind, and neither understands nor is able to understand
the Word of God when preached, but regards it as a foolish thing, and
never of himself draws nigh unto God; but is rather an enemy of God, and
so remains until by the power of the Holy Spirit, operative through the
Word preached and heard, out of pure grace, without any co-operation on
his part he is converted, gifted with faith, regenerated and renewed"
(page 665). \[2\] (ii) "We believe that in spiritual and Divine things,
the understanding, heart, and will of the man who has not been born
again, are wholly unable, by his own natural powers, to understand,
believe, embrace, think, will, begin, finish, act, operate or
co-operate; but that as to good he is utterly corrupt and dead, so that
in his nature since the fall, before his regeneration, there does not
remain the least spark of spiritual power by which he can prepare
himself for the grace of God, or grasp it when offered, or adapt himself
to it, and of himself be capable of receiving it. Neither can he by his
own powers contribute in any way to his own conversion, either in the
whole or the half or the smallest part, or act, operate, or co-operate
from himself, or as if from himself; but he is a servant of sin and a
slave to Satan, by whom he is moved. Consequently his natural freedom of
choice, by reason of his corrupted powers and his depraved nature, is
active and efficient only in those things that are displeasing to God
and opposed to Him" (page 656). \[3\] (iii) "In civil and natural
matters man is diligent and intelligent, but in spiritual and Divine
matters, which look to the soul's salvation, he is like a stock or a
stone, or like the pillar of salt into which Lot's wife was turned,
which have not the use of eyes or mouth or any of the senses" (page
661). \[4\] (iv) "Man, however, has the power of locomotion, or of
controlling his external members, also the ability to hear the Gospel,
and in some measure meditate on it; and yet in his secret thoughts he
despises it as a foolish thing, and is unable to believe it; and in this
respect he is worse than a stock, unless the Holy Spirit is efficacious
in him, enkindling and producing in him faith and other virtues pleasing
to God, and also obedience" (page 662). \[5\] (v) "In one sense it may
be said that man is not a stone or a stock. A stone or a stock does not
resist, neither does it understand or feel what takes place in itself,
as man by his will resists God until he has been converted to God. So it
is true that before conversion man is a rational creature, endowed with
understanding, get not in Divine things; and with a will, yet not such
as wills any saving good. Nevertheless, he is unable to contribute
anything to his own salvation, and in this respect is worse than a stock
or a stone" (pages 672, 673). \[6\] (vi) "The whole of conversion is the
operation, gift, and work of the Holy Spirit alone, who effects and
operates it by his own virtue and power through the Word, in the
understanding, heart, and will of man as in a passive subject, where the
man does nothing, but is purely passive. Nevertheless, this is not done
in the same way as a statue is formed from stone, or a seal is impressed
upon wax, since the wax has neither knowledge nor will" (page 681).
\[7\] (vii) "According to the sayings of some of the fathers and later
doctors, 'God draws only the willing;' therefore in conversion man's
will does something. But this statement is not conformable to sound
doctrine, for it confirms a false opinion respecting the powers of human
choice in conversion" (page 582). \[8\] (viii) "In external worldly
affairs, which are subject to reason, there is still left to man some
share of understanding, ability, and faculty; although these wretched
remnants are exceedingly feeble; and moreover, insignificant as they
are, they are so poisoned and contaminated by hereditary disease, that
in the sight of God they are worthless" (page 641): \[9\] (ix) "In
conversion, whereby from being a child of wrath man becomes a child of
grace, he does not co-operate with the Holy Spirit, since his conversion
is the work exclusively and wholly of the spirit" (pages 219, 579 and
following; 663 and following; Appendix, page 143). "Nevertheless, the
man who is born anew through the power of the Holy Spirit may
co-operate, although much infirmity accompanies his co-operation; and he
works well so far and so long as he is led, ruled, and guided by the
Holy Spirit. Nevertheless, he does not cooperate with the Holy Spirit in
the same way as two horses together draw a carriage" (page 674). \[10\]
(x) "Original sin is not some wrong that is actually perpetrated, but it
is inmostly inherent and fixed in man's nature, substance and essence.
It is the fountain of all actual sins, such as depraved thoughts and
conversation, and evil deeds" (page 577). "This hereditary disease, by
which man's whole nature has been corrupted, is a horrible sin, and is
indeed the beginning and head of all sins, from which as a source and
fountain all transgressions flow forth" (page 640). "By this sin, as if
by a spiritual leprosy, even throughout the inmost parts and deepest
recesses of the heart, all of man's nature is in the sight of God wholly
infected and corrupted; and on account of this corruption the person of
man is by the law of God accused and damned, so that we are by nature
children of wrath and bondsmen of death and damnation, unless by the
gift of Christ's merit we are delivered and preserved from these evils"
(page 639). "For this reason there is a total want or deprivation of the
original righteousness or image of God created in connection with man in
Paradise, and this is the source of the impotence, folly, and stupidity
which render man utterly incompetent in all Divine and spiritual things.
In the place of the lost image of God in man, there is the inmost,
vilest, deepest inscrutable, and ineffable corruption of his whole
nature and of all his powers (especially of the higher and chief
faculties of the soul), in mind, understanding, heart, and will" (page
640).

<span class="margnote"><span id="465.">465.</span></span>

These are the precepts, dogmas, and canons of the present church
respecting man's freedom of choice in spiritual and in natural things,
as also respecting original sin. They are here presented in order that
the precepts, dogmas, and canons of the New Church on these subjects may
be seen more clearly; for from the two formulas so contrasted the truth
appears in the light, just as when an ugly face is placed beside a
handsome one in a picture, the two being seen at the same time, the
beauty of one and the ugliness of the other are clearly displayed to the
eye. The canons of the New Church here follow.

<span class="margnote"><span id="466.">466.</span></span>

II\. THE PLACING OF TWO TREES IN THE GARDEN OF EDEN, ONE OF LIFE, AND
THE OTHER OF THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOOD AND EVIL, SIGNIFIES THAT FREEDOM OF
CHOICE IN THINGS SPIRITUAL HAS BEEN GIVEN TO MAN. It is believed by many
that by Adam and Eve in the book of Moses the first created persons are
not meant, and in proof of this, arguments respecting Pre-adamites have
been brought forward, drawn from the computations and chronologies of
some heathen nations, and from the saying of Cain, Adam's firstborn, to
Jehovah: I shall be a fugitive and a wanderer in the earth, so that
whosoever findeth me shall slay me. Therefore Jehovah set a sign upon
Cain, lest any finding him should slay him (Gen. 4:14, 15). Afterwards
Cain went out from the presence of Jehovah, and dwelt in the land of
Nod, and builded a city (Gen. 4:16, 17). From this it is claimed that
the earth was inhabited before the time of Adam. But that by Adam and
his wife the Most Ancient church on this earth is meant has been
abundantly shown in the Arcana Coelestia published by me at London; and
in that work it is also shown that "the garden of Eden" means the wisdom
of the men of that church; "the tree of life," the Lord in man and man
in the Lord; "the tree of the knowledge of good and evil," man not in
the Lord but in what is his own (as he is who believes that he does
everything, even good, of himself); and that "eating" from that tree
means the appropriation of evil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="467.">467.</span></span>

"The garden of Eden" in the Word does not mean a garden, but
intelligence, nor does "tree" mean any tree, but man. That "the garden
of Eden" signifies intelligence and wisdom, can be seen from the
following passages: In thy wisdom and thine intelligence thou hast made
to thyself wealth (Ezek. 28:4). Also in what follows: Full of wisdom,
thou has been in Eden the garden of God, every precious stone was thy
covering (Ezek. 28:4, 12, 13). This is said of the prince and king of
Tyre, of whom wisdom is predicated, because "Tyre" in the Word signifies
the church in respect to knowledges of truth and good through which
comes wisdom; "the precious stones" which were his covering, also
signify knowledges of truth and good; for the prince and the king of
Tyre were not in the garden of Eden. \[2\] And again in Ezekiel: Asshur
a cedar in Lebanon. The cedars in the garden of God have not hidden it.
No tree in the garden of God was like unto it in its beauty. All the
trees of Eden in the garden of God envied it (Ezek. 31:3, 8, 9). And
again: To whom art thou thus become like in glory and in greatness among
the trees of Eden? (verse 18). This is said of Assyria, because in the
Word it signifies rationality and intelligence therefrom. \[3\] In
Isaiah: Jehovah shall comfort Zion, He will turn her desert into Eden,
and her wilderness into the garden of Jehovah (51:3). Here "Zion" means
the church, and "Eden" and "the garden of Jehovah" mean wisdom and
intelligence. In the Apocalypse: To him that overcometh will I give to
eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God
(2:7). In the midst of the street, and on either side of the river,
there will be the tree of life (22:2). \[4\] From these passages it is
clear that "the garden of Eden" in which Adam is said to have been
placed, means intelligence and wisdom, because like thing are said of
Tyre, Assyria, and Zion. Elsewhere in the Word "garden" signifies
intelligence (as in Isaiah 58:11; 61:11; Jer. 31:12; Amos 9:14; Num.
24:6). This spiritual meaning of a garden derives its cause from
representations in the spiritual world, where paradises are seen
wherever the angels are in intelligence and wisdom; the very
intelligence and wisdom which they possess from the Lord cause such
things to be present about them; and this comes from correspondence, for
all things that exist in the spiritual world are correspondences.

<span class="margnote"><span id="468.">468.</span></span>

That "tree" signifies man, can be seen from the following passages in
the Word: And all the trees of the field shall know that I Jehovah
humble the high tree, exalt the low tree, dry up the green tree, and
make the dry tree to bud (Ezek. 17:24). Blessed is the man whose delight
is in the law. He shall be like a tree planted by the streams of waters,
that bringeth forth its fruits in its season (Ps. 1:1-3; Jer. 17:3).
Praise Jehovah, fruitful trees (Ps. 148:7, 9). The trees of Jehovah are
full (Ps. 104:16). The axe is laid unto the root of the tree; every tree
that bringeth not forth good fruit shall be hewn down (Matt. 3:10;
7:16-21). Either make the tree good and the fruit good, or else make the
tree corrupt \[and the fruit corrupt\]; for the tree is known by its
fruit (Matt. 12:33; Luke 6:43, 44). I will kindle a fire that shall
devour every green tree and every dry tree (Ezek. 20:47). Because "tree"
signifies man, it was a statute That the fruit of a tree not serviceable
for food in the land of Canaan should be as uncircumcised (Lev. 19:23,
24). Because an olive tree signifies a man of the celestial church, it
is said: Of the two witnesses who prophesied, that they were two olive
trees standing near the God of the whole earth (Apoc. 11:4; also Zech.
4:3, 11, 12). And in David: I am like a green olive tree in the house of
God (Ps. 52:3). And in Jeremiah: Jehovah called thy name, a green olive
tree, fair and of goodly fruit (Jer. 11:16, 17); besides other passages
which are not here presented on account of their great number.

<span class="margnote"><span id="469.">469.</span></span>

At this day anyone who is inwardly wise is able to see or divine that
what is written of Adam and his wife involves spiritual things, which no
one has heretofore known, because the spiritual sense of the Word has
not been disclosed until now. Who cannot readily see that Jehovah could
not have planted two trees in the garden, and one of them for a
stumbling-block, except for the sake of some spiritual representation?
Again, does it square with Divine justice that because they both ate of
that tree they were accursed, and that this curse clings to every man
that comes after them, thus that the whole human race was damned for the
fault of one man, in which there was no evil arising from lust of the
flesh or iniquity of heart? Why did not Jehovah in the first place
restrain man from eating of the tree, since He was present and saw the
consequences? And why did He not hurl the serpent into Hades before he
had persuaded them? But, my friend, God did not do this, because He
would thus have deprived man of his freedom of choice, from which man is
man, and not a beast. When this is known it is very evident that by
these two trees, one of life and the other of death, man's freedom of
choice in spiritual things is represented. Moreover, inherited evil is
not from that source, but from parents, by whom an inclination to the
evil in which they themselves have been is transmitted to their
children. The truth of this is clearly seen by anyone who carefully
studies the manners, dispositions, and faces of the children, and even
of the households that have descended from one father. Nevertheless, it
depends on each one in a family whether he will accede to or withdraw
from inherited evil, since everyone is left to his own choice. But the
particular significance of the tree of life and the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil has been fully explained in the Memorable
Relation recorded above (n. 48), which see.

<span class="margnote"><span id="470.">470.</span></span>

III\. MAN IS NOT LIFE, BUT A RECEPTACLE OF LIFE FROM GOD. It is
generally believed that life is in man as his own, thus that he is not
only a receptacle of life, but is also life. This general belief is from
its so appearing, since man lives; that is, feels, thinks, speaks, and
acts, wholly as if from himself. Wherefore the statement that man is a
receptacle of life, and not life, must needs seem like something unheard
of, or like a paradox, because it is opposed to the appearance, and thus
to sensual thought. The cause of the fallacious belief that man is also
life itself, consequently that life was created in man and afterward
generated by parents, I have adduced from the appearance; but the reason
why the fallacy is drawn from the appearance, is that most men at the
present day are natural, and but few are spiritual, and the natural man
judges from appearances and their fallacies, which are diametrically
opposed to the truth that man is not life but only a receptacle of life.
\[2\] That man is not life but a receptacle of life from God can be seen
from these evident proofs, that all created things are in themselves
finite, and that man, being finite, could have been created only from
things finite. Therefore it is said in the book of Creation, that Adam
was made from the earth and its dust, from which he was also named, for
"Adam" means the earth's soil; and it is a fact that every man consists
only of such things as are in the earth, and from the earth in the
atmospheres. Those things that are in the atmospheres from the earth man
absorbs by means of his lungs and the pores of his whole body, and the
grosser elements he absorbs by means of food composed of earthy
substances. \[3\] But in regard to man's spirit, that also is created
from finite things. What is man's spirit but a receptacle of the life of
the mind? The finite things of which it is composed are spiritual
substances, which are in the spiritual world, and are also brought
together in our earth and hidden therein. Unless they were therein along
with material things no seed could be impregnated from things inmost,
and then grow in a wonderful manner undeviatingly from the first shoot
even to fruit and to new seed. Neither could any worms be procreated
from effluvia from the earth and exhalations from vegetable matters,
with which the atmospheres are impregnated. \[4\] Who can think
rationally that the infinite can create anything but finite things, and
that man, being finite, is anything but a form which the infinite can
vivify from the life in itself? And this is what is meant by these
words: Jehovah God formed man, the dust of the ground, and breathed into
his nostrils the breath of lives (Gen. 2:7). God, because He is
infinite, is Life in Himself. This He cannot create and then transfer
into man, for that would be to make man God. That this was done was the
insane idea of the serpent or the devil, and from him of Adam and Eve;
for the serpent said: In the day ye eat of the fruit of this tree your
eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as God (Gen. 3:5). \[5\] This dire
persuasion, that God transfused and transferred Himself into men, was
held by the men of the Most Ancient church at its end, when it was
consummated. This I have heard from their own mouths; and on account of
that horrible belief that they were consequently gods, they lie deeply
hidden in a cavern near to which no one can approach without being
seized by an inward dizziness which causes him to fall. That the Most
Ancient church is meant and described by Adam and his wife, has been
made known in the preceding section.

<span class="margnote"><span id="471.">471.</span></span>

Who does not see, when he is able to think from reason elevated above
the sensual things of the body, that life is not creatable? For what is
life but the inmost activity of the love and wisdom that are in God and
are God, which life, indeed, may be called the essential living force?
He who sees this can also see that this life cannot be transferred into
any man, except in connection with love and wisdom. Who denies or can
deny that every good of love and every truth of wisdom is solely from
God, and that so far as man receives these from God he lives from God,
and is said to be born of God, that is, regenerated? On the other hand,
so far as one does not receive love and wisdom, or what is the same,
charity and faith, he does not receive from God the life that is life in
itself, but life from hell, and this is no other than inverted life
which is called spiritual death.

<span class="margnote"><span id="472.">472.</span></span>

From the foregoing it can be perceived and concluded that the following
things are not creatable, namely: (1) The infinite is not. (2) Love and
wisdom are not. (3) Consequently life is not. (4) Light and heat are
not. (5) Even activity itself viewed in itself is not. But organs
receptive of these are creatable and have been created. These statements
may be illustrated by the following comparisons: Light is not creatable,
but its organ, the eye, is; sound, which is an activity of the
atmosphere, is not creatable, but its organ, the ear, is; neither is
heat, which is the primary active principle, for the reception of which
all things in the three kingdoms of nature have been created, and
according to this reception are acted upon, but do not act. \[2\] It is
from the order of creation, that wherever there are actives there are
also passives, and that these two should join themselves together as a
one. If actives were creatable as passives are there would have been no
need of the sun, and heat and light from it, but all created things
would have permanent existence without these. But if these should be
taken away the created universe would lapse into chaos. \[3\] The sun
itself of this world consists of created substances, the activity of
which produces fire. These things are presented for the sake of
illustration. It would be the same with man, if spiritual light, which
in its essence is wisdom, and spiritual heat, which in its essence is
love, did not flow into man and were not received by him. The entire man
is nothing but a form organized to receive light and heat, both from the
natural world and from the spiritual world, for these two worlds
correspond to each other. If it were denied that man is a form receptive
of love and wisdom from God, influx would also be denied, and thus that
all good is from God. Conjunction with God would also be denied, and
consequently, that man can be an abode and temple of God would be an
expression devoid of meaning.

<span class="margnote"><span id="473.">473.</span></span>

But man does not know this from any light of reason, for that light is
obscured by fallacies that arise from the appearances pertaining to the
external bodily senses, and that are believed in. Man has no other
feeling than that he lives from his own life, because the instrumental
feels the principal to be its own, and is unable therefore to
distinguish between the principal and the instrumental, for these two
causes act together as one cause, according to a theory known in the
learned world. The principal cause is life, and the instrumental cause
is man's mind. The appearance is also that beasts possess life created
within them, but this is a similar fallacy; for beasts are organs
created to receive light and heat both from the natural world and from
the spiritual world. For each species is a form of some natural love,
and receives light and heat from the spirit world mediately through
heaven and hell; the gentle beasts through heaven, and the fierce
through hell. Man alone receives light and heat, that is, wisdom and
love, immediately from the Lord. This is the difference.

<span class="margnote"><span id="474.">474.</span></span>

That the Lord is Life in Himself, thus Life itself, He teaches in John:
The Word was with God, and God was the Word; in Him was life, and the
life was the light of men (John 1:1, 4). Again: As the Father hath life
in Himself, so hath He given to the Son to have life in Himself (5:26).
And again: I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life (John 14:6). And again:
He that followeth Me shall have the light of life (John 8:12).

<span class="margnote"><span id="475.">475.</span></span>

IV\. SO LONG AS MAN LIVES IN THE WORLD, HE IS KEPT MIDWAY BETWEEN HEAVEN
AND HELL, AND IS THERE IN SPIRITUAL EQUILIBRIUM, WHICH IS FREEDOM OF
CHOICE. In order to know what freedom of choice is and the nature of it,
it is necessary to know its origin. Especially from a recognition of its
origin it can be known, not only that there is such a thing as freedom
of choice, but also what it is. Its origin is in the spiritual world,
where man's mind is kept by the Lord. Man's mind is his spirit, which
lives after death; and his spirit is constantly in company with its like
in the spiritual world, and at the same time by means of the material
body with which it is enveloped, it is with men in the natural world.
Man does not know that in respect to his mind he is in the midst of
spirits, for the reason that the spirits with whom he is in company in
the spiritual world, think and speak spiritually, while his own spirit
thinks and speaks naturally so long as he is in the material body; and
the natural man cannot understand or perceive spiritual thought and
speech, nor the reverse. This is why spirits cannot be seen. But when
the spirit of man is in company with spirits in their world, he is also
in spiritual thought and speech with them, because his mind is
interiorly spiritual but exteriorly natural; therefore by means of his
interiors he communicates with spirits, while by means of his exteriors
he communicates with men. By such communication man has a perception of
things, and thinks about them analytically. If it were not for such
communication, man would have no more thought or other thought than a
beast, and if all connection with spirits were taken away from him, he
would instantly die. \[2\] But to make it comprehensible how man can be
kept midway between heaven and hell and thereby in spiritual equilibrium
from which he has freedom of choice, it shall be briefly explained. The
spiritual world consists of heaven and hell; heaven then is overhead,
and hell is beneath the feet, not, however, in the center of the globe
inhabited by men, but below the lands of the spiritual world, which are
also of spiritual origin, and therefore not extended \[spatially\], but
with an appearance of extension. \[3\] Between heaven and hell there is
a great interspace, which to those who are there appears like a complete
orb. Into this interspace, evil exhales from hell in all abundance;
while from heaven, on the other hand, good flows into it, also in all
abundance. It was of this interspace that Abraham said to the rich man
in hell: Between us and you there is a great gulf fixed; so that they
who would pass from hence to you cannot, neither can they who are there
cross over to us (Luke 16:26). Every man, as to his spirit, is in the
midst of this interspace, solely for this reason, that he may be in
freedom of choice. \[4\] Because this interspace is so large and because
it appears to those who are there like a vast orb, it is called the
World of Spirits. Moreover, it is full of spirits, because every man
after death first goes there, and is there prepared either for heaven or
for hell. There he is among spirits, in company with them, as formerly
he was among men in the world. There is no purgatory there; that is a
fiction invented by the Roman Catholics. But that world has been treated
of particularly in the work on Heaven and Hell (London, 1758, n.
421-535).

<span class="margnote"><span id="476.">476.</span></span>

Every man from infancy even to old age is changing his locality or
situation in that world. When an infant he is kept in the eastern
quarter towards the northern part; when a child, as he learns the first
lessons of religion, he moves gradually from the north towards the
south; when a youth, as he begins to exercise his own thoughts, he is
borne southward; and afterwards when he judges for himself and becomes
his own master, he is borne into the southern quarter towards the east,
according to his growth in such things as have regard interiorly to God
and love to the neighbor. But if he inclines to evil and imbibes it, he
advances towards the west. For all in the spiritual world have their
abodes according to the quarters; in the east are those who are in good
from the Lord, because the sun, in the midst of which is the Lord, is in
that quarter; in the north are those who are in ignorance; in the south,
those who are in intelligence; and in the west, those who are in evil.
Man himself is not kept as to his body in that interspace or middle
region, but only as to his spirit; and as his spirit changes its state
by advancing towards good or towards evil, so is it transferred to
localities or situations in this quarter or in that, and comes into
association with those who dwell there. But it must be understood that
the Lord does not transfer man to this or that place, but man transfers
himself in different ways. If he chooses good, he together with the
Lord, or rather the Lord together with him, transfers his spirit towards
the east. But if man chooses evil, he together with the devil, or rather
the devil together with him, transfers his spirit towards the west. It
must be noticed that where the term heaven is here used, the Lord also
is meant, because the Lord is the all in all things of heaven; and where
the term devil is used, hell also is meant, because all who are there
are devils.

<span class="margnote"><span id="477.">477.</span></span>

Man is kept in this great interspace, and midway therein continually,
for the sole purpose that he may have freedom of choice in spiritual
things, for this is a spiritual equilibrium, because it is an
equilibrium between heaven and hell, thus between good and evil. All who
are in that great interspace are, as to their interiors, conjoined
either with the angels of heaven or with the devils of hell; or at the
present day either with the angels of Michael or with the angels of the
dragon. After death every man betakes himself to his own in that
interspace and associates himself with those who are in a love similar
to his own, for love conjoins everyone there with his like, and causes
him to breathe out his soul freely, and to continue in his previous
state of life. But the externals that do not make one with his internals
are then gradually put off, and when this has been done the good man is
raised up to heaven, and the evil man betakes himself to hell, each to
such as he is at one with as to his ruling love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="478.">478.</span></span>

This spiritual equilibrium, which is freedom of choice, may be
illustrated by various forms of natural equilibrium. It is like the
equilibrium of a man bound about his body or at his arms between two men
of equal strength, one of whom draws the man between them to the right,
and the other to the left, so that the man in the middle can freely turn
this way or that as if unrestrained by any force; and if he turns toward
the right he draws the man on his left forcibly toward him, even
bringing him to the ground. It would be the same with any unresisting
person, even if bound between three men on his right, and the same
number on his left, of equal power; also if bound between camels or
horses. \[2\] Spiritual equilibrium, which is freedom of choice, may be
compared to a balance, in each scale of which equal weights are placed;
but if a slight weight is then added to either scale, the tongue of the
scale begins to vibrate. It is similar with a pole or large beam
balanced on its support. Each and all things within man, as the heart,
the lungs, the stomach, the liver, the pancreas, the spleen, the
intestines, and the rest, are in such a state of equilibrium; and for
this reason each is able to discharge its functions in perfect quiet. It
is the same with all the muscles; if they were without such equilibrium
all action and reaction would cease, and man would no longer act as a
man. Since, then, all things of the body are in such equilibrium, so are
all things of the brain, and consequently all things of the mind
therein, which relate to the will and understanding. \[3\] There is a
freedom also belonging to beasts, birds, fishes and insects; but these
are impelled by their bodily senses, prompted by appetite and pleasure.
Man would not be unlike these if his freedom to do were equal to his
freedom to think. He, too, would then be impelled by his bodily senses,
prompted by lust and pleasure. It is otherwise with one who heartily
accepts the spiritual things of the church, and by means of them
restrains his freedom of choice. Such a man is led by the Lord away from
lusts and evil pleasures and his connate avidity for them, and acquires
an affection for what is good, and turns away from evil. He is then
transferred by the Lord nearer to the east, and at the same time to the
south of the spiritual world, and is introduced into heavenly freedom,
which is freedom indeed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="479.">479.</span></span>

V. IT IS CLEARLY MANIFEST FROM THAT PERMISSION OF EVIL IN WHICH
EVERYONE'S INTERNAL MAN IS THAT MAN HAS FREEDOM OF CHOICE IN SPIRITUAL
THINGS. That man has freedom of choice in spiritual things must first be
confirmed by generals and afterward by particulars which everyone will
acknowledge at first hearing. The generals are: (1) That the wisest of
mankind, Adam and his wife, suffered themselves to be seduced by a
serpent. (2) That their first son Cain slew his brother Abel, and
Jehovah God did not hinder them by speaking to them, but only by a curse
after the deed. (3) That the Israelitish nation worshiped a golden calf
in the desert, and yet Jehovah saw this from Mount Sinai, and did not
prevent it. (4) That David numbered the people, and a plague was
therefore sent upon them, by which so many thousands of men perished;
and that God, not before but after the deed, sent Gad the prophet to
David, and denounced punishment upon him. (5) That Solomon was permitted
to establish idolatrous forms of worship. (6) And many kings after him
were permitted to profane the temple and the holy things of the church,
and at length that nation was permitted to crucify the Lord. (7) That
Mohammed was permitted to establish a religion in many respects not
conformable to Sacred Scripture. (8) That the Christian religion is
divided into many sects, and each into heresies. (9) That there are so
many impious persons in Christendom, and even a glorying in impieties,
as also machinations and wiles even against the pious, righteous, and
sincere. (10) That injustice sometimes triumphs over justice in law and
business. (11) That even impious persons are exalted to honors, and
become leaders in church and state. (12) That wars are permitted, the
slaughter of so many men, and the plundering of so many cities, nations,
and families; and so on. Can anyone deduce such things from any other
source than the possession of freedom of choice by every man? The
permission of evil known throughout the world has no other origin. That
the laws of permission are also laws of Divine Providence may be seen in
the work on The Divine Providence (Amsterdam, 1764, n. 234-274), where
the foregoing examples are explained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="480.">480.</span></span>

The particulars which prove that man has freedom of choice as much in
spiritual things as in natural things, are innumerable. Let anyone, if
he wishes, give attention to himself, and see whether he cannot, seventy
times a day, or three hundred times a week, think of God, the Lord, the
Holy Spirit, and Divine things, which are called the spiritual things of
the church; and let him see whether in this he feels any compulsion,
whether he is moved to think so by any pleasure, or even by any lust,
and this whether he has faith or not. Consider also, in whatever state
you may be, whether you are able to think about anything without freedom
of choice, either in your conversation, or in your prayers to God, or in
preaching, or even in listening. Does not freedom of choice carry every
point in these actions? And still further, without freedom of choice in
every particular, even to the most minute particulars, you could no more
breathe than a statue; for respiration follows thought and speech
therefrom in every step. I say, no more than a statue, rather no more
than a beast, because a beast breathes from a natural freedom of choice,
but man from a freedom of choice both in things natural and in things
spiritual; for a man is not born like a beast. A beast is born with all
the ideas that are attendant upon its natural love in matters pertaining
to nutrition and propagation; but a man is born destitute of connate
ideas, having only the capacity to know, understand, and become wise,
and an inclination to love both himself and the world, and also the
neighbor and God. This is why it is said that if freedom of choice were
taken from man in all the particulars of his volition and thought, he
could no more breathe than a statue, and why it is not said, no more
than a beast.

<span class="margnote"><span id="481.">481.</span></span>

No one denies that man has freedom of choice in natural things. But this
a man has from his freedom of choice in spiritual things; for, as has
been shown already, the Lord flows into every man from above or within
with the Divine good and truth, and thereby breathes into man a life
distinct from the life of beasts, and gives him the power and the will
to receive the Divine good and Divine truth and to act from these; and
this He never takes away from any. From this it follows that it is the
unceasing will of the Lord that man should receive truth and do good,
and thus become spiritual, and for this he was born; and to become
spiritual without freedom of choice in spiritual things is as impossible
as it is to thrust a camel through the eye of a sewing needle, or to
touch a star in the firmament with the hand. That the ability to
understand truth and to will it is given to every man, even to devils,
and is never taken away, has been shown me by living experience. On one
occasion one of those who were in hell was brought up into the world of
spirits, and was there asked by angels from heaven whether he could
understand the things they said to him, which were Divine spiritual
things; and he said that he could. He was then asked why he did not
accept such things; and he replied that he did not wish for them because
he did not love them. He was then told that he could wish for them. He
was astonished at this, and said that he could not. Therefore the angels
breathed into his understanding the glory of reputation with its
pleasantness, receiving which he did wish for them and even loved them.
But presently he was sent back into his former state, in which he was a
plunderer, an adulterer, and a calumniator of his neighbor; and then he
no longer understood those things because he did not wish to do so. From
this it is clear that man is man by virtue of his freedom of choice in
spiritual things, and that without it he would be like a stock, or a
stone, or the statue of Lot's wife.

<span class="margnote"><span id="482.">482.</span></span>

That man would have no freedom of choice in civil, moral, and natural
things, if he had none in spiritual things, is evident from this, that
spiritual things, which are called theological, have their seat in the
highest region of his mind, like the soul in the body. They have their
seat there because there is the door through which the Lord enters into
man. Beneath these are things civil, moral, and natural, which in man
receive all their life from the spiritual things that have their abode
above them. And because life from the highest regions flows in from the
Lord, and man's life is an ability to think and will freely, and to
speak and act therefrom, it follows that his freedom of choice in
political and natural affairs is from that source and no other. From
that spiritual freedom man has a perception of what is good and true,
and of what is just and right in civil matters; and this perception is
the understanding itself in its essence. \[2\] Man's freedom of choice
in spiritual things is comparatively like the air in the lungs, which is
inhaled, retained, and expelled in accordance with all the changes of
his thought; and without that freedom he would be worse than one
laboring under a nightmare, angina, or asthma. It is also like the blood
in the heart; if this began to fail the heart would first palpitate, and
then after a few convulsive movements, would cease to beat altogether.
It may also be compared to a body in motion, which keeps moving as long
as the effort in it continues; but both motion and effort cease at the
same time. So also is it with the freedom of choice which man's will
possesses. Both of these, freedom of choice and the will, may be called
the living effort in man, for when volition ceases, action ceases, and
when freedom of choice ceases volition ceases. \[3\] If man were
deprived of spiritual freedom, it would be comparatively as if the
wheels were taken from machinery, the fans from a windmill, or the sails
from a vessel. It would even be as with one who in dying sends forth his
last breath; for the life of man's spirit consists in his freedom of
choice in spiritual things. The angels weep when they but hear it said
that this freedom of choice is denied by many ministers of the church at
this day; and they call this denial madness upon madness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="483.">483.</span></span>

VI\. WITHOUT FREEDOM OF CHOICE IN SPIRITUAL THINGS THE WORD WOULD BE OF
NO USE, AND CONSEQUENTLY THE CHURCH WOULD BE NOTHING. It is known
throughout the Christian world that in the broadest sense the Word means
the law, or the book of the laws, in accordance with which man must live
to obtain eternal life. And what is there more frequently taught in it
than that man should do good and not evil, and should believe in God and
not in idols? And it is full of commands and exhortations to do these
things, and of blessings and promises of reward for those who do them,
and of curses and threats for those who do not. To what purpose is this,
if man has no freedom of choice in spiritual things, that is, in such
things as relate to salvation and eternal life? Would it not be void of
meaning, and subserve no use? And if man were to cling to the idea that
he has no power and no liberty in spiritual things, and thus were to be
separated from any power of will in spiritual matters, would the Sacred
Scriptures then seem to him to be anything more than a blank sheet
without a syllable upon it, or like a sheet upon which a whole inkstand
had been emptied, or like mere curves and dots without any letters,
therefore like an empty volume? \[2\] To confirm this from the Word
ought not to be necessary, but as the churches of today have poured
themselves forth in mental inanities respecting spiritual things, and to
confirm these have brought forth passages from the Word which have been
falsely interpreted, it may be well to present others which command man
to do and to believe. Such are the following: The kingdom of God shall
be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits
thereof (Matt. 21:43). Bring forth fruits worthy of repentance. And even
now the axe is laid unto the root of the tree; every tree therefore
which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire
(Luke 3:8, 9). Jesus said, Why call ye Me Lord, Lord, and do not the
things that I say? Everyone who cometh to Me, and heareth My words, and
doeth them, is like a man building a house upon a rock. But he that
heareth and doeth not, is like unto a man that built a house upon the
ground without a foundation (Luke 6:46-49). Jesus said, My mother and My
brethren are those who hear the Word of God and do it (Luke 8:21). We
know that God heareth not sinners; but if one worship God, and do His
will, him He heareth (John 9:31). If ye know these things, blessed are
ye if ye do them (John 13:17). He that hath My commandments and doeth
them, he it is that loveth Me; and I will love him (John 14:21). Herein
is My Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit (John 15:8). Ye are My
friends if ye do whatsoever I command you; I have chosen you, that ye
should bear fruit, and that your fruit should remain (John 15:14, 16).
Make the tree good, the tree is known by its fruit (Matt. 12:33). Bring
forth fruits worthy of repentance (Matt. 3:8). He that is sown upon good
ground this is he that heareth the Word, and beareth fruit (Matt.
13:23). He that reapeth receiveth reward, and gathereth fruit unto life
eternal (John 4:36). Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your
doings; learn to do good (Isa. 1:16, 17). The Son of man shall come in
the glory of His Father, and then He shall render unto everyone
according to his deeds (Matt. 16:27). And shall come forth, they that
have done goods, unto the resurrection of life (John 5:29). Their works
do follow with them (Apoc. 14:13). Behold, I come quickly; and My reward
is with Me, to give to every man according to his work (Apoc. 22:12).
Jehovah whose eyes are open to give everyone according to his ways.
According to our doings, hath He dealt with us (Jer. 32:19; Zech. 1:6).
\[3\] The Lord teaches the same in His parables, many of which imply
that those who do good will be accepted while those who do evil will be
rejected, As in the parable of the workmen in the vineyard (Matt.
21:33-44). Of the talents and pounds given to trade with (Matt.
25:14-31; Luke 19:13-25). So also of Faith; Jesus said, Whosoever
believeth in Me shall never die, but shall live (John 11:25, 26). This
is the will of the Father, that everyone who believeth in the Son may
have eternal life (John 6:40). He that believeth on the Son hath eternal
life but he that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath
of God abideth on him (John 3:36). For God so loved the world, that He
gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth on Him should not
perish, but have eternal life (John 3:16.) And again: Thou shalt love
the Lord thy God with thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy
mind; and thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. On these two
commandments hang all the law and the prophets (Matt. 22:37-40). But
these are only a very few of such passages in the Word, and they are
like a few cups of water from the sea.

<span class="margnote"><span id="484.">484.</span></span>

Who does not see the emptiness (I do not wish to say the foolishness) of
the extracts quoted above (n. 464) from the ecclesiastical work entitled
Formula Concordiae, when he has read them, together with some passages
quoted here and elsewhere from the Word? Would he not think to himself:
If it were as there taught, that man has no freedom of choice in
spiritual things, what but an idle word would religion be, which is
doing good? And what is the church apart from religion but like a bark
about a stick which is fit for nothing but to be burned? And he would
think, moreover, If there is no church because no religion, what are
heaven and hell but the fables of ministers and rulers of the church to
ensnare the people, and elevate themselves to higher honors? And this is
the source of that detestable saying on the lips of many: Who can do
good, or acquire faith of himself? Consequently they disregard these
things, and live like pagans. But my friend, shun evil and do good and
believe in the Lord from all your heart and in all your soul, and the
Lord will love you, and will give you a love of doing and faith to
believe. Then from love you will do good, and from faith, which is
trust, you will believe; and if you persevere in so doing, a reciprocal
conjunction will be effected, which will be perpetual, and this is
salvation itself and eternal life. If man from the powers given him
should fail to do good, and from his mind should fail to believe in the
Lord, what would he be but a wilderness and a desert, or altogether like
dry ground, which does not receive the rain, but throws it off or like a
sandy plain where there are sheep without pasture? And he would be like
a dried-up fountain, or like stagnant water therein, its course being
obstructed; or like an abode where there is neither harvest nor water,
where, unless he quickly fled from the place and sought a habitable
abode elsewhere, he would perish with hunger and thirst.

<span class="margnote"><span id="485.">485.</span></span>

VII\. WITHOUT FREEDOM OF CHOICE IN SPIRITUAL THINGS, THERE WOULD BE
NOTHING IN MAN WHEREBY HE COULD IN TURN CONJOIN HIMSELF WITH THE LORD;
CONSEQUENTLY THERE WOULD BE NO IMPUTATION, BUT MERE PREDESTINATION,
WHICH IS DETESTABLE. That without freedom of choice in spiritual things
there would be neither charity nor faith in any man, still less a
conjunction of the two, has been fully shown in the chapter on Faith.
From this it follows, that without freedom of choice in spiritual things
there would be nothing in man whereby the Lord could conjoin Himself to
him, and yet, without reciprocal conjunction, no reformation or
regeneration, and thus no salvation is possible. That without a
reciprocal conjunction of man with the Lord, and of the Lord with man,
there would be no imputation, is an irrefragable consequence. The
conclusions that follow from confirming the idea that there is any
imputation of good and evil without freedom of choice in spiritual
things, are numerous, and in the latter part of this work, where it
treats of the heresies, paradoxes, and contradictions flowing from the
faith of the present day, which imputes to man the merit and
righteousness of the Lord God the Savior, these preposterous conclusions
will be exposed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="486.">486.</span></span>

Predestination is an offspring of the faith of the present church, for
it is born from a belief in man's absolute impotence, with no power of
choice in spiritual things; it is born from this doctrine and also from
the belief in man's conversion as being a dead thing, in that he is like
a stock, and has therefore no conscious knowledge whether he is a stock
vivified by grace or not. For it is said that election is of the mere
grace of God, exclusive of all human action, whether it proceed from the
powers of nature or of reason, and that it takes place where and when
God wills, thus from His good pleasure. The works that follow faith as
evidences thereof, resemble, to a reflecting mind, the works of the
flesh; and the spirit which produces them does not make evident their
origin, but effects them out of grace or good pleasure, like faith
itself. \[2\] From all this it is clear that the dogma of the present
church respecting predestination has come forth from this belief like a
shoot from its seed; and I may say that it has flowed forth out of it as
an almost inevitable consequence. This consequence was first reached by
the Predestinarians, then by Gottschalk, afterwards by Calvin and his
disciples, and was at length firmly established by the Synod of Dort,
and from that was carried forth into the church as the palladium of
religion, or rather as the head of Gorgon or Medusa engraved on the
shield of Pallas by the Supralapsarians and Infra-Lapsarians. \[3\] But
what more pernicious thing could have been devised, or could anything
more cruel be believed of God, than that some of the human race are
damned by predestination? For would it not be a cruel creed, that the
Lord, who is love itself and mercy itself, should desire a multitude to
be born for hell, or that myriads of myriads should be born doomed, that
is, devils and satans; also that from His Divine wisdom, which is
infinite, He should not have provided and does not provide, that those
who live well and acknowledge God should not be cast into eternal fire
and torment? He is ever the Lord, the Creator and Savior of all, and He
alone leads all, and desires not the death of any. Therefore, what more
infamous thing could be believed or thought than that whole nations and
peoples should, under His auspices and oversight, be handed over by
predestination to the devil as his prey, to satisfy his voracity? But
this is an offspring of the faith of the present church; the faith of
the New Church abhors it as a monster.

<span class="margnote"><span id="487.">487.</span></span>

I had thought that such senseless doctrine never could have been
sanctioned by any Christian, much less have found utterance and a public
promulgation; and yet this was done by many chosen men of the clergy at
the Synod of Dort, in Holland, and the creed was afterward elegantly
written and given to the public; and because of this and to remove my
doubts, some of those who aided in framing the decrees of that synod
were sent to me. When they appeared standing near me, I said, "Who from
any sound reason can reach the conclusion that predestination is true
doctrine? Can it be that any but cruel ideas of God and shameful ideas
of religion should flow from it? When anyone has engraved predestination
on his heart by means of confirmations must he not think of all that
pertains to the church as destitute of meaning, and the same of the
Word? And must he not think of God, who has predestined to hell so many
myriads of men, as a tyrant?" \[2\] At these remarks they looked at me
with a satanic expression, and said, "We were among those chosen to form
the Synod of Dort, and we then confirmed ourselves and have since
continued to do so still more in many ideas respecting God, the Word,
and religion, which we have not dared to make public; but when we have
spoken on these subjects and taught them, we have twisted and woven a
web of various colored threads, and over it strewed feathers borrowed
from the wings of peacocks." But because they still wished to do the
same, the angels, by power given them by the Lord, closed the externals
of their minds and opened the internals, and from these they were
compelled to speak. And then they said, "Our faith, which we have formed
by conclusions, one following from another, was and still is as follows:
\[3\] (1) "That there is no Word of Jehovah God, but some windy afflatus
from the mouths of the prophets. This we have thought, because the Word
predestines all to heaven, and teaches that man alone is in fault if he
does not walk in the ways that lead thither. (2) That religion exists
because it is necessary; but it is like a strong wind bearing a fragrant
odor for the vulgar; therefore that it ought to be taught by ministers,
both small and great, and from the Word too, because the Word is
accepted. This we have thought, because where there is predestination
there religion is a nullity. (3) That the civil laws of justice are
religion; but predestination is not determined by a life in accord with
those laws, but by the pure good pleasure of God, as with a king in
whose mere glance there is absolute power. (4) The all that the church
teaches ought to be exploded as vanity, and rejected as rubbish, except
that there is a God. (5) That spiritual things, which are so cried up,
are nothing but ethereal substances beneath the sun, which induce upon
man, if they penetrate deeply into him, vertigo and stupor, and make him
a detestable monster in the sight of God." (6) When they were asked
about faith (from which they deduced predestination), whether they
believed it to be spiritual, they said that it was effected according to
predestination, but when it is given men were like stocks. From this
they are indeed vivified, but not spiritually. \[4\] After these
horrible sayings they wished to go away; but I said to them, "Wait a
little longer, and I will read you something from Isaiah;" and I read
the following: Rejoice not, O Philistia, all of thee, because the rod
that smiteth thee is broken; for out of the serpent's root hath gone
forth a cockatrice, whose fruit shall be a fiery flying serpent (Isa.
14:29). And this I explained by the spiritual sense, showing that
"Philistia" means the church separate from charity; that the
"cockatrice" that had gone forth from the serpent's root means its
doctrine of three Gods and of imputative faith applied to each singly;
and that its "fruit," which is a fiery flying serpent, means no
imputation of good and evil, but immediate mercy, whether man lives well
or ill. \[5\] Hearing this, they said, "It may be so; but from that
volume which you call the Holy Word select something on predestination."
And I opened the book, and in the same Prophet I came upon the following
passage, which suited the purpose: They hatched viper's eggs and wove
the spider's web; he that eateth of their eggs dieth: and when one is
crushed it breaketh out into a viper (Isa. 59:5). Hearing this, they
could not endure the explanation; but some of those who had been sent to
me (there were five) hurried away into a cave, round about which
appeared a dusky burning, a sign that they had neither faith nor
charity. Evidently, therefore, the decree of that synod respecting
predestination is not only an insane but a cruel heresy; and ought,
therefore, to be so rooted out from the brain that not a single vestige
of it shall be left.

<span class="margnote"><span id="488.">488.</span></span>

The inhuman belief that God predestinates man to hell, may be likened to
the inhumanity of fathers among certain barbarous races, who cast their
sucklings and infants into the streets; or to the inhumanity of some
warriors who throw their slain into forests to be devoured by wild
beasts. It may also be likened to the cruelty of a tyrant, who divides a
people he has subdued into classes, giving some of them to the hangman,
throwing some into the depths of the sea, and some into the fire. It may
also be likened to the fury of some wild beasts, which devour their own
young; and also to the madness of dogs that fly at the reflection of
themselves in a minor.

<span class="margnote"><span id="489.">489.</span></span>

VIII\. IF THERE WERE NO FREEDOM OF CHOICE IN SPIRITUAL THINGS, GOD WOULD
BE THE CAUSE OF EVILS AND THUS THERE WOULD BE NO IMPUTATION. That God is
the cause of evil follows from the prevailing belief, which was first
hatched by those who held council in the city of Nice. There was
concocted and established the still persistent heresy, that there were
from eternity three Divine persons, each one a God by Himself. This egg
being hatched, the adherents of the belief must needs approach each
Person separately as God. They compiled a creed that imputed to men the
merit or righteousness of the Lord God the Savior; and that no man might
share with the Lord in that merit, they took away from man all freedom
of choice in spiritual things, and decreed the utmost impotence as to
that faith. And as they deduced everything spiritual pertaining to the
church from that faith alone, they asserted a like impotence with
reference to everything that the church teaches concerning salvation.
Hence sprung, one after another, direful heresies based upon that faith
and man's impotence in spiritual things, and also that most pernicious
heresy, predestination, which was treated of in the preceding section;
all of which imply that God is the cause of evil, or that He created
both good and evil. But, my friend, put faith in no council, but in the
Lord's Word, which is above councils. What have not Roman Catholic
councils produced? Or that of Dort, from which came forth that terrible
viper, predestination? It may be thought that giving to man freedom of
choice in spiritual things was the mediate cause of evil; consequently,
that if such freedom of choice had not been given him, he could not have
transgressed. But, my friend, pause here, and consider whether any man
could have been so created as to be a man without freedom of choice in
spiritual things. If deprived of that, he would be no longer a man but
only a statue. What is freedom of choice but the power to will and do,
and to think and speak to all appearance as if of oneself? Because this
power was given to man in order that he might live as a man, two trees
were placed in the garden of Eden, the tree of life and the tree of the
Knowledge of good and evil; and this signifies that because of the
freedom given him, man is able to eat of the fruit of the tree of life
or of the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="490.">490.</span></span>

That everything that God created was good, appears from the first
chapter of Genesis where it is said (verses 10, 12, 18, 21, 25), "God
saw that it was good;" and finally (in verse 31), that "God saw
everything that He had made, and behold it was very good;" also from
man's primeval state in paradise. But that evil has its origin in man,
is plain from Adam's state succeeding the fall, or after it, in that he
was expelled from paradise. From this it is clear that unless freedom of
choice in spiritual things had been given to man, not man, but God would
have been the cause of evil, and thus God would have been the creator
both of good and of evil. But to think that God created evil is
abominable. Because God gave man freedom of choice in spiritual things
He did not create evil, neither does He ever inspire any evil into man,
for the reason that He is good itself, and in that good is omnipresent,
continually urging and importuning to be received; and even when not
received, He does not withdraw; for if He were to withdraw, man would
instantly die, nay, would lapse into non-entity; for man's life, and the
subsistence of all things of which he consists, are from God. God did
not create evil, but evil was introduced by man himself, since man turns
the good which is continually flowing in from God into evil, whereby he
turns himself away from God and toward himself; and when this is done,
delight in good remains, but then becomes delight in evil; for unless a
delight seemingly similar remained, man could not continue to live;
since delight constitutes the life of his love. Nevertheless these two
kinds of delight are diametrically opposite to each other; but man does
not know this so long as he lives in the world; but he will know it
after death and will have a clear perception of it, for then delight of
the love of good is turned into heavenly blessedness, while delight of
the love of evil is turned into infernal horror. From the foregoing it
is evident that every man was predestined to heaven, and no one to hell;
but that man gives himself over to hell by the abuse of his freedom of
choice in spiritual things, whereby he embraces such things as exhale
from hell. For, as before said, every man is kept midway between heaven
and hell, that he may be in a state of equilibrium between good and
evil, and consequently in freedom of choice in spiritual things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="491.">491.</span></span>

That God has implanted freedom not only in man, but also in every beast,
and an analogue of it even in things inanimate, enabling each to receive
it according to its nature, as He also provides what is good for them
all; but that the objects themselves turn the good into evil, may be
illustrated by comparisons. The atmosphere gives to every man the
ability to breathe, and in like manner to every beast tame or wild, also
to every bird, the owl and dove alike; it also gives the ability to fly,
and yet it is not the atmosphere that causes its gifts to be received by
creatures of contrary genius and nature. The ocean furnishes in itself
an abode and also offers nourishment, to every fish; but the ocean does
not cause one fish there to devour another; or the crocodile to turn its
food into poison with which it kills men. The sun provides heat and
light for all things; but objects, such as the various vegetable
productions of the earth, receive these diversely, a good tree and a
good shrub in one way, and the thorn and thistle in another; or a
harmless herb in one way, and a poisonous herb in another. The rain
falls from the higher region of the atmosphere upon all parts of the
earth; and the earth administers the waters therefrom to every shrub,
herb, and grass, and each one of them takes to itself according to its
need. This is what is called an analogue of freedom of choice, because
they drink in the rain freely through their little mouths, pores, and
ducts, which stand open in the warm seasons, the earth merely supplying
the fluids and elements, and the plants partaking of them from a certain
kind of hunger and thirst. The like is true of men, in that the Lord
flows into every man with spiritual heat, which in its essence is good
of love, and with spiritual light, which in its essence is the truth of
wisdom; but man receives these according to whether he turns towards God
or towards self. Therefore the Lord, in teaching about love towards the
neighbor, says: That ye may be the children of the Father, who maketh
His sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the
just and on the unjust (Matt. 5:45). And elsewhere He says: That He
desires the salvation of all.

<span class="margnote"><span id="492.">492.</span></span>

To the foregoing I add this Memorable Relation: Several times I have
heard expressions respecting good of charity made to descend from
heaven, which passed through the world of spirits and penetrated into
hell, even to its depths; and in their progress these expressions were
turned into such as were directly contrary to good of charity, and
finally into expressions of hatred of the neighbor; a sign that
everything that goes forth from the Lord is good, and that it is turned
into evil by the spirits in hell. The same was done with certain truths
of faith, which in their progress were turned into the opposite
falsities. For it is the recipient form itself that turns whatever
enters into it into what is in accord with itself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="493.">493.</span></span>

IX\. EVERYTHING SPIRITUAL OF THE CHURCH THAT ENTERS INTO MAN IN FREEDOM,
AND IS RECEIVED WITH FREEDOM, REMAINS; BUT NOT THE REVERSE. That which
is received by man with freedom remains in him, because freedom belongs
to his will; and because it belongs to his will it also belongs to his
love. That the will is the receptacle of love has been shown elsewhere.
That everything belonging to love is free, and also is of the will
everyone understands when it is said, "This I will, because I love it,"
and on the other hand, "Because I love this I will it." But man's will
is two-fold, interior and exterior, that is, it belongs to the internal
and to the external man; therefore a deceiver may act and talk before
the world in one way and with his familiar friends in another way.
Before the world he acts and talks from the will of his external man,
but with his familiar friends from the will of his internal man; but the
will here meant is that of the internal man, where his ruling love
dwells. From these few remarks it is clear that the interior will is the
man himself, for in it is the very being and essence of his life; while
the understanding is the form thereof whereby the will renders its love
visible. Everything that man loves and wills from love is free; for
whatever proceeds from the love of the internal will is his life's
delight; and because this is the being of his life, it is also his very
own \[proprium\]; and this is why that which is received with the
freedom of this will, remains, for it adds itself to what is his own. On
the contrary, anything that is introduced into man when he is not in
freedom is not thus received. But of this in what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="494.">494.</span></span>

But it must be well understood that the spiritual things of the Word and
church which man imbibes from love, and which his understanding confirms
are what remain in him, but not so things civil and political; because
spiritual things ascend into the highest region of the mind, and there
take form. This is because the Lord's entrance into man with Divine
truths and goods is there, and that region is like a temple in which He
resides. But because things civil and political belong to the world,
they occupy the lower regions of the mind, and some of them become there
like little buildings around that temple, and some like vestibules
through which there is entrance. Another reason why the spiritual things
of the church dwell in the highest region of the mind, is that they
belong to the soul, and have regard to its eternal life; and the soul is
in things highest, and derives its nourishment from no other than
spiritual food. This is why the Lord calls Himself "Bread," for He says:
I am the living bread which came down out of heaven: if any man eat of
this bread, he shall live forever (John 6:51). That region is also the
seat of man's love, which is the source of his happiness after death;
and there too his freedom of choice in spiritual things chiefly resides,
and from this descends all the freedom that man possesses in natural
things; and such being the origin of this freedom it enters into all
forms of freedom of choice in natural things, and by means of these the
ruling love, which occupies the highest region, takes on whatever is
conducive to its own ends. The communication between these is like that
between a spring and the waters that flow from it, or like the
communication between the prolific principle itself of a seed and each
and all parts of the tree, especially the fruit, in which it renews
itself. But when anyone denies freedom of choice in spiritual things,
and thus rejects it, he makes for himself another fountain, and opens a
channel from that; and this changes spiritual freedom into merely
natural and finally into infernal, freedom. And infernal freedom becomes
like the prolific principle of a seed, freely traversing the trunk and
branches to the fruit, which owing to its origin is inwardly rotten.

<span class="margnote"><span id="495.">495.</span></span>

All freedom that is from the Lord is freedom indeed, but that which is
from hell, and in man therefrom, is bondage. Yet to one who is in
infernal freedom spiritual freedom must needs appear like bondage,
because the two are opposite. But all who are in spiritual freedom not
only know, but also see, that infernal freedom is bondage; and the
angels therefore turn away from that freedom as from a cadaverous
stench, while infernal spirits draw it in like an aromatic odor. It is
known from the Lord's Word that worship from freedom is truly worship,
and that spontaneity is pleasing to the Lord; therefore it is said in
David: I will freely sacrifice unto God (Ps. 54:6). The willing ones of
the people are gathered together, even the people of the God of Abraham
(Ps. 47:9). Therefore there were free will offerings among the children
of Israel; their sacred worship consisted chiefly of sacrifices, and
because of God's pleasure in what is spontaneous, it was commanded: That
every man whose heart impelled him, and everyone whose willing spirit
moved him, should bring an offering to Jehovah for the work of the
tabernacle (Ex. 35:5, 21, 29). And the Lord says: If ye abide in My
Word, ye are truly My disciples; and ye shall know the truth, and the
truth shall make you free. If therefore the Son shall make you free, ye
shall be truly free. But everyone that committeth sin is the servant of
sin (John 8:31-36).

<span class="margnote"><span id="496.">496.</span></span>

That which a man receives with freedom remains, because his will accepts
it and appropriates it, and because it enters his love, and the love
acknowledges it as its own, and by means of it is formed. This shall be
illustrated by comparisons, in which, because they are taken from
natural things, heat will be substituted for love. It is well known that
by means of heat, and according to the amount of it, the doors are
opened in every plant, and as these are opened the plant inwardly
returns into the form of its nature, spontaneously partakes of its
proper nutriment, retains what is suitable, and grows. It is the same
with a beast; all that it selects and eats from the love of nutrition
which is called appetite, is added to its body, and thus remains. That
which is suitable is continually added to the body, because all its
components are perpetually renewed. This is known to be so, although by
few. \[2\] Also with beasts heat opens all parts of the body, and causes
their natural love to act freely. This is why in spring and summer they
enter and return into the instinct of propagating and rearing their
young, which they do from the utmost freedom, because to do so belongs
to the ruling love implanted in them by creation for the sake of
preserving the universe in the state in which it was created. \[3\] The
freedom of love may be illustrated by this freedom induced by heat,
because love produces heat, as is evident from its effects, for man is
enkindled, heated, and inflamed as love is exalted to zeal, or to a
blaze of anger. The heat of the blood or the vital heat of men, and of
animals in general, is from no other source. It is because of this
correspondence that it is by heat that the bodily parts are adapted to
receive freely those things to which the love aspires. \[4\] In such
equilibrium and consequent freedom are all things that are within man.
In such freedom the heart propels its blood upward and downward alike,
the mesentery distributes its chyle, the liver does its work for the
blood, the kidneys secrete, the glands filter and so on. If this
equilibrium were to suffer the member would sicken, and would labor
under a paralysis or loss of strength; and herein equilibrium and
freedom are one. There is not a substance in the created universe that
does not tend to equilibrium, in order that it may be in freedom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="497.">497.</span></span>

X. MAN'S WILL AND UNDERSTANDING ARE IN THIS FREEDOM OF CHOICE;
NEVERTHELESS IN BOTH WORLDS, THE SPIRITUAL AND THE NATURAL, THE DOING OF
EVIL IS RESTRAINED BY LAWS; BECAUSE OTHERWISE SOCIETY IN BOTH WORLDS
WOULD PERISH. Every man can know that he has freedom of choice in
spiritual things merely by observing his own thought. Is not any man
able to think in freedom about God, the Trinity, charity and the
neighbor, faith and its operation, and about the Word and all its
teachings, and, when he has studied theology, about the particulars of
these subjects? And who cannot think and even draw conclusions, and
teach and write, either for or against these things? If man were
deprived of this freedom for a single moment, could he continue to
think; would not his tongue be dumb, and his hand powerless? Therefore,
my friend, you may if you choose, by merely observing your own thought,
reject and detest that absurd and hurtful heresy, which at this day has
induced upon Christendom a lethargy respecting the heavenly doctrine of
charity and faith, and of salvation thereby, and eternal life. \[2\] The
reasons why this freedom of choice resides in man's will and
understanding are the following: (1) Because these two faculties must
first be instructed and reformed, and then by means of these the two
faculties of the external man, which cause him to speak and act. (2)
Because these two faculties of the internal man constitute his spirit
which lives after death, and which is subject only to Divine law, the
primary thing of which is, that man should think of the law, should
practice and obey it of himself, although from the Lord. \[3\] (3)
Because, as to his spirit, man is midway between heaven and hell, thus
between good and evil, and therefore in equilibrium, and in consequence
of this he has freedom of choice in spiritual things (on which
equilibrium see above, n. 475 seq.). But so long as man lives in the
world, he is as to his spirit in equilibrium between heaven and the
world, and then he is scarcely aware that so far as he withdraws from
heaven and draws nearer to the world, he draws near to hell. He is aware
of this and yet not aware, in order that even in this respect he may be
in freedom, and may be reformed. \[4\] (4) Because these two, the will
and the understanding, are the two receptacles of the Lord, the will the
receptacle of love and charity, the understanding the receptacle of
wisdom and faith; and each one of these is made active by the Lord while
man is in complete freedom, in order that there may be a mutual and
reciprocal conjunction between them, whereby salvation is effected. (5)
Because all the judgment that is effected in man after death is in
accord with the use he has made of freedom of choice in spiritual
things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="498.">498.</span></span>

The conclusion from all this is that freedom of choice itself in
spiritual things resides in the soul of man in all perfection, and from
that it flows, like a stream into a fountain, into his mind, into the
two parts of it, which are the will and the understanding, and through
these into the bodily senses, and into speech and actions. For in man
there are three degrees of life, the soul, the mind, and the sentient
body; and all that is included in the higher degree is more perfect than
that which is in a lower degree. It is this freedom of man, through
which, in which, and with which, the Lord is present in him, and
unceasingly urgent to be received; but He in no way sets aside or takes
away this freedom, since, as said above, whatever man does in spiritual
things, that is not done from freedom, does not endure. It may therefore
be said that the Lord's abode in man is this freedom of man which is in
his soul. \[2\] It is evident without explanation that the doing of
evil, in both the spiritual and the natural world, is restrained by
laws, since otherwise society would everywhere cease to exist.
Nevertheless, it must be made clear that without such external bonds,
not only would society cease to exist, but the whole human race would
perish. For man is enticed by two loves, the love of ruling over all,
and the love of possessing the wealth of all. These loves, if uncurbed,
rush onward to infinity. The hereditary evils into which man is born
have arisen principally from these two loves; nor was the sin of Adam
any other than a desire to become as God, which evil the serpent infused
into him, as it is written; therefore in the curse pronounced upon him
it is said: That the earth should bring forth the thorn and the thistle
to him (Gen. 3:5, 18); which means all evil and falsity therefrom. All
who are enslaved by these loves, look upon themselves as the one only
object, in which and for which all others exist. Such have no pity, no
fear of God, no love for the neighbor; consequently they are unmerciful,
inhuman and cruel, and are possessed by an infernal lust and greed for
robbing and plundering, and by craft and cunning in working out their
purposes. Such evils are not innate in the beasts of the earth; these do
not slaughter and devour each other, except from the love of satisfying
their hunger or defending themselves. Therefore a wicked man, viewed
with reference to these loves, is more inhuman, fiercer, and worse than
any beast. \[3\] That man is inwardly such, is manifest in seditious
disturbances when the bonds of law are loosed, and also in massacres and
pillaging, when the signal is given to soldiers that they are free to
satiate their fury upon the conquered or besieged; from which scarcely
anyone desists until the drum beats the order to do so. From all this it
is clear that if no fear of legal penalties restrained men, not only
society, but the whole human race, would be destroyed. But none of these
evils can be removed except by the true use of freedom of choice in
spiritual things, and this is done by directing the mind to reflection
upon the state of life after death.

<span class="margnote"><span id="499.">499.</span></span>

But this shall be still further illustrated by comparisons, as follows:
Without some kind of freedom of choice in all created things, both
animate and inanimate, no creation could have taken place; for without
freedom of choice in natural things for beasts there would be no choice
of food conducive to their nourishment, and no propagation and
preservation of offspring; thus, no beasts. If the fishes of the sea and
the shellfish at its bottom, had no such freedom, there would be no fish
or shellfish. In like manner, unless this freedom were in every insect,
there would be no silk-worm yielding silk, no bee furnishing wax and
honey, no butterfly sporting with its consort in the air, feeding on the
juices of flowers, and representing, after he has shed his exuviae as a
worm, the happy state of man in the heavenly realm. \[2\] Unless there
were something analogous to freedom of choice in the earth's soil, in
the seed sown in it, in all parts of the tree that has grown out of it,
and in its fruit, and again in the new seed, there would be no plant
life. Unless there were something analogous to freedom of choice in
every metal, and in every stone both precious and common, there would be
no metal or stone, or even a grain of sand; for even this freely absorbs
the ether, emits its natural exhalations, throws off its worn-out
elements and restores itself with new. From this there is a magnetic
sphere about the magnet, an iron sphere about iron, a coppery one about
copper, a silver sphere about silver, a golden one about gold, a stony
sphere about stone, a nitrous sphere about niter, a sulfur sphere about
sulfur, and a different sphere about every particle of dust. From this
sphere the inmost of every seed is impregnated, and its prolific
principle vegetates; for without such an exhalation from every least
particle of the earth's dust, there would be no beginning of germination
and no continuance of it. How could the earth, except by what is exhaled
from it, penetrate with dust and water to the inmost center of a grain
sown in it, as into a grain of mustard seed, for example: Which is less
than all seeds, but when it is grown, it is greater than herbs, and
becometh a tree? (Matt. 13:32; Mark. 4:30-32). \[3\] Since freedom has
been thus implanted in all created subjects, in each according to its
nature, why should not freedom of choice have been implanted in man
according to his nature, that he may become spiritual? This is the
reason that free will in spiritual things is given to man, from the womb
to the last hour of his life in the world, and afterward to eternity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="500.">500.</span></span>

XI\. IF MEN HAD NOT FREEDOM OF CHOICE IN SPIRITUAL THINGS, ALL THE
INHABITANTS OF THE WORLD MIGHT IN ONE DAY BE LED TO BELIEVE IN THE LORD;
BUT THIS CANNOT BE DONE, BECAUSE THAT WHICH IS NOT RECEIVED BY MAN WITH
FREEDOM OF CHOICE DOES NOT REMAIN. That God could, in one day, if
freedom of choice in spiritual things had not been given to man, lead
all the inhabitants of the world to believe in Him, follows as a true
conclusion from the Divine omnipotence when not rightly understood.
Those who do not understand the Divine omnipotence, may suppose either
that there is no such thing as order, or that God can act contrary to
order as well as according to it; when yet, without order, no creation
was possible. The primary thing of order is for man to be an image of
God, consequently, that he be continually perfecting in love and wisdom,
and thus becoming that image more and more. To this end God is working
continually in man; but this would be in vain, for it would be
impossible, if man were destitute of freedom of choice in spiritual
things, whereby he could turn to God and reciprocally conjoin himself
with God. For there is an order from which and according to which the
whole universe, with each and all things in it, was created; and because
all creation was effected from that order and according to it God is
called order itself. Thus it is the same whether we say, acting contrary
to order, or acting contrary to God. God Himself, even, cannot act
contrary to His own Divine order, since this would be to act contrary to
His very Self; and therefore He leads every man according to that order
which is Himself, guiding the wandering and the fallen into it, and the
resisting toward it. If man could have been created without freedom of
choice in spiritual things, what would have been more easy for an
omnipotent God than to lead all the inhabitants of the world to believe
in the Lord? Could He not have implanted this faith in everyone, both
without means and by means, without means by His absolute power and its
irresistible operation, which is unceasing in its efforts to save man;
or by means, through torments brought upon man's conscience, or through
mortal convulsions of the body and awful threats of death, if he did not
receive that faith; or still further, by the opening of hell and the
presence of devils therefrom holding frightful torches in their hands,
or by calling forth therefrom the dead whom they had known, in the forms
of fearful specters? But to all this there is a reply in the words of
Abraham to the rich man in hell, If they hear not Moses and the
prophets, neither will they be persuaded though one rose from the dead
(Luke 16:31).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 501-550](tcr11.md)
