[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](row06)  [Next](row08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THOSE LITTLE "DIFFERENCES" BETWEEN SCIENCE AND FOLKLORE

No Witches--No Angels.--The reader must reach this conclusion in his own
reasoning--we are not intent on persuading you to believe something you
do not want to believe; persuasions are not made that way. If we do not
have witches, as some would tell us, then we cannot have angels,
according to those others who feel they do some thinking, too. Denying
the one, and not excluding the other, makes a man's everyday reasoning
look silly, does it not?

When we compare notes with men of the cloth, as to the possibility of
there being witches in the world, and here at home, they usually greet
the comment with a rather blank expression, but no rebuttal.

Yet, it just must be true that we do have witches and "witchcraft" in
Pennsylvania--in and out of religious circles--for we have great faith
and belief in the presence and power of angels--not only those that
hovered over the hills of Judea, but also the red and blue hills of our
beloved Pennsylvania!

To accept belief in one element and not in the other would tend to
destroy the joys of many holidays fostered by the Christian church.

State to Banish Belief in Witches.--One of the most interesting news
items we have seen in two score years, appeared in one of the Harrisburg
papers a few years ago. lt was inspired in one of the highest state
departments, but got out of the department, into the papers, without the
head-man knowing anything about it (so he said). This is the item; read
it thoroughly:

SEE EDUCATION ENDING 'HEX' BELIEFS IN PENNA.

Harrisburg (during the Earle Administration).--State educators declared
here yesterday that hexerei, terror of numerous rural farm communities
for many years, is being banished from Pennsylvania by the public
schools.

School authorities explained that instruction in the sciences, even in
the lower grades, has proved the most effective weapon against the
superstition.

They said that "hex" symbols calculated to cause illness in a
farrn-house or disease of cattle still may be seen on farms and houses,
but that the younger rural folk spurn beliefs that frightened their kin
only a few years back.

Court records show the "hex" responsible for many crimes, including
murder and arson, during the past 50 years.

Many items of news get into the papers--all types of stories--but it is
noteworthy to record that some one had in mind becoming a new Savior of
the human race!

How in the world are the school authorities going to do all this? Do
they think that children will remember only what they learn in school,
and forget all they learn at home, in the Sunday-school, church, in the
theatres, AND on the streets?

Will the schools teach a new truth--that "all is good"--"nothing is
evil?"--and won't the kids forget? With teachers who are recruited from
every type of religion, some anti-religious, and some too religious,
what impress will that make on the student, as against "science?"

Will the public school system evolve a new plan of study that will prove
the stories in the Bible to be something different than children have
been led to believe--for years?

And, what will the new studies have to say on the subject of, let us
say: "holy-water," as used by the Catholics in their devotions; or, even
plain water, as used by the Protestants in their baptism ceremonies?

If the schools must support this phase of religion and its symbolism,
will they declare that water for baptisms, or holy-water, are
efficacious when used in a religious sense, and not be of effect when
used by "witch doctors" either at home, or abroad?

Science already agrees that there is no value to either of these waters,
or services, but if it is forced down the throats of youngsters in
school, it will upset the plans of the church fathers of all creeds! The
latter claim that holy-water, accompanied by "prayers," has a special
virtue that beats anything science has yet produced! Can school-learning
overcome this belief?

The science which the school authorities are teaching is a poor science
that says "hex" slayings and practices, are so much more vicious and
devastating in Pennsylvania, than "sex" slayings and their many
practices; so much more degrading and superstitious than the thousand
and one promises delivered from a hundred thousand platforms in America
and throughout the world, which never come true; and worse than the
countless self-abuses of which they say little or nothing--and certainly
not in the public press.

The State and school authorities flounder in their own mire when they
fail to recognize that many of our superstitions are condoned and taught
within church and school, and which, per se, makes them "perfect" (or
"white art"); but when practised outside church or school, makes them
"black art."

Let us talk about "hallowe'en," the season when witches, vampire bats,
black cats, and fantastics with their false-faces and hideous make-up,
are abroad in all America. Where, if you please, do we see greater
evidences of a survival of the idea of "witches" than in the grade
schools of America?

We received a number of very interesting comments from well known
Americans on the subject of "Science vs. Witches--in the Schools." Some
are from physicians, professors, educators, writers, and just plain
everyday citizens.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: And So They Celebrate Pagan Days In Our Public Schools](row08)
