[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](yat04)  [Next](yat06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EQALSY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Yana Texts*, by Edward Sapir, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### III. THE VISIT OF THE GEESE PEOPLE TO MOUNT SHASTA.  <span id="fr_21"></span>[67](#fn_21)

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

Flint Rock had his sweat-house at Mount Shasta. Flint Rock was a chief
and lived there at Mount Shasta. "I shall send word to people for them
to come," said the chief, named Flint Rock Chief. "I intend to have a
dance," said the chief. "Do you go to the south and tell the people to
come, far away in the south. Who is it that can run, so as to go and
tell the people in the south? Go tell them to come! Go tell the Geese
people to come! Go tell the Crane people to come! Go tell the White
Geese to come! Go tell the Heron People in the south to come!" "It is I
who shall go to tell them. I am a good runner," said Humming-bird. "So!"
said the chief, "do so! Go tell them to come!" "What is it that I shall
say?" said Humming-bird. "Pray tell them people are having a dance. Pray
tell them Flint Rock Chief is having a dance." Humming-bird wrapped a
wildcat skin about his head and made himself all ready.

Off he flew, flew to the south. The Geese people were living in the
south, the Geese people lived there in great numbers. There was a
sweat-house, and Humming-bird flew about over the smoke-hole of the
sweat-house. "Bū's\*, bū's\*, bū's\*, bū's\*," he said, for that was
Humming-bird's way of talking. He was talking to the Geese, telling them
the news. Many were the people that looked at Humming-bird, flying about
at the smoke-hole. "What sort of person can that be talking? His
language is not understood.

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Perhaps he has
come to tell us something, but we do not understand his language.
"Bū's\*, bū's\*, bū's\*, bū's\*," Humming-bird kept saying, talking at
the smoke-hole of the sweathouse. "What he says is unintelligible," said
the Geese and White Geese, said the Herons, said the Whistling Swans.

Coyote was living with them. "Hehe'?! This language is not understood. I
cannot make out what he is saying. Go and talk to Coyote. He is always
saying that he understands every language. Go tell him to come." Someone
was sent to tell Coyote to come. (On arriving at Coyote's house he
said,) "You! You have been sent for." "What's that?" said Coyote.
"Indeed, somebody has flown up to here, and nobody understands his
language." "Indeed! It is I who understand the speech of far to the
north." Now Coyote arose and went into the sweathouse. Coyote sat down
inside, and Humming-bird kept saying, "Bū's\*, bū's\*, bū's\*, bū's\*,"
flying around over the smoke-hole. "We do not understand him," said the
people there. Coyote sat down, bung his head down, and listened. "Hä!"
said Coyote, and he lifted up his eyes. He reported the news to the
Geese people. "Flint Rock Chief has sent for you to come," said Coyote.
"This one says that you should peel bark off the trees, to make string.
That is what this humming-bird says." <span
id="fr_22"></span>[68](#fn_22) "Indeed!" said the people of the south.
"He sends for you. This one says that you should take bark off of
bā'ni <span id="fr_23"></span>[69](#fn_23)bushes so as to make string,"
said Coyote, reporting to them what he had heard. "He wants you to start
out today," said Coyote. "That's all that humming-bird has to say."

"Bū's\*, bū's\*, bū's\*," Humming-bird kept saying, flying about over
the smoke-hole. The Geese people said, "Hehe'?! he would be flying off
back home, if his language had been understood. It seems that you do not
understand Humming-bird's words, that is why he does not fly off. If you
had understood his language, he would have flown bock home." Coyote said
no more. (The

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

chief said,) "Go and tell Meadow-lark Woman about it. She always says
that she can understand the language of the far north." A certain man
ran off to tell Meadow-lark Woman about it. "He wants you to come." "Who
is it that wants me to come?" "It is Goose Chief that wants to have you
come. We do not understand Humming-bird's language, and so he has sent
for you." Coyote went off home, and now the woman came. She did not
enter the sweat-house. Meadow-lark Woman talked with Humming-bird;
Meadow-lark talked her own language in speaking outside the house with
Humming-bird. They flew up together in the air, talking to each other.
Now Humming-bird flew off home in the air, flew back home to the north.

The woman came down and sat in the sweat-house, the sweathouse of the
Geese. "He came to tell you," she said, reporting to them what she had
heard, "he came from Flint Rock Chief to tell you. He says that Flint
Rock Chief is having a dance, that he has been sent after you; that is
what Humming-bird says." Goose Chief said, "Indeed! Put your feather
headdresses outside to give them an airing! Hang your head-bands around!
Wash your necklaces of shell beads! My people, let us go there to have a
dance. Her words, telling us of Hummingbird's message, are good. Look at
Coyote going off home! He did not tell that to us. Coyote was lying."
Many were the people that started off. Now they were all dressed up.
"Put nets on your heads. Put on your white head-bands. Put beads about
your necks," (said Goose Chief). Now they came from the south, and
camped over night at Cī'p!a.[51](yat04.htm#fn_18) "Let us rest here over
night. Early in the morning let us practice dancing here. Let us go
north dancing. Who is it that will lead the dance?" "I shall be the one
to lead the dance," said Coyote. "No. It is the chief that shall lead in
the dance." "No," said Coyote, "It is I who will lead the dance, for I
am a chief." "Do you think that he who is not a chief leads in a dance?"
(they said to him.) "Hê!" said Coyote, "they call me chief. Far off in
the east they tell me that I am a chief," said Coyote. "They call me
chief far off in the south. they call me chief far off in the west, they
call me chief far off In the north. I travel all around in every

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

direction," said Coyote. "I have never before heard people calling me
Coyote. Today for the first time I heard myself called dog," said
Coyote. "Well! Go ahead, lead us in the dance."

The people started in to dance at Cī'p!a. "Inī'yaha," went Coyote's
song. "Wê'yahinā' ‘inī'yahinā', wê'yahinā' ‘inī'yahinā', wê'yahinā'
‘inī'yahinā'," went Coyote's song, while they all danced. Now they
proceeded north as they danced. Coyote danced in company with
Meadow-lark Woman. Very pretty was that woman with her apron of rodent
bones strung on buck-skin tassels and with a round tule basket-cap that
she had on her head. As they proceeded north the Geese filed up in a
long line from the south, dancing. All the Geese people, every sort of
person that was there, had wings. Coyote alone did not have wings.
Coyote led the dance singing away, while the Geese people filed up from
the south, dancing as they proceeded north. "‘E‘, ‘e‘, ‘e‘, ‘e‘, ‘e‘,"
whispered the people. They flew up into the air, went right up, all of
them, and continued their dance northwards while flying in the air.

Coyote looked up and found himself all alone, dancing on the ground;
they had all left Coyote behind and were moving northwards in the air.
"What are you doing?" said Coyote, talking up to them in the air, as he
found himself abandoned by all. The Geese went right on to the north.
Suddenly Coyote stopped dancing and started to run. Coyote ran to the
north, came running after the people to one side. Coyote ran across the
river, running down the mountains, running up the mountains. He looked
very ugly, his legs were bruised with thorns, he was covered with blood,
his feet were swollen, his legs were cut up by the rocks and scratched
by the brush. Coyote was coming running after them, running all by
himself now.

Now the Geese people arrived at Mount Shasta, at Flint Rock's
sweat-house. They danced around the sweat-house on the ground. Coyote
had not come; indeed he was dead, having been tired out and hungry. The
South people danced around, dancing around together in a circle. When it
was dark they stopped dancing. Flint Rock Chief spoke out loud, "Get
wood! Build a fire in the sweat-house! These people will go inside."

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The South people
entered, they were chuck full in the sweathouse. "Let us go outside,"
said the chief, talking (to his own people). "Let us make a fire outside
in the night time." The sweat-house was crowded, the people filled it
entirely. Those who belonged to that house all moved outside. There were
the Geese people inside, all by themselves, sitting inside the
sweat-house. Flint Rock Chief shut the door of the sweat-house, so the
sweathouse was totally dark; there was no daylight whatever. The people
outside, the owners of the sweat-house, were making much noise, having a
good time. Three times it was day and three times it was night, and
there was no daylight inside; it was always night. The people outside
were having a good time pounding acorns and hunting deer.

"This looks bad. Daylight must have appeared long ago." The people
inside felt around with their hands. There was no fire there and they
were hungry and thirsty. "He has shut the door on us, he is angry at
us," said they inside. "Four days and four nights have passed and there
is no daylight yet. What shall we do? We are all going to be killed.
Hehe'?! Would that I could get outside again! Have not any of you
perchance a flint flaker? Have not any of you perchance a flaking maul?"
"Yes," said Ma'ldama. <span id="fr_24"></span>[70](#fn_25) "I have a
pitching tool." "I also have a pitching tool," said
Bop?didjū's\*i. <span id="fr_25"></span>[71](#fn_26) "Yes," said the
chief, "it is you that always say that you have supernatural power." The
pitching tool was like this here, <span id="fr_26"></span>[72](#fn_27)
the flaking maul was like this here. <span
id="fr_27"></span>[72](#fn_27) Those two men, little Bop?didjū's\*i and
Ma'ldama, had pitching tools. They arose in the sweat-house in the night
that surrounded them all. The sweat-house was made entirely of flint
rock, thick was the flint rock. They put out their hands inside and felt
around all over. They were all like blind men. "Now! pound away!" This
is how they did, pounding away at the flint rock to test for a thin
spot. Now he pushed his pitching tool against the flint rock and pounded
on it with his maul. This is how Ma'ldama did. <span
id="fr_28"></span>[66](#fn_24)

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "S\* s\*" said the
chips of flint as the), fell to the ground. The flakes made a noise as
they were thrown to the ground. Thus he kept it up all day, and little
Bop?didjū's\*i worked too. Every little while they pounded around with
their hands to see flow thick it was. Now it became thin and they
pounded away at that spot. "S\*!" said the flint chips as they fell
splintered off to the ground. They pounded with their hands to see how
thick it was. "S\*!" said the flakes falling down on the ground. Again
they pounded with their pitching tools. Thus they did and burst right
through the wall. Now they had made a hole right through. The light of
day streamed in, it became daylight as soon as the hole had been burst
through. The sweat-house was lit up. Now the people returned. They all
came out again, returned out of the sweat-house. <span
id="fr_29"></span>[73](#fn_28)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[35:67](yat05.htm#fr_21) This myth reads very
much like an explanation or mythic rendition of the yearly migration of
the geese and other aquatic birds to the north. The Geese people danced
at Cī'p!a (see note 51) just as the geese of today frequent the same
spot. It would be going too far, however, to maintain that the myth in
its entirety is directly based on the observation of natural events. In
its first portion it is strikingly similar to the beginning of Betty
Brown's story of "Coyote, Heron, and Lizard" (no. XII).

<span id="fn_22"></span>[46:68](yat05.htm#fr_22) Coyote's explanation of
Humming-bird's message is of course an absurd invention on his part. The
Geese people, according to him, are to go north in order to help the
northern chief make string.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[46:69](yat05.htm#fr_23) A brown-colored bush
from the hark of which the Indians make string. Very possibly to be
identified with Apocynum cannabinum, "Indian hemp."

<span id="fn_24"></span>[49:66](yat05.htm#fr_28) Accompanied by tapping
ruler on knife against window.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[49:70](yat05.htm#fr_24) A bird of dark-brown
color, of about the size of a meadow-lark.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[49:71](yat05.htm#fr_25) An unidentified bug.
The name means "one who chips off flint."

<span id="fn_27"></span>[49:72](yat05.htm#fr_27) See note 64.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[50:73](yat05.htm#fr_29) The ending seems abrupt
even for an Indian story. Sam said that he never heard how the Geese
people returned home but thought that the myth ended there he stopped.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. Bluejay's Journey to the Land of the Moon](yat06)
