[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](yat30)  [Next](yat32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EQALSY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Yana Texts*, by Edward Sapir, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VIII. RABBIT WOMAN AND HER CHILD.

Jack Rabbit lived at Bā'wa at Battle creek. There were many people
there. It was the spring time, the clover was growing. All went out to
get clover, young girls and all. Rabbit had a baby, but no husband. She
went with the rest. She had no friends to whom to give the child while
she was gone. One woman said, "I can take it for you." "Yes," said
Rabbit. She gave it to her, and went off for the clover. By and by she
came back with the rest, and put the clover in the house. She put the
roots in the ashes, and sat down to eat, ate all the roots. Some one had
given her some meat, and she ate this also.

Then she remembered her baby. "I forgot my child," she said. She jumped
up and went to the woman to whom she had given it. "My friend, how is my
child? I want my baby." She answered, "Some one else has taken him to
the next house." So Rabbit went there and asked. She was given the same
answer.

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> So Rabbit went on,
and was answered as before. She went to house after house. Rabbit felt
bad. She went to the last house and received the same answer. She went
all around once more. The people had killed the child, had given some of
it to Rabbit when she came back. Rabbit stopped and cried. She thought,
"I ate my baby."

Rabbit had another baby. It was sick. Rabbit said, "My baby is sick. I
do not know what is the matter." The people had no medicine-man. Someone
told her, "There is a medicine-man living to the north." She took her
baby and went after the medicine-man. Some one saw her and asked, "Where
are you going?" "My baby is sick." The man said, "What is the matter?"
Rabbit said, "I do not know. It has the colic (?), I guess." The man
said, "I am a medicine-man." It was Coyote. She said, "What is your
name? I want to go to Palê'lu, there is a medicine-man there.
Mā'makalik!ūwi is his name." Coyote said, "Yes. That is my name." She
said, "Well, take the baby."

Coyote took it. He sat down on a rock, looked at the baby, and put his
hand on him. Rabbit said she wanted to go home. "I thought that you
would doctor him; now I want to go." Coyote said, "No. If I am going to
doctor, I want to do it at my house." Rabbit said, "Yes." She went to
Coyote's house. Coyote doctored the child, danced. When he got through,
he said, "The baby is all right." That night he told Rabbit. "Go to
sleep on the south side." She did so. Coyote said. "I'm going to doctor
somewhere else. I shall be back soon," and he went out. By and by he
came back. He looked at Rabbit, saw that she was asleep. He walked
softly up, sat down, and looked at her. He thought, "I want some meat.
I've had no meat for a long time." So he killed her, and the baby too.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX. Coyote and Rabbit Gamble](yat32)
