[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hindusim](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](seh14)  [Next](seh16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

### THE PLAGUE

"I HAVE a case for you, Sister." It was the doctor's voice in the
doorway, and I knew at once what he meant. My first case of plague. A
few minutes later we entered the cottage where the patient lay. It was
an ordinary mud hut, with its tiny unlighted compartments opening on a
central court. In one room lay a quantity of clean linen, for the people
were *dhobies*; in another division was the family cow; and at the
moment of our entrance the matter in hand was the lifting of the invalid
out of a confined room to a small wooden bed on the veranda. Utterly
lethargic he lay there, poor child, a bright promising boy of twelve or
fourteen. He had been ill since the previous evening; it was now nine
o’clock in the morning; the bubo was slightly developed; and with the
gravest predictions and repeated instructions the doctor hurried off to
attend just such another.

It was so little that could be done. Food, medicine, and a bath--all
these could be given. Yes, and the head could be shaved, ice applied,

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

and a fan kept going; but when all was said and done, one was sitting
there to watch a human being die--to watch, without hope of saving. For
no one who knew the awful intensity of the struggle into which he would
presently have to enter, who knew too the overgrown and underfed
condition of the child himself, could have a doubt as to the way the
battle would end. The evening would come, and he would die. So the
doctor had said. Not that I realised this. If I had, I doubt whether I
could have driven the mother off at once, as, to my bitter regret, I
did, possessed by the notion that isolation and disinfection, the only
services I could render, should be thoroughly performed. She was busy
near her boy, fanning him perhaps, and constantly inhaling the air that
he was breathing out. Did I know she was his mother? I should like to
think not. I should like to make any excuse for the fact that I pointed
out to her that it would be wise if she sat some distance away. Poor
mother! She went at once, crushed and broken-spirited, without a word.
But quietly, quietly the tears began to flow down her poor thin face,
and she broke into stifled sobs. That was too much. I found something
that she must do, and with careful advice brought her back to do it. And
there she sat, thenceforward, curled up beside the pillow with the boy's
head at her feet.

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

He was violent now, and the great effort was to keep him quiet, for one
unlucky movement might be fatal. But even in his delirium I had this
always before me--the sight of perfect love between a mother and her
son. Once, indeed, mistaking me for her, he snatched at my hand, and
carried his own to his lips, and often, not catching his mother's eyes,
he would smile at me--always with that same debonair and tender look of
the good comrade, given to carrying the burdens and bringing his mother
cheer. I was reminded of that moment earlier in the morning, when he had
caught the announcement that no barber could be got for him under two or
three pice, and struggling to rise from his bed had cried that he would
bring him for one.

He was evidently a good boy, in more senses than one--a devotee and a
dreamer of dreams. For every now and then, as a gleam of consciousness
would displace the awful look of alienation in the great brown
eyes--every now and then he would call loudly upon *Shiva, Kali!* or
repeat words of worship; and nothing soothed and quieted him like the
incessant repetition of *Haribol*, or the hymn that was commonly sung
about the streets at that time:

"Call on the Lord,  
Call on the Lord,  
Call on the Lord, my brother, <span id="page_73">p. 73</span>  
Than this name of the Lord,  
For mortal man,  
There is no other way."

"There is no other way," the weak voice would murmur in snatches after
me, and then the invisible hand would again, as it were, draw the
curtain, and the soul would be seen no more at the windows whence for a
moment it had looked forth.

And so the end came. All day long the family had watched in the
courtyard, his mother and myself on the little veranda. All day long
they had been eager to serve in every way that was possible, and when I
had to go away for an hour or two my place was taken by a young man from
the neighbourhood, whose quiet dignity and firmness in dealing with the
patient roused my hearty admiration. At five in the afternoon the doctor
returned. "He is getting very low," he said; "another hour or two at
most and the outburst will end in a collapse of the heart."

How long the minutes seemed! For the last outbreak of violence was very
short-lived, and ended in a wild attempt to repeat the *Haribol* for a
length of time. I took up the words, and stood saying them over and over
to the movements of the fan, while with a look of relief the lad's head
sank back on the pillow. He lay quiet, the breath came in shorter and
shorter gasps, and he died.

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

"Give me twelve instead of one," said the doctor, "and I can try steam
baths."

It was evident that one could hope to do nothing alone. All the medical
men held that a man once down with plague was doomed. It was a great
thing to know that there was a field for work; that the disease, though
so deadly, was neither repulsive nor specially infectious; that
assistance was wanted in order to try finer methods of treatment; and
above all, that, as I had ample opportunity of verifying later, no
prejudice of caste or religion would stand in the way of our help being
accepted. But in order to act upon all this knowledge, religious orders
like those Franciscans of the Middle Ages who put an end to the same
disease in Europe would be required, so for the moment we gave up the
idea.

Then persons with influence were consulted, and offers of help came from
zenana ladies, if we should turn a house of our own into a women's
hospital. At this point our difficulties began to be amusing. The nurses
were to be zenana ladies, and so were the patients. This sounded simple
enough. But the latter would insist on being accompanied to the hospital
by their husbands, brothers, or sons, who would watch by their bedside
day and night. And in that case, how could the nurses attend to them?

"Besides," said the kindly official who was advising

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

us, "to turn your house into a hospital would involve some little
expense, and do you know what would be your chance of receiving
patients, after all?"

I shook my head.

"There are more than six hundred hospitals in Calcutta," <span
id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2) he said, "and they contain an aggregate of
something like four patients."

So our dream of a hospital for Bengali women, managed by Bengali ladies,
also came to an end, and we also realised the wisdom of the Government
in deciding that its duty lay not in grappling with the disease itself,
but rather with the conditions that had led to its development.

The conditions which are immediately preventible appear to be twofold:
(1) insanitation, and (2) ignorance; and if solid work is done towards
the removal of these evils, it cannot but be that the plague shall prove
a friend to mankind in the long run.

One of its first and greatest services leas lain in the humanising of
the lower castes. Their labour is at this moment in high demand. Bright
little sweeper-boys command the wages of full-grown men, with short
hours and plenty of encouragement

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

and stimulus to work. How proud of themselves the conservancy gangs
look, spades in their hands and buckets on their shoulders! Strange how
all things work in together to further the great purpose of an epoch,
and even a catastrophe like the present is really to hasten that supreme
function of the English in India, the giving of democracy to the Indian
people. For the immediate outcome of good work and good wages is sure to
be the establishment of schools in sweeper-villages, and with that first
step taken towards the mountain-peaks of knowledge it is not too early
to look forward to the day when they shall be received as men in the
councils of their nation.

One thing that has struck me daily, as I have gone about the *bustees*
to note progress and conditions, is the fine physique of these
"untouchables," compared with higher-caste boys of their own age. Though
small-built, they are lithe, active, and well-knit. One never sees among
them those physical deformities of bad feeding and ill-health that are
so common among the children of the very poor.

But, except for this superiority, I must confess that I find no marked
difference of type. They seem to me to have, like other Hindus, the same
faces that I have been accustomed to all my life, under slightly darker
skins. If I had not known the country, I should have believed that this
so-called

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Negritoid Pariah
was as good an Aryan as myself; that he was no aboriginal, set to the
hewing of wood and drawing of water for the race's sake, but one who had
simply lost rank by that same process of trade-differentiation that
certainly accounts for so many of the castes. These men are very dark,
it is true--quite a chocolate-brown in some cases; but they are by no
means uniformly so, and I have seen this particular colour sometimes in
the highest classes, especially, as I fancy, where there is much
exposure to the weather. Perhaps, however, there is greater irregularity
of features amongst these pariahs than higher up in the social scale;
but the question remains, whether this is due to race-inferiority, or to
that freedom for individuality which must result from laxity of
conventions. No one who has seen how the children of converted Jews lose
the physiognomy of their forefathers will despise the influence of ideas
on national types.

Anyway, whatever may be the future of our boys, for the present they are
full of fun and enthusiasm. A really bad drain is quite a find to them
all, and they work with patience and ardour, under supervision. For the
real inferiority of the lower castes is that they require so much
organisation and superintendence from their more fortunate countrymen.
In the case of the one gang in which I am interested, three different
people devote time

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

and attention to overlooking the labour, and under these, again, there
is the foreman of the gang; and every bit of this is absolutely
necessary.

One of the most intolerable evils is the arrangement of bamboo "sanitary
structures" in large clusters in the very centre and in close contact
with dwelling-huts. These and the tanks--which continually receive
sewage and other contaminations from the *bustees*--constitute the great
permanent nuisances of the town. Nothing short of complete effacement
could be efficient sanitation; but it should be added that the present
state of things is of very long standing, and not an outgrowth of recent
years.

In the pursuit of difficulties there is, I find, a limit at which toil
becomes more or less sullen and despairing. Such toil for a scavenger
can be found in one of the outlying districts of the Calcutta municipal
area, where our workers discovered drains which would bid a fair
defiance to Herakles himself. And there dwelt a Mussulman population,
consisting of poultry, goats, and human beings iii inextricable
confusion.

There are open spaces with green grass in these villages, and visions of
how it might be tantalise one as one explores--a well-flushed and
repaired ditch; a pleasant village-green; a tree or a flowering shrub
here and there. Given the land, these things ought not to be impossible
for

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

two thousand people paying municipal rates in one of the richest cities
of the world. But we have had to keep twenty men digging for a week to
get even a tiny stream of water to trickle feebly out of that terrible
ditch. It had not been touched, they say, for fifteen years. And though
we have swept the village-green, we have had no means for turning it
into a garden, nor would we if we could, since we could not thereafter
provide the wherewithal to keep it sweet and beautiful.

In the heart of this sordid quarter we come upon a little Moslem
burying-ground. A low wall, pierced with a simple pattern, bounds it in
restful curving lines. It is entirely without monuments or memorials,
but in one corner a blasted tree of some sort--not unlike those
grudging-leaved elders of the English Black Country--seems to stand for
a landmark. And here, as they tell us, a holy man lies buried, and they,
too poor to erect a stone, and too faithful to forget, have made shift
with this old stump to keep green the memory of one who, poor like
themselves, helped them years ago to live a fuller life.

A curious thing about a neighbourhood like this is that now and then one
finds in it some old house and garden of great respectability. Is it a
law of the growth of population that the

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

poor inhabit always what the rich have left? How else can one explain
the traces of past grandeur that one meets everywhere? In another
*bustee*, surely one of the most hopeless of its sort, we find on the
great central tank a ruined *ghat* that was once superb. The whole
thing, with the reflection of the water in the sky, and the old tree
that to this day bears its yearly load of glorious flame-coloured
blossoms, is uncommonly like the picturesque and ruined villages of
Kashmir.

One has to go down under the surface to see that the plague is here at
all. When we hear in Europe that a place is "declared" stricken, we
conjure up pictures of mortality in all its forms: grass growing on
deserted pavements, houses marked with crosses, and the weird voice at
midnight crying "Bring out your dead!" How different it really is! I
first heard of the ravages of the disease at a European dinner party,
and I came home and discovered that seven deaths had occurred in one
week in my own lane.

Not a sound had betrayed the fact. The accustomed wailing had all been
hushed. The dead had been buried or burned at night. Not one word to the
outside world had betrayed the agony of the watchers by the beloved. Not
one token told that men had dropped out of the ranks of the living. This
was, of course, at the

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

beginning of the outbreak. As time went on, the people realised, I
think, that no outrage on their privacy was intended, and one began to
meet the bearers more often about the streets, chanting *Rama Nama Satya
hai* (The Name of the Lord alone is real) to their swinging pace, as
they carried silent forms to the last rites; or one encountered one of
those mournful Moslem processions by torchlight to the sound of the
solemn *Allah illa, ’ill, ’ill Allah!* in the hour of dusk.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[75:1](seh15.htm#fr_2) Six hundred hospitals was
a computation that included all family hospitals and single rooms
licensed and set apart as wards under the Plague Regulations. Even of
these many were allowed to lapse, so that the actual number came to be
much below six hundred while still unnecessarily large. \[This refers to
the outbreak of 1899.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Mediæval University of India](seh16)
