[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hindusim](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](seh26)  [Next](seh28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

### THE NORTHERN PILGRIMAGE <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5)

To Indians themselves, if they have never before been on pilgrimage, the
life of the pilgrim-roads is likely to be a revelation. Who uttered a
doubt that India had a place and a life for women? Certainly none who
had ever seen a pilgrimage. Marching along we meet them, singly or in
couples, or maybe in long strings of tens and twenties, old and young
mingled together. There is neither fear nor exaggerated shyness in their
demeanour. Sometimes one will be separated by a few yards from her
party, telling her beads, or lost in solitary thought. Sometimes, again,
we meet an old woman who seems to belong to none. But almost everyone is
cheerful, and almost all, from the custom of wearing their jewels all
the time, have an air of festivity and brightness. All pilgrims know one
another. Here none of the stiffness of a meaner world prevails. We all
speak to one another as we pass. *Jai! Kedar Nath Swami ki Jai!* or
*Jai! Badri Bissai lal ki Jai!* we say to each whom we meet, whether man
or woman. And no words can describe the flash of sweetness

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

and brightness that lights up the reply. We are all out on a holiday
together, and an air of gentle innocence and hilarity prevails in face
of difficulties and creates a sort of freemasonry amongst all who seek
the common goal. One has the chance here of studying the refinement of
Eastern salutations, Sometimes a wayfarer passes who is telling her
beads, or who, for some reason or another, does not care to break her
silence: but oh, the dignity and charm of the bow that answers the
pilgrim's salutation in such a case! Even here, in an environment which
is in some ways one of intensified practicality, we meet now and again
with the inveterate dreamer, living in that world upon whose shores no
wave can break. It was turning into the wedge-shaped ravine of
Garurganga that we came upon one such. She was a little old woman, and
we caught her just as she had stepped out of her prim little shoes,
placed neatly behind her, and with rapt look prostrated herself. Two
people who were coming forward drew back at this, that she might not
know herself interrupted, and then as again we stepped forward and came
face to face with her, we saw that for the moment she was lost in the
world of her own reverence. In her eyes was the look of one who saw not
the earth. It was a sudden glimpse of the snow mountains to which she
had paid involuntary homage.

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

Climbing over some peculiarly difficult boulders in the dry bed of a
torrent, we met two old women, both almost blind, and bent half-double
with age and infirmity. They were coming back from Badri Narayan. The
place was terrible, and as we came up to them one of them stumbled. But
to an ejaculation of concern, they replied, between themselves, with an
air of triumph in their gaiety, "What! Is not Narayan leading? And since
He has given *darsana*, what does this matter?"

#### I.--HARDWAR AND HRISHIKESH

Happy they whose pilgrimage can begin at Hardwar! Never surely was there
a place so beautiful. It is like Benares on a very small scale. But as
one of our party remarked, people go to Benares to die, and to Hardwar
as the beginning of a high undertaking. This of itself confers on the
town an air of brightness. In the moonlight nights the *jatris* set out
with their *pandas*, singing, as they go, along the roads. And oh, the
evening worship of the Ganges! In the very middle of the lowest step of
the semicircular *ghâts* of the Brahma Kund a priest stands waving what
looks like a small brass tree of flame. Behind him crowd the
worshippers, chiefly women, and on the bridge and island that stretch
across

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

the little bay in front of him, forming the chord of the semicircle,
stand and sit other worshippers, obviously, to judge by differences of
dress and type, travellers from many and various provinces. All is rapt
silence while the public worship is proceeding, but as it ends the whole
multitude breaks out into chanting. Choir upon choir they sing the
glories of the Ganges, answering each other in the manner of an
antiphon. And away beyond them stretch green islands and wooded heights,
about which the blue veil of the evening mists has just begun to fall.
The very scene in itself is the perfection of praise. "O ye mountains
and hills, bless ye the Lord! Praise Him and magnify Him for ever! O ye
rivers and streams, bless ye the Lord! Praise Him and magnify Him for
ever!"

It is the railway, we are told, that has popularised Hardwar. Until a
few years ago, Kankhal had been long the recognised centre, and people
made pilgrimage only to Hardwar for bathing and praying, being
exceedingly careful to be back before nightfall, so probable was the
experience of a tiger on the road between the two places. But the fact
that the habit of pilgrimage could persist at all under such
circumstances is eloquent testimony to the age of the place. Kankhal
itself, a couple of miles away, is the seat of Shiva as Daksheshwar, and
therefore, we cannot doubt, one

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

of the most ancient sites of Hinduism. Here we are shown the very place
where Sati fell, and that where Daksha offered sacrifice. Suddenly a
whole chapter of pre-Hindu Hinduism--perhaps ages long--becomes visible
to us. We see that there was a time when people were familiar with the
image of the goat-headed Lord of Creation. We remember the Great God Pan
of the Greeks, with his one goat-foot. And we do not wonder that there
should have been a struggle between this old nature-god Daksha, who may
have been a personification of the Polar Star, and the new Shiva, Lord
of the consciences of men.

Hrishikesh, twelve miles away from Hardwar, is a university of an
ancient type. Here, amongst some of the most beautiful scenery of the
Himalayas, just at the rapids of the Ganges, are hundreds of straw huts
in which live *sadhus*. Amongst these it is doubtless possible to
realise the ideal of the Vedic *ashramas*, in a life of simplicity,
order, and learning. The first duty of the new arrival is, as I have
heard, to build his own hut. Within, these men live alone or in couples,
according to the merciful custom that usually carries the begging friars
forth, not alone, but by twos. But when evening comes, at any rate in
the winter, the great meditation fires are lighted here and there, in
the open air, and seated round them the monks discourse "of settled
things."

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Then they relapse
by degrees into the depths of thought, and when darkness has fallen and
all is quiet, one after another each man slips quietly away to his own
hut. It is an extraordinary combination of freedom and society, of the
ideals of the hermitage and of the monastery. It may be that it gives us
a glimpse of the monastic conditions of the Thebaid, but in modern times
it could certainly be paralleled nowhere outside India. The *sadabratas*
in the little town close by are another institution corresponding to
nothing in foreign countries. Here the *sadhus* daily receive their
rations of food, some cooked and some uncooked. For it is a mistake to
think that those who have taken up the life of the *sannyasin* can study
and think without a certain amount of bodily nourishment. Our
selfishness may make us eager to preach such an ideal, but it will
always be for others to realise! At the same time the sadabratas relieve
the monks of the dishonour of becoming beggars, and the community of the
scandal of a disorderly burden. These, in their present high
organisation and development, owe a great deal to the life and work of
Kambliwálá Bábá, one of the national heroes whose name is known too
little outside monastic ranks. By his labours the Northern Pilgrimage
has been rendered available for the thousands of pilgrims who now pass
along it, and it is to be hoped

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

that in the movement now going on for the recovery of biographies, his
will not be forgotten. The present road from Hardwar to Hrishikesh, with
its new temple and bazaar of Satya Narayan, is of Kambliwálá Bábá's
making, as are all the good *dharmsalas* along the road. The old way to
Hrishikesh lay along the Ganges-bank. In the desert-like country about
Hrishikesh, one of the characteristic charities is the little
water-and-mat stations, where a *gerua*-turbaned servant lives in a
little hut, serving out water to each passer-by who asks for it, and
keeping a clean space swept where anyone can lie down on a mat in the
shade of a tree.

How old is Hrishikesh? In its very nature it is impermanent. The
materials of which it is built this winter will not remain after next
summer's rains. And how long the site has been used in this way, who
shall say? Maybe the history of Hardwar would give us some clue to this.
Maybe the *Kumbh Mela* would help us to calculate its age. The very
fleetingness of its buildings must have lengthened its days, for
political convulsions that would sweep clean the caves of Ajanta or
Ellora would leave this winter-resort of the learned and pious entirely
unaffected. As the waters of a lake close over a stone, so would
Hrishikesh recover from catastrophe and grow out of its very memory. And
the tradition

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

goes, we must remember, that one of the earliest literary undertakings
of the people--the division of the Vedas by Vyasa into four--was carried
out in this place.

#### II.--SRINAGAR

We reached Srinagar five days after leaving Hardwar. The present town
stands near the centre of a wide flat vale, in which the cactus and the
bo-tree proclaim a sub-tropical climate. It is obviously new, having
been rebuilt on a slightly different site so lately as the time of the
Gohonna flood about fifteen years ago. This event was a great
epoch-maker throughout the valleys leading up to Badri Narayan. It swept
away ancient temples and images, and necessitated the rebuilding of many
a town and village. One cannot but mourn the loss of historic remains of
priceless interest, but at the same time one suspects that, from a
sanitary and cleansing point of view, the flood may have done more good
than harm. Like the great fire of London in 1666, it seems to have wiped
out the past and banished disease-germs as well as carvings.

Srinagar has been rebuilt, as already said, since the flood, but the
site of the older city is still evident enough, as one enters from the
south, by the clustering of temples and shrines among the

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

cactus hedges and peepul-trees of the wide open plain. There are many
still older temples to be seen from the road, of a ponderous and severe
beauty, in a type immediately preceding that of mediæval Orissa. They
are comparatively small but marvellously perfect. The style must have
persisted long in the Himalayas. There are examples of it, in more
developed and slender form, here at Srinagar, as modern as two hundred
years old; but the earliest examples must be very old indeed, dating
from the days of the Hindu Revival under the Guptas, that is to say from
about A.D. 400 or even earlier. Even the town of Srinagar, as it was at
the time of the flood, was only founded, it is said, by Raja Ajaipal in
the year 1446, so that it could not be regarded as old from an Indian
point of view. But the fact is there must always have been a city here,
ever since the Himalayas began to be inhabited, and certainly ever since
the coming of the Asokan missions.

The geographical situation, in the midst of a valley that is almost a
plain, forces the formation of an organic centre. The height is only
about sixteen hundred feet above the sea, so it supports a sub-tropical
vegetation and at the same time is accessible to all the cooler airs of
the higher mountains. We can well imagine how the first colony of
Buddhistic monks would gradually

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

settle down, and live their monastic life, with its regular worship,
preaching, and study, contented in the main to become an organic part of
the life about them. Actual traces of their occupation have all been
obliterated long long ago, but wherever we find a very old religious
dedication, which has been a sheet-anchor of worship for century after
century, we may infer with some certainty that it was established by
them. Such centres exist at Srinagar in the Temples of Komoleswar and of
the Five Pandavas. Of the two, Komoleswar is probably the older. The
story told in the Puranas of the Mother, is here appropriated to Shiva,
and he appears as the god to whom Rama made the offering of blue
lotuses. There is a Shiva here of pre-Sankaracharyan type, and the
temple stands in a large and ancient enclosure round which are houses
and other buildings. Vaishnavism also has flowed over Komoleswar in its
time, for there are scores of votive tablets carved with the feet of the
Lord. But the place has never forgotten its Shaivite origin, and claims
to have been visited by Sankaracharya, which we should certainly expect
to have been the case. The old temple of the Five Pandavas stands on the
roadway into Srinagar.

Was there once an intention of laying out the whole country with temples
dedicated in order

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

to the heroes and *munis* of the national epic? One shrinks from the
thought of a task so gigantic, but there seems some reason to think it
may have been contemplated, and the fact that most of these must since
have disappeared is no real argument against it. The Himalayan kingdom
has always been in such vital contact with the Hinduism of the plains,
through *sadhus* and pilgrims and merchants, that it has shared to the
full in each period as it rose, and each wave has been followed by
another striving to efface the traces of that which preceded it. In this
particular temple of the Five Pandavas, the Vaishnavism of Ramanuja has
left its mark. There is a grotesque image of Narada worshipped here
which is said to commemorate the primeval *swayambara*, where Narayana
chose Lakshmi to be his spouse. The bride shrank from the appearance of
Narada, who sat immediately in front of his master, and looked at
Narayana himself instead. This was indeed the end to be attained, for
she was the destined bride of God. But the method involved a wound to
Narada's self-love, and for this he cursed Vishnu--the devotee cursed
God!--saying that in a future birth as Rama he would have trouble with
this wife. This is evidently a late and corrupt tale, intended to
appropriate an image said to be Narada's, and to synthetise all the
developments through which Vaishnavism had

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

already passed, claiming them as historic phases of the mediæval form
preached by Ramanuja.

Vaishnavism made a strong impression at Srinagar. It seems to have been
held meritorious to make a pilgrimage there, and give offerings at the
shrine of Lakshmi-Narayan, in lieu of going all the way to Badri
Narayan. There is one grand old temple erected for this purpose four
hundred years ago. Unfortunately it is now surrounded by a cactus-hedge,
and is therefore

inaccessible. It was superseded two hundred years later by a building of
much poorer architecture. But the traditions are interesting. The Garur
in front of the later temple is believed to be inferior to that which
originally stood there. This, it is said, was so beautiful that it flew
away! "Even this," the guide will add, with pardonable pride in local
gods, "is such as you will not often see." Alas, I could not share his
high opinion of the present Garur as a work of art.

There have been many Srinagars, and one of them at least would seem to
have been connected with the consecration of a great rock altar to Devi.
If the tradition is to be trusted, human sacrifice was practised here,
and there is a story of the splendid indignation of Sankaracharya, who
hurled the stone of sacrifice upside down into the river, and left to
the sight of future generations only its bottom. If that was so,
Sankaracharya would

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

appear not only as the enemy of Tantrikism, but also as the reformer of
Mother-worship in this matter. The rock is some miles out of the present
town, and stands near a great deodar cedar on the opposite bank.

#### III.--KEDAR NATH

The final stage of the road to Kedar Nath is terrible, especially the
last four miles of steep ascent. About the beauty of the scenery one
could not say enough, but the difficulties of the climb ought not to be
forgotten. It is a dolorous stairway, as hard as life itself; in very
truth, as the *panda* ruefully said to me, "the way to Heaven!" All this
is forgotten, however, when at last we reach the uplands and begin to
feel ourselves within measurable distance of Kedar Nath. We are now
amongst the wide turf-covered tablelands, and the flowers begin to
abound, as in some paradise of Moghul painters. At every step we pass or
are passed by other pilgrims. The eagerness round and about us is
indescribable. Then comes the moment when the temple is visible for the
first time. A shout goes up from our carriers and others, and many
prostrate themselves. We press forward more rapidly than before. It is
even now a mile or so to the village. But at last we arrive, and
entering find

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

that the shrine itself stands at the end of the long avenue-like street,
with the mountain and glacier rising sheer behind it, as if all India
converged upon Kedar Nath as its northern point, and all roads met at
the sacred feet of the Lord of Mountains. Probably, when first the
temple was built in this spot, it was actually on the edge of the
glacier, which in all these centuries has retreated only to a distance
of less than a mile. We had made great efforts to reach our goal on a
Monday, for this is held a great benison in visiting a shrine of Shiva.
But when we arrived it was the middle of the day, and the temple was
closed till the evening *arati*. As the afternoon ended, the cold blue
mists came down from the mountains, enwrapping everything; and one sat
out in the village street, watching cowled forms, in their brown
*kombols*, pacing back and forth through the mist before the tight-shut
doors. Suddenly we were called to see the *arati*. Darkness had fallen
but the mists had gone, and the stars and the snows were clear and
bright. Lights were blazing and bells clanging within the temple and we
stood without, among the watching people. As the lights ceased to swing
and the *arati* ended, a shout of rapture went up from the waiting
crowd. Then the cry went out to clear the road, and the rush of the
pilgrims up the steep steps began. What a sight was this! On and on, up
and up, they came, crowding, breathless, almost

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

struggling, in their mad anxiety to enter the shrine, reach the image,
and at the last, by way of worship, to bend forward and touch with the
heart the sacred point of the mountain! For this half-embrace is what
the worship consists of at Kedar Nath. They poured in at the great south
door, out by the east. On and on, up and up; one had not dreamed the
place contained so many people as now panted forward to obtain entrance.
Suddenly, from one of the doorkeepers I heard an exclamation of pity,
and then he stooped and tenderly lifted a little bent old woman, bowed
down under the weight of years, who had lost her footing in the crowd
and might have fallen and been trodden under foot. It was one of the
sights of a lifetime to stand there, in the black darkness at the top of
the steps, and watch the pilgrims streaming in. It seemed as if all
India lay stretched before one, and Kedar Nath were its apex, while from
all parts everywhere, by every road, one could see the people streaming
onward, battling forward, climbing their way up, all for what?--for
nothing else than to touch God!

 

We had a wonderful walk next day, to the glaciers and the heights, and
some of us rested on a hillside, listening to the perpetual muffled boom
of the avalanches, as they broke and fell

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

from some part or other of the great ice-mass to the north. "Yes," said
the peasant who guided us, thoughtfully, as he stood gazing with us at
the glacier. "It looks as if it stood perfectly still. But really it is
moving, like any other river." The great temple looked small and distant
now, like a village church, and only the towering heights seemed grand
enough for the worship of God. We felt this still more when we stood and
looked up at the vast snowy expanse that they call the Mahaprasthan, the
Great Release. For the Pandava story culminates at Kedar Nath, and we
are shown the very road by which Yudhisthira and his brothers and the
Lady Draupadi went, on that last great journey by which they reached the
end. Others since then have followed them, it is said, and have signed
their names at the last on a great rock-face that stands on the way. We
made our way there: and sure enough we found numbers of trisuls drawn in
white and black and red, in wavering lines some of them, as if by hands
that shook with age, and some of them strong and firm: but all, if the
country-folk are to be believed, the autographs of those who felt that
desire was ended and the supreme renunciation now theirs to make. For
the *Shastras*, say those who know, make man free of society at two
places, Kedar Nath and Allahabad.

The site of Kedar Nath is very old. There is

<span id="page_205.">p. 205.</span>

a temple of Satya-Narayana built over a spring, in the village-street.
There is also a tiny chapel containing the nine forms of Devi. There are
pre-Sankaracharyan Shivas also, and square watercourses, dotted about
the central shrine. On the whole it would seem as if, at the period
commonly referred to as the visit of Sankaracharya, Satya-Narayana had
been superseded by Shiva as the principal deity. And the Devi-worship
which was probably still older than Satya-Narayana remained henceforth
side by side with it, in a similar subordination. The question of the
order in which its pre-Sankaracharyan phases succeeded one another is
the great crux of the story of Hinduism.

The carving round the doorway of the temple is evidently ancient, and
the ornament consists of Hinduistic figures of gods and kings contained
in niches, not unlike those which contain Buddhas in the last of the
art-periods at Ajanta. This would predispose us to assign a date between
the expulsion from Gandhara, A.D. 751, and the year 1000, leaning
somewhat to the latter because of the very manifest decadence in style.
We must remember that the importance of Kedar Nath as a place of
pilgrimage has always kept it in touch with the plains, and that at the
same time there seems never to have been any Mohammedan invasion of
these Himalayan valleys. These

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

facts explain why it is possible to find in this remote spot an
important link between older Buddhistic and later Hindu sculpture.

Above all, Kedar Nath is the shrine of the *sadhus*. As in the days of
Buddhism, so in those of Sankaracharya, and as then so also now, the
yellow robe gleams and glistens in all directions. There is no begging,
for the *sadabratas* supply all the wants of monastic visitors. But
there is a world of enthusiasm, and still the tradition goes amongst
them that Kedar Nath is a place of good omen for *sannyasins*, for here
came Sankaracharya and falling into *samadhi* died.

It was the second day of our stay when an old man who had been seriously
ill for many months reached the place and made his *darsana*. He had
ended his journey, and hastened to fulfil his vow within the hour. But
scarcely had he done so, barely had he ceased from prayer, not yet was
the rapture of achievement abated, when the battle was declared for him
to be finished, and in the bright morning air, with long sighing
breaths, his soul went forth. Such is the benediction with which the
Lord of Mountains lays His hand upon His own!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[189:1](seh27.htm#fr_5) See note, [p.
207](seh28.htm#page_207).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Note to the Northern Pilgrimage](seh28)
