[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aia06)  [Next](aia08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

### CHAPTER IV.

### OF THE TWELVE HOUSES, THEIR NATURE AND SIGNIFICATION.

As before we have said there are twelve signs, and also twelve houses of
heaven; so now we are come to relate the nature of these twelve houses,
the exact knowledge of which is so requisite, that he who learns the
nature of the planets and signs without exact judgment of the houses, is
like an improvident man, that furnishes himself with a variety of
household stuff, having no place wherein to bestow them. There is
nothing appertaining to the life of man in this world which, in one way
or other, hath no relation to one of the twelve houses of heaven; and as
the twelve signs are appropriate to the particular members of man's
body, so also do the twelve houses represent, not only the several parts
of man, but his actions, quality of life, and living. And the curiosity
and judgment of our forefathers in astrology was such, that they have
allotted to every house a particular signification; and so distinguished
human accidents <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10.md) throughout the whole
twelve houses. He that understands the questions appertaining to each of
them, shall not want sufficient grounds whereon to judge or give a
rational answer upon any contingent accident, and success thereof.

*Of the* FIRST *House, and its Signification*. <span
id="fr_11"></span>[2](#fn_11.md)

The first house contains all that part of heaven from the line where the
[figure 1](aia05.htm#img_fig01.md) stands unto the [figure
2](aia25.htm#img_fig02.md), where the second house begins: it is
*one-third* of the distance between the horizon and meridian below the
earth. It has signification

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

of the *life* of man, of the stature, colour, complexion, form, and
shape of him that propounds the question, or is born; in eclipses and
great conjunctions, and upon the Sun his annual ingress into ♈; it
signifies the common people, or general state of that kingdom where the
figure is erected. And as it is the first house, it represents the head
and face of man; so that if either ♄ or ♂ be in this house, either at
the time of a question or at the time of birth, you may observe some
blemish in the face, <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12.md) or in that
member appropriated to the sign that is then upon the cusp of the house;
as, if ♈ be in the ascendant, the mark, mole, or scar is, without fail,
in the head or face; and if few degrees of the sign ascend, the mark is
in the upper part of the head; if the middle of the sign be on the cusp,
the mole, mark, or scar is in the middle of the face, or near it; if the
latter degrees ascend, the face is blemished near the chin, towards the
neck; this I have found true in hundreds of examples. Of colours, it
hath the white; that is, if a planet be in this house that has
signification of white, the complexion of the party is more pale or wan;
or, if you inquire after the colour of the clothes of any man, if his
significator be in the first house, and in a sign corresponding, the
party's apparel is white or grey, or somewhat near that colour: so also
if the question be regarding cattle, when their significators are found
in this house, it denotes them to be of that colour, or near it: the
house is masculine. The consignificators of this house are ♈ and ♄: for
as this house is the first house, so is ♈ the first sign, and ♄ the
first of the planets; and therefore, when ♄ is but moderately well
fortified in this house, and in any benevolent aspect of ♃, ♀, ☉, or ☽,
it promises a good sober constitution of body, and usually long life; ☿
doth also joy in this

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

house, because it represents the head, and he the tongue, fancy, and
memory; when he is well dignified and posited in this house, he produces
good orators; <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13.md) it is called the
Ascendant, because when the ☉ and planets come to the cusp of this
house, they ascend, or then arise, and are visible in our horizon.

*Questions concerning the* SECOND *House*.

From this house is required judgment concerning the estate or fortune of
him that asks the question, of his wealth of property, of all moveable
goods, money lent, of profit or gain, loss or damage; in suits of law,
it signifies a man's friends or assistants; in private duels, the
querent's second; in an eclipse or great conjunction, the poverty or
wealth of the people: in the Sun his entrance into ♈, it represents the
ammunition, allies, and support the commonwealth shall have; it imports
their magazines. It represents, in man, the neck and hinder part of it
towards the shoulders; of colours, the green. It is a feminine house,
and succeedent.

It has consignificators, ♃ and ♉; for if ♃ be placed in this house, or
be lord hereof, it is an argument of an estate or fortune; ☉ and ♂ are
never well placed in this house: either of them shew dispersion of
substance, according to the capacity and quality of him that is either
born or asks the question <span id="fr_14"></span>[2](#fn_14.md).

*The* THIRD *House*

Has signification of brethren, sisters, cousins, or kindred, neighbours,
small journeys, or inland journeys, often removing from one place to
another; epistles, letters, rumours, messengers: it rules the shoulders,
arms, hands, and fingers.

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Of colours, it governs the red and yellow, or
sorrel colour; it has consignificators, ♊ and ♂, which is one reason why
♂ in this house, unless joined with ♄, is not very unfortunate it is a
cadent house, and is the joy of the ☽; for if she be posited therein,
especially in a moveable sign, it is an argument of much travel,
trotting, and trudging, or of being seldom quiet: the house is
masculine.

*The* FOURTH *House*

Gives judgment of fathers in general, or ever of his father that
inquires, or that is born; of lands, houses, tenements, inheritance,
tillage of the earth, treasures hidden; the determination or *end* of
any thing; towns, cities, or castles besieged or not besieged; all
ancient dwellings, gardens, fields, pastures, orchards the quality and
nature of the grounds one purchases, whether vineyards, cornfields, &c.,
and shews whether the ground be woody, stony, or barren.

The sign of the fourth denotes the town, the lord thereof, the
governor; <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15.md) it rules the breast and
lungs; and of colours, the red: its consignificators are ♋, and the ☉:
we call it the angle of the Earth, or *Imum Cœli*: it is feminine, and
the north angle. In nativities or questions this fourth house represents
fathers; so does the ☉ by day, and ♄ by night; yet if the ☉ be here
placed, he is not ill, but rather shows the father to be of a noble
disposition, &c.

*The* FIFTH *House*.

By this house we judge of children, of ambassadors, of the state of a
woman with child, of banquets, of ale-houses, taverns, plays, messengers
or agents for republics, of the wealth of the father, the ammunition of
a town besieged; if

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

the woman with child shall bring forth male or female; of the health or
sickness of his son or daughter that asks the question. It rules the
stomach, liver, heart, sides, and back, and is masculine. Of colours,
black and white, or honey colour; and is a succeedent house; its
consignificators are ♌ and ♀, who does joy in this house, in regard it
is the house of pleasure, delight and merriment; it is wholly
unfortunate by ♂ or ♄, and they therein shew disobedient children, and
untoward.

*The* SIXTH *House*.

It concerns men and maid servants, galley slaves, hogs, sheep, goats,
hares, conies, all manner of lesser cattle, and profit or loss got
thereby; *sickness*, its quality and cause; the principal humour
offending, curable or not curable; whether the disease be short or long;
day-labourers, tenants, farmers. shepherds, hogherds, neatherds,
warreners, and it signifies uncles, or the father's brothers and
sisters. It rules the inferior part of the belly and intestines, even to
the rectum. The house is a feminine and cadent house, unfortunate as
having no aspect to the ascendant. Of colours, *black*; ♂ rejoices in
this house, but its consignificators are the sign ♍ and planet ♀: we
usually find that ♂ and ♀ in conjunction in this house are arguments of
a good physician. <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16.md)

*The* SEVENTH *House*.

It gives judgment of marriage; and describes the person inquired after,
whether it be a man or woman; all manner of love questions; or public
enemies, the defendant in a lawsuit, in war, the opposing party; all
quarrels, duels, lawsuits; it astrology, the artist himself; in physic,
the physician; thieves and thefts, the person stealing, whether man or
woman; wives,

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

sweethearts, their shape, description, condition, nobly or ignobly born;
in an annual ingress, whether war or peace may be expected; of victory,
who overcomes and who is worsted fugitives or runaways, banished or
outlawed men. It has consignificators ♎ and ☽; ♄ or ♂ unfortunate
herein, shew ill in marriage. <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17.md) Of
colour, a dark black. It rules the haunches, and the navel, to the
buttocks, is called the angle of the west, and is masculine.

*The* EIGHTH *House*.

The estate of men deceased; death, its quality and nature; the wills,
legacies, and testaments of men deceased; dowry of the wife, portion of
the maid, whether much or little, easy to be obtained or with
difficulty. In duels, it represents the adversary's second; in lawsuits,
the defendant's friends; what kind of death a man shall die; it
signifies fear and anguish of mind; <span id="fr_18"></span>[2](#fn_18.md)
also who shall be heir to the deceased. It rules the privy parts. Of
colours, the green and black. Of signs, it has ♏ for consignificator and
♄ . The hemorrhoids, the stone, stranguary, and bladder, are ruled by
this house, also poisons; it is a succeedent house, and feminine.

*The* NINTH *House*.

By this house we give judgment of voyages or long journies beyond seas,
of religious men, or clergy of any kind, whether bishops or inferior
ministers; dreams, visions, foreign countries, books, learning, church
livings or benefices, and of the kindred of one's wife or husband. Of
colours, it has the

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

green and white; of man's body, it rules the fundament, the hips, and
thighs; ♃ and ♂ are consignificators of this house; for if ♃ be herein
placed, it naturally signifies a devout man in his religion, or one
modestly given. I have often observed when the Dragon's tail, ♄, or ♂
have been unfortunately placed in this house, the querent has either
been little better than an atheist or a desperate sectarian. <span
id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19.md) ☉ rejoices to be in this house, which is
masculine and cadent.

*The* TENTH *House*.

Commonly it personates kings, princes, dukes, earls, judges, prime
officers, commanders-in-chief, whether in armies or towns; all sorts of
magistracy and officers in authority, also mothers; honour, preferment,
dignity, office, lawyers, professions or trade; it also signifies
kingdoms, empires, dukedoms, counties; it has of colours red or white,
and rules the knees and thighs. It is called the *medium cœli*, or
midheaven, and is feminine. Its consignificators are ♑ and ♂. Either ♃
or the ☉ are very fortunate in this house, especially when they are
placed together; ♄ or ☋ usually deny honour as to persons of quality,
and to the vulgar little prosperity in profession or trade.

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

*The* ELEVENTH *House*.

It does naturally represent friends and friendship, hope, trust,
confidence, the praise or dispraise of any one; the fidelity or
falseness of friends. As to kings, it personates their favourites,
counsellors, servants, their associates or allies; their money,
exchequer or treasure; in war, ammunition and soldiery, it represents
courtiers, &c. In a commonwealth, governed by a few of the nobles and
commons, it personates their assistance in council; as, in London, the
tenth house represents the lord mayor; the eleventh, the common council,
the ascendant the generality of the commoners of the said city. Of
members, it rules the legs to the ancles; of colours, saffron or yellow.
It has ☉ and ♒ for consignificators: ♃ especially rejoices in this
house. It is a succeedent house, and masculine, and in virtue is nearly
equivalent either to the seventh or fourth house.

*The* TWELFTH *House*.

It has signification of private enemies, great cattle, or horses, oxen,
elephants, &c.; sorrow, tribulation, imprisonment, all manner of
affliction, self-undoing, &c.; and of such men as maliciously undermine
their neighbours, or inform secretly against them. It has
consignificators ♓ and ♀. Saturn does much delight in that house, for he
is naturally the author of mischief. It rules, in man's body, the feet.
In colour it represents the green. It is a cadent house, and feminine.

This is the true character of the several houses, according to the
Ptolomeian doctrine, and the experience I have had myself for many
years. I must confess the Arabians have made several other divisions of
the houses; but I could never, in my practice, find any verity in them;
therefore I will say nothing of them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_10"></span>[27:1](aia07.htm#fr_10.md) The term *accidents*
here signifies the events of life generally.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[27:2](aia07.htm#fr_11.md) See [Fig
1](aia05.htm#img_fig01.md).

<span id="fn_12"></span>[28:1](aia07.htm#fr_12.md) This is verified in the
nativity of Lord Brougham, who was born with ♄ ascending in ♏; he has a
very great natural defect in the face, a nervous catching of the muscles
of the mouth. &c.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[29:1](aia07.htm#fr_13.md) Lord Brougham, who is
one of the nest orators of the age, was born with ☿ just rising.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[29:2](aia07.htm#fr_14.md) ☽ in this house, if in
good aspect to ♃, gives the native wealth. The Duke of Wellington had ☽
in this house in △ to ♃ in the 10th.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[30:1](aia07.htm#fr_15.md) This alludes to
questions of sieges, which were too frequent in the land in the author's
time.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[31:1](aia07.htm#fr_16.md) This alludes to
questions regarding sickness. and by no means to nativities.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[32:1](aia07.htm#fr_17.md) We always find that ♄,
♂, or ♅, in this house are *causes* of ill-fortune in marriage, or the
married state, in nativities, let them be aspected how they will; and in
questions, we have no opinion of them, though ever so strongly
dignified. The Duke of Wellington had both ♄ and ♂ in the 7th, and was
unfortunate in marriage.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[32:2](aia07.htm#fr_18.md) This alludes to the
significator of the querent being placed in the 9th house.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[33:1](aia07.htm#fr_19.md) This merely alludes to
horary questions, and can have no kind of *influence* this way, these
things being at the most *symbols* of a good or bad man; for in
nativities the mind is influenced by the Moon and Mercury only. The
error of confounding these two branches of the science, nativities, in
which the planets are *causes* (under God) of events, and horary
questions, in which they are only *signs* of the events, has been the
chief means of bringing this sublime science into disrepute. This error
appears to have arisen from the low state and condition of astronomy in
the middle ages, when, even as late as the days of Charles II., Dr.
Goad, his physician, assures us that the astronomers could not calculate
an opposition of the planets ♃ and ♄ nearer than a week. How, then, can
it be expected that the judgments of astrologers should have always been
correct, when the very data on which they depended were often erroneous?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Of Saturn, and his Signification](aia08.md)
