[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aia07)  [Next](aia09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

### CHAPTER V.

### OF SATURN, AND HIS SIGNIFICATION.

Hs is the supremest or highest of all the planets, <span
id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20) and is placed between Jupiter and the
firmament; he is not very bright or glorious, nor does he twinkle or
sparkle, but is of a pale or wan ashy colour; slow in motion, finishing
his course through the twelve signs of the zodiac in 29 years, 167 days,
and 5 hours, or thereabouts. His mean motion is two minutes and one
second; his diurnal motion sometimes is three, four, five, or six
minutes, seldom more; his greatest north latitude from the ecliptic is 2
degrees 48 minutes; his greatest south latitude is 2 degrees 49 minutes.

In the zodiac he has two of the twelve signs for his houses; viz.
Capricorn ♑, his night house; Aquarius ♒, his day house. He is exalted
in ♎, receives his fall in ♈, and rejoices in the sign Aquarius, ♒. He
governs the airy triplicity by day, which is composed of ♊, ♎, ♒.

If in any question he be in any degree wherein he has a term, he cannot
be said to be peregrine, or void of essential dignities; or if he be in
any of those degrees allotted him for his face or decanate, he cannot
then be said to be peregrine: understand this in all the other
planets. <span id="fr_21"></span>[2](#fn_21)

He continues retrograde 140 days; is five days in his first stage before
retrogradation, and so many in his second station before becoming
direct. He is cold and dry (being far removed from the Sun); melancholy,
earthy, masculine; and the greater infortune, author of solitariness,
malevolent, &c.

*When well dignified*, he is profound in imagination, in his

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

acts severe, in words reserved, in speaking and giving very spare; in
labour patient, in arguing or disputing grave, in obtaining the goods of
this life studious and solicitous, in all manner of actions
austere. <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22)

*When ill dignified*, he is envious, covetous, jealous, and mistrustful;
timorous, sordid, outwardly dissembling, sluggish, auspicious, stubborn;
a contemner of women, a liar, malicious, murmuring; never contented, and
ever repining.

*Corporature*.--Most part of his body cold and dry; of a middle stature,
his complexion pale, swarthy or muddy; his eyes little and black,
looking downward; a broad forehead, black or sad hair, and it hard or
rugged; great ears, hanging, lowering eyebrows, thick lips and nose; a
rare or thin beard, a lumpish, unpleasant countenance, either holding
his head forward or stooping; his shoulders broad and large, and many
times crooked; his belly somewhat short and lank; his thighs spare,
lean, and not long; his knees and feet ill made; and frequently striking
against each other, with a shuffling gait.

Saturn *Oriental*.--You must observe, if Saturn be oriental of the Sun,
the stature is more short, but decent and well composed.

Saturn *Occidental*.--The man is more black and lean, and fewer hairs;
and again, if he wants latitude, the body is more lean; if he have great
latitude, the body is more fat or fleshy; if the latitude be south, more
fleshy, but quick in motion. If north, hairy and much flesh.

♄ in his first station, a little fat; in his second station, fat,
ill-favoured bodies, and weak; and this observe constantly in all the
other planets.

*Quality of Men*.--In general ♄ signifies husbandmen,

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

clowns, beggars, day labourers, old men, fathers, grandfather, monks,
jesuits, sectarians.

*Employment*.--Curriers, night-farmers, miners under ground, tinners,
potters, broom men, plumbers, brickmakers, maltsters, chimney-sweepers,
sextons of churches, bearers of corpses, scavengers, hostlers, colliers,
carters, gardeners, ditchers, chandlers, dyers of black cloth, and
herdsmen, shepherds, or cow-keepers.

*Sicknesses*.--All impediments in the right ear, or teeth; all quartan
agues proceeding from cold, dry and melancholy distempers, leprosies,
consumptions, black jaundice, palsies, tremblings, vain fears,
fantasies, dropsy, the hand and foot gout, apoplexies, too much flux of
the hemorrhoids; and *ruptures*, if in Scorpio or Leo, in any ill aspect
with Venus.

*Orb*.--His orb is nine degrees before and after; that is, his influence
begins to work when either he applies or any planet applies to him, and
is within the half of nine degrees added to the half of that planet's
orb, and continues in force until he is separate an equal distance.

*Years*.--The greatest years he signifies is 465. His greater 57; his
medium years 43½; his least 30. The meaning whereof is this: admit we
frame a new building, erect a town or city, or a family, or principality
is begun when Saturn is essentially and occidentally strong, the
astrologer may probably conjecture the family, principality, &c. may
continue 465 years in honour, &c. without any sensible alteration. As to
age, he relates to decrepit old men, fathers, grandfathers; the like in
plants, trees, and all living creatures.

*Places*.--He delights in deserts, woods, obscure vanes, caves, dens,
holes, mountains, or where men have been buried, churchyards, &c.;
ruinous buildings, coal-mines, sinks, dirty and stinking places, houses
of office, &c.

*Countries*.--Late authors say he rules over Bavaria, Saxony, Stiria,
Romandiola, Ravenna. Constantia, Ingoldstadt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_20"></span>[35:1](aia08.htm#fr_20) This was true, as far as
the author knew; the planet Herschel not having been then discovered.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[35:2](aia08.htm#fr_21) For the terms, &c., see
the table of Essential Dignities.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[36:1](aia08.htm#fr_22) By these descriptions is
meant, that persons signified in horary questions by this planet are of
such a character; and if he influence the native by being in the
ascendant at the time of birth, it applies also in nativities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Of the Planet Jupiter, and his Signification](aia09)
