[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aia05)  [Next](aia07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

### CHAPTER III.

### OF THE ASPECTS.

THE figure of the heavens being erected, it now remains to observe how
the planets are situated as regards each other; or, in other words, how
they are aspected. And, first,

Of Zodiacal Aspects.

These are as follow:--

Semi ✶, a Semi-sextile, or 30 degrees.

Semi ☐, a Semi-square, or 45 degrees.

✶, a Sextile, or 60 degrees.

A Quintile, or distance of 72 degrees.

☐, a Square, or quartile, 90 degrees.

△, a Trine, or distance of 120 degrees.

A Sesquiquadrate, or square and a half, 135 degrees.

A Biquintile, or double quintile, 144 degrees.

☍ an Opposition, 180 degrees.

*Good* aspects are the semi-sextile, sextile, quintile, trine, and
biquintile.

*Evil* aspects are the semi-square, square, sesquiquadrate, and
opposition.--N.B. The conjunction, marked thus ☌, is when two planets
are in the same degree and minute of the zodiac: when it is exact, it is
very powerful, and is called a *partile* ☌; but if within the planets'
orbs, it is called a *platic* conjunction, and is less powerful. To know
whether it should be considered at all, the orbs of the two planets
should be added together, and one-half the sum taken; if the planets be
beyond that distance, they are not even in platic ☌. The same holds good
with regard to other aspects.

The orbs of the cusps of the houses are 5°, so that if A

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

planet be one-half its orb and 5° more distant from a house, it is not
in aspect to that house; the same if the *aspect* of the planet fall
beyond that distance from the cusp of any other house.

*Orbs of the Planets*.

♄, 9°; ♃, 9°; ♂, 7°; ☉, 15, ♀, 7°; ☿ 7°; ☽, 12°.--N.B. ♅ has had no orb
of operation discovered; but I think it may safely be considered as 7°
in all horary figures, &c.

*Of Mundane Aspects*.

These are formed by the houses in horary astrology, and by the semi-arcs
of the planets in nativities. Thus, a semi ✶ is 1 house; a semi ☐, 1½; a
✶, 2 houses; a ☐, 3 houses; a △, 4 houses; a sesqui △, 4½ houses; and an
☍, 6 houses.

The ⅓ of a semi arc is a semi ✶; the ½ of a semi-arc is a semi ☐; the ⅔
of a semi-arc is a ✶; the whole semi-arc is a ☐; and 1-5th less than the
semi-arc is a quintile; the whole semi-arc and ⅓ more is a △; the whole
semi-arc and ½ more is a sesqui ☐; the one-tenth part of a semi-arc
added to a sesqui ☐, is a biquintile.--N.B. The entire arc of a planet,
or double the semi-arc, will not give the measure of its distance from
the opposite point of its place; but if the two semi-arcs of a planet,
both diurnal and nocturnal, be added together, they make 180°, an
opposition aspect.

*Of Parallels*.

The Zodiacal Parallel is when two planets have the same amount of
declination from the equator. It is the most powerful of all aspects,
but is not generally used in horary astrology.

The Mundane Parallel is an equal distance from the meridian. It is used
by some horary astrologers. When any of the above aspects are formed
between the planets, they are

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

found to have a mutual influence or action on each other; according to
the nature of the aspect. For example: if the ☉ be 60 degrees (a ✶) from
♃ in any figure, it *denotes* that the person signified by the Sun is
under the benefit influence of the benevolent ♃; and *shews* success
according to the nature of the question. In nativities it *causes* good
health and good fortune in life. But if ☉ be 90 degrees (a ☐) from ♄, it
*shews* discredit, a failure of hopes, &c. in a question; and in a
nativity it produces much sickness to the native, and also misfortunes
to his father. This was verified in the nativity of Napoleon Bonaparte's
son, who was born at 9h. 15m. A.M. 20th March, 1811, when ☉ was in 28°
53'° of ♓, and ♄ was in 26° 28' of ♐; just 92° 25 distant from each
other. This very close ☐ aspect of ☉ and ♄ caused great trouble to the
native, through his father's misfortunes; and, ☉ was the hyleg, produced
a consumptive disease, and early death. It is remarkable, that his
father's troubles began immediately after his birth; and it will always
be found in the nativity of a child, that the fortune of its parents may
be ascertained thereby until the birth of another child. If, for
example, the child have evil planets in the fourth house, its father
will be more or less-unfortunate until the birth of another child; when,
if that other have ♃ and ♀ in the fourth house, the father's affairs
will become more fortunate: so very beautifully do the nativities of
parents and their children sympathise together.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV Of the Twelve Houses, Their Nature and
Signification](aia07)
