[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aia02)  [Next](aia04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# LIFE OF WILLIAM LILLY.

IN offering an abstract of the most valuable of this clever astrologer's
works to the notice of the public, I consider myself called upon to make
some mention of his personal history. And it fortunately happens that
this is not made up of imaginary ideas, founded on a few known facts,
and a multiplicity of suppositions; for what we know of this man of
extraordinary talent rests on the best evidence. He undertook, in his
sixty-sixth year, to write a history of his own life to his "worthy
friend," Elias Ashmole, Esq., afterwards Sir Elias Ashmole, the founder
of the celebrated museum which bears his name. Mr. Ashmole made marginal
notes therein, which testify his high opinion of our Author; and,
fortunately for the cause of Astrology, this gentleman verified the
correctness of the Figures of Heaven, which are given in the subsequent
pages; for we find the following note at the foot of page 131:--"*I
devised the forms and fashions of the several schemes, E. A.*" This note
was made after these observations of Lilly. "The desire I had to benefit
posterity and my country, at last overcame all difficulties; so that
what I could not do in one year, I perfected early the next year, 1647;
and then in that year, viz. 1647, I finished the third book of
nativities; during the composing whereof, for seven whole weeks, I was
shut up of the plague, burying in that time two maid servants thereof;
yet, towards November that

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

year, the Introduction, called by the name of *Christian Astrology*, was
made publick."

The fact of this work having been chiefly composed under such awful
circumstances, with a dreadful death immediately before his eyes, with
the pestilence ravaging his own house-hold, might, with unprejudiced
men, have been taken as a proof that the writer was sincere in what he
wrote; and really believed in the truth of that which he taught to
others as truth under the solemn appeal to Almighty God, which is so
beautifully worded in his introductory epistle. Modern critics, however,
can see no force in this argument, but unhesitatingly condemn *William
Lilly* "as an accomplished impostor, and a knavish
fortune-teller." <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) Such, reader, is the
force of prejudice. It will not allow men to examine before they
condemn; for if it did, then would the literary world speedily
acknowledge the reality of those doctrines which our Author has so ably
set forth in the following pages.

William Lilly was born of an honest yeoman family, in the town of
"Diseworth, seven miles south of the town of Derby, on the first day of
May, 1602." At eleven years old he was sent to Ashby de la Zouch, to be
instructed by one Mr. John Brindley. Here he says he learned the
following authors, viz., *Sententiæ Pueriles*, *Cato*, *Corderius*,
*Æsop's Fables*, *Tully's Offices*, *Ovid de Tristibus*; lastly,
*Virgil*, then *Horace*; as also *Camden's Greek Grammar*, *Theognis*,
and *Homer's Iliads*; and entered *Udall's Hebrew Grammar*. In the
eighteenth year of his age his master "was enforced from keeping school,
being persecuted by the Bishop's officers;" and our Author was "enforced
to leave school." He then kept school himself for "one quarter of a
year." On Monday, April 3rd, 1620, he left Diseworth and came to London,
where he was compelled to accept the humble situation of a

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

footboy, his father being then "in Leicester gaol for debt," and, of
course, incapable of doing much for his son. He had only seven shillings
and sixpence left when he arrived at London, having "footed it all
along" with the carrier. In 1624 his mistress died, having given him
"five pounds in old gold." After which he lived "most comfortably," his
master having a great affection for him. In 1626 his master married
again, having first settled on our Author twenty pounds a year, which he
enjoyed all through life. In October, 1627, he was made free of the
Salters' Company. And on the "eighth day of September, 1627," married
his master's widow, this same lady; and they "lived very lovingly" until
her death, October, 1633.

In the year 1632 he began to study Astrology, being instructed in the
rudiments by one Evans, a Welshman, of indifferent abilities. Lilly
tells us that he applied himself to these interesting studies "many
times, twelve, or fifteen, or eighteen hours, day and night;" adding, "I
was curious to discover whether there was any verity in the art or not."
By this his first wife he acquired a fortune of "very near to one
thousand pounds." In the year 1634 he purchased the moiety of thirteen
houses in the Strand, for which he gave £530. The figure of the heavens,
erected on this occasion, will be found in the following pages. November
the 18th, 1634, he married again, and had £500 portion with that wife.
"She was of the nature of Mars," and he lived not very lovingly with
her, as seems by his observations at her death. He appears to have now
practised horary astrology with success, and to have instructed numerous
individuals in the art; among others he taught John Humphreys, in the
year 1640, for which service he received forty pounds. He also wrote, in
the year 1639, a Treatise on the Eclipse of the Sun, May 22d, 1639; and
appears, about that period, to

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

have turned his attention much to Mundane Astrology. He says, <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) "I did carefully, in 1642 and 1643, take
notice of every grand action which happened betwixt king and parliament;
and did first then incline to believe, that, as all sublunary affairs
did depend upon superior causes, so there was a possibility of
discovering them by the configurations of the superior bodies; in which
way making some essays in those two years, I found encouragement to
proceed further, which I did: I perused the writings of the ancients,
but therein they were silent, or gave no satisfaction; at last, I framed
unto myself that method which then and since I follow, which I hope, in
time, may be more perfected by a more penetrating person than myself."

He appears to have dabbled a little in magic also, but he soon "grew
weary of such employment," and burned his books. Lilly's better sense
led him to perceive which of these studies was worthy of an honest and
intelligent man's pursuit, and which not.

About April, 1644, he first published *Merlinus Anglicus Junior*. This
work contained some of his most remarkable predictions, and was
continued for many years. It attracted much attention, and was the means
of adding greatly to the fame of our Author as an Astrologer. In that
year he printed the *White King's Prophecy*, "of which were sold, in
three days, eighteen hundred:" and some other works of like nature, the
*Prophetical Merlin*, &c.

In 1645 he was twice had before a Committee of the Parliament, for some
observations in his *Starry Messenger*; but he escaped, partly by means
of his numerous friends, and partly by his own ingenuity.

In 1647, when he published the present work, he was introduced to
General Fairfax, who paid him and his art some

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

compliments. In this year he was consulted by King Charles I., as to a
safe place to conceal his royal person; but the King, unfortunately for
himself, neglected Lilly's advice, and was accordingly ruined. Again, in
1648, the King consulted Lilly; but though he promised to take the
Astrologer's advice, and come up to London with the Commissioners, he
did not, however, keep his word, and again lost a good opportunity of
escaping from his evil destiny.

"In this year," says Lilly, "for very great considerations, the council
of state gave me in money fifty pounds, and a pension of one hundred
pounds *per annum*, which for two years I received, but no more." In
January 1649 he was present at the trial of King Charles, "who spoke,"
says he, "excellently well."

In 1651 he published *Monarchy or No Monarchy*, which contained several
hieroglyphics; among others those of the great plague and fire of
London, which the reader will find a copy of in this work.

These celebrated predictions were made by means of the motions of the
fixed stars, as is evident by the words of Lilly; who says, "the
asterisms and signs and constellations give greatest light thereunto."
*The Bull's North Horn*, a star which, Ptolemy says, is "like Mars,"
was, in the year 1666, when the fire occurred, in ♊ 17° 54', which is
the exact ascendant of London. It was, no doubt, by this means Lilly
judged the city would suffer by fire; for in his Almanac for 1666 he
states, that the 19th degree of ♊ is London's horoscope. Our Author was
not very nice in his calculations; and it may be observed, that though
it may be called the 19th degree, being within 6 minutes of it, yet, in
reality, ♊ 17° 54' is the true ascendant of London. It was that which
ascended at the moment of *driving the first pile of the new London
Bridge*.

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

|                                                                                                                                                        |                |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------|
| The longitude of the *Bull's North Horn*, 1st January, 1834                                                                                            | ♊ 20° 15'      |
| Longitude of London's ascendant                                                                                                                        | ♊ <u>17 54</u> |
| Difference                                                                                                                                             | 2 21           |
| This difference of 2° 21' is equal to 8460 seconds of longitude, which, divided by 50⅓" (the rate at which the fixed stars proceed yearly), gives 168. |                |
| From the year                                                                                                                                          | 1834           |
| Take away                                                                                                                                              | <u>168</u>     |
|                                                                                                                                                        | 1666           |

it gives the year when that evil star was crossing the ascending sign of
London. And as it is of the *fiery* nature of Mars, we need not be
surprised that it produced such terrific results. The celebrated
*Nostradamus* had predicted the same event in that year, about 111 years
previously, as follows:

"Le sang du juste à Londres fera faute  
Bruslez par feu, de vingt et trois, les six."

The blood of the just, which has peen spilt in London, requires it to be
burned with fire in sixty-six. He states that he made this prediction by
"Astronomical Affections."

In 1651 Lilly was again had before the Parliament, on ac-count of his
predictions, and was thirteen days in the custody of the
Serjeant-at-Arms. But the prediction which gave offence, viz. that the
"Parliament stood upon a tottering foundation, and that the commonalty
and soldiery would join together against them," was amply fulfilled by
the members being turned out of doors by Oliver Cromwell.

In February, 1654, his second wife died; and in October following he
married a third, signified, in his nativity, "by *Jupiter in Libra*;
and," says he, "she is so totally in her conditions. to my great
comfort."

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

In 1655 he was indicted at Hicks's Hall by a half-witted young woman.
The cause of the indictment was, that he had given judgment upon stolen
goods, and received two shillings and sixpence; contrary to an act made
in King James's time.

"I owned," says he, "the taking of half-a-crown for my judgment of the
theft, but said, that I gave no other judgment but that the goods would
not be recovered, being that was all which was required of me. I spoke
for myself, and introduced my own *Introduction* into court, saying,
that I had some years before emitted that book for the benefit of this
and other nations; that it was allowed by authority, and had found good
acceptance in both Universities; that the study of Astrology was lawful,
and not contradicted by any scripture.; that I neither had, or ever did,
use any charms, sorceries, or enchantments, related in the bill of
indictment,' &c. The jury, who went not from the bar, brought in, No
true Bill."

"In 1666 happened," says our Author, "that miraculous conflagration in
the city of London, whereby, in four days, the most part thereof was
consumed by fire." He then gives an account of his being brought before
the House of Commons by the following summons:

MONDAY, 22nd OCTOBER, 1666.

"At the Committee appointed to enquire after the causes of the late
fires:--

"ORDERED,

"That Mr. Lilly do attend this Committee on Friday next, being the 25th
of October, 1666, at two of the clock in the afternoon, in the Speaker's
chamber, to answer such questions as shall be then and there asked him.

"ROBERT BROOKE."         

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

In remarking on the circumstance, he says, "I conceive there was never
more civility used unto any than unto myself; and you know there was no
small number of parliament men appeared, when they heard I was to be
there."

"Sir Robert Brooke spoke to this purpose:--

"'Mr. Lilly, this Committee thought fit to summon you to appear before
them this day, to know, if you can say anything as to the cause of the
late fire, or whether there might be any design therein. You are called
the rather hither, because, in a book of your's long since printed, you
hinted some such thing by one of your hieroglyphics.' Unto which I
replied,

"May it please your honours,

"After the beheading of the late King, considering that in the three
subsequent years the parliament acted nothing which concerned the
settlement of the nation's peace, and seeing the generality of the
people dissatisfied, the citizens of London discontented, the soldiery
prone to mutiny, I was desirous, according to the best knowledge God had
given me, to make enquiry by the art I studied, what might, from that
time, happen unto the parliament and nation in general. At last, having
satisfied myself as well as I could, and perfected my judgment therein,
I thought it most convenient to signify my intentions and conceptions
thereof in forms, shapes, types, hieroglyphicks, &c., without any
commentary, that so my judgment might be concealed from the vulgar, and
made manifest only unto the wise; I herein imitating the examples of
many wise philosophers who had done the like. Having found, Sir, that
the city of London should be sadly afflicted with a great plague, and
not long after with an exhorbitant fire, I framed these two
hieroglyphicks, as represented in the book, which, in effect, have
proved very true."

"Did you foresee the year?" said one. l did not," said

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

\[paragraph continues\] I, or was desirous; of that I made no scrutiny."
"I proceeded:--'Now, Sir, whether there was any design of burning the
city, or any employed to that purpose, I must deal ingenuously with you;
that, since the fire, I have taken much pains in the search thereof, but
cannot, or could not, give myself any the least satisfaction therein. I
conclude that it was the finger of God only; but what instruments he
used thereunto I am ignorant.'

"The Committee seemed well pleased with what I spoke, and dismissed me
with great civility."

After this, nothing very remarkable happened to our Author. He left
London, having acquired an independence, and settled at Hersham, in the
year of the great plague, 1665. He then applied himself diligently to
the study of physic, and on the 11th October, 1670, he received a
licence to practise as a physician. He continued to practise with much
success, no doubt by applying his astrological science thereto; and he
gave his advice and, prescriptions freely, without money. His skill and
his charity gained him extraordinary credit and estimation.

He continued generally in good health till August, 1674; but his health
and his eyesight remained very weak afterwards. He still continued to
write his monthly observations and astrological judgments, though
latterly by aid of an amanuensis (Mr. Henry Colley, who succeeded him as
an astrologer), even until the year 1682.

In the beginning of 1681 he was seized with a flux, which he recovered
from, but then became totally blind. The 30th of May of that year he was
seized with a dead palsy; and, after some days of severe suffering, he
died about three o'clock on the morning of the 9th of June, 1681,
"without any shew of trouble or pangs."

He was buried in the chancel of Walton Church, his friend,

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Sir Elias Ashmole, assisting at the laying him
in his grave, which was "on the left side of the communion table."

A black marble stone was afterwards placed thereon by Ins friend, with
the following inscription:

Ne Oblivione Conteretur Urna  
GULIELMI LILLII  
ASTROLOGI PERITISSIMI  
QUI FATIS CESSIT  
Quinto Idus Junii Anno Christo Juliano  
MDCLXXXI  
Hoc Illi posuit amoris Monumentum  
ELIAS ASHMOLE  
ARMIGER.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

"*An Epistle to the Student in Astrology*.

"My Friend, whoever thou art, that with so much ease shalt receive the
benefit of my hard studies, and doest intend to proceed in this heavenly
knowledge of the starres; In the first place, consider and admire thy
Creator, be thankful) unto him, and be humble, and let no naturall
knowledge, how profound or transcendant soever it be, elate thy mind to
neglect that Divine Providence, by whose al-seeing order and appointment
all things heavenly and earthly have their constant motion: the more thy
knowledge is enlarged, the more doe thou magnify the power and wisdome
of Almighty God: strive to preserve thyself in his favour; for the more
holy thou art, and more neer to God, the purer judgment thou shalt give.

"Beware of pride and self-conceit: remember how that long agoe no
irrationall creature thirst offend man the Macrocosme, but did
faithfully serve and obey him; so long as he

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

was master of his own reason and passions, or until he subjected his
will to the unreasonable part. But, alas! when iniquity abounded, and
man gave the reins to his own affection, and deserted reason, then every
beast, creature, and outward harmfull thing, became rebellious to his
command. Stand fast (oh, man) to thy God: then consider thy own
nobleness; how all created things, both present and to come, were for
thy sake created; nay, for thy sake God became man: thou art that
creature, who, being conversant with Christ, livest and reignest above
the heavens, and sits above all power and authority. How many
pre-eminences, privileges, advantages, hath God bestowed on thee: thou
rangest above the heavens by contemplation, conceivest the motion and
magnitude of the stars: thou talkest with angels, yea, with God himself:
thou hast all creatures within thy dominion, and keepest the devils in
subjection. Doe not, then, for shame deface thy nature, or make thyself
unworthy of such gifts, or deprive thyself of that great power, glory,
and blessednesse, God hath allotted thee, by casting from thee his
favour ' for possession of a few imperfect pleasures.

"Having considered thy God, and what thyself art, during thy being God's
servant, now receive instruction how in thy practice I would have thee
carry thyself. As thou daily conversest with the heavens, so instruct
and form thy mind according to the image of Divinity: learn all the
ornaments of virtue, be sufficiently instructed therein: be humane,
curtius, familiar to all, easie of accesse: afflict not the miserable
with terrour of a harsh judgment; direct such to call on God to divert
his judgments impending over them: be civil, sober, covet not an estate;
give freely to the poor, both money and judgment: let no worldly wealth
procure an erronious judgment from thee, or such as may dishonour the
art. Be sparing in delivering judgment against the common-wealth thou
livest

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

in; avoyd law and controversie: in thy study be *totus in illus*, that
thou mayest be *singulus in arte*. Be not extravagant, or desirous to
learn every science; be not *aliquid in omnibus*; be faithfull,
tenacious, betray no ones secrets. Instruct all men to live well: be a
good example thyselfe; love thy own native country; be not dismaid if
ill spoken of, *conscientia mille testes*. God suffers no sin
unpunished, no lye unrevenged. Pray for the nobility, honour the gentry
and yeomanry of England; stand firme to the commands of this parliament;
have a reverent opinion of our worthy lawyers, for without their learned
paines, and the mutual assistance of some true spirited gentlemen, we
might yet be made slaves, but we will not; we now see light as well as
many of the clergy. Pray, if it stand with God's will, that monarchy in
this kingdom may continue, his Majesty and posterity reigne; forget not
the Scottish nation, their mutual assistance in our necessity, their
honourable departure. God preserve the illustrious *Fairfax*, and his
whole armye, and let the famous city of London be ever blessed, and all
her worthy citizens. <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2)

"WILLIAM LILLY."               

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[2:1](aia03.htm#fr_0) Retrospective Review, vol.
ii. p. 51.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[4:1](aia03.htm#fr_1) See p. 101 of Lilly's
History of his Life and Times.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[12:1](aia03.htm#fr_2) I have retained the exact
orthography of this epistle, which is a curious and interesting remnant
of our author's day. It was penned in 1547.--ED.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I.](aia04)
