[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aia11)  [Next](aia13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

### CHAPTER IX.

### OF THE PLANET VENUS, AND HER SEVERAL SIGNIFICATION AND NATURE.

*Name*.--After the Sun succeedeth Venus.

*Colour in the Element*.--She is of a bright, shining colour, and is
well known by the name of the evening star, or Hesperus; and that is
when she appears after the Sun is set; she is commonly called the
morning star, but by the learned Lucifer, when she is seen long before
the rising of the Sun. Her mean motion is 59 minutes and 8 seconds; her
diurnal motion is sometimes 62 minutes a-day, and 82 minutes she never
exceeds. Her greatest latitude is 9° 2'. She is retrograde 42 days, and
stationary 2. Her year is 224 days and 7 hours.

*Element*.--She is a feminine planet, temperately cold and moist;
nocturnal, the lesser fortune, author of mirth and cheerfulness.

*Manners and Quality when well dignified*.--She signifies a quiet man,
not given to law, quarrel, or wrangling; not vicious; pleasant, neat and
spruce, loving mirth in his words and actions, cleanly in apparel,
rather drinking much than gluttonous; prone to venery, often entangled
in love matters, zealous in their affections, musical, delighting in
baths and all honest merry meetings, or amusements and theatricals; easy
of belief, and not given to labour, or take any pains; a company keeper,
cheerful, nothing mistrustful, a right virtuous man or woman, often
jealous, yet without cause.

*When ill dignified*. Then he is riotous, expensive, wholly given to
dissipation and lewd companies of women, nothing regarding his
reputation, coveting unlawful beds, incestuous,

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

an adulterer, fantastical, a mere skip-jack, of no faith, no repute, no
credit, spending his means in ale-houses, taverns, and among scandalous
loose people; a mere lazy companion, nothing careful of the things of
this life, or any thing religious.

*Corporature*.--A man of fair but not tall stature, his complexion being
white, tending to a little darkness <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30)
which makes him more lovely, very fair, lovely eyes, and sometimes
black; a round face and not large, fair hair, smooth and plenty of it,
and it is usually of a light brown colour; a lovely mouth and cherry
lips, the face pretty fleshy, a rolling wandering eye, a body very
delightful, lovely, and exceedingly well shaped; one desirous of
trimming and making himself neat and complete both in clothes and body,
a love dimple in his cheeks, <span id="fr_31"></span>[2](#fn_31) a
stedfast eye, and full of amorous enticements.

*Oriental*.--When oriental, the body inclines to tallness or a kind of
upright straightness in person; not corpulent or very tall, but neatly
composed; a right Venus person is a pretty, complete, handsome man or
woman.

*Occidental*.--When she is occidental, the man is more short in stature,
yet very decent and comely in shape and form, well liked of all.

*Quality of Persons, and Employments*.--Musicians, gamesters, silkmen,
mercers, linen-drapers, painters, jewellers, players, lapidaries,
embroiderers, woman-tailors, wives, mothers, virgins, choristers,
fiddlers, pipers: when joined with the y; ballad-singers, perfumers,
seamstresses, picture-drawers, engravers, upholsterers, limners,
glovers, and such as sell those

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

commodities which adorn women, either in body (as clothes) or in face
(as complexion waters).

*Sicknesses*.--Diseases by her signified are principally in the matrix
and members of generation; in the reins, belly, back, navel, and those
parts; the gonorrhœa or running of the reins, lues venerea or any
disease arising from inordinate lust, priapism, impotency in generation,
hernias, &c., the diabetes, or an involuntary discharge of urine.

*Orb*.--Her orb is 7 degrees.

*Years*.--Her greatest years are 151; her greater 82, her mean 45, her
least 8. In man she governs youth from 14 to 28.

*Countries*.--Arabia, Austria, Campania, Vienna, Polonia the Greater,
Turin, Parthia, Media, Cyprus. <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_30"></span>[46:1](aia12.htm#fr_30) This signifies a pale or
wan complexion, yet with a dark hue.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[46:2](aia12.htm#fr_31) Those who have Venus
strong, either in their nativities, or as their significators in
questions, invariably have dimples either in the cheek or chin.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[47:1](aia12.htm#fr_32) These observations are
retained from respect to our author; but we must repeat, that it is ♉
and ♎ the houses of ♀, which govern these.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Of Mercury, and his Signification, Nature, and
Property](aia13)
