[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aia17)  [Next](aia19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XV.

### THE NATURE, PLACE, COUNTRIES, GENERAL DESCRIPTION, AND DISEASES SIGNIFIED BY THE TWELVE SIGNS.

#### ARIES

Is a masculine, diurnal sign, moveable, cardinal, equinoctial; in nature
fiery, hot and dry, choleric, bestial, luxurious, in temperate, and
violent; the diurnal house of ♂; of the fiery triplicity, and of the
east.

*Diseases*.--All gumboils, swellings, pimples in the face, smallpox,
hair lips, polypus, ringworms, falling sickness, apoplexies, megrims,
tooth-ache, head-ache, and baldness.

*Places* ♈ *signifies*.--Where sheep and cattle do feed, sandy or hilly
grounds; a place of refuge for thieves, (as unfrequented places); in
houses, the covering, ceiling, or plastering;

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

a stable for small beasts; lands newly taken in or recently ploughed, or
where bricks or lime has been burnt.

*Description of the Body or Shape* ♈ *represents*.--A dry body, not
exceeding in height; lean or spare, but lusty bones, and his limbs
strong; the visage long, black eye-brows, a long scraggy neck, thick
shoulders; the complexion dusky, brown or swarthy.

*Countries ruled by* ♈.--England, Germany, Denmark, Lesser Poland,
Palestine, Syria, Naples.--*Towns*: Florence, Verona, Padua, Marseilles,
Burgundy, Saragossa, Bergamo.

#### TAURUS.

*Qualities of the Sign* ♉ .--it is an earthy, cold, dry, melancholy,
feminine, nocturnal, fixed, bestial sign; of the earthy triplicity, and
south; the night house of Venus.

*Diseases*.--The king's evil, sore throats, wens, fluxes of rheums
falling into the throat, quinzies, abscesses in those parts.

*Places*.--Stables where horses are, low houses, houses where the
implements of cattle are laid up; pasture or feeding grounds, where no
houses are near; plain grounds, or where bushes have lately been
eradicated, and wherein wheat and corn are substituted; some little
trees not far off; in houses, cellars, low rooms.

*Shape and Description*.--It represents one of a short, but full, strong
and well-set stature; a broad forehead; great eyes, large swarthy face,
and broad strong shoulders; great mouth, and thick lips; gross hands;
black, rugged hair.

*Countries ruled by* ♉.--Ireland, Persia, Great Poland, Asia Minor, the
Archipelago, and the southern parts of Russia.--Towns: Dublin, Mantua,
Leipsic, Parma, Franconia, Lorraine: also the islands of Cyprus and
Samos, and the port and vicinity of Navarino.

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

#### GEMINI.

*Quality and Property of* ♊.--It is an aerial, hot, moist, sanguine,
diurnal, common or double-bodied human sign; the diurnal house of ☿; of
the airy triplicity, western, masculine.

*Diseases*.--It signifies all diseases, accidents, or infirmities in the
arms, shoulders, or hands; corrupted blood, windiness in the veins,
distempered fancies, and nervous diseases.

*Places*.--Wainscot of rooms, plaistering, and walls of houses; the
halls, or where play is used; hills and mountains, barns, storehouses
for corn, coffers, chests and high places.

*Countries ruled by* ♊.--North America, Lower Egypt, Lombardy, Sardinia,
Brabant, Belgium, West of England.--*Towns*: London (especially ♊ 17°
54'), Versailles, Mentz, Bruges, Louvaine, Cordova, New York, and
Nuremberg.

*Description*.--An upright, tall, straight body, either in man or woman;
the complexion sanguine, not clear, but obscure and dark; long arms, yet
many times the hands and feet short, and very fleshy; a dark hair, <span
id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43.md) almost black; a strong, active body, a
good piercing hazel eye, and wanton, and of perfect and quick sight; of
excellent understanding, and judicious in worldly affairs.

#### CANCER.

*Quality and Property of* ♋.--It is the only house of the Moon, and is
the first sign of the watery triplicity; is a watery, cold, moist,
phlegmatic, feminine, nocturnal, moveable sign; mute, and slow of voice;
fruitful, northern.

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

*Diseases*.--It signifies imperfections all over, or in the breast,
stomach, and paps; weak digestion, cold stomach, phthisic, salt phlegms,
rotten coughs, dropsical humours, imposthumations in the stomach,
cancers, <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44.md) which are mostly in the
breast.

*Places*.--The sea, great rivers, navigable rivers; but in in-land
countries it denotes places near rivers, brooks, springs, wells, cellars
in houses, wash-houses, marsh-grounds, ditches with rushes, sedges, sea
banks, trenches, cisterns.

*Shape and Description*.--Generally a low and small stature, the upper
parts larger than the lower; a round visage; sickly, pale, and white
complexion; the hair a sad brown; little eyes; prone to have many
children, if a woman.

*Countries ruled by* ♋.--Holland, Scotland, Zealand, Georgia, and all
Africa.--Towns: Constantinople, Tunis, Algiers, Amsterdam, Cadiz,
Venice, Genoa, York, St. Andrews, Manchester, New York, Bern, Lubeck,
Milan, and Vicentia.

#### LEO.

*Quality and Property of* ♌.--It is the only house of the Sun; by
nature, fiery, hot, dry, choleric; diurnal, commanding, bestial, <span
id="fr_45"></span>[2](#fn_45.md) barren; of the east, and fiery triplicity;
masculine.

*Diseases*.--All sicknesses in the ribs and sides, as pleurisies,

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

convulsions, pains in the back, trembling or .passion of the heart,
violent burning fevers; all weakness or diseases in the heart, sore
eyes, the plague, the pestilence, the yellow jaundice.

*Places*.--A place where wild beasts frequent; woods, forests, desert,
steep, rocky, and inaccessible places; king's palaces, castles, forts,
parks; in houses where fire is kept, near a chimney.

*Shape and Form*.--Great round head; large prominent eyes, as if staring
out, or goggle eyes, quick sighted; a full and large body, and more than
of middle stature; broad shoulders, narrow sides, yellow or dark flaxen
hair, and it curling or turning up; a fierce countenance, but ruddy high
sanguine complexion; strong, valiant, and active; step firm, and mind
courteous.

*Countries ruled by* ♌.--France, Italy, Bohemia, Sicily, Rome.--*Towns*:
Rome, Bath, Bristol, Taunton, Cremona, Prague, Apulia, Ravenna, and
Philadelphia; also the Alps and the ancient Chaldea, as far as Bussorah.

#### VIRGO.

*Property and Quality of* ♍.--It is an earthy, cold, melancholy, barren,
feminine, nocturnal, southern sign; the house and exaltation of ☿; of
the earthy triplicity.

*Places*.--It signifies a study, where books are kept; a closet, a
dairy-house, corn-fields, granaries, malt-houses, hay, barley, wheat or
peas ricks, &c.; or a place where cheese and butter is preserved and
stored up.

*Diseases*.--The worms, wind, cholic; all obstructions and croaking of
the bowels, infirmities in the testicles, any disease in the belly.

Countries ruled by ♍.--Turkey in Europe and Asia, Switzerland,
Mesopotamia, or Diarbed; all the country between

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

the Tigris and the Euphrates, the land of the Turcomans, &c., and the
West Indies.--*Towns*: Paris, Lyons, Toulouse, St. Etienne, Basil,
Heidelburg, Reading; also Jerusalem, Candia, Lower Silesia, Croatia or
Liburnia, Babylon or Bagdat, Thessaly, Corinth, and the Morea. Also the
trade and government of Liverpool, which are ruled especially by the 9th
degree.

*Shape and Form*.--A slender body, rather tall, but well composed; a
ruddy, brown complexion; black hair, <span id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46.md)
well favoured or lovely, but not a beautiful creature; a small, shrill
voice, all members inclining to brevity; <span
id="fr_47"></span>[2](#fn_47.md) a witty, discreet soul, judicious, and
exceedingly well spoken; studious, and given to history, whether man or
woman. It produces a rare understanding, if ☿ be in this sign, and ☽ in
♋; but somewhat unstable.

#### LIBRA.

*Nature and Property o*f ♎.--This sign is hot and moist, sanguine,
masculine, moveable, equinoctial, cardinal, humane, diurnal: of the airy
triplicity, and western; the chief house of ♀.

*Diseases*.--All diseases, (or the stone and gravel) in the reins of the
back and kidneys; heats and diseases in the loins or haunches;
imposthumes or ulcers in the reins, kidneys, or bladder; weakness in the
back, corruption of blood.

*Places*.--In the fields it represents ground near windmills, or some
straggling barn or outhouse, or sawpits, or where coopers work, or wood
is cut, sides of hills, tops of mountains, trees, grounds where hawking
and hunting is used; sandy and gravel fields; pure clear air, and sharp;
the upper

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

rooms in houses, chambers, garrets, one chamber within an-other; tops of
chests of drawers, wardrobes, &c.

*Shape and Form*.--It personates a well-framed body, straight, tall, and
more subtle or slender than gross; a round, lovely, and beautiful
visage; a pure sanguine colour; in youth, no abundance or excess in
either red or white; but in age, pimples, or a very high colour; the
hair yellowish, smooth, and long, eyes generally blue, and temper even.

*Countries ruled by* ♎.--China, Japan, parts of India near them;
Austria, Usbeck in Persia, towards India; Upper Egypt, Livonia, the
vicinity of the Caspian Sea.--*Towns*: Lisbon, Vienna, Antwerp,
Francfort, Spires, Fribourg, Charlestown in America, and its vicinity.

#### SCORPIO.

*Nature and Property of* ♏.--It is a cold, watery, nocturnal,
phlegmatic, northern, feminine sign; of the watery triplicity; the house
and joy of Mars; usually it represents subtle, deceitful men.

*Diseases*.--Gravel, the stone in the secret parts or bladder; ruptures,
fistulas, or the piles; priapisms, all afflictions in the private parts,
either of men or women; defects in the matrix, and its diseases;
injuries, &c. to the spermatic cord, the groin, &c.

*Places*.--Places where all kinds of creeping beasts use, as beetles,
&c.; or such as be without wings and are poisonous; gardens, vineyards,
orchards, ruinous houses near waters; muddy, moorish grounds; stagnant
lakes, quagmires, ponds, sinks, the kitchen or larder, washhouse, &c.

*Form and Description*.--A corpulent, strong, able body, somewhat a
broad or square face; a dusky, muddy complexion, and sad dark hair, much
and crisping; a hairy body, somewhat bow-legged, short-necked; a squat,
well-trussed fellow.

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

*Countries ruled by* ♏--Barbary, Morocco, Norway, Valet the Catalonia,
Bavaria, and the ancient Cappadocia.--*Towns*: Francfort on the Oder,
Messina, Ghent, Liverpool, which is especially ruled by the 19th degree.

#### SAGITTARY.

*Quality and Nature of* ♐ .--It is of the fiery triplicity, east; in
nature hot, dry, masculine, choleric; diurnal, common, bicorporal or
double body, the house and joy of ♃.

*Diseases*.--It rules the thighs and buttocks, and all fistulous tumours
or hurts falling in those members; and generally denotes heated blood,
fevers, pestilence, falls from horses, or hurts from them or four-footed
beasts; also prejudice by fire, heat, and intemperateness in sports.

*Places*.--A stable for war-horses, or a house where great four-footed
beasts are usually kept; it represents in the fields, hills, and the
highest land; also grounds that rise a little above the rest. In houses,
upper rooms and places near the fire.

*Shape and Form of Body*.--It represents a well-favoured countenance,
somewhat long visage, but full and ruddy, or almost like sunburnt, the
hair light chestnut colour, the stature somewhat above the middle size,
a conformity in the members, and a strong, able body; inclined to
baldness, and one fond of horses.

Countries ruled by ♐.--Arabia Felix, Spain, Hungary, parts of France
near Cape Finisterre, Dalmatia, Istria, Tuscany, Moravia,
Sclavonia.--*Towns*: Cologne, Buda, Avignon, Narbonne, Toledo.

#### CAPRICORN.

*Quality and Nature of* ♑.--It is the house of Saturn, and is nocturnal,
cold, dry, melancholy, earthy, feminine, cardinal, moveable.
four-footed, southern: the exaltation of ♂.

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

*Diseases*.--It has government of the knees, and all diseases incident
to those places, either by strains or fractures; it denotes leprosy,
itch, and cutaneous complaints.

*Places*.--It shows an ox-house or cow-house, or where calves are kept,
or tools for husbandry, or old wood is laid up, or where sails for ships
and such materials are stored; also sheep-pens, and grounds where sheep
feed;, fallow grounds, barren fields, bushy and thorny; dunghills in
fields, or where soil is laid in low houses; dark places, near the
ground or threshold.

*Corporature*.--Usually dry bodies, not high of stature, long, lean, and
slender visage; thin beard, and black hair, a narrow chin, long small
neck, and narrow chest. I have found many times, ♑ ascending, the party
to have white hair, but in the seventh ever black. <span
id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48.md)

Countries ruled by ♑.--India, Greece, parts of Persia about Circan,
Macran, and Chorassan; Lithuania, Saxony, Albania, Bulgaria, Stiria,
Mexico, and parts about the Isthmus of Darien, Santa Martha, Popayan,
Pasta, &c.--*Towns*: Mecklenburgh, Hesse, Oxford; and also the Orkney
Islands.

#### AQUARIUS.

*Nature and Property of* ♒.--This is an airy, hot, and moist sign;
diurnal, sanguine, fixed, humane, masculine, the principal house of ♄;
western.

*Sickness*.--It governs the legs, ancles, and all manner of infirmities
incident to those members; spasmodic and nervous diseases, cramps, wind,
&c.

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

*Places*.--Hilly and uneven places; spots newly dug or ploughed, or
where quarries of stone are, or any minerals have been dug up; in
houses, the roofs, eaves or upper parts; vineyards, or near some little
spring or conduit head.

*Shape and form*.--It represents a squat, thick corporature, or one of a
strong, plump, well-composed body, not tall: a long visage, sanguine
complexion; if ♄, who is lord of this house, be in ♑ or ♒, the party is
black in hair, and in complexion sanguine, with prominent teeth;
otherwise I have observed the party is of clear, white, or fair
complexion, and of sandy-coloured hair, or very flaxen, and a very pure
skin. <span id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49.md)

*Countries ruled by* ♒.--Arabia the stony, Russia, Tartary, Prussia,
parts of Poland, Lithuania and Muscovy, Lower Sweden,
Westphalia.--*Towns*: Hamburgh, Bremen, Piedmont; also Affghaunistan,
and other parts of Asia bordering on Persia; and this sign has rule over
the affairs of state in England, especially the 13th degree. <span
id="fr_50"></span>[2](#fn_50.md)

#### PISCES.

*Property and Quality of* ♓.--This is a northern, cold sign, fruitful,
phlegmatic, feminine, watery; the house of ♃ and exaltation of ♀; a
bicorporeal, common or double-bodied sign; an idle, effeminate, sickly
sign, or representing a party of no action.

*Sickness*.--All diseases in the feet, as the gout; and all lameness and
pains incident to those members, mucous discharges, itch, blotches,
breakings out; boils and ulcers proceeding

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

from corrupt blood; colds and moist diseases, and bowel complaints
caused by wet feet.

*Places*.--It represents grounds full of water, or where many springs
and many fowl are: also fish-ponds, or rivers full of fish; places where
hermitages have been, moats about houses, water-mills. In houses, places
near the water, as some well or pump, or where water stands. <span
id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51.md)

*Corporature*.--A short stature, not very well made; a good large face,
pale complexion, the body fleshy or swelling, not very straight, but
incurvating, or stooping somewhat with the head. <span
id="fr_52"></span>[2](#fn_52.md)

*Countries ruled by* ♓.--Portugal, Calabria, Normandy, Galicia in Spain,
Cilicia.--*Towns*: Alexandria, Ratisbon, Worms, Seville, Compostella,
Tiverton.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_43"></span>[59:1](aia18.htm#fr_43.md) In all cases, I think
the hair will be found to be of the colour given by the planet near to
or aspecting closely the degree ascending, or on the cusp of the house
which signifies the party. I find that ♊ more frequently gives brown
hair in questions.--ZAD.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[60:1](aia18.htm#fr_44.md) There is little doubt
that this disease took its name from the astrological fact, that the
sign ♋ rules the breast, in which it generally occurs. Persons born with
this sign ascending have always some defect, scar, mark, or disease in
the breast.--ZAD.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[60:2](aia18.htm#fr_45.md) This term signifies,
that if a person be born under or signified by this sign, or if they
have ☽ therein, and at all afflicted by the malefics, they will have
less of humane feelings than when under any other sign, except the last
half of ♐. They do not sympathize with other persons' sufferings, or
feel compassion.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[62:1](aia18.htm#fr_46.md) The early part of the
sign gives brown hair.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[62:2](aia18.htm#fr_47.md) If ♅ ascend therein, the
limbs will be long and the body taller.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[65:1](aia18.htm#fr_48.md) This remark of the
author confirms our previous opinion, that the colour of the hair in
questions depends on the ruler of the term ascending: in nativities, or
the planets aspecting the ascendant, as well as the sign ascending.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[66:1](aia18.htm#fr_49.md) The Princess Charlotte
of Wales was born with this sign ascending; it gives more beauty than
any other sign except ♎.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[66:2](aia18.htm#fr_50.md) Eclipses in m cause
great innovations in the state in England: comets plunge the nation into
war. The greatest changes have occurred in the laws while ♅ has been in
♒.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[67:1](aia18.htm#fr_51.md) This sign denotes
standing water, as ♋ does running water.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[67:2](aia18.htm#fr_52.md) I have generally found
persons born under this sign have a very delicate skin, and often a
white chalky appearance, and flabby.--ZAD.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. Teaching What Use May Be Made of the Former
Discourse of the Twelve Signs](aia19.md)
