[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aia12)  [Next](aia14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER X.

### OF MERCURY, AND HIS SIGNIFICATION, NATURE, AND PROPERTY.

MERCURY is the least of all the planets, never distant from the Sun
above 28 degrees; by which reason he is seldom visible to our sight.

*Colour and Motion*.--He is of a dusky silver colour; his mean motion is
59 minutes and 8 seconds, but he is sometimes so swift, that he moves
above 1 degree and 40 minutes in one day. He is stationary one day,
retrograde twenty-four days. His year is 87 days and 23 hours.

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

*Latitude*.--His greatest south latitude is 3 degrees 35 minutes,
greatest north latitude 3 degrees 33 minutes.

*Nature*.--We may not call him either masculine or feminine, for he is
either the one or the other as joined to any planet; for if in ☌ with a
masculine planet, he becomes masculine: <span
id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33.md) if with a feminine, then feminine; but of
his own nature he is cold and dry, and therefore melancholy: with the
good he is good, with the evil planets, ill; he is author of subtlety,
tricks, devices, perjury, &c.

*Manners when well dignified*.--Being well dignified, he represents a
man of a subtle and political brain and intellect, an excellent
disputant or logician, arguing with learning and discretion, and using
much eloquence in his speech; a searcher into all kinds of mysteries and
learning, sharp and witty, learning almost any thing without a teacher;
ambitious of being exquisite in every science, desirous naturally to
travel and see foreign parts; a man of an unwearied fancy, curious in
the search of any occult knowledge, able by his own genius to produce
wonders, given to divination and the more secret knowledge. If he turn
merchant, no man exceeds him in way of trade, or invention of new ways
whereby to obtain wealth.

*Manners when ill dignified*.--A troublesome wit, a kind of phrenetic
man, his tongue and pen against every man; wholly bent to fool his
estate and time in loquacity and trying nice conclusions to no purpose,
a great liar, boaster, prattler, busybody; false; a tale-carrier,
addicted to wicked arts, as necromancy, and such like ungodly
knowledges; easy of belief, an ass or very idiot, constant in no place
or opinion, cheating and thieving everywhere; a newsmonger, pretending
all manner of knowledge, but void of true or solid learning;

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

a trifler, a mere frantic fellow; if he prove a divine, then a mere
verbal fellow, frothy, of no judgment, easily perverted, constant in
nothing but idle words and bragging.

Corporature.--Generally he denotes one of an high stature, and straight,
thin, spare body; a high forehead, and somewhat narrow long face, long
nose, fair eyes, neither perfectly black nor grey, thin lips and nose,
little hair on the chin, but much on his head, and of a sad brown
inclining to blackness; long arms, fingers, and hands; his complexion
like an olive or chesnut colour. You must observe ☿ more than all the
planets; for having any aspect to a planet, he partakes more of the
influence of that planet than any other does; if with ♄, then heavy;
with ♃, more temperate; with ♂, more rash; with ☉, more genteel; with ♀,
more jesting; with ☽, more changeable.

*Oriental*.--When he is oriental, his complexion is honey-colour, or
like one sunburnt; in the stature of his body not very high, but well
jointed; small eyes, not much hair; in very truth, according to the
height of body, very well composed, but still a defect in the
complexion, swarthy brown, and in the tongue all for his own interest.

*Occidental*.--When occidental, a tawny visage, lank body, small slender
limbs, hollow eyes, either sparkling, red or fiery; the whole frame of
body inclining to dryness.

*Quality of Men and Professions*.--He generally signifies all literary
men, philosophers, mathematicians, astrologians, <span
id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34.md) merchants, secretaries, writers,
sculptors, poets, orators, advocates, schoolmasters, stationers,
printers, exchangers of money, attorneys, ambassadors, commissioners,
clerks, artificers, generally accomptants, solicitors; sometimes
thieves, prattling ministers, busy secretaries, and they unlearned;
grammarians, tailors, carriers, messengers, footmen, usurers.

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

*Sickness*.--All vertigos, lethargies, or giddiness in the head;
madness, either lightness or any disease of the brain; phthisic; all
stammering and imperfection in the tongue, vain and fond imaginations,
all defects in the memory, hoarseness, dry coughs, too great abundance
of spittle, all snaffling and snuffling in the head or nose; the hand
and feet gout, dumbness, foul or diseased tongue; all evils in the fancy
and intellectual parts.

*Orb*.--His orb is 7 degrees.

*Years*.--His greatest years are 450, his greater 76, his mean 48, his
little or least 20.

Countries.--He has Grecia, Flanders, Egypt. Of towns, Paris.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_33"></span>[48:1](aia13.htm#fr_33.md) This applies to aspects
also; but, of course, only in horary questions.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[49:1](aia13.htm#fr_34.md) This more especially if
with or in good aspect to *Herschel*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. Of the Moon, her Properties and
Significations](aia14.md)
