[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aia09)  [Next](aia11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VII.

### OF THE PLANET MARS, AND HIS SEVERAL SIGNIFICATIONS.

MARS does in order succeed Jupiter, is less in body, and appears to our
sight of a shining, fiery, sparkling colour: he finishes his course in
the zodiac in 1 year, 321 days, and 22 hours: his greatest latitude
north is about 4° 31'; his south, 6° 47'; and is retrograde 80 days;
stationary two or three. He governs wholly the watery triplicity, viz.
♋, ♏, and ♓.

*Nature*.--He is a masculine, nocturnal planet, in nature hot and dry,
choleric and fiery; the lesser infortune, author of quarrels, strifes,
and contentions.

*Manners when well dignified*.--In feats of war and courage invincible,
scorning that any should exceed him; subject to no reason, bold,
confident, immoveable, contentious, challenging all honour to
themselves; valiant, lovers of war and things pertaining thereto,
hazarding himself in all perils, unwilling to obey or submit to anybody;
a boaster of his own acts; one that slights all things in comparison of
victory, and yet of prudent behaviour in his own affairs.

*When ill dignified*.--Then he is a prattler, without modesty or
honesty; a lover of slaughter and quarrels, murder, thievery, a promoter
of sedition, frays, and commotions; an highway thief, as wavering as the
wind, a traitor, of turbulent spirit, perjured, obscene, rash, inhuman,
neither fearing God nor

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

caring for man; unthankful, treacherous; oppressors, ravenous, cheaters,
furious, and violent. <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25)

*Corporature*.--Generally martialists have this form; they are but of
middle stature, their bodies strong, and their bones large, rather lean
than fat; their complexion of a brown, ruddy colour, their visage round,
their hair red or sandy, and many times crisping or curling; sharp,
hazel, piercing eyes; a bold confident countenance; and they are active
and fearless.

*Oriental*.--He signifies valiant men; some white mixed with their
redness, inclined to be tall, and of a hairy body.

*Occidental*.--Very ruddy complexion, but low stature, little head,
smooth body, and not hairy; yellow hair, stiff, and the natural humours
generally more dry.

*Qualities of Men and their Professions*.--Generals of armies, colonels,
captains, or any soldiers having command in armies; all manner of
soldiers, physicians, apothecaries, surgeons, chemists, gunners,
butchers, marshals, sergeants, bailiffs, hangmen, thieves, smiths,
bakers, armourers, watchmakers, tailors, cutlers of swords and knives,
barbers, dyers, cooks, carpenters, gamesters, bear-wards, tanners, and
curriers, according as ♂ may be strong or weak.

*Diseases*.--The gall, tertian fevers, pestilent burning fevers,
meagrims in the head,, carbuncles, the plague, and all plague sores,
burnings, ringworms, blisters, phrensies, mad sudden distempers in the
head, yellow jaundice, bloody flux, fistulas; all wounds and diseases in
men's genitals, the stone both in the reins and bladder, scars or
smallpox in the face. <span id="fr_26"></span>[2](#fn_26)

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

Mars causes all hurts by iron, the shingles, and such other diseases as
arise by too much choler, anger, or passion.

*Places*.--Smiths' shops, furnaces, slaughter-houses, places where
bricks or charcoal are burned, or have been burned; chimneys, and
forges. <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27)

His orb is only seven degrees.

*Years*.--In man he governs the flourishing time of youth, and from 41
to 56; his greatest year is 264; greater 66, lower 40, and least 15.

*Countries*.--Saromatia, Lombardy, Batavia, Ferraria, Gothland.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_25"></span>[41:1](aia10.htm#fr_25) These extremely evil
qualities obtain only when the ☽ and ☿ are also very much afflicted.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[41:2](aia10.htm#fr_26) ♂ coming to ill aspect
of the ascendant by direction early in nativities generally causes
either smallpox, measles, or scarlet fever; but if the nativity denote
it, he may give hurts, wounds, fevers, &c.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[42:1](aia10.htm#fr_27) To this may be added,
cutlers' shops, and places where iron is manufactured in any manner,
armouries, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Of the Sun, His General and Particular
Significations](aia11)
