[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aia18)  [Next](aia20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XVI.

### TEACHING WHAT USE MAY BE MADE OF THE FORMER DISCOURSE OF THE TWELVE SIGNS.

IF one demand of the artist, what condition, quality, or stature the
person inquired of is, then observe the sign of that house whereby he is
signified, and the planet in it, the sign wherein the lord of that house
is, and wherein the Moon is; mix one with another, and by the greater
testimonies judge; for if the sign be humane, viz. ♊, ♍, ♒, or the first
half of ♐ that ascends, and the lord of that sign, or the ☽ in any sign
of the same nature, you may judge the body to be handsome, and the
conditions of the party to be sociable, or very courteous,

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

\[paragraph continues\] &c. If the query be concerning a disease, and ♈
be either on the cusp of the ascendant or descending in the sixth house,
you may judge he has something in his disease of the nature of ♈, but
what it is, you must know by the concurrence of the other significators.

If a person has lost or missed any cattle, or any material thing, let
him observe what sign the significator of the thing is in; if in ♈ and
it be a beast strayed, or the like, let him see what manner of places
that sign directs into, and let him repair thither to search,
considering the quarter of heaven the sign signifies; if it be a piece
of goods that without hands cannot be removed, then let him look into
such parts of or about his house, as ♈ signifies.

If one asks concerning travel, whether such a country, city, or kingdom
will be healthful or prosperous unto him, see in the figure what sign
the lord of the ascendant is in: if the significator be fortunate in ♈,
or if ♃ or ♀ be therein, he may safely travel or sojourn in such cities
or countries as the sign ♈ represents; which you may easily perceive in
the above-named catalogue. Those countries subject to the sign wherein
the infortunes are posited, unless they themselves be significators, are
ever unfortunate. Remember, that a gentleman inquires, usually, if he
shall have his health and live jocundly in such or such a country or
city; the merchant wholly aims at trade, and the increase of his stock;
therefore, in the merchant's figure, you must consider the country or
city subject to the sign of the second house, or where the part of
fortune, or lord of the second house is, and which is most fortified,
and thither let him trade. <span id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_53)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_53"></span>[68:1](aia19.htm#fr_53) This implies, that you
must judge by the sign on the house which rules the particular subject
of inquiry; as if it be, where he may gain a good wife, look to the
seventh house.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII. Of the Essential Dignities of the Planets](aia20)
