[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aia21)  [Next](aia23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

### CHAPTER XIX.

### CONSIDERATIONS BEFORE JUDGMENT.

ALL the ancients that have written of questions do give warning to the
astrologer, that before he delivers judgment he well consider whether
the figure is radical <span id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55.md) and capable of
judgment: the question then shall not be taken for radical: 1st, when
either the first or second degrees of a sign ascend, (especially in
signs of short ascensions, viz., ♑, ♒, ♓, ♈, ♉, ♊). You may not then
adventure judgment, unless the querent be very young, and his
corporature, complexion, and moles or scars of his body, agree with the
quality of the signs ascending. 2d. If 27 or more degrees of any sign
ascend, it is not safe to give judgment, except the querent be in years
corresponding to the number of degrees ascending, or unless the figure
be set upon a time certain, viz. any event happening, such as a man went
away or fled at such a time precisely; to learn the result: here you may
judge, because it is no propounded question. 3d. It is not safe to judge
when the ☽ is in the later degrees of a sign, especially in ♊, ♏, or ♑;
or, as some say, when she is in *via combusta*, which is, when she is in
the last 15 degrees of ♎ or the first 15 degrees of ♏.

All manner of matters go hardly on (except the principal significators
be very strong) when the ☽ is void of course; yet sometimes she performs
it void of course, if in ♉, ♋, ♐, or ♓. You must also be wary, when in
any *question propounded* you find the cusp of the seventh house
afflicted, or

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

the lord of the house retrograde or impedited, and the matter at that
time not concerning the seventh house, but belonging to any other house:
it is an argument that the judgment of the astrologer will give little
content, or nothing please the querent, for the seventh house generally
has signification of the artist. The Arabians, as Alkindus and others,
do deliver the following rules, as very fit to be considered before a
question be judged:--viz. if ♄ be in the ascendant, especially
retrograde, the matter of that question seldom or never comes to good: ♄
in the seventh either corrupts the judgment of' the astrologer, or is a
sign the matter propounded will come from one misfortune to another. If
the lord of the ascendant be combust, neither question propounded will
take, nor the querent be regulated. The lord of the seventh unfortunate,
or in his fall, or terms of the infortunes, the artist shall scarce give
a solid judgment.

When the testimonies of fortunes and infortunes are equal, defer
judgment: it is not possible to know which way the balance will turn;
however, defer your opinion till another question better inform you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_55"></span>[74:1](aia22.htm#fr_55.md) This term signifies,
like the *radix* or root, the figure of birth; for when a person asks
his first question of an astrologer, it will generally be found that the
same sign, and often the same degree, will ascend that ascended at his
birth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX. What Significator, Querent, and Quesited, are; and an
Introduction to the Judgment of a Question.](aia23.md)
