[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aia35)  [Next](aia37.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

### CHAPTER XXXIII

### THE TENTH HOUSE AND ITS QUESTIONS.--VIZ. OFFICE, DIGNITY, PREFERMENT, GOVERNMENT, TRADE, OR PROFESSION, &c.

THE usual significators are for the querent; and the 10th house, its
lord, and the ☉, for the place, preferment, &c., inquired after.

If the lord of the ascendant or ☽ be both joined by good aspect to the
☉, or by ☌ or good aspect to the lord of the 10th, and this planet
behold the 10th, or be therein, the querent shall gain the thing sought
for, if he use proper endeavours.

Or if none of the significators be joined to the lord of the 10th, yet
if the lord of the ascendant or ☽ be in the 10th, unafflicted, he shall
gain it; and also, if the lord of the 10th be in the ascendant; and very
easily, if the two lords be going to a good aspect.

The lord of the 10th joined to ♃ or ♀, and in the ascendant, he gains
the office, &c., easily; if joined to ♄ or ♂, and either of them in the
ascendant, but well dignified, it will be gained, but with difficulty.

The lord of the 10th receiving ☽, or the lord of the 1st, denotes
success. And if there be translation of light from the lord of the
ascendant to the lord of the 10th, it denotes that it will be gained by
means of such a person as the planet translating the light describes.

If the lord of the ascendant apply to ☌ of the lord of the 10th, and
there happen no previous abscission by any other planet before the ☌ be
complete, the querent will gain his desire, but he must labour hard for
it.

If any planet be in ✶ or △ to the lord of the 10th, or the

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

\[paragraph continues\] ☉, let the querent make application to such
persons as they describe; for they may greatly befriend the querent by
means of their influence.

If the promising planet in any case be in an angle, the matter will be
readily completed; if in a succeedent, but slowly; and if in a cadent,
the affair goes backward at times; but may, at last, be performed, if
the planet be otherwise well dignified.

If an evil planet behold ☽ or the ascendant by ☐ or ☍, without reception
mutual, he hinders the querent by means of that person who is to solicit
the cause, &c. for him.

The best sign of all is, when the two lords be joined together, and the
☽ separate from the lord of the 10th, and apply to the lord of the
ascendant; but it she apply to either, it is good.

If the lord of the ascendant apply to good aspect of the lord of the
4th, it denotes success; but if the lord of the 4th be joined also to
the lord of the 10th, the matter shall be effected, but only after much
delay and vexation.

*Whether a Person shall remain in the Office he holds, or not*?

Observe whether the lords of the 1st and 10th be in ☌, or any aspect;
and note whether the more ponderous planet of the two be in any angle
but the 4th; if so, he shall not be removed. But if the heavy planet be
in the 4th, or approaching it from the 5th, he will leave his office.
Yet, if there be reception between the two lords, he shall recover it
again; and if the reception be mutual, he returns speedily, and with
more honour than before.

You may judge the same if the lord of the ascendant be joined to a
planet in the 3d or 9th, or to their lords, and

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

after separation be joined to a planet in any angle, except the 4th.

But if the two lords (of the 1st and 10th) separate from each other,
then he returns no more to his office, but loses it entirely.

If the lord of the ascendant, or 10th, or the ☽, are disposed of by any
planet in an angle, (except the 4th), and that planet be slow in motion,
he shall not be removed until that planet. be combust or retrograde, or
leave the sign he is in; but much about that time he will be removed,
unless some powerful aspects intervene.

If the ☽ be joined to the lord of the 10th, and he in the 10th, the
officer or governor, &c., shall not be removed.

If the lord of the ascendant, or ☽, be joined to the lord of the 10th,
and he more weighty than either of them, and in the 10th, 11th, or 5th
houses, free from impediment, though he behold not the 10th, the officer
shall be transferred to some other place or office; but if he behold the
10th, he shall remain where he is.

If the ☽ be joined to any planet not in his essential dignities, though
with reception, (unless it be ♃ or ♀ by ✶ or △), the querent shall leave
his employment, office, &c. If either the lord of the 4th, or ☽, be in
the 4th, and ♈, ♋, ♎ or ♑, be on its cusp, he will leave it; and this is
more certain if ☽ be then joined to the lord of the 4th, and he
peregrine. The same may be feared if ☽ be in ♑, and afflicted, or if she
be void of course, and the lord of the ascendant be afflicted.

*Whether a King expelled his Kingdom, or an Officer having lost his
Place, shall be restored*?

The ascendant and its lord are for the querent, be he king, duke, or
gentleman, &c. Observe, that if the lord of the 1st

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

be in ☌ with the lord of the 10th, and the more ponderous planet behold
the 10th house, then the king or ruler, &c. shall be restored.

If the planet do not behold the 10th house, observe whether ☽ be joined
to any planet in the ascendant, or 10th, which also will denote his
restoration. If ☽ be in ♈, ♋, ♎, or ♑, he returns the sooner. If the
lord of the 10th be joined to a planet in the 10th, or the ☉, (but not
by ☌ to ☉), it denotes the same. The lord of the 10th a lighter planet
than the lord of the 4th, and separated from him, argues the same.

If the lord of the 10th be lighter than the lord of the ascendant, and
be joined to him, he shall return to his office, &c. So also, if ☽ be
joined to the lord of the 10th, and behold the 10th house, unless
disposed of by a peregrine planet under the earth.

The lord of the 1st aspected and received by a planet not afflicted, he
returns; if not received, he will not.

The ☽ joined to a planet in the 9th, (it not being a fortune), shews
that the king, &c. recedes from his kingdom, &c. If it be a fortune, and
in ♈, ♉, ♋, ♌, ♎, cp, aq, he will return; and if it be in ♊, ♍, ♐, or
pi, he obtains office, power, &c. in another place.

The lord of the 10th, or ☽, being afflicted by ☌ of an infortune in any
angle, the king, &c. shall never be restored. <span
id="fr_122"></span>[1](#fn_121.md)

*Of the Profession, Trade, or Employment of which any one is capable*.

Consider the lords of the ascendant and 10th, and the

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

cusps of those houses, the, and ☽, also the places of ♂ and ♀; for these
two planets are the significators of trade or employment. Observe which
of the two (♂ or ♀) is the most powerful, and note the sign he may be
in; also consider the four angles, and any planet in them. If they be in
fiery signs, or the majority of them, (viz. ♂, ♀, the planet in an
angle, and the cusps of angles, especially the 10th), and ♂ have any
dignity in the place of the lord of the 10th, or the ☉, say the querent
will make a good tradesman, &c. in any business where *fire* is used, or
of its nature; and if the lord of the 10th be in his exaltation, he will
do well in serving the king, or any high nobleman, &c.

If the significator of the employment, (usually the lord of the 10th, or
a planet, especially ♂ or ♀, in the 10th, near the cusp), be in ♈,
*weak*, he will make a good cattle-dealer, groom, farrier, grazier, &c.;
if *strong*, a coachmaker, veterinary surgeon, &c., where he has to do
with horses or great cattle, in a respectable way.

If the significator be in ♉, then husbandry will best suit him; or
gardening, corn-dealing, grazing, &c.; or if ♀ be the significator, such
things as appertain to women's affairs, a soap-boiler, fuller of cloth,
scourer, &c.

If the significator be in ♊, he will make a writer, clerk, bailiff, &c.,
or a surveyor, painter, astronomer, astrologer, geometer, schoolmaster,
&c.

If he be in ♋, he will be fitted for a variety of occupations; but he
will be likely to go to sea, or to deal in liquids, such as wines, beer,
&c.; and he will be fond of political distinction.

If he be in ♌, he will make a good horse-jockey or coach-man; a smith,
watchmaker, glassblower, huntsman, or cow-doctor; or to do with any
trade which uses fire.

If in ♍, he will make a good secretary to a person in

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

power, a schoolmaster, accountant, stationer, printer; he will be an
excellent politician, or be a good astrologer, &c.

If in ♎, he will be a good poet or orator; singer, or musician; silkman,
or linendraper, &c.

If in ♏, he may prove a good surgeon, apothecary, or physician; or a
brazier, founder, brewer, vintner, waterman, of master.

If in ♐, he will do very well to make a clergyman, to study chemistry,
to buy and sell cattle, or to be a cook or butcher.

If he be in ♑, he will prove a good chandler, victualler, farrier,
farmer, dealer in wool, lead, or farming commodities.

If he be in ♒, he will make an excellent ship-carpenter; and if any
planet aspect him out of a watery sign, he may prove a good sailor or
ship-master, or a painter and ornamenter of ships, or a merchant.

If he be in ♓, he makes a good jester, singer, player, &c., or brewer,
or fishmonger; but generally the genius is dull, and the party given to
sottishness.

As fiery signs shew workers at the fire, whether gold-smiths, &c., or
bakers, &c., so earthy signs shew occupations connected with the earth,
as potters, ditchers, brick-makers, gardeners, &c.; airy signs import
singers, game-keepers, actors, &c.; and watery, sailors, fishermen,
water-men, laundresses waiters in taverns, &c.

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

<span id="img_fig28"></span>

[![&lt;i&gt;Fig&lt;/i&gt;. 28.](tn/fig28.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig28.jpg.md)  
*Fig*. 28.  

JUDGMENT ON THE ABOVE FIGURE.

The ascendant and ♀ are for the querent, the 10th house for the office
or preferment he expected.

Finding ☽ strong in the 10th, was one argument that he should succeed.
In the next place ☽, applied to △ of ♄, who has exaltation in the
ascendant, and who receives ♀ by house, and is received by her again by
exaltation. The ☽ applying to △ of the lord of the 4th (♄), argued that
in the *end* he should obtain the office; but as ☉ was in the 7th

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

in ☍ to the ascendant, with ☋, and was lord of the 11th, I judged that
he employed as a friend a *solar* man, who was false, and did rather
envy than feel friendly to him. I concluded, that with some difficulty
he would obtain the office, notwithstanding the opposition a pretended
friend offered; and so it came to pass within three weeks, and he then
discovered that his friend was false; who had a great scar in his face,
his hair of a blackish colour, shewn by ☉ being so near ☋. The
separation of ☽ from ☐ of ☿, argued that he had delivered many petitions
about it, hitherto without any success.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_121"></span>[272:1](aia36.htm#fr_122.md) This rule will answer
the question of the re-election of any Member of Parliament for any
place he has formerly represented; as well as the restoration of any
minister, &c. to power, or the return of any individual to any office or
employment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIV. Of the Eleventh House, and its Questions, viz. of
Friends, Hopes, Property of the King, &c.](aia37.md)
