[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aia43)  [Next](aia45.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

### THE EFFECTS OF THE ☐ OR ☍ ASPECTS BETWEEN THE SIGNIFICATORS

♄ ☐ *or* ☍ ♃

If ♄ be significator, it shews much trouble by lawyers or the clergy,

If ♃ be significator, he is always wretched and miserable idle,
unfortunate, and beggarly.

♄ ☐ *or* ☍ ♂

If ♄ be significator, it is the aspect of cruelty and murder, and the
person so signified is extremely unfortunate; he generally lives a most
dejected life, and dies a violent death.

If ♂ be significator, the person shewn by him is very malicious,
treacherous, and blood-thirsty; one delighting in the most evil deeds,
yet very cowardly, sly, and much addicted to suicide and secret revenge;
of a cruel complexion: in short, such a character as Don Miguel of
Portugal.

♄ ☐ *or* ☍ ☉

If ♄ be significator, it is the aspect of infamy and contempt; the
person is prodigal, ambitious, overbearing, hating control, very
disagreeable in his manners, extremely unfortunate, subject to the
frowns of persons in power, and often meets a violent death.

If ☉ be significator, the person is cowardly, spiteful, treacherous,
malicious, unfeeling, covetous, repining, always despising any thing of
kindness and humanity; one who generally leads a life of wretchedness,
and frequently meets with a bad end, and sometimes dies in prison.

♄ ☐ *or* ☍ ♀

If ♄ be significator, it shews dissipation, and the person leads a most
detestable life, connected with the lowest order

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

of prostitutes, by whom he is eventually brought to ruin and disgrace.

If ♀ be significator, the person is generally of an evil complexion, and
not very handsome; very sly, artful, full of mischief, and much addicted
to dissipation, though not suspected; mostly unfortunate.

♄ ☐ *or* ☍ ☿

If ♄ be significator, it indicates a thief, cheat, or swindler; a low,
cunning fellow, sly, envious, treacherous, and malicious, one who is
always planning some scheme to deceive his most intimate friends;
generally forming a bad opinion of every one, and not at all particular
as to speaking the truth.

If ☿ be significator, the person is very artful, always involved in
strife and contention, and much given to vilify the character of others,
by whom he is tormented with lawsuits; it also indicates pettifogging
attornies, who very seldom act honestly towards their clients.

♄ ☐ *or* ☍ ☽

If ♄ be significator, it shews a wandering, unsettled and changeable
person, not of a genteel form, but one who is down-looking, and inclined
to stoop forward; always very fretful, and appearing full of trouble;
not a good disposition, nor to be depended on. He seldom attains any
high situation, but, if he does, he soon falls into disgrace again.

If ☽ be significator, (*which in some measure she always is of the*
QUERENT), the person is extremely unfortunate, always in trouble with
the lower order of mankind, from whom he receives many injuries; he is
mean, cowardly, and very dejected; is rather unhealthy, seldom living a
long life, and generally dying a miserable death.

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

♃ ☐ *or* ☍ ♂

If ♃ be significator, it denotes violence, ingratitude, a furious
temper, and danger of death by malignant fevers.

If ♂ be significator, it shews pride, ingratitude, insolence, and the
hatred of the clergy on account of theological opinions.

♃ ☐ *or* ☍ ☉

If ♃ be significator, it gives arrogance, prodigality, and much vanity,
with a great desire to be distinguished, which is but very rarely
gratified.

If ☽ be significator, the person represented wastes his property by
riotous living and all kinds of extravagance.

♃ ☐ *or* ☍ ♀

If ♃ be significator, it shews extravagance, dissipation, and all kinds
of debauchery and intemperance.

If ♀ be significator, the person has many enemies among the clergy, and
the legal profession, magistrates, &c., and he is equally void of virtue
and prudence.

♃ ☐ *or* ☍ ☿

If ♃ be significator, it gives trouble, contention, perplexities,
lawsuits, and, in consequence, indigence.

If ☿ be significator, the person is frequently persecuted for his
singular religious opinions; his understanding is weak, and he is often
involved in strife and contention.

♃ ☐ *or* ☍ ☽

If ♃ be significator, it shews one of many words, though of poor
abilities; he is weak and foolish, and, if in a public capacity, is
execrated by the multitude.

If the ☽ he significator. he is injured by faithless friends

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

and deceitful relatives: and his property is impoverished by
hypocritical fanatics.

♂ ☐ *or* ☍ ☉

If ♂ be significator, it denotes a man of great ambition and violence;
but his fortune is too evil to allow him to succeed.

If the ☉ be significator, he is restrained by no principle of honour or
gratitude; his affairs are always deranged, and he makes use of the most
violent means to retrieve them. Such a one frequently becomes a footpad,
murderer, or house-weaker, and is either killed in some contest, or
falls a victim to the laws of his country.

♂ ☐ *or* ☍ ♀

If ♂ be significator, these aspects cause lust, excess, prodigality,
disease, and injury by loose women, and complete waste of fortune.

If ♀ be significator, he is very treacherous, mischievous, base, and
inconstant; or if it be a female, she is a prostitute, or very
shameless.

♂ ☐ *or* ☍ ☿

If ♂ be significator, it shews one of some ability, but his talents are
applied to the most dishonourable purposes.

If ☿ be significator, it denotes a thief or assassin; one whose most
solemn protestations are not to be believed; who will desert his
benefactors at their utmost need: he is violent, furious, contentious,
and despised by every one for his in-famous life.

♂ ☐ *or* ☍ ☽

If ♂ be significator, the querent described by him is a fit companion
for the lowest and most unprincipled of mankind; he is very unfortunate,
and is probably a wandering vagabond, who travels over the earth without
a friend or a home.

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

If ☽ be significator, he is excessively abusive, malicious, and
treacherous. He may travel into foreign countries as a sailor or
soldier, amidst innumerable dangers and hardships, and die by
pestilence, dysentery, or the sword.

☉ ☐ *or* ☍ ☽

If the ☉ be significator, the person suffers losses, trouble, and much
anxiety.

If ☽ be significator, he is obstinate and quarrelsome; he is exceedingly
ambitious and prodigal; and is sometimes marked in the face, or his eyes
are affected: the latter is especially the case if ☉ be afflicted by ♂,
or either ☉ or ☽ are with the *nebulous* stars.

♀ ☐ *or* ☍ ☽

If ♀ be significator, it shews a changeable, unsettled life, great
troubles in marriage, and much ill-fortune.

If the ☽ be significator, it shews a dissolute, extravagant life,
attended with indigence and poverty, and much trouble from females.

☿ ☐ *or* ☍ ☽

If ☿ significator, it no doubt gives some abilities, but such persons
are too unsettled to apply very closely to any subject; they are
continually shifting their situations, (especially if ☿ be in a moveable
sign), nor are they very sincere in their professions of friendship, nor
very scrupulous in the method by which they may attain their ends.

If ☽ be significator, they have a defect in their utterance, have but
little ability, except a kind of low cunning, which they apply to
dishonest purposes. But as ☿ is acted on by every planet having an
aspect to him, it will be necessary to observe each aspect, and allow
for its influence; for if ☿ have a △ of ♃, the ☐ of ☿ to ☽ will not be
near se evil, though

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

the person will be far from sensible, notwithstanding that they are
tolerably honest and well-meaning.

OBSERVATION.--The student must always remember, that the true character
and condition of the person signified can only be correctly learned by
noticing all the aspects the significator may receive, as well as
observing the nature of the sign and house it is in, and the degree of
strength or weakness it possesses, as well as those planets which aspect
it. Thus, if the significator be ♂, and he receive the ☍ of ☉, yet if ☉
be weak, and ♂ have also a △ of ♃, this benefic planet being strong, he
may judge that the querent will suffer by the evil influence of ☉, by
receiving a severe wound in a duel, or in honourable warfare; whereas
if, instead of the △ of ♃, the ☐ of ☿ occurred, there would be little
doubt that he would be killed by police officers, or die by the hand of
the public executioner--the latter especially. if ☉ was in the 10th
house.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: List of Fixed Stars Which may be Considered in Horary
Questions](aia45.md)
