[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Shinn](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wyw02)  [Next](wyw04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875166105/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Your Word is Your Wand*, by Florence Scovel Shinn, \[1928\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PROSPERITY

(See also *The Game of Life and How to Play I*t.)

Man comes into the world financed by God, with all that he desires or
requires already on his pathway.

This supply is released through faith and the *Spoken Word*.

"If thou canst believe, all things are possible."

For example: A woman came to me one day, to tell me of her experience in
using an affirmation she had read in my book, *The Game of Life and How
to Play It*.

She was without experience but desired a good position on the stage. She
took the affirmation: "Infinite Spirit, open the way for my great
abundance. I am an irresistible magnet for all that belongs to me by
Divine Right."

She was given a very important part in a successful opera.

She said: "It was a miracle, due to that affirmation, which I repeated
hundreds of times."

#### AFFIRMATIONS

I now draw from the abundance of the spheres my immediate and endless
supply.

All channels are free!

All doors are open!

———

I now release the gold-mine within me. I am linked with an endless
golden stream of prosperity which comes to me under grace in perfect
ways.

———

Goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life and I shall
dwell in the house of abundance forever.

———

My God is a God of plenty and I now receive all that I desire or
require, and more.

———

All that is mine by Divine Right is now released and reaches me in great
avalanches of abundance, under grace in miraculous ways.

———

My supply is endless, inexhaustible and immediate and comes to me under
grace in perfect ways.

———

All channels are free and all doors fly open for my immediate and
endless, Divinely Designed supply.

My ships come in over a calm sea, under grace in perfect ways.

———

I give thanks that the millions which are mine by Divine Right, now pour
in and pile up under grace in perfect ways.

———

Unexpected doors fly open, unexpected channels are free, and endless
avalanches of abundance are poured out upon me, under grace in perfect
ways.

———

I spend money under direct inspiration wisely and fearlessly, knowing my
supply is endless and immediate.

———

I am fearless in letting money go out, knowing God is my immediate and
endless supply.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Happiness](wyw04.md)
