[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Shinn](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wyw01)  [Next](wyw03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875166105/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Your Word is Your Wand*, by Florence Scovel Shinn, \[1928\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SUCCESS

There are certain words or pictures which impress the subconscious mind.

For example: A man called asking me to speak the word for his right
work.

I gave him the statement: "Behold I have set before thee the open door
of destiny and no man shall shut it!"

It didn't seem to make much impression, so I was inspired to add: "And
no man shall shut it for it is *nailed back!*"

The man was electrified and went out walking on air. Within a few weeks
he was called to a distant city to fill a wonderful position which came
about in a miraculous way.

I give another example of a woman who fearlessly followed a "hunch."

She was working for a small salary when she read my book, *The Game of
Life and How to Play It*. The thought came in a flash, to start in
business for herself and open a Tearoom and Candy Shop.

The idea staggered her at first, but it persisted, so she boldly went
forth and procured a shop and assistants.

She "spoke the word for supply," for she did not have money to back her
enterprise. It came in miraculous ways, and the shop opened!

From the first day it was filled with people, and now it is "crammed
jammed"; they stand in line and wait.

One day, being a holiday, her assistants became gloomy and said they
could not expect to do much business. My student, however, replied that
God was her supply and every day was a good day.

In the afternoon an old friend came in to see the shop and bought a two
pound box of candy. He gave her a check and when she looked at it she
found it was for a hundred dollars. So it was indeed a good day! One
hundred dollars for a box of candy!

She says every morning she enters the shop with wonder and gives thanks
that she had the fearless faith that wins!

#### AFFIRMATIONS

The decks are now cleared for Divine Action and my own comes to me under
grace in a magical way.

———

I now let go of worn-out conditions and worn-out things.

Divine order is established in my mind, body and affairs.

"Behold, I make all things new."

———

My seeming impossible good now comes to pass, the unexpected now
happens!

———

The "four winds of success" now blow to me my own.

From North, South, East and West comes my endless good.

———

The Christ in me is risen, I now fulfill my destiny.

———

Endless good now comes to me in endless ways.

———

I clap my cymbals and rejoice, for Jehovah goes before me making clear,
easy and successful my way!

———

I give thanks for my whirlwind success.

I sweep all before me for I work with the Spirit and follow the Divine
Plan of my life.

———

My Spiritual Sporting blood is up! I am more than equal to this
situation.

———

I am awake to my good, and gather in the harvest of endless
opportunities.

———

I am harmonious, poised and magnetic.

I now draw to myself *my own*. My power is God's power and is
irresistible!

———

Divine order is now established in my mind, body and affairs.

I see clearly and act quickly and my greatest expectations come to pass
in a miraculous way.

———

There is no competition on the Spiritual plane. What is rightfully mine
*is given me under grace*.

———

I have within me an undiscovered country, which is revealed to me now,
in the name of Jesus Christ.

———

Behold! I have set before thee the open door of Destiny and no man shall
shut it, for it is *nailed back*.

———

The tide of Destiny has turned and everything comes my way.

———

I banish the past and now live in the wonderful now, where happy
surprises come to me each day.

———

There are no lost opportunities in Divine Mind, as one door shut
*another door opened*.

———

I have a magical work in a magical way, I give magical service for
magical pay.

———

The genius within me is now released. I now fulfill my destiny.

———

I make friends with hindrances and every obstacle becomes a
stepping-stone. Every-thing in the Universe, visible and invisible, is
working to bring to me my own.

———

I give thanks that the walls of Jericho fall down and all lack,
limitation and failure are wiped out of my consciousness in the name of
Jesus Christ.

———

I am now on the royal road of Success, Happiness and Abundance, all the
traffic goes my way.

———

I will not weary of well-doing, for when I least expect it I shall reap.

———

Jehovah goes before me and the battle is won!

All enemy thoughts are wiped out.

I am victorious in the name of Jesus Christ.

———

There are no obstacles in Divine Mind, therefore, there is nothing to
obstruct my good.

———

All obstacles now vanish from my pathway.

Doors fly open, gates are lifted and I enter the Kingdom of fulfillment,
under grace.

———

Rhythm, harmony and balance are now established in my mind, body and
affairs.

———

New fields of Divine activity now open for me and these fields are white
with the harvest.

———

Man's will is powerless to interfere with God's will. God's will is now
done in my mind, body and affairs.

———

God's plan for me is permanent and cannot be budged.

I am true to my *heavenly vision*.

———

"The Divine Plan of my life now takes shape in definite, concrete
experiences leading to my heart's desire."

———

I now draw from the Universal Substance, with irresistible power and
determination, that which is mine by Divine Right.

———

I do not resist this situation. I put it in the hands of Infinite Love
and Wisdom. *Let the Divine idea now come to pass*.

———

My good now flows to me in a steady, unbroken, ever-increasing stream of
success, happiness and abundance.

———

There are no lost opportunities in the Kingdom.

As one door shuts another door opens.

———

"There is nothing to fear for there is no power to hurt."

I walk up to the lion on my pathway and find an angel in armor, and
victory in the name of Jesus Christ.

———

I am in perfect harmony with the working of the law. I stand aside and
let Infinite Intelligence make easy and successful my way.

———

The ground I am on is holy ground; The ground I am on is successful
ground.

———

New fields of Divine Activity now open for me.

Unexpected doors fly open, unexpected channels are free.

———

What God has done for others He can do for me and more!

———

I am as necessary to God as He is to me, for I *am* the channel to bring
*His plan to pass*.

———

I do not limit God by seeing limitation in myself. With God and myself
all things are possible.

———

Giving precedes receiving and my gifts to others precede God's gifts to
me.

———

Every man is a golden link in the chain of my good.

———

My poise is built upon a rock. I see clearly and act quickly.

———

God cannot fail, so I cannot fail. "The warrior within me" has already
won.

———

Thy Kingdom come in me, Thy will be done in me and my affairs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Prosperity](wyw03)
