[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Shinn](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wyw16)  [Next](wyw18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875166105/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Your Word is Your Wand*, by Florence Scovel Shinn, \[1928\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE DIVINE DESIGN

(*See also The Game of Life and How to Play It*.)

There is a Divine Design for each man!

Just as the perfect picture of the oak is in the acorn, the divine
pattern of his life is in the super-conscious mind of man.

In the Divine Design there is no limitation, only health, wealth, love
and perfect self-expression.

So on man's pathway there is always a Divine Selection. Each day he must
live according to the Divine Plan or have unhappy reactions.

For example: A woman moved into a new apartment which she had almost
furnished, when the thought came to her: "On that side of the room
should stand a Chinese cabinet!

Not long after, she was walking by an antique shop. She glanced in and
there stood a magnificent Chinese cabinet about eight feet high,
elaborately carved.

She entered and asked the price. The salesman said it was worth a
thousand dollars but the woman who owned it was willing to take less.
The man added: "What will you offer for it?" The woman paused and the
price "Two hundred dollars" came into her mind, so she answered: "Two
hundred dollars." The man said he would let her know if the offer were
satisfactory.

She did not want to cheat anyone or get anything which was not
rightfully hers, so going home she said repeatedly: "*If it's mine I
can't lose it and of it isn't mine, I don't want it*." It was a snowy
day and she said she emphasized her words by kicking the snow from right
to left, clearing a pathway to her apartment.

Several days elapsed when she was notified that the woman was willing to
sell the cabinet for two hundred dollars.

There is a supply for every demand, from Chinese cabinets to millions of
dollars.

"Before ye call I shall answer," but, unless it is the Divinely Selected
cabinet or millions they would never bring happiness.

"Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it."
(Psalm 127-1.)

———

#### AFFIRMATIONS

I let go of everything not divinely designed for me, and the perfect
plan of my life now comes to pass.

———

What is mine by Divine Right can never be taken from me.

God's perfect plan for me is built upon a rock.

———

I follow the magic path of intuition and find myself in my Promised
Land, under grace.

———

My mind, body and affairs are now molded according to the Divine pattern
within.

———

"God is the only power and that power is within me. There is only one
plan, God's plan, and that plan now comes to pass."

———

"I give thanks that I now bring forth from the Universal Substance
everything that satisfies all the righteous desires of my heart."

———

The divine Design of my life now comes to pass. I now fill the place
that I can fill and no one else can fill. I now do the things which I
can do and no one else can do.

———

I am fully equipped for the Divine Plan of my life; I am more than equal
to the situation.

———

All doors now open for happy surprises and the Divine Plan of my life is
speeded up under grace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Health](wyw18)
