[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Navajo](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmc00)  [Next](tmc02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

# INTRODUCTION.

1\. The ceremony of dsilyídje qaçàl, or mountain chant--literally, chant
towards (a place) within the mountains--is one of a large number
practiced by the shamans, or medicine men, of the Navajo tribe. I have
selected it as the first of those to be described, because I have
witnessed it the most frequently, because it is the most interesting to
the Caucasian spectator, and because it is the best known to the whites
who visit and reside in and around the Navajo country. Its chief
interest to the stranger lies in the various public performances of the
last night. Like other great rites of the shamans, it has its secret
ceremonies of many days' duration in the medicine lodge; but, unlike the
others, it ends with a varied show in the open air, which all are
invited to witness. Another ceremony which I have attended, and which
the whites usually call the "Yay\`bichy Dance" (Yèbitcai), has a final
public exhibition which occupies the whole night, but it is unvaried.
Few Europeans can be found who have remained awake later than midnight
to watch it. Such is not the case with the rite now to be described.
Here the white man is rarely the first to leave at dawn.

2\. The appropriateness of the name dsilyídje or tsilgitce--towards (a
place) within the mountains--will be better understood from the myth
than from any brief description. "Dxilyi\`" way well allude to mountains
in general or to the Carrizo Mountains in particular, to the place in
the mountains (paragraphs 9 and 38) where the originator of these
ceremonies (whom I often find it convenient to call "prophet") dwelt, or
to the name of the prophet (par. 41), or to all these combined. Qaçàl
signifies a sacred song or a collection of sacred songs. From the many
English synonyms for song I have selected the word chant to translate
qaçàl. In its usual signification hymnody may be its more exact
equivalent, but it is a less convenient term than chant. The shaman, or
medicine man, who is master of ceremonies, is known as qaçàli or
chanter--el cantador, the Mexicans call him. In order to keep in mind
his relationship to similar functionaries in other tribes I shall, from
time to time, allude to him as the priest, the shaman, or the medicine
man, following

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

the example of other authors. To all ceremonies of a character similar
to this the term qaçàl is applicable. It would seem from this that the
Navajo regard the song as the chief part of the ceremony, but since the
Americans, as a rule, regard all Indian ceremonies as merely dances and
call them dances, I will, out of deference to a national prejudice,
frequently refer to the ceremony as a dance.

3\. Sometimes the collective rites and amusements o e last night are
spoken of as ilnasjíngo qaçàl, or chant in the dark circle of branches,
from *il*, branches of a tree; *nas*, surrounding, encircling; *jin*,
dark; and *go*, in. The name alludes to the great fence of pin-on
branches, erected after sunset on the last night, to receive the guests
and performers. I shall often refer to this inclosure as the corral.
Some white men call. the rites I describe. the "corral dance," but more
usually they call them the "hoshkàwn dance," from one of the minor
performances of the last night, the hackàn-inçá\`, or act of the *Yucca
baccata*, a rite or drama which seems to particularly excite the
Caucasian interest. To such minor sets the terms inçá\` and alìli. are
applied; these may be translated dance, show, act, or exhibition.

4\. The purposes of the ceremony are various. Its ostensible reason for
existence is to cure disease; but it is made the occasion for invoking
the unseen powers in behalf of the people at large for various purposes,
particularly for good crops and abundant rains. It would appear that it
is also designed to perpetuate their religious symbolism. Some of the
shows of the last night are, undoubtedly intended to be dramatic and
entertaining as well as religious, while the merely social element of
the whole affair is obvious. It is an occasion when the people gather to
have a jolly time. The patient pays the expenses and, probably in
addition to the favor and help of the gods and the praise of the
priesthood, hopes to obtain social distinction for his liberality.

5\. This, like other great rites of the Navajo, is of nine days'
duration. Some of these rites may take place in the summer; but the
great majority of them, including this dsilyídje qaçàl, may be
celebrated only in the winter, in the season when the thunder is silent
and the rattlesnakes are hibernating. Were they to tell of their chief
gods or relate their myths of the ancient days at any other time, death
from lightning or snake-bite would, they believe, be their early fate.

6\. While in New Mexico I sometimes employed a very liberal minded
Navajo, named Juan, as a guide and informant. He had spent many years
among Americans, Mormons, and Mexicans, and was, I imagined, almost
perfectly emancipated, from his "early bias." He spoke both English and
Spanish fairly. On one occasion, during the mouth of August, in the
height of the rainy season, I had him in my study conversing with him.
In an unguarded moment, on his part, I led him into a discussion about
the gods of his people, and neither of us had noticed a heavy storm
coming over the crest of the Zuñi Mountains, close by. We were just
talking of Estsánatlehi, the goddess of the west, when

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

the house was shaken by a terrific peal of thunder. He rose at once,
pale and evidently agitated, and, whispering hoarsely, "Wait till
Christmas; they are angry," he hurried away. I have seen many such
evidences of the deep influence of this superstition on them.

7\. When the man (or the woman) who gives the entertainment concludes he
is sick and that he can afford to call a shaman, it is not the latter
who decides what particular rites are best suited to cure the malady. It
is the patient and his friends who determine this. Then they send for a
man who is known to be skilled in performing the desired rites, and it
is his province merely to do the work required of him.

8\. Before beginning to describe the ceremonies it will be well to
relate the myth accounting for their origin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Myth of the Origin of Dsilyídje Qaçàl.](tmc02)
