[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Navajo](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmc04)  [Next](tmc06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

# SACRIFICES OF DSILYÍDJE QAÇÀL.

176\. The sacrifices made to the gods during these ceremonies consist,
of nothing more than a few sticks and feathers, with the occasional
addition of strings and beads--a form of sacrificial offering common
among various tribes of the Southwest, including the sedentary Indiana,
of the pueblos. Daring the six days' work in the medicine lodge and. the
corral, I saw but one lot of these sticks prepared (paragraphs 96, 87);
but I think this lot represented two sets, i. e., sacrifices to two
different

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

mythical beings. It is, however, indicated in the myth that a
considerable number of these sacrifices, called by the Navajo keçàn
(Englished, kethàwn), belong to the mountain chant and may properly be
offered during its celebration. I have seen among the Navajo a few
varieties of these devotional offerings and I have obtained descriptions
of many. Although I cannot rely on the minute accuracy of these
descriptions, I will present them for such value as they may possess in
illustrating the general character of this system of worship, a system
which might profitably occupy for years the best labors of an earnest
student to elucidate.

 

![](img/07000.jpg)

FIG 58. Sacrificial sticks (keçàn)

 

177\. Fig. 58 represents a kethàwn belonging, not to the mountain chant,
but to the klèdji-qaçàl, or chant of the night. It is sacred to the
Youth and the Maiden of the Rock Crystal, divine beings who dwell in
Taisnàtcini, a great mountain north of the Pueblo of Jemez. The original
is in the National Museum at Washington. It consists of two sticks
coated with white earth and joined by a cotton string a yard long, which
is tied to each stick by a clove hitch. A black bead is on the center of
the string; a turkey feather and an eagle feather are secured with the
clove hitch to one of the sticks.

 

![](img/07000.jpg)

FIG. 59. The talking kethàwn (keçàn-yalci\`)

 

178\. Fig. 59 depicts a kethàwn pertaining also to the klèdji-qaçàl. It
is called keçàn-yalci\`, or talking kethàwn. The sticks are willow. The
one to the left is painted black, to represent a male character
(Qastcèbaka) in the myth and ceremony of klèdji-qaçàl. The other stick
is painted blue, to denote a female character (Qastèbaäd) in the same
rites. The blue stick has a diagonal face at the top to indicate the
square topped female mask (paragraph 168). The naturally round end of
the black stick sufficiently indicates the round male mask. The cord
wrapped around the two sticks is similar to that described in the

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

paragraph immediately preceding. About the middle of the cord is a long
white shell bead, shown in the cut. The breast feathers of the turkey
and the downy feathers of the eagle are attached to the sticks. This
kethàwn I saw once in the possession of a Navajo qaçàli. I was permitted
to sketch it, but could not purchase it. The interpretation given of its
symbolism is that of the qaçàli who owned it. In the myth of
klèdji-qaçàl it is said that the beneficent god Qastcèëlçi used this
kethàwn when he removed from the prophet Co the evil spell which had
been cast on the latter by the wind god.

179\. In Schoolcraft's Archives of Aboriginal Knowledge, Philadelphia,
1860, Vol. III, page 306, is a cut illustrating an article undoubtedly
of a similar nature to that shown in Fig. 59. It is a sacrificial plume
stick of the Moki. The Moki interpreter explained to Mr. Schoolcraft
that it contained a message from the Indians to the President and the
particulars of this message are fully set forth in his text. At first I
doubted if the object could have any other purpose than a sacrificial
one and was inclined to discredit the statement of the Moki interpreter.
But on learning that the Navajo had a similar arrangement of sticks and
feathers, which was called by the significant name of keçàn-yalçi\`, or
talking kethàwn, I was more inclined to believe that some of these
kethàwns may answer a double purpose and be used to convey messages, or
at least serve as mnemonic aids to envoys.

180\. The cac-bikeçàn (bear kethàwn) spoken of in the myth consisted of
two sticks, each a span long, one painted black (male), the other
painted blue (female). Each had red and blue bands at the ends and in
the middle. There were no feathers or beads. (Paragraph 40.)

181\. The glòï-bikeçàn, or sacrifices to the weasels, were four in
number, two yellow and two white. In preparing the sticks one end was
always; to be held to the north, the other towards the south. At each
end & narrow circle of red and a narrow circle of blue were painted; the
red being to the north, i. e., outside of the blue at one end and inside
of it at the other. The weasel men directed that the sticks should be
buried in the ground in the same direction in which they were held when
being made, lying from north to south with the outer red ring at the
north. (Paragraph 41.)

182\. Four sticks pertained to the klictsò-bikeçàn: one was black, with
four white deer tracks painted on it; another was blue, with four yellow
deer trucks; a third was white, with four black deer trucks; the fourth
was yellow, with four blue deer tracks. The Great Serpent said to the
Navajo prophet: "Then are certain moles who, when they dig in the
ground, scatter the earth in a long winding heap like the form of a
crawling snake. In such a heap of earth will you bury these kethàwns."
(Paragraph 42.)

183\. There are two sticks belonging to the kethàwn of the lightning god
(i¢nì\`-bikeçàn). One is black, with a white zigzag stripe from end

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

to end; the other blue, with a yellow zigzag stripe from end to end.
(Paragraph 43.)

184 The Estsàn-¢igìni, or Holy Women, showed the prophet but one kethàwn
stick. It was painted white and decorated with three pair's of circular
bands, red and blue, the blue in each case being next to the body of the
painter while he holds the stick in decorating it. This kethàwn must be
buried at the base of a young spruce tree, with the first blue circle
next to the tree. (Paragraph 455.)

185\. Four sticks were shown by the Tcikè-cac-nátlehi. They were black,
sprinkled with specular iron ore to make them shine; decorated with
three pairs of bands, red and blue, applied as in the kethàwns of the
Estsàn-¢igìni; and buried under a young piñon, with the first blue band
or circle next to the tree. (Paragraph 46.)

186\. The two kethàwns seen by Dsilyi\` Neyáni at Big Oaks, the home of
the ¢igin-yosíni, were both banded at the ends with blue and red and had
marks to symbolize the givers. One was white, with two pairs of stripes,
red and blue, running lengthwise. The other was yellow, with many
stripes of black and yellow running lengthwise. (Paragraph 49.)

187\. At Last Mountain, the home of the skunks, two kethàwns, evidently
intended to symbolize these animals, were shown to the Prophet and his
divine companions. Both the sticks were black: one had three white
longitudinal stripes on one side; the other had three longitudinal rows
of white spots, three spots in each row, on one side. (Paragraph 90.)

188\. The two sticks shown by the squirrels, Glo\`dsilkàï and
Glo\`dsiljíni, were painted blue, sprinkled with specular iron ore, and
surrounded at the ends with red and blue bands. One was to be planted at
the base of a pine tree and one at the base of a spruce tree.

189\. At Dsilyi\`-içín the porcupines exhibited two kethàwns. They were
very short, being equal in length to the middle joint of the little
finger. One was black and one was blue. Each had red and blue terminal
bands and each had a number of white dots on one side to)represent
porcupine quills. "Bury them," said ¢asàni, "under a piñon tree."
(Paragraph 52.)

190\. At Qo¢estsò four kethàwns, rather elaborately decorated, were
shown. Two were half white and half black, the black part having white
spots and the white part having black spots on it. The other two were
half blue and half yellow, the yellow beings potted with blue and the
blue with yellow. There were red and blue rings at the ends. (Paragraph
53.)

191\. The Tçikè-¢igìni showed their visitors two kethàwns, one black and
one blue. Each was a span long and was surrounded with three pairs of
bands, blue and red, put on in the manner observed in making the
kethàwns of the Estsàn-¢igìni. (Paragraph 184.) To the center of the
black kethàwn five blue feathers were tied. To the center of the

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

blue kethàwn five yellow feathers were fastened. Five black beads were
interred with the black stick--one tied to the center, one stuck in the
end, and three laid loose in the ground. Five blue turquoise beads wore
similarly buried with the blue stick. Such kethàwns must be buried at
the foot of a spruce tree, with the beads towards the mountains of
¢epéntsa. By "head" is meant the end held the farther from the body of
the painter when the paint is applied, the end having the red band at
its extremity. (Paragraph 54.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Original Texts and Translations of Songs.](tmc06)
