[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Yoga](../yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ysp07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P42UQ/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Yoga Sutras of Patanjali*, by Charles Johnston, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# BOOK IV

### 1. Psychic and spiritual powers may be inborn, or they may be gained by the use of drugs, or by incantations, or by fervour, or by Meditation.

Spiritual powers have been enumerated and described in the preceding
sections. They are the normal powers of the spiritual man, the antetype,
the divine edition, of the powers of the natural man. Through these
powers, the spiritual man stands, sees, hears, speaks, in the spiritual
world, as the physical man stands, sees, hears, speaks in the natural
world.

There is a counterfeit presentment of the spiritual man, in the world of
dreams, a shadow lord of shadows, who has his own dreamy powers of
vision, of hearing, of movement; he has left the natural without
reaching the spiritual. He has set forth from the shore, but has not
gained the further verge of the river. He is borne along by the stream,
with no foothold on either shore. Leaving the actual, he has fallen
short of the real, caught in the limbo of vanities and delusions. The
cause of this aberrant phantasm is always the worship of a false, vain
self, the lord of dreams, within one's own breast. This is the psychic
man, lord of delusive and bewildering psychic powers.

Spiritual powers, like intellectual or artistic gifts, may be inborn:
the fruit, that is, of seeds planted and reared with toil in a former
birth. So also the powers of the psychic man may be inborn, a delusive
harvest from seeds of delusion.

Psychical powers may be gained by drugs, as poverty, shame, debasement
may be gained by the self-same drugs. In their action, they are baneful,
cutting the man off from consciousness of the restraining power of his
divine nature, so that his forces break forth exuberant, like the
laughter of drunkards, and he sees and hears things delusive. While
sinking, he believes that he has risen; growing weaker, he thinks
himself full of strength; beholding illusions, he takes them to be true.
Such are the powers gained by drugs; they are wholly psychic, since the
real powers, the spiritual, can never be so gained.

Incantations are affirmations of half-truths concerning spirit and
matter, what is and what is not, which work upon the mind and slowly
build up a wraith of powers and a delusive well-being. These, too, are
of the psychic realm of dreams.

Lastly, there are the true powers of the spiritual man, built up and
realized in Meditation, through reverent obedience to spiritual law, to
the pure conditions of being, in the divine realm.

### 2. The transfer of powers from one venture to another comes through the flow of the natural creative forces.

Here, if we can perceive it, is the whole secret of spiritual birth,
growth and life Spiritual being, like all being, is but an expression of
the Self, of the inherent power and being of Atma. Inherent in the Self
are consciousness and will, which have, as their lordly heritage, the
wide sweep of the universe throughout eternity, for the Self is one with
the Eternal. And the consciousness of the Self may make itself manifest
as seeing, hearing, tasting, feeling, or whatsoever perceptive powers
there may be, just as the white sunlight may divide into many-coloured
rays. So may the will of the Self manifest itself in the uttering of
words, or in handling, or in moving, and whatever powers of action there
are throughout the seven worlds. Where the Self is, there will its
powers be. It is but a question of the vesture through which these
powers shall shine forth. And wherever the consciousness and desire of
the ever-creative Self are fixed, there will a vesture be built up;
where the heart is, there will the treasure be also.

Since through ages the desire of the Self has been toward the natural
world, wherein the Self sought to mirror himself that he might know
himself, therefore a vesture of natural elements came into being,
through which blossomed forth the Self's powers of perceiving and of
will: the power to see, to hear, to speak, to walk, to handle; and when
the Self, thus come to self-consciousness, and, with it, to a knowledge
of his imprisonment, shall set his desire on the divine and real world,
and raise his consciousness thereto, the spiritual vesture shall be
built up for him there, with its expression of his inherent powers. Nor
will migration thither be difficult for the Self, since the divine is no
strange or foreign land for him, but the house of his home, where he
dwells from everlasting.

### 3. The apparent, immediate cause is not the true cause of the creative nature-powers; but, like the husbandman in his field, it takes obstacles away.

The husbandman tills his field, breaking up the clods of earth into fine
mould, penetrable to air and rain; he sows his seed, carefully covering
it, for fear of birds and the wind; he waters the seed-laden earth,
turning the little rills from the irrigation tank now this way and that,
removing obstacles from the channels, until the even How of water
vitalizes the whole field. And so the plants germinate and grow, first
the blade, then the ear, then the full corn in the ear. But it is not
the husbandman who makes them grow. It is, first, the miraculous plasmic
power in the grain of seed, which brings forth after its kind; then the
alchemy of sunlight which, in presence of the green colouring matter of
the leaves, gathers hydrogen from the water and carbon from the gases in
the air, and mingles them in the hydro-carbons of plant growth; and,
finally, the wholly occult vital powers of the plant itself, stored up
through ages, and flowing down from the primal sources of life. The
husbandman but removes the obstacles. He plants and waters, but God
gives the increase.

So with the finer husbandman of diviner fields. He tills and sows, but
the growth of the spiritual man comes through the surge and flow of
divine, creative forces and powers. Here, again, God gives the increase.
The divine Self puts forth, for the manifestation of its powers, a new
and finer vesture, the body of the spiritual man.

### 4. Vestures of consciousness are built up in conformity with the Boston of the feeling of selfhood.

The Self, says a great Teacher, in turn attributes itself to three
vestures: first, to the physical body, then to the finer body, and
thirdly to the causal body. Finally it stands forth radiant, luminous,
joyous, as the Self.

When the Self attributes itself to the physical body, there arise the
states of bodily consciousness, built up about the physical self.

When the Self, breaking through this first illusion, begins to see and
feel itself in the finer body, to find selfhood there, then the states
of consciousness of the finer body come into being; or, to speak
exactly, the finer body and its states of consciousness arise and grow
together.

But the Self must not dwell permanently there. It must learn to find
itself in the causal body, to build up the wide and luminous fields of
consciousness that belong to that.

Nor must it dwell forever there, for there remains the fourth state, the
divine, with its own splendour and everlastingness.

It is all a question of the states of consciousness; all a question of
raising the sense of selfhood, until it dwells forever in the Eternal.

### 5. In the different fields of manifestation, the Consciousness, though one, is the elective cause of many states of consciousness.

Here is the splendid teaching of oneness that lies at the heart of the
Eastern wisdom. Consciousness is ultimately One, everywhere and forever.
The Eternal, the Father, is the One Self of All Beings. And so, in each
individual who is but a facet of that Self, Consciousness is One.
Whether it breaks through as the dull fire of physical life, or the
murky flame of the psychic and passional, or the radiance of the
spiritual man, or the full glory of the Divine, it is ever the Light,
naught but the Light. The one Consciousness is the effective cause of
all states of consciousness, on every plane.

### 6. Among states of consciousness, that which is born of Contemplation is free from the seed of future sorrow.

Where the consciousness breaks forth in the physical body, and the full
play of bodily life begins, its progression carries with it inevitable
limitations. Birth involves death. Meetings have their partings. Hunger
alternates with satiety. Age follows on the heels of youth. So do the
states of consciousness run along the circle of birth and death.

With the psychic, the alternation between prize and penalty is swifter.
Hope has its shadow of fear, or it is no hope. Exclusive love is
tortured by jealousy. Pleasure passes through deadness into pain. Pain's
surcease brings pleasure back again. So here, too, the states of
consciousness run their circle. In all psychic states there is egotism,
which, indeed, is the very essence of the psychic; and where there is
egotism there is ever the seed of future sorrow. Desire carries bondage
in its womb.

But where the pure spiritual consciousness begins, free from self and
stain, the ancient law of retaliation ceases; the penalty of sorrow
lapses and is no more imposed. The soul now passes, no longer from
sorrow to sorrow, but from glory to glory. Its growth and splendour have
no limit. The good passes to better, best.

### 7. The works of followers after Union make neither for bright pleasure nor for dark pain The works of others make for pleasure or pain, or a mingling of these.

The man of desire wins from his works the reward of pleasure, or incurs
the penalty of pain; or, as so often happens in life, his guerdon, like
the passionate mood of the lover, is part pleasure and part pain. Works
done with self-seeking bear within them the seeds of future sorrow;
conversely, according to the proverb, present pain is future gain.

But, for him who has gone beyond desire, whose desire is set on the
Eternal, neither pain to be avoided nor pleasure to be gained inspires
his work. He fears no hell and desires no heaven. His one desire is, to
know the will of the Father and finish His work. He comes directly in
line with the divine Will, and works cleanly and immediately, without
longing or fear. His heart dwells in the Eternal; all his desires are
set on the Eternal.

### 8. From the force inherent in works comes the manifestation of those dynamic mind images which are conformable to the ripening out of each of these works.

We are now to consider the general mechanism of Karma, in order that we
may pass on to the consideration of him who is free from Karma. Karma,
indeed, is the concern of the personal man, of his bondage or freedom.
It is the succession of the forces which built up the personal man,
reproducing themselves in one personality after another.

Now let us take an imaginary case, to see how these forces may work out.
Let us think of a man, with murderous intent in his heart, striking with
a dagger at his enemy. He makes a red wound in his victim's breast; at
the same instant he paints, in his own mind, a picture of that wound: a
picture dynamic with all the fierce will-power he has put into his
murderous blow. In other words he has made a deep wound in his own
psychic body; and, when he comes to be born again, that body will become
his outermost vesture, upon which, with its wound still there, bodily
tissue will be built up. So the man will be born maimed, or with the
predisposition to some mortal injury; he is unguarded at that point, and
any trifling accidental blow will pierce the broken Joints of his
psychic armour. Thus do the dynamic mind-images manifest themselves,
coming to the surface, so that works done in the past may ripen and come
to fruition.

### 9. Works separated by different nature, or place, or time, are brought together by the correspondence between memory and dynamic impression.

Just as, in the ripening out of mind-images into bodily conditions, the
effect is brought about by the ray of creative force sent down by the
Self, somewhat as the light of the magic lantern projects the details of
a picture on the screen, revealing the hidden, and making secret things
palpable and visible, so does this divine ray exercise a selective power
on the dynamic mind-images, bringing together into one day of life the
seeds gathered from many days. The memory constantly exemplifies this
power; a passage of poetry will call up in the mind like passages of
many poets, read at different times. So a prayer may call up many
prayers.

In like manner, the same over-ruling selective power, which is a ray of
the Higher Self, gathers together from different births and times and
places those mind-images which are conformable, and may be grouped in
the frame of a single life or a single event. Through this grouping,
visible bodily conditions or outward circumstances are brought about,
and by these the soul is taught and trained.

Just as the dynamic mind-images of desire ripen out in bodily conditions
and circumstances, so the far more dynamic powers of aspiration, wherein
the soul reaches toward the Eternal, have their fruition in a finer
world, building the vesture of the spiritual man.

### 10. The series of dynamic mind-images is beginningless, because Desire is everlasting.

The whole series of dynamic mind-images, which make up the entire
history of the personal man, is a part of the mechanism which the Self
employs, to mirror itself in a reflection, to embody its powers in an
outward form, to the end of self-expression, self-realization,
self-knowledge. Therefore the initial impulse behind these dynamic
mind-images comes from the Self and is the descending ray of the Self;
so that it cannot be said that there is any first member of the series
of images, from which the rest arose. The impulse is beginningless,
since it comes from the Self, which is from everlasting. Desire is not
to cease; it is to turn to the Eternal, and so become aspiration.

### 11. Since the dynamic mind-images are held together by impulses of desire, by the wish for personal reward, by the substratum of mental habit, by the support of outer things desired; therefore, when these cease, the self reproduction of dynamic mind-images ceases.

We are still concerned with the personal life in its bodily vesture, and
with the process whereby the forces which have upheld it are gradually
transferred to the life of the spiritual man, and build up for him his
finer vesture in a finer world.

How is the current to be changed? How is the flow of self-reproductive
mind-images, which have built the conditions of life after life in this
world of bondage, to be checked, that the time of imprisonment may come
to an end, the day of liberation dawn?

The answer is given in the Sutra just translated. The driving-force is
withdrawn and directed to the upbuilding of the spiritual body.

When the building impulses and forces are withdrawn, the tendency to
manifest a new psychical body, a new body of bondage, ceases with them.

### 12. The difference between that which is past and that which is not yet come, according to their natures, depends on the difference of phase of their properties.

Here we come to a high and difficult matter, which has always been held
to be of great moment in the Eastern wisdom: the thought that the
division of time into past, present and future is, in great measure, an
illusion; that past, present, future all dwell together in the eternal
Now.

The discernment of this truth has been held to be so necessarily a part
of wisdom, that one of the names of the Enlightened is: 'he who has
passed beyond the three times: past, present, future.'

So the Western Master said: 'Before Abraham was, I am'; and again, 'I am
with you always, unto the end of the world'; using the eternal present
for past and future alike. With the same purpose, the Master speaks of
himself as 'the alpha and the omega, the beginning and the end, the
first and the last.'

And a Master of our own days writes: 'I feel even irritated at having to
use these three clumsy words—past, present, and future. Miserable
concepts of the objective phases of the subjective whole, they are about
as ill adapted for the purpose, as an axe for fine carving.'

In the eternal Now, both past and future are consummated.

Björklund, the Swedish philosopher, has well stated the same truth:

'Neither past nor future can exist to God; He lives undividedly, without
limitations, and needs not, as man, to plot out his existence in a
series of moments. Eternity then is not identical with unending time; it
is a different form of existence, related to time as the perfect to the
imperfect. Man as an entity for himself must have the natural
limitations for the part. Conceived by God, man is eternal in the divine
sense, but conceived by himself, man's eternal life is clothed in the
limitations we call time. The eternal is a constant present without
beginning or end, without past or future.'

### 13. These properties, whether manifest or latent, are of the nature of the Three Potencies.

The Three Potencies are the three manifested modifications of the one
primal material, which stands opposite to perceiving consciousness.
These Three Potencies are called Substance, Force, Darkness; or viewed
rather for their moral colouring, Goodness, Passion, Inertness. Every
material manifestation is a projection of substance into the empty space
of darkness. Every mental state is either good, or passional, or inert.
So, whether subjective or objective, latent or manifest, all things that
present themselves to the perceiving consciousness are compounded of
these three. This is a fundamental doctrine of the Sankhya system.

### 14. The external manifestation of an object takes place when the transformations ore in the same phase.

We should be inclined to express the same law by saying, for example,
that a sound is audible, when it consists of vibrations within the
compass of the auditory nerve; that an object is visible, when either
directly or by reflection, it sends forth luminiferous vibrations within
the compass of the retina and the optic nerve. Vibrations below or above
that compass make no impression at all, and the object remains
invisible; as, for example, a kettle of boiling water in a dark room,
though the kettle is sending forth heat vibrations closely akin to
light.

So, when the vibrations of the object and those of the perceptive power
are in the same phase, the external manifestation of the object takes
place.

There seems to be a further suggestion that the appearance of an object
in the 'present,' or its remaining hid in the 'past,' or 'future,' is
likewise a question of phase, and, just as the range of vibrations
perceived might be increased by the development of finer senses, so the
perception of things past, and things to come, may be easy from a higher
point of view.

### 15. The paths of material things and of states of consciousness are distinct, as is manifest from the fact that the same object may produce different impressions in different minds.

Having shown that our bodily condition and circumstances depend on
Karma, while Karma depends on perception and will, the sage recognizes
the fact that from this may be drawn the false deduction that material
things are in no wise different from states of mind. The same thought
has occurred, and still occurs, to all philosophers; and, by various
reasonings, they all come to the same wise conclusion; that the material
world is not made by the mood of any human mind, but is rather the
manifestation of the totality of invisible Being, whether we call this
Mahat, with the ancients, or Ether, with the moderns.

### 16. Nor do material objects defend upon a single mind, for how could they remain objective to others, if that mind ceased to think of them?

This is but a further development of the thought of the preceding Sutra,
carrying on the thought that, while the universe is spiritual, yet its
material expression is ordered, consistent, ruled by law, not subject to
the whims or affirmations of a single mind. Unwelcome material things
may be escaped by spiritual growth, by rising to a realm above them, and
not by denying their existence on their own plane. So that our system is
neither materialistic, nor idealistic in the extreme sense, but rather
intuitional and spiritual, holding that matter is the manifestation of
spirit as a whole, a reflection or externalization of spirit, and, like
spirit, everywhere obedient to law. The path of liberation is not
through denial of matter but through denial of the wills of self,
through obedience, and that aspiration which builds the vesture of the
spiritual man.

### 17. An object is perceived, or not perceived, according as the mind is, or is not, tinged with the colour of the object.

The simplest manifestation of this is the matter of attention. Our minds
apprehend what they wish to apprehend; all else passes unnoticed, or, on
the other hand, we perceive what we resent, as, for example, the noise
of a passing train; while others, used to the sound, do not notice it at
all.

But the deeper meaning is, that out of the vast totality of objects ever
present in the universe, the mind perceives only those which conform to
the hue of its Karma. The rest remain unseen, even though close at hand.

This spiritual law has been well expressed by Emerson:

'Through solidest eternal things the man finds his road as if they did
not subsist, and does not once suspect their being. As soon as he needs
a new object, suddenly he beholds it, and no longer attempts to pass
through it, but takes another way. When he has exhausted for the time
the nourishment to be drawn from any one person or thing, that object is
withdrawn from his observation, and though still in his immediate
neighbourhood, he does not suspect its presence. Nothing is dead. Men
feign themselves dead, and endure mock funerals and mournful obituaries,
and there they stand looking out of the window, sound and well, in some
new and strange disguise. Jesus is not dead, he is very well alive: nor
John, nor Paul, nor Mahomet, nor Aristotle; at times we believe we have
seen them all, and could easily tell the names under which they go.'

### 18. The movements of the psychic nature are perpetually objects of perception, since the Spiritual Man, who is the lord of them, remains unchanging.

Here is teaching of the utmost import, both for understanding and for
practice.

To the psychic nature belong all the ebb and flow of emotion, all hoping
and fearing, desire and hate: the things that make the multitude of men
and women deem themselves happy or miserable. To it also belong the
measuring and comparing, the doubt and questioning, which, for the same
multitude, make up mental life. So that there results the emotion-soaked
personality, with its dark and narrow view of life: the shivering,
terror driven personality that is life itself for all but all of
mankind.

Yet the personality is not the true man, not the living soul at all, but
only a spectacle which the true man observes. Let us under stand this,
therefore, and draw ourselves up inwardly to the height of the Spiritual
Man, who, standing in the quiet light of the Eternal, looks down serene
upon this turmoil of the outer life.

One first masters the personality, the 'mind,' by thus looking down on
it from above, from within; by steadily watching its ebb and flow, as
objective, outward, and therefore not the real Self. This standing back
is the first step, detachment. The second, to maintain the
vantage-ground thus gained, is recollection.

### 19. The Mind is not self-luminous, since it can be seen as an object.

This is a further step toward overthrowing the tyranny of the 'mind':
the psychic nature of emotion and mental measuring. This psychic self,
the personality, claims to be absolute, asserting that life is for it
and through it; it seeks to impose on the whole being of man its narrow,
materialistic, faithless view of life and the universe; it would clip
the wings of the soaring Soul. But the Soul dethrones the tyrant, by
perceiving and steadily affirming that the psychic self is no true self
at all, not self-luminous, but only an object of observation, watched by
the serene eyes of the Spiritual Man.

### 20. Nor could the Mind at the same time know itself and things external to it.

The truth is that the 'mind' knows neither external things nor itself.
Its measuring and analyzing, its hoping and fearing, hating and
desiring, never give it a true measure of life, nor any sense of real
values. Ceaselessly active, it never really attains to knowledge; or, if
we admit its knowledge, it ever falls short of wisdom, which comes only
through intuition, the vision of the Spiritual Man.

Life cannot be known by the 'mind,' its secrets cannot be learned
through the 'mind.' The proof is, the ceaseless strife and contradiction
of opinion among those who trust in the mind. Much less can the 'mind'
know itself, the more so, because it is pervaded by the illusion that it
truly knows, truly is.

True knowledge of the 'mind' comes, first, when the Spiritual Man,
arising, stands detached, regarding the 'mind' from above, with quiet
eyes, and seeing it for the tangled web of psychic forces that it truly
is. But the truth is divined long before it is clearly seen, and then
begins the long battle of the 'mind,' against the Real, the 'mind'
fighting doggedly, craftily, for its supremacy.

### 21. If the Mind be thought of as seen by another more inward Mind, then there would be an endless series of perceiving Minds, and a confusion of memories.

One of the expedients by which the 'mind' seeks to deny and thwart the
Soul, when it feels that it is beginning to be circumvented and seen
through, is to assert that this seeing is the work of a part of itself,
one part observing the other, and thus leaving no need nor place for the
Spiritual Man.

To this strategy the argument is opposed by our philosopher, that this
would be no true solution, but only a postponement of the solution. For
we should have to find yet another part of the mind to view the first
observing part, and then another to observe this, and so on, endlessly.

The true solution is, that the Spiritual Man looks down upon the psychic
nature, and observes it; when he views the psychic pictures gallery,
this is 'memory,' which would be a hopeless, inextricable confusion, if
we thought of one part of the 'mind,' with its memories, viewing another
part, with memories of its own.

The solution of the mystery lies not in the 'mind' but beyond it, in the
luminous life of the risen Lord, the Spiritual Man.

### 22. When the psychical nature takes on the form of the spiritual intelligence, by reflecting it, then the Self becomes conscious of its own spiritual intelligence.

We are considering a stage of spiritual life at which the psychical
nature has been cleansed and purified. Formerly, it reflected in its
plastic substance the images of the earthy; purified now, it reflects
the image of the heavenly, giving the spiritual intelligence a visible
form. The Self, beholding that visible form, in which its spiritual
intelligence has, as it were, taken palpable shape, thereby reaches
self-recognition, self-comprehension. The Self sees itself in this
mirror, and thus becomes not only conscious, but self-conscious. This
is, from one point of view, the purpose of the whole evolutionary
process.

### 23. The psychic nature, taking on the colour of the Seer and of things seen, leads to the perception of all objects.

In the unregenerate man, the psychic nature is saturated with images of
material things, of things seen, or heard, or tasted, or felt; and this
web of dynamic images forms the ordinary material and driving power of
life. The sensation of sweet things tasted clamours to be renewed, and
drives the man into effort to obtain its renewal; so he adds image to
image, each dynamic and importunate, piling up sin's intolerable burden.

Then comes regeneration, and the washing away of sin, through the fiery,
creative power of the Soul, which burns out the stains of the psychic
vesture, purifying it as gold is refined in the furnace. The suffering
of regeneration springs from this indispensable purifying.

Then the psychic vesture begins to take on the colour of the Soul, no
longer stained, but suffused with golden light; and the man red generate
gleams with the radiance of eternity. Thus the Spiritual Man puts on
fair raiment; for of this cleansing it is said: Though your sins be as
scarlet, they shall be white as snow; though they be as crimson, they
shall be as wool.

### 24. The psychic nature, which has been printed with mind-images of innumerable material things, exists now for the Spiritual Man, building for him.

The 'mind,' once the tyrant, is now the slave, recognized as outward,
separate, not Self, a well-trained instrument of the Spiritual Man.

For it is not ordained for the Spiritual Man that, finding his high
realm, he shall enter altogether there, and pass out of the vision of
mankind. It is true that he dwells in heaven, but he also dwells on
earth. He has angels and archangels, the hosts of the just made perfect,
for his familiar friends, but he has at the same time found a new
kinship with the prone children of men, who stumble and sin in the dark.
Finding sinlessness, he finds also that the world's sin and shame are
his, not to share, but to atone; finding kinship with angels, he
likewise finds his part in the toil of angels, the toil for the
redemption of the world.

For this work, he, who now stands in the heavenly realm, needs his
instrument on earth; and this instrument he finds, ready to his hand,
and fitted and perfected by the very struggles he has waged against it,
in the personality, the 'mind,' of the personal man. This once tyrant is
now his servant and perfect ambassador, bearing witness, before men, of
heavenly things and even in this present world doing the will and
working the works of the Father.

### 25. For him who discerns between the Mind and the Spiritual Man, there comes perfect fruition of the longing after the real being of the Self.

How many times in the long struggle have the Soul's aspirations seemed
but a hopeless, impossible dream, a madman's counsel of perfection. Yet
every finest, most impossible aspiration shall be realized, and ten
times more than realized, once the long, arduous fight against the
'mind,' and the mind's worldview is won. And then it will be seen that
unfaith and despair were but weapons of the 'mind,' to daunt the Soul,
and put off the day when the neck of the 'mind' shall be put under the
foot of the Soul.

Have you aspired, well-nigh hopeless, after immortality? You shall be
paid by entering the immortality of God.

Have you aspired, in misery and pain, after consoling, healing love? You
shall be made a dispenser of the divine love of God Himself to weary
souls.

Have you sought ardently, in your day of feebleness, after power? You
shall wield power immortal, infinite, with God working the works of God.

Have you, in lonely darkness, longed for companionship and consolation?
You shall have angels and archangels for your friends, and all the
immortal hosts of the Dawn.

These are the fruits of victory. Therefore overcome. These are the
prizes of regeneration. Therefore die to self, that you may rise again
to God.

### 26. Thereafter, the whole personal being bends toward illumination, toward Eternal Life.

This is part of the secret of the Soul, that salvation means, not merely
that a soul shall be cleansed and raised to heaven, but that the whole
realm of the natural powers shall be redeemed, building up, even in this
present world, the kingly figure of the Spiritual Man.

The traditions of the ages are full of his footsteps; majestic,
uncomprehended shadows, myths, demi-gods, fill the memories of all the
nobler peoples. But the time cometh, when he shall be known, no longer
demi-god, nor myth, nor shadow, but the ever-present Redeemer, working
amid men for the life and cleansing of all souls.

### 27. In the internals of the batik, other thoughts will arise, through the impressions of the dynamic mind-images.

The battle is long and arduous. Let there be no mistake as to that. Go
not forth to this battle without counting the cost. Ages have gone to
the strengthening of the foe. Ages of conflict must be spent, ere the
foe, wholly conquered, becomes the servant, the Soul's minister to
mankind.

And from these long past ages, in hours when the contest flags, will
come new foes, mind-born children springing up to fight for mind,
reinforcements coming from forgotten years, forgotten lives. For once
this conflict is begun, it can be ended only by sweeping victory, and
unconditional, unreserved surrender of the vanquished.

### 28. These are to be overcome as it was taught that hindrances should be overcome.

These new enemies and fears are to be overcome by ceaselessly renewing
the fight, by a steadfast, dogged persistence, whether in victory or
defeat, which shall put the stubbornness of the rocks to shame. For the
Soul is older than all things, and invincible; it is of the very nature
of the Soul to be unconquerable.

Therefore fight on, undaunted; knowing that the spiritual will, once
awakened, shall, through the effort of the contest, come to its full
strength; that ground gained can be held permanently; that great as is
the dead-weight of the adversary, it is yet measurable, while the
Warrior who fights for you, for whom you fight, is, in might,
immeasurable, invincible, everlasting.

### 29. He who, after he has attained, is wholly free from self, reaches the essence of all that can be known, gathered together like a cloud. This is the true spiritual consciousness.

It has been said that, at the beginning of the way, we must kill out
ambition, the great curse, the giant weed which grows as strongly in the
heart of the devoted disciple as in the man of desire. The remedy is
sacrifice of self, obedience, humility; that purity of heart which gives
the vision of God. Thereafter, he who has attained is wrapt about with
the essence of all that can be known, as with a cloud; he has that
perfect illumination which is the true spiritual consciousness. Through
obedience to the will of God, he comes into oneness of being with God;
he is initiated into God's view of the universe, seeing all life as God
sees it.

### 30. Thereon comes surcease from sorrow and the burden of toil.

Such a one, it is said, is free from the bond of Karma, from the burden
of toil, from that debt to works which comes from works done in
self-love and desire. Free from self-will, he is free from sorrow, too,
for sorrow comes from the fight of self-will against the divine will,
through the correcting stress of the divine will, which seeks to
counteract the evil wrought by disobedience. When the conflict with the
divine will ceases, then sorrow ceases, and he who has grown into
obedience, thereby enters into joy.

### 31. When all veils are rent, all stains washed away, his knowledge becomes infinite; little remains for him to know.

The first veil is the delusion that thy soul is in some permanent way
separate from the great Soul, the divine Eternal. When that veil is
rent, thou shalt discern thy oneness with everlasting Life. The second
veil is the delusion of enduring separateness from thy other selves,
whereas in truth the soul that is in them is one with the soul that is
in thee. The world's sin and shame are thy sin and shame: its joy also.

These veils rent, thou shalt enter into knowledge of divine things and
human things. Little will remain unknown to thee.

### 32. Thereafter comes the completion of the series of transformations of the three nature potencies, since their purpose is attained.

It is a part of the beauty and wisdom of the great Indian teachings, the
Vedanta and the Yoga alike, to hold that all life exists for the
purposes of Soul, for the making of the spiritual man. They teach that
all nature is an orderly process of evolution, leading up to this,
designed for this end, existing only for this: to bring forth and
perfect the Spiritual Man. He is the crown of evolution: at his coming,
the goal of all development is attained.

### 33. The series of transformations is divided into moments. When the series is completed, time gives place to duration.

There are two kinds of eternity, says the commentary: the eternity of
immortal life, which belongs to the Spirit, and the eternity of change,
which inheres in Nature, in all that is not Spirit. While we are content
to live in and for Nature, in the Circle of Necessity, Sansara, we doom
ourselves to perpetual change. That which is born must die, and that
which dies must be reborn. It is change evermore, a ceaseless series of
transformations.

But the Spiritual Man enters a new order; for him, there is no longer
eternal change, but eternal Being. He has entered into the joy of his
Lord. This spiritual birth, which makes him heir of the Everlasting,
sets a term to change; it is the culmination, the crowning
transformation, of the whole realm of change.

### 34. Pure spiritual life is, therefore, the inverse resolution of the potencies of Nature, which have emptied themselves of their value for the Spiritual man; or it is the return of the power of pure Consciousness to its essential form.

Here we have a splendid generalization, in which our wise philosopher
finally reconciles the naturalists and the idealists, expressing the
crown and end of his teaching, first in the terms of the naturalist, and
then in the terms of the idealist.

The birth and growth of the Spiritual Man, and his entry into his
immortal heritage, may be regarded, says our philosopher, either as the
culmination of the whole process of natural evolution and involution,
where 'that which flowed from out the boundless deep, turns again home';
or it may be looked at, as the Vedantins look at it, as the restoration
of pure spiritual Consciousness to its pristine and essential form.
There is no discrepancy or conflict between these two views, which are
but two accounts of the same thing. Therefore those who study the wise
philosopher, be they naturalist or idealist, have no excuse to linger
over dialetic subtleties or disputes. These things are lifted from their
path, lest they should be tempted to delay over them, and they are left
facing the path itself, stretching upward and onward from their feet to
the everlasting hills, radiant with infinite Light.

 

 

 

<span class="small">THE END</span>

 

 

 
