[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Yoga](../yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ysp02)  [Next](ysp04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P42UQ/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Yoga Sutras of Patanjali*, by Charles Johnston, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### INTRODUCTION TO BOOK II

The first book of Patanjali's Yoga Sutras is called the Book of
Spiritual Consciousness. The second book, which we now begin, is the
Book of the Means of Soul Growth. And we must remember that soul growth
here means the growth of the realization of the spiritual man, or, to
put the matter more briefly, the growth of the spiritual man, and the
disentangling of the spiritual man from the wrappings, the veils, the
disguises laid upon him by the mind and the psychical nature, wherein he
is enmeshed, like a bird caught in a net.

The question arises: By what means may the spiritual man be freed from
these psychical meshes and disguises, so that he may stand forth above
death, in his radiant eternalness and divine power? And the second book
sets itself to answer this very question, and to detail the means in a
way entirely practical and very lucid, so that he who runs may read, and
he who reads may understand and practise.

The second part of the second book is concerned with practical spiritual
training, that is, with the earlier practical training of the spiritual
man.

The most striking thing in it is the emphasis laid on the Commandments,
which are precisely those of the latter part of the Decalogue, together
with obedience to the Master. Our day and generation is far too prone to
fancy that there can be mystical life and growth on some other
foundation, on the foundation, for example, of intellectual curiosity or
psychical selfishness. In reality, on this latter foundation the life of
the spiritual man can never be built; nor, indeed, anything but a
psychic counterfeit, a dangerous delusion.

Therefore Patanjali, like every great spiritual teacher, meets the
question: What must I do to be saved? with the age-old answer: Keep the
Commandments. Only after the disciple can say, These have I kept, can
there be the further and finer teaching of the spiritual Rules.

It is, therefore, vital for us to realize that the Yoga system, like
every true system of spiritual teaching, rests on this broad and firm
foundation of honesty, truth, cleanness, obedience. Without these, there
is no salvation; and he who practices these, even though ignorant of
spiritual things, is laying up treasure against the time to come.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II](ysp04)
