<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](uljc17)  [Next](uljc19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002TX7KEA/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ, by Nicolas Notovitch \[1890\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XIII.

1\. Thus Saint Issa taught the people of Israel for three years, in
every city and every village, on the highways and in the fields, and all
he said came to pass.

2\. All this time the disguised spies of the

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

governor Pilate observed him closely, but heard nothing to sustain the
accusations formerly made against Issa by the chiefs of the cities.

3\. But Saint Issa's growing popularity did not allow Pilate to rest. He
feared that Issa would be instrumental in bringing about a revolution
culminating in his elevation to the sovereignty, and, therefore, ordered
the spies to make charges against him.

4\. Then soldiers were sent to arrest him, and they cast him into a
subterranean dungeon, where he was subjected to all kinds of tortures,
to compel him to accuse himself, so that he might be put to death.

5\. The Saint, thinking only of the perfect bliss of his brethren,
endured all those torments with resignation to the will of the Creator.

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

6, The servants of Pilate continued to torture him, and he was reduced
to a state of extreme weakness; but God was with him and did not permit
him to die at their hands.

7\. When the principal priests and wise elders learned of the sufferings
which their Saint endured, they went to Pilate, begging him to liberate
Issa, so that he might attend the great festival which was near at hand.

8\. But this the governor refused. Then they asked him that Issa should
be brought before the elders' council, so that he might be condemned, or
acquitted, before the festival, and to this Pilate agreed.

9\. On the following day the governor assembled the principal chiefs,
priests, elders and judges, for the purpose of judging Issa.

10\. The Saint was brought from his prison. They made him sit before the
governor,

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

between two robbers, who were to be judged at the same time with Issa,
so as to show the people he was not the only one to be condemned.

11\. And Pilate, addressing himself to Issa, said, "Is it true, Oh! Man;
that thou incitest the populace against the authorities, with the
purpose of thyself becoming King of Israel?"

12\. Issa replied, "One does not become king by one's own purpose
thereto. They have told you an untruth when you were informed that I was
inciting the people to revolution. I have only preached of the King of
Heaven, and it was Him whom I told the people to worship.

13\. "For the sons of Israel have lost their original innocence and
unless they return to worship the true God they will be sacrificed and
their temple will fall in ruins.

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

14\. "The worldly power upholds order in the land; I told them not to
forget this. I said to them, 'Live in conformity with your situation and
refrain from disturbing public order;' and, at the same time, I exhorted
them to remember that disorder reigned in their own hearts and spirits

15\. "Therefore, the King of Heaven has punished them, and has destroyed
their nationality and taken from them their national kings, 'but,' I
added, 'if you will be resigned to your fate, as a reward the Kingdom of
Heaven will be yours."

16\. At this moment the witnesses were introduced; one of whom deposed
thus: "Thou hast said to the people that in comparison with the power of
the king who would soon liberate the Israelites from the

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

yoke of the heathen, the worldly authorities amounted to nothing."

17\. "Blessings upon thee!" said Issa. "For thou hast spoken the truth!
The King of Heaven is greater and more powerful than the laws of man and
His kingdom surpasses the kingdoms of this earth.

18\. "And the time is not far off, when Israel, obedient to the will of
God, will throw off its yoke of sin; for it has been written that a
forerunner would appear to announce the deliverance of the people, and
that he would re-unite them in one family."

19\. Thereupon the governor said to the judges: "Have you heard this?
The Israelite Issa acknowledges the crime of which he is accused. Judge
him, then, according to your laws and pass upon him condemnation to
death."

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

20\. "We cannot condemn him," replied the priests and the ancients. "As
thou hast heard, he spoke of the King of Heaven, and he has preached
nothing which constitutes insubordination against the law."

21\. Thereupon the governor called a witness who had been bribed by his
master, Pilate, to betray Issa, and this man said to Issa: "Is it not
true that thou hast represented thyself as a King of Israel, when thou
didst say that He who reigns in Heaven sent thee to prepare His people?"

22\. But Issa blessed the man and answered: "Thou wilt find mercy, for
what thou hast said did not come out from thine own heart." Then,
turning to the governor he said: "Why dost thou lower thy dignity and
teach thy inferiors to tell falsehood, when,

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

without doing so, it is in thy power to condemn an innocent man?"

23\. When Pilate heard his words, he became greatly enraged and ordered
that Issa be condemned to death, and that the two robbers should be
declared guiltless.

24\. The judges, after consulting among themselves, said to Pilate: "We
cannot consent to take this great sin upon us,--to condemn an innocent
man and liberate malefactors. It would be against our laws.

25\. "Act thyself, then, as thou seest fit." Thereupon the priests and
elders walked out, and washed their hands in a sacred vessel, and said:
"We are innocent of the blood of this righteous man."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIV](uljc19)

</div>
