[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](thp17) 
[Next](thp19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766100413/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Hidden Power, by Thomas Troward \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

### XVI

### SEPARATION AND UNITY

I

"THE prince of this world cometh, and hath nothing in Me" (John xiv,
30). In these words the Grand Master of Divine Science gives us the key
to the Great Knowledge. Comparison with other passages shows that the
terms here rendered "prince" and "world" can equally be rendered
"principle" and "age." Jesus is here speaking of a principle of the
present age so entirely opposed to that principle of which he himself
was the visible expression, as to have no part in him. It is the utter
contradiction of everything that Jesus came to teach and to exemplify.
The account Jesus gave of himself was that he came "to bear witness to
the Truth," and in order that men "might have life, and that they might
have it more abundantly"; consequently the principle to which he refers
must be the exact opposite of Truth and Life--that is, it must be the
principle of Falsehood and Death.

What, then, is this false and destructive principle which rules the
present age? If we consider the gist

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

of the entire discourse of which these are the concluding words, we
shall find that the central idea which Jesus has been most strenuously
endeavouring to impress upon his disciples at their last meeting before
the crucifixion, is that of the absolute identity and out-and-out
oneness of "the Father" and "the Son," the principle of the perfect
unity of God and Man. If this, then, was the great Truth which he was
thus earnestly solicitous to impress upon his disciples' minds when his
bodily presence was so shortly to be removed from them--the Truth of
Unity--may we not reasonably infer the opposing falsehood to be the
assertion of separateness, the assertion that God and man are not one?
The idea of separateness is precisely the principle on which the world
has proceeded from that day to this--the assumption that God and man are
not one in being, and that the matter is of a different essence from
spirit. In other words, the principle that finds favour with the
intellectuality of the present age is that of duality--the idea of two
powers and two substances opposite in kind, and, therefore, repugnant to
each other, permeating all things, and so leaving no wholeness anywhere.

The entire object of the Bible is to combat the idea of two opposing
forces in the world. The good news is said to be that of
"reconciliation" (2 Cor. v. 18), where also we are told that "all things
are from God," hence leaving no room for any other power or any other
substance; and the great falsehood, which it is

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

the purpose of the Good News to expose, is everywhere in the Bible
proclaimed to be the suggestion of duality, which is some other mode of
Life, that is not the One Life, but something separate from it--an idea
which it is impossible to state distinctly without involving a
contradiction in terms. Everywhere the Bible exposes the fiction of the
duality of separation as the great lie, but nowhere in so emphatic and
concentrated a manner as in that wonderful passage of Revelations where
it is figured in the mysterious Number of the Beast. "He that hath
understanding let him count the number of the Beast . . . and his number
is six hundred and sixty and six" (Rev. xiii, 18, R.V.). Let me point
out the great principle expressed in this mysterious number. It has
other more particular applications, but this one general principle
underlies them all.

It is an established maxim that every unity contains in itself a
trinity, just as the individual man consists of body, soul, and spirit.
If we would perfectly understand anything, we must be able to comprehend
it in its threefold nature; therefore in symbolic numeration the
multiplying of the unit by three implies the completeness of that for
which the unit stands; and, again, the threefold repetition of a number
represents its extension to infinity. Now mark what results if we apply
these representative methods of numerical expression to the principles
of Oneness and of separateness respectively. Oneness is Unity, and 1 X
3=3,

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

which, intensified to its highest expression, is written as 333. Now
apply the same method to the idea of separateness. Separateness consists
of one and another one, each of which, according to the universal law,
contains a trinity. In this view of duality the totality of things is
two, and 2 X 3=6, and, intensifying this to its highest expression, we
get 666, which is the Number of the Beast.

Why of the Beast? Because separateness from God, or the duality of
opposition, which is also a duality of polarity, which is Dual-Unity,
recognises something as having essential being, which is not the One
Spirit; and such a conception can be verbally rendered only by some word
that in common acceptance represents something, not only lower than the
divine, but lower than the human also. It is because the conception of
oneself as a being apart from God, if carried out to its legitimate
consequences, must ultimately land all who hold it in a condition of
things where open ferocity or secret cunning, the tiger nature or the
serpent nature, can be the only possible rule of action.

Thus it is that the principle of the present age can have no part in
that principle of Perfect Wholeness which the Great Master embodied in
His teaching and in Himself. The two ideas are absolutely incompatible,
and whichever we adopt as our leading principle, it must be to the
entire exclusion of the other; we cannot serve God and Mammon. There is
no such thing as partial wholeness. Either we are still in the

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

principle of Separateness, and our eyes are not yet open to the real
nature of the Kingdom of Heaven; or else we have grasped the principle
of Unity without any exception anywhere, and the One Being includes all,
the body and the soul alike, the visible form and the invisible
substance and life of all equally; nothing can be left out, and we stand
complete here and now, lacking no faculty, but requiring only to become
conscious of our own powers, and to learn to have confidence in them
through "having them exercised by reason of use."

The following communication from "A Foreign Reader," commenting on the
Number of the Beast, as treated by Judge Troward in "Separation and
Unity," is taken from EXPRESSION for 1902, in which it was first
published. Following is Judge Troward's reply to this letter.

Dear Mr. Editor.--A correspondent in the current number of *Expression*
points out the reference in the Book of Revelation to the number 666 as
the mark of the Beast, because the trinity of mind, soul, and body, if
considered as unity, may be expressed by the figures 333, and therefore
duality is 333 X 2 = 666.

I think the inverse of the proposition is still more startling, and I
should like to point it out. Instead of multiplying let us try dividing.
First of all take unity as the unit one and divide by three
(representing of course the same formula, viz., mind, soul and body).
Expressed by a common fraction it is merely 1/3, which is an incomplete
mathematical figure. But take the decimal

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

formula of one divided by three, and we arrive at .3 circulating, i. e.,
.3333 on to infinity. In other words, the result of the proposition by
mathematics is that you divide this formula of spirit, soul, and body
into unity, and it remains true to itself ad infinitum.

Now we come to consider it as a duality in the same way. Expressed as a
vulgar fraction it is 2/3; but as a decimal fraction it is .6666 ad
infinitum. I think this is worth noting.

Yours very faithfully,

A Foreign Reader. Brussels, Aug. 14, 1902.

Dear Editor.--I return with many thanks the very interesting letter
received with yours, and I am very glad that my article should have been
instrumental in drawing forth this further light on the subject.

This, moreover, affords an excellent illustration of one great principle
of Unity, which is that the Unity repeats itself in every one of its
parts, so that each part taken separately is an exact reproduction (in
principles) of the greater Unity of which it is a portion. Therefore, if
you take the individual man as your unit (which is what I did), and
proceed by multiplication, you get the results which were pointed out in
my article. And conversely, if you take the Great Unity of All-Being as
your unit, and proceed by division, you arrive at the result shown by
your foreign correspondent. The principle is a purely mathematical one,
and is extremely interesting in the present application as showing the
existence of a system of concealed mathematics running through the whole
Bible. This bears out what I said in my article that there

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

were other applications of the principle in question, though this one
did not at the time occur to me.

I am much indebted to your correspondent for the further proof thus
given of the correctness of my interpretation of the Number of the
Beast. Both our interpretations support each other, for they are merely
different ways of stating the same thing, and they have this advantage
over those generally given, that they do not refer to any particular
form of evil, but express a general principle applicable to all alike.

Yours sincerely,

T. London, Aug. 30, 1902.

II

It may perhaps emphasize my point if I remind my readers that it was the
conflict between the principles of Unity and separation that led to the
crucifixion of Jesus. We must distinguish between the charge which
really led to his death, and the merely technical charge on which he was
sentenced by the Roman Governor. The latter--the charge of opposition to
the royal authority of Caesar--has its significance; but it is clear
from the Bible record that this was merely formal, the true cause of
conviction being contained in the statement that of the chief priests:
"We have a law, and by our law he ought to die, because he made himself
the Son of God."

The antagonism of the two principles of Unity and

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

separation had first been openly manifested on the occasion when Jesus
made the memorable declaration,

"I and my Father are one." The Jews took up stones to stone him. Then
said Jesus unto them, "Many good works have I shown you from my Father;
for which of those works do ye stone Me?" The Jews replied, "For a good
work we stone thee not; but for blasphemy; and because that thou, being
a man, makest thyself God." Jesus said, "Is it not written in your law,
I said ye are gods? If He called them gods, unto whom the Word of God
came (and the Scriptures cannot be broken), say ye of him, whom the
Father hath sanctified, and sent into the world, thou blasphemest;
because I said, I am the Son of God?" Here we have the first open
passage of arms between the two opposing principles which led to the
scene of Calvary as the final testimony of Jesus to the principle of
Unity. He died because he maintained the Truth; that he was one with the
Father. That was the substantive charge on which he was executed. "Art
thou the son of the Blessed?" he was asked by the priestly tribunal; and
the answer came clear and unequivocal, "I am." Then said the Council,
"He hath spoken blasphemy, what further need have we of witnesses?" And
they all condemned him to be worthy of death.

Jesus did not enter into a palpably useless argument with judges whose
minds were so rooted in the idea of dualism as to be impervious to any
other conception; but with a mixed multitude, who were not officially

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

committed to a system, the case was different. Among them there might be
some still open to conviction, and the appeal was, therefore, made to a
passage in the Psalms with which they were all familiar, pointing out
that the very persons to whom the Divine word was addressed were styled
"gods" by the Divine Speaker Himself. The incontrovertibleness of the
fact was emphasised by the stress laid upon it as "Scripture which
cannot be broken;" and the meaning to be assigned to the statement was
rendered clear by the argument which Jesus deduced from it. He says in
effect, "You would stone me as a blasphemer for saying of myself what
your own Scriptures say concerning each of you." The claim of unity with
"the Father," he urges, was no unique one, but one which the Scripture,
rightly understood, entitled every one of his hearers to make for
himself.

And so we find throughout that Jesus nowhere makes any claim for himself
which he does not also make for those who accept his teaching. Does he
say to the Jews, "Ye are of this world; I am not of this world?" Equally
he says of his disciples, "They are not of the world, even as I am not
of the world." Does he say, "I am the light of the world?" Equally, he
says, "Ye are the light of the world." Does he say, "I and my Father are
one?" Equally he prays that they all might be one, even as we are one.
Is he styled "the Son of God?" Then St. John writes, "To them gave he
power to become sons of God, even to as many

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

as believe on his name;" and by belief on the name we may surely
understand belief in the principle of which the name is the verbal
representation.

The essential unity of God and man is thus the one fact which permeates
the whole teaching of Jesus. He himself stood forth as its living
expression. He appealed to his miracles as the proofs of it: "it is the
Father that doeth the works." It formed the substance of his final
discourse with his disciples in the night that he was betrayed. It is
the Truth, to bear witness to which, he told Pilate, was the purpose of
his life. In support of this Truth he died, and by the living power of
this Truth he rose again. The whole object of his mission was to teach
men to realise their unity with God and the consequences that must
necessarily follow from it; to draw them away from that notion of
dualism which puts an impassable barrier between God and man, and thus
renders any true conception of the Principle of Life impossible; and to
draw them into the clear perception of the innermost nature of Life, as
consisting in the inherent identity of each individual with that
Infinite all-pervading Spirit of Life which he called "the Father."

"The branch cannot bear fruit except it abide in the vine;" the power of
bearing fruit, of producing and of giving forth, depends entirely on the
fact that the individual is, and always continues to be, as much an
organic part of Universal Spirit as the fruit-bearing branch is an
organic part of the parent stem. Lose this idea,

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

and regard God as a merely external Creator who may indeed command us,
or even sometimes be moved by our cries and entreaties, and we have lost
the root of Livingness and with it all possibility of growth or of
liberty. This is dualism, which cuts us off from our Source of Life; and
so long as we take this false conception for the true law of Being, we
shall find ourselves hampered by limitations and insoluble problems of
every description: We have lost the Key of Life and are consequently
unable to open the door.

But in proportion as we abide in the vine, that is, consciously realise
our perpetual unity with Originating Spirit, and impress upon ourselves
that this unity is neither bestowed as the reward of merit, nor as an
act of favour--which would be to deny the Unity, for the bestowal would
at once imply dualism--but dwell on the truth that it is the innermost
and supreme principle of our own nature; in proportion as we consciously
realise this, we shall rise to greater and greater certainty of
knowledge, resulting in more and more perfect externalisation, whose
increasing splendour can know no limits; for it is the continual
outflowing of the exhaustless Spirit of Life in that manifestation of
itself which is our own individuality.

The notion of dualism is the veil which prevents men seeing this, and
causes them to wander blindfolded among the mazes of endless perplexity;
but, as St. Paul truly says, when this veil is taken away we shall find
ourselves changed from glory to glory as by the Lord

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

the Spirit. "His name shall be called Immanuel," that is "God *in* us,"
not a separate being from ourselves. Let us remember that Jesus was
condemned by the principle of separation because he himself was the
externalisation of the principle of Unity, and that, in adhering to the
principle of Unity we are adhering to the only possible root of Life,
and are maintaining the Truth for which Jesus died.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVII. Externalisation](thp19)
