[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](thp18) 
[Next](thp20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766100413/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Hidden Power, by Thomas Troward \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

### XVII

### EXTERNALISATION

WHO would not be happy in himself and his conditions? That is what we
all desire--more fulness of life, a greater and brighter vitality in
ourselves, and less restriction in our surroundings. And we are told
that the talisman by which this can be accomplished is Thought. We are
told, Change your modes of thought, and the changed conditions will
follow. But many seekers feel that this is very much like telling us to
catch birds by putting salt on their tails. If we can put the salt on
the bird's tail, we can also lay our hand on the bird. If we can change
our thinking, we can thereby change our circumstances.

But how are we to bring about this change of cause which will in its
turn produce this changed effect? This is the practical question that
perplexes many earnest seekers. They can see their way clearly enough
through the whole sequence of cause and effect resulting in the
externalisation of the desired results, if only the one initial
difficulty could be got over. The difficulty is a real one, and until it
is overcome it vitiates all the teaching and reduces it to a mere paper

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

theory. Therefore it is to this point that the attention of students
should be particularly directed. They feel the need of some solid basis
from which the change of thought can be effected, and until they find
this the theory of Divine Science, however perfect in itself, will
remain for them nothing more than a mere theory, producing no practical
results.

The necessary scientific basis exists, however, and is extremely simple
and reasonable, if we will take the pains to think it out carefully for
ourselves. Unless we are prepared to support the thesis that the Power
which created the universe is inherently evil, or that the universe is
the work of two opposite and equal powers, one evil and the other
good--both of which propositions are demonstrably false--we have no
alternative but to say that the Originating Source of all must be
inherently good. It cannot be partly good and partly evil, for that
would be to set it against itself and make it self-destructive;
therefore it must be good altogether. But once grant this initial
proposition and we cut away the root of all evil. For how can evil
proceed from an All-originating Source which is good altogether, and in
which, therefore, no germ for the development of evil is to be found?
Good cannot be the origin of evil; and since nothing can proceed except
from the one Originating Mind, which is only good, the true nature of
all things must be that which they have received from their
Source--namely, good.

Hence it follows that evil is not the true nature of

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

anything, and that evil must have its rise in something external to the
true nature of things. And since evil is not in the true nature of the
things themselves, nor yet in the Universal Mind which is the
Originating Principle, there remains only one place for it to spring
from, and that is our own personal thought. First we suppose evil to be
as inherent in the nature of things as good--a supposition which we
could not make if we stopped to consider the necessary nature of the
Originating Principle. Then, on this entirely gratuitous supposition, we
proceed to build up a fabric of fears, which, of course, follow
logically from it; and so we nourish and give substance to the Negative,
or that which has no substantial existence except such as we attribute
to it, until we come to regard it as having Affirmative power of its
own, and so set up a false idea of Being--the product of our own
minds--to dispute the claims of true Being to the sovereignty of the
universe.

Once assume the existence of two rival powers--one good and the other
evil--in the direction of the universe, and any sense of harmony becomes
impossible; the whole course of Nature is thrown out of gear, and,
whether for ourselves or for the world at large, there remains no ground
of certainty anywhere. And this is precisely the condition in which the
majority of people live. They are surrounded by infinite uncertainty
about everything, and are consequently a prey to continual fears and
anxieties; and the only way

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

of escape from this state of things is to go to the root of the matter,
and realise that the whole fabric of evil originates in our own inverted
conception of the nature of Being.

But if we once realise that the true conception of Being necessarily
excludes the very idea of evil, we shall see that, in giving way to
thoughts and fears of evil, we are giving substance to that which has no
real substance in itself, and are attributing to the Negative an
Affirmative force which it does not possess--in fact, we are creating
the very thing we fear. And the remedy for this is always to recur to
the original nature of Being as altogether Good, and then to speak to
ourselves thus: "My thought must continually externalise something, for
that is its inherent quality, which nothing can ever alter. Shall I,
then, externalise God or the opposite of God? Which do I wish to see
manifested in my life--Good or its opposite? Shall I manifest what I
know to be the reality or the reverse?" Then comes the steady resolve
always to manifest God, or Good, because that is the only true reality
in all things; and this resolve is with power because it is founded upon
the solid rock of Truth.

We must refuse to know evil; we must refuse to admit that there is any
such thing to be known. It is the converse of this which is symbolised
in the story of the Fall. "In the day that thou eatest thereof thou
shalt surely die" was never spoken of the knowledge

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

of Good, for Good never brought death into the world. It is eating the
fruit of the tree of a so-called knowledge which admits a second branch,
the knowledge of evil, that is the source of death. Admit that evil has
a substantive entity, which renders it a subject of knowledge, and you
thereby create it, with all its consequences of sorrow, sickness and
death. But "be sure that the Lord He is God"--that is, that the one and
Only Ruling Principle of the universe, whether within us or around us,
is Good and Good only--and evil with all its train sinks back into its
original nothingness, and we find that the Truth has made us free. We
are free to externalise what we will, whether in ourselves or our
surroundings, for we have found the solid basis on which to make the
needed change of mental attitude in the fact that the Good is the only
reality of Being.

1902\.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVIII. Entering into the Spirit of It](thp20)
