[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](thp16) 
[Next](thp18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766100413/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Hidden Power, by Thomas Troward \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

### XV

### BEAUTY

Do we sufficiently direct our thoughts to the subject of Beauty? I think
not. We are too apt to regard Beauty as a merely superficial thing, and
do not realise all that it implies. This was not the case with the great
thinkers of the ancient world--see the place which no less a one than
Plato gives to Beauty as the expression of all that is highest and
greatest in the system of the universe. These great men of old were no
superficial thinkers, and, therefore, would never have elevated to the
supreme place that which is only superficial. Therefore, we shall do
well to ask what it is that these great minds found in the idea of
Beauty which made it thus appeal to them as the most perfect outward
expression of all that lies deepest in the fundamental laws of Being. It
is because, rightly apprehended, Beauty represents the supremest living
quality of Thought. It is the glorious overflowing of fulness of Love
which indicates the presence of infinite reserves of Power behind it. It
is the joyous profusion that shows the possession of inexhaustible
stores of wealth which can afford to be thus lavish and yet

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

remain as exhaustless as before. Read aright, Beauty is the index to the
whole nature of Being.

Beauty is the externalisation of Harmony, and Harmony is the
co-ordinated working of all the powers of Being, both in the individual
and in the relation of the individual to the Infinite from which it
springs; and therefore this Harmony conducts us at once into the
presence of the innermost undifferentiated Life. Thus Beauty is in most
immediate touch with the very arcanum of Life; it is the brightness of
glory spreading itself over the sanctuary of the Divine Spirit. For if,
viewed from without, Beauty is the province of the artist and the poet,
and lays hold of our emotions and appeals directly to the innermost
feelings of our heart, calling up the response of that within us which
recognises itself in the harmony perceived without, this is only because
it speeds across the bridge of Reason with such quick feet that we pass
from the outmost to the inmost and back again in the twinkling of an
eye; but the bridge is still there and, retracing our steps more
leisurely, we shall find that, viewed from within, Beauty is no less the
province of the calm reasoner and analyst. What the poet and the artist
seize upon intuitionally, he elaborates gradually, but the result is the
same in both cases; for no intuition is true which does not admit of
being expanded into a rational sequence of intelligible factors, and no
argument is true which does not admit of being condensed into that rapid
suggestion which is intuition.

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

Thus the impassioned artist and the calm thinker both find that the only
true Beauty proceeds naturally from the actual construction of that
which it expresses. It is not something added on as an afterthought, but
something pre-existing in the original idea, something to which that
idea naturally leads up, and which pre-supposes that idea as affording
it any *raison d’être*. The test of Beauty is, What does it express? Is
it merely a veneer, a coat of paint laid on from without? Then it is
indeed nothing but a whited sepulchre, a covering to hide the vacuity or
deformity which needs to be removed. But is it the true and natural
outcome of what is beneath the surface? Then it is the index to
superabounding Life and Love and Intelligence, which is not content with
mere utilitarianism hasting to escape at the earliest possible point
from the labour of construction, as though from an enforced and
unwelcome task, but rejoicing over its work and unwilling to quit it
until it has expressed this rejoicing in every fittest touch of form and
colour and exquisite proportion that the material will admit of, and
this without departing by a hairbreadth from the original purpose of the
design.

Wherever, therefore, we find Beauty, we may infer an enormous reserve of
Power behind it; in fact, we may look upon it as the visible expression
of the great truth that Life-Power is infinite. And when the inner
meaning of Beauty is thus revealed to us, and we learn to know it as the
very fulness and overflowing of

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Power, we shall
find that we have gained a new standard for the guidance of our own
lives. We must begin to use this wonderful process which we have learnt
from Nature. Having learnt how Nature works--how God works--we must
begin to work in like manner, and never consider any work complete until
we have carried it to some final outcome of Beauty, whether material,
intellectual, or spiritual. Is my intention good? That is the initial
question, for the intention determines the nature of the essence in
everything. What is the most beautiful form in which I can express the
good I intend? That is the ultimate question; for the true Beauty which
our work expresses is the measure of the Power, Intelligence, Love--in a
word, of the quantity and quality of our own life which we have put into
it. True Beauty, mind you--that which is beautiful because it most
perfectly expresses the original idea, not a mere ornamentation
occupying our thoughts as a thing apart from the use intended.

Nothing is of so small account but it has its fullest power of
expression in some form of Beauty peculiarly its own. Beauty is the law
of perfect Thought, be the subject of our Thought some scheme affecting
the welfare of millions, or a word spoken to a little child. True Beauty
and true Power are the correlatives one of the other. Kindly expression
originates in kindly thought; and kindly expression is the essence of
Beauty, which, seeking to express itself ever more and more perfectly,
becomes that fine touch of sympathy

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

which is artistic skill, whether applied in working upon material
substances or upon the emotions of the heart. But, remember, first Use,
then Beauty, and neither complete without the other. Use without Beauty
is ungracious giving, and Beauty without Use is humbug; never
forgetting, however, that there is a region of the mind where the use is
found in the beauty, where Beauty itself serves the direct purpose of
raising us to see a higher ideal which will thenceforward permeate our
lives, giving a more living quality to all we think and say and do.

Seen thus the Beautiful is the true expression of the Good. From
whichever end of the scale we look we shall find that they accurately
measure each other. They are the same thing in the outermost and the
innermost respectively. But in our search for a higher Beauty than we
have yet found we must beware of missing the Beauty that already exists.
Perfect harmony with its environment, and perfect expression of its own
inward nature are what constitute Beauty; and our ignorance of the
nature of the thing or its environment may shut our eyes to the Beauty
it already has. It takes the genius of a Millet to paint, or a Whitman
in words, to show us the beauty of those ordinary work-a-day figures
with which our world is for the most part peopled, whose originals we
pass by as having no form or comeliness. Assuredly the mission of every
thinking man and woman is to help build up forms of greater beauty,
spiritual, intellectual,

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

material, everywhere; but if we would make something grander than
Watteau gardens or Dresden china shepherdesses, we must enter the great
realistic school of Nature and learn to recognise the beauty that
already surrounds us, although it may have a little dirt on the surface.
Then, when we have learnt the great principles of Beauty from the
All-Spirit which is it, we shall know how to develop the Beauty on its
own proper lines without perpetuating the dirt; and we shall know that
all Beauty is the expression of Living Power, and that we can measure
our power by the degree of beauty into which we can transform it,
rendering our lives,

"By loveliness of perfect deeds,  
More strong than all poetic thought."

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVI. Separation and Unity](thp18)
