[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](thp15) 
[Next](thp17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766100413/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Hidden Power, by Thomas Troward \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

### XIV

### THE SPIRIT OF OPULENCE

IT is quite a mistake to suppose that we must restrict and stint
ourselves in order to develop greater power or usefulness. This is to
form the conception of the Divine Power as so limited that the best use
we can make of it is by a policy of self-starvation, whether material or
mental. Of course, if we believe that some form of self-starvation is
necessary to our producing good work, then so long as we entertain this
belief the fact actually is so *for us*. "Whatsoever is not of
faith"--that is, not in accordance with our honest *belief*--"is sin";
and by acting contrary to what we really believe we bring in a
suggestion of opposition to the Divine Spirit, which must necessarily
paralyse our efforts, and surround us with a murky atmosphere of
distrust and want of joy.

But all this exists in, and is produced by, our *belief*; and when we
come to examine the grounds of this belief we shall find that it rests
upon an entire misapprehension of the nature of our own power. If we
clearly realise that the creative power in ourselves is *unlimited*,
then there is no reason for limiting the

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

extent to which we may enjoy what we can create by means of it. Where we
are drawing from the *infinite* we need never be afraid of taking more
than our share. That is not where the danger lies. The danger is in not
sufficiently realising our own richness, and in looking upon the
externalised products of our creative power as being the true riches
instead of the creative power of spirit itself.

If we avoid this error, there is no need to limit ourselves in taking
what we will from the infinite storehouse: "All things are yours." And
the way to avoid this error is by realising that the true wealth is in
identifying ourselves with the *spirit* of opulence. We must be opulent
in our *thought*. Do not "think money," as such, for it is only one
means of opulence; but *think opulence*, that is, largely, generously,
liberally, and you will find that the means of realising this thought
will flow to you from all quarters, whether as money or as a hundred
other things not to be reckoned in cash.

We must not make ourselves dependent on any particular *form* of wealth,
or insist on its coming to us through some particular channel--that is
at once to impose a limitation, and to shut out other forms of wealth
and to close other channels; but we must enter into the *spirit* of it.
Now the spirit is Life, and throughout the universe Life ultimately
consists in *circulation*, whether within the physical body of the
individual or on the scale of the entire solar system;

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

and circulation means a continual flowing around, and the *spirit* of
opulence is no exception to this universal law of all life.

When once this principle becomes clear to us we shall see that our
attention should be directed rather to the giving than the receiving. We
must look upon ourselves, not as misers' chests to be kept locked for
our own benefit, but as centres of distribution; and the better we
fulfil our function as such centres the greater will be the
corresponding inflow. If we choke the outlet the current must slacken,
and a full and free flow can be obtained only by keeping it open. The
spirit of opulence--the opulent mode of thought, that is--consists in
cultivating the feeling that we possess all sorts of riches which we can
*bestow upon others*, and which we can bestow *liberally* because by
this very action we open the way for still greater supplies to flow in.
But you say, "I am short of money, I hardly know how to pay for
necessaries. What have I to give?"

The answer is that we must always start from the point where we are; and
if your wealth at the present moment is not abundant on the material
plane, you need not trouble to start on that plane. There are other
sorts of wealth, still more valuable, on the spiritual and intellectual
planes, which you can give; and you can start from this point and
practise the spirit of opulence, even though your balance at the bank
may be nil. And then the universal law of attraction

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

will begin to assert itself. You will riot only begin to experience an
inflow on the spiritual and intellectual planes, but it will extend
itself to the material plane also.

If you have realised the *spirit* of opulence you *cannot help* drawing
to yourself material good, as well as that higher wealth which is not to
be measured by a money standard; and because you truly understand the
*spirit* of opulence you will neither affect to despise this form of
good, nor will you attribute to it a value that does not belong to it;
but you will *co-ordinate* it with your other more interior forms of
wealth so as to make it the material instrument in smoothing the way for
their more perfect expression. Used thus, with understanding of the
relation which it bears to spiritual and intellectual wealth, material
wealth becomes *one with them*, and is no more to be shunned and feared
than it is to be sought for its own sake.

It is not money, but the *love* of money, that is the root of evil; and
the *spirit* of opulence is precisely the attitude of mind which is
furthest removed from the love of money for its own sake. It does not
believe in money. What it does believe in is the generous feeling which
is the intuitive recognition of the great law of circulation, which does
not in any undertaking make its first question, How much am I going to
*get* by it? but, How much am I going to *do* by it? And making *this*
the first question, the getting will flow in with a generous profusion,
and with a spontaneousness

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

and rightness of direction that are absent when our first thought is of
receiving only.

We are not called upon to give what we have not yet got and to run into
debt; but we are to give liberally of what we have, with the knowledge
that by so doing we are setting the law of circulation to work, and as
this law brings us greater and greater inflows of every kind of good, so
our out-giving will increase, not by depriving ourselves of any
expansion of our own life that we may desire, but by finding that every
expansion makes us the more powerful instruments for expanding the life
of others. "Live and let live" is the motto of the true opulence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XV. Beauty](thp17)
