[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](thp23) 
[Next](thp25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766100413/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Hidden Power, by Thomas Troward \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

### XXII

### MIND AND HAND

I HAVE before me a curious piece of ancient Egyptian symbolism. It
represents the sun sending down to the earth innumerable rays, with the
peculiarity that each ray terminates in a hand. This method of
representing the sun is so unusual that it suggests the presence in the
designer's mind of some idea rather different from those generally
associated with the sun as a spiritual emblem; and, if I interpret the
symbol rightly, it sets forth the truth, not only of the Divine Being as
the Great Source of all Life and of all Illumination, but also the
correlative truth of our individual relation to that centre. Each ray is
terminated by a hand, and a hand is the emblem of active working; and I
think it would be difficult to give a better symbolical representation
of innumerable individualities, each working separately, yet all
deriving their activity from a common source. The hand is at work upon
the earth, and the sun, from which it is a ray, is shining in the
heavens; but the connecting line shows whence all the strength and skill
of the hand are derived.

If we look at the microcosm of our own person we

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

find this principle exactly reproduced. Our hand is the instrument by
which all our work is done--literary, artistic, mechanical, or
household--but we know that all this work is really the work of the
mind, the will-power at the centre of our system, which first determines
what is to be done, and then sets the hand to work to do it; and in the
doing of it the mind and hand become one, so that the hand is none other
than the mind working. Now, transferring this analogy to the microcosm,
we see that we each stand in the same relation to the Universal Mind
that our hand does to our individual mind--at least, that is our normal
relation; and we shall never put forth our full strength except from
this standpoint.

We rightly realise our will as the centre of our individuality, but we
should do better to picture our individuality as an ellipse rather than
a circle, a figure having two "conjugate foci," two equilibriated
centres of revolution rather than a single one, one of which is the
will-power or faculty of *doing*, and the other the consciousness or
perception of *being*. If we realise only one of these two centres we
shall lose both mental and moral balance. If we lose sight of that
centre which is our personal will, we shall become flabby visionaries
without any backbone; and if, in our anxiety to develop backbone, we
lost sight of the other centre, we shall find that we have lost that
which corresponds to the lungs and heart in the physical body, and that
our backbone, however perfectly developed, is rapidly drying

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

up for want of those functions which minister vitality to the whole
system, and is only fit to be hung up in a museum to show what a rigid,
lifeless thing the strongest vertebral column becomes when separated
from the organisation by which alone it can receive nourishment. We must
realise the one focus of our individuality as clearly as the other, and
bring both into equal balance, if we would develop all our powers and
rise to that perfection of Life which has no limits to its glorious
possibilities.

Keeping the ancient Egyptian symbol before used, and considering
ourselves as the hand, we find that we derive all our power from an
infinite centre; and because it is infinite we need never fear that we
shall fail to draw to ourselves all that we require for our work,
whether it be the intelligence to lay hold of the proper tool, or the
strength to use it. And, moreover, we learn from the symbol that this
central power is generic. This is a most important truth. It is the
centre from which all the hands proceed, and is as fully open to any one
hand as to any other. Each hand is doing its separate work, and the
whole of the central energy is at its disposal for its own specific
purpose. The work of the central energy, as such, is to supply vitality
to the hands, and it is they that differentiate this universal power
into all the varied forms of application which their different aptitudes
and opportunities suggest. We, as the hands, live and work because the
Central Mind lives and works in us. We are one with it, and it

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

Is one with us; and so long as we keep this primal truth before us, we
realise ourselves as beings of unlimited goodness and intelligence and
power, and we work in the fulness of strength and confidence
accordingly; but if we lose sight of this truth, we shall find that the
strongest will must get exhausted at last in the unequal struggle of the
individual against the universe.

For if we do not recognise the Central Mind as the source of our
vitality, we are literally "fighting for our own hand," and all the
other hands are against us, for we have lost the principle of connection
with them. This is what must infallibly happen if we rely on nothing but
our individual will-power. But if we realise that the will is the power
by which we give out, and that every giving out implies a corresponding
taking in, then we shall find in the boundless ocean of central living
Spirit the source from which we can go on taking in *ad infinitum*, and
which thus enables us to give out to any extent we please. But for wise
and effective giving out a strong and enlightened will is an absolute
necessity, and therefore we do well to cultivate the will, or the active
side of our nature. But we must equally cultivate the receptive side
also; and when we do this rightly by seeing in the Infinite Mind the one
source of supply, our will-power becomes intensified by the knowledge
that the whole power of the Infinite is present to back it up; and with
this continual sense of Infinite Power behind us we can go calmly and
steadily

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

to the accomplishment of any purpose, however difficult, without
straining or effort, knowing that it shall be achieved, not by the hand
only, but by the invincible Mind that works through it. "Not by might,
nor by power, but by My Spirit, saith the Lord of hosts."

1902\.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIII. The Central Control](thp25)
