[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](thp25) 
[Next](thp27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766100413/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Hidden Power, by Thomas Troward \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

### XXIV

### WHAT IS HIGHER THOUGHT?

Resolution passed October, 1902, by the Kensington Higher Thought
Centre.

"*That the Centre stands for the definite teaching of absolute Oneness
of Creator and Creation--Cause and Effect--and that nothing which may
contradict or be in opposition to the above principles be admitted to
the 'Higher Thought' Centre Platform*.

"*By Oneness of Cause and Effect is meant, that Effect (man) does
consist only of what Cause is; but a part (individual personality) is
not therefore co-extensive with the whole*."

THIS Resolution is of the greatest importance. Once admit that there is
any Power outside yourself, however beneficent you may conceive it to
be, and you have sown the seed which must sooner or later bear the fruit
of "*Fear*" which is the entire ruin of Life, Love and Liberty. There is
no *via media*. Say we are only reflections, however accurate, of The
Life, and in the admission we have given away our Birthright. However
small or plausible may be the germ of thought which admits that we are
anything less in principle than, The

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Life Itself, it
must spring up to the ultimate ruin of the Life-Principle itself. We
*are* It itself. The difference is only that between the generic and the
specific of the *same* thing. We must contend earnestly, both within
ourselves and outwardly, for the *one great foundation* and never, now
on to all eternity, admit for a single instant any thought which is
opposed to this, the Basic Truth of Being.

The leading ideas connected with Higher Thought are (I) That Man
controls circumstances, instead of being controlled by them, and (II) as
a consequence of the foregoing, that whatever teaches us to *rely* on
power *borrowed* from a source *outside* ourselves is *not* Higher
Thought; and that whatever explains to us the *Infinite* source of our
*own inherent power* and the consequent *limitless* nature of that power
*is* Higher Thought. This avoids the use of terms which may only puzzle
those not accustomed to abstract phraseology, and is substantially the
same as the resolution of October, 1902.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXV. Fragments](thp27)
