[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sce02)  [Next](sce04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II. THE SECRET COMMONWEALTH.

The tract, of which the reader now knows the history, is a little volume
of somewhat singular character. Written in 1691 by the Rev. Robert Kirk,
minister of Aberfoyle, it is a kind of metaphysic of the Fairy world.
Haying lived through the period of the sufferings of the Kirk, the
author might have been expected either to neglect Fairyland altogether,
or to regard it as a mere appanage of Satan's kingdom--a "burning

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

question" indeed, for some of the witches who suffered at Presbyterian
hands were merely narrators of popular tales about the state of the
dead. That she trafficked with the dead, and from a ghost won a medical
recipe for the cure of Archbishop Adamson of St. Andrews, was the charge
against Alison Pearson. "The Bischope keipit his castle lyk a tod in his
holl, seik of a disease of grait fetiditie, and oftymes under the cure
of women suspected of witchcraft, namlie, ane wha confessit hir to haiff
learnit medecin of ane callit Mr. Wilyeam Simsone, that apeired divers
tymes to hir efter his dead, and gaiff hir a buik. . . . She was execut
in Edinbruche for a witch " (James Melville's *Diary*, p. 137, 1583).
The Archbishop, like other witches, had a familiar in the form of a
hare, which once ran before him down the street. These were the beliefs
of men of learning like James, the nephew and companion of Andrew
Melville. Even in our author's own time, Archbishop Sharp was accused of
entertaining "the muckle black Deil" in his study at midnight, and of
being "levitated" and dancing in the air. This last feat, creditable to
a saint or a Neo-Platonist like Plotinus, was reckoned for

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

sin to Archbishop Sharp, as may be read in Wodrow's *Analecta*. Thus all
Fairydom was commonly looked on as under the same guilt as witchcraft.
Yet Mr. Kirk of Aberfoyle, living among Celtic people, treats the land
of faery as a mere fact in nature, a world with its own laws, which he
investigates without fear of the Accuser of the Brethren. We may thus
regard him, even more than Wodrow, as an early student in folk-lore and
in psychical research--topics which run into each other--and he shows
nothing of the usual persecuting disposition. Nor, again, is Mr. Kirk
like Glanvil and Henry More. He does not, save in his title-page and in
one brief passage, make superstitious creeds or psychical phenomena into
arguments and proofs against modern Sadducees. Firm in his belief, he
treats his matter in a scientific spirit, as if he were dealing with
generally recognised physical phenomena.

Our study of Mr. Kirk's little tractate must have a double aspect. It
must be an essay partly on folk-lore, on popular beliefs, their relation
to similar beliefs in other parts of the world, and the residuum of
fact, preserved by tradition, which they may contain. On the

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

other hand, as mental phenomena are in question--such things as
premonitions, hallucinations, abnormal or unusual experiences
generally--a criticism of Mr. Kirk must verge on "Psychical Research."
The Society organised for that difficult subject certainly takes a vast
deal of trouble about all manner of odd reports and strange visions. It
"transfers" thoughts of no value, at a great expense of time and of
serious hard work. But, as far as the writer has read the Society's
Proceedings, it "takes no keep," as Malory says, of these affairs in
their historical aspect. Whatever hallucination, or illusion, or
imposture, or the "subliminal self" can do today, has always been done
among peoples in every degree of civilisation. An historical study of
the topic, as contained in trials for witchcraft, in the reports of
travellers and missionaries, in the works of the seventeenth-century
Platonists, More, Glanvill, Sinclair, and others, and in the rare tracts
such as *The Devil in Glen Luce* and *The Just Devil of Woodstock*, not
to mention Lavater, Wierus, Thyræus, Reginald Scott, and so on, is as
necessary to the psychologist as to the folklorist. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) If there be an element of fact

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

in modern hypnotic experiments (a matter on which I have really no
opinion), it is plain that old magic and witchcraft are not mere
illusions, or not commonplace illusions. The subliminal self has his
stroke in these affairs. Assuredly the Psychologists should have an
historical department. The evidence which they would find is, of course,
vitiated in many obvious ways, but the evidence contains much that
coincides with that of modern times, and the coincidence can hardly be
designed--that is to say, the old Highland seers had no design of
abetting modern inquiry. It may be, however, that their methods and
ideas have been traditionally handed down to modern "sensitives" and
"mediums." At all events, here is an historical chapter, if it be but a
chapter in "The History of Human Error." These wide and multifarious
topics can only be touched on lightly in this essay; the author will be
content if he directs the attention of students with more leisure and a
better library of *diablerie* to the matter. But first we glance at *The
Secret Commonwealth* as folk-lorists.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[xvi:1](sce03.htm#fr_0) Note
( [a](sce29.htm#xref_a)), p. 81.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Subterranean Inhabitants](sce04)
