[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sce03)  [Next](sce05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

### III. "THE SUBTERRANEAN INHABITANTS."

Mr. Kirk's first chapter, "Of the Subterranean Inhabitants," naturally
suggests the recent speculations of Mr. MacRitchie. The gist of Mr.
MacRitchie's *Testimony of Tradition* is that there once was a race of
earth-dwellers in this island; that their artificial caves still exist;
that this people survive in popular memory as "the legendary Feens," and
as the Pechts of popular tales, in which they are regarded as dwarfs.
"The Pechs were unco wee bodies, but terrible strang." Here, then, it
might be thought that we have the origin of Fairy beliefs. There really
was, on this showing, a dwarf race, who actually did live in the
"fairy-hills," or howes, now commonly looked on as sepulchral monuments.

There is much in Mr. MacRitchie's theory which does not commend itself
to me. The modern legends of Pechts as builders of Glasgow Cathedral,
for example, do not appear to prove such a late survival of a race known
as Picts, but are on a level with the old Greek belief that the Cyclopes
built Mycenæ (*Testimony of Tradition*, p. 72). Granting, for the sake
of discussion,

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

that there were still Picts or Pechs in Galloway when Glasgow Cathedral
was built (in the twelfth century), these wild Galloway men, scourges of
the English Border, were the very last people to be employed as masons.
The truth is that the recent Scotch have entirely forgotten the ages of
mediæval art. Accustomed to the ill-built barns of a robbed and stinted
Kirk, they looked on the. Cathedral as no work of ordinary human beings.
It was a creation of the Pechts, as Mycenæ and Tiryns of the mighty
walls were creations of the Cyclopes. By another coincidence, the
well-known story of the last Pecht, who refuses to divulge the secret of
the heather ale, is told in the Volsunga Saga, and in the
*Nibelungenlied*, of the Last Niflung. Again, the breaking of a bar of
iron, which he takes for a human arm, by the last Pecht is a tale
current of the Drakos in modern Greece (see Chambers's *Popular
Traditions of Scotland* for the last Pecht). I cannot believe that the
historical Picts were a set of half-naked, dwarfish savages, hairy men
living underground. These are the topics of Sir Arthur Wardour and
Monkbarns. Mr. W. F. Skene may be said to have put the historic Picts in

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

their proper place as the ancestors of the Highlanders. The Pecht of
legend answers to the Drakos and the Cyclopes: the beliefs about his
habits may have been suggested by the tumuli, still more by the
*brochs*: it seems less probable that they represent an historical
memory. As to the Irish "Feens," the topic can only be discussed by
Celtic scholars. But it does not follow, because the leader of the Feens
seemed a dwarf among giants, that therefore his people were a dwarfish
race. <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) The story proves no more than
Gulliver's Travels.

Once more, we often read in the Sagas of a hero like Grettir, who opens
a howe, has a conflict with a "barrow-wight," as Mr. Morris calls the
"howe-dweller," and wins gold and weapons. But the dweller in the howe
is often merely the able-bodied ghost of the Norseman, a known and named
character, who is buried there; he is not a Pecht. Thus, as it seems to
me, the Scotch and Celts possessed a theory of a legendary people, as
did the Greeks. Whether any actual traditions of an earlier, perhaps a
Finnish race, was at the bottom of the legend, is an obscure question,
But, having such a

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

belief, the Scotch easily discovered homes for the fancied people in the
sepulchral howes: they "combined their information." The Fairies, again,
are composite creatures. As they came to births and christenings, and as
Norse wise-wives (as in the Saga of Eric the Red) prophesied at
festivals, Mr. MacRitchie combines his own information. The Wise-wife is
a Finn woman, and Finn and Fairy amalgamate. But the Egyptians, as in
the *Tale of Two Brothers* (Maspero, *Contes Egyptiens*), had their
Hathors, who came and prophesied at births; the Greeks had their Mœræ,
as in the story of Meleager and the burning brand. The Hathors and Mœræ
play, in ancient Egypt and in ancient Greece, the part of Fairies at the
christening, but surely they were not Finnish women! In short, though a
memory of some old race may have mingled in the composite Fairy belief,
this is at most but an element in the whole, and the part played by
ancestral spirits, naturally earth-dwellers, is probably more important.
Bishop Callaway has pointed out, in the preface to his *Zulu Tales*,
that what the Highlanders say of the Fairies the Zulus say of "the
Ancestors." In many ways, as when persons carried off to

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Fairyland meet relations or friends lately
deceased, who warn them, as Persephone and Steenie Steenson were warned,
to eat no food in this place, Fairyland is clearly a memory of the
pre-Christian Hades. There are other elements in the complex mass of
Fairy tradition, but Chaucer knew "the Fairy Queen Proserpina," as
Campion calls her, and it is plain that in very fact "the dread
Persephone," the "Queen over death and the dead," had dwindled into the
lady who borrows Tamlane in the ballad. Indeed Kirk mentions but does
not approve of this explanation, "that those subterranean people are
departed souls." Now, as was said, the dead are dwellers under earth.
The worshippers of Chthonian Demeter (Achaia) beat the earth with wands;
so does the Zulu sorcerer when he appeals to the Ancestors. And a
Macdonald in Moidart, being pressed for his rent, beat the earth, and
cried aloud to his dead chief, "Simon, hear me; you were always good to
me." <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[xx:1](sce04.htm#fr_1) *The Testimony of
Tradition*, p. 75.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[xxii:1](sce04.htm#fr_2) In Father Macdonald's
book on Moidart.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. Fairyland and Hades](sce05)
