[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sce06)  [Next](sce08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VI. SECOND SIGHT AND "TELEPATHY."

We have already hinted that events of an ordinary kind--illusions, cases
of mistaken identity, or hallucination--are probably the groundwork in
part of the Highland belief in second sight. Of course, if a certain
proportion of hallucinations were or could be taken for "veridical,"
attention would be given to these alone: the others would be neglected.
The Psychical Society has collected and examined hundreds of these cases
in modern life.

The Society may find out, experimentally, whether second sight can be
acquired in the manner described by Mr. Kirk--whether by

<span id="page_lviii">p. lviii</span>

the hair tether, or by merely putting the foot under that of a seer.
Thus contact is used in thought reading, as, in second sight, the seer
by contact communicates his hallucination. Second sight itself is now
called telepathy, which, however, does not essentially advance our
knowledge of the subject. It is either very common, or people who choose
to claim the possession of it are very common. In our society it is mere
matter for idle tales; in the Highlands the second sight was a belief
and a system. Mr. Pepys and Dr. Johnson investigated the matter, and Dr.
Johnson came away open to conviction, but unconvinced. The Psychical
Society is now examining second sight in the Highlands. It is
interesting to learn that the Presbyterian seers justified their visions
out of the Bible, which also justified the burning of these gifted men
on occasion. Mr. Kirk is tolerant enough to ascribe their visions to a
"bounty of Providence." This may have passed, north of the Highland
line, but in Fife and the south the seers would speedily have been
accommodated with a stake and tar-barrel. The writings of Wodrow and Mr.
Robert Blair of St. Andrews (1650-60)

<span id="page_lix">p. lix</span>

prove that if a savoury preacher wrought marvels, he was inspired, but
if an amateur did the very same things,--prophesied, healed diseases,
and so forth,--he, or she, was likely to be haled before the Presbytery,
and possibly dragged to the stake. In the Highlands these invidious
distinctions were less forcibly drawn. Mr. Kirk treats the whole
question in his curiously cold scientific way. If these things occur,
they are in the realm of Nature, and are results of causes which may be
variously conjectured. They may be providential, or a sport of
evolution, derived from "a complexionall Quality of the first acquirer,"
which often becomes hereditary in his lineage.

Lord Tarbott's letter to an inquirer, Robert Boyle, is added by Mr. Kirk
to his little treatise, with his own annotations. His belief that the
Fairy sights could only be seen while the eyes are kept steady without
twinkling, is attested by a well-known anecdote. On the afternoon of
Culloden, a little girl, staying with Lord Lovat at Gortuleg, was
reading in a window-seat. Chancing to look out, she saw a company of
headlong riders hastening to the castle. Believing them to be the
*Sleagh Maith*,

<span id="page_lx">p. lx</span>

she tried hard to keep her eyes from twinkling, that she might not lose
the vision. But these, alas! were no Fairies, they were Prince Charles
and his men flying from the victorious English. The tale proves that the
belief long survived the day of the minister of Aberfoyle. Lord Tarbott
mentions, also, the vision of the shroud on the breast of a man about to
die, which seems to be alluded to in the prophecy of Theoclymenus in the
*Odyssey*. Lord Tarbott's tales are of the familiar kind, there are
dozens of such in *Theophilus Insulanus*. Mr. Kirk's notes are chiefly
remarkable for his citation of Walter Grahame's "evil eye," which killed
what he praised,--a world-wide superstition, too common to need
supporting by foreign and classical examples.

Unluckily, at this point Mr. Kirk abandons what we may call his
scientific attitude. He has accounted for his "supernatural" affairs as
not supernatural at all, but phenomena in Nature, and subject, like
other phenomena, to laws. But now it occurs to him to explain the
conduct of his *Sleagh Maith* as the result of missionary zeal on their
part: "they endeavour to convince us of a Deity; " though, on the face

<span id="page_lxi">p. lxi</span>

of his argument, a Co-walker no more proves a Deity than does an
ordinary "walker." He may have been reading "the learned Dr. Mor" (More
the Platonist), and may have altered his ideas. His account of a girl
who learned, or rather composed, a long poem by aid of "our nimble and
courteous spirits," affords an early example of what is called "an
inspirational medium." It is unlucky that Mr. Kirk did not publish this
work, of which he had a copy. The ordinary "spiritual" poetry may be
written, as Dr. Johnson said of *Ossian*, "by any one who would abandon
his mind to it." When Mr. Kirk maintains that Neolithic arrow-heads
could not have been executed "by all the Airt of man," he relapses from
his usual odd common-sense. He also believes in men who are magically
shot-proof, like Claverhouse, who had to be shot by a silver bullet;
like Archbishop Sharp, on whom his pious assassins erroneously held that
their bullets took no effect; and like certain soldiers mentioned by
Dugald Dalgetty of Drumthwacket. This absurd belief was very generally
held by the Covenanters. Where his local superstitions and those of his
generation are not concerned, Mr. Kirk recovers his clearness of
intellect. In

<span id="page_lxii">p. lxii</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Purgatory he finds only the pre-Christian Hades,
"our Secret Republick," with an ecclesiastical colouring--"additional
Fictions of Monks' doting and crazied Heads." Mr. Kirk did not perceive
the danger involved in his own argument. If a Highland second-sighted
man answers to a Hebrew prophet in his visions and trances, a Hebrew
prophet is in danger of being no more considered than a Highland
second-sighted man. However, it is to Mr. Kirk's praise that he shows no
persecuting disposition as far as witches are concerned (though he has
seen them pricked), and that he argues very fairly from his premisses,
and within his limits. <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27.md) He recognises
the unity of spiritual phenomena and of popular beliefs, whether it
springs from a common well-head of delusion in our nature, or whether it
really has a source in the observation of peculiar and rather rare
phenomena.

To the Edinburgh edition of 1815 (probably the only one) the editor
added the work of Theophilus Insulanus on Second Sight. This is not rare
nor expensive, and we do not reproduce it. One case of "telepathy" may
be quoted from Theophilus.

<span id="page_lxiii">p. lxiii</span>

"Donald Beaton, residenter in Hammir, related that, in his passage from
Glasgow to the Isle of Sky, he stopped at Tippermory, a known harbour in
the Isle of Mull." Here some one gave him a loin of venison. Donald,
whose wife's mother was a seer, to try her powers, wished that piece of
venison in her hands. "The same night the seer, who lived with her
daughter, his wife, apprehended she saw him enter the house with a
shapeless lump in his hands--she knew not what, but it resembled flesh,
which gave herself and her daughter great joy, as they had despaired of
him by his long absence." This is "telepathy," if telepathy there be.

Another picturesque tale shows how, on the night before the Rout of Moy,
Patrick M'Caskill met the famed M'Rimmon (*sic*), M'Leod's piper, in the
town of Inverness, and saw him contract into the size of a boy of five
or six, and expand again into his athletic proportions. M'Rimmon was
killed in the Rout of Moy--an attempt to surprise and seize Prince
Charles. Before leaving Skye he had prophesied--

M'Leod shall come back,  
But M'Rimmon shall never."

 

<span id="page_lxiv">p. lxiv</span>

The editor is acquainted with a splendid case of second sight in
Kensington. The seer was an accomplished English gentleman, and
mentioned his vision at the moment to a witness who remembers and
corroborates the statement. Thus the Hebrides and Highlands have no
monopoly of second sight.

The researches of M. Charcot, M. Richet, and other psychologists do not
at present help us much in the matter of veridical second sight. It is
not a hallucination "suggested" to a hypnotised subject, but an
impression produced by a remote person or event on a subject who has not
been hypnotised at all. For example, Dr. Adam Clarke, in his *Life*
(vol. ii. p. 16) tells us of Mr. Tracy Clarke, who, being in the Isle of
Man with his son, dreamed that he had visited his wife in Liverpool. He
told his son that Mrs. Clarke was looking very well, but, contrary to
her habit, was sleeping in the best bedroom. On the day when Mr. Clarke
said this, Mrs. Clarke, who had been sleeping in her best bedroom, told
the little son who lay in her room that she had heard his father ride up
to the house, stable his horse, open the door, come upstairs, and walk
round her bed, but that she

<span id="page_lxv">p. lxv</span>

could not see him. This is a case at least of second hearing, and has no
hypnotic explanation.

We end in the candid spirit of Dr. Johnson, as far as the Polter-Geist
and second sight are concerned--willing to be convinced, but far indeed
from conviction. As to the Fairy belief, we conceive it to be a complex
matter, from which tradition, with its memory of earth-dwellers, is not
wholly absent, while more is due to a survival of the pre-Christian
Hades, and to the belief in local spirits--the Vuis of Melanesia, the
Nereids of ancient and modern Greece, the Lares of Rome, the fateful
Mœræ and Hathors--old imaginings of a world not yet "dispeopled of its
dreams." <span id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_27"></span>[lxii:1](sce07.htm#fr_27.md) Note
( [f](sce29.htm#xref_f)), [p. 86](sce29.htm#page_86.md).

<span id="fn_28"></span>[lxv:1](sce07.htm#fr_28.md) The "earth-houses " in
Scotland and the isles, which seem to have been inhabited at an early
period, can seldom be called hills or mounds; being built for purposes
of concealment, they are usually almost on a level with the surrounding
land. The *Fairy hills*, on the other hand, are higher and much more
notable, and were probably sepulchral. This, at least, is the impression
left on me by Mr. MacRitchie's book, *The Underground Life*. (Privately
printed. Edinburgh, 1892.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Colophon](sce08.md)
