[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sce04)  [Next](sce06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

### IV. FAIRYLAND AND HADES.

Thus, to my mind at least, the *Subterranean Inhabitants* of Mr. Kirk's
book are not so much a traditional recollection of a real dwarfish race
living underground (a hypothesis of Sir Walter Scott's), as a lingering
memory of the Chthonian beings, "the Ancestors." A good case in point is
that of Bessie Dunlop, of Dalry, in Ayrshire, tried on 8th November 1576
for witchcraft. She dealt in medicine and white magic, and obtained her
prescriptions from Thomas Reid, slain at Pinkie fight (1547), who often
appeared to her, and tried to lead her off to Fairyland. She, like
Alison Pearson, was "convict and burnt" (Scott's *Demonology*, p. 146,
and Pitcairn's *Criminal Trials*). Both ladies knew the Fairy Queen, and
Alison Pearson beheld Maitland of Lethington, and Buccleugh, in
Fairyland, as is recounted in a rhymed satire on Archbishop Adamson
(Dalzell's *Scottish Poems*, p. 321). These are excellent proofs that
Fairyland was a kind of Hades, or home of the dead.

Mr. Kirk, who speaks of the *Sleagh Maith* as confidently as if he were
discussing the habits of some remote race which he has visited, credits

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

them, as the Greek gods were credited, with the power of nourishing
themselves on some fine essential part of human sacrifice, of human
food, "some fine spirituous Liquors, that peirce like pure Air and Oil,
on the poyson or substance of Corns and Liquors." Others, more gross,
steal the actual grain, "as do Crowes and Mice." They are heard
hammering in the howes: as Brownies they enter houses and cleanse the
hearths. They are the Domovoys, as the Russians call them. John Major,
in his exposition of St. Matthew (1518, fol. xlviii.), gives perhaps the
oldest account of Brownies, in a believing temper. Major styles them
Fauni or *brobne*. They thrash as much grain in one night as twenty men
could do. They throw stones about among people sitting by the fire.
Whether they can predict future events is doubtful (see Mr. Constable in
Major's *Greater Britain*, p. xxx. Edinburgh, 1892). To us they seem not
much remote from the Roman Lares--spirits of the household, of the
hearth. In all these creatures Mr. Kirk recognises "an abstruse People,"
who were before our more substantial race, whose furrows are still to be
seen on the hill-tops. They never were, to his mind, plain palpable

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

folk; they are only visible, in their quarterly flittings, to men of the
second sight. That gift of vision includes not only power to see distant
or future events, but the viewless forms of air. To shun the flittings,
men visit church on the first Sunday of the quarter: then they will be
hallowed against elf-shots, "these Arrows that fly in the dark." As is
well known, superstition explained the Neolithic arrow-heads as Fairy
weapons; it does not follow that a tradition of a Neolithic people
suggested the belief in Fairies. But we cannot deny absolutely that some
such memory of an earlier race, a shy and fugitive people who used
weapons of stone, may conceivably play its part in the Fairy legend.

Thence Mr. Kirk glides into that singular theory of savage metaphysics
which somewhat resembles the Platonic doctrine of Ideas. All things, in
Red Indian belief, have somewhere their ideal counterpart or "Father."
Thus a donkey, when first seen, was regarded as "the Father" or
archetype "of Rabbits." Now the second-sighted behold the "Double-man,"
"Doppel-ganger," "Astral Body," "Wraith," or what you will, of a living
person, and that is merely his counterpart in the abstruse world. The

<span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

industry of the Psychical Society has collected much material--evidence,
whatever its value, for the existence of the Double-man. We may call it
a hallucination, which does not greatly increase our knowledge. From
personal experience, and the experience of friends, I am constrained to
believe that we may think we see a person who is not really present to
the view--who may be in the next room, or downstairs, or a hundred miles
off. This experience has occurred to the sane, the unimaginative, the
healthy, the free from superstition, and in circumstances by no means
mystic--for example, when the person supposed to be seen was not dying,
nor distressed, nor in any but the most normal condition. Indeed, the
cases when there was nothing abnormal in the state of the person seen
are far more numerous, in my personal knowledge, than those in which the
person seen was dying, or dead, or excited. The reverse appears to be
the rule in the experience of the Psychical Society. "The actual
proportion of coincidental to non-coincidental cases, after all
deduction for possible sources of error, was in fact such that the
probability against the supposition of chance coincidence became
enormous, on the assumption of

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

ordinary accuracy on the part of informants" (Professor Sidgwick, *Proc.
S. P. R.*, vol. viii. p. 607). Some 17,000 answers were collected. We
must apparently accept these facts as not very abnormal nor very
unusual, and doubtless as capable of some subjective explanation. But
when such things occurred among imaginative and uneducated Highlanders,
they became foundations and proofs of the doctrine of second
sight--proofs, too, of the primitive metaphysical doctrine of
counterparts and *correspondences*. "They avouch that every Element and
different state of Being have Animals resembling these of another
Element." By persons not knowing this, "the Roman invention of guardian
Angels particularly assigned" has been promulgated. The guardian Angel
of the Roman superstition is merely the Double or Co-walker--the type
(in the viewless world) of the man in the apparent world. Thus are
wraiths and ghosts explained by our Presbyterian psychologist and his
Highland flock. All things universally have their types, their reflex: a
man's type, or reflex, or "co-walker" may be seen at a distance from or
near him during his life--nay, may be seen after his death. The gifted
man of

<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

second sight can tell the substantial figure from the airy counterpart.
Sometimes the reflex anticipates the action of the reality: "was often
seen of old to enter a House, by which the people knew that the Person
of that Likeness was to visit them in a few days." It may have occurred
to most of us to meet a person in the street whom we took for an
acquaintance. It is not he, but we meet the real man a few paces farther
on. Thus a distinguished officer, at home on leave, met a friend, as he
tells me, in Piccadilly. The other passed without notice: the officer
hesitated about following him, did not, and in some fifty yards met his
man. There is probably no more in this than resemblance and coincidence,
but this is the kind of thing which was worked by the Highlanders into
their metaphysics. <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md)

The end of the Co-walker is obscure. "This

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

Copy, Echo, or living Picture goes att last to his own Herd." Thus
Ghosts are short-lived, and, according to M. d'Assier on the Manners of
Posthumous Man (*L'Homme Posthume*), seldom survive for more than a
century. By an airy being of this kind the Highlanders explained the
false or morbid appetite. A "joint-eater" inhabited the patient, "he
feeds two when he eats." As a rule, the Fairies get their food as
witches do--take "the Pith and Milk from their Neighbours' Cows unto
their own chiesehold, throw a Hair-tedder, at a great distance, by Airt
Magic, only drawing a spigot fastened in a Post, which, will bring Milk
as farr as a Bull will be heard to roar." This is illustrated in the
drinking scene in *Faust*. This kind of charge is familiar in trials for
witchcraft.

In accordance with the whole metaphysics of the system of doubles, which
are parasites on humanity, is the superstition of nurses stolen by
Fairies, and of children kidnapped while changelings are left in their
place. The latter accounts for sudden decline and loss of health by a
child; he is not the original child, but a Fairy brat. To guard against
this, bread (as human food hateful to Fairies--so the Kanekas carry a
boiled

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

yam about at night), or the Bible, or iron is placed in the bed of
childbirth. "Iron scares spirits," as the scholiast says of the drawn
sword of Odysseus in Hades. The Fairy bride, in Wales, vanishes on being
touched with iron.

This belief probably came in when iron was a new, rare, and mysterious
metal. The mortal nurses in Fairyland are pleasantly illustrated by the
ballad

"I heard a cow lows,  
A bonny, bonny cow lowe,"

in C. Kirkpatrick Sharpe's *Ballad Book*. <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4.md) This part of the superstition is not easy to
elucidate. Kirk repeats the well-known tales of the blinding of the
mortal who saw too clearly "by making use of their Oyntments."
Well-known examples occur in Gervase of Tilbury, and are cited in
Scott's note on *Tamlane* in the *Border Minstrelsy*. As Homer fables of
the dead, their speech is a kind of whistling like the cry of
bats--another indication of the pre-Christian Hades. <span
id="fr_5"></span>[2](#fn_5.md) They have feasts and burials; and Pashley,
in his *Travels in Crete*, tells the well-known Border story of a man
who fired on a

<span id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Fairy bridal, and heard a voice cry, "Ye have
slain the bonny bridegroom." It is, of course, to be noted that the
modern Greek superstition of the Nereids, who carry off mortal girls to
dance with them till they pine away, answers to some of our Fairy
legends, while it will hardly be maintained that the Nereids are a
memory of pre-historic Finns. "Antic corybantic jollity" is a note of
Nereids, as well as of the *Sleagh Maith*. "The Inconvenience of their
*succubi*," the Fairy girls who make love to young men, is well known in
the Breton ballad, *Le Sieur Nan*. The same superstition is current
among the Kanekas of New Caledonia. My cousin, Mr. Atkinson, was visited
by a young Kaneka, who twice or thrice returned to take leave of him
with much emotion. When Mr. Atkinson asked what was the matter, the lad
said that he had just met, as he thought, the girl of his heart in the
forest. After a scene of dalliance she vanished, and he knew that she
was a forest Fairy, and that he must die in three days, which he did.
This is the "inconvenience of their succubi," regretted by Mr. Kirk.
Thus it appears that the mass of these opinions is not local, nor Celtic
merely, but of world-wide

<span id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span>

diffusion. Thus Sir Walter Scott observes of the Afghans and
Highlanders, "Their superstitions are the same, or nearly so. The
*Gholée Beabacan* (demons of the desert) resemble the *Boddach* of the
Highlanders, 'who walked the heath at midnight and at noon'" (*Quarterly
Review*, xiv. 289). Again, Mr. Kirk says that "Were-wolves and Witches'
true Bodies are (by the union of the spirit of Nature that runs thorow
all, echoing and doubling the Blow towards another) wounded at home,
when the astrial or assumed Bodies are stricken elsewhere." Thus, if a
witch-hare is shot, the witch's real body is hurt in the same part; and
Lafitau, in North America, found that when a Huron shot a witch-bird,
the real magician was stricken in the same place. The theory that the
Fairies appear as "a little rough Dog" is illustrated by the Welsh Dogs
of Hell. *Blackwood's Magazine* for 1818 contains many examples of these
Hell-dogs, which are often invested in a sheet of fire, as Rink says is
the case among the Eskimo. Take a modern instance. "Mr. F. A. Paley and
friend, walking home at night on a lonely road, see a large black dog
rise from it, slowly walk to the side, and disappear. They search in
vain. Mr. Paley

<span id="page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span>

hears subsequently that this mysterious dog is the terror of the
neighbourhood, but no such real dog is known." Date, summer 1837
(*Journ. of S. P. R.*, Feb. 1893, p. 31).

The dwellings of these airy shadows of mankind are, naturally, "Fairie
Hills." There is such a hill, the Fairy Hill at Aberfoyle, where Mr.
Kirk resided: Baillie Nicol Jarvie describes its legends in an admirable
passage in *Rob Roy*. Mr. MacRitchie says, "How much of this 'howe' is
artificial, or whether any of it is, remains to be discovered." It is
much larger than most artificial tumuli. According to Mr. Kirk, the
Highlanders "superstitiously believe the souls of their Predecessors to
dwell" in the fairy-hills. "And for that end, say they, a Mote or Mount
was dedicate beside every Churchyard, to receive the souls till their
adjacent bodies arise, and so become as a Fairy hill." Here the Highland
philosophers have conspicuously put the cart before the horse. The
tumuli are much older than the churches, which were no doubt built
beside them because the place had a sacred character. Two very good
examples may be seen at Dalry, on the Ken, in Galloway, and at Parton,
on Loch Ken. The grassy howes are

<span id="page_xxxiv">p. xxxiv</span>

large and symmetrical, and the modern Presbyterian churches occupy old
sites; at Parton there are ruins of the ancient Catholic church. Round
the tumulus at Dalry, according to the local form of the *Märchen* of
Hesione, a great dragon used to coil in triple folds, before it was
killed by the blacksmith. Nobody, perhaps, can regard these tumuli, and
many like them, as anything but sepulchral. On the road between
Balantrae, in Ayrshire, and Stranraer, there is a beautiful tumulus
above the sea, which at once recalls the barrow above the main that
Elpenor in the *Odyssey*, asked Odysseus to build for him, "the memorial
of a luckless man." In the *Argonautica* of Apollonius Rhodius, the
ghost of a hero who fell at Troy appears to the adventurers on a tumulus
like this of the Ayrshire coast. In speaking of these barrows Mr. Kirk
tells how, during a famine about 1676, two women had a vision of a
treasure hid in a fairy-hill. This they excavated, and discovered some
coins "of good money." The great gold corslet of the British Museum is
said to have been found in Wales, where tradition spoke of a ghost in
golden armour which haunted a hillock. The hillock was excavated, and
the golden corslet,

<span id="page_xxxv">p. xxxv</span>

like the Shakespearian bricks, is "alive to testify" to the truth of the
story.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xxviii:1](sce05.htm#fr_3.md) A much odder case is
reported. Two young men photographed a reach of a river. In the
photograph, when printed, was visible the dead body of a woman floating
on the stream. The water was dragged. Nothing was found; but two or
three days later a girl drowned herself in the pool! As the Reports of
the Psychical Society sometimes say, "no confirmation has been
obtained;" but this is a pleasing instance of the Reflex, and of second
sight in a photographic camera.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xxx:1](sce05.htm#fr_4.md) It is also published in
Mrs. Graham Tomson's *Border Ballads* (Walter Scott).

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xxx:2](sce05.htm#fr_5.md) Note
( [b](sce29.htm#xref_b)), [p. 81](sce29.htm#page_81.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. Fairies and Psychical Research](sce06.md)
