[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sce13)  [Next](sce15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

4\. THEIR Houƒes are called large and fair, and (unleƒs att ƒome odd
occaƒions) unperceaveable by vulgar eyes, like Rachland, and other
inchanted Iƒlands, having fir Lights, continual Lamps, and Fires, often
ƒeen without Fuel to ƒuƒtain them. Women are yet alive who tell they
were taken away when in Child-bed to nurƒe Fairie Children, a lingering
voracious Image of their (them?) being left in their place, (like their
Reflexion in a Mirrour,) which (as if it were ƒome inƒatiable Spirit in
ane aƒƒumed Bodie) made firƒt ƒemblance to devour the Meats that it
cunningly carried by, and then left the Carcaƒe as if it expired and
departed thence by a naturall and common Death. The Child, and Fire,
with Food and other Neceƒƒaries, are ƒet before the Nurƒe how ƒoon ƒhe
enters; but ƒhe nather perceaves any Paƒƒage

out

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

out, nor ƒees what thoƒe People doe in other Rooms of the Lodging. When
the Child is wained, the Nurƒe dies, or is conveyed back, or gets it to
her choice to ƒtay there. But if any Superterraneans be ƒo ƒubtile, as
to practice Slights for procuring a Privacy to any of their Miƒteries,
(ƒuch as making uƒe of their Oyntments, which as Gygeƒ's Ring makes them
inviƒible, or nimble, or caƒts them in a Trance, or alters their Shape,
or makes Things appear at a vaƒt Diƒtance, &c.) they ƒmite them without
Paine, as with a Puff of Wind, and bereave them of both the naturall and
acquired Sights in the twinkling of ane Eye, (both theƒe Sights, where
once they come, being in the ƒame Organ and inƒeparable,) or they ƒtrick
them Dumb. The Tramontains to this Day put Bread, the Bible, or a piece
of Iron, in Womens Beds when travelling, to ƒave them from being thus
ƒtollen; and they commonly report, that all uncouth, unknown Wights are
terrifyed by nothing earthly ƒo much as by cold Iron. They delyver the
Reaƒon to be that Hell lying betwixt the chill Tempeƒts, and the Fire
Brands of ƒcalding

Metals

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Metals, and Iron of the North, (hence the
Loadƒtone cauƒes a tendency to that Point,) by ane Antipathy thereto,
theƒe odious far-ƒcenting Creatures ƒhrug and fright at all that comes
thence relating to ƒo abhorred a Place, whence their Torment is eather
begun, or feared to come hereafter

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](sce15)
