[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sce17)  [Next](sce19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

8\. THEIR Weapons are moƒt what ƒolid earthly Bodies, nothing of Iron,
but much of Stone, like to yellow ƒoft Flint Spa, ƒhaped like a barbed
Arrow-head, but flung like a Dairt, with great Force. Theƒe Armes (cut
by Airt and Tools it ƒeems beyond humane) have ƒomething of the Nature
of Thunderbolt ƒubtilty, and mortally wounding the vital Parts without
breaking the Skin; of which Wounds I have obƒerved in

Beaƒts

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Beaƒts, and felt them with my Hands. They are
not as infallible Benjamites, hitting at a Hair's-breadth; nor are they
wholly unvanquiƒhable, at leaƒt in Appearance.

THE MEN of that SECOND SIGHT do not diƒcover ƒtrange Things when aƒked,
but at Fits and Raptures, as if inƒpyred with ƒome Genius at that
Inƒtant, which before did lurk in or about them. Thus I have frequently
ƒpoke to one of them, who in his Tranƒport told he cut the Bodie of one
of thoƒe People in two with his Iron Weapon, and ƒo eƒcaped this Onƒet,
yet he ƒaw nothing left behind of that appearing divyded; at other Times
he out wreƒted \[wreƒtled?\] ƒome of them. His Neibours often perceaved
this Man to diƒappear at a certane Place, and about one Hour after to
become viƒible, and diƒcover him ƒelfe near a Bow-ƒhot from the firƒt
Place. It was in that Place where he became inviƒible, ƒaid he, that the
Subterraneans did encounter and combate with him. Thoƒe who are unƒeened
or unƒanctified (called Fey) are ƒaid to be pierced or wounded with
thoƒe People's Weapons, which makes them do

ƒomewhat

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

ƒomewhat verie unlike their former Practice, cauƒing a sudden
Alteration, yet the Cauƒe thereof unperceavable at preƒent; nor have
they Power (either they cannot make uƒe of their natural Powers, or
aƒk't not the heavenly Aid,) to eƒcape the Blow impendent. A Man of the
Second Sight perceaved a Perƒon standing by him (found to others view)
wholly gored in Blood, and he (amazed-like) bid him inƒtantly flee. The
whole Man laught at his Airt and Warning, ƒince there was no appearance
of Danger. He had ƒcarce contracted his Lips from Laughter, when
unexpectedly his Enemy leapt in at his Side, and ƒtab'd him with their
Weapons. They alƒo pierce Cows or other Animals, uƒewally ƒaid to be
Elf-ƒhot, whoƒe pureƒt Subƒtance (if they die) theƒe Subterraneans take
to live on, viz. the aereal and ætherial Parts, the moƒt ƒpirituous
Matter for prolonging of Life, ƒuch as Aquavitæ (moderately taken) is
among Liquors, leaving the terreƒtrial behind. The Cure of ƒuch Hurts
is, only for a Man to find out the Hole with his Finger; as if the
Spirits flowing from a Man's

warme

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

warme Hand were Antidote ƒufficient againƒt their poyƒon'd Dairts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](sce19.md)
