[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sce25)  [Next](sce27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

#### A SUCCINT ACCOMPT

OF

### My LORD TARBOTT'S RELATIONS,

IN A LETTER TO THE

#### HONOURABLE ROBERT BOYLE, ESQUIRE,

OF THE

##### PREDICTIONS MADE BY SEERS,

Whereof himƒelf was Ear and Eye-witneƒs.

\[I thought fit to adjoyne \[it\] hereunto, that I might not be thought
ƒingular in this Diƒquiƒition; that the Mater of Fact might be
undenyably made out; and that I might, with all Submiƒƒion, give
Annotations, with Animadverƒions, on his ƒuppoƒed Cauƒes of that
Phenomenon, with my Reaƒons of Diƒƒent from his judgement.\]

SIR,

I HEARD very much, but beleived very little, of the Second Sight; yet
its being aƒƒumed

by

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

by ƒeverall of great Veracity, I was induced to make Inquirie after it
in the Year 1652, being then confin'd to abide in the North of Scotland
by the Engliƒh Uƒurpers. The more generall Accounts of it were, that
many Highlanders, yet far more Iƒlanders, were qualified with this
Second Sight; that Men, Women, and Children, indiƒtinctly, were ƒubject
to it, and Children, where Parents were not. Some times People came to
age, who had it not when young, nor could any tell by what Means
produced. It is a Trouble to moƒt of them who are ƒubject to it, and
they would be rid of it any Rate if they could. The Sight is of no long
Duration, only continuing ƒo long as they can keep their Eyes ƒteady
without twinkling. The hardy therefore fix their look, that they may ƒee
the longer; but the timorous ƒee only Glances, their Eyes always
twinkles at the firƒt Sight of the Object. That which generally is ƒeen
by them, are the Species of living Creatures, and of inanimate Things,
which was in Motion, ƒuch as Ships, and Habits upon Perƒons. They never
ƒie the

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

the Species of any Perƒon who is already dead. What they foirƒie fails
not to exiƒt in the Mode, and in that Place where it appears to them.
They cannot well know what Space of Time ƒhall interveen between the
Apparition and the real Exiƒtance: But ƒome of the hardieƒt and longeƒt
Experience have ƒome Rules for Conjectures; as, if they ƒie a Man with a
ƒhrowding Sheet in the Apparition, they will conjecture at the Nearneƒs
or Remoteneƒs of his Death by the more or leƒs of his Bodie that is
covered by it. They will ordinarily ƒie their abƒent Friends, tho at a
great Diƒtance, ƒome tymes no leƒs than from America to Scotland,
ƒitting, ƒtanding, or walking in ƒome certain Place; and then they
conclude with a Aƒƒurance that they will ƒie them ƒo and there. If a Man
be in love with a Woman, they will ordinarily ƒie the Species of that
Man ƒtanding by her, and ƒo likewiƒe if a Woman be in love; and they
conjecture at their Enjoyments (of each other) by the Species touching
(of) the Perƒon, or appearing at a Diƒtance from her (if they enjoy not
one another.) If they ƒie

the

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

the Species of any Perƒon who is ƒick to die, they ƒie them covered over
with the ƒhrowding Sheet.

THESE Generalls I had verified to me by ƒuch of them as did ƒie, and
were eƒteemed honeƒt and ƒober by all the Neighbourhood; for I inquired
after ƒuch for my Information. And becauƒe there were more of theƒe
Seers in the Iƒles of Lewis, Harris, and Uiƒt, than in any other Place,
I did entreat Sir James M'Donald (who is now dead) Sir Normand M'Loud,
and Mr. Daniel Moriƒon, a verie honeƒt Perƒon, (who are ƒtill alive,) to
make Inquirie in this uncouth Sight, and to acquaint me therewith; which
they did, and all found ane Agriement in theƒe Generalls, and informed
me of many Inƒtances confirming what they ƒaid. But though Men of
Diƒcretion and Honour, being but at 2d Hand, I will chooƒe rather to put
myƒelf than my Friends on the Hazard of being laughed at for incredible
Relations.

I WAS once travelling in the Highlands, and a good Number of Servants
with me, as is uƒuall

there

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

there; and one of them going a little before me, entering into a Houƒe
where I was to ƒtay all Night, and going haiƒtily to the Door, he
ƒuddenly ƒtept back with a Screech, and did fall by a Stone, which hit
his Foot. I aƒked what the Matter was, for he ƒeemed to be very much
frighted. He told me very ƒeriouƒly that I ƒhould not lodge in that
Houƒe, becauƒe ƒhortly a dead Coffin would be carried out of it, for
many were carrying of it when he was heard cry. I neglecting his Words,
and ƒtaying there, he ƒaid to other of his Servants, he was ƒorry for
it, and that ƒurely what he ƒaw would ƒhortly come to paƒs. Tho no ƒick
Perƒon was then there, yet the Landlord, a healthy Highlander, died of
ane appoplectick Fit before I left the Houƒe.

In the year 1653, Alexander Monro (afterward Lieut. Coll. to the Earl of
Dunbarton's Regiment,) and I were walking in a Place called Ullabill, in
Lochbroom, on a little Plain, at the Foot of a rugged Hill. There was a
Servant working with a Spade in the Walk before us; his Back was to us,
and his Face to

the

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

the Hill. Before we came to him, he let the Spade fall, and looked
toward the Hill. He took Notice of us as wee paƒƒed neer by him, which
made me look at him; and perceiving him to ƒtair a little ƒtrangely, I
conjectured him to be a Seer. I called at him, at which he ƒtarted and
ƒmiled. What are you doing? ƒaid I. He anƒwered, I have ƒeen a very
ƒtrange Thing; ane Army of Engliƒhmen, leeding of Horƒes, coming doun
that Hill; and a Number of them are come down to the Plain, and eating
the Barley, which is growing in the Field neer to the Hill. This was on
the 4th May, (for I notted the Day,) and it was four or fyve Days before
the Barley was ƒown in the Field he ƒpoke of. Alexander Monro aƒked him
how he knew they were Engliƒhmen? He ƒaid, becauƒe they were leeding of
Horƒes, and had on Hats and Bootts, which he knew no Scot Man would have
there. We took little Notice of the whole Storie, as other than a
fooliƒh Viƒion; but wiƒhed that ane Engliƒh Partie were there, we being
then at Warr with them, and the Place almoƒt unacceƒlable for Horƒe-

men

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

men. But in the Beginning of Auguƒt therafter, the Earle of Midleton
(then Lieut. for the King in the Highlands) having occaƒion to march a
Party of his toward the South Highlands, he ƒent his Foot thorow a Place
called Inverlawell; and the Fore-partie which was firƒt down the Hill,
did fall off eating the Barley which was on the litle Plain under it.
And Monro calling to mynd what the Seer told us, in May preceiding, he
wrote of it, and ƒent ane Expreƒs to me to Lochƒlin, in Roƒs, (where I
then was) with it.

I HAD Occaƒion once to be in Companie where a Young Lady was, (excuƒe my
not naming of Perƒons,) and I was told there was a notable Seer in the
Companie. I called him to ƒpeak with me, as I did ordinarly when I found
any of them; and after he had anƒwered me to ƒeveral Queƒtions, I aƒked
if he knew any Perƒon to be in love with that Lady. He ƒaid he did, but
he knew not the Perƒon; for during the two Dayes he had been in her
Company, he perceaved one ƒtanding neer her, and his Head leaning on her
Shoulder; which he ƒaid

did

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

did fore-tell that the Man ƒhould marrie her, and die before her,
according to his Obƒervation. This was in the Year 1655. I deƒired him
to deƒcribe the Perƒon, which he did; ƒo that I could conjecture, by the
Deƒcription, of ƒuch a one, who was of that Ladyes Acquaintance, tho
there were no thought of their Marriage till two Years thereafter. And
having Occaƒion, in the Year 1657, to find this Seer, who was ane
Iƒlander, in Company with the other Perƒon whom I conjectured to have
been deƒcribed by him, I called him aƒide, and aƒked if that was the
Perƒon he ƒaw beƒide the Lady near two Years then paƒt. He ƒaid it was
he indeed, for he had ƒeen that Lady juƒt then ƒtanding by him Hand in
Hand. This was ƒome few Months before their Marriage, and that Man is
ƒince dead, and the Lady ƒtill alive.

I SHALL trouble you but with one more, which I thought moƒt remarkable
of any that occurred to me. In January 1652, the above mentioned Lieut.
Coll. Alex. Monro and I happened to be in the Houƒe of one Wm. M'Cleud
of Ferrinlea, in the County of Roƒs.

He

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

\[paragraph continues\] He, the Landlord, and I were ƒitting in three
Chairs neir the Fire, and in the Corner of the great Chimney there were
two Iƒlanders, who were that verie Night come to the Hous, and were
related to the Landlord. While the one of them was talking with Monro, I
perceaved the other to look oddly toward me. From this Look, and his
being ane Iƒlander, I conjectured him a Seer, and aƒked him, at what he
ƒtair'd? He anƒwered, by deƒiring me to riƒe from that Chair, for it was
ane unluckie one. I aƒked him why. He anƒwered, becauƒe there was a dead
Man in the Chair nixt to me. Well, ƒaid I, if it be in the nixt Chair, I
may keep mine own. But what is the Likneƒs of the Man? He ƒaid he was a
tall Man, with a long Grey Coat, booted, and one of his Legs hanging
over the Arme of the Chair, and his head hanging dead to the other Side,
and his Arme backward, as if it were brocken. There were ƒome Engliƒh
Troops then quartered near that Place, and there being at that Time a
great Froƒt after a Thaw, the Country was covered all over with Yce.
Four or Fyve of the Engliƒh ryding by

this

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

this Houƒe ƒome two Hours after the Viƒion, while we were ƒitting by the
Fire, we heard a great Noiƒe, which prov'd to be thoƒe Troopers, with
the Help of other Servants, carrying in one of their Number, who had got
a very miƒcheivous Fall, and had his Arme broke; and falling frequently
in ƒwooning Fits, they brought him into the Hall, and ƒet him in the
verie Chair, and in the verie Poƒture that the Seer had propheƒied. But
the Man did not die, though he recovered with great Difficulty.

AMONG the Accounts given me by Sir Normand M'clud, there was one worth
of ƒpecial Notice, which was thus. There \[was\] a Gentleman in the Iƒle
of Harris, who was always ƒeen by the Seers with ane Arrow in his Thigh.
Such in the Iƒle who thought thoƒe prognoƒtications infalliable, did not
doubt but he would be ƒhot in the Thigh before he died. Sir Normand told
me that he heard it the Subject of their Diƒcourƒe for many Years. At
laƒt he died without any ƒuch Accident. Sir Normand was at his Buriall,
at St Clement's Church in the Harris. At the ƒame Time, the Corps of
another

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

another Gentleman was brought to be buried in the ƒame verie Church. The
Friends on either Side came to debate who ƒhould firƒt enter the Church,
and in a Trice from Words they came to Blows. One of the Number (who was
arm'd with Bow and Arrows) let one fly among them. (Now everie Familie
in that Iƒle have their Buriall-place in the Church in Stone Cheƒts, and
the Bodies are carried in open Biers to the Buriall-place.) Sir Normand
having appeaƒed the Tumult, one of the Arrows was found ƒhot in the dead
Man's Thigh. To this Sir Normand was a Witneƒs.

IN the Account which Mr Daniel Moriƒon, Parƒon in the Lewis, gave me,
there was one, tho it be hetergeneous from the ƒubject, yet it may
\[be\] worth your Notice. It was of a young Woman in his Pariƒh, who was
mightily frightned by ƒeeing her own Image ƒtill before her, alwayes
when ƒhe came to the open Air; the Back of the Image being alwayes to
her, ƒo that it was not a reflection as in a Mirrour, but the Species of
ƒuch a Body as her own, and in a very like Habit, which appeared to
herƒelf

continually

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

continually before her. The Parƒon keept her a long whyle with him, but
had no Remedy of her Evill, which troubled her exceidingly. I was told
afterwards, that when ƒhe was four or fyve Years elder ƒhe ƒaw it not.

THESE are Matters of Fact, which I aƒƒure yow they are truely related.
But theƒe, and all others that occurred to me, by Information or
otherwiƒe, could never lead me into a remote Conjecture of the Cauƒe of
ƒo extraordinary a Phænomenon. Whither it be a Quality in the Eyes of
ƒome People into theƒe Pairts, concurring with a Quality in the Air
alƒo; whither ƒuch Species be every where, tho not ƒeen by the Want of
Eyes ƒo qualified, or from whatever other Cauƒe, I muƒt leave to the
Inquiry of clearer judgements than mine. But a Hint may be taken from
this image which appeared ƒtill to this Woman abovementioned, and from
another mentioned by Ariƒtotle, in the 4th of his Metaphyƒicks (if I
remember right, for it is long ƒince I read it;) as alƒo from the common
Opinion that young Infants (unƒullied with many Objects) do ƒie
Appearitions, which were

not

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

not ƒeen by thoƒe of elder Years; as like wife from this, that ƒeveralls
did ƒie the Second Sight when in the Highlands or Iƒles, yet when
tranƒported to live in other Countreys, eƒpecially in America, they
quite loƒe this Qualitie, as was told me by a Gentleman who knew ƒome of
them in Barbadoes, who did ƒee no Viƒion there, altho he knew them to be
Seers when they lived in the Iƒles of Scotland.

Thus far my Lord Tarbett.

==================

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conclusions](sce27)
