[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sce19)  [Next](sce21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

10\. THERE be many Places called Fairie-hills, which the Mountain People
think impious and dangerous to peel or diƒcover, by taking Earth or Wood
from them; ƒuperƒtitiouƒly beleiving the Souls of their Prediceƒƒors to
dwell there. <span id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33.md) And for that End (ƒay
they) a Mote or Mount was dedicate beƒide every Church-yard, to receive
the Souls till their adjacent Bodies ariƒe, and ƒo become as a
Fairie-hill; they uƒeing Bodies of Air when called Abroad. They alƒo
affirme thoƒe Creatures that move inviƒibly in a Houƒe, and caƒt hug
great Stones, but do no much Hurt, becauƒe counter-wrought by ƒome more
courteous and charitable Spirits that are everywhere ready to defend
Men, (Dan. 10. 13.) to be Souls that have not attained their Reƒt,
thorough a vehement Deƒire of revealling a Murther or notable Injurie
done or receaved,

or

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

or a Treaƒure that was forgot in their Liftyme on Earth, which when
diƒcloƒ'd to a Conjurer alone, the Ghoƒt quite removes.

IN the nixt Country to that of my former Reƒidence, about the Year 1676,
when there was ƒome Scarcity of Graine, a marvelous Illapƒe and Viƒion
ƒtrongly ƒtruck the Imagination of two Women in one Night, living at a
good Diƒtance from one another, about a Treaƒure hid in a Hill, called
SITHBHRUAICH, or Fayrie-hill. The Appearance of a Treaƒure was firƒt
repreƒented to the Fancy, and then an audible Voyce named the Place
where it was to their awaking Senƒes. Whereupon both aroƒe, and meitting
accidentallie at the Place, diƒcovered their Deƒigne; and joyntly
digging, found a Veƒƒell as large as a Scottiƒh Peck, full of ƒmall
Pieces of good Money, of ancient Coyn; which halving betuixt them, they
ƒold in Diƒh-fulls for Diƒh-fulls of Meall to the Countrey People. Very
many of undoubted Credit ƒaw, and had of the Coyn to this Day. But
whither it was a good or bad Angell, one of the ƒubterranean People, or
the reƒƒleƒs Soul of him who hid it,

that

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

that diƒcovered it, and to what End it was done, I leave to the
Examination of others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_33"></span>[23:1](sce20.htm#fr_33.md) Note
( [d1](sce29.htm#xref_d1)), [p. 88](sce29.htm#page_88.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](sce21.md)
