[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sce28)  [Next](sce30.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

## NOTES.

### INTRODUCTION.

Note (<span id="xref_a">a</span>), [p. xvi](sce03.htm#page_xvi.md).--"The
Psychical Society."

The Psychical Society, as far as the writer is aware has not examined
officially the old accounts of the phenomena which it investigates at
present. The Catalogue of the Society's Library, however, proves that it
does not lack the materials.

Note (<span id="xref_b">b</span>), [p. xxx](sce05.htm#page_xxx.md).--"Their
speech is a kind of whistling."

That the voice of spirits is a kind of whistling, twittering, or
chirping, is a very widely diffused and ancient belief. The ghosts in
Homer twitter like bats; in New Caledonia an English settler found that
he could scare the natives from a piece of ground by whistling there at
night. Mr. Samuel Wesley says, "I followed the noise into almost every
room in the house, both by day and by night, with lights and without,
and have sat alone for some time, and, when I heard the noise, spoke to
it to tell me what it was, but never heard any articulate voice, and
only once or twice two or three feeble squeaks, a little louder than the
chirping of a bird, and not like the noise of rats, which I have often
heard" (*Memoirs of the Wesley Family*, p. 164). Professor Alexander
mentions the "peculiar whistling sound" at some manifestations in Rio
Janeiro as "rather frequent " (*Proc. S. P. R.*,

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

81 xix. 180). Here children were the mediums; how did they get the idea
of the traditional whistle? See also the following note.

Note (<span id="xref_c">c</span>), [p. xl](sce06.htm#page_xl.md).--"Not
long after the Spanish conquest of Peru."

The phenomena alluded to here are said to have occurred in 1549. The
evidence is a mere report by Cieza de Leon, who does not pretend to have
been an eye-witness. But, as Mr. Clements Markham, Cieza's editor,
remarks, the phenomena are analogous to those of spiritualism. At the
very least, we find a belief in this kind of manifestation at a remote
date, and in an outlandish place. Cieza says: <span
id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37.md)

"When the Adelantado Belalcazar was governor of the province of Popyan,
and when Gomez Hernandez was his lieutenant in the town of Auzerma,
there was a chief in a village called Pirsa, almost four leagues from
the town, whose brother, a good-looking youth named Tamaraqunga,
inspired by God, wished to go to the town of the Christians to receive
baptism. But the devils did not wish that he should attain his desire,
fearing to lose what seemed secure, so they frightened this Tamaraqunga
in such sort that he was unable to do anything. God permitting it, the
devils stationed themselves in a place where the chief alone could see
them, in the shape of birds called *auras*. Finding himself so
persecuted by the devils, he sent in great haste to a Christian living
near, who came at once, and hearing what he wanted, signed him with the
sign of the cross. But the devils then frightened him more than ever,
appearing in hideous forms, which only were visible to

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

him. *The Christian only saw stones falling from the air and heard
whistling*. A brother of one Juan Pacheco, citizen of the same town,
then holding office in the place of Gomez Hernandez, who had gone to
Caramanta, came from Auzerma with another man to visit the Indian chief.
They say that Tamaraqunga was much frightened and ill-treated by the
devils, who carried him through the air from one place to another in
presence of the Christians, he complaining and the devils whistling and
shouting. Sometimes when the chief was sitting with a glass of liquor
before him, the Christians saw the glass raised up in the air and put
down empty, and a short time afterwards the wine was again poured into
the cup from the air." Compare what Ibn Batuta, the old Arab traveller,
saw at the court of the King of Delhi. The matter is discussed in
Colonel Yule's *Marco Polo*.

This may suffice as a specimen of the manifestations. They continued
while the chief was on his way to church; he was lifted into the air,
and the Christians had to hold him down. In church the ghostly whistling
was heard, and stones fell around, while the chief said that he saw
devils standing upside down, and himself was thrown into that unusual
posture. The combination of convulsive movements with the other
phenomena is that which we have already remarked in the cases of "Mr.
H." and the grandson of William Morse. Cieza de Leon says that the chief
was not troubled after his baptism. The illusions of the
newly-converted, so like those of the early Christian hermits, are
described by Callaway in his *Zulu Tales*.

Note (<span id="xref_d">d</span>), [p. 1](sce09.htm#page_1.md).

Priestley's explanation of the Epworth disturbances is imposture by the
servants, by way of a practical joke.

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Coleridge, on the other hand, says that "all
these stories, and I could produce fifty cases at least equally well
authenticated, and, as far as the veracity of the narrators, and the
single fact of their having seen and heard such and such sights or
sounds, above all rational scepticism, are as much like one another as
the symptoms of the same disease in different patients."

It is a pity that Coleridge did not produce his fifty well-authenticated
examples. The similarity of the narratives everywhere, all the world
over, is exactly what makes them interesting. Coleridge goes on. 'This
indeed I take to be the true and only solution--a contagious nervous
disease, the acme, or intensest form of which is catalepsy" (Southey's
*Wesley*, vol. i. p. 14, Coleridge's note). If there be such a
contagious nervous disease, it is a very remarkable malady, and well
worth examining. The Wesleys were not alarmed; they bantered the spirit;
they wished they could set him to work; and beyond the trembling of the
children when Jeffrey was knocking during their sleep, there is no sign
of morbid conditions. A neighbouring clergyman, who was asked to pass a
night in the house, saw and heard just what the others heard and
saw. <span id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38.md) The hypothesis of a contagious
nervous disease, in which every witness exhibits the same symptoms of
illusion in all parts of the world, is a theory which needs a good deal
of verification. Where material traces of the disturbances remain, it is
absurd to speak of contagious hallucinations. We must fall back on the
hypothesis of trickery, or must say with Southey, "Such things may be
preternatural, yet not miraculous; they may not be in the ordinary
course of nature, yet imply no alteration of its laws." Any theory is
more plausible than the idea that Mr. Wesley and Mr. Hoole

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

were in a state bordering on catalepsy. Believers in hypnotism may think
it possible that this, that, and the other persons, if they submitted
themselves to hypnotic influences, might have the same hallucinations
suggested to them. But there is no evidence, in the Epworth case nor in
the Rerrick case, of any such matter. "So far as we yet know, sensory
hallucination of several persons together, *who are not in a hypnotic
state*, is a rare phenomenon, and therefore not a probable explanation"
(*Proc. S. P. R.*, iv. 62). There is some evidence that epileptic
patients suffer from the same illusions--for example, the presence of a
woman in a red cloak; and in *delirium tremens* the "horrors" are
usually similar. But that all the persons who enter a given house should
be impressed by the same material illusions, as of chairs and tables,
and even beds (like Nancy Wesley's) flying about, is a theory more
incredible than the hypothesis either of trickery or of abnormal
occurrences. When the disturbances always cease on the arrival of a
competent witness, then it is not hard to say which theory we ought to
choose. For imposture see next note.

Note (<span id="xref_e">e</span>), [p.
lvii](sce06.htm#page_lvii.md).--"Children at *séances*."

The phenomena discussed are most frequently connected with children, who
may be regarded either as mediums or impostors, conscious or
unconscious. In *Proc. S. P. R.*, iv. 25-42, Professor Barrett gives the
case of a little girl whom he knew. She had raps wherever she went, even
when alone with the Professor, who made her stand with her hands against
the wall, at the greatest stretch of her arms, "with the muscles of the
legs and arms all in tension." "A brisk pattering of raps" followed
Professor Barrett's request. But he also mentions a boy "of juvenile
piety," who "for twelve

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

months deceived his father, a distinguished surgeon, and all his family,
by pretended spiritualistic manifestations, which appeared at first
sight inexplicable, until the cunning trickery of the lad was
discovered." The only difference between these cases is that an
"outsider" discovered trickery in one instance and not in the other.
This is a very ticklish kind of certainty, and it is plain that children
can do a great deal in the way of mere imposture. The state of any young
Wesley who might have been caught out is unenviable. Verily Mr. Wesley
would not have spared for his crying.

Note (<span id="xref_f">f</span>), [p. lxii](sce07.htm#page_lxii.md).--"The
pricking of witches."

It is pretty certain that some of these unlucky old women were pricked
"in anæsthetic areas."

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Note (<span id="xref_a1">a1</span>), [p. 8](sce12.htm#page_8.md).--"These
Arrows that fly in the Dark."

The arrows are the ancient flint arrow-heads, which Mr. Kirk later
asserts to be too delicate for human artificers. On this matter Isabel
Gowdie, the witch, confessed, "As for Elf arrows, the Divell sharpes
them with his ain hand, and deliveris them to Elf boys, wha whyttlis and
dightis them with a sharp thing lyk a paking needle; bot whan I was in
Elfland, I saw them whyttling and dighting them." Isabel described the
manner in which witches use this artillery: "We spang them from the
naillis of our thoombs," and with these she and her friends shot and
slew many men and women. The confessions of Isabel Gowdie are in the
third volume of Pitcairn's *Scottish Criminal Trials*. They contain
little or nothing of the "psychical;" all is mere folk-lore, fairy
tales, and charms derived from the old Catholic liturgy. The poor woman,
having begun to fable, fabled

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

with manifest enjoyment and considerable power. It seems from her
account that each "Covin," or assembly of witches, had a maiden in it,
and "without our maiden we could do no great thing." On the other hand,
an extraordinary case of an epileptic boy, who was hurled about, and
beheld distant occurrences in trance, may be read in Chambers's
*Domestic Annals of Scotland*, iii. 449. Candles used to go out when
this boy, a third son of Lord Torpichen, was in the room. The date
(1720) and the place (Mid-Lothian) prevented any one from being burned
for bewitching him. A fast was proclaimed. The boy recovered, and did
good service in the navy. He is said to have been "levitated"
frequently."

Note (<span id="xref_b1">b1</span>), [p. 11](sce13.htm#page_11.md).--" Milk
thorow a hair-tedder. "

Isabel Gowdie confessed to stealing milk from the cow by magic. "We
plait the rope the wrong way, in the Devil's name, and we draw the
tether between the cow's hind feet, and out betwixt her forward feet, in
the Devil's name, and thereby take with us the cow's milk."

Mr. Kirk, it will be observed, does not connect the Fairy kingdom with
that of Satan, as some of his contemporaries were inclined to do.

Note (<span id="xref_c1">c1</span>), [p. 19](sce17.htm#page_19.md).--"The
Wreath (wraith) . . . is only exuvious fumes of the Man. . . . exhaled
and congealed into a various likeness."

What is this theory of "Men illiterate and unwary in their
Observations," but Von Hartmann's doctrine of "the nerve force which
issues from the body of the medium, and then proceeds to set up fresh
centres of force in all neighbouring objects . . . while it still
remains under the control of the medium's unconscious will"? See Mr.
Walter Leaf on Hartmann's *Der Geisterhypothese des Spiritismus*, *Proc.
S. P. R.*, xix. 293

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

It is amusing to find a learned German coinciding in scientific theory
with "ignorant and unwary" Highland seers. Both regard the phantasms as
manifestations of "nerve-force," "exuvious fumes," and as "neither souls
nor counterfeiting spirits."

Note (<span id="xref_d1">d1</span>), [p. 23](sce19.htm#page_23.md).--"Fairy
hills."

The hypothesis that the Fairy belief may be a tradition of an ancient
race dwelling in subterranean homes, is older than Mr. McRitchie or Sir
Walter Scott. In his *Scottish Scenery* (1803), Dr. Cririe suggests that
the germ of the Fairy myth is the existence of dispossessed aboriginals
dwelling in subterranean houses, in some places called Picts' houses,
covered with artificial mounds. The lights seen near the mounds are
lights actually carried by the mound-dwellers. Dr. Cririe works out in
some detail "this marvellously absurd supposition," as the *Quarterly
Review* calls it (vol. lix., p. 280).

Note (<span id="xref_e1">e1</span>), [p.
30](sce22.htm#page_30.md).--"Master Greatrake, the Irish Stroaker."

Glanvill, in *Essays on Several Important Subjects* (1675), prints a
letter from an Irish Bishop on Greatrex, the "stroker." He cured
diseases "by a sanative contagion." According to the Bishop, Greatrex
had an impression that he could do "faith-healing," and found that he
could, but whether by virtue of some special power or by "the people's
fancy," he knew not. He frequently failed, and his patients had
relapses. See his own *Account of Strange Cures: in a Letter to Robert
Boyle*. London, 1666.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_37"></span>[82:1](sce29.htm#fr_37.md) *The Travels of Pedro de
Cieza de Leon*, ch. cxviii.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[84:1](sce29.htm#fr_38.md) Mr. Hoole's account,
*Memoirs of the Wesleys*, p. 91.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Postscript](sce30.md)
