[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Parapsychology](../index) 
[Theosophy](../../the/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](clrv03) 
[Next](clrv05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0835670953/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Clairvoyance*, by C.W. Leadbeater, \[1899\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

### CHAPTER III

#### SIMPLE CLAIRVOYANCE: PARTIAL

The experiences of the untrained clairvoyant—and be it remembered that
that class includes all European clairvoyants except a very few—will,
however, usually fall very far short of what I have attempted to
indicate; they will fall short in many different ways—in degree, in
variety, or in permanence, and above all in precision.

Sometimes, for example, a man's clairvoyance will be permanent, but very
partial, extending only perhaps to one or two classes of the phenomena
observable; he will find himself endowed with some isolated fragment of
higher vision, without apparently possessing other powers of sight which
ought normally to accompany that fragment, or even to precede it. For
example, one of my dearest friends has all his life had the power

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

to see the atomic ether and atomic astral matter, and to recognize their
structure, alike in darkness or in light, as interpenetrating everything
else; yet he has only rarely seen entities whose bodies are composed of
the much more obvious lower ethers or denser astral matter, and at any
rate is certainly not permanently able to see them. He simply finds
himself in possession of this special faculty, without any apparent
reason to account for it, or any recognizable relation to anything else;
and beyond proving to him the existence of these atomic planes and
demonstrating their arrangement, it is difficult to see of what
particular use it is to him at present. Still, there the thing is, and
it is an earnest of greater things to come—of further powers still
awaiting development.

There are many similar cases—similar, I mean, not in the possession of
that particular form of sight (which is unique in my experience), but in
showing the development of some one small part of the full and clear
vision of the astral and etheric planes. In nine cases out of ten,
however, such partial clairvoyance will at the same time lack

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

precision also—that it is to say, there will be a good deal of vague
impression and inference about it, instead of the clear-cut definition
and certainty of the trained man. Examples of this type are constantly
to be found, especially among those who advertise themselves as "test
and business clairvoyance."

Then, again, there are those who are only temporarily clairvoyant under
certain special conditions. Among these there are various subdivisions,
some being able to reproduce the state of clairvoyance at will by again
setting up the same conditions, while with others ti comes sporadically,
without any observable reference to their surroundings and with yet
others the powers shows itself only once or twice in the whole course of
their lives.

To the first of these subdivisions belong those who are clairvoyant only
when in the mesmeric trance—who when not so entranced are incapable of
seeing or hearing anything abnormal. These may sometimes reach great
heights of knowledge and be exceedingly precise in their indications,
but when that is so they are usually undergoing a course of

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

regular training, though for some reason unable as yet to set themselves
free from the leaden weight of earthly lie without assistance.

In the same class we may put those—chiefly Orientals—who gain some
temporary sight only under the influence of certain drugs, or by means
of the performance of certain ceremonies. The ceremonialist sometimes
hypnotizes himself by his repetitions, and in that condition becomes to
some extent clairvoyant; more often he simply reduces himself to a
passive condition in which some other entity can obsess him and speak
through him. Sometimes, again, his ceremonies are not intended to affect
himself at all, but to invoke some astral entity who will give him the
required information; but of course that is a case of magic, and not of
clairvoyance. Both the drugs and the ceremonies are methods emphatically
to be avoided by any one who wishes to approach clairvoyance from the
higher side, and use it for his own progress and for the helping of
others. The Central African medicine-man or witch doctor and some of the
Tartar Shamans are good examples of the type.

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

Those to whom a certain amount of clairvoyant power has come
occasionally only, and without any reference to their own wish, have
often been hysterical or highly nervous persons, with whom the faculty
was to a large extent one of the symptoms of a disease. Its appearance
showed that the physical vehicle was weakened to such a degree that it
no longer presented any obstacle in the way of a certain modicum of
etheric or astral vision. An extreme example of this class is the man
who drinks himself into delirium tremens, and in the condition of
absolute physical ruin and impure psychic excitation brought about by
the ravages of that fell disease, is able to see for the time some of
the loathsome elemental and other entities which he has drawn round
himself by his long course of degraded and bestial indulgence. There
are, however, others cases where the power of sight has appeared and
disappeared without apparent reference to the state of the physical
health; but it seems probable that even in those, if they could have
been observed closely enough, some alteration in the condition of the
etheric double would have been noticed.

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

Those who have only one instance of clairvoyance to report in the whole
of heir lives are a difficult band to classify at all exhaustively,
because of the great variety of the contributory circumstances. There
are many among them to whom the experience has come at some supreme
moment of their lives, when it is comprehensible that there might have
been a temporary exaltation of faculty which would be sufficient to
account for it.

In the case of another subdivision of them the solitary case has been
the seeing of the an apparition most commonly of some friend or relative
at the point of death. Two possibilities are then offered for our
choice, and in each of them the strong wish of the dying man is the
impelling force. That force may have enabled him to materialize himself
for a moment, in which case of course no clairvoyance was needed; or
more probably it may have acted mesmerically upon the percipient, and
momentarily dulled his physical and stimulated his higher sensitiveness.
In either case the vision is the product of the emergency and is not
repeated simply because the necessary conditions are not repeated.

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

There remains, however, an irresolvable residuum of cases in which a
solitary instance occurs of the exercise of undoubted clairvoyance,
while yet the occasion seems to us wholly trivial and unimportant. About
these we can only frame hypotheses; the governing conditions are
evidently not on the physical plane, and a separate investigation of
each case would be necessary before we could speak with any certainty as
to its causes. In some such it has appeared that an astral entity was
endeavouring to make some communication, and was able to impress only
some unimportant detail on its subject—the useful or significant part of
what it had to say failing to get through into the subject's
consciousness.

In the investigation of the phenomena of clairvoyance all these varied
types and many others will be encountered, and a certain number of cases
of mere hallucination will be almost sure to appear also, and will have
to be carefully weeded out from the list of examples. The student of
such a subject needs an inexhaustible fund of patience and steady
perseverance, but if he goes on long enough he will begin dimly to
discern order

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

behind the chaos, and will gradually get some idea of the great laws
under which the whole evolution working.

It will help him greatly in his efforts if he will adopt the order which
we have just followed—that, is if he will first take the trouble to
familiarize himself as thoroughly as may be with the actual facts
concerning the planes with which ordinary clairvoyance deals. If he will
learn what there really is to be seen with astral and etheric sight, and
what their respective limitations are, he will then have, as it were, a
standard by which to measure the cases which he observes. Since all
instances of partial sight must of necessity fit into some niche in this
whole, if he has the outline of the entire scheme in his head he will
find it comparatively easy with a little practice to classify the
instances with which he is called upon to deal.

We have said nothing as yet as to the still more wonderful possibilities
of clairvoyance upon the mental plane, nor indeed is it necessary that
much should be said, as it is exceedingly improbable that the
investigator will ever meet with any examples of it except

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

among pupils properly trained on some of the very highest schools of
Occultism. For them it opens up yet another new world, vaster far than
all those beneath it—a world in which all that we can imagine of utmost
glory and splendour is the commonplace of existence. Some account of its
marvellous faculty, its ineffable bliss, its magnificent opportunities
for learning and for work, is given in the sixth of our Theosophical
manuals, and to that the student may be referred.

All that it has to give—all of it at least that he can assimilate—is
within the reach of the trained pupil, but for the untrained clairvoyant
to touch it is hardly more than a bare possibility. It has been done in
mesmeric trance, but the occurrence is of exceeding rarity, for it needs
almost superhuman qualifications in the way of lofty spiritual
aspiration and absolute purity of thought and intention upon the part
both of the subject and the operator.

To a type of clairvoyance such as this, and still more fully to that
which belongs to the plane next above it, the name of spiritual sight
may reasonably be applied; and since

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

the celestial world to which it opens our eyes lies all round us here
and now, it is fit that our passing reference to it should be made under
the heading of simple clairvoyance, thought it may be necessary to
allude to it again when dealing with clairvoyance in space, to which we
will now pass on.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Clairvoyance in Space: Intentional](clrv05)
