[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Shinn](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](gol05)  [Next](gol07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875166105/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

![](../tnshinn.jpg)  
*The Game of Life and How to Play It*, by Florence Scovel Shinn,
\[1925\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CASTING THE BURDEN

### Impressing the Subconscious

When man knows his own powers and the workings of his mind, his great
desire is to find an easy and quick way to impress the subconscious with
good, for simply an intellectual knowledge of the Truth will not bring
results.

In my own case, I found the easiest way is in "casting the burden."

A metaphysician once explained it in this manner. He said, "The only
thing which gives anything weight in nature, is the law of gravitation,
and if a boulder could be taken high above the planet, there would be no
weight in that boulder; and that is what Jesus Christ meant when he
said: "My yoke is easy and my burden is light."

He had overcome the world vibration, and functioned in the fourth
dimensional realm, where there is only perfection, completion, life and
joy.

He said: "Come to me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest." "Take my yoke upon you, for my yoke is easy and my
burden is light."

We are also told in the fifty-fifth Psalm, to "cast thy burden upon the
Lord." Many passages in the Bible state that the *battle is God's* not
man's and that man is always to "*stand still*" *and see the Salvation
of the Lord*.

This indicates that the superconscious mind (or Christ within) is the
department which fights man's battle and relieves him of burdens.

We see, therefore, that man violates law if he carries a burden, and a
burden is an adverse thought or condition, and this thought or condition
has its root in the subconscious.

It seems almost impossible to make any headway directing the
subconscious from the conscious, or reasoning mind, as the reasoning
mind (the intellect) is limited in its conceptions, and filled with
doubts and fears.

How scientific it then is, to cast the burden upon the superconscious
mind (or Christ within) where it is "made light," or dissolved into its
"native nothingness."

For example: A woman in urgent need of money, "made light" upon the
Christ within, the superconscious, with the statement, "I cast this
burden of lack on the Christ (within) and I go free to have plenty!"

The belief in lack was her burden, and as she cast it upon the
Superconscious with its belief of plenty, an avalanche of supply was the
result.

We read, "The Christ in you the hope of glory."

Another example: One of my students had been given a new piano, and
there was no room in her studio for it until she had moved out the old
one. She was in a state of perplexity. She wanted to keep the old piano,
but knew of no place to send it. She became desperate, as the new piano
was to be sent immediately; in fact, was on its way, with no place to
put it. She said it came to her to repeat, "I cast this burden on the
Christ within, and I go free."

A few moments later, her ’phone rang, and a woman friend asked if she
might rent her old piano, and it was moved out, a few minutes before the
new one arrived.

I knew a woman, whose burden was resentment. She said, "I cast this
burden of resentment on the Christ within, and I go free, to be loving,
harmonious and happy." The Almighty superconscious, flooded the
subconscious with love, and her whole life was changed. For years,
resentment had held her in a state of torment and imprisoned her soul
(the subconscious mind).

The statement should be made over and over and over, sometimes for hours
at a time, silently or audibly, with quietness but determination.

I have often compared it to winding-up a victrola. We must wind
ourselves up with spoken words.

I have noticed, in "casting the burden," after a little while, one seems
to see clearly. It is impossible to have clear vision, while in the
throes of carnal mind. Doubts and fear poison the mind and body and
imagination runs riot, attracting disaster and disease.

In steadily repeating the affirmation, "I cast this burden on the Christ
within, and go free," the vision clears, and with it a feeling of
relief, and sooner or later comes *the manifestation of good, be it
health, happiness or supply*.

One of my students once asked me to explain the "darkness before the
dawn." I referred in a preceding chapter to the fact that often, before
the big demonstration "everything seems to go wrong," and deep
depression clouds the consciousness. It means that out of the
subconscious are rising the doubts and fears of the ages. These old
derelicts of the subconscious rise to the surface, to be put out.

It is then, that man should clap his cymbals, like Jehoshaphat, and give
thanks that he is saved, even though he seems surrounded by the enemy
(the situation of lack or disease). The student continued, "How long
must one remain in the dark" and I replied, "until *one can see in the
dark*," and "*casting the burden enables one to see in the dark*."

In order to impress the subconscious, active faith is always essential.

"Faith without works is dead." In these chapters I have endeavored to
bring out this point.

Jesus Christ showed active faith when "He commanded the multitude to sit
down on the ground," before he gave thanks for the loaves and the
fishes.

I will give another example showing how necessary this step is. In fact,
active faith is the bridge, over which man passes to his Promised Land.

Through misunderstanding, a woman had been separated from her husband,
whom she loved deeply. He refused all offers of reconciliation and would
not communicate with her in any way.

Coming into the knowledge of Spiritual law, she denied the appearance of
separation. She made this statement: "There is no separation in Divine
Mind, therefore, I cannot be separated from the love and companionship
which are mine by divine right."

She showed active faith by arranging a place for him at the table every
day; thereby impressing the subconscious with a picture of his *return*.
Over a year passed, but she never wavered, and *one day he walked in*.

The subconscious is often impressed through music. Music has a fourth
dimensional quality and releases the soul from imprisonment. It makes
wonderful things seem *possible, and easy of accomplishment!*

I have a friend who uses her victrola, daily, for this purpose. It puts
her in perfect harmony and releases the imagination.

Another woman often dances while making her affirmations. The rhythm and
harmony of music and motion carry her words forth with tremendous power.

The student must remember also, not to despise the "day of small
things."

Invariably, before a demonstration, come "signs of land."

Before Columbus reached America, he saw birds and twigs which showed him
land was near. So it is with a demonstration; but often the student
mistakes it for the demonstration itself, and is disappointed.

For example: A woman had "spoken the word" for a set of dishes. Not long
afterwards a friend gave her a dish which was old and cracked.

She came to me and said, "Well, I asked for a set of dishes, and all I
got was a cracked plate."

I replied, "The plate was only signs of land. It shows your dishes are
coming—look upon it as birds and seaweed," and not long afterwards the
dishes came.

Continually "making-believe," impresses the subconscious. If one makes
believe he is rich, and makes believe he is successful, in "due time he
will reap."

Children are always "making believe," and "except ye be converted, and
become as little children, ye shall not enter the Kingdom of Heaven."

For example: I know of a woman who was very poor, but no one could make
her *feel poor*. She earned a small amount of money from rich friends,
who constantly reminded her of her poverty, and to be careful and
saving. Regardless of their admonitions, she would spend all her
earnings on a hat, or make someone a gift, and be in a rapturous state
of mind. Her thoughts were always centered on beautiful clothes and
"rings and things," but without envying others.

She lived in the world of the wondrous, and only riches seemed real to
her. Before long she married a rich man, and the rings and things became
visible. I do not know whether the man was the "Divine Selection," but
opulence had to manifest in her life, as she had imaged only opulence.

There is no peace or happiness for man, until he has erased all fear
from the subconscious.

Fear is misdirected energy and must be redirected, or transmuted into
Faith.

Jesus Christ said, "Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith?" "All
things are possible to him that believeth."

I am asked, so often by my students, "*How can I get rid of fear?*"

I reply, "*By walking up to the thing you are afraid of*."

"The lion takes its fierceness from your fear."

Walk up to the lion, and he will disappear; run away and he runs after
you.

I have shown in previous chapters, how the lion of lack disappeared when
the individual spent money fearlessly, showing faith that God was his
supply and therefore, unfailing.

Many of my students have come out of the bondage of poverty, and are now
bountifully supplied, through losing all fear of letting money go out.
The subconscious is impressed with the truth that *God is the Giver and
the Gift;* therefore as one is one with the Giver, he is one with the
Gift. A splendid statement is, "I now thank God the Giver for God the
Gift."

Man has so long separated himself from his good and his supply, through
thoughts of separation and lack, that sometimes, it takes dynamite to
dislodge these false ideas from the subconscious, and the dynamite is a
big situation.

We see in the foregoing illustration, how the individual was freed from
his bondage by *showing fearlessness*.

Man should watch himself hourly to detect if his motive for action is
fear or faith.

"Choose ye this day whom we shall serve," fear or faith.

Perhaps one's fear is of personality. Then do not avoid the people
feared; be willing to meet them cheerfully, and they will either prove
"golden links in the chain of one's good," or disappear harmoniously
from one's pathway.

Perhaps one's fear is of disease or germs. Then one should be fearless
and undisturbed in a germ-laden situation, and he would be immune.

One can only contract germs while vibrating at the same rate as the
germ, and fear drags men down to the level of the germ. Of course, the
disease laden germ is the product of carnal mind, as all thought must
objectify. Germs do not exist in the superconscious or Divine Mind,
therefore are the product of man's "vain imagination."

"In the twinkling of an eye," man's release will come when he realizes
*there is no power in evil*.

The material world will fade away, and the fourth dimensional world, the
"World of the Wondrous," will swing into manifestation.

"And I saw a new heaven, and a new earth—and there shall be no more
death, neither sorrow nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain;
for the former things are passed away."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Love](gol07.md)
