[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Shinn](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gol06)  [Next](gol08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875166105/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

![](../tnshinn.jpg)  
*The Game of Life and How to Play It*, by Florence Scovel Shinn,
\[1925\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LOVE

Every man on this planet is taking his initiation in love. "A new
commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another." Ouspensky
states, in "Tertium Organum," that "love is a cosmic phenomenon," and
opens to man the fourth dimensional world, "The World of the Wondrous."

Real love is selfless and free from fear. It pours itself out upon the
object of its affection, without demanding any return. Its joy is in the
joy of giving. Love is God in manifestation, and the strongest magnetic
force in the universe. Pure, unselfish love *draws to itself its own;*
it does not need to seek or demand. Scarcely anyone has the faintest
conception of real love. Man is selfish, tyrannical or fearful in his
affections, thereby losing the thing he loves. Jealousy is the worst
enemy of love, for the imagination runs riot, seeing the loved one
attracted to another, and invariably these fears objectify if they are
not neutralized.

For example: A woman came to me in deep distress. The man she loved had
left her for other women, and said he never intended to marry her. She
was torn with jealousy and resentment and said she hoped he would suffer
as he had made her suffer; and added, "How could he leave me when I
loved him so much?"

I replied, "You are not loving that man, you are hating him," and added,
"*You can never receive what you have never given. Give a perfect love
and you will receive a perfect love*. Perfect yourself on this man. Give
him a perfect, *unselfish* love, demanding nothing in return, do not
criticise or condemn, and *bless him wherever he is*."

She replied, "No, I won't bless him unless I know where he is!"

"Well," I said, "that is not real love."

"When you *send out real love*, real love will return to you, either
from this man or his equivalent, for if this man is not the divine
selection, you will not want him. As you are one with God, you are one
with the love which belongs to you by divine right."

Several months passed, and matters remained about the same, but she was
working conscientiously with herself. I said, "When you are no longer
disturbed by his cruelty, he will cease to be cruel, as you are
attracting it through your own emotions."

Then I told her of a brotherhood in India, who never said, "Good
morning" to each other. They used these words: "*I salute the Divinity
in you*." They saluted the divinity in every man, and in the wild
animals in the jungle, and they were never harmed, for they *saw only
God in every* living thing. I said, "Salute the divinity in this man,
and say, 'I see your divine self only. I see you as God sees you,
perfect, made in His image and likeness.'"

She found she was becoming more poised, and gradually losing her
resentment. He was a Captain, and she always called him "The Cap."

One day, she said, suddenly, "*God bless the Cap wherever he is*."

I replied: "Now, that is real love, and when you have become a 'complete
circle,' and are no longer disturbed by the situation, you will have his
love, or attract its equivalent."

I was moving at this time, and did not have a telephone, so was out of
touch with her for a few weeks, when one morning I received a letter
saying, "We are married."

At the earliest opportunity, I paid her a call. My first words were,
"What happened?"

"Oh," she exclaimed, "a miracle! One day I woke up and all suffering had
ceased. I saw him that evening and he asked me to marry him. We were
married in about a week, and I have never seen a more devoted man."

There is an old saying: "*No man is your enemy, no man is your friend,
every man is your teacher*."

So one should become impersonal and learn what each man has to teach
him, and soon he would learn his lessons and be free.

The woman's lover was teaching her selfless love, which every man,
sooner or later, must learn.

Suffering is not necessary for man's development; it is the result of
violation of spiritual law, but few people seem able to rouse themselves
from their "soul sleep" without it. When people are happy, they usually
become selfish, and automatically the law of Karma is set in action. Man
often suffers loss through lack of appreciation.

I knew a woman who had a very nice husband, but she said often, "I don't
care anything about being married, but that is nothing against my
husband. I'm simply not interested in married life."

She had other interests, and scarcely remembered she had a husband. She
only thought of him when she saw him. One day her husband told her he
was in love with another woman, and left. She came to me in distress and
resentment.

I replied, "It is exactly what you spoke the word for. You said you
didn't care anything about being married, so the subconscious worked to
get you unmarried."

She said, "Oh yes, I see. People get what they want, and then feel very
much hurt."

She soon became in perfect harmony with the situation, and knew they
were both much happier apart.

When a woman becomes indifferent or critical, and ceases to be an
inspiration to her husband, he misses the stimulus of their early
relationship and is restless and unhappy.

A man came to me dejected, miserable and poor. His wife was interested
in the "Science of Numbers," and had had him read. It seems the report
was not very favorable, for he said, "My wife says I'll never amount to
anything because I am a two."

I replied, "I don't care what your number is, you are a perfect idea in
divine mind, and we will demand the success and prosperity which are
*already planned* for you by that Infinite Intelligence."

Within a few weeks, he had a very fine position, and a year or two
later, he achieved a brilliant success as a writer. No man is a success
in business unless he loves his work. The picture the artist paints for
love (of his art) is his greatest work. The pot-boiler is always
something to live down.

No man can attract money if he despises it. Many people are kept in
poverty by saying: "Money means nothing to me, and I have a contempt for
people who have it."

This is the reason so many artists are poor. Their contempt for money
separates them from it.

I remember hearing one artist say of another, "He's no good as an
artist, he has money in the bank."

This attitude of mind, of course, separates man from his supply; he must
be in harmony with a thing in order to attract it.

Money is God in manifestation, as freedom from want and limitation, but
it must be always kept in circulation and put to right uses. Hoarding
and saving react with grim vengeance.

This does not mean that man should not have houses and lots, stocks and
bonds, for "the barns of the righteous man shall be full." It means man
should not hoard even the principal, if an occasion arises, when money
is necessary. In letting it go out fearlessly and cheerfully he opens
the way for more to come in, for God is man's unfailing and
inexhaustible supply.

This is the spiritual attitude towards money and the great Bank of the
Universal never fails!

We see an example of hoarding in the film production of "Greed." The
woman won five thousand dollars in a lottery, but would not spend it.
She hoarded and saved, let her husband suffer and starve, and eventually
she scrubbed floors for a living.

She loved the money itself and put it above everything, and one night
she was murdered and the money taken from her.

This is an example of where "love of money is the root of all evil."
Money in itself, is good and beneficial, but used for destructive
purposes, hoarded and saved, or considered more important than love,
brings disease and disaster, and the loss of the money itself.

Follow the path of love, and all things are added, *for God is love*,
and *God is supply;* follow the path of selfishness and greed, and the
supply vanishes, or man is separated from it.

For example; I knew the case of a very rich woman, who hoarded her
income. She rarely gave anything away, but bought and bought and bought
things for herself.

She was very fond of necklaces, and a friend once asked her how many she
possessed. She replied, "Sixty-seven." She bought them and put them
away, carefully wrapped in tissue paper. Had she used the necklaces it
would have been quite legitimate, but she was violating "the law of
use." Her closets were filled with clothes she never wore, and jewels
which never saw the light.

The woman's arms were gradually becoming paralyzed from holding on to
things, and eventually she was considered incapable of looking after her
affairs and her wealth was handed over to others to manage.

So man, in ignorance of the law, brings about his own destruction.

All disease, all unhappiness, come from the violation of the law of
love. Man's boomerangs of hate, resentment and criticism, come back
laden with sickness and sorrow. Love seems almost a lost art, but the
man with the knowledge of spiritual law knows it must be regained, for
without it, he has "become as sounding brass and tinkling cymbals."

For example: I had a student who came to me, month after month, to clean
her consciousness of resentment. After a while, she arrived at the point
where she resented only one woman, but that one woman kept her busy.
Little by little she became poised and harmonious, and one day, all
resentment was wiped out.

She came in radiant, and exclaimed "You can't understand how I feel! The
woman said something to me and instead of being furious I was loving and
kind, and she apologized and was perfectly lovely to me.

No one can understand the marvelous lightness I feel within!"

Love and good-will are invaluable in business. For example: A woman came
to me, complaining of her employer. She said she was cold and critical
and knew she did not want her in the position.

"Well," I replied, "Salute the Divinity in the woman and send her love."

She said "I can't; she's a marble woman."

I answered, "You remember the story of the sculptor who asked for a
certain piece of marble. He was asked why he wanted it, and he replied,
'because there is an angel in the marble,' and out of it he produced a
wonderful work of art."

She said, "Very well, I'll try it." A week later she came back and said,
"I did what you told me to, and now the woman is very kind, and took me
out in her car."

People are sometimes filled with remorse for having done someone an
unkindness, perhaps years ago.

If the wrong cannot be righted, its effect can be neutralized by doing
some one a kindness *in the present*.

"This one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind and
reaching forth unto those things which are before."

Sorrow, regret and remorse tear down the cells of the body, and poison
the atmosphere of the individual.

A woman said to me in deep sorrow, "Treat me to be happy and joyous, for
my sorrow makes me so irritable with the members of my family that I
keep making more Karma."

I was asked to treat a woman who was mourning for her daughter. I denied
all belief in loss and separation, and affirmed that God was the woman's
joy, love and peace.

The woman gained her poise at once, but sent word by her son, not to
treat any longer, because she was "so happy, it wasn't respectable."

So "mortal mind" loves to hang on to its griefs and regrets.

I knew a woman who went about bragging of her troubles, so, of course,
she always had something to brag about.

The old idea was if a woman did not worry about her children, she was
not a good mother.

Now, we know that mother-fear is responsible for many of the diseases
and accidents which come into the lives of children.

For fear pictures vividly the disease or situation feared, and these
pictures objectify, if not neutralized.

Happy is the mother who can say sincerely, that she puts her child in
God's hands, and knows therefore, that he is divinely protected.

For example: A woman awoke suddenly, in the night, feeling her brother
was in great danger. Instead of giving in to her fears, she commenced
making statements of Truth, saying, "Man is a perfect idea in Divine
Mind, and is always in his right place, therefore, my brother is in his
right place, and is divinely protected."

The next day she found that her brother had been in close proximity to
an explosion in a mine, but had miraculously escaped.

So man is his brother's keeper (in thought) and every man should know
that the thing he loves dwells in "the secret place of the most high,
and abides under the shadow of the Almighty."

"There shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy
dwelling."

"Perfect love casteth out fear. He that feareth is not made perfect in
love," and "Love is the fulfilling of the Law."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Intuition Or Guidance](gol08)
