[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Shinn](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gol02)  [Next](gol04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875166105/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

![](../tnshinn.jpg)  
*The Game of Life and How to Play It*, by Florence Scovel Shinn,
\[1925\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE POWER OF THE WORD

 

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p>      "By thy words thou shalt be justified,<br />
 and by thy words thou shalt be condemned."</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

A person knowing the power of the word, becomes very careful of his
conversation. He has only to watch the reaction of his words to know
that they do "not return void." Through his spoken word, man is
continually making laws for himself.

I knew a man who said, "I always miss a car. It invariably pulls out
just as I arrive."

His daughter said: "I always catch a car. It's sure to come just as I
get there." This occurred for years. Each had made a separate law for
himself, one of failure, one of success. This is the psychology of
superstitions.

The horse-shoe or rabbit's foot contains no power, but man's spoken word
and belief that it will bring him good luck creates expectancy in the
subconscious mind, and attracts a "lucky situation." I find however,
this will not "work" when man has advanced spiritually and knows a
higher law. One cannot turn back, and must put away "graven images." For
example: Two men in my class had had great success in business for
several months, when suddenly everything "went to smash." We tried to
analyze the situation, and I found, instead of making their affirmations
and looking to God for success and prosperity, they had each bought a
"lucky monkey." I said: "Oh I see, you have been trusting in the lucky
monkeys instead of God." "Put away the lucky monkeys and call on the law
of forgiveness," for man has power to forgive or neutralize his
mistakes.

They decided to throw the lucky monkeys down a coalhole, and all went
well again. This does not mean, however, that one should throw away
every "lucky" ornament or horse-shoe about the house, but he must
recognize that the power back of it is the one and only power, God, and
that the object simply gives him a feeling of expectancy.

I was with a friend, one day, who was in deep despair. In crossing the
street, she picked up a horseshoe. Immediately, she was filled with joy
and hope. She said God had sent her the horseshoe in order to keep up
her courage.

It was indeed, at that moment, about the only thing that could have
registered in her consciousness. Her hope became faith, and she
ultimately made a wonderful demonstration. I wish to make the point
clear that the men previously mentioned were depending on the monkeys,
alone, while this woman recognized the power back of the horseshoe.

I know, in my own case, it took a long while to get out of a belief that
a certain thing brought disappointment. If the thing happened,
disappointment invariably followed. I found the only way I could make a
change in the subconscious, was by asserting, "There are not two powers,
there is only one power, God, therefore, there are no disappointments,
and this thing means a happy surprise." I noticed a change at once, and
happy surprises commenced coming my way.

I have a friend who said nothing could induce her to walk under a
ladder. I said, "If you are afraid, you are giving in to a belief in two
powers, Good and Evil, instead of one. As God is absolute, there can be
no opposing power, unless man makes the false of evil for himself. To
show you believe in only One Power, God, and that there is no power or
reality in evil, walk under the next ladder you see." Soon after, she
went to her bank. She wished to open her box in the safety-deposit
vault, and there stood a ladder on her pathway. It was impossible to
reach the box without passing under the ladder. She quailed with fear
and turned back. She could not face the lion on her pathway. However,
when she reached the street, my words rang in her ears and she decided
to return and walk under it. It was a big moment in her life, for
ladders had held her in bondage for years. She retraced her steps to the
vault, and the ladder was no longer there! This so often happens! If one
is willing to do a thing he is afraid to do, he does not have to.

It is the law of nonresistance, which is so little understood.

Someone has said that courage contains genius and magic. Face a
situation fearlessly, and there is no situation to face; it falls away
of its own weight.

The explanation is, that fear attracted the ladder on the woman's
pathway, and fearlessness removed it.

Thus the invisible forces are ever working for man who is always
'pulling the strings" himself, though he does not know it. Owing to the
vibratory power of words, whatever man voices, he begins to attract.
People who continually speak of disease, invariably attract it.

After man knows the truth, he cannot be too careful of his words. For
example: I have a friend who often says on the ’phone, "Do come to see
me and have a fine old-fashioned chat." This "old-fashioned chat" means
an hour of about five hundred to a thousand destructive words, the
principal topics being loss, lack, failure and sickness.

I reply: "No, I thank you, I've had enough old-fashioned chats in my
life, they are too expensive, but I will be glad to have a new-fashioned
chat, and talk about what we want, not what we don't want." There is an
old saying that man only dares use his words for three purposes, to
"heal, bless or prosper." What man says of others will be said of him,
and what he wishes for another, he is wishing for himself.

"Curses, like chickens, come home to roost."

If a man wishes someone "bad luck," he is sure to attract bad luck
himself. If he wishes to aid someone to success, he is wishing and
aiding himself to success.

The body may be renewed and transformed through the spoken word and
clear vision, and disease be completely wiped out of the consciousness.
The metaphysician knows that all disease has a mental correspondence,
and in order to heal the body one must first "heal the soul."

The soul is the subconscious mind, and it must be "saved" from wrong
thinking.

In the twenty-third psalm, we read: "He restoreth my soul." This means
that the subconscious mind or soul, must be restored with the right
ideas, and the "mystical marriage" is the marriage of the soul and the
spirit, or the subconscious and super-conscious mind. They must be one.
When the subconscious is flooded with the perfect ideas of the
superconscious, God and man are one. "I and the Father are one." That
is, he is one with the realm of perfect ideas; he is the man made in
God's likeness and image (imagination) and is given power and dominion
over all created things, his mind, body and affairs.

It is safe to say that all sickness and unhappiness come from the
violation of the law of love. A new commandment I give unto you, "Love
one another," and in the Game of Life, love or good-will takes every
trick.

For example: A woman I know, had, for years an appearance of a terrible
skin disease. The doctors told her it was incurable, and she was in
despair. She was on the stage, and she feared she would soon have to
give up her profession, and she had no other means of support. She,
however, procured a good engagement, and on the opening night, made a
great "hit." She received flattering notices from the critics, and was
joyful and elated. The next day she received a notice of dismissal. A
man in the cast had been jealous of her success and had caused her to be
sent away. She felt hatred and resentment taking complete possession of
her, and she cried out, "Oh God don't let me hate that man." That night
she worked for hours "in the silence."

She said, "I soon came into a very deep silence. I seemed to be at peace
with myself, with the man, and with the whole world. I continued this
for two following nights, and on the third day I found I was healed
completely of the skin disease!" In asking for love, or good will, she
had fulfilled the law, ("for love is the fulfilling of the law") and the
disease (which came from subconscious resentment) was wiped out.

Continual criticism produces rheumatism, as critical, inharmonious
thoughts cause unnatural deposits in the blood, which settle in the
joints.

False growths are caused by jealousy, hatred, unforgiveness, fear, etc.
Every disease is caused by a mind not at ease. I said once, in my class,
"There is no use asking anyone 'What's the matter with you?' we might
just as well say, 'Who's the matter with you?'" Unforgiveness is the
most prolific cause of disease. It will harden arteries or liver, and
affect the eye-sight. In its train are endless ills.

I called on a woman, one day, who said she was ill from having eaten a
poisoned oyster. I replied, "Oh, no, the oyster was harmless, you
poisoned the oyster. What's the matter with you?" She answered, "Oh
about nineteen people." She had quarrelled with nineteen people and had
become so inharmonious that she attracted the wrong oyster.

Any inharmony on the external, indicates there is mental inharmony. "As
the within, so the without."

Man's only enemies are within himself. "And a man's foes shall be they
of his own household." Personality is one of the last enemies to be
overcome, as this planet is taking its initiation in love. It was
Christ's message—"Peace on Earth, good will towards man." The
enlightened man, therefore, endeavors to perfect himself upon his
neighbor. His work is with himself, to send out goodwill and blessings
to every man, and the marvelous thing is, that if one blesses a man he
has no power to harm him.

For example: A man came to me asking to "treat" for success in business.
He was selling machinery, and a rival appeared on the scene with what he
proclaimed, was a better machine, and my friend feared defeat. I said,
"First of all, we must wipe out all fear, and know that God protects
your interests, and that the divine idea must come out of the situation.
That is, the right machine will be sold, by the right man, to the right
man." And I added, "Don't hold one critical thought towards that man.
Bless him all day, and be willing not to sell your machine, if it isn't
the divine idea." So he went to the meeting, fearless and nonresistant,
and blessing the other man. He said the outcome was very remarkable. The
other man's machine refused to work, and he sold his without the
slightest difficulty. "But I say unto you, love your enemies, bless them
that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which
spitefully use you and persecute you."

*Good-will produces a great aura of protection about the one who sends
it, and "No weapon that is* *formed against him shall prosper. "In other
words, love and good-will destroy the enemies within one's self,
therefore, one has no enemies on the external!*

*"There is peace on earth for him who sends goodwill to man!"*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Law of Nonresistance](gol04)
