[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Shinn](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](gol04)  [Next](gol06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875166105/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

![](../tnshinn.jpg)  
*The Game of Life and How to Play It*, by Florence Scovel Shinn,
\[1925\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE LAW OF KARMA

#### and

### THE LAW OF FORGIVENESS

Man receives only that which he gives. The Game of Life is a game of
boomerangs. Man's thoughts, deeds and words, return to him sooner or
later, with astounding accuracy.

This is the law of Karma, which is Sanskrit for "Comeback." "Whatsoever
a man soweth, that shall he also reap."

For example: A friend told me this story of herself, illustrating the
law. She said, "I make all my Karma on my aunt, whatever I say to her,
some one says to me. I am often irritable at home, and one day, said to
my aunt, who was talking to me during dinner. '*No more talk, I wish to
eat in peace*.'"

"The following day, I was lunching with a woman with whom I wished to
make a great impression. I was talking animatedly, when she said: '*No
more talk, I wish to eat in peace!*'"

My friend is high in consciousness, so her Karma returns much more
quickly than to one on the mental plane.

The more man knows, the more he is responsible for, and a person with a
knowledge of Spiritual Law, which he does not practice, suffers greatly,
in consequence. "The fear of the Lord (law) is the beginning of wisdom."
If we read the word Lord, law, it will make many passages in the Bible
much clearer.

"Vengeance is mine, I will repay, saith the Lord" (law). It is the law
which takes vengeance, not God. God sees man perfect, "created in his
own image," (imagination) and given "power and dominion."

This is the perfect idea of man, registered in Divine Mind, awaiting
man's recognition; for man can only be what he sees himself to be, and
only attain what he sees himself attaining.

"Nothing ever happens without an on-looker" is an ancient saying.

Man sees first his failure or success, his joy or sorrow, before it
swings into visibility from the scenes set in his own imagination. We
have observed this in the mother picturing disease for her child, or a
woman seeing success for her husband.

Jesus Christ said, "And ye shall know the truth and the truth shall make
you free."

So, we see freedom (from all unhappy conditions) comes through
knowledge—a knowledge of Spiritual Law.

Obedience precedes authority, and the law obeys man when he obeys the
law. The law of electricity must be obeyed before it becomes man's
servant. When handled ignorantly, it becomes man's deadly foe. *So with
the laws of Mind!* 

For example: A woman with a strong personal will, wished she owned a
house which belonged to an acquaintance, and she often made mental
pictures of herself living in the house. In the course of time, the man
died and she moved into the house. Several years afterwards, coming into
the knowledge of Spiritual Law, she said to me: "Do you think I had
anything to do with that man's death?" I replied: "Yes, your desire was
so strong, everything made way for it, but you paid your Karmic debt.
Your husband, whom you loved devotedly, died soon after, and the house
was a white elephant on your hands for years."

The original owner, however, could not have been affected by her
thoughts had he been positive in the truth, nor her husband, but they
were both under Karmic law. The woman should have said (feeling the
great desire for the house), "Infinite Intelligence, give me the right
house, equally as charming as this, the house *which is mine by divine
right*."

The divine selection would have given perfect satisfaction and brought
good to all. The divine pattern is the only safe pattern to work by.

*Desire is a tremendous force, and must be directed in the right
channels, or chaos ensues*.

In demonstrating, the most important step is the *first step*, to "*ask
aright*."

Man should always demand only that which is his by *divine right*.

To go back to the illustration: Had the woman taken this attitude: "If
this house, I desire, is mine, I cannot lose it, if it is not, give me
its equivalent," the man might have decided to move out, harmoniously
(had it been the divine selection for her) or another house would have
been substituted. Anything forced into manifestation through personal
will, is always "ill-got," and has "ever bad success."

Man is admonished, "My will be done not thine," and the curious thing
is, man always gets just what he desires when he does relinquish
personal will, thereby enabling Infinite Intelligence to work through
him.

"Stand ye still and see the salvation of the Lord" (law).

For example: A woman came to me in great distress. Her daughter had
determined to take a very hazardous trip, and the mother was filled with
fear.

She said she had used every argument, had pointed out the dangers to be
encountered, and forbidden her to go, but the daughter became more and
more rebellious and determined. I said to the mother, "You are forcing
your personal will upon your daughter, which you have no right to do,
and your fear of the trip is only attracting it, for man attracts what
he fears." I added, "Let go, and take your mental hands off; *put it in
God's Hands, and use this statement:*" "I put this situation in the
hands of Infinite Love and Wisdom; if this trip is the Divine plan, I
bless it and no longer resist, but if it is not divinely planned, I give
thanks that it is now dissolved and dissipated." A day or two after
that, her daughter said to her, "Mother, I have given up the trip," and
the situation returned to its "native nothingness."

It is learning to "stand still," which seems so difficult for man. I
will deal more fully with this law in the chapter on nonresistance.

I will give another example of sowing and reaping, which came in the
most curious way.

A woman came to me saying, she had received a counterfeit twenty-dollar
bill, given to her at the bank. She was much disturbed, for, she said,
"The people at the bank will never acknowledge their mistake."

I replied, "Let us analyze the situation and find out why you attracted
it." She thought a few moments and exclaimed: "I know it, I sent a
friend a lot of stagemoney, just for a joke." So the law had sent her
some stagemoney, for it doesn't know anything about jokes.

I said, "Now we will call on the law of forgiveness, and neutralize the
situation."

Christianity is founded upon the law of forgiveness—Christ has redeemed
us from the curse of the Karmic law, and the Christ within each man is
his Redeemer and Salvation from all inharmonious conditions.

So I said: "Infinite Spirit, we call on the law of forgiveness and give
thanks that she is under grace and not under law, and cannot lose this
twenty dollars which is hers by divine right."

"Now," I said, "Go back to the bank and tell them, fearlessly, that it
was given you, there by mistake."

She obeyed, and to her surprise, they apologized and gave her another
bill, treating her most courteously.

So knowledge of the Law gives man power to "rub out his mistakes." Man
cannot force the external to be what he is not.

If he desires riches, he must be rich first in consciousness.

For example: A woman came to me asking treatment for prosperity. She did
not take much interest in her household affairs, and her home was in
great disorder.

I said to her, "If you wish to be rich, you must be orderly. All men
with great wealth are orderly—and order is heaven's first law." I added,
"You will never become rich with a burnt match in the pincushion."

She had a good sense of humor and commenced immediately, putting her
house in order. She rearranged furniture, straightened out bureau
drawers, cleaned rugs, and soon made a big financial demonstration—a
gift from a relative. The woman, herself, became made over, and keeps
herself keyed-up financially, by being ever watchful of the *external
and expecting prosperity, knowing God is her supply*.

Many people are in ignorance of the fact that gifts and things are
investments, and that hoarding and saving invariably lead to loss.

"There is that scattereth and yet increaseth; and there is that
withholdeth more than is meet, but it tendeth to poverty."

For example: I knew a man who wanted to buy a fur-lined overcoat. He and
his wife went to various shops, but there was none he wanted. He said
they were all too cheap-looking. At last, he was shown one, the salesman
said was valued at a thousand dollars, but which the manager would sell
him for five-hundred dollars, as it was late in the season.

His financial possessions amounted to about seven hundred dollars. The
reasoning mind would have said, "You can't afford to spend nearly all
you have on a coat," but he was very intuitive and never reasoned.

He turned to his wife and said, "If I get this coat, I'll make a ton of
money!" So his wife consented, weakly.

About a month later, he received a ten-thousand-dollar commission. The
coat made him feel so rich, it linked him with success and prosperity;
without the coat, he would not have received the commission. It was an
investment paying large dividends!

If man ignores these leadings to spend or to give, the same amount of
money will go in an uninteresting or unhappy way.

For example: A woman told me, on Thanksgiving Day, she informed her
family that they could not afford a Thanksgiving dinner. She had the
money, but decided to save it.

A few days later, someone entered her room and took from the bureau
drawer the exact amount the dinner would have cost.

The law always stands back of the man who spends fearlessly, with
wisdom.

For example: One of my students was shopping with her little nephew. The
child clamored for a toy, which she told him she could not afford to
buy.

She realized suddenly that she was seeking lack, and not recognizing God
as her supply!

So she bought the toy, and on her way home, *picked up, in the street,
the exact amount of money she had paid for it*.

Man's supply is inexhaustible and unfailing when fully trusted, but
faith or trust must precede the demonstration. "According to your faith
be it unto you." "Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the
evidence of things not see—"for faith holds the vision steady, and the
adverse pictures are dissolved and dissipated, and "in due season we
shall reap, if we faint not."

Jesus Christ brought the good news (the gospel) that there was a higher
law than the law of Karma—and that that law transcends the law of Karma.
It is the law of grace, or forgiveness. It is the law which *frees man
from the law of cause and effect—the law of consequence*. "*Under grace,
and not under law*."

We are told that on this plane, man reaps where he has not sown; the
gifts of God are simply poured out upon him. "All that the Kingdom
affords is his." This continued state of bliss awaits the man who has
overcome the race (or world) thought.

In the world thought there is tribulation, but Jesus Christ said: "Be of
good cheer; I have overcome the world."

The world thought is that of sin, sickness and death. He saw their
absolute unreality and said sickness and sorrow shall pass away and
death itself, the last enemy, be overcome.

We know now, from a scientific standpoint, that death could be overcome
by stamping the subconscious mind with the conviction of eternal youth
and eternal life.

The subconscious, being simply power without direction, *carries out
orders without questioning*.

Working under the direction of the superconscious (the Christ or God
within man) the "resurrection of the body" would be accomplished.

Man would no longer throw off his body in death, it would be transformed
into the "body electric," sung by Walt Whitman, for Christianity is
founded upon the forgiveness of sins and "an empty tomb."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Casting the Burden](gol06.md)
