[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Shinn](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gol09)  [Next](gol11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875166105/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

![](../tnshinn.jpg)  
*The Game of Life and How to Play It*, by Florence Scovel Shinn,
\[1925\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DENIALS AND AFFIRMATIONS

"Thou shalt also decree a thing, and it shall be established unto thee."

All the good that is to be made manifest in man's life is already an
accomplished fact in divine mind, and is released through man's
recognition, or spoken word, so he must be careful to decree that only
the Divine Idea be made manifest, for often, he decrees, through his
"idle words," failure or misfortune.

It is, therefore, of the utmost importance, to word one's demands
correctly, as stated in a previous chapter.

If one desires a home, friend, position or any other good thing, make
the demand for the "divine selection."

For example: "Infinite Spirit, open the way for my right home, my right
friend, my right position. I give thanks *it now manifests under grace
in a perfect way*."

The latter part of the statement is most important. For example: I knew
a woman who demanded a thousand dollars. Her daughter was injured and
they received a thousand dollars indemnity, so it did not come in a
"perfect way." The demand should have been worded in this way: "Infinite
Spirit, I give thanks that the one thousand dollars, which is mine by
divine right, is now released, and reaches me under grace, in a perfect
way."

As one grows in a financial consciousness, he should demand that the
enormous sums of money, which are his by divine right, reach him under
grace, in perfect ways.

It is impossible for man to release more than he thinks is possible, for
one is bound by the limited expectancies of the subconscious. He must
enlarge his expectancies in order to receive in a larger way.

Man so often limits himself in his demands. For example: A student made
the demand for six hundred dollars, by a certain date. He did receive
it, but heard afterwards, that he came very near receiving a thousand
dollars, but he was given just six hundred, as the result of his spoken
word.

"They limited the Holy One of Israel." Wealth is a matter of
consciousness. The French have a legend giving an example of this. A
poor man was walking along a road when he met a traveler, who stopped
him and said: "My good friend, I see you are poor. Take this gold
nugget, sell it, and you will be rich all your days."

The man was overjoyed at his good fortune, and took the nugget home. He
immediately found work and became so prosperous that he did not sell the
nugget. Years passed, and he became a very rich man. One day he met a
poor man on the road. He stopped him and said: "My good friend, I will
give you this gold nugget, which, if you sell, will make you rich for
life." The mendicant took the nugget, had it valued, and found it was
only brass. So we see, the first man became rich through feeling rich,
thinking the nugget was gold.

Every man has within himself a gold nugget; *it is his consciousness of
gold, of opulence, which brings riches into his life*. In making his
demands, man begins at his *journey's end*, that is, he declares *he has
already received*. "*Before ye call I shall answer*."

Continually affirming establishes the belief in the subconscious.

It would not be necessary to make an affirmation more than once if one
had perfect faith! One should not plead or supplicate, but give thanks
repeatedly, that he has received.

"The desert shall *rejoice* and blossom as the rose." This rejoicing
which is yet in the desert (state of consciousness) opens the way for
release. The Lord's Prayer is in the form of command and demand, "Give
us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our debts as we forgive our
debtors," and ends in praise, "For thine is the Kingdom and the Power
and the Glory, forever. Amen." "Concerning the works of my hands,
command ye me." So prayer is command and demand, praise and
thanksgiving. The student's work is in making himself believe that "with
God all things are possible."

This is easy enough to state in the abstract, but a little more
difficult when confronted with a problem. For example: It was necessary
for a woman to demonstrate a large sum of money within a stated time.
She knew she must *do something* to get a realization (for realization
is manifestation), and she demanded a "lead."

She was walking through a department store, when she saw a very
beautiful pink enamel papercutter. She felt the "pull" towards it. The
thought came. "I haven't a paper cutter good enough to open letters
containing large cheques."

So she bought the papercutter, which the reasoning mind would have
called an extravagance. When she held it in her hand, she had a flash of
a picture of herself opening an envelope containing a large cheque, and
in a few weeks, she received the money. The pink papercutter was her
bridge of active faith.

Many stories are told of the power of the subconscious when directed in
faith.

For example: A man was spending the night in a farmhouse. The windows of
the room had been nailed down, and in the middle of the night he felt
suffocated and made his way in the dark to the window. He could not open
it, so he smashed the pane with his fist, drew in draughts of fine fresh
air, and had a wonderful night's sleep.

The next morning, he found he had smashed the glass of a bookcase and
the window had remained closed during the whole night. He had *supplied
himself with oxygen, simply by his thought of oxygen*.

When a student starts out to demonstrate, he should never turn back.
"Let not that man who wavers think that he shall receive anything of the
Lord."

A student once made this wonderful statement, "When I ask the Father for
anything, I put my foot down, and I say: Father, I'll take nothing less
than I've asked for, but more!" So man should never compromise: "Having
done all—Stand." This is sometimes the most difficult time of
demonstrating. The temptation comes to give up, to turn back, to
compromise.

"He also serves who only stands and waits."

Demonstrations often come at the eleventh hour because man then lets go,
that is, stops reasoning, and Infinite Intelligence has a chance to
work.

"Man's dreary desires are answered drearily, and his impatient desires,
long delayed or violently fulfilled."

For example: A woman asked me why it was she was constantly losing or
breaking her glasses.

We found she often said to herself and others with vexation, "I wish I
could get rid of my glasses." So her impatient desire was violently
fulfilled. What she should have demanded was perfect eye-sight, but what
she registered in the subconscious was simply the impatient desire to be
rid of her glasses; so they were continually being broken or lost.

Two attitudes of mind cause loss: depreciation, as in the case of the
woman who did not appreciate her husband, or *fear of loss*, which makes
a picture of loss in the subconscious.

When a student is able to let go of his problem (cast his burden) he
will have instantaneous manifestation.

For example: A woman was out during a very stormy day and her umbrella
was blown inside-out. She was about to make a call on some people whom
she had never met and she did not wish to make her first appearance with
a dilapidated umbrella. She could not throw it away, as it did not
belong to her. So in desperation, she exclaimed: "Oh, God, you take
charge of this umbrella, I don't know what to do."

A moment later, a voice behind her said: "Lady, do you want your
umbrella mended?" There stood an umbrella mender.

She replied, "Indeed, I do."

The man mended the umbrella, while she went into the house to pay her
call, and when she returned, she had a good umbrella. So there is always
an umbrella mender at hand, on man's pathway, when one puts the umbrella
(or situation) in God's Hands.

One should always follow a denial with an affirmation.

For example: I was called on the ’phone late one night to treat a man
whom I had never seen. He was apparently very ill. I made the statement:
"I deny this appearance of disease. It is unreal, therefore cannot
register in his consciousness; this man is a perfect idea in Divine
Mind, pure substance expressing perfection."

There is no time or space, in Divine Mind, therefore the word reaches
instantly its destination and does not "return void." I have treated
patients in Europe and have found that the result was instantaneous.

I am asked so often the difference between visualizing and visioning.
Visualizing is a mental process governed by the reasoning or conscious
mind; visioning is a spiritual process, governed by intuition, or the
superconscious mind. The student should train his mind to receive these
flashes of inspiration, and work out the "divine pictures," through
definite leads. When a man can say, "I desire only that which God
desires for me," his false desires fade from the consciousness, and a
new set of blueprints is given him by the Master Architect, the God
within. God's plan for each man transcends the limitation of the
reasoning mind, and is always the square of life, containing health,
wealth, love and perfect self-expression. Many a man is building for
himself in imagination a bungalow when he should be building a palace.

If a student tries to force a demonstration (through the reasoning mind)
he brings it to a standstill. "I will hasten it," saith the Lord. He
should act only through intuition, or definite leads. "Rest in the Lord
and wait patiently. Trust also in him, and he will bring it to pass."

I have seen the law work in the most astonishing manner. For example: A
student stated that it was necessary for her to have a hundred dollars
by the following day. It was a debt of vital importance which had to be
met. I "spoke the word," declaring Spirit was "never too late" and that
the supply was at hand.

That evening she ’phoned me of the miracle. She said that the thought
came to her to go to her safety-deposit box at the bank to examine some
papers. She looked over the papers, and at the bottom of the box, was a
new one hundred dollar-bill. She was astounded, and said she knew she
had never put it there, for she had gone through the papers many times.
It may have been a materialization, as Jesus Christ materialized the
loaves and fishes. Man will reach the stage where his "word is made
flesh," or materialized, instantly. "The fields, ripe with the harvest,"
will manifest immediately, as in all of the miracles of Jesus Christ.

There is a tremendous power alone in the name Jesus Christ. It stands
for *Truth Made Manifest*. He said, "Whatsoever ye ask the Father, in y
name, he will give it to you."

The power of this name raises the student into the fourth dimension,
where he is freed from all astral and psychic influences, and he becomes
"unconditioned and absolute, as God Himself is unconditioned and
absolute."

I have seen many healings accomplished by using the words, "In the name
of Jesus Christ."

Christ was both person and principle; and the Christ within each man is
his Redeemer and Salvation.

The Christ within, is his own fourth dimensional self, the man made in
God's image and likeness. This is the self which has never failed, never
known sickness or sorrow, was never born and has never died. It is the
"resurrection and the life" of each man! "No man cometh to the Father
save by the Son," means, that God, the Universal, working on the place
of the particular, becomes the Christ in man; and the Holy Ghost, means
God-inaction. So daily, man is manifesting the Trinity of Father, Son
and Holy Ghost.

Man should make an art of thinking. The Master Thinker is an artist and
is careful to paint only the divine designs upon the canvas of his mind;
and he paints these pictures with masterly strokes of power and
decision, having perfect faith that there is no power to mar their
perfection and that they shall manifest in his life the ideal made real.

All power is given man (through right thinking) to bring *his heaven*
upon *his earth*, and this is the *goal of the* "*Game of Life*."

The simple rules are fearless faith, nonresistance and love!

May each reader be now freed from that thing which has held him in
bondage through the ages, standing between him and his own, and "know
the Truth which makes him free"—free to fulfill his destiny, to bring
into manifestation the "*Divine Design of his life*, Health, Wealth,
Love and Perfect Self-Expression." "Be ye transformed by the renewing of
your mind."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Denials and Affirmations](gol11)
