[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Maya](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mhwap2)  [Next](mhwap4) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0806104473/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Maya Hieroglyphic Writing (excerpts)*, by J. Eric S. Thompson,
\[1950\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

### APPENDIX III

#### Whorf's Attempts to Decipher the Maya Hieroglyphs

It is an old trait of human nature when in the mist to be very sure
about its road.  
                                                                           —JOHN
BUCHAN

IT HAD BEEN my intention to ignore Whorf's (1933, 1942) attempts to read
the Maya hieroglyphic writing, supposing that all students of the
subject would by now have consigned them to that limbo which already
holds the discredited interpretations of Brasseur de Bourbourg
(1869-70), de Rosny (1876), Charency (1876), Le Plongeon, Cresson
(1894), and Cyrus Thomas (1886). Nevertheless, it seems advisable to
examine his writings because of his position in the linguistic field and
because of the air of certitude with which his interpretations are
offered.

My objections to Whorf's writings are not against his conclusions as to
the nature of Maya hieroglyphic writing, but against his lines of
reasoning. I feel that he has built his structure on the shifting sands
of false premises with the aid of a scaffolding of misidentifications.
That the structure contains some good stone is not improbable. Whorf
maintained that the glyphs are purely phonetic, and that each element
represents a syllable or the single consonant with which that syllable
commences. Glottal stops may be ignored. Obviously, with such a method,
one can get almost any interpretation one likes out of the writing.

I propose to analyze very briefly the steps by which Whorf reaches two
or three of his fundamental interpretations in order to show how shaky
are the whole foundations.

*Cumhu*. Whorf's interpretation of the month sign Cumhu serves him both
as proof of his arguments and as a base on which to build a whole series
of interpretations. First, it should be noted that the month was almost
certainly called Cumku in Yucatec, not Cumhu, for it is thus spelled in
all the books of Chilam Balam and in the month list of Sanchez de
Aguilar. The only source for Cumhu is our edition of Landa, which is
notoriously weak in the transcriptions of Maya words; the *k* of Cumku
might easily have been copied as *h* by the scribe who extracted the
surviving version of Landa's writings. Secondly, it should be noted that
in no other Maya language does the eighteenth month have a name
resembling in any way Cumku.

Whorf (1933, p. 19) takes the superfix of Landa's drawing of Cumku as "a
form of the day sign Ahau," which, he says, "was pronounced with the *a*
scarcely sounded, and which would seem to represent the syllable *hu*.
An examination of a series of Cumku glyphs would have shown Whorf that
the superfix of Landa's glyph is not a sort of Ahau, but a poorly drawn
example of the regular superfix which, whatever else it may be, is not a
form of that day sign (fig. 19,*1-16*). Whorf next argues that the
original name of the glyph may have been Cumhau. As he takes certain
extraneous elements to the left as standing for *cum*, he reads the
whole as Cumhau, completely ignoring the Kan sign which is the main
element of the month glyph.

However, in 1942 a quite different derivation of Cumku appears: Whorf
decides that the Kan sign does not stand for maize or ripeness, the fact
that everywhere in the codices and on sculptures one finds the Kan sign
associated with maize or the maize god being dismissed as secondary
symbolism. Instead the Kan sign means *hu*, "iguana," apparently because
the Aztec equivalent is Cuetzpalin, "lizard." The original meaning of
the Kan sign, Whorf tells us, is *huun*, "a letter or book," and the
sign shows us this book or letter folded up like a modern letter in its
envelope! A glyph of an iguana above a Kan sign from Dresden is
explained as "an example of the method of repeated affirmation, using
the ordinary sign for *hu* \[the Kan sign\], topped by an iguana figure
. . Here the formula which we use in transliterating is *hu-hu*, to be
read or pronounced, of course, as *hu*." On the same pages (29-31) as
the iguana over the Kan sign, and occupying precisely the same
positions, are pictorial glyphs showing respectively a turkey head and a
haunch of venison, both above a Kan sign, and two fish, but these Whorf
ignores. Obviously, they represent offerings, either turkey and maize,
venison and maize, and iguana and maize, or, more probably, turkey
tamales, venison tamales, and iguana tamales. The Kan sign cannot stand
for *hu*, "iguana," in one place and not in the other; the pictures are
so obviously related.

Whorf now returns to Cumhu (Cumku). Whereas before the hu had been
represented by Ahau (elided to *hau*) as the superfix, now the *hu* is
shown by the main element. A variant form of the superfix is identified
as a feather (fig. 19,*15*), "*kukum*," from which one drops the

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

*ku* and obtains kumhu. The mere fact that kumhu (glottalized) and Cumhu
are totally different sounds is not accepted by Whorf as a valid
argument against his theory. Whorf does not mention that the superfix in
question is extremely rare with Cumku, [occurring](errata.htm#3) only
twice in Dresden and never in the inscriptions, and he gives nothing
beyond his bare statement for accepting this highly conventionalized
symbol as representing a feather.

Thus, two entirely different phonetic translations are offered for what
is almost certainly a misspelled version of a Yucatecan month name. They
are self-contradictory and based on a complete ignorance of Maya
hieroglyphs.

One of the most important of Whorf's "proofs" derives from an
identification of the hand as the symbol for the sound *ma* or *m*.
First, Whorf, in a very roundabout and unconvincing way, shows how the
sound *ma* might have been represented in Maya writing by a hand. Next,
he calls attention to his drawing of Landa's sign for *m*, of which he
says, "I regard it as a corrupted reproduction of a cursive Manik." I do
not know whether he means that Landa's drawing or his own is the
corrupted reproduction, for besides turning Landa's sign upside down, he
has redrawn it in such a way that it appears about halfway between a
Manik sign and Landa's *m*. Because the hand is the sign for the day
called Manik only in Yucatec (other names in other dialects are ignored
by Whorf), and because his drawing of Landa's *m* is identified by him
as a hand (and of course *m* also covers *ma*), Whorf uses the definite
identification of the hand as the symbol for *ma*. The hand completion
sign is then given the sound *ma*, and we learn that in an IS this hand
before a period glyph should be translated as *ma*, e.g. 9 baktuns, 15
katuns, *ma tun*, *ma uinal*, *ma kin*. Although this interpretation is
not implausible, it has, so far as I know, no parallel in the books of
Chilam Balam. When used to translate the similar hand before a PE date,
it makes nonsense: "9 Ahau 18 Mol, no 19 Katuns." If the sign means *ma*
"no" or "not," it cannot precede a numeral.

Next, Whorf, rightly or wrongly, identifies the well-known prefix of Mac
(Beyer's "down-balls" prefix) as two hands (fig. 18,*1-15,20*). He
should at least have noted that in the scores of examples of this
element in this and other glyphs not once do hands drawn in a
naturalistic manner replace the elements he identifies as such; there is
no mention of that fact. Instead, Whorf boldly states as a fact that the
sign represents two hands wrist to wrist, and previous identifications
of the element which are totally different are passed over in silence.
The two hands are again given the sound *ma*. The fish head of Mac is
identified as Cimi, "death," and given Landa's sound *k*, no attention
being paid to the fact that the sound is *ka* with a glottal, not *c*.
Thus two doubtful hands (*ma?*) plus a wrongly identified Cimi (*ka*)
equal Mac.

The hand in Whorf's thesis can stand not only for *ma* but also for *m*.
Thus in discussing Glyph C of the lunar series, Whorf assigns to the
head of the death god, not the sound *ka* as given by Landa, nor that of
*c* which he used in the derivation of Mac, but that of *la*. To a kin
sign which is not in the original, is ascribed the value *le*, although
Landa assigns it the sound *te*. The hand below is given the sound *m*
or *ma*, and the whole, together with the coefficients and the moon
signs, reads "3 *Lama* lunations," "3 *lelemma* lunations," "5 *lemma*
lunations." Next we are referred to Tozzer's grammar where, we are told,
"a classifier used for periods of time is *lem*." Accordingly, if the
Maya wrote these moon inscriptions *in the way they talked* they must
have written not "six lunations," but "six *lem* lunations." It sounds
very convincing, but if the reader will turn obligingly to Tozzer's
grammar (1921, p. 291), he will find the entry "Lem. For times; hun lem,
once." In other words, *lem* refers not to *time*, but to *times*.
References to lunations in the books of Chilam Balam show the use of the
numerical classifier *p’el* with moons. The least that can be said of
such arguments is that they are unbelievably sloppy.

Rather than prolong this examination unwarrantedly, let us briefly
discuss one of the two passages Whorf has translated from the codices.
It is that on Madrid 113d \[read 102d1, I give below Whorf's
interpretation and my comment.

The action in the pictures is that of weaving. . . . The verbs for both
pictures are alike and their second components are *ma*. The first
component is a sign for which I have a body of evidence to show a
phonetic value *ya*. Maya students will recall that it is the superfix
of the glyphs of the months *Yax* (*Yac*) and *Yaxkin* (*Yack’in*) in
the codices. The verb then reads *ya-ma*. *Yama* or *Yamah* would be a
perfective or possibly an aorist of the transitive conjugation of a verb
with stem *yam*. A common stem *yam* in the Perez dictionary means
between, interstice, and as verb, interpose, insert, force between, get
caught between. This is the action shown; the subject is *inserting* the
shuttle and its thread into the warp, or *putting it between* the warp
threads.

Comment: The first component, as every Maya student will recall, is
definitely not the yax superfix. If, as I suppose, the body of evidence
largely rests on this identification, it is of a wraithlike nature.
Whorf completely ignores the postfix. The *ma* is our old friend the
grasping hand.

I cannot understand the many meanings for verbs with the root *yam*
which Whorf derives from Pio Perez. I find: *yambezah, mudar,
diferenciar; dejar espacio entre dos cosas; interponer. Yamnaat,
entrever, presuponer*,

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

*calcular, prever. Yampahal, mudarse, diferenciarse, vomitar. Yampal,
trocar suertes. Yamtah, poner intermedios*. Of these only the last could
possibly correspond to the meanings assigned the stem by Whorf, although
actually it means to set intervals. The word *yamtah* is not given in
the Motul dictionary, but we find there a more precise definition of
*yam:* "*la concavidad o espacio que hay entre dos cosas, e intervalo, o
distancia de tiempo y lugar*." No word with the root *yam* in the Motul
dictionary carries any meaning approaching that which Whorf implies. In
fact, the action of inserting the shuttle seems to be the opposite of
one main concept which is that of creating, not filling, a space in time
or place which separates two objects. Whorf's translations from the
Perez dictionary are grossly exaggerated and misleading. Taken in
conjunction with the *lem* incident and Landa's *m*, they imply that
Whorf considered that he could strain the evidence as much as he liked
to gain his point.

Granting, even, that *yam* could be the root of a word meaning "to
insert," I see no reason why that word should have been used to describe
the act of weaving.

Whorf continues:

The first part of the object glyph is a sign that has phonetic values
*sa* and *sak*. It appears here in the form it has as sign of the month
Zac (Sak) and of the color white (sak), and so might have here the value
*sak*. The second upper part of the glyph is the *a* of Landa. . . . The
second lower part of the glyph is a form of the day-sign Ahau. My
evidence is that Ahau is a polyphonic character and that one of its
values besides *hau*, *hu* is *li*, *l*. Maya students will recall its
use as superfix of the sign for east, *lik’in*. It is thus possible to
read this object glyph as *sak-a-l*. But *sakal* \[*sacal*\] is the Maya
word for woven cloth. . . . The two glyph blocks in the lower line are
name-glyphs answering to the unknown name of the deity shown in the
picture. We may denote them and this deity's name as X<sub>1</sub>
X<sub>2</sub>. We may now transliterate the "verse" and translate it . .
. *Yama sakal* X<sub>1</sub> X<sub>2</sub>. Translation: X<sub>1</sub>
X<sub>2</sub> inserts (it) into the cloth.

Comment: Unfortunately, Whorf is again in error. The element he reads as
*zac* "white" is not that at all; the zac sign has two nubbins, and
varies quite a lot from the element depicted on this page. One wants a
lively imagination to recognize the superfix \[my *te* (1) affix\] as
Landa's *a*. The main element is not an Ahau. Whorf elsewhere (1942, p.
487) identifies this same glyph as *e*, deriving it from Landa's sign
for *e*. Thus, one must conclude that all three components of the glyph
are wrongly identified.

Even had the elements been correctly translated, and even did the glyph
compound actually represent the sounds *sakal* (admitting the dubious
argument that the appearance of Ahau in the glyph for east permits its
identification with *li* and thence *l*), it is very much to he doubted
that such first-class weavers as the Maya would have used a word for
woven cloth to represent the warp threads. I am neither a weaver nor a
linguist, but such imprecision in nomenclature does not strike me as
Maya.

Of the five elements which Whorf uses, four are wrongly identified; of
the two words he obtains, one does not have the meaning he ascribes to
it, whereas the other probably would not be used in the sense he
attributes to it. Whorf's writings are a direful warning to those with a
similarly uncritical approach to the hieroglyphic problems. For
imprecision of a somewhat similar nature in Whorf's special field of
linguistics, the reader is referred to a paper (Thompson, 1943g), in
which I demonstrate that two words, *mis* and *tumin*, for which Whorf
created an imposing Uto-Aztecan ancestry, are common Spanish words,
introduced to the New World in post-Columbian times.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix IV. Maya Calculations Far into the Past and into the
Future](mhwap4)
