[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Egypt](../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](stle14) 
[Next](stle16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0865433623/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Stolen Legacy*, by George G. M. James, \[1954\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

### NOTES

#### CHAPTER I

\(1\) *The Teachings of the Egyptians*. This was called Sophia by the
Greeks and meant Wisdom Teaching. It included (a) Philosophy and the
Arts and Sciences (b) religion and magic and (c) secret methods of
communication both linguistic and mathematical. Read The Stromata of
Clement of Alexandria, Bk. 6, p. 756 and 758; also Diodorus I, 80; also
Ancient Mysteries by C. H. Vail, p. 22–23; The Stromata of Clement of
Alexandria, Bk. 5, c. 7 and 9.

\(2\) *The Peri Physeos*

This was the name given to one of the earliest books on science apart
from the manuscripts of the Egyptians. The name means "Concerning
nature". Read Ancient Mysteries by C. H. Vail, p. 16.

#### CHAPTER II

The period of Greek philosophy was unsuitable for the production of
Greek philosophers. Because (a) Persian domination did not only enslave
the Greeks but kept them in a constant state of fear (b) It also kept
them busy organizing Leagues in constant self-defense against aggression
and (c) The city states could not agree, and the Peloponnesian wars kept
them in constant warfare with each other. Read Sandford's Mediterranean
World, c. 12, p. 203, 205; c. 13 and 15, p. 225, 255; also c. 18, p.
317, 319; also The Tutorial History of Greece, c. 27, 28 and 29.

#### CHAPTER III

\(1\) *The Summum Bonum*. This means (a) The Greatest Good (b) the
lifting of man from the level of a mortal and advancing him to the level
of a God (c) the salvation of the soul (d) the purpose of philosophy (e)
the goal of the Egyptian theory of salvation. Read C. H. Vail's Ancient
Mysteries, p. 25.

\(2\) *The Grand Lodge of Luxor*

The ruins of the ancient Grand Lodge of Luxor are found today on the
banks of the Nile in Upper Egypt in the ancient city of Thebes. It was
built by Pharaoh Amenothis III. It was the only Grand Lodge of the
ancient world. It had branches or minor lodges throughout the ancient
world; in Europe, Asia, [Africa](errata.htm#20), North America, South
America

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

and probably in Australia. These were some of the places:—(a) Palestine
at Mt. Carmel (b) Syria at Mt. Herman in Lebanon (c) Babylon (d) Media,
near the Red Sea (e) India, on the banks of the Ganges (f) Burma (g)
Athens (h) Rome (i) Croton (j) Rhodes (k) Delphi (l) Miletus (m) Cyprus
(n) Corinth (o) Crete (p) Central and South America, especially Peru (q)
Among the American Indians and among the Mayas, Aztecs and Incas of
Mexico. Read Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics by Jas. Hastings;
Lives of Eminent Philosophers by Diogenes Laertius; and History of
Philosophy by Thomas Stanley. The discovery of the ruins of Luxor on the
banks of the Nile and the organization of the Egyptian Mysteries into a
Grand Lodge with minor lodges throughout the ancient world are evidence
that Egypt was the cradle of the Mysteries and of the Masonic
Brotherhood.

\(3\) *The rebuilding of the temple of Delphi*

This temple was burnt down in 548 B.C. by the Greeks who were always
hostile towards the Egyptian Mysteries. The Brethren tried at first to
raise funds from the native Greeks but failed in their attempt. They
then decided to approach the Grand Master Amasis King of Egypt, who
unhesitatingly donated three times as much as was needed for the
purpose. This act of King Amasis shows the universality of the
brotherhood of the Egyptian Mysteries and of Free Masonry. Read
Sandford's Mediterranean World, p. 135 and 139; also John Kendrick's
Ancient Egypt, Bk. II, p. 363.

\(4\) *The abolition of Greek philosophy together with the Egyptian
Mysteries*

Identical effects proceed from identical causes. Therefore the edicts of
Theodosius in the 4th century A.D. and of Justinian in the 6th century
A.D., which closed down the Egyptian Mysteries, simultaneously had the
same effect upon Greek philosophy, and proved the identity between them.
Read The Ecclesiastical edicts of the Theodosian Code by W. K. Boyd;
also Mythology of Egypt by Max Muller, c. 13, p. 241–245; also
Sandford's Mediterranean World, p. 508, 548, 552–568.

\(5\) *The Statue of the Egyptian Goddess Isis with Her Child Horns in
Her arms*

This was the first Madonna and Child of human history. It was a Black
Madonna and Child. Read Max Muller's Mythology of Egypt, c. 13, p.
241–245; also Sandford's Mediterranean World, p. 552–568. Remember that
the name Egyptian is a Greek word Aiguptos which means Black, and that
primitive man visualized God in terms of his own attributes and this
included colour.

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

\(6\) *All the great religious leaders from Moses to Christ were
Initiates of the Egyptian Mysteries*

This is an inference from the nature of the Egyptian Mysteries and
prevailing custom.

\(a\) The Egyptian Mystery System was the One Holy Catholic Religion of
the remotest antiquity.

\(b\) It was the one and only Masonic Order of Antiquity, and as such,

\(c\) It built the Grand Lodge of Luxor in Egypt and encompassed the
ancient world with its branch lodges.

\(d\) It was the first University of history and it made knowledge a
secret, so that all who desired to become Priests and Teachers had to
obtain their training from the Mystery System, either locally at a
branch lodge or by travelling to Egypt.

We know that Moses became an Egyptian Priest, a Hierogrammat, and that
Christ after attending the lodge at Mt. Cannel went to Egypt for Final
Initiation, which took place in the Great Pyramid of Cheops. Other
religious leaders obtained their preparation from lodges most convenient
to them.

\(e\) This explains why all religions, seemingly different, have a
common nucleus of similarity; belief in a God; belief in immortality and
a code of ethics. Read Ancient Mysteries by C. H. Vail, p. 61; Mystical
Life of Jesus by H. Spencer Lewis; Esoteric Christianity by Annie
Besant, p. 107, 128–129; Philo; also read note (2) Chapter III for
branch lodges of the ancient world.

#### CHAPTER IV

\(1\) *The Genesis of Greek Enlightenment*

In the reign of King Amasis, the Persians through Cambyses invaded Egypt
525 B.C. and as a result (a) Immigration regulations against the Greeks
were removed (b) They were allowed to settle at Naucratis and do their
research (c) This contact enabled the Greeks to begin to borrow Egyptian
Culture and to become enlightened. Read Herodotus, Bk. II, p. 113;
Plutarch, p. 380; Diogenes, Bk. IX 49; Ovid Fasti III 338.

\(2\) *Cheops and Cecrops*

Those were Greek names for the Egyptian Khufu who belonged to the 4th
Dynasty of the Egyptians. It was during the Pyramid Age, and Cheops was
also the name of the Great Pyramid where Christ received His Final
Initiation into the Egyptian Mysteries. Read Brucker's Critical History
of Philosophy; also Mystical Life of Jesus by H. Spencer Lewis.

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

#### CHAPTER V

\(1\) *The Diagram of the Four Qualities and Four Elements*

This is important evidence that the teachings of the supposed early
Ionic philosophers and of Heracleitus originated from the Egyptian
Mysteries. Read the Diagram and also Ancient Mysteries by C. H. Vail, p.
61; and the Creation Story of the Memphite Theology by Frankfort; also
Rosicrucian Digest, May 1952, p. 175.

\(2\) *The Pythagorean Theorem*

Pythagoras travelled to Egypt and was taught geometry by the Egyptian
Priests and made to sacrifice to the Gods, before they showed him the
proof of the theorem of the square on the hypotenuse of a right angled
triangle. Pythagoras did not discover this proof, and it is misleading
to name the theorem after him. Read Herodotus, Bk. III, p. 124;
Diogenes, Bk. VIII, p. 3; Pliny, N. H., 36, 9; also Plutarch and
Demetrius.

#### CHAPTER VI

\(1\) *The doctrine of self-knowledge: Man know thyself* (*Seauton
gnothi*)

This doctrine has been falsely ascribed to Socrates. It was an
inscription that was placed on the Egyptian temples, and Socrates copied
it directly or indirectly. Read Zeller's History of Philosophy, p. 105;
S. Clymer's Fire Philosophy and Max Muller's Egyptian Mythology.

\(2\) *The Farewell Conversation of Socrates with his pupils and
friends*

These conversations are significant in the following respects:—

\(a\) Socrates is identified as a member of the Egyptian Mysteries or
Masonic Order.

\(b\) Masonic behavior is manifested through these conversations.

\(c\) The books containing these conversations; Plato's Crito, Phaedo,
Euthyphro, Apology and Timaeus, are the earliest specimen of Masonic
literature apart from the secret writings of the Egyptians.

\(d\) Of the three Athenian philosophers Socrates stood highest in the
rank of a Free Mason. He was not afraid of death, he did not publish the
knowledge imparted to him and he was an honest man. Read Crito and
Phaedo of Plato.

\(3\) *Plato's Theory of Ideas*

After the Egyptian Priests discovered the fundamental principle of
opposites as underlying life in the universe, they applied it in their
interpretation of natural phenomena. Consequently this mode of
interpretation has been reflected in the teachings of the so-called
Greek philosophers who had obtained their education from the Egyptian

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mystery System.
Read the doctrines of Parmenides who in the problem of existence
distinguishes between Being and non-Being; also of Heracleitus in the
problem of flux and change through the process of transmutation; also of
Socrates in the proof of immortality, and Plato in his supposed Theory
of Ideas, in which he distinguished between (a) the real and unreal (b)
the idea of a thing and the thing itself (c) the noumena and phenomena.
In all these instances the principle of opposites has been used as a
method of interpretation. This method is Egyptian not Platonic.

\(4\) *The Republic of Plato: The Ideal State*

Plato's authorship of the Republic is disputed for the following
reasons:—

\(a\) The attributes of an Ideal State are expressed in the allegory of
the charioteer and winged steeds which is dramatized in the Judgment
Drama of the Egyptian Book of the Dead and therefore proves its Egyptian
origin.

\(b\) The chariot was neither a culture pattern nor war machine of the
Greeks at the time of Plato. The wars of the Greeks with the Persians
and the Peloponnesian wars were all maritime.

\(c\) At this time the Egyptians were specialists in the manufacture of
chariots and horse breeding Gen., c. 45, v. 27; c. 47, v. 17; Deut., c.
17, v. 16; I Kings, c. 10, v. 28.

\(d\) The historians Diogenes Laertius, Aristoxenus and Favorinus have
declared that the subject matter of the Republic was found in the
controversies written by Protagoris (481–411) when Plato was but a boy.
Read Diogenes Laertius, p. 311 and 327; also The Egyptian Book of the
Dead, c. 17; also Republic III 415; V 478; and VI 490 sqq.

\(5\) *The Timaeus of Plato*

Plato's authorship of the Timaeus is also disputed for the following
reasons:—

\(a\) The historian Diogenes Laertius in Bk. VIII, p. 399–401 has
declared that when Plato visited Dionysius in Sicily, he paid Philolaus
a Pythagorean forty Alexandrian Minae of silver for a book, from which
he copied the whole contents of the Timaeus.

\(b\) The subject matter of the Timaeus is eclectic. Read the Timaeus.

\(6\) *Magic is the Key to the interpretation of ancient religion and
natural philosophy*

Through the application of the principle: that the qualities of
entities, human or divine, are distributed throughout their various
parts; and that contact with such entities releases those qualities,
many religious phenomena and those of primitive science could be
interpreted and understood.

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

\(a\) The cure of the woman who touched the hem of Christ's garment,
Mark, c. 5, verses 25–34.

\(b\) The cure of several people, who held the handkerchiefs of St.
Paul. Acts, c. 19, verse 12.

\(c\) In order to accomplish creation, Atom the Sun God sat upon Ptah,
the God of Gods, in order to absorb His qualities of creative thought,
speech and omnipotence. This act qualified Him as the Logos and Demiurge
and He first created the Gods and finally mortals. Read Memphite
Theology in Frankfort's Ancient Egyptian Religion and Dr. Frazer's
Golden Bough.

\(7\) *The doubts and discrepancies in the life and activities of
Aristotle*

It is somewhat unfortunate that history has represented the life and
activities of Aristotle in a way so repugnant to reason, that the world
has been compelled to doubt his accomplishments and fame. It tells us
that

\(a\) he spent twenty years as a pupil under Plato whom we know was
incompetent to teach him.

\(b\) It tells us that Alexander gave him money to buy his large number
of books, but the Greeks had no libraries at the time, nor was it easy
to purchase books which were not in circulation.

\(c\) It also tells us that three lists of books which bear his name
differ froth one another, in source, date and quantity.

\(d\) The third list contains one thousand books: a quantity which is a
mental and physical impossibility as the production of a single
individual in a single lifetime.

\(e\) It is silent about Aristotle's visits to Egypt, although it was
the custom in his days for Greek students to go to Egypt for the purpose
of their education. Read Zeller's History of Philosophy, p. 172–173;
Diogenes, Bk. V, p. 449; B. D. Alexander's History of Philosophy, p.
92–93.

\(8\) *The Unmoved Mover: Proton Kinoun Akineton*

A doctrine ascribed to Aristotle in his attempt to prove the existence
of God. The God in this doctrine was Atom the Egyptian Sun God, who in
the creation story of the Memphite Theology, sat upon the God of Gods
Ptah and having absorbed His creative qualities, speech and omnipotence,
became the Logos and accomplished the work of creation by projecting
Gods from various parts of His own body. This doctrine did not originate
from Aristotle, but has been traced to the creation story of the
Memphite Theology of the Egyptians. Read Memphite Theology in
Frankfort's Ancient Egyptian Religion, c. 20 and

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 23; also p. 25, 26
and 35; William Turner's History of Philosophy, p. 141–143; B. D.
Alexander, p. 102–103.

\(9\) *Aristotle's doctrine of the Soul*

This doctrine has been found to be only a very small part of the
elaborate philosophy of the soul found in the Egyptian Book of the Dead,
which is the original source of Aristotle's supposed doctrine. Read the
Egyptian Book of the Dead by Sir E. A. Budge, p. 29–64.

#### CHAPTER VII

*The Curriculum of the Egyptian Mysteries*

Through the curriculum of the Egyptian Mysteries it is now known that
the African Continent has given the following Legacy to the civilization
of the world. It consists of the following culture patterns:—

\(1\) Holy Catholic Orders, together with a priesthood divided into
ranks according to training.

\(2\) Holy Catholic Worship, consisting of rituals, ceremonies including
processions and appropriate vestments of priests.

\(3\) Greek Philosophy and the Arts and Sciences, including the Seven
Liberal Arts, that is, the Quadrivium and Trivium which were the
foundation training of Neophytes. These were included in the forty-two
Books of Hermes.

\(4\) The applied Sciences which produced the pyramids, tombs,
libraries, obelisks, and Sphinxes, war chariots and ships, etc.

\(5\) The social sciences, appropriate for the highest civilization in
ancient times. Read The Stromata of Clement of Alexandria, c. 6, p. 756,
758; also Diodorus I, 80. Read also The Mechanical Triumphs of the
Ancient Egyptians by F. M. Barber; History of Mathematics by Florian
Cajeri; History of Mathematics by W. W. R. Ball.

#### CHAPTER VIII

*The Memphite Theology*

\(1\) *Definition*

The Memphite Theology is an inscription on a stone containing the
cosmology, theology and philosophy of the Egyptians. Read Frankfort's
Ancient Egyptian Religion, c. 20 and 23; also Frankfort's Intellectual
Adventure of Man. It is located in the British Museum.

\(2\) *Importance*

Its importance lies in the fact that (a) it is an authoritative source
of Egyptian Philosophy, Cosmology and Religion (b) it is proof of the
Egyptian origin of Greek philosophy.

\(3\) *The Source of Modern Scientific Knowledge*

\(a\) Atom the Egyptian Sun God who is the Logos of Heracleitus,

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

the Demiurge of Plato and the Unmoved Mover of Aristotle creates eight
other Gods by projecting them from His own body, thus producing nine
Gods or the Ennead. This is identical with the Nebular Hypothesis of
Laplace, in which the original Sun creates eight other planets, by
throwing off rings from itself, thus producing the nine major planets of
modern scientific belief.

\(b\) It has been shown on pages [146](stle12.htm#page_146) and
[147](stle12.htm#page_147) of this book, that the name of Atom the
Egyptian Sun God is the same name used for the atom of science and also
that the attributes of both are the same. Read Frankfort's Intellectual
Adventure of Man, p. 53; Frankfort's Kingship and the Gods, p. 182; also
Herodotus II, 112; Diodorus I, 29.

\(4\) *It offers great possibilities for modern scientific research*

What science knows about (a) the number of major planets (b) how these
major planets were created by the Sun and (c) the attributes of the atom
has been traced to the Cosmology of the Memphite Theology, which
suggests that (d) science knows only 1/5 of the secrets of creation and
therefore 4/5 of such secrets yet remains to be discovered (e)
consequently The Memphite Theology offers great possibilities for modern
scientific research.

#### CHAPTER IX

*The Drama of Greek Philosophy*

\(1\) This consists of three actors (a) Alexander the Great who invaded
Egypt and plundered the Royal Library at Alexandria (b) Aristotle and
the alumni of his school, who took possession of the Royal Library and
having first carried off large quantities of scientific books,
subsequently converted it into a research Centre and University. (c) The
Roman government, which through the edicts of Emperors Theodosius and
Justinian closed down the Egyptian Mysteries together with its schools,
the University of the Ancient World and System of the African Culture.

\(2\) The result of this was (a) the misrepresentation and erroneous
opinion that the African Continent and people are backward in culture
and have made no contribution to civilization and (b) the establishment
of Christianity as a rival against the Mysteries or African System of
Culture, in order to perpetuate this erroneous opinion.

\(3\) A further result has been (a) the false worship of Greek intellect
and (b) the activities of Missionary enterprise through which the
culture of Black people is caricatured both in literature and in
exhibitions.

\(4\) A further result has been (a) the general feeling among Black

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

people throughout the world that they are in great need of freedom from
their social plight, and (b) The offer by "Stolen Legacy" of a "New
Philosophy of African Redemption" in order to meet this universal need
of "Social Reformation".

\(5\) *The nature and methods of this New Philosophy and Social
Reformation*

\(a\) The New Philosophy of African Redemption is simply the proposition
that the "Greeks were not the authors of Greek philosophy: but the
people of North Africa, the Egyptians". This must be preached and
circulated for centuries to come.

\(b\) The effects of this New Philosophy should be as follows:—

\(1\) To change the mentality both of White and Black people and their
attitude towards each other and bring about a Social Reformation.

\(2\) To stimulate the Black people to abandon their false worship of
Greek intellect, and to reject the caricature of their culture by
Missionary enterprise and to demand a change in Missionary policy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index](stle16)
