[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Egypt](../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](stle05) 
[Next](stle07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0865433623/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Stolen Legacy*, by George G. M. James, \[1954\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span> <span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

### CHAPTER II:

### So-called Greek Philosophy Was Alien To The Greeks And Their Conditions Of Life.

#### 1. The Period of Greek Philosophy (640–322 B.C.) Was A Period of Internal and External Wars, and Was Therefore Unsuitable For Producing Philosophers.

<span class="smallcaps">History</span> supports the fact that from the
time of Thales. to the time of Aristotle, the Greeks were victims of
internal disunion, on the one hand, while on the other, they lived in
constant fear of invasion from the Persians who were a common enemy to
the city states.

Consequently when they were not fighting with one another they found
themselves busy fighting the Persians, who soon dominated them and
became their masters. From the 6th century B.C. the territory from the
coast of Asia Minor to the Indus Valley became united under the single
power of Persia, whose central territory Iran has survived as a national
unit to the present day. Persian expansion was like a nightmare to the
Greeks who dreaded the Persians on account of their invulnerable navy,
and organized themselves into Leagues and Confederacies in order to
resist their enemy. (C. 12 P. 195; Sandford's Mediterranean World).
There are three sources which throw light on the chaotic and troublesome
conditions of this period in Greek history. (A) The Persian Conquests
(B) The Leagues and (C) Peloponnesian wars.

A. *The Persian Conquests*

After the Persians had conquered the Ionians (possibly ancient
Hittites), and made them their subjects, Polycrates (539–524 B.C.)
seized the Island of Samos and made it a famous city. (Sandford's
Mediterranean World c. 9). Between

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 499 and 494 B.C.
the Ionians revolted against the Persians, who defeated them at Lade,
while Cyprus and Miletus were also captured. (Sandford's Mediterranean
World c. 12). In the summer of 490 B.C. Greek and Persian forces met at
Marathon, but after a hand to hand fight, both belligerents withdrew,
only to prepare stronger forces in order to renew the conflict.
Accordingly, after ten years had elapsed a Hellenic League was organized
against the Persians, and the Spartan King Leonides was sent with an
army to hold the pass at Thermopylae, until the fleet should win a
decisive victory. (C. 12, P. 202; Sandford's Mediterranean World).
Accordingly, during the month of August 481 B.C. Persian ships under the
command of Xerxes anchored in the gulf of Pagasae, while the Greeks
anchored off Cape Artemisium. Both sides awaited a favorable opportunity
to attack. The Persians began to force the pass while simultaneously one
of their detachments was secretly aided by a Greek traitor, along a
steep mountain pass to the rear of the Greek position. Having been taken
by surprise, the Greek guards immediately withdrew without resistance.
The Spartans who were guarding Thermopylae were all slain and the pass
captured by the Persians. (Sandford's Mediterranean World C. 12 P. 202).
Having been defeated at Thermopylae, the Greeks withdrew to Salamis,
where again they encountered a naval engagement with the Persians. It
was late in September 481 B.C., and the result was a wanton destruction
of ships on both sides, without any decision. Both belligerents
withdrew: The Persians to Thessaly, and the Greeks to Attica.
(Sandford's Mediterranean World C. 12 P. 203).

With the persistent aim of freedom from Persian domination, Athens,
together with the island and coast cities (of the Aegean and Ionia)
renewed their resistance of Persian rule. This was the confederacy of
Delos, which undertook several naval engagements, but with little or no
success. In 467 B.C. the battle of Eurymedon River was fought and lost
with a great number of ships. Eighteen years later (449 B.C.)

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

another naval engagement took place off the island of Cyprus, but again
without decision, and consequently Persian sovereignty over the Greeks
remained. (Sandford's Mediterranean World C. 12 P. 205). In the meantime
Sparta, under the terms of the Treaty of Miletus (413 B.C.) obtained
subsidies from Persia, for naval construction, on condition that she
recognize Persian sovereignty over the Ionians and their allies. This
was done by Sparta as a threat to Athenian ambitions.

However, it was not long after the Treaty of Miletus, that the Greeks
themselves submitted to the authority and dominance of the Persians.
During the winter 387–386 B.C., the individual Ionian cities, signed the
peace terms of the Persian King, and finally accepted Persian rule. This
Treaty was negotiated by a Spartan envoy who was authorized by the
Persian King to enforce its provisions. (Sandford's Mediterranean World
C. 13 and 15, P. 225 and 255).

B. *The Leagues*

Apart from the resistance of a common foe, the Persians, a study of the
function of the Leagues, reveals the enmity and spirit of aggression
which were characteristic of the relationship which existed between the
Greek city states themselves.

Accordingly in 505 B.C., the Peloponnesian states signed treaties among
themselves, pledging warfare against Sparta who had absorbed them under
her influence. Meanwhile, Aristogoras revived the Ionian League (499–494
B.C.) to resist Persian aggression, and friendship between Athens and
Aegina was restored by the Hellenic League (481 B.C.) which was
afterward converted into the Confederacy of Delos (478 B.C.) as
mentioned elsewhere. In like manner, Thebes also fell in line with the
general temper of the age and organized the Boeotian League, a
federation of city states, for self-protection and aggression.
(Sandford's Mediterranean World C. 9, P. 150; C. 12, P. 201).

In 377 B.C. a second Athenian Confederacy was organized, but this was to
frustrate the aims of the Lacedaemonians and

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

to compel them to respect the right of the Athenians and their allies
(Sandford's Mediterranean World C. 15, P. 260). Likewise in 290 B C.,
the Aetolian League, made up of the States of central Greece, gained
control of Delphi, and frequently violated Achaean rights in the
Peloponnesus, while in 225 B.C. Antigonus Doson organized another
Hellenic League, with the purpose of obstructing the ambitions of Sparta
and her Aetolian allies. (Sandford's Mediterranean World C. 18, P. 317
and 319).

(W. H. Couch's Hist. of Greece, p. 206–209, c. 11. Botsford & Robinson's
Hellenic Hist., p. 115–121; 127–142. T. B. Bury's Hist. of Greece, p.
216–229; 240–241; 259–269; 471472. The Tutorial Hist. of Greece by W. J.
Woodhouse, c. 18, 20 and 21).

C. *The Peloponnesian Wars* 460–445 *B.C. and* 431–421 *B.C*.

Owing to the ambitions of Athens to dominate the Ionians and other
neighboring peoples, Pericles launched a campaign of alliances and
conquests extending from Thessaly to Argos, and from Euboea to
Naupactus, Achaea and the chief islands of the Ionian Sea.

The net results were as follows: (a) Athens established alliances with
Boeotia, Phocis and Locris, in spite of Sparta's opposition. (b) In 456
B.C. Aegina was captured and made tributary. (c) In 450 B.C. Athens
failed in her attempt to invade Corinth. (d) In 451 friendship between
Athens and Sparta was restored through the instrumentality of Cimon, on
the condition that Athenian alliance with Argos was dissolved. (e) In
447 B.C. the exiled Oligarchs of Thebes defeated the Athenians at
Coronea, and reestablished the Boeotian League under Theban leadership.
(f) In 445 B.C. the 30 years peace was signed and after the revolt of
Euboea and Megara, Sparta invaded Attica and Pericles sued for peace.
Athens lost all her continental holdings. (Sandford's Mediterranean
World C. 13, P. 220).

The second Peloponnesian war (431–421 B.C.) like that of

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

the first arose through a general spirit of rebellion among the Greek
city states against Athenian imperialism, Sparta being the chief enemy.

The net results were as follows: (a) In 435 B.C. war between Corcyra and
Corinth, Corcyra being aided by Athens.

\(b\) In 432 B.C.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

\(1\) Athens blockaded Potidaea, because she refused to dismantle her
Southern walls, and dismiss her Corinthian Magistrates.

\(2\) Megara was excluded from Greek Markets, in order to reduce her to
subjection.

\(3\) The Peloponnesian League planned war against Athens and Boeotia.
Phocis and Locris were to fight against Athens, Corcyra and a few
Northern states.

</div>

\(c\) In 431 B.C.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

\(1\) Thebes attacked Plataea, and while a Peloponnesian army occupied
Attica, the Athenian fleet raided Peloponnesus.

\(2\) Pericles being unable to defend Attica adequately transferred the
civil population every Spring to the area between the walls of Athens
and the Peiraeus. In the meantime the Athenian fleet operated against
Potidaea, the Peloponnesian coast and Corinthian commerce.

</div>

\(d\) In 428 B.C.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

\(1\) Mitylene and all the cities of Lesbos revolted.

\(2\) A brutal massacre of Oligarchs took place at Corcyra.

</div>

\(e\) In 425 B.C.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

\(1\) A Laconian force at Pylos was captured and a fort was established
through Demosthenes and Cleon.

\(2\) Cythera and other stations were fortified against the
Peloponnesians.

\(3\) Amphipolis was captured by Brasidas a Spartan, who had instigated
rebellion among the Athenian

</div>

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

allies, and after Brasdias and Cleon had been killed in battle (422
B.C.), Athens authorized Nicias to sue for peace. (Sandford's
Mediterranean World C. 13, P. 220–221).

</div>

It is obvious from a study of the causes and effects of the
Peloponnesian wars that

\(a\) The Greek states were envious of each other and

\(b\) The desire for power and expansion led to constant aggression and
warfare among themselves.

\(c\) The condition of constant warfare between the city states was
unfavourable for the production of philosophers.

Before passing on to consider my next proposition I would like to say
that it is an accepted truth that the development of philosophical
thought requires an environment which is free from disturbance and
worries. The period commonly assigned to Greek philosophy (i.e. Thales
to Aristotle) was exactly the opposite to one of peace and tranquility,
and therefore it could not be expected to produce philosophy. The
obstacles against the origin and development of Greek philosophy, were
not only the frequency of civil wars; and the constant defense against
Persian aggression; but also the threat of extermination from the
Athenian government, its worst enemy.

D. <span class="smallcaps">Philosophy Requires a Suitable
Environment</span>.

I must now add the following quotation which depicts this period. "For
although the natural ills that beset mankind are many, we ourselves have
added to them by wars and civil strife against one another, so that some
have been unjustly put to death in their own cities, others driven into
exile with their wives and children, and many have been compelled, for
the sake of their daily bread, to die fighting against their own people,
for the sake of the enemy". (Isocrates)

(Botsford & Robinson's Hellenic Hist., c. XIII. Couch's Hist. of Greece,
c. XXII. Bury's Hist. of Greece, c. X. The Tutorial Hist. of Greece by
W. J. Woodhouse, c. 27, 28 and 29).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III: Greek Philosophy Was the Offspring of The Egyptian
Mystery System](stle07)
