<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act012)  [Next](act014.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#001.md)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 13:0</span></span>

Of the prophets and teachers in the Church of Antioch, [Act
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#001.md). By command of the Holy Spirit
the Church appoints Saul and Barnabas to a particular work, [Act
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#002.md), [Act
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#003.md). They depart, and travel to
Seleucia, Cyprus, and Salamis, preaching in the Jewish synagogues, [Act
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#004.md), [Act
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#005.md). At Paphos they meet with
Bar-Jesus or Elymas, a Jewish sorcerer, who endeavored to prevent the
deputy of the island from receiving the Christian faith, [Act
13:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#006.md). Saul, for the first time
called Paul, denounces the judgments of God upon him, and he is struck
blind, [Act 13:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#009.md). The deputy,
seeing this, is confirmed in the faith, [Act
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#012.md). Paul and his company leave
Paphos, and come to Pamphylia, where John Mark leaves them, and returns
to Jerusalem, [Act 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#013.md). Paul and
Barnabas proceed to Antioch; and, coming into a synagogue of the Jews,
are requested by the rulers of it to preach to the people, [Act
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#014.md), [Act
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#015.md). Paul preaches, and proves that
Jesus is the Christ, vv. 16-41. The Gentiles desire the sermon to be
preached to them the next Sabbath, and many of the Jews and proselytes
receive the Christian faith, [Act
13:42](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#042.md), [Act
13:43](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#043.md). The next Sabbath the whole city
attend; and the Jews, filled with envy, contradict and blaspheme, [Act
13:44](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#044.md), [Act
13:45](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#045.md). Paul and Barnabas with great
boldness show that, by the order of God, the Gospel was to be preached
first to them; but, seeing they had rejected it, it should now be taken
from them, and sent to the Gentiles, [Act
13:46](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#046.md), [Act
13:47](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#047.md). The Gentiles rejoice and
receive the truth, [Act 13:48](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#048.md), [Act
13:49](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#049.md). The Jews raise a persecution
against the apostles, and expel them, [Act
13:50](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#050.md). They come to Iconium, full of
joy and the Holy Ghost, [Act 13:51](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#051.md),
[Act 13:52](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#052.md).

[Acts 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 13:1</span></span>

Certain prophets and teachers - Προφηται και διδασκαλοι. It is probable
that these were not distinct offices; both might be vested in the same
persons. By prophets we are to understand, when the word is taken
simply, persons who were frequently inspired to predict future events,
and by teachers, persons whose ordinary office was to instruct the
people in the Christian doctrine. These also, to be properly qualified
for the office, must have been endued with the influence of the Holy
Spirit; for, as but a very small portion of the Scriptures of the New
Testament could have as yet been given, it was necessary that the
teachers should derive much of their own teaching by immediate
revelation from God. On prophets and teachers, see the note on [Act
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#027.md).

Barnabas - Of whom see before, [Act
11:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#022.md).

Simeon-Niger - Or Simeon the Black, either because of his complexion, or
his hair. It was on reasons of this kind that surnames, surnoms, name
upon name were first imposed. Of this Simeon nothing farther is known.

Lucius of Cyrene - See [Act 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#020.md).

Manaen, which had been brought up with Herod - Our margin has given the
proper meaning of the original word συντροφος, a foster-brother; i.e.
Manaen was the son of the woman who nursed Herod Antipas; and the son,
also, whose milk the young Herod shared. Of a person whose name was
Manaen or Menahem, and who was in the court of Herod, we read several
things in the Jewish writers. They say that this man had the gift of
prophecy, and that he told Herod, when he was but a child, that he would
be king. When Herod became king he sent for him to his court, and held
him in great estimation. It might have been the son of this Menahem of
whom St. Luke here speaks. Dr. Lightfoot has shown this to be at least
possible.

[Acts 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 13:2</span></span>

As they ministered to the Lord, and fasted - On Mondays and Thursdays it
was usual with the more pious Jews to attend the public service in their
synagogues, and to fast: the former is what we are to understand by
ministering to the Lord. On the Sabbaths they attended the service in
the synagogue, but did not fast. The Greek word, λειτουργουντων,
signifies performing the office of praying, supplicating, rendering
thanks, etc.: hence the word λειτουργια, liturgy, the work of prayer,
etc., from λιτη, supplication, according to some; or rather from λειτος,
common, and εργον, work, the common or public work, in which all the
people were engaged.

The Holy Ghost said - A revelation of the Divine will was made to some
person then present; probably to either Simeon, or Lucius, or Manaen,
mentioned before.

Separate me Barnabas and Saul - Consecrate, or set them apart, for the
particular work whereunto I have called them. How this was done, we find
in the next verse.

[Acts 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 13:3</span></span>

And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them -

1\. They fasted: this was probably done by the whole Church.

2\. They prayed, that God would bless and prosper them in their work.

3\. They land hands upon them; thus solemnly appointing them to that
particular work.

But was it by this fasting, praying, and imposition of hands that these
men were qualified for this work? No. God had already called them to it,
[Act 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#002.md), and he who called them had
qualified them. Both their call and their qualification came from God;
but he chose that they should have also the sanction of that Church of
which they had been members; and therefore he said, Separate me, etc.
The ordination of elders among the Jews was by three persons; and here
we find three, Simeon, Lucius, and Manaen, ordaining two others,
Barnabas and Saul. But how did the Jews ordain? Not by imposition of
hands: this is strictly forbidden, see Maimon. Sanh. chap. 4. "After
what manner is the ordaining of elders for ever? Not that they should
lay their hands on the head of an elder; but only that they should call
him Rabbi, and say to him, Behold, thou art ordained, and hast power of
judging, etc." It is remarkable that the imposition of hands in the
ordaining of elders was not used among the ancient Jews, probably never
under the first temple; and rarely, if ever, under the second. See
Lightfoot on this place. The Church at Antioch, however, did depart from
this custom: they put their hands on the heads of Barnabas and Saul;
thus designating them to be the persons whom they, under the direction
of the Holy Spirit, sent to preach the Gospel of Christ to the heathen.

When the Holy Spirit said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work
whereunto I have called them, and the elders of the Church, in
consequence, prayed, fasted, and laid their hands upon them, they
certainly understood that by acting thus they fulfilled the mind of the
Spirit. Hence, is it not evident that, when the elders of the Church of
God have good reason to believe that He has called certain persons to
the work of the ministry, and qualified them for that work, they should
proceed as the elders of the Church of Antioch did; and by fasting,
prayer, and imposition of hands, separate those persons for the work
whereunto God has called them. Such persons will consider themselves
accountable to God and his Church, and should take care how they use the
gift and authority received from both. Is it not being wise above what
is written to say, "When God has called and given authority, there is no
need of ordination or appointment from man?" I would just ask the
objector, Why, then, when God had called Barnabas and Saul to the work,
did he command the Church to separate them to him for that very work?
And why did they, in obedience, fast, pray, and lay hands upon them? I
shall dispute with no man about the superior excellence of the episcopal
or presbyterian form in ordination: if all the preliminaries be right,
they may be both equally good, for all that I have ever been able to
learn to the contrary; but that there should be some proper scriptural
form attended to, I am fully satisfied. Besides, if the plan of the
Church at Antioch were regularly and faithfully followed, in sending
forth the ministers of the Gospel, no man can prove that God would not
own them in an especial manner, and more particularly prosper their
work. But, O ye rulers of the Church! be careful, as ye shall answer it
to God, never to lay hands on the head of a man whom ye have not just
reason to believe God has called to the work; and whose eye is single,
and whose heart is pure. Let none be sent to teach Christianity, who
have not experienced it to be the power of God to the salvation of their
own souls. If ye do, though they have your authority, they never can
have the blessing nor the approbation of God. "I sent them not:
therefore they shall not profit this people at all, saith the Lord."
[Jer 23:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#032.md).

[Acts 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 13:4</span></span>

Being sent forth by the Holy Ghost - By his influence, authority, and
under his continual direction. Without the first, they were not
qualified to go; without the second, they had no authority to go; and
without the third, they could not know where to go.

Departed, unto Seleucia - This is generally understood to be Seleucia of
Pieria, the first city on the coast of Syria, coming from Cilicia; near
the place where the river Orontes pours itself into the sea.

They sailed to Cyprus - A well known island in the Mediterranean Sea.
See on [Act 4:36](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#036) (note.md).

[Acts 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 13:5</span></span>

Salamis - The capital of the island of Cyprus; afterwards called
Constantia, and now Salina, situated on the eastern part of the island.

They preached the word of God - Τον λογον, The doctrine of God, the
Christian religion, emphatically so called.

They had also John to their minister - This was John Mark, of whom we
heard, [Act 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#025.md); for their minister,
ὑπηρετην, to assist them in minor offices, as deacon or servant, that
they might give themselves wholly to the doctrine of the Lord.

[Acts 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 13:6</span></span>

Gone through the isle - Ὁλην, The Whole isle, is added here by ABCDE,
several others, both the Syrian, Coptic, Ethiopic, Armenian, Vulgate,
and Itala; and also by several of the Greek fathers; and this must be
the true reading, for it is evident they ran through the whole island
from east to west.

Unto Paphos - This town, next in importance to Salamis, was situated on
the western part of the isle; and having gone from Salamis to this place
is a proof that they had gone through the whole island from east to
west, according to the reading noticed above. There was probably no town
in the universe more dissolute than Papas. Here Venus had a superb
temple: here she was worshipped with all her rites; and from this place
she was named the Paphian Venus, the queen of Paphos, etc. This temple
and whole city were destroyed by an earthquake; so that a vestige of
either does not now remain. There are two islands which go by this name,
both adjoining, and on the west side of the island of Cyprus. One is
called Old Paphos, the other New Paphos; the latter is probably the
island here mentioned, though they are often confounded. On this island
there is a Christian Church, dedicated to St. George, in which service
is performed by the Greek ministers. It is a bishop's see, suffragan to
the Abp. of Nicosia.

A certain sorcerer - Τινα μαγον, A magician, one who used magical arts,
and pretended to have commerce with supernatural agents. A person who
dealt in sleight of hand, or leger-de-main. Such as I have supposed
Simon Magus to be. See the note on [Act
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#009.md).

A false prophet - A deceiver, one who pretended to have a Divine
commission, a fortune teller.

Bar-Jesus - That is, the son of Jesus or Joshua; as Bar-jona is the son
of Jonah; Bar-tholomew, the son of Thalmi, etc.

[Acts 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 13:7</span></span>

The deputy of the country - Ανθυπατῳ, The proconsul. Rosenmuller and
others remark, that in those days the Romans sent two different kinds of
governors into the provinces. Some of the provinces were Caesarean or
imperial, and into those they sent propretors; others belonged to the
senate and people of Rome, and into those they sent proconsuls. Cyprus
had formerly been an imperial province; but Augustus, who made the
distinction, had given it to the people, whence it was governed by a
proconsul. See Dion Cass. Hist. Rom. lib. iv. p. 523. (Edit. Leunclav.)

Sergius Paulus - This proconsul is not mentioned any where else: he
became a Christian, had his name written in the book of life, and,
probably on that very account, blotted out of the Fasti Consulares.

A prudent man - Ανδρι συνετῳ, A man of good sense, of a sound
understanding, and therefore wished to hear the doctrine taught by these
apostles; he did not persecute the men for their preaching, but sent for
them that he might hear for himself.

[Acts 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 13:8</span></span>

But Elymas, the sorcerer, (for so is his name by interpretation) - That
is, Elymas is the interpretation of the word μαγος, or sorcerer; not of
the word Bar-Jesus as some have imagined; and to support which they have
been led into strange etymologies on the word βαρ-Ιησους, Bar-Jesus. But
how is Elymas, Ελυμας, the interpretation of the word μαγος, magician or
sorcerer? Ans. Both names are Asiatic; but neither Hebrew nor Greek. I
have already observed, in the note on [Mat
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#001.md), that mogh in Persian means an
idolater, a worshipper of fire, and sometimes what we term a magician.
Elymas is from the Arabic ilm, knowledge, science, doctrine, art; from
alama, he was wise, skilled, etc.; hence aleem or alymon, a doctor or
learned man, and, with the Greek termination, ελυμας, Elymas, the
interpretation of mogh, Greek μαγος, magos, a magician, a wise man,
doctor, etc.

[Acts 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 13:9</span></span>

Saul, who also is - Paul - This is the first time the name Paul occurs,
and the last time in which this apostle is called Saul, as his common or
general name.

Saul, שאול Shaul, was the name of the first Israelitish king, and
signifies asked, sought; from שאל shaal, he asked, inquired, etc.

Paul, Paulus, if derived from the Latin, signifies little, dwarfish: but
if from the Hebrew, פלא pala, it signifies extraordinary, wonderful; and
this appears to have been the derivation assigned to it by St. Jerome,
com. in Ep. Pauli ad Philem., who translates it mirabilis, wonderful,
and Hesychius must have had the same in view, for he defines it thus,
Παυλος, θαυμαϚος, η εκλεκτος, συμβουλος, Paul, wonderful, or elect,
counsellor. The lexicographer had probably here in view, [Isa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006.md) : his name shall be called (פלא
יועיץ pelé yoêts) wonderful, counsellor; which he might corrupt into
paulus, and thus make his θαυμαϚος συμβουλος out of it by way of
explanation. Triller, however, supposes the συμβουλος of Hesychius to be
corrupted from συνδουλος fellow servant, which is a term not
unfrequently applied to apostles, etc., in the New Testament, who are
called the servants of God; and it is used by Paul himself, [Col
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#007.md); [Col
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#007.md). The Latin original is the most
probable. It is well known that the Jews in the apostolic age had
frequently two names, one Hebrew, the other Greek or Roman. Saul was
born of Jewish parents, a Hebrew of the Hebrews; he had therefore his
first name from that language, שאול Shaul, asked or begged; as it is
possible he might have been a child for whom his parents had addressed
their fervent petitions to God. The case of Samuel is one in point. See
[Sa1 1:9-18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#009.md). As he was born in Tarsus,
in Cilicia, he was consequently born a free Roman citizen; and hence his
parents would naturally give him, for cognomen, some name borrowed from
the Latin tongue, and Paulus, which signifies little, might indicate
that he was at his birth a small or diminutive child. And it is very
likely that he was low in stature all his days; and that it is to this
he refers himself, [Co2 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#010.md), for his
bodily presence is weak, and his speech contemptible. If he were small
in stature, his voice would be naturally low and feeble; and the Greeks,
who were fond of a thundering eloquence, would despise him on this very
account.

Filled with the Holy Ghost - Therefore the sentence he pronounced was
not from himself, but from God. And indeed, had he not been under a
Divine influence, it is not likely he would have ventured thus to accost
this sorcerer in the presence of the governor, who, no doubt, had
greatly admired him.

[Acts 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 13:10</span></span>

O full of all subtilty - Δολου, Deceit, pretending to supernatural
powers without possessing any, and having only cunning and deceit as
their substitutes.

And - mischief - Ῥᾳδιουργιας, from ῥᾳδιος, easy, and εργον, a work; one
who is ready at his work; a word which excellently well defines a
juggler, one who is expert at sleight of hand; though it is often
employed to signify an abandoned and accomplished villain.

Child of the devil - Υἱε διαβολου, Son of the devil, possessing his
nature; filled with his cunning; and, in consequence, practising deceit.

Enemy of all righteousness - Εχθρεπασης δικαιοσυνης; Opposed in thy
heart to all that is just, true, and good.

Wilt thou not cease to pervert, etc. - Ου παυσῃ διαϚρεφων. Wilt thou not
cease perverting? He had probably labored in this bad work from the
beginning of Paul's ministry in the place; and God in his mercy had
borne with him; and no doubt the apostle had warned him, for thus much
seems implied in the reproof. What a terrible character is given of this
bad man! He no doubt passed among the people for what we call a clever
fellow; and he was so clever as to hide himself under a pretty dense
mask; but God, who searches the heart, plucked it off, and tells him,
and those who were perverted by him, what an accomplished deceiver and
knave he was.

The right ways of the Lord - Τας ὁδους Κυριου τας ευθειας, The ways of
the Lord, the straight ways. This saying is very emphatical. The ways of
Elymas were crooked and perverse; the ways of the Lord, the doctrine
taught by him, plain and straight. What is here said of the conduct and
teaching of Elymas, for he was a false prophet, is true of all false
doctrine: it is complex, devious, and tortuous: while the doctrine of
God is simple, plain, and straight; directing in the way, the sure way,
that leads to present peace and everlasting happiness. From the
phraseology which the apostle employs in this terrible address to
Elymas, we may learn, as well as from his name Bar-Jesus, that he was by
birth and education a Jew. On this account he was the greater enemy to
Christianity; and on this same account he was the less excusable.

[Acts 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 13:11</span></span>

The hand of the Lord is upon thee - The power of God is now about to
deal with thee in the way of justice.

Thou shalt be blind - Every word here proves the immediate inspiration
of Paul. He was full of the Holy Ghost when he began this address: by
the light of that Spirit he discerned the state of Elymas, and exposed
his real character; and, by the prophetic influence of that same Spirit,
he predicted the calamity that was about to fall upon him, while as yet
there was no sign of his blindness! Mark this!

Not seeing the sun for a season - In the midst of judgment God remembers
mercy. This blindness was not to be perpetual: it was intended to be the
means of awakening and softening the hard heart of this poor sinner.
There is an ancient tradition, and it is mentioned both by Origen and
Chrysostom, that Elymas, in consequence of this became a sincere convert
to the religion of Christ. Origen says: "And Paul by a word striking him
blind, who was with the proconsul, Sergius Paul, δια των πονων επιϚρεφει
αυτον εις θεοσεβειαν, by anguish converted him to godliness." And,
commenting on - Thou shalt be blind, not seeing the sun, αχρι καιρου,
for a season, asks, "And why for a season? That, being smitten on
account of his transgressions, and brought to repentance, he might at
last be deemed worthy to see the sun, not only with his body, but with
his mind; that the Divine virtue might be proclaimed in restoring him to
sight, and his soul, believing, might receive godliness." Com. in Exod.,
vol. i. p. 117, edit. de la Rue, Par. 1733.

There fell on him a mist and darkness - Αχλυς, achlus, is a disordered
state of the eye, in which the patient sees through a thick mist. This
thick mist, or perturbed state of the eye, took place first: it
increased, and σκοτος, thick, positive darkness, was the issue.

He went about - Πεπιαγων. Not knowing how to take a right step, he
groped about in great uncertainty; and, not being able to find his way,
he sought for some persons to lead him by the hand. This state of Elymas
is inimitably expressed in one of the cartoons of Raphael, now at
Hampton-court, (and lately engraved, in the true spirit of the original,
by Mr. Thomas Holloway), in which his whole figure expresses the depth
of distress, concern, uncertainty, and confusion; and, to use a word
common in exhibiting this matchless piece of painting, he is blind from
head to foot. In this manner the text authorizes the painter to express
the state of this miserable culprit.

[Acts 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 13:12</span></span>

The deputy - believed - This was a proof that the doctrine was true; and
that the power of God, from which nothing could be concealed, and which
nothing could resist, was with these preachers.

Being astonished - Εκπλησσομενος, Being struck with astonishment, as
Elymas was struck with blindness. Thus the word of God is a two-edged
sword: it smites the sinner with judgment or compunction; and the
sincere inquirer after truth, with conviction of its own worth and
excellence.

[Acts 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 13:13</span></span>

Paul and his company loosed from Paphos - They sailed away from this
island, leaving, it may be presumed, Elymas a sincere and deeply humbled
penitent; and Sergius Paul, a thorough and happy believer in the
doctrine of Christ.

Previously to this time, St. Luke always mentions Barnabas before Paul;
but after this he mentions Paul always first; probably after seeing how
God had distinguished him in the late proceedings at Cyprus; as much of
the Holy Spirit now rested upon him.

They came to Perga in Pamphylia - As Perga was not a maritime town, it
is conjectured that the apostles sailed up the river Cestrus, in order
to come to this place, which, according to Strabo, was situated about
sixty leagues up this river, and near to which was a famous temple
dedicated to Diana. For Pamphylia, see [Act
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#010.md).

And John departing from them - Why John Mark left his brethren at this
place we are not informed; probably he went to visit his pious mother
Mary at Jerusalem, and to see Peter, to whom he is supposed to have been
much attached. It certainly was not with the approbation of Paul that he
left them at this place, as we learn from [Act
15:38](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#038.md); yet his departure does not seem
to have merited the displeasure of Barnabas; for John Mark having met
these apostles at Antioch, when Paul purposed to revisit the various
places where they had planted the word of God, Barnabas was willing to
take him with them; but Paul would not consent, because he had departed
from them from Pamphylia, and went not with them to the work, [Act
15:35-39](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#035.md), and this occasioned a
separation between Barnabas and Paul. It does not appear that John Mark
was under any obligation to accompany them any longer or any farther
than he pleased. He seems to have been little else than their servant,
and certainly was not divinely appointed to this work, as they were; and
consequently might leave them innocently, though not kindly, if they
could not readily supply his place. In this respect John Mark might be
to blame; but Barnabas, whose nephew he was, could look over this fault
more easily than Paul, who could not find those motives to pass by what
was reprehensible in his conduct which natural affection might furnish
to his brother apostle.

[Acts 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 13:14</span></span>

They came to Antioch in Pisidia - This place is mentioned thus to
distinguish it from Antioch in Syria, with which it had nothing in
common but the name. There were several cities and towns in various
districts of these countries called Antioch: some have reckoned up not
less than twelve. Pisidia, in which this was situated, was a province of
Asia Minor, near to Pamphylia, having Phrygia on the north, and
Pamphylia on the south. The position of all these places may be seen on
the map.

Into the synagogue on the Sabbath day - Though Paul was now on a special
mission to the Gentiles, yet he availed himself of every opportunity, in
every place, of making the first offer of salvation to the Jews.

[Acts 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 13:15</span></span>

After the reading of the law and the prophets - A certain portion of the
law and another of the prophets, was read every Sabbath; and the law was
so divided as to be read over once every year. In the notes at the
conclusion of Deuteronomy, I have considered this subject at large, and
given a complete table of the Parashoth, sections of the law, and
Haphtaroth, sections of the prophets, which are read every Sabbath in
the year in the Jewish synagogues. To have an exact view of every part
of the Jewish ecclesiastical economy, the reader will do well to consult
the above mentioned table, and those which follow it: they have been
drawn up with great care, attention, and indescribable labor.

It has been a question, in what language were the law and prophets read
in a synagogue of Pisidia, for in that district Strabo informs us that
four languages were spoken, viz. the Pisidian, the Solyman, the Greek,
and the Lydian. Dr. Lightfoot conjectures, with great probability, that
the Scriptures were read in the original Hebrew; and that an interpreter
tendered the reading to the people in their mother tongue. There is no
doubt that the Jews and proselytes understood the Greek tongue well; and
they certainly had the Septuagint version among them.

The rulers of the synagogue - These were the persons whose business it
was to read the appointed sections, and to take care of the synagogue
and its concerns; and to see that all was done decently and in order.

Sent unto them - Seeing them to be Jews, they wished them to give some
suitable address to the people, i.e. to the Jews who were then engaged
in Divine worship; for the whole of the following discourse, which
greatly resembles that of St. Stephen, Acts 7:1-53, is directed to the
Jews alone; and this was probably spoken either in Hebrew or Greek.

Ye men and brethren - Ανδρες αδελφοι, Men brethren, a Hebraism for, "Ye
men who are our brethren," i.e. Jews, as we ourselves are; but ανδρες is
often an expletive, as we have already seen. See the note on [Act
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#002.md).

If ye have any word of exhortation - Ει εϚι λογος εν ὑμιν παρακλησεως·
If ye have any subject of consolation, any word of comfort to us, who
are sojourners in this strange land, speak it. The Consolation of Israel
was an epithet of the Messiah among the Jews; and it is probable that it
was in reference to him that the rulers of the synagogue spoke. That
παρακλησις is to be understood here as meaning consolation, and this in
reference to the Messiah, the whole of the following discourse will
prove to the attentive reader; in which Paul shows the care and
protection of God towards his people Israel, and the abundant provision
he had made for their salvation by Jesus Christ. They wished for
consolation, and he declared unto them glad tidings, and many felt the
power and comfort of the doctrine of the cross.

[Acts 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 13:16</span></span>

Men of Israel - Ye that are Jews by birth; and ye that fear God - ye
that are proselytes to the Jewish religion. In this discourse Paul
proves that Jesus Christ is the Messiah, sent from God, not only for the
salvation of the Jews, but of the whole human race. And this he does,
not with the rhetorician's arts, but in a plain, simple detail of the
history of Christ, and the most remarkable transactions of the people of
God, which referred to his manifestation in the flesh. Rosenmuller.

[Acts 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 13:17</span></span>

The God of - our fathers - The apostle begins his discourse with the
Egyptian bondage, and their deliverance from it, as points the most
remarkable and striking in their history; in which the providence and
mighty power of God, exerted so frequently in their behalf, were
peculiarly conspicuous.

Exalted the people - Even when they were strangers in the land, and
greatly oppressed, God exalted them; made them a terror to their
enemies, and multiplied them greatly.

With a high arm - A literal translation of the Hebrew phrase, בזרוע רמה
bezeroa ramah, with a lifted-up arm, to protect them and destroy their
enemies. The meaning of the phrase is, a manifest display of the Divine
power.

[Acts 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 13:18</span></span>

About the time of forty years - The space of time between their coming
out of Egypt, and going into the promised land.

Suffered he their manners - Ετροποφορησεν αυτους; He dealt indulgently
with them: howsoever they behaved towards him, he mercifully bore with,
and kindly treated them. But instead of ετροποφορησεν, ACE, some others,
with the Syriac, Arabic, Coptic, Ethiopic, and some of the fathers, read
ετροφοφορησεν, which signifies, he nourished and fed them, or bore them
about in his arms as a tender nurse does her child. This reading
confirms the marginal conjecture, and agrees excellently with the scope
of the place, and is a reading at least of equal value with that in the
commonly received text. Griesbach has admitted it, and excluded the
other. Both, when rightly understood, speak nearly the same sense; but
the latter is the most expressive, and agrees best with Paul's
discourse, and the history to which he alludes. See the same form of
expression, [Num 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#012.md); [Exo
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#004.md); [Isa
46:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#003.md), [Isa
46:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#004.md); [Isa
63:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#009.md).

[Acts 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 13:19</span></span>

Destroyed seven nations - The Canaanites, Hittites, Girgasites,
Amorites, Hivites, Peresites, and Jebusites. The rabbins frequently call
them שבעה אומות Shebaah Omoth, the Seven Nations.

[Acts 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 13:20</span></span>

And after that he gave unto them judges about the space of four hundred
and fifty years - This is a most difficult passage, and has been termed
by Scaliger, Crux Chronologorum. The apostle seems here to contradict
the account in [Kg1 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#001.md) : And it came
to pass in the four hundred and eightieth year after the children of
Israel were come out of the land of Egypt, in the fourth year of
Solomon's reign, he began to build the house of the Lord.

Sir Norton Knatchbull, in his annotations upon difficult texts, has
considered the various solutions proposed by learned men of the
difficulty before us; and concludes that the words of the apostle should
not be understood as meaning how long God gave them judges, but when he
gave them; and therefore proposes that the first words of this verse,
Και μετα ταυτα, ὡς ετεσι τετρακοσιοις και πεντηκοντα, should be referred
to the words going before, [Act 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#017.md),
that is, to the time When the God of the children of Israel chose their
fathers.

"Now this time wherein God may properly be said to have chosen their
fathers, about 450 years before he gave them judges, is to be computed
from the birth of Isaac, in whom God may properly be said to have chosen
their fathers; for God, who had chosen Abraham out of all the people of
the earth, chose Isaac at this time out of the children of Abraham, in
whose family the covenant was to rest. To make this computation evident,
let us observe that from the birth of Isaac to the birth of Jacob are 60
years; from thence to their going into Egypt, 130; from thence to the
exodus, 210; from thence to their entrance into Canaan, 40; from that to
the division of the land (about which time it is probable they began to
settle their government by judges) 7 years; which sums make 447: viz. 60
+ 130 + 210 + 40 + 7 = 447. And should this be reckoned from the year
before the birth of Isaac, when God established his covenant between
himself and Abraham, and all his seed after him, [Gen
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#019.md), at which time God properly
chose their fathers, then there will be 448 years, which brings it to
within two years of the 450, which is sufficiently exact to bring it
within the apostle's ὡς, about, or nearly.

"Some have made the period 452 years; which, though two years more than
the apostle's round number, is still sufficiently reconcilable with his
qualifying particle ὡς, about. And it may be added that the most correct
writers often express a sum totally, but not exactly: so, with
Demosthenes and Plautus, we find that called a talent where some drachms
were either wanting or abounding." The sacred writers often express
themselves in the same way: e.g. He made a molten sea, ten cubits from
the one brim to the other; and a line of thirty cubits did compass it
about. Now we know that the circumference of any circle is only in round
numbers to its diameter as three to one; but, correctly, is considerably
more, nearly as 22 to 7. But even the Spirit of God does not see it
necessary to enter into such niceties, which would only puzzle, and not
instruct the common reader.

Calmet has paraphrased these passages nearly to the same sense: the text
may be thus connected; [Act 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#019.md). And
having destroyed; seven nations in the land of Canaan, he divided their
land to them by lot, about one hundred and fifty years after. And
afterwards he gave them judges, to the time of Samuel the prophet. The
paraphrase of Calmet is the following: "The God of this people of Israel
chose our fathers in the person of Abraham; he promised him the land of
Canaan; and four hundred and fifty years after this promise, and the
birth of Isaac, who was the son and heir of the promise, he put them in
possession of that land which he had promised so long before." As this
view of the subject removes all the principal difficulties, I shall not
trouble my reader with other modes of interpretation.

[Acts 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 13:21</span></span>

Saul the son of Cis - In all proper names quoted from the Old Testament,
we should undoubtedly follow, as nearly as possible, the same
orthography: קיש Kish, was the name of this king's father, and so we
spell it in the Old Testament, and yet have transformed it into Cis in
the New, where the orthography is almost entirely lost.

The space of forty years - Reckoning from the time of his anointing by
Samuel to the time of his death, from a.m. 2909 to 2949.

[Acts 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 13:22</span></span>

David - a man after mine own heart - That is, a man who would rule the
kingdom according to God's will. Dr. Benson's observation on this point
is very judicious: "When it is said that David was a man after God's own
heart, it should be understood, not of his private, but of his public,
character. He was a man after God's own heart, because he ruled the
people according to the Divine will. He did not allow of idolatry; he
did not set up for absolute power. He was guided in the government of
the nation by the law of Moses, as the standing rule of government, and
by the prophet, or the Divine oracle, whereby God gave directions upon
particular emergencies. Whatever Saul's private character was, he was
not a good king in Israel. He did not follow the law, the oracle, and
the prophet; but attempted to be absolute, and thereby to subvert the
constitution of the kingdom. That this was the meaning of David's being
a man after God's own heart will easily appear by comparing [Sa1
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#028.md); [Sa1
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#017.md), [Sa1
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#018.md); [Ch1
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#013.md), [Ch1
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#014.md); [Psa
78:70](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#070.md), etc.; [Psa
89:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#020.md), etc."

[Acts 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 13:23</span></span>

Of this man's seed hath God - raised - a Savior - That Jesus Christ came
in a direct and indisputable line from David, according to both promise
and prophecy, may be seen in the notes on [Mat
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001.md), etc., and particularly in the
notes at the end of Luke And that the Messiah was promised to come from
the family of David, see [Isa 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001.md),
[Isa 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002.md), and [Jer
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#005.md), [Jer
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#006.md).

[Acts 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 13:24</span></span>

John - preached - the baptism of repentance - On the nature and effects
of John's preaching, see the notes on [Mat
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#001.md), etc., and [Luk
3:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#010) (note.md).

[Acts 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 13:25</span></span>

As John fulfilled his course - As John was fulfilling his race, he said,
etc. It has been supposed that the word δρομον, course, or race, is used
here to point out the short duration of the Baptist's ministry, and the
fervent zeal with which he performed it. It signifies properly his
ministry, or life. A man's work, employment, function, etc., is his
race, course, or way of life. John had a ministry from God; and he
discharged the duties of it with zeal and diligence; bore the fatigues
of it with patience and resignation; and was gloriously successful in
it, because the hand of the Lord was with him.

[Acts 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 13:26</span></span>

Men and brethren - This should have been translated brethren simply. See
the note on [Act 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#002.md).

Children of the stock of Abraham - All ye that are Jews.

And whosoever among you feared God - That is, all ye who are Gentiles,
and are now proselytes to the Jewish religion.

The word of this salvation - The doctrine that contains the promise of
deliverance from sin, and the means by which it is brought about; all
which is founded on Jesus, of the stock of David, dying and rising again
for the salvation of Jews and Gentiles.

[Acts 13:27](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 13:27</span></span>

Because they knew him not - A gentle excuse for the persecuting high
priests, etc. They did not know that Jesus was the Christ, because they
did not know the prophets: and why did they not know the prophets, which
were read every Sabbath day? Because they did not desire to know his
will; and therefore they knew not the doctrine of God: nor did they know
that, in condemning Christ, they fulfilled those very Scriptures which
were read every Sabbath day in their synagogues.

[Acts 13:28](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 13:28</span></span>

They found no cause of death in him - No reason why he should be
condemned. Though they accused him of several things, yet they could not
substantiate the most trifling charge against him; and yet, in
opposition to all justice and equity, desired Pilate to put him to
death! This points their perfidy in the strongest light.

[Acts 13:29](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 13:29</span></span>

They took him down from the tree - The apostle passes rapidly over
several circumstances of his death, that he might establish the fact of
his resurrection.

[Acts 13:30](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 13:30</span></span>

But God raised him from the dead - And thus gave the fullest proof of
his innocence. God alone can raise the dead; and he would not work a
miracle so very extraordinary, but on some extraordinary occasion.

[Acts 13:31](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">act 13:31</span></span>

He was seen many days, etc. - The thing was done but a very short time
since; and many of the witnesses are still alive, and ready to attest
the fact of this resurrection in the most unequivocal manner.

[Acts 13:32](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 13:32</span></span>

We declare unto you glad tidings - We proclaim that Gospel to you which
is the fulfillment of the promise made unto the fathers.

[Acts 13:33](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">act 13:33</span></span>

Written in the second Psalm - Instead of τῳ ψαλμῳ τῳ δευτερῳ the second
Psalm, πρωτῳ ψαλμῳ, the first Psalm, is the reading of D, and its Itala
version, and several of the primitive fathers. Griesbach has received it
into the text; but not, in my opinion, on sufficient evidence. The
reason of these various readings is sufficiently evident to those who
are acquainted with Hebrew MSS. In many of these, two Psalms are often
written as one; and the first and second Psalms are written as one in
seven of Kennicott's and De Rossi's MSS. Those who possessed such MSS.
would say, as it is written in the First Psalm; those who referred to
MSS. where the two Psalms were separate, would say, in the Second Psalm,
as they would find the quotation in question in the first verse of the
second Psalm. There is, therefore, neither contradiction nor difficulty
here; and it is no matter which reading we prefer, as it depends on the
simple circumstance, whether we consider these two Psalms as parts of
one and the same, or whether we consider them as two distinct Psalms.

Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee - It has been disputed
whether this text should be understood of the incarnation or of the
resurrection of our Lord. If understood of his incarnation, it can mean
no more than this, that the human nature of our blessed Lord was
begotten by the energy of the Holy Spirit in the womb of the blessed
virgin; for as to his Divine nature, which is allotted to be God, it
could neither be created nor begotten. See some reasons offered for this
on [Luk 1:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#035) (note.md); and, if those be
deemed insufficient, a thousand more may be added. But in the above
reasons it is demonstrated that the doctrine of the eternal Sonship of
Christ is absolutely irreconcilable to reason, and contradictory to
itself. Eternity is that which has had no beginning, nor stands in any
reference to time: Son supposes time, generation, and father; and time
also antecedent to such generation: therefore the rational conjunction
of these two terms, Son and eternity, is absolutely impossible, as they
imply essentially different and opposite ideas.

If the passage in question be understood of the resurrection of Christ,
it points out that the human nature, which was produced by the power of
God in the womb of the virgin, and which was the Son of God, could see
no corruption; and therefore, though it died for sin, must be raised
from the dead before it saw corruption. Thus God owned that human nature
to be peculiarly his own; and therefore Jesus Christ was declared to be
the Son of God with power, by the resurrection from the dead, [Rom
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004.md).

[Acts 13:34](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">act 13:34</span></span>

No more to return to corruption - To the grave, to death, the place and
state of corruption; for so we should understand the word διαφθοραν in
the text.

The sure mercies of David - Τα ὁσια Δαβιδ τα πιϚα. These words are
quoted literatim from the Septuagint version of [Isa
55:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#003.md); where the Hebrew is חסדי דוד
הנאמנים chasdey David ha-neemanim, of which the Greek is a faithful
translation; and which sure mercies of David St. Paul considers as being
fulfilled in the resurrection of Christ. From this application of the
words, it is evident that the apostle considered the word David as
signifying the Messiah; and then the sure or faithful mercies, being
such as relate to the new covenant, and the various blessings promised
in it, are evidently those which are sealed and confirmed to mankind by
the resurrection of Christ; and it is in this way that the apostle
applies them. Had there not been the fullest proof of the resurrection
of Christ, not one of the promises of the new covenant could have been
considered as sure or faithful. If he did not rise from the dead, then,
as said the apostle, your faith and our preaching are vain, [Co1
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#014.md).

The following observations of Bp. Pearce are judicious: "For the sense
of these words, we must have recourse to what God said to David in [Sa2
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#011.md), [Sa2
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#012.md), etc., explained by what is said
in [Psa 89:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#003.md), [Psa
89:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#004.md), [Psa
89:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#028.md), [Psa
89:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#029.md), [Psa
89:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#036.md), where frequent mention is made
of a covenant established by God with David, and sworn to by God, that
David's seed should endure for ever, and his throne as the days of
heaven, and as the sun, to all generations. This covenant and this oath
are the sure and sacred things of which Isaiah, [Isa
55:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#003.md), speaks; and Luke in this place.
And Paul understood them as relating to the kingdom of Jesus, (the Son
of David), which was to be an everlasting kingdom; and if an everlasting
one, then it was necessary that Jesus should have been (as he was)
raised from the dead; and, to support this argument, Paul, in the next
verse, strengthens it with another, drawn from [Psa
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010.md)."

[Acts 13:36](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">act 13:36</span></span>

David - fell on sleep - and saw corruption - David died, was buried, and
never rose again; therefore, David cannot be the person spoken of here:
the words are true of some other person; and they can be applied to
Jesus Christ only; and in him they are most exactly fulfilled. See the
notes on [Act 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#029.md), [Act
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#030.md), etc.

[Acts 13:38](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">act 13:38</span></span>

Be it known unto you, therefore - This is the legitimate conclusion:
seeing the word of God is true, and he has promised an endless
succession to the seed of David; seeing David and all his family have
failed in reference to the political kingdom, a spiritual kingdom and a
spiritual succession must be intended, that the sure covenant and all
its blessings may be continued. Again: seeing the person by whom this is
to be done is to see no corruption; - seeing David has died, and has
seen (fallen under the power of) corruption; - seeing Jesus the Christ
has wrought all the miracles which the prophets said he should work; -
seeing he has suffered all the indignities which your prophets said he
must suffer; - seeing after his death he has most incontestably risen
again from the dead, and has not fallen under the power of corruption, -
then he must be the very person in whom all the predictions are
fulfilled, and the person through whom all the blessings of the covenant
must come.

Through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins - See the
notes on [Act 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#030.md), [Act
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#031.md). Remission of sins, the removal
of the power, guilt, and pollution of sin comes alone through this man,
whom ye crucified, and who is risen from the dead.

[Acts 13:39](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">act 13:39</span></span>

And by him - On his account, and through him, all that believe in his
Divine mission, and the end for which he has been manifested, namely, to
put away sin by the sacrifice of himself, are justified from all things,
from the guilt of all transgressions committed against God; from which
ye could not be justified by the law of Moses; because it is impossible
that the blood of bulls and goats, and the ashes of a heifer sprinkling
the unclean, or any other rite or service of this kind, could take away
sin from the soul, cancel its guilt in the conscience, or make an
atonement to the Divine justice; but this is the sacrifice which God has
required; this is every way suited to the end for which it has been
instituted; and this is the sacrifice alone which God can accept. Your
law says, "Do this, and ye shall live;" and, "Cursed is every one that
continueth not in all things that are written in the book of the law to
do them." Ye have not done these things required; ye have not continued
in any good thing; ye have not only not done all things commanded, but
ye have done none, none as they ought to be done; and therefore ye are
under the curse. The Gospel says, Believe on the Lord Jesus; credit his
Divine mission; consider his death an atonement for sin; believe in his
resurrection, as a proof that the atonement is made, believe that he
suffered, died, and rose again for your justification; and that for his
sake God, though he be infinitely just, can be the justifier of all who
believe in him. By the law of Moses there is neither justification nor
salvation: in Jesus Christ there are both, and all the sure mercies of
David. Therefore, believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and ye shall be
justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the
law of Moses.

[Acts 13:40](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">act 13:40</span></span>

Beware - lest that come upon you, etc. - If you reject these benefits,
now freely offered to you in this preaching of Christ crucified, you may
expect such judgment from the hand of God as your forefathers
experienced, when, for their rebellion and their contempt of his
benefits, their city was taken, their temple destroyed, and themselves
either slain by the sword, or carried into captivity. It is evident that
St. Paul refers to [Hab 1:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#005.md); and in
those verses the desolation by the Chaldeans is foretold. Never was
there a prophecy more correctly and pointedly applied. These Jews did
continue to slight the benefits offered to them by the Lord; and they
persevered in their rebellion: what was the consequence? The Romans
came, took their city, burnt their temple, slew upwards of a million of
them, and either carried or sold the rest into captivity. How exactly
was the prophecy in both cases fulfilled!

[Acts 13:41](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">act 13:41</span></span>

Behold, ye despisers - There is a remarkable difference here between the
Hebrew text in Habakkuk, and that in the Septuagint, which is a little
abridged here by St. Paul. I shall exhibit the three texts. Heb: -

ראו בגוים והביטו והתמהו תמהו כי פעל פעל בימיכם לא תאמינו כי יספר

Reu bagoyim vehabitu vehitammehu; temehu; ki poal poel bimeycem, lo
teaminu hi yesupar.

Behold, ye among the heathen, (nations), and regard, and be astonished;
be astonished, for I am working a work in your days, which; when it
shall be told, ye will not credit.

See Houbigant.

Sept.

Ιδετε οἱ καταφρονηται, και επιβλεψατε, και θαυμασατε θαυμασια, και
αφανισθητε· διοτι εργον εγω εργαζομαι εν ταις ἡμεραις ὑμων, ὁ ου μη
πιϚευσητε, εαν τις εκδιηγηται ὑμιν.

See, ye despisers, and look attentively, and be astonished, (or hide
yourselves), for I work a work in your days, which, if any one will tell
to you, ye will not believe.

St. Luke.

Ιδετε οἱ καταφρονηται, \[και επιβλεψατε\], και θαυμασατε, \[θαυμασια\],
και αφανισθητε· ὁτι εργον εγω εργαζομαι εν ταις ἡμεραις ὑμων, εργον ᾡ ου
μη πιϚευσητε, εαν τις εκδιηγηται ὑμιν.

Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and be astonished, (or hide
yourselves), for I work a work in your days, which, if any one will tell
unto you, ye will not believe.

I have taken Luke's quotation from the best MSS., and I have quoted the
Septuagint according to the Codex Alexandrinus; and the quotations are
exactly the same, not only in words, but almost in letters, with the
exception of επιβλεψατε and θαυμασια which the evangelist omits, and
which I have included in crotchets in the text of St. Luke, merely that
the place of the omission may be the better seen. It may now be
necessary to inquire how St. Luke and the Septuagint should substitute
ye despisers, for ye among the heathen, in the Hebrew text?

Without troubling myself or my readers with laborious criticisms on
these words, with which many learned men have loaded the text, I will
simply state my opinion, that the prophet, instead of בגוים bagoyim,
among the heathen, wrote בגדים bogadim, despisers, or transgressors: a
word which differs only in a single letter, ד daleth, for ו vau; the
latter of which might easily be mistaken by a transcriber for the other,
especially if the horizontal stroke of the ד daleth happened to be a
little faint towards the left; as, in that case, it would wear the
appearance of a ו vau; and this is not unfrequently the case, not only
in MSS., but even in printed books. It seems as evident as it can well
be that this gives the word which the Septuagint found in the copy from
which they translated: their evidence, and that of the apostle, joined
to the consideration that the interchange of the two letters mentioned
above might have been easily made, is quite sufficient to legitimate the
reading for which I contend. Houbigant and several others are of the
same mind.

The word αφανισθητε, which we translate perish, signifies more properly
disappear, or hide yourselves; as people, astonished and alarmed at some
coming evil, betake themselves to flight, and hide themselves in order
to avoid it.

[Acts 13:42](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">act 13:42</span></span>

When the Jews were gone out - That part of them in whom the words of the
prophet were fulfilled, viz. those who, though they had the clearest
relation of so interesting a history, would not believe it: they shut
their eyes against the light, and hardened their hearts against the
truth. There were other Jews in the assembly that did believe, and were
saved.

The Gentiles besought - There is some doubt whether the original,
παρεκαλουν τα εθνη, should be translated the Gentiles besought; or they
besought the Gentiles: for the words will bear either, but the latter
sense more naturally. When the Jews retired, determining not to credit
what was spoken, the apostle, seeing the Gentiles of a better mind,
requested them to come and hear those words, or doctrines, the next
Sabbath. But, the next, το μεταξυ, as Hesychius defines it, μετ' ολιγον,
ανα μεσον, shortly, or betwixt, may mean the after part of the same
Sabbath, or the course of the ensuing week, between the two Sabbaths;
for Mondays and Thursdays, or the second and fifth days of the week,
were times in which those who feared God usually met together in the
synagogue; for it is a maxim with the rabbins, that no three days should
elapse without reading of the law.

On this verse there is a great number of various readings: instead of,
when the Jews were going out of the synagogue, ABCDE, several others of
great repute, with all the Syriac, the Coptic, Ethiopic, Armenian,
Vulgate, and Itala, read, As they were going out, they entreated that
these words should be preached unto them in the course of the week, or
the next Sabbath. So that, according to this well accredited reading,
the words, εκ της συναγωγης των Ιουδαιων, are left out in the first
clause, αυτων being put in their place; and τα εθνη, the Gentiles, is
wholly omitted in the second clause. The most eminent critics approve of
this reading; indeed it stands on such authority as to render it almost
indubitable. Of the αυτων, them, which is substituted for the first
clause, Professor White says, lectio indubie genuina: this reading is
undoubtedly genuine; and of the τα εθνη εις, he says, certissime
delenda: they should certainly be expunged. We are therefore to
understand the words thus: that, "as they were going out on the breaking
up of the assembly, some of them desired that they might have these
doctrines preached to them on the ensuing week or Sabbath." And thus all
the ambiguity of the verse vanishes.

[Acts 13:43](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#043.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">act 13:43</span></span>

Many of the Jews - Direct descendants from some of the twelve tribes;
and religious proselytes, heathens who had been converted to Judaism,
and, having submitted to circumcision, had become proselytes of the
covenant: though some think that the expression means proselytes of the
gate - persons who believed in one God, like the Jews, but who had not
received circumcision.

Persuaded them to continue in the grace of God - That is, that they
should continue to credit the Gospel; to receive the spirit and
influence of it; to bring forth the fruits of that spirit; and thus
continue under the favor and approbation of God.

[Acts 13:44](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#044.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">act 13:44</span></span>

The next Sabbath day - The good news had spread far and wide, by means
of the converted Jews and proselytes.

Almost the whole city - Jews, proselytes, and Gentiles, came together to
hear τον λογον του Θεου, this doctrine of God, this Divine teaching, by
which so many of their kindred and acquaintance had become so wise and
happy. It is not by public discourses merely that people are converted
to God; but by the private teaching and godly conduct of those who have
received the truth; for, as these are scattered throughout society, they
are a leaven in every place.

[Acts 13:45](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#045.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">act 13:45</span></span>

The Jews - were filled with envy - See on [Act
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#017) (note.md). These could not bear the
Gentiles, who believed in Christ, to be equal with them; and yet;
according to the Gospel, it was really the case.

Contradicting - The arguments and statements brought forward by the
disciples; and blaspheming, speaking impiously and injuriously of Jesus
Christ. This is probably what is meant.

[Acts 13:46](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#046.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">act 13:46</span></span>

Waxed bold - Παρῥησιασαμενοι; Having great liberty of speech; a strong,
persuasive, and overpowering eloquence. They had eternal truth for the
basis of this discourse; a multitude of incontestable facts to support
it; an all-persuading eloquence to illustrate and maintain what they had
asserted.

Should first have been spoken to you - When our Lord gave his apostles
their commission to go into all the world, and preach the Gospel to
every creature, he told them they must begin first at Jerusalem, [Mar
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015.md); [Luk
24:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#047.md). In obedience therefore to this
command, the apostles (in every place where they preached) made their
first offers of the Gospel to the Jews.

Ye put it from you - Απωθεισθε αυτον, Ye disdain this doctrine, and
consider it contemptible: so the word is frequently used.

And judge yourselves unworthy of everlasting life - Was this meant as a
strong irony? "Ye have such humbling thoughts of yourselves, that ye
think the blessings of the Gospel too good to be bestowed on such
worthless wretches as ye are." Or did the apostle mean that, by their
words and conduct on this occasion, they had passed sentence on
themselves, and, in effect, had decided that they were unworthy of the
grace of the Gospel; and God now ratifies that judgment by removing
those blessings from them, and sending them to the Gentiles?

[Acts 13:47](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#047.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">act 13:47</span></span>

For so the Lord commanded us - The apostles could quote a pertinent
scripture for every thing they did; because the outlines of the whole
Gospel dispensation are founded in the law and the prophets; and they
were now building the Church of God according to the pattern shown them
in the Mount. In the things of God, no man nor minister should go
farther than he can say, Thus it is written, and thus it behoves me to
do; and let him see that his quotations are fairly made, and not a
detached passage or member of a sentence produced, because it seems to
look like the system he wishes to establish.

I have set thee to be a light of the Gentiles - This quotation is from
[Isa 49:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#006.md), and was most fully in
point. The Jews could not resist the testimony of their own prophet; and
the Gentiles rejoiced to find that the offers of salvation were to be
made so specifically to them.

For salvation unto the ends of the earth - The very name of the Messiah,
viz Jesus, announced the design and end of his mission. He is the
Savior, and is to be proclaimed as such to the ends of the earth; to all
mankind; to every nation, and people, and tongue; and, wherever the
Gospel is preached, there is a free, full, and sincere offer of
salvation to every soul that hears it. And the offer is proof
sufficient, in itself, that there is a power to receive its blessings
given to those to whom the offer is made; as it would be of no use to
offer them a salvation which it was designed they either should not or
could not receive. A son of Satan might be capable of such dissimulation
and bad faith; but the holy God cannot.

[Acts 13:48](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#048.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">act 13:48</span></span>

As many as were ordained to eternal life believed - This text has been
most pitifully misunderstood. Many suppose that it simply means that
those in that assembly who were fore-ordained; or predestinated by God's
decree, to eternal life, believed under the influence of that decree.
Now, we should be careful to examine what a word means, before we
attempt to fix its meaning. Whatever τεταγμενοι may mean, which is the
word we translate ordained, it is neither προτεταγμενοι nor προορισμενοι
which the apostle uses, but simply τεταγμενοι, which includes no idea of
pre-ordination or pre-destination of any kind. And if it even did, it
would be rather hazardous to say that all those who believed at this
time were such as actually persevered unto the end, and were saved unto
eternal life. But, leaving all these precarious matters, what does the
word τεταγμενος mean? The verb ταττω or τασσω signifies to place, set,
order, appoint, dispose; hence it has been considered here as implying
the disposition or readiness of mind of several persons in the
congregation, such as the religious proselytes mentioned [Act
13:43](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#043.md), who possessed the reverse of
the disposition of those Jews who spake against those things,
contradicting and blaspheming, [Act
13:45](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#045.md). Though the word in this place
has been variously translated, yet, of all the meanings ever put on it,
none agrees worse with its nature and known signification than that
which represents it as intending those who were predestinated to eternal
life: this is no meaning of the term, and should never be applied to it.
Let us, without prejudice, consider the scope of the place: the Jews
contradicted and blasphemed; the religious proselytes heard attentively,
and received the word of life: the one party were utterly indisposed,
through their own stubbornness, to receive the Gospel; the others,
destitute of prejudice and prepossession, were glad to hear that, in the
order of God, the Gentiles were included in the covenant of salvation
through Christ Jesus; they, therefore, in this good state and order of
mind, believed. Those who seek for the plain meaning of the word will
find it here: those who wish to make out a sense, not from the Greek
word, its use among the best Greek writers, and the obvious sense of the
evangelist, but from their own creed, may continue to puzzle themselves
and others; kindle their own fire, compass themselves with sparks, and
walk in the light of their own fire, and of the sparks which they have
kindled; and, in consequence, lie down in sorrow, having bidden adieu to
the true meaning of a passage so very simple, taken in its connection,
that one must wonder how it ever came to be misunderstood and
misapplied. Those who wish to see more on this verse may consult
Hammond, Whitby, Schoettgen, Rosenmuller, Pearce, Sir Norton Knatchbull,
and Dodd.

[Acts 13:49](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#049.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">act 13:49</span></span>

The word of the Lord was published, etc. - Those who had come from
different parts, and were converted, carried the glad tidings to their
respective neighbourhoods; and thus the doctrine was published
throughout all the region of Pisidia, where they then were. See on [Act
13:44](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#044) (note.md).

[Acts 13:50](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#050.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">act 13:50</span></span>

Devout and honorable women - It is likely that these were heathen
matrons, who had become proselytes to the Jewish religion; and, as they
were persons of affluence and respectability, they had considerable
influence with the civil magistracy of the place, and probably their
husbands were of this order; and it is likely that they used that
influence, at the instigation of the Jews, to get the apostles expelled
from the place.

[Acts 13:51](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#051.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">act 13:51</span></span>

They shook off the dust of their feet against them - This was a very
significant rite; by it, they in effect said: Ye are worse than the
heathen: even your very land is accursed for your opposition to God, and
we dare not permit even its dust to cleave to the soles of our feet; and
we shake it off, in departing from your country, according to our Lord's
command, ([Mat 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#014).md), for a testimony
against you, that we offered you salvation, but ye rejected it and
persecuted us. The Jews, when travelling in heathen countries, took
care, when they came to the borders of their own, to shake off the dust
of their feet, lest any of the unhallowed ground should defile the
sacred land of Israel.

Came unto Iconium - According to Strabo, Iconium was a small fortified
town, the capital of Lycaonia, at present called Cogni. "Lycaonia was a
province at the back of Pamphylia, higher up in Asia Minor, and to the
northeast of Pamphylia." Pearce.

[Acts 13:52](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#052.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">act 13:52</span></span>

The disciples were filled with joy and with the Holy Ghost - Though in
the world they had tribulation, yet in Christ they had peace; and, while
engaged in their Master's work, they always had their Master's wages.
The happiness of a genuine Christian lies far beyond the reach of
earthly disturbances, and is not affected by the changes and chances to
which mortal things are exposed. The martyrs were more happy in the
flames than their persecutors could be on their beds of down.

St. Paul's sermon at Antioch has been thus analyzed.

1\. His prologue, [Act 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#016.md),
addressed to those who fear God.

2\. His narrative of God's goodness to Israel:

1\. In their deliverance from Egypt.

2\. In their support in the wilderness.

3\. In his giving them the land of Canaan.

4\. In the judges and kings which he had given for their governors, Acts
13:7-22.

3\. His proposition, that Jesus was the Christ, the Savior of the world,
[Act 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#023.md).

4\. The illustration of this proposition, proving its truth:

1\. From Christ's stock and family, [Act
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#023.md).

2\. From the testimony of his forerunner, [Act
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#024.md).

3\. From the resurrection of Christ, [Act
13:30](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#030.md); which was corroborated with the
testimony of many Galileans, [Act
13:31](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#031.md), and of the prophets, David,
[Act 13:33](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#033.md), [Act
13:35](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#035.md), and Isaiah, [Act
13:34](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#034.md).

5\. He anticipates objections, relative to the unjust condemnation,
death and burial of Christ, [Act
13:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#027.md).

6\. His epilogue, in which he excites his audience to embrace the Gospel
on two considerations:

1\. The benefits which they receive who embrace the Gospel, [Act
13:38](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#038.md), [Act
13:39](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#039.md).

2\. The danger to which they were exposed who should despise and reject
it, [Act 13:40](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#040.md), [Act
13:41](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#041.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 14](act014.md)

</div>
