<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act025)  [Next](act027) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 26](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 26:0</span></span>

Paul answers for himself before Agrippa, to whom he pays a true
compliment, in order to secure a favorable hearing, [Act
26:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#001); gives an account of his
education from his youth up, [Act
26:4](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#004), [Act
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#005); shows that the Jews persecuted
him for his maintaining the hope of the resurrection, [Act
26:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#006); states his persecution of the
Christians, [Act 26:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#009); gives an
account of his miraculous conversion, [Act
26:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#012); and of his call to the
ministry, [Act 26:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#016). His obedience
to that call, and his success in preaching the doctrine of Christ
crucified, [Act 26:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#019). While he is
thus speaking, Festus interrupts him, and declares him to be mad through
his abundant learning, [Act 26:24](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#024);
which charge he modestly refutes with inimitable address, and appeals to
King Agrippa for the truth and correctness of his speech, [Act
26:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#025). On which, Agrippa confesses
himself almost converted to Christianity, [Act
26:28](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#028). Paul's affectionate and elegant
address to him on this declaration, [Act
26:29](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#029). The council breaks up, and they
all pronounce him innocent, [Act
26:30-32](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#030).

[Acts 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 26:1</span></span>

Then Paul stretched forth the hand - This act, as we have already seen
on [Act 21:40](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#040), was merely to gain
attention; it was no rhetorical flourish, nor designed for one. From
knowing, partly by descriptions, and partly by ancient statues, how
orators and others who address a concourse of people stood, we can
easily conceive the attitude of St. Paul. When the right hand was
stretched out, the left remained under the cloak, which being thrown off
the right shoulder, to give the arm the fuller liberty, it then rested
on the left: under these circumstances, the hand could be stretched out
gracefully, but was confined to no one attitude, though the third and
fourth fingers were generally clenched.

[Acts 26:2](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 26:2</span></span>

I think myself happy - As if he had said, This is a peculiarly fortunate
circumstance in my favor, that I am called to make my defense before a
judge so intelligent, and so well acquainted with the laws and customs
of our country. It may be necessary just to observe that this Agrippa
was king of Trachonitis, a region which lay on the north of Palestine,
on the east side of Jordan, and south of Damascus. For his possessions,
see on [Act 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#013) (note).

[Acts 26:4](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 26:4</span></span>

My manner of life, etc. - The apostle means to state that, though born
in Tarsus, he had a regular Jewish education, having been sent up to
Jerusalem for that purpose; but at what age does not appear; probably
about twelve, for at this age the male children were probably brought to
the annual solemnities. See on [Luk
2:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#041) (note).

[Acts 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 26:5</span></span>

After the most straitest sect - That is, the Pharisees; who were reputed
the strictest in their doctrines, and in their moral practices, of all
the sects then among the Jews. The sects were the Pharisees, Sadducees,
and Essenes.

[Acts 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 26:6</span></span>

For the hope of the promise - This does not appear to mean, the hope of
the Messiah, as some have imagined, but the hope of the resurrection of
the dead, to which the apostle referred in [Act
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#006) (note), where he says to the
Jewish council, (from which the Roman governor took him), of the hope
and resurrection of the dead I am called in question: see the notes
there. And here he says, I stand and am judged for the hope of the
promise, etc., and to which, he says, [Act
26:7](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#007), the twelve tribes hope to come.
The Messiah had come, and was gone again, as Paul well knew; and what is
here meant is something which the Jews hoped to come to, or attain; not
what was to come to them; and this singular observation excludes the
Messiah from being meant. It was the resurrection of all men from the
dead which Paul's words signified; and this the Jews had been taught to
hope for, by many passages in the Old Testament. I shall only add, that
when, in the next verse, this hope of the promise is mentioned as what
the Jews did then hope, καταντηοαι, to come to, it is the very same word
which Paul, in [Phi 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#011), uses to
express the same thing: If by any means, (says he) καταντησω, I might
attain to, the resurrection of the dead. Bp. Pearce.

[Acts 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 26:8</span></span>

That God should raise the dead? - As Agrippa believed in the true God,
and knew that one of his attributes was omnipotence, he could not
believe that the resurrection of the dead was an impossible thing; and
to this belief of his the apostle appeals; and the more especially,
because the Sadducees denied the doctrine of the resurrection, though
they professed to believe in the same God. Two attributes of God stood
pledged to produce this resurrection: his truth, on which his promise
was founded; and his power, by which the thing could be easily affected,
as that power is unlimited.

Some of the best critics think this verse should be read thus: What!
should it be thought a thing incredible with you, if God should raise
the dead?

[Acts 26:10](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 26:10</span></span>

Many of the saints - From what is said in this verse, it seems that
Paul, before his conversion, was invested with much power: he imprisoned
the Christians; punished many in various synagogues; compelled them to
blaspheme - to renounce, and, perhaps, to execrate Christ, in order to
save their lives; and gave his voice, exerted all his influence and
authority, against them, in order that they might be put to death; and
from this it would seem that there were other persons put to death
besides St. Stephen, though their names are not mentioned.

[Acts 26:11](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 26:11</span></span>

Being exceedingly mad against them - Only a madman will persecute
another because of his differing from him in religious opinion; and the
fiercest persecutor is he who should be deemed the most furious madman.

Unto strange cities - Places out of the jurisdiction of the Jews, such
as Damascus, which he immediately mentions.

[Acts 26:12](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 26:12</span></span>

Whereupon as I went to Damascus - See the whole account of the
conversion of Saul of Tarsus explained at large, in the notes on [Act
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#002) (note), etc.

[Acts 26:16](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 26:16</span></span>

But rise, etc. - The particulars mentioned here, and in the two
following verses, are not given in [Act
9:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#001), nor in [Act
22:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#006), where he gives an account of
his conversion. He has detailed the different circumstances of that
important event, as he saw it necessary; and perhaps there were several
others which then took place, that he had no opportunity of mentioning,
because there was nothing in succeeding occurrences which rendered it
necessary to produce them.

To make thee a minister - Ὑπηρετην, An under-rower; that is, one who is
under the guidance and authority of another; an assistant, or servant.
So Paul was to act solely under the authority of Jesus Christ; and tug
hard at the oar, in order to bring the vessel, through the tempestuous
ocean, to the safe harbour. See the concluding observations on John 6
(note).

And a witness - Μαρτυρα, A martyr. Though this word literally means a
witness, yet we apply it only to such persons as have borne testimony to
the truth of God at the hazard and expense of their lives. In this
sense, also, ancient history states St. Paul to have been a witness; for
it is said he was beheaded at Rome, by the command of Nero.

In the which I will appear - Here Christ gives him to understand that he
should have farther communications from himself; and this may refer
either to those interpositions of Divine Providence by which he was so
often rescued from destruction, or to those encouragements which he
received in dreams, visions, trances, etc., or to that general
inspiration under which he was enabled to apprehend and reveal the
secret things of God, for the edification of the Church. To all of which
may be added that astonishing power by which he was so often enabled to
work miracles for the confirmation of the truth.

[Acts 26:17](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 26:17</span></span>

Delivering thee from the people - From the Jews - and from the Gentiles,
put here in opposition to the Jews; and both meaning mankind at large,
wheresoever the providence of God might send him. But he was to be
delivered from the malice of the Jews, that he might be sent with
salvation to the Gentiles.

[Acts 26:18](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 26:18</span></span>

To open their eyes - To be the instrument of informing their
understanding in the things of God.

To turn them from darkness to light - From heathenism and superstition
to the knowledge and worship of the true God.

From the power of Satan unto God - Της εξουσιας του Σατανα, From the
authority and domination of Satan; for as the kingdom of darkness is his
kingdom, so those who live in this darkness are under his dominion; and
he has authority and right over them. The blessed Gospel of Christ is
the means of bringing the soul from this state of spiritual darkness and
wretchedness to the light and liberty of the children of God; and thus
they are brought from under the power and authority of Satan, to be
under the power and authority of God.

That they may receive forgiveness of sins - That all their sins may be
pardoned, and their souls sanctified; for nothing less is implied in the
phrase, αφεσις ἁμαρτιων, which signifies the taking away or removal of
sins.

And inheritance - By remission of sins, i.e. the removal of the guilt
and pollution of sin, they become children of God; and, if children,
then heirs; for the children of the heavenly family shall alone possess
the heavenly estate. And as the inheritance is said to be among them
that are Sanctified, this is a farther proof that αφεσις ἁμαρτιων
signifies, not only the forgiveness of sins, but also the purification
of the heart.

By faith that is in me - By believing on Christ Jesus, as dying for
their offenses, and rising again for their justification. Thus we see
that not only this salvation comes through Christ, but that it is to be
received by faith; and, consequently, neither by the merit of works, nor
by that of suffering.

[Acts 26:19](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 26:19</span></span>

I was not disobedient unto the heavenly vision - This, O Agrippa, was
the cause of my conversion from my prejudices and mal-practices against
the doctrine of Christ. The vision was from heaven; I received it as
such, and began to preach the faith which I had before persecuted.

[Acts 26:20](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 26:20</span></span>

But showed first unto them of Damascus - He appears to have preached at
Damascus, and in the neighboring parts of Arabia Deserta, for about
three years; and afterwards he went up to Jerusalem. See [Gal
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#017), [Gal
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#018); and see the note on [Act
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#023).

That they should repent - Be deeply humbled for their past iniquities,
and turn to God as their Judge and Savior, avoiding all idolatry and all
sin; and thus do works meet for repentance; that is, show by their
conduct that they had contrite hearts, and that they sincerely sought
salvation from God alone. For the meaning of the word repentance, see
the note on [Mat 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002).

[Acts 26:21](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 26:21</span></span>

For these causes the Jews - went about to kill me - These causes may be
reduced to four heads: -

1\. He had maintained the resurrection of the dead.

2\. The resurrection of Christ, whom they had crucified and slain.

3\. That this Jesus was the promised Messiah.

4\. He had offered salvation to the Gentiles as well as to the Jews. He
does not mention the accusation of having defiled the temple, nor of
disloyalty to the Roman government; probably, because his adversaries
had abandoned these charges at his preceding trial before Festus: see
[Act 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#008); and see Calmet.

[Acts 26:22](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 26:22</span></span>

Having - obtained help of God - According to the gracious promise made
to him: see [Act 26:17](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#017).

Witnessing both to small and great - Preaching before kings, rulers,
priests, and peasants; fearing no evil, though ever surrounded with
evils; nor slackening in my duty, notwithstanding the opposition I have
met with both from Jews and Gentiles. And these continual interpositions
of God show me that I have not mistaken my call, and encourage me to go
forward in my work.

[Acts 26:23](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 26:23</span></span>

That Christ should suffer - That the Christ, or Messiah, should suffer.
This, though fully revealed in the prophets, the prejudices of the Jews
would not permit them to receive: they expected their Messiah to be a
glorious secular prince; and, to reconcile the fifty-third of Isaiah
with their system, they formed the childish notion of two Messiahs -
Messiah ben David, who should reign, conquer, and triumph; and Messiah
ben Ephraim, who should suffer and be put to death. A distinction which
has not the smallest foundation in the whole Bible.

As the apostle says he preached none other things than those which Moses
and the prophets said should come, therefore he understood that both
Moses and the prophets spoke of the resurrection of the dead, as well as
of the passion and resurrection of Christ. If this be so, the favourite
system of a learned bishop cannot be true; viz. that the doctrine of the
immortality of the soul was unknown to the ancient Jews.

That he should be the first that should rise from the dead - That is,
that he should be the first who should rise from the dead so as to die
no more; and to give, in his own person, the proof of the resurrection
of the human body, no more to return under the empire of death. In no
other sense can Jesus Christ be said to be the first that rose again
from the dead; for Elisha raised the son of the Shunammite. A dead man,
put into the sepulchre of the Prophet Elisha, was restored to life as
soon as he touched the prophet's bones. Christ himself had raised the
widow's son at Nain; and he had also raised Lazarus, and several others.
All these died again; but the human nature of our Lord was raised from
the dead, and can die no more. Thus he was the first who rose again from
the dead to return no more into the empire of death.

And should show light unto the people - Should give the true knowledge
of the law and the prophets to the Jews; for these are meant by the term
people, as in [Act 26:17](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#017). And to the
Gentiles, who had no revelation, and who sat in the valley of the shadow
of death: these also, through Christ, should be brought to the knowledge
of the truth, and be made a glorious Church, without spot, or wrinkle,
or any such thing. That the Messiah should be the light both of the Jews
and Gentiles, the prophets had clearly foretold: see [Isa
60:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001) : Arise and shine, or be
illuminated, for thy Light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen
upon thee. And again, [Isa 49:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#006) : I
will give thee for a Light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my
salvation unto the ends of the earth. With such sayings as these Agrippa
was well acquainted, from his education as a Jew.

[Acts 26:24](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 26:24</span></span>

Paul, thou art beside thyself - "Thou art mad, Paul!" "Thy great
learning hath turned thee into a madman." As we sometimes say, thou art
cracked, and thy brain is turned. By the τα πολλα γραμματα it is likely
that Festus meant no more than this, that Paul had got such a vast
variety of knowledge, that his brain was overcharged with it: for, in
this speech, Paul makes no particular show of what we call learning; for
he quotes none of their celebrated authors, as he did on other
occasions; see [Act 17:28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028). But he here
spoke of spiritual things, of which Festus, as a Roman heathen, could
have no conception; and this would lead him to conclude that Paul was
actually deranged. This is not an uncommon case with many professing
Christianity; who, when a man speaks on experimental religion, on the
life of God in the soul of man - of the knowledge of salvation, by the
remission of sins - of the witness of the Spirit, etc., etc., things
essential to that Christianity by which the soul is saved, are ready to
cry out, Thou art mad: he is an enthusiast: that is, a religious madman;
one who is not worthy to be regarded; and yet, strange to tell, these
very persons who thus cry out are surprised that Festus should have
supposed that Paul was beside himself!

[Acts 26:25](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 26:25</span></span>

I am not mad, most noble Festus - This most sensible, appropriate, and
modest answer, was the fullest proof he could give of his sound sense
and discretion. The title, ΚρατιϚε, most noble, or most excellent, which
he gives to Festus, shows at once that he was far above indulging any
sentiment of anger or displeasure at Festus, though he had called him a
madman; and it shows farther that, with the strictest conscientiousness,
even an apostle may give titles of respect to men in power, which taken
literally, imply much more than the persons deserve to whom they are
applied. ΚρατιϚος, which implies most excellent, was merely a title
which belonged to the office of Festus. St. Paul hereby acknowledges him
as the governor; while, perhaps, moral excellence of any kind could with
no propriety be attributed to him.

Speak forth the words of truth and soberness - Αληθειας και σωφροσυνης,
Words of truth and of mental soundness. The very terms used by the
apostle would at once convince Festus that he was mistaken. The
σωφροσυνη of the apostle was elegantly opposed to the μανια of the
governor: the one signifying mental derangement, the other mental
sanity. Never was an answer, on the spur of the moment, more happily
conceived.

[Acts 26:26](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 26:26</span></span>

Before whom also I speak freely - This is a farther judicious apology
for himself and his discourse. As if he had said: Conscious that the
king understands all these subjects well, being fully versed in the law
and the prophets, I have used the utmost freedom of speech, and have
mentioned the tenets of my religion in their own appropriate terms.

This thing was not done in a corner - The preaching, miracles, passion,
death, and resurrection of Jesus Christ, were most public and notorious;
and of them Agrippa could not be ignorant; and indeed it appears, from
his own answer, that he was not, but was now more fully persuaded of the
truth than ever, and almost led to embrace Christianity.

[Acts 26:27](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 26:27</span></span>

Believest thou the prophets? - Having made his elegant compliment and
vindication to Festus, he turns to Agrippa; and, with this strong appeal
to his religious feeling, says, Believest thou the prophets? and
immediately anticipates his reply, and, with great address, speaks for
him, I know that thou believest. The inference from this belief
necessarily was: "As thou believest the prophets, and I have proved that
the prophets have spoken about Christ, as suffering and, triumphing over
death, and that all they say of the Messiah has been fulfilled in Jesus
of Nazareth, then thou must acknowledge that my doctrine is true."

[Acts 26:28](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 26:28</span></span>

Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian - Εν ολιγῳ με πειθεις
ΧριϚιανον γενεσθαι. This declaration was almost the necessary
consequence of the apostle's reasoning, and Agrippa's faith. If he
believed the prophets, see [Act 26:22](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#022),
[Act 26:23](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#023), and believed that Paul's
application of their words to Christ Jesus was correct, he must
acknowledge the truth of the Christian religion; but he might choose
whether he would embrace and confess this truth, or not. However, the
sudden appeal to his religious faith extorts from him the declaration,
Thou hast nearly persuaded me to embrace Christianity. How it could have
entered into the mind of any man, who carefully considered the
circumstances of the case, to suppose that these words of Agrippa are
spoken ironically, is to me unaccountable. Every circumstance in the
case proves them to have been the genuine effusion of a heart persuaded
of the truth; and only prevented from fully acknowledging it by secular
considerations.

[Acts 26:29](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 26:29</span></span>

I would to God, etc. - Ευξαιμην αν τῳ Θεῳ, και εν ολιγῳ και εν πολλῳ -
So fully am I persuaded of the infinite excellence of Christianity, and
so truly happy am I in possession of it, that I most ardently wish that
not only thou, but this whole council, were not only almost, but
altogether, such as I am, these Chains excepted. Thus, while his heart
glows with affection for their best interests, he wishes that they might
enjoy all his blessings, if possible, without being obliged to bear any
cross on the account. His holding up his chain, which was probably now
detached from the soldier's arm, and wrapped about his own, must have
made a powerful impression on the minds of his audience. Indeed, it
appears they could bear the scene no longer; the king was overwhelmed,
and rose up instantly, and so did the rest of the council, and went
immediately aside; and, after a very short conference among themselves,
they unanimously pronounced him innocent; and his last word, των δεσμων,
Bonds! and the action with which it was accompanied, had made such a
deep impression upon their hearts that they conclude their judgment with
that very identical word δεσμων. Would to God, says the apostle, that
all who hear me this day were altogether such as I am, except these
Bonds! The whole council say - This man hath done nothing worthy of
death nor of Bonds! Δεσμων, Bonds, is echoed by them from the last words
of the apostle; as we may plainly perceive that, seeing such an innocent
and eminent man suffering such indignity had made a deep impression upon
their hearts. Alas! why should such a man be in B-O-N-D-S!

[Acts 26:32](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 26:32</span></span>

Then said Agrippa, etc. - The king himself, who had participated in the
strongest emotions on the occasion, feels himself prompted to wish the
apostle's immediate liberation; but this was now rendered impracticable,
because he had appealed to Caesar; the appeal was no doubt registered,
and the business must now proceed to a full hearing. Bp. Pearce
conjectures, with great probability, that Agrippa, on his return to
Rome, represented Paul's case so favourably to the emperor, or his
ministers of state, that he was soon set at liberty there, as may be
concluded from [Act 28:30](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#030), that he
dwelt two whole years in his own hired place; and to the same cause it
seems to have been owing that Julius, who had the care of Paul as a
prisoner in the ship, treated him courteously; see [Act
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#003), [Act
27:43](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#043). And the same may be gathered
from [Act 28:14](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#014), [Act
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#016). So that this defense of the
apostle before Agrippa, Bernice, Festus, etc., was ultimately
serviceable to his important cause.

1\. The conversion of Saul was a wonderful work of the Spirit of God;
and, as we have already seen, a strong proof of the truth of
Christianity; and the apostle himself frequently appeals to it as such.

2\. His mission to the Gentiles was as extraordinary as the calling of
the Gentiles itself. Every thing is supernatural in a work of grace;
for, because nature cannot produce the effects, the grace of God, which
implies the co-operation of his omniscience, omnipotence, and endless
mercy, undertakes to perform the otherwise impossible task.

3\. From the commission of St. Paul, we see the state in which the
Gentile world was, previously to the preaching of the Gospel.

1\. Their eyes are represented as closed; their understanding was
darkened; and they had no right apprehension of spiritual or eternal
things.

2\. They were in a state of darkness; living without the knowledge of
the true God, in a region where nothing but ignorance prevailed.

3\. They were under the dominion and authority of Satan; they were his
vassals, and he claimed them as his right.

4\. They were in a state of guiltiness; living, in almost every respect,
in opposition to the dictates even of nature itself.

5\. They were polluted; not only irregular and abominable in their
lives, but also impure and unholy in their hearts. Thus far their state.

Behold what the grace of the Gospel is to do for these Gentiles, in
order to redeem them from this state: -

1\. It opens their eyes; gives them an understanding, whereby they may
discern the truth; and, without this illumination from above, the truth
of God can never be properly apprehended.

2\. It turns them from the darkness to the light; a fine metaphor, taken
from the act of a blind man, who is continually turning his eyes towards
the light, and rolling his eyes upwards towards the sun, and in all
directions, that he may collect as many of the scattered rays as he can,
in order to form distinct vision. In this way the Gentiles appeared to
be, in vain, searching after the light, till the Gospel came, and turned
their eyes to the Sun of righteousness.

3\. They are brought from under the bondage and slavery of sin and
Satan, to be put under the obedience of Jesus Christ. So that Christ and
his grace as truly and as fully rule and govern them as sin and Satan
did formerly. This is a proof that the change is not by might, nor by
power, but by the Spirit of the Lord.

4\. He pardons their sin, so that they are no longer liable to endless
perdition.

5\. He sanctifies their nature, so that they are capable of loving and
serving him fervently with pure hearts; and are thus rendered fit for
the enjoyment of the inheritance among the saints in light.

Such a salvation, from such a bondage, does the Gospel of Christ offer
to the Gentiles - to a lost world. It is with extreme difficulty that
any person can be persuaded that he needs a similar work of grace on his
heart to that which was necessary for the conversion of the Gentiles. We
may rest assured that no man is a Christian merely by birth or
education. If Christianity implies the life of God in the soul of man -
the remission of sins - the thorough purification of the heart,
producing that holiness without which none can see the Lord, then it is
evident that God alone can do this work, and that neither birth nor
education can bestow it. By birth, every man is sinful; by practice,
every man is a transgressor; for all have sinned. God alone, by faith in
Christ Jesus, can save the sinner from his sins. Reader, has God saved
thee from this state of wretchedness, and brought thee "into the
glorious liberty of his children?" Let thy conscience answer for itself.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 27](act027)

</div>
