<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act008)  [Next](act010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 9:0</span></span>

Saul, bent on the destruction of the Christians, obtains letters from
the high priest, authorizing him to seize those whom he should find at
Damascus, and bring them bound to Jerusalem, [Act
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#001), [Act
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#002). On his way to Damascus, he has a
Divine vision, is convinced of his sin and folly, is struck blind, and
remains three days without sight, and neither eats nor drinks, [Act
9:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#003). Ananias, a disciple, is
commanded in a vision to go and speak to Saul, and restore his sight,
[Act 9:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#010). Ananias goes and lays
his hands on him, and he receives his sight, and is baptized, [Act
9:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#017). Saul, having spent a few days
with the Christians at Damascus, goes to the synagogues, proclaims
Christ, and confounds the Jews, [Act
9:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#020). The Jews lay wait to kill
him, but the disciples let him down over the walls of the city in a
basket, by night, and he escapes to Jerusalem, [Act
9:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#023). Having wished to associate
with the disciples there, they avoid him; but Barnabas takes and brings
him to the apostles, and declares his conversion, [Act
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#026), [Act
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#027). He continues in Jerusalem
preaching Christ, and arguing with the Hellenistic Jews, who endeavor to
slay him; but the disciples take him to Caesarea, and send him thence to
his own city Tarsus, [Act 9:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#028).
About this time, the Churches, being freed from persecution, are edified
and multiplied, [Act 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#031). Peter heals
Eneas at Lydda, who had been afflicted with the palsy eight years: in
consequence of which miracle, all the people of Lydda and Saron are
converted, [Act 9:32-35](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#032). Account of
the sickness and death of a Christian woman named Tabitha, who dwelt at
Joppa; and her miraculous restoration to life by the ministry of Peter,
[Act 9:36-41](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#036). Gracious effects
produced among the inhabitants of Lydda by this miracle, [Act
9:42](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#042), [Act
9:43](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#043).

[Acts 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 9:1</span></span>

Saul, yet breathing out threatenings and slaughter - The original text
is very emphatic, ετι εμπνεων απειλης και φονου, and points out how
determinate Saul was to pursue and accomplish his fell purpose of
totally destroying the infant Church of Christ. The mode of speech
introduced above is very frequent in the Greek writers, who often
express any vehement and hostile affection of the mind by the verb
πνεειν, to breathe, to pant; so Theocritus, Idyll. xxii. ver. 82:

Ες μεσσον συναγον, φονον αλλαλοισι πνεοντες.

They came into the assembly, breathing mutual slaughter.

Euripides has the same form, πυρ πνεουσα και φονον, breathing out fire,
and slaughter, Iphig. in Taur.

And Aristophanes more fully, referring to all the preparations for war:
-

Αλλα πνεοντας δορυ και λογχας και λευκολοφους τρυφαλειας,

Και πηληκας, και κνημιδας, και θυμους ἑπταβοειους.

They breathed spears, and pikes, and helmets, and crests, and greaves,
and the fury of redoubted heroes.

The figure is a favourite one with Homer: hence μενεα πνειοντες Αβαντες,
the Abantes breathing strength. - Il. ii. 536. And how frequently he
speaks of his fierce countrymen as, μενεα πνειοντες Αχαιοι, the Greeks
breathing strength, see Il. iii. 8; xi. 508; xxiv. 364, which phrase an
old Scholiast interprets, being filled with strength and fury. St. Luke,
who was master of the Greek tongue, chose such terms as best expressed a
heart desperately and incessantly bent on accomplishing the destruction
of the objects of its resentment. Such at this time was the heart of
Saul of Tarsus; and it had already given full proof of its malignity,
not only in the martyrdom of Stephen, but also in making havoc of the
Church, and in forcibly entering every house, and dragging men and
women, whom he suspected of Christianity, and committing them to prison.
See [Act 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#003).

Went unto the high priest - As the high priest was chief in all matters
of an ecclesiastical nature, and the present business was pretendedly
religious, he was the proper person to apply to for letters by which
this virulent persecutor might be accredited. The letters must
necessarily be granted in the name of the whole Sanhedrin, of which
Gamaliel, Saul's master, was at that time the head; but the high priest
was the proper organ through whom this business might be negotiated.

[Acts 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 9:2</span></span>

Letters to Damascus to the synagogues - Damascus, anciently called דמסק
Damask, and דרמסק Darmask, was once the metropolis of all Syria. It was
situated at fifty miles' distance from the sea; from which it is
separated by lofty mountains. It is washed by two rivers, Amara or
Abara, which ran through it, and Pharpar, called by the Greeks
Chrysorrhoas, the golden stream, which ran on the outside of its walls.
It is one of the most ancient cities in the world, for it existed in the
time of Abraham, [Gen 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#015); and how
long before is not known. The city of Damascus is at present a place of
considerable trade, owing to its being the rendezvous for all the
pilgrims from the north of Asia, on their road to and from the temple of
Mecca. It is surrounded with pretty strong walls, which have nine gates,
and is between four and five miles in circumference. It contains about
100,000 inhabitants, some say more, the principal part of whom are Arabs
and Turks, with whom live, in a state of considerable degradation, about
15,000 Christians. Damascus, like other places of importance, has passed
through the hands of many masters. It was captured and ruined by Tiglath
Pileser, who carried away its inhabitants to Kin, beyond the Euphrates,
about 740 years before the Christian era; and thus was fulfilled the
prophecy of Isaiah, [Isa 17:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#001), and
that of Amos, [Amo 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#004), [Amo
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#005). It was also taken by Sennacherib,
and by the generals of Alexander the Great. Metellus and Laelius seized
it, during the war of Pompey with Tigranes; before Christ 65. It
continued under the dominion of the Romans till the Saracens took
possession of it, in a.d. 634. It was besieged and taken by Teemour
lenk, a.d. 1400, who put all the inhabitants to the sword. The Egyptian
Mamelukes repaired Damascus when they took possession of Syria; but the
Turkish Emperor Selim having defeated them at the battle of Aleppo in
1516, Damascus was brought under the government of the Turks, and in
their hands it still remains. In the time of St. Paul it was governed by
Aretas, whose father, Obodas, had been governor of it under Augustus.
Damascus is 112 miles south of Antioch; 130 N.N.E. of Jerusalem; and 270
S.S.W; of Diarbek. Longitude 37 east: latitude 33 45' north. The fruit
tree called the Damascene, vulgarly Damazon, and the flower called the
Damask rose, were transplanted from Damascus to the gardens of Europe;
and the silks and linens, known by the name of Damasks, were probably
first manufactured by the inhabitants of this ancient city.

Any of this way - That is, this religion, for so דרך derec in Hebrew,
and ὁδος, hodos, in Hellenistic Greek, are often to be understood. דרך
יהוה derec Yehovah, the way of the Lord, implies the whole of the
worship due to him, and prescribed by himself: the way or path in which
he wills men to walk, that they may get safely through life, and finally
attain everlasting felicity. The Jewish writers designate the whole
doctrine and practice of Christianity by a similar expression, דרך
הנוצרים derec hanotsarim, the way, doctrine, or sect of the Christians.

Whether they were men or women - Provided they were Jews; for no
converts had as yet been made among the Gentiles; nor did the power of
the high priest and Sanhedrin extend to any but those who belonged to
the synagogues. Pearce.

In every country where there were Jews and synagogues, the power and
authority of the Sanhedrin and high priest were acknowledged: just as
papists in all countries acknowledge the authority of the pope. And as
there can be but one pope, and one conclave, so there could be but one
high priest, and one Sanhedrin; and this is the reason why the high
priest and sanhedrin at Jerusalem had authority over all Jews, even in
the most distant countries.

[Acts 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 9:3</span></span>

Suddenly there shined round about him - This might have been an
extraordinary flash of the electric fluid, accompanied with thunder,
with which God chose to astonish and confound Saul and his company; but
so modified it as to prevent it from striking them dead. Thunder would
naturally follow such a large quantity of this fluid as appears to have
been disengaged at this time; and out of this thunder, or immediately
after it, Christ spoke in an awful and distinct voice, which appears to
have been understood by Saul only.

[Acts 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 9:4</span></span>

And he fell to the earth - Being struck down with the lightning: many
persons suppose he was on horseback, and painters thus represent him;
but this is utterly without foundation. Painters are, in almost every
case, wretched commentators.

[Acts 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 9:5</span></span>

Who art thou, Lord? - Τις ει, Κυριε; Who art thou, Sir? He had no
knowledge who it was that addressed him, and would only use the term
Κυριε, as any Roman or Greek would, merely as a term of civil respect.

I am Jesus whom thou persecutest - "Thy enmity is against me and my
religion; and the injuries which thou dost to my followers I consider as
done to myself." The following words, making twenty in the original, and
thirty in our version, are found in no Greek MS. The words are, It is
hard for thee to kick against the pricks: and he trembling and
astonished said, Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? and the Lord said
unto him. It is not very easy to account for such a large addition,
which is not only not found in any Greek MS. yet discovered, but is
wanting in the Itala, Erpen's Arabic, the Syriac, Coptic, Sahidic, and
most of the Slavonian. It is found in the Vulgate, one of the Arabic,
the Ethiopic, and Armenian; and was probably borrowed from [Act
26:14](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#014), and some marginal notes. It is
wanting also in the Complutensian edition, and in that of Bengel.
Griesbach also leaves it out of the text.

It is hard for thee, etc. - Σκληρον σοι προς κεντρα λακτιζειν. This is a
proverbial expression, which exists, not only in substance, but even in
so many words, both in the Greek and Latin writers. Κεντρον, kentron,
signifies an ox goad, a piece of pointed iron stuck in the end of a
stick, with which the ox is urged on when drawing the plough. The origin
of the proverb seems to have been this: sometimes it happens that a
restive or stubborn ox kicks back against the goad, and thus wounds
himself more deeply: hence it has become a proverb to signify the
fruitlessness and absurdity of rebelling against lawful authority, and
the getting into greater difficulties by endeavoring to avoid trifling
sufferings. So the proverb, Incidit in Scyllam qui vult vitare
Charybdim. Out of the cauldron into the fire. "Out of bad into worse."
The saying exists, almost in the apostolic form, in the following
writers. Euripides, in Bacch. ver. 793: -

Θυοιμ' αν αυτῳ μαλλον, η θυμουμενος

Προς κεντρα λακτιζοιμι, θνητος ων, Θεῳ.

"I, who am a frail mortal, should rather sacrifice to him who is a God,
than, by giving place to anger, kick against the goads."

And Aeschylus, in Agamemnon, ver. 1633: -

Προς κεντρα μη λακτιζε.

Kick not against the goads.

And again in Prometh. Vinct. ver. 323: -

Προς κεντρα κωλον εκτενεις, ὁρων ὁτι

Τραχυς μοναρχος ουδ' ὑπευθυνος κρατει.

"Thou stretchest out thy foot against goads, seeing the fierce monarch
governs according to his own will."

Resistance is of no use: the more thou dost rebel, the more keenly thou
shalt suffer. See the Scholiast here.

Pindar has a similar expression, Pyth. ii. ver. 171-5: -

Φερειν δ' ελαφρως

Επαυχενιον λαβοντα

Ζυγον γ' αρηγει. Ποτι κεντρον δε τοι

Λακτιζεμεν, τελεθει

Ολισθηρος οιμος.

"It is profitable to bear willingly the assumed yoke.

To kick against the goad is pernicious conduct."

Where see the Scholiast, who shows that "it is ridiculous for a man to
fight with fortune: for if the unruly ox, from whom the metaphor is
taken, kick against the goad, he shall suffer still more grievously."
Terence uses the same figure. Phorm. Act i. scen. 2, ver. 27: -

Venere in mentem mihi istaec: nam inscitia est,

Adversum stimulum calces. - "

These things have come to my recollection, for it is foolishness for
thee to kick against a goad."

Ovid has the same idea in other words, Trist. lib. ii. ver. 15: -

At nunc (tanta meo comes est insania morbo)

Saxa malum refero rursus ad icta pedem.

Scilicet et victus repetit gladiator arenam;

Et redit in tumidas naufraga puppis aquas.

But madly now I wound myself alone,

Dashing my injured foot against the stone:

So to the wide arena, wild with pain,

The vanquish'd gladiator hastes again;

So the poor shatter'd bark the tempest braves,

Launching once more into the swelling waves.

Intelligent men, in all countries and in all ages of the world, have
seen and acknowledged the folly and wickedness of fighting against God;
of murmuring at the dispensations of his providence; of being impatient
under affliction; and of opposing the purposes of his justice and mercy.
The words contain a universal lesson, and teach us patience under
affliction, and subjection to the sovereign will of God; and they
especially show the desperate wickedness of endeavoring, by persecution,
to hinder the dissemination of the truth of God in the earth. He that
kicks against this goad does it at the risk of his final salvation. The
fable of the viper and the file is another illustration of this proverb:
it gnawed and licked the file, till it destroyed its teeth and wasted
away its tongue. The maxim in the proverb should be early inculcated on
the minds of children and scholars; when chastised for their faults,
resistance and stubbornness produce increased coercion and chastisement.
And let parents and masters learn that the oft-repeated use of the goad
and ferula seldom tend to reclaim, but beget obduracy and desperation.
The advice of Columella to the ploughman, having some relation to the
proverb in the text, and a strong bearing on this latter part of the
subject, is worthy of the most serious regard: "Voce potius quam
verberibus terreat: ultimaque sint opus recusantibus remedia plagae.
Nunquam stimulo lacessat juvencum, quod retrectantem calcitrosumque eum
reddit: nonnunquam tamen admoneat flagello." Columella, De Re Rustica,
lib. ii. cap. 2, in fine. "Let the husbandman intimidate his oxen more
by his voice than by blows, to which he should never have recourse but
in extreme cases. A young steer should never be goaded, for this will
induce him to kick and run back; but on proper occasions the whip, as an
incentive to activity, may be profitably used." In reference to the same
subject, which all concerned should feel to be of the greatest
importance I shall close with the advice of one greater than the Roman
agriculturist: Fathers, provoke not your children to anger, lest they be
discouraged, [Col 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#021); but bring them
up (εν παιδειᾳ και νουθεσιᾳ Κυριου) in the discipline and admonition of
the Lord, [Eph 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#004), using the
authority that God has given you with a steady hand, actuated by a
tender and feeling heart.

[Acts 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 9:6</span></span>

Trembling - Under a strong apprehension of meeting the judgment he
deserved.

And astonished - At the light, the thunder, and the voice.

Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? - The word Κυριε, Lord, is here to
be understood in its proper sense, as expressing authority and dominion:
in the 5th verse it appears to be equivalent to our word sir.

The pride of the Pharisee is now brought down to the dust; and the fury
of the persecutor is not only restrained, but the lion becomes a lamb.
What wilt thou have me to do? Wilt thou condescend to employ me among
thy meanest servants?

Go into the city, and it shall be told thee, etc. - Jesus could have
informed him at once what was his will concerning him; but he chose to
make one of those very disciples whom he was going to bring in bonds to
Jerusalem the means of his salvation:

1\. To show that God will help man by man, that they may learn to love
and respect each other.

2\. That in the benevolence of Ananias he might see the spirit and
tendency of that religion which he was persecuting, and of which he was
shortly to become an apostle.

[Acts 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 9:7</span></span>

Stood speechless, hearing a voice, but seeing no man - The men were
εννεοι, stupified, hearing της φωνης, the voice or thunder, but not
distinguishing the words, which were addressed to Saul alone; and which
were spoken out of the thunder, or in a small, still voice, after the
peal had ceased. The remarkable case, [Kg1
19:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#011), may serve to illustrate that
before us. And he said, Go forth, and stand upon the mount before the
Lord; and the Lord passed by, and a great and strong wind rent the
mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks before the Lard; and after the
wind an earthquake; and after the earthquake a fire; and after the fire
a still small voice; and when Elijah heard it, he wrapped his face in
his mantle, and went out, and stood in the entering in of the cave, and
behold, there came a voice unto him, and said, What Dost Thou Here,
Elijah! The thunder must have been heard by all; the small, still voice
by Saul alone. This consideration amply reconciles the passage in the
text with that in [Act 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#009), where
Paul says, They that were with me saw the light and were afraid, but
they heard not the voice of him that spoke with one. They had heard the
thunder which followed the escape of the lightning, but they heard not
the voice of him that spake to Saul; they did not hear the words, I am
Jesus whom thou persecutest, etc.; but they saw and heard enough to
convince them that the whole was supernatural; for they were all struck
down to the earth with the splendor of the light, and the sound of the
thunder, which I suppose took place on this occasion. It has been a
question among divines, whether Jesus Christ did really appear to Saul
on this occasion. The arguments against the real appearance are not
strong. St. Luke tells us that those who were with him heard the voice,
but they saw no man; which is a strong intimation that he saw what they
did not. Ananias, it seems, was informed that there had been a real
appearance, for, in addressing Saul, [Act
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#017), he says, The Lord Jesus that
Appeared unto Thee in the way as thou camest, etc. And Barnabas
intimates thus much, when he brought him before the apostles at
Jerusalem, for he declared unto them how he had Seen the Lord in the
way, and that he had spoken unto him; and, [Act
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#014), where the discourse of Ananias
is given more at large, he says, The God of our fathers hath chosen thee
that thou shouldest know his will, and See that Just One, and shouldest
Hear the voice of his mouth; so we find that hearing the voice, or words
of his mouth, was not what is called the appearance; for, besides this,
there was an actual manifestation of the person of Christ. But St.
Paul's own words, [Co1 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#001), put the
subject out of dispute: Am I not an apostle? Am I not free? Have I Not
Seen Jesus Christ Our Lord? To which may be added, [Co1
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#008), And last of all, He Was Seen of
Me Also, as of one born out of due time.

[Acts 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 9:8</span></span>

When his eyes were opened, he saw no man - Instead of ουδενα, no man,
the Codex Alexandrinus, the Syriac, Vulgate, and some others, have ουδεν
nothing. He not only saw no man, but he saw nothing, being quite blind;
and therefore was led by the hand to Damascus, μη βλεπων, being without
sight.

[Acts 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 9:9</span></span>

Neither did eat nor drink - The anxiety of his mind and the anguish of
his heart were so great that he had no appetite for food; and he
continued in total darkness and without food for three days, till
Ananias proclaimed salvation to him in the name of the Lord Jesus.

[Acts 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 9:10</span></span>

A certain disciple - named Ananias - A general opinion has prevailed in
the Greek Church that this Ananias was one of the seventy-two disciples,
and that he was martyred; and they celebrate his martyrdom on the first
of October. It has been farther stated that his house was turned into a
church, which remains to the present day, though now occupied as a
Turkish mosque; but even the Mohammedans have the tradition, and treat
his memory with great respect. However this may be, from [Act
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#012), we learn, what is of more
importance, that he was a devout man according to the law, having a good
report of all the Jews that dwelt there. See on [Act
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#017) (note).

To him said the Lord in a vision - Εν ὁραματι, In a strong impression
made upon his mind, which left no doubt concerning its heavenly origin,
nor of the truth of the things represented by it. It is very probable
that the whole took place in a dream.

[Acts 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 9:11</span></span>

Arise, and go into the street which is called Straight - How very
particular is this direction! And it was necessary that it should be so,
that he might see the whole to be a Divine communication; the house was
probably one in which Saul was accustomed to reside when at Damascus;
and where he was known as a native of Tarsus.

Tarsus was a city of Cilicia, seated on the Cydnus, and now called
Tarasso. It was, at one period, the capital of all Cilicia, and became a
rival to Alexandria and Athens in the arts and sciences. The
inhabitants, in the time of Julius Caesar, having shown themselves
friendly to the Romans, were endowed with all the privileges of Roman
citizens; and it was on this account that St. Paul claimed the rights of
a Roman citizen; a circumstance which, on different occasions, was to
him, and the cause in which he was engaged, of considerable service.

Behold, he prayeth - He is earnestly seeking to know my will, and to
find the salvation of his soul; therefore, go speedily, and direct him.
Some have laid needless stress on these words, as if they intimated,
that "though Saul as a Pharisee had often said his prayers, yet he had
never prayed them till now." This is not correct: he could himself
testify that, while he was a Pharisee, he had lived in all good
conscience towards God; and consequently, in that time, made many
faithful and fervent prayers; but he was praying now for instruction,
and his prayers were speedily answered.

[Acts 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 9:12</span></span>

Hath seen in a vision - While God prepares Ananias, by a vision, to go
and minister to Saul, he at the same time prepares Saul, by another
vision, to profit by this ministry.

[Acts 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 9:13</span></span>

Lord, I have heard by many of this man - This was all done in a dream,
else this sort of reasoning with his Maker would have been intolerable
in Ananias. Saul had been a notorious persecutor; many could testify of
his outrageous acts against the poor followers of Christ.

Thy saints - That is, the Christians, or followers of Christ. Ἁγιοι
signifies not only holy persons, but also consecrated persons; from α,
negative, and γη, the earth; persons who are separated from all earthly
uses, and consecrated to the service of God alone.

[Acts 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 9:14</span></span>

And here he hath authority, etc. - Ananias had undoubtedly heard of
Saul's coming, and the commission he had received from the chief
priests; and he was about to urge this as a reason why he should have no
connection with so dangerous a man.

[Acts 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 9:15</span></span>

Go thy way - He was thus prevented from going farther in his reasoning
on this subject.

He is a chosen vessel unto me - The word σκευος in Greek, and כלי Keley
in Hebrew, though they literally signify a vessel, yet they are both
used to signify any kind of instrument, or the means by which an act is
done. In the Tract. Sohar Exod. fol. 87, on these words of Boaz to Ruth,
[Rut 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#009), When thou art athirst, go
unto the vessels and drink, etc., there are these remarkable words. "כלי
keley, vessels; that is, the righteous, who are called the vessels or
instruments of Jehovah; for it is decreed that the whole world shall
bring gifts to the King Messiah; and these are the vessels of the Lord:
vessels, I say, which the holy and blessed God uses, although they be
brittle; but they are brittle only in this world, that they may
establish the law and the worship with which the holy and blessed God is
worshipped in this world; neither can this ministry be exercised but by
vessels or instruments."

This mode of speech was common also among the Greek and Roman writers.
So Polybius, speaking of Damocles, Excerpta, vol. iii. lib. 13, \[Edit.
Ernesti\], says, Ην ὑπηρετικον σκευος, και πολλας εχων εφορμας εις
πραγματων οικονομιαν. "He was a useful instrument, and fit for the
management of affairs." We find Paul, in [Th1
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#004), using the same word, σκευος, for
the body, agreeable to the expression of Lucretius, iii. 441, Corpus,
quod Vas quasi constitit ejus. "The Body, which is the Vessel or
instrument of the soul." See Bp. Pearce on this passage.

Chosen vessel. - Σκευος εκλογης is properly a Hebraism, for an excellent
or well-adapted instrument. Every reader of the Bible must have noticed
how often the word chosen is used there to signify excelling or eminent:
so we use the word choice, "choice men," eminent persons; "choice
things," excellent articles. So in [Jer
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#007) : They shall cut down the choice
cedars, וכרתו מבחר ארזיך vecaretu Mibchar arazeyca; και εκκοψουσι τας
εκλεκτας κεδρους σου, Sept. They shall cut the most Excellent of thy
cedars; or thy cedar trees, which are the most excellent of their kind,
they will cut down. Whoever considers the character of St. Paul, his
education, attainments in natural knowledge, the distinguished part he
took - first against Christianity, and afterwards, on the fullest
conviction, the part he took in its favor - will at once perceive how
well he was every way qualified for the great work to which God had
called him.

To bear my name before the Gentiles - To carry the ensign of the cross
among the Greeks and Romans; and, by the demonstration of the Spirit, to
confound their wisdom and learning, and prove that neither salvation nor
happiness could be found in any other. Hence he was emphatically called,
the apostle of the Gentiles, [Ti1 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#007);
[Ti2 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#011). See also [Gal
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#007), [Gal
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#008), and [Eph
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#008).

[Acts 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 9:16</span></span>

How great things he must suffer - Instead of proceeding as a persecutor,
and inflicting sufferings on others, I will show him how many things he
himself must suffer for preaching that very doctrine which he has been
hitherto employed in persecuting. Strange change indeed! And with great
show of reason, as with incontrovertible strength of argument, has a
noble writer, Lord Lyttleton, adduced the conversion of Saul of Tarsus,
and his subsequent conduct, as an irrefragable proof of the truth of
Christianity.

Some think that the words, I will show him, etc., refer to a visionary
representation, which Christ was immediately to give Saul, of the trials
and difficulties which he should have to encounter; as also of that
death by which he should seal his testimony to the truth. If so, what a
most thorough conviction must Saul have had of the truth of
Christianity, cheerfully and deliberately to give up all worldly honors
and profits, and go forward in a work which he knew a violent death was
to terminate!

[Acts 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 9:17</span></span>

Brother Saul - As he found that the Head of the Church had adopted Saul
into the heavenly family, he made no scruple to give him the right hand
of fellowship, and therefore said, Brother Saul.

The Lord, even Jesus - Of what use is this intrusive word even here? It
injures the sense. St. Luke never wrote it; and our translators should
not have inserted it. The Lord Jesus, the sovereign Jesus who appeared
unto thee in the way, hath sent me, that thou mightest receive thy
sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost. Christ could have cured him so
miraculously by his own power, without human means, as he had
enlightened his heart without them; but he will honor man by making him
his agent, even in working miracles.

And be filled with the Holy Ghost - So it appears that the Holy Spirit
was given to him at this time, and probably by the imposition of the
hands of Ananias. To say that it would be degrading to an apostle to
receive the Holy Ghost by means of one who was not an apostle is a very
flimsy argument against the evidence which the text affords that Saul
did receive this Spirit by the ministry of Ananias: besides, Saul was
not an apostle at this time; he was not even a Christian; and the Holy
Ghost, which he received now, was given more to make him a thorough
Christian convert than to make him an apostle. No person will deny that
he was baptized by Ananias; and certainly there was as strong an
objection against an apostle receiving baptism from one who was not an
apostle as there could be in receiving the Holy Spirit from such a
person. It is very likely that Ananias was either one of the seventy
disciples commissioned by Jesus Christ himself, or one of those who had
been converted on the day of pentecost. If he were the former, any
authority that man could have he had. But who was the instrument is a
matter of little importance; as the apostleship, and the grace by which
it was to be fulfilled, came immediately from Jesus Christ himself. Nor
has there ever been an apostle, nor a legitimate successor of an
apostle, that was not made such by Christ himself. If we consider the
authority as coming by man, or through any description of men, we should
be arrested and confounded by the difficult question, Who baptized the
apostles? Jesus Christ baptized no man, [Joh
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#002). Who then baptized Peter! Can the
Roman conclave answer this question? I trow not. It would be as
difficult to answer it as to prove Peter's supremacy. We have no
evidence who baptized the apostles, who themselves baptized so many
others. The truth is, none but Christ ever made an apostle; and none but
himself can make and qualify a Christian minister.

[Acts 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 9:18</span></span>

There fell from his eyes as it had been scales - This was real: he had
been so dazzled with the brightness of the light that we may suppose the
globe of the eye, and particularly the cornea, had suffered considerable
injury. The structure of the cornea was doubtless much disturbed, and
the whole of that humor would be rendered opaque, and incapable of
permitting the rays of light to pass through the different humours to
the retina, where all the images of things transmitted through the
lenses, or humours, are distinctly painted. In the miraculous cure the
membrane was restored to its primitive state, and the opaque matter
separated from the cornea, in the form of thin laminae or scales. This
being done, the light would have as free a passage as formerly, and the
result would be distinct vision.

And arose, and was baptized - That he was baptized by Ananias there is
every reason to believe; as he appears to have been the chief Christian
at Damascus. As baptism implied, in an adult, the public profession of
that faith into which he was baptized, this baptism of Saul proved, at
once, his own sincerity, and the deep and thorough conviction he had of
the truth of Christianity.

[Acts 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 9:19</span></span>

When he had received meat, he was strengthened - His mind must have been
greatly worn down under his three days' conviction of sin, and the awful
uncertainty he was in concerning his state; but when he was baptized,
and had received the Holy Ghost, his soul was Divinely invigorated; and
now, by taking food, his bodily strength, greatly exhausted by three
days' fasting, was renewed also. The body is not supported by the bread
of life, nor the soul by the bread that perisheth: each must have its
proper aliment, that the whole man may be invigorated, and be enabled to
perform all the functions of the animal and spiritual life with
propriety and effect.

Then was Saul certain days with the disciples - Doubtless under
instructions, relative to the doctrines of Christianity; which he must
learn particularly, in order to preach them successfully. His miraculous
conversion did not imply that he must then have a consummate knowledge
of every Christian doctrine. To this day we find that even the genuine
Christian convert has a thousand things to learn; and for his
instruction he is placed in the Church of Christ, where he is built up
on his most holy faith by the ministry and experience of the disciples.
Without the communion of saints, who is likely to make a steady and
consistent Christian; even though his conversion should have been the
most sincere and the most remarkable?

[Acts 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 9:20</span></span>

Preached Christ in the synagogues - Instead of ΧριϚον, Christ, Ιησουν,
Jesus, is the reading of ABCE, several others of high importance,
together with the Syriac, Coptic, Ethiopic, Armenian, Slavonic, and
Vulgate.

The great question to be determined, for the conviction of the Jews, was
that Jesus was the Son of God. That the Christ, or Messiah, was to be
the Son of God, they all believed. Saul was now convinced that Jesus,
whom they had crucified, and who had appeared to him on the way, was the
Son of God, or Messiah; and therefore as such he proclaimed him. The
word Christ should be changed for Jesus, as the latter is, without
doubt, the genuine reading.

The first offers of the grace of the Gospel were uniformly made to the
Jews. Saul did not at first offer Jesus to the heathens at Damascus; but
to the synagogues of the Jews.

[Acts 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 9:21</span></span>

Is not this he that destroyed them - Ὁ πορθησας. The verb πορθειν has
three acceptations in the Greek writers:

1\. To treat one as an enemy, to spoil him of his goods.

2\. To lead away captive, to imprison.

3\. To slay.

Paul was properly πορθων, a destroyer, in all these senses.

1\. He acted as the most determined enemy of the Christians: Being
exceedingly mad against them, he persecuted them to strange cities, [Act
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#011).

2\. He shut up many of the saints in prison, [Act
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#003); [Act
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#014); [Act
26:10](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#010).

3\. He persecuted them unto death - gave his voice against them that
they might be destroyed, and was a principal instrument in the martyrdom
of Stephen. He breathed threatenings and slaughter. See [Act
7:58](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#058); [Act
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#001); [Act
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#001); [Act
26:10](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#010), [Act
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#011).

Therefore these three meanings of the original word are all exemplified
in the conduct of Saul.

[Acts 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 9:22</span></span>

Confounded the Jews - Συνεχυνε, Overwhelmed them so with his arguments
that they were obliged to blush for the weakness of their own cause.

Proving that this - Οὑτος, This person, viz. Jesus, is very Christ; εϚιν
ὁ ΧριϚος, Is the Christ, or Messiah. See on [Act
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#021) (note).

[Acts 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 9:23</span></span>

And after that many days were fulfilled - What follows relates to
transactions which took place about three years after his conversion,
when he had come a second time to Damascus, after having been in Arabia.
See [Gal 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#017), [Gal
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#018). What he did in Arabia we know
not; he probably preached Christ in different Jewish synagogues; but
with what fruit we are not told. St. Luke, who could not have been
ignorant of this part of his history, passes it over in silence; and any
assertion, at this distance of time, Relative to his employment in
Arabia for those three years, must be both foolish and impertinent.

[Acts 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 9:24</span></span>

They watched the gates day and night to kill him - At this time Damascus
was under the government of Aretas, king of Arabia, who was now at war
with Herod, his son-in-law, who had put away his daughter in order to
marry Herodias, his brother Philip's wife. As Herod was supported by the
Romans, Saul's enemies might intimate that he was in league with them or
Herod; and, as the gates of the city were constantly watched and shut,
that no spy might enter, and no fugitive get away, they thought it would
be easy to apprehend him; and doubtless got orders for the different
officers at the gates to be on the look-out that he might not be
permitted to escape.

[Acts 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 9:25</span></span>

Let him down, by the wall - Favoured, probably, by a house built against
or upon the wall, through the window of which they could lower him in a
basket; and by this means he made his escape. His escape was something
similar to that of the spies at Jericho, [Jos
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#015).

[Acts 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 9:26</span></span>

He assayed to join himself to the disciples - Επειρατο κολλασθαι, He
endeavored to get closely united to them, to be in religious fellowship
with them.

Believed not that he was a disciple - They did not suppose it possible
that such a person could be converted to the faith of Christ. The full
power of Divine grace, in the conversion of the soul, was not yet
completely known.

[Acts 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 9:27</span></span>

Barnabas - brought him to the apostles - That is, to Peter and James;
for others of the apostles he saw none, [Gal
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#019). It appears that he went up at
this time to Jerusalem merely to see Peter, with whom he abode fifteen
days, [Gal 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#018). How it came that the
apostles and Church at Jerusalem had not heard of Saul's conversion,
which had taken place three years before, is not easy to be accounted
for. The following considerations may help;

1\. It is certain that intelligence did not travel speedily in those
primitive times; there were few open roads, and no regular posts, except
those between military stations.

2\. Though there were many Jews in Damascus, and several Christians, yet
the city was heathen, and under a heathen king, with whom the Jews at
Jerusalem could have little commerce.

3\. Though Herod had married the daughter of Aretas, yet, as he had put
her away, there were great animosities between the two courts, which at
last broke out into an open war; this must have prevented all social and
commercial intercourse.

4\. The Christians were at that time greatly persecuted by the Jews, and
therefore the few that dwelt at Damascus could have little connection,
if any, with their brethren at Jerusalem.

5\. It might be the interest of the Jews at Jerusalem, supposing they
had heard of it, to keep the fact of Saul's conversion as quiet as
possible, that the Christian cause might not gain credit by it.

6\. They might have heard of his conversion; but either did not fully
credit what they had heard, or were not satisfied that the person who
now presented himself was the man; for it is not likely that all the
Christians at Jerusalem had been personally acquainted with Saul.

[Acts 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 9:28</span></span>

He was with them coming in and going out - Freely conversing and
associating with them; but this seems to have continued only fifteen
days. See [Gal 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#018).

[Acts 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 9:29</span></span>

Disputed against the Grecians - That is, the Hellenistic Jews, viz.
those who lived in Grecian cities, spoke the Greek language, and used
the Septuagint version for their scriptures. And thus the Syriac version
has interpreted this place. See the note on [Act
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001), where this subject is largely
explained.

[Acts 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 9:30</span></span>

They brought him down to Caesarea - Calmet contends that this was
Caesarea of Palestine, and not Caesarea Philippi; it being his opinion,
and indeed that of others, that where this word occurs without any
addition, in the New Testament, Caesarea of Palestine is meant, and not
Caesarea Philippi. See on [Act 8:40](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#040)
(note).

Sent him forth to Tarsus - This was his own city; and it was right that
he should proclaim to his own countrymen and relatives that Gospel
through which he was become wise to salvation.

[Acts 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">act 9:31</span></span>

Then had the Churches rest - Instead of ἱα εκκλησιαι, the Churches, ABC,
several others, the Syriac, Coptic, Ethiopic, Armenian, and Vulgate,
have ἡεκκλησια, the Church. Every assembly of God's people was a Church;
the aggregate of these assemblies was The Church. The wordειρηνην, which
we translate rest, and which literally signifies peace, evidently means,
in this place, prosperity; and in this sense both it and the Hebrew שלום
shalom are repeatedly used. But what was the cause of this rest or
success? Some say, the conversion of Saul, who before made havoc of the
Church; but this is not likely, as he could not be a universal cause of
persecution and distress, however active and virulent he might have been
during the time of his enmity to the Christian Church. Besides his own
persecution, related above, shows that the opposition to the Gospel
continued with considerable virulence three years after his conversion;
therefore it was not Saul's ceasing to be a persecutor that gave this
rest to the Churches. Dr. Lardner, with a greater show of probability,
maintains that this rest was owing to the following circumstance: Soon
after Caligula's accession to the imperial dignity, the Jews at
Alexandria suffered very much from the Egyptians in that city; and at
length their oratories were all destroyed. In the third year of
Caligula, a.d. 39, Petronius, who was made president of Syria in the
place of Vitellius, was sent by the emperor to set up his statue in the
temple at Jerusalem. This was a thunder-stroke to the Jews, and so
occupied them that they had no time to think of any thing else;
apprehending that their temple must be defiled, and the national
religion destroyed, or themselves run the risk of being exterminated if
they rebelled against the imperial decree.

The account given by Josephus will set this in a clear point of view.
"Caligula sent Petronius to go with an army to Jerusalem, to set up his
statues in the temple, enjoining him if the Jews opposed it, to put to
death all that made resistance, and to make all the rest of the nation
slaves. Petronius therefore marched from Antioch into Judea, with three
legions, and a large body of auxiliaries raised in Syria. All were
hereupon filled with consternation, the army being come as far as
Ptolemais. The Jews, then, gathering together, went to the plain near
Ptolemais, and entreated Petronius in the first place for their laws, in
the next place for themselves. Petronius was moved with their
solicitations, and, leaving his army and the statues, went into Galilee,
and called an assembly of the heads of the Jews at Tiberias; and, having
exhorted them without effect to submit to the emperor's orders, said,
'Will ye then fight against Caesar?' They answered that they offered up
sacrifices twice every day for the emperor and the Roman people; but
that if he would set up the images, he ought first of all to sacrifice
the whole Jewish nation; and that they were ready to submit themselves,
their wives and children, to the slaughter." Philo gives a similar
account of this transaction. See Lardner's Credibility, Works, vol. i.
p. 97, etc.

It appears, therefore, that, as these transactions took place about the
time mentioned in the text, their persecution from the Romans diverted
them from persecuting the Christians; and Then had the Churches rest
throughout all Judea and Galilee, and Samaria; the terror occasioned by
the imperial decree having spread itself through all those places.

Were edified - Οικοδομουμεναι, A metaphor taken from a building.

1\. The ground is marked out;

2\. the ichnograph, or dimensions of the building, ascertained;

3\. the foundation is digged;

4\. the foundation stone laid;

5\. the walls builded up with course upon course;

6\. the top-stone brought on;

7\. the roof raised, and the whole covered in; and,

8\. the interior part fitted up and adorned, and rendered convenient for
the intended inhabitant.

This figure frequently occurs in the sacred writings, especially in the
New Testament. It has its reason in the original creation of man: God
made the first human being as a shrine or temple, in which himself might
dwell. Sin entered, and the heavenly building was destroyed. The
materials, however, though all dislocated, and covered with rubbish and
every way defiled, yet exist; no essential power or faculty of the soul
having been lost. The work of redemption consists in building up this
house as it was in the beginning, and rendering it a proper habitation
for God. The various powers, faculties, and passions, are all to be
purified and refined by the power of the Holy Spirit, and order and
harmony restored to the whole soul. All this is beautifully pointed out
by St. Peter, [Pe1 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#004), [Pe1
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005) : To whom (Jesus Christ) coming as
unto a Living Stone, chosen of God and precious, ye also, as Living
Stones, are Built Up a spiritual House, a holy priesthood, to offer up
spiritual sacrifices to God by Jesus Christ. And St. Paul, who, from his
own profession as a tent-maker, could best seize on the metaphor, and
press it into this spiritual service, goes through the whole figure at
large, in the following inimitable words: Ye are the Household of God,
and are Built upon the Foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus
Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone, in whom all the Building,
Fitly Framed together, groweth unto a Holy Temple in the Lord: in whom
ye also are Builded together for a Habitation of God, through the
Spirit, [Eph 2:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#019). Edification
signifies, therefore, an increase in the light, life, and power of God;
being founded on the doctrine of Christ crucified; having the soul
purified from all unrighteousness, and fitted, by increasing holiness,
to be a permanent residence for the ever-blessed God.

Walking in the fear of the Lord - Keeping a continually tender
conscience; abhorring all sin; having respect to every Divine precept;
dreading to offend him from whom the soul has derived its being and its
blessings. Without this salutary fear of God there never can be any
circumspect walking.

In the comfort of the Holy Ghost - In a consciousness of their
acceptance and union with God, through his Spirit, by which solid peace
and happiness are brought into the soul; the truly religious man knowing
and feeling that he is of God, by the Spirit which is given him: nothing
less can be implied in the comfort of the Holy Ghost.

Were multiplied - No wonder that the Church of God increased, when such
lights as these shone among men. This is a short, but full and forcible
description of the righteousness, purity, and happiness of the primitive
Church.

[Acts 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 9:32</span></span>

As Peter passed throughout all quarters - Δια παντων, Bp. Pearce thinks,
should be translated, not through all quarters, but through all the
saints. The Churches having rest, the apostles made use of this interval
of quiet to visit the different congregations, in order to build them up
on their most holy faith. Of Saul we hear no more till [Act
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#030), which is supposed to be about
five years after this time; eight in all from his conversion. Peter, it
seems, had continued in Jerusalem all the time that the Churches were in
a state of persecution throughout the whole land. Great as he was, he
never evidenced that steady determinate courage by which St. Paul was so
eminently distinguished; nor did he ever suffer half so much for God and
his truth.

To the saints - The Jews, who had been converted to Christianity.

Which dwelt at Lydda - A town in the tribe of Ephraim, almost on the
border of Judea, and nigh unto Joppa: it was about ten leagues from
Jerusalem, and was afterwards known by the name of Diospolis, or the
city of Jupiter.

[Acts 9:33](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">act 9:33</span></span>

A certain man named Eneas - This name has been celebrated in the annals
of heathen poetry, in that beautiful work of the poet Virgil, called the
Aeneid; which gives an account of the misfortunes, travels, wars, etc.,
of a Trojan prince of this name, after the destruction of his native
city, Troy. On the difference of names which so frequently occurs in
some pasts of the Scriptures, Calmet makes the following judicious
remarks: As both Greek and Hebrew, or Syriac, were commonly spoken in
Palestine, most persons had two names, one Greek and the other Hebrew.
Thus Peter was called Cephas in Hebrew, and Petros in Greek. Paul was
called Saul in Hebrew, and Paulos in Greek. The person in [Act
9:36](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#036), Tabitha in Hebrew, and Dorcas in
Greek. And the paralytic person cured by Peter, Hananiah in Hebrew, and
Aineas in Greek. So Thomas was the Hebrew name of the apostle who in
Greek was called Didymus.

Had kept his bed eight years - This was occasioned by a palsy; and now
inveterate and hopeless, through its long standing.

[Acts 9:34](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">act 9:34</span></span>

Jesus Christ maketh thee whole - Not Peter, for he had no power but what
was given him from above. And, as an instrument, any man could heal with
this power as well as Peter; but God chose to put honor upon those
primitive preachers of his word, that men might see that they were
commissioned from heaven.

Arise, and make thy bed - Give now full proof that Jesus Christ Has made
thee whole, by arising, and by making thy bed. He was at home, and
therefore was not commanded, as the paralytic person, to take up his
bed; but he was ordered to make it - strew it afresh, that all might see
that the cure was perfect.

[Acts 9:35](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">act 9:35</span></span>

All that dwelt in Lydda and Saron saw him - Saron was that champaign
country that lay between Joppa and Lydda. The long affliction of this
man had been well known; and his cure, consequently, became a subject of
general examination: it was found to be real. It was known to have been
performed by the grace and mercy of Christ; and the consequence of all
this conviction was that all these people became Christians.

[Acts 9:36](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">act 9:36</span></span>

Now there was at Joppa - This was a sea-port town on the coast of the
Mediterranean Sea, about a day's journey from Jerusalem. It is supposed
to be the same which is called in the Old Testament Japho, which
belonged to the tribe of Dan, [Jos
19:46](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#046). It is at present called Jaffa,
and is still a place of considerable note.

A certain disciple named Tabitha - This word is more properly Syriac
than Hebrew. Tebitho is the word in the Syriac version, and is their
manner of writing the Hebrew צבי tsebi, the ט teth being changed for the
צ tsaddi. The word tabio, and the feminine tabitho, have the same
meaning as the Hebrew צבי tsebi and the Greek Δορκας, Dorcas, and
signify the gazel or antelope; and it is still customary in the east to
give the names of beautiful animals to young women. The comparison of
fine eyes to those of the antelope is continually occurring in the
writings of the Arabic and Persian poets. The person in the text
probably had her name in the same way. She was very beautiful, and was
therefore called Tabitha and Dorcas.

This woman was full of good works - She spent her life in acts of
kindness and charity. Her soul was full of love to God and man; and her
whole time was filled up with works of piety and mercy.

[Acts 9:37](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">act 9:37</span></span>

She was sick, and died - Even her holiness and usefulness could not
prevent her from sickness and death. Dust thou art, and to dust thou
shalt return, is a decree that must be fulfilled, even on the saints;
for the body is dead, sentenced to death, because of sin, though the
spirit be life because of righteousness.

Whom when they had washed - Having the fullest proof that she was dead,
they prepared for her interment. In most nations of the world it was
customary to wash their dead before they buried them, and before they
laid them out to lie in state, as Homer tells us was the case with the
body of Patroclus: -

Ὡς εἱπων, ἑταροισιν εκεκλετο διος Αχιλλευς,

Αμφι πυρι Ϛησαι τριποδα μεγαν, οφρα ταχιϚα

Πατροκλον λουσειαν -

Και τοτε δη λουσαν τε, και ηλειψαν λιπ' ελαιῳ

\- Iliad xviii. 343.

"So saying, he bade his train surround with fire

A tripod huge, that they might quickly cleanse

Patroclus from all stains of clotted gore.

They on the blazing hearth a tripod placed,

Infused the water, thrust dry wood beneath,

And soon the flames, encompassing around

Its ample belly, warm'd the flood within.

Soon as the water in the singing brass

Simmer'd, they bathed him, and with limpid oil Anointed.

They stretch'd him on his bed, then cover'd him

From head to feet with linen texture light,

And with a wide unsullied mantle last."

Cowper.

The waking or watching of the dead was also practised among the ancient
Greeks, as we learn from a preceding paragraph, where Achilles,
addressing his dead friend Patroclus, tells him: -

Τοφρα δε μοι παρα νηυσι κορωνισι κεισεαι αὑτως·

Αμφι δε σε Τρωαι και Δαρδανιδες βαθυκολποι

Κλαυσονται, νυκτας τε και ηματα δακρυχεουσαι

Il. xviii. 338.

\- "Mean time, among

My lofty galleys thou shalt lie, with tears

Mourn'd day and night, by Trojan captives fair

And Dardan, compassing thy bier around."

Cowper.

A similar description is given by Virgil of the funeral obsequies of
Misenus, Aeneid vi. ver. 212.

Nec minus interea Misenum in littore Teucri

Flebant, et cineri ingrato suprema ferebant.

Pars calidos latices et aena undantia flammis

Expediunt, corpusque lavant frigentis et ungunt

Fit gemitus: tum membra toro defleta reponunt,

Purpureasque super vestes, velamina nota,

Conjiciunt, etc.

"Meanwhile, the Trojan troops, with weeping eyes,

To dead Misenus pay his obsequies.

First from the ground a lofty pile they rear

Of pitch-trees, oaks, and pines, and unctuous fir:

The fabric's front with cypress twigs they strew;

And stick the sides with boughs of baleful yew;

The topmost part his glitt'ring arms adorn:

Warm waters then, in brazen cauldrons borne,

Are pour'd to wash his body, joint by joint;

And fragrant oils the stiffen'd limbs anoint.

With groans and cries Misenus they deplore.

Then on a bier with purple cover'd o'er

The breathless body, thus bewail'd, they lay."

Dryden.

These rites, in many respects, resemble those still used among the
native Irish. See the account of the funeral ceremonies of the
Egyptians, in the notes on [Gen 50:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#002)
(note). The primitive Christians washed the bodies of their dead not
only out of decency and affectionate respect to them, but as a token of
their firm belief in the resurrection of the dead.

[Acts 9:38](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">act 9:38</span></span>

Sent unto him - desiring - that he would not delay to come - Tabitha
died at Joppa, and Peter was at Lydda, about four leagues distant. But
why did they send for Peter? We cannot tell. It is not likely that they
had any expectation that he should raise her from the dead; for none of
the apostles had as yet raised any; and if God did not choose to restore
Stephen to life, this favor could not be reasonably expected in behalf
of inferior persons. However, they might hope that he who cured Eneas at
Lydda might cure Dorcas; for it is probable that they had sent for Peter
before she died; and in this sense we might understand the απεϚειλαν of
the text.

[Acts 9:39](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">act 9:39</span></span>

Showing the coats and garments - Χιτωνας και ἱματια, the outer and inner
garments. These, it appears, she had made for the poor, and more
particularly for poor widows, in whose behalf she had incessantly
labored.

[Acts 9:40](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">act 9:40</span></span>

Peter put them all forth, and kneeled down and prayed - It was not even
known to Peter that God would work this miracle: therefore he put all
the people out, that he might seek the will of God by fervent prayer,
and during his supplications be liable neither to distraction nor
interruption, which he must have experienced had he permitted this
company of weeping widows to remain in the chamber.

And turning - to the body - Σωμα, The lifeless body, for the spirit had
already departed.

Said, Tabitha, arise - During his wrestling with God, he had,
undoubtedly, received confidence that she would be raised at his word.

And when she saw Peter, she sat up - As Dorcas was a woman so eminently
holy, her happy soul had doubtless gone to the paradise of God. Must she
not therefore be filled with regret to find herself thus called back to
earth again? And must not the remembrance of the glories she had now
lost fill her with dislike to all the goods of earth? No: for,

1\. As a saint of God, her Maker's will must be hers; because she knew
that this will must be ever best.

2\. It is very likely that, in the case of the revivescence of saint or
sinner, God mercifully draws a veil over all they have seen or known, so
that they have no recollection of what they have either seen or heard.
Even St. Paul found it impossible to tell what he had heard in the third
heaven, though he was probably not in the state of the dead. Of the
economy of the invisible world God will reveal nothing. We walk here by
faith, and not by sight.

[Acts 9:41](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">act 9:41</span></span>

Saints and widows - In primitive times the widows formed a distinct part
of the Christian Church.

[Acts 9:42](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">act 9:42</span></span>

Many believed in the Lord - That is, in Christ Jesus, in whose name and
through whose power they understood this miracle to be wrought. This
miracle, as well as that at Lydda, was not only the means of
strengthening the faith of the disciples, and gaining credit to the
cause of Christianity, but also of bringing many sincere converts to the
Lord, so that the Church was thereby both builded up and multiplied.

[Acts 9:43](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">act 9:43</span></span>

He tarried many days in Joppa - Taking advantage of the good impression
made on the people's minds by the miracle, he preached to them the great
truths of Christianity, and thus established them in the faith.

Simon a tanner - Whether the original word βυρσευς signifies a tanner or
a currier, is of little consequence. The person who dealt in the hides,
whether of clean or unclean animals, could not be in high repute among
the Jews. Even in Joppa, the trade appears to have been reputed unclean;
and therefore this Simon had his house by the sea side. See [Act
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#006). Of the trade itself the
Talmudists speak with great contempt; they reckon it among blemishes.
See proofs in Schoettgen.

1\. Thus terminates what has not been improperly called the first period
of the Christian Church, which began at the day of pentecost, [Act
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001), and continued to the resurrection
of Dorcas; a period of about eight years. During the whole of this time
the Gospel was preached to the Jews only, no Gentile being called before
Cornelius, the account of whose conversion, and the Divine vision that
led to it, are detailed in the following chapter. Salvation was of the
Jews: theirs were the fathers, the covenants, and the promises, and from
them came Christ Jesus; and it was right that they should have the first
offer of a salvation which, while it was a light to lighten the
Gentiles, was to be the glory of the Israelitish people. When they
utterly rejected it, then the apostles turned unto the Gentiles. Among
them the Christian Church was founded, and thus the reprobates became
the elect, and the elect became reprobates. Reader! behold the goodness
and severity of God! Towards them that fell, severity; but towards thee,
goodness, if thou continue in his goodness; otherwise thou also shalt be
cut off, [Rom 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#022). Thou canst only
stand by faith; and be not high-minded, but fear. Nothing less than
Christ dwelling in thy heart by faith can save thy soul unto eternal
life.

2\. The conversion of Saul of Tarsus is one of the most remarkable facts
recorded in the history of the Christian Church. When we consider the
man; the manner in which he was brought to the knowledge of the truth;
the impression made on his own mind and heart by the vision he had on
his way to Damascus, and the effect produced in all his subsequent life,
we have a series of the most convincing evidences of the truth of the
Christian religion. In this light he ever viewed the subject himself;
the manner of his conversion he ever appealed to, as the most proper
apology for his conduct; and, on several most important occasions, he
not only refers to it, but enters into a detail of its circumstances,
that his hearers might see that the excellency of the power was of God
and not of man.

Saul of Tarsus was not a man of a light, fickle, and uncultivated mind.
His natural powers were vast, his character the most decided, and his
education, as we learn from his historian, and from his writings, was at
once both liberal and profound. He was born and brought up in a city
which enjoyed every privilege of which Rome itself could boast, and was
a successful rival both of Rome and Athens in arts and science. Though a
Jew, it is evident that his education was not confined to matters that
concerned his own people and country alone. He had read the best Greek
writers, as his style, allusions, and quotations sufficiently prove;
and, an matters which concern his own religion, he was instructed by
Gamaliel, one of the most celebrated doctors the synagogue had ever
produced. He was evidently master of the three great languages which
were spoken among the only people who deserved the name of nations - the
Hebrew, and its prevailing dialect, the Chaldio-Syriac; the Greek, and
the Latin; languages which, notwithstanding all the cultivation through
which the earth has passed, maintain their rank, which is a most
decisive superiority over all the languages of the universe. Was it
likely that such a man, possessing such a mind, cultivated to such an
extent, could have been imposed on or deceived? The circumstances of his
conversion forbid the supposition: they do more; they render it
impossible. One consideration on this subject will prove that imposture
in this case was impossible: he had no communication with Christians;
the men that accompanied him to Damascus were of his own mind -
virulent, determined enemies to the very name of Christ; and his
conversion took place in the open day, on the open road, in company only
with such men as the persecuting high priest and Sanhedrin thought
proper to be employed in the extermination of Christianity. In such
circumstances, and in such company, no cheat could be practised. But was
not he the deceiver? The supposition is absurd and monstrous, for this
simple reason, that there was no motive that could prompt him to feign
what he was not; and no end that could be answered by assuming the
profession of Christianity. Christianity had in it such principles as
must expose it to the hatred of Greece, Rome, and Judea. It exposed the
absurdity and folly of Grecian and Roman superstition and idolatry, and
asserted itself to be the completion, end, and perfection of the whole
Mosaic economy. It was therefore hated by all those nations, and its
followers despised, detested, and persecuted. From the profession of
such a religion, so circumstanced, could any man, who possessed even the
most moderate share of common sense, expect secular emolument or
advantage? No! Had not this apostle of the Gentiles the fullest
conviction of the truth of Christianity, the fullest proof of its
heavenly influence on his own soul, the brightest prospect of the
reality and blessedness of the spiritual world, he could not have taken
one step in the path which the doctrine of Christ pointed out. Add to
this, that he lived long after his conversion, saw Christianity and its
influence in every point of view, and tried it in all circumstances.
What was the result? The deepest conviction of its truth; so that he
counted all things dross and dung in comparison of the excellency of its
knowledge. Had he continued a Jew he would have infallibly risen to the
first dignities and honors of his nation; but he willingly forfeited all
his secular privileges and well grounded expectations of secular honor
and emolument, and espoused a cause from which he could not only have no
expectation of worldly advantage, but which, most evidently and
necessarily, exposed him to all sorts of privations, sufferings,
hardships, dangers, and death itself! These were not only the
unavoidable consequences of the cause he espoused; but he had them fully
in his apprehension and constantly in his eye. He predicted them, and
knew that every step he took was a progressive advance in additional
sufferings, and the issue of his journey must be a violent death!

The whole history of St. Paul proves him to be one of the greatest of
men; and his conduct after he became a Christian, had it not sprung from
a Divine motive, of the truth of which he had the fullest conviction,
would have shown him to be one of the weakest of men. The conclusion
therefore is self-evident, that in St. Paul's call there could be no
imposture, that in his own mind there could be no deception, that his
conversion was from heaven, and the religion he professed and taught,
the infallible and eternal truth of Jehovah. In this full conviction he
counted not his life dear unto him, but finished his rugged race with
joy, cheerfully giving up his life for the testimony of Jesus; and thus
his luminous sun set in blood, to rise again in glory. The conversion of
St. Paul is the triumph of Christianity; his writings, the fullest
exhibition and defense of its doctrines; and his life and death, a
glorious illustration of its principles. Armed with this history of
Paul's conversion and life, the feeblest believer needs not fear the
most powerful infidel. The ninth chapter of the Acts of the Apostles
will ever remain an inexpugnable fortress to defend Christianity and
defeat its enemies. Reader, hath not God so done his marvellous works
that they may be had in everlasting remembrance?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 10](act010)

</div>
