<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act003)  [Next](act005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 4:0</span></span>

The priests and Sadducees are incensed at the apostles' teaching, and
put them in prison, [Act 4:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#001). The
number of those who believed, [Act
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#004). The rulers, elders, and scribes
call the apostles before them, and question them concerning their
authority to teach, [Act 4:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#005). Peter,
filled with the Holy Ghost, answers, and proclaims Jesus, [Act
4:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#008). They are confounded at his
discourse and the miracle wrought on the lame man, yet command them not
to preach in the name of Jesus, [Act
4:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#013). Peter and John refuse to
obey, [Act 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#019), [Act
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#020). They are farther threatened and
dismissed, [Act 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#021), [Act
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#022). They return to their own
company, who all join in praise and prayer to God, [Act
4:23-30](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#023). God answers, and fills them
with the Holy Spirit, [Act 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#031). The
blessed state of the primitive disciples, [Act
4:32-35](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032). The case of Joses, who sells
his estate, and brought the money to the common stock, [Act
4:36](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#036), [Act
4:37](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#037).

[Acts 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 4:1</span></span>

The priests - These persons had evidenced the most implacable enmity
against Christ from the beginning.

The captain of the temple - See this office particularly explained in
the note on [Luk 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#004) (note).

The Sadducees - Whose whole system was now in danger by the preaching of
the resurrection of Christ; for they believed not in the immortality of
the soul, nor in any future world. These made a common cause with the
priests, etc., to suppress the evidence of Christ's resurrection, and
silence the apostles.

[Acts 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 4:2</span></span>

Being grieved - Διαπονουμενοι, They were thoroughly fatigued with the
continuance of this preaching; their minds suffered more labor, through
vexation at the success of the apostles, than the bodies of the apostles
did in their fatiguing exercise of preaching during the whole day.

[Acts 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 4:4</span></span>

The number - was about five thousand - That is, as I understand the
passage, the one hundred and twenty which were converted before
pentecost, the three thousand converted at pentecost, and one thousand
eight hundred and eighty converted since the conversion of the three
thousand; making in the whole five thousand, or ὡσει about that number:
there might have been more or less; the historian does not fix the
number absolutely. A goodly flock in one city, as the commencement of
the Christian Church! Some think all the five thousand were converted on
this day; but this is by no means likely.

[Acts 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 4:5</span></span>

Their rulers, and elders, and scribes - Those with the high priest Annas
formed the Sanhedrin, or grand council of the Jews.

[Acts 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 4:6</span></span>

Annas - Though this man was not now actually in the office of high
priest, yet he had possessed it for eleven years, bore the title all his
life, and had the honor of seeing five of his sons fill that eminent
place after him - an honor that never happened to any other person from
the commencement of the Mosaic institution. He is the same who is called
Ananus by Josephus, Ant. b. xx. c. 8.

And Caiaphas - He was son-in-law to Annas, [Joh
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#013), was now high priest, and the
same who, a short time before, condemned Christ to be crucified.

And John - Dr. Lightfoot conjectures, with great probability that this
was Jochanan ben Zaccai, who was very famous at that time in the Jewish
nation. Of him it is said in the Talmud, Jucas. fol. 60: "Rabbin
Jochanan ben Zaccai the priest lived 120 years. He found favor in the
eyes of Caesar, from whom he obtained Jafneh. When he died, the glory of
wisdom ceased." The following is a remarkable passage: Yoma, fol. 39:
Forty years before the destruction of the city, (the very time of which
St. Luke now treats), when the gates of the temple flew open of their
own accord, Rab. Jochanan ben Zaccai said, "O temple! temple! why dost
thou disturb thyself? I know thy end, that thou shalt be destroyed, for
so the Prophet Zachary hath spoken concerning thee: open thy doors, O
Lebanon! that the fire may devour thy cedars." See Lightfoot and
Schoettgen.

And Alexander - This was probably Alexander Lysimachus, one of the
richest Jews of his time, who made great presents to the temple, and was
highly esteemed by King Agrippa. See Calmet. He was brother to the
famous Philo Judaeus, and father of Alexander Tiberius, who married
Berenice, the daughter of Agrippa the elder, and was governor of Judea
after Cuspius Fadus. See Josephus, Ant. l. xix. c. 5, s. 1.

Of the kindred of the high priest - Or rather, as Bp. Pearce renders it,
"of the race of the high priests, i.e. of the family out of which the
high priests were chosen." It may, however, comprehend those who
belonged to the families of Annas and Caiaphas, and all who were
connected with the sacerdotal family. Luke distinctly mentions all
these, to show how formidable the enemies were against whom the infant
Church of Christ had to contend.

[Acts 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 4:7</span></span>

By what power, or by what name, have ye done this? - It seems that this
council were convinced that the lame man was miraculously healed; but it
is very likely that they believed the whole to be the effect of magic;
and, as all intercourse with familiar spirits, and all spells, charms,
etc., were unlawful, they probably hoped that, on the examination, this
business would come out, and that then these disturbers of their peace
would be put to death. Hence they inquired by what power, εν ποιᾳ
δυναμει, by what supernatural energy; or in what name, by what mode of
incantation; and who is the spirit you invoke, in order to do these
things? False prophets, reputed witches, wizards, etc., were to be
brought before the sanhedrin, to be by them judged, acquitted, or
condemned, according to the evidence. Some think the words should be
thus understood: Who gave you authority to teach publicly! This belongs
to the sanhedrin. What, therefore, is your authority, and who is he who
gave it to you?

[Acts 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 4:8</span></span>

Then Peter, filled with the Holy Ghost - Which guided him into all
truth, and raised him far above the fear of man; placing him in a widely
different state of mind to that in which he was found when, in the hall
of Caiaphas, he denied his Master, through fear of a servant girl. But
now was fulfilled the promise of Christ, [Mat
10:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#018); And ye shall be brought
before governors and kings for my sake; but take no thought how or what
ye shall speak; for it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your
Father that speaketh in you.

[Acts 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 4:9</span></span>

The good deed done - Επι ευεργεσιᾳ, The benefit he has received in being
restored to perfect soundness.

[Acts 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 4:10</span></span>

By the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth - This was a very bold
declaration in the presence of such an assembly; but he felt he stood on
good ground. The cure of the lame man the day before was notorious; his
long infirmity was well known; his person could be easily identified;
and he was now standing before them whole and sound: they themselves
therefore could judge whether the miracle was true or false. But the
reality of it was not questioned, nor was there any difficulty about the
instruments that were employed; the only question is, How have ye done
this? and in whose name? Peter immediately answers, We have done it in
the name of Jesus of Nazareth whom ye crucified, and whom God hath
raised from the dead.

[Acts 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 4:11</span></span>

This is the stone which was set at nought of you builders - By your
rejection and crucifixion of Jesus Christ, you have fulfilled one of
your own prophecies, [Psa 118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022); and,
as one part of this prophecy is now so literally fulfilled, ye may rest
assured, so shall the other; and this rejected stone shall speedily
become the head stone of the corner. See the note on [Mat
21:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#042).

[Acts 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 4:12</span></span>

Neither is there salvation in any other - No kind of healing, whether
for body or soul, can come through any but him who is called Jesus. The
spirit of health resides in him; and from him alone its influences must
be received.

For there is none other name - Not only no other person, but no name
except that divinely appointed one, [Mat
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#021), by which salvation from sin can
be expected - none given under heaven - no other means ever devised by
God himself for the salvation of a lost world. All other means were only
subordinate, and referred to him, and had their efficacy from him alone.
He was the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world; and no man ever
came, or can come, to the Father but by him.

[Acts 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 4:13</span></span>

The boldness of Peter and John - Την παρῥησιαν, The freedom and fluency
with which they spoke; for they spoke now from the immediate influence
of the Holy Ghost, and their word was with power.

That they were unlearned and ignorant men - Αγραμματοι, Persons without
literature, not brought up in nor given to literary pursuits - and
ignorant, ιδιωται, persons in private life, brought up in its
occupations alone. It does not mean ignorance in the common acceptation
of the term; and our translation is very improper. In no sense of the
word could any of the apostles be called ignorant men; for though their
spiritual knowledge came all from heaven, yet in all other matters they
seem to have been men of good, sound, strong, common sense.

They took knowledge of them - Επεγινωσκον may imply that they got
information, that they had been disciples of Christ, and probably they
might have seen them in our Lord's company; for there can be little
doubt that they had often seen our Lord teaching the multitudes, and
these disciples attending him.

That they had been with Jesus - Had they not had his teaching, the
present company would soon have confounded them; but they spoke with so
much power and authority that the whole sanhedrin was confounded. He who
is taught in spiritual matters by Christ Jesus has a better gift than
the tongue of the learned. He who is taught in the school of Christ will
ever speak to the point, and intelligibly too; though his words may not
have that polish with which they who prefer sound to sense are often
carried away.

[Acts 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 4:14</span></span>

They could say nothing against it - They could not gainsay the apostolic
doctrine, for that was supported by the miraculous fact before them. If
the doctrine be false, the man cannot have been miraculously healed: if
the man be miraculously healed, then the doctrine must be true that it
is by the name of Jesus of Nazareth that he has been healed. But the man
is incontestably healed; therefore the doctrine is true.

[Acts 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 4:16</span></span>

A notable miracle hath been done - A miracle has been wrought, and this
miracle is known, and acknowledged to be such; all Jerusalem knew that
he was lame - lame from his birth, and that he had long begged at the
Beautiful gate of the temple; and now all Jerusalem knew that he was
healed; and there was no means by which such a self-evident fact could
be disproved.

[Acts 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 4:17</span></span>

But that it spread no farther - Not the news of the miraculous healing
of the lame man, but the doctrine and influence which these men preach
and exert. More than a thousand people had already professed faith in
Christ in consequence of this miracle, (see [Act
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#004)), and if this teaching should be
permitted to go on, probably accompanied with similar miracles, they had
reason to believe that all Jerusalem (themselves excepted, who had
steeled their hearts against all good) should be converted to the
religion of him whom they had lately crucified.

Let us straitly threaten them - Απειλῃ απειλησωμεθα, Let us threaten
them with threatening, a Hebraism, and a proof that St. Luke has
translated the words of the council into Greek, just as they were
spoken.

That they speak ...to no man in this name - Nothing so ominous to them
as the name of Christ crucified, because they themselves had been his
crucifiers. On this account they could not bear to hear salvation
preached to mankind through him of whom they had been the betrayers and
murderers, and who was soon likely to have no enemies but themselves.

[Acts 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 4:18</span></span>

Not to speak ...nor teach in the name of Jesus - Any other doctrine, and
any other name, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites and infidels will
bear, but the doctrine which is according to godliness, proclaiming
salvation through the blood of Christ crucified, they will not bear. If
their doctrine were not the truth of God it could not be so unpopular;
there is such an enmity in human nature against all that is good and
true, that whatever comes from God is generally rejected by wicked men.

[Acts 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 4:19</span></span>

Whether it be right in the sight of God - As if they had said: Worldly
prudence and a consideration of our secular interests would undoubtedly
induce us to obey you; but acting as before God, and following the
dictates of eternal truth and justice, we dare not be silent. Can it be
right to obey men contrary to the command and will of God? When he
commands us to speak, dare we hold our tongue? We have received our
authority from God through Christ, and feel fully persuaded of the truth
by the Holy Spirit which now dwells in us; and we should be guilty of
treason against God, were we on any consideration to suppress his
testimony. Your own consciences testify that we should be sinners
against our heavenly King, were we to act according to your orders; and
the conclusion is, that we cannot but speak what we have seen and heard.

[Acts 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 4:21</span></span>

When they had farther threatened them - Προσαπειλησαμενοι, When they had
added to their former threatenings, repeating the former menaces, and
adding new penalties.

Finding nothing how they might punish them - Or, as the Codex Bezae
reads, μηεὑρισκοντες αιτιαν, πως κολασωνται, not finding a cause why
they might punish them. This reading is supported by the Syriac and
Arabic. Bp. Pearce says, "This is better sense and better Greek."

Because of the people - The people saw the miracle, confessed the finger
of God, believed on the Lord Jesus, and thus became converts to the
Christian faith; and the converts were now so numerous that the
sanhedrin was afraid to proceed to any extremities, lest an insurrection
should be the consequence.

[Acts 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 4:22</span></span>

The man was above forty years old - The disease was of long standing,
and consequently the more inveterate; but all difficulties, small or
great, yield equally to the sovereign power of God. It is as easy with
God to convert a sinner of forty or four-score, as one of ten years old.
But he who now refuses to obey the call of God has neither reason nor
revelation to support himself even in the most distant hope that he
shall get, in a future time, the salvation which he rejects in the
present.

[Acts 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 4:23</span></span>

They went to their own company - This was properly the first persecution
that had been raised up against the Church since the resurrection of
Christ; and as the rest of the disciples must have known that Peter and
John had been cast into prison, and that they were to be examined before
the sanhedrin, and knowing the evil disposition of the rulers toward
their brethren, they doubtless made joint supplication to God for their
safety. In this employment it is likely Peter and John found them on
their return from the council, and repeated to them all their treatment,
with the threats of the chief priests and elders.

[Acts 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 4:24</span></span>

Lord, thou art God - Δεσποτα, συ ὁ Θεος, Thou God art the sovereign
Lord. Thy rule is universal, and thy power unlimited; for thou hast the
heaven and its glories, the earth and the sea, and their endlessly
varied and numerous inhabitants, under thy direction and control.

[Acts 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 4:25</span></span>

By the mouth of thy servant David hast said - Several add, but
impertinently, δια πνευματος ἁγιου, by the Holy Spirit; but it is
sufficient that God has said it; and thugs we find that David spoke by
the inspiration of God; and that the second Psalm relates to Jesus
Christ, and predicts the vain attempts made by Jewish and heathen powers
to suppress Christianity.

[Acts 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 4:26</span></span>

Against the Lord and against his Christ - Κατα του Χριστου αυτου should
be translated, against his Anointed, because it particularly agrees with
ὁν εχρισας, whom thou hast Anointed, in the succeeding verse.

[Acts 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 4:27</span></span>

There is a parenthesis in this verse that is not sufficiently noticed:
it should be read in connection with [Act
4:28](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#028), thus: For of a truth against thy
holy child Jesus, whom thou hast anointed, (for to do whatsoever thy
hand and thy counsel determined before to be done), both Herod and
Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and people of Israel, were gathered
together.

It is evident that what God's hand and counsel determined before to be
done was not that which Herod, Pontius Pilate, the Gentiles, (Romans),
and the people of Israel had done and were doing; for, then, their rage
and vain counsel would be such as God himself had determined should take
place, which is both impious and absurd; but these gathered together to
hinder what God had before determined that his Christ or Anointed should
perform; and thus the passage is undoubtedly to be understood.

Were gathered together - Εν τῃ πολει ταυτῃ, In this very city, are added
by ABDE, and several others; all the Syriac, the Coptic, Ethiopic,
Armenian, Slavonian, Vulgate, Itala, and several of the primitive
fathers. This reading Griesbach has received into the text. This makes
the words much more emphatic; in this thy own city, these different and
in all other cases dissentient powers are leagued together against thine
Anointed, and are determined to prevent the accomplishment of thy
purpose.

[Acts 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 4:29</span></span>

And now, Lord, behold their threatenings - It is not against us, but
against thee, that they conspire: it is not to prevent the success of
our preaching, but to bring to nought thy counsel: the whole of their
enmity is against thee. Now, Lord, look upon it; consider this.

And grant unto thy servants - While we are endeavoring to fulfill thy
counsels, and can do nothing without thee, sustain our courage, that we
may proclaim thy truth with boldness and irresistible power.

[Acts 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 4:30</span></span>

By stretching forth thine hand to heal - Show that it is thy truth which
we proclaim, and confirm it with miracles, and show how highly thou hast
magnified thy Son Jesus, whom they have despised and crucified, by
causing signs and wonders to be wrought in his name.

Thy holy child Jesus - Του ἁγιου παιδος σου should be translated, thy
holy Servant, as in [Act 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#025). Δαβιδ
παιδος σου, thy servant David, not thy Child David: the word is the same
in both places.

[Acts 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">act 4:31</span></span>

The place was shaken - This earthquake was an evidence of the presence
of God, and a most direct answer to their prayer, as far as that prayer
concerned themselves. The earthquake proclaimed the stretched-out arm of
God, and showed them that resistance against his counsels and
determinations must come to nought.

And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost - And, in consequence of
this, they spake the word of God with boldness; a pointed answer to a
second part of their request, [Act
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#029). A right prayer will always have
a right and ready answer. Though these disciples had received the Holy
Spirit on the day of pentecost, yet they were capable of larger
communications; and what they had then received did not preclude the
necessity of frequent supplies, on emergent occasions. Indeed, one
communication of this Spirit always makes way and disposes for another.
Neither apostle nor private Christian can subsist in the Divine life
without frequent influences from on high. Had these disciples depended
on their pentecostal grace, they might have sunk now under the terror
and menaces of their combined and powerful foes. God gives grace for the
time being, but no stock for futurity, because he will keep all his
followers continually dependent on himself.

With boldness - Παντι τῳ θελοντι πιστευειν, To all who were willing to
believe, is added by DE, two others, Augustin, Irenaeus, and Bede.

[Acts 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 4:32</span></span>

The multitude of them that believed - The whole 5000, mentioned [Act
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#004), and probably many others, who had
been converted by the ministry of the other apostles since that time.

Were of one heart and of one soul - Were in a state of the most perfect
friendship and affection. In all the 5000 there appeared to be but one
heart and one soul; so perfectly did they agree in all their views,
religious opinions, and holy affections. Some MSS. add, και ουκ ην
διακρισις εν αυτοις ουδεμια, and there was no kind of difference or
dissension among them. This remarkable reading is found in the Codex
Bezae, another of great authority, E, two others, Ambrose, Bede,
Cyprian, and Zeno. Diogenes Laertius relates of Aristotle, ερωτηθεις, τι
εστι φιλος; being asked, What is a Friend? εφη, μια ψυχη δυο σωμασιν
ενοικουσα answered, One soul dwelling in Two bodies. This saying has
been justly celebrated: but what would this wonderful philosopher have
thought and said, had he seen these disciples of Jesus, and friends of
mankind: one soul dwelling in 5000 bodies!

They had all things common - See the notes on [Act
2:44](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#044), where this subject is examined.
See below, [Act 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#034).

[Acts 4:33](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">act 4:33</span></span>

With great power gave the apostles witness - This power they received
from the Holy Spirit, who enabled them, μεγαλῃ δυναμει, with striking
miracles, to give proof of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus; for this
is the point that was particularly to be proved: that he was slain and
buried, all knew; that he rose again from the dead, many knew; but it
was necessary to give such proofs as should convince and confound all.
This preaching and these miracles demonstrated this Divine truth: Jesus
died for your sins - he rose again for your justification; behold what
God works in confirmation of these glorious truths; believe therefore in
the Lord Jesus, and ye shall not perish, but have everlasting life.

Great grace was upon them all - They all received much of the favor or
grace of God; and they had much favor with all who feared God. In both
these ways this clause may be understood; for χαρις means favor, whether
that be evidenced by benevolence or beneficence, or by both. The favor
of God is the benevolence of God; but his benevolence is never exerted
without the exertions of his beneficence. Hence the grace or favor of
God always implies a blessing or gift from the hand of his mercy and
power. The favor or benevolence of men may exist without beneficence,
because it may not be in their power to communicate any gift or benefit,
though they are disposed to do it; or, 2dly. the persons who enjoy their
favor may not stand in need of any of their kind acts; but it is not so
with God: his good will is ever accompanied by his good work; and every
soul that is an object of his benevolence stands in the utmost need of
the acts of his beneficence. Hence, as he loved the world, he gave his
Son a ransom for all. All needed his help; and, because they all needed
it, therefore all had it. And truly we may say of the whole human race,
for whom the Son of God tasted death, that great grace was upon all; for
All have been purchased by his sacrificial death. This by the way.

[Acts 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">act 4:34</span></span>

Neither was there any among them that lacked - It was customary with the
Jews to call the poor together, to eat of the sacrifices, but as the
priests, etc., were incensed against Christ and Christianity,
consequently the Christian poor could have no advantage of this kind;
therefore, by making a common stock for the present necessity, the poor
were supplied; so there was none among them that lacked. This provision
therefore of the community of goods, which could be but temporary, was
made both suitably and seasonably. See Bp. Pearce, and see the note on
[Act 2:44](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#044).

[Acts 4:35](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">act 4:35</span></span>

Laid ...down at the apostles' feet - To show how cordially and entirely
they parted with them. And they entrusted the management of the whole to
those men to whom they found God had entrusted the gifts of his Holy
Spirit, and the doctrine of the kingdom of heaven.

[Acts 4:36](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">act 4:36</span></span>

Joses - Or, Joseph, as many excellent MSS. read; but who he was, farther
than what is here said, we know not.

Surnamed Barnabas - Or, Barsabbas, according to the Coptic.

The son of consolation - Υἱος παρακλησεως; As παρακλησις signifies
exhortation, as well as consolation, and is indeed distinguished from
the latter, [Co1 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#003), the original
name was probably בר נבא Bar naba, or בר נביא Bar nebia, which signifies
the son of prophecy or exhortation; and this is certainly one sense
which prophecy has in the New Testament; and in this way Barnabas
distinguished himself among the apostles. See [Act
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#023). And Barnabas Exhorted them all
that with purpose of heart they should cleave unto the Lord.

A Levite, and of the country of Cyprus - Cyprus is an island in the
Mediterranean Sea, off Cilicia, and not very distant from the Jewish
coast. The Jews were very numerous in that island: see Dion. Cas. lib.
68, 69. Though he was a Levite, he might have had land of his own by
private purchase. The Levites, as a tribe, had no land in Israel; but
the individuals certainly might make purchases any where in the country:
but, as Barnabas was of Cyprus, his land probably lay there; and as it
is likely that he was one of those strangers that came up to Jerusalem
to the late feast, and was there converted, he might have sold his land
in the island to some of his own countrymen who were at Jerusalem at
this time; and so, being called to the work of the ministry, continued
to associate with the apostles, travelling every where, and preaching
the Gospel of the kingdom of God. He was the constant companion of St.
Paul, till the separation took place on account of John Mark, mentioned
[Act 15:36-39](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#036).

It is worthy of remark that the two apostles of the Gentiles, though of
Jewish extraction, were both born in Gentile countries; Paul in Cilicia,
Barnabas in Cyprus: this gave them many advantages; served to remove
prejudices from the heathens; and gave them no doubt much facility in
the Greek tongue, without which they could have done but little in Asia
Minor, nor in most parts of the Roman empire where they traveled. How
admirably does God determine even the place of our birth, and the bounds
of our habitation! When under the influence of the grace of Christ,
every thing is turned to a man's advantage. The man whom he calls to his
work he will take care to endue with every necessary qualification. And
is it too much to say that God never did call a man to preach the Gospel
whom he did not qualify in such a manner that both the workman and the
work should appear to be of God?

Some have said that ignorance is the mother of devotion. Devotion and
religion are both scandalized by the saying. Enlightened piety has ever
been the most sincere, steady, and active. God makes those wise who turn
unto him; and by experimental religion all the powers of the mind are
greatly improved. Every genuine minister of Christ has an enlightened
heart; and, to this, it is his duty to add a well-cultivated mind. Ex
quovis ligno Mercurius non fit: A blockhead never did, and never can,
make a minister.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 5](act005)

</div>
