<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act014)  [Next](act016.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001.md)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 15:0</span></span>

Certain teachers from Judea insist on the necessity of the converted
Gentiles being circumcised, [Act 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001.md).
Paul and Barnabas are sent to Jerusalem to consult the apostles on this
subject, [Act 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002.md). They come to
Jerusalem, and inform the apostles of the conversion of the Gentiles;
and of the trouble which certain Pharisees had occasioned concerning
circumcision, [Act 15:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#003.md). The
apostles having assembled to consider the question, Peter delivers his
opinion, [Act 15:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#006.md). Barnabas and
Paul relate their success among the Gentiles, [Act
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#012.md). James delivers his judgment,
[Act 15:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#013.md). The apostles and elders
agree to what he proposes, and send Judas and Silas with Paul and
Barnabas to the converted Gentiles, [Act
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#022.md); and send an epistle containing
their decree to the Churches of Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia, [Act
15:23-29](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#023.md). Paul and his company return,
and read the epistle to the brethren at Antioch, which produces great
joy; and Judas and Silas preach to them, [Act
15:30-32](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#030.md). Judas returns to Jerusalem,
but Silas continues with Paul and Barnabas, teaching and preaching, [Act
15:33-35](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#033.md). Paul proposes to Barnabas to
visit the Churches where they had preached; and, on the latter
determining to take John Mark with them, Paul refuses, [Act
15:36-38](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#036.md). They disagree; and Barnabas,
taking John Mark, sails to Cyprus, [Act
15:39](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#039.md). And Paul, taking Silas, goes
through Syria and Cilicia, confirming the Churches, [Act
15:40](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#040.md), [Act
15:41](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#041.md).

[Acts 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 15:1</span></span>

Except ye be circumcised, etc. - The persons who taught this doctrine
appear to have been converts to Christianity; but, supposing that the
Christian religion was intended to perfect the Mosaic, and not to
supersede it, they insisted on the necessity of circumcision, because,
by that, a man was made debtor to the whole law, to observe all its
rites and ceremonies. This question produced great disturbance in the
apostolic Church; and, notwithstanding the decree mentioned in this
chapter, the apostles were frequently obliged to interpose their
authority in order to settle it; and we find a whole Church, that at
Galatia, drawn aside from the simplicity of the Christian faith by the
subtilty of Judaizing teachers among themselves, who insisted on the
necessity of the converted Gentiles being circumcised.

Ye cannot be saved - Ye can neither enjoy God's blessing in time, nor
his glory in eternity. Such an assertion as this, from any reputable
authority, must necessarily shake the confidence of young converts.

[Acts 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 15:2</span></span>

No small dissension and disputation - Paul and Barnabas were fully
satisfied that God did not design to bring the converted Gentiles under
the yoke of circumcision: they knew that Jesus Christ was the end of the
law for righteousness (justification) to every one that believed, and
therefore they opposed the Judaizing teachers. This was one of the first
controversies in the Christian Church; but, though the difference of
sentiment was considerable, it led to no breach of Christian charity nor
fellowship among themselves.

They determined that Paul, etc. - This verse is read very differently in
the Codex Bezae: Γενομενης δε εκτασεως και ζητησεως ουκ ολιγης τῳ Παυλῳ
και τῳ Βαρναβᾳ συν αυτοις. ελεγεν γαρ ὁ Παυλος μενειν οὑτως, καθως
επιϚευσαν, διΐσχυριζομενος. οἱ δε εληλυθοτες απο Ἱερουσαλημ, παρηγγειλαν
αυτοις, τῳ Παυλῳ και τῳ Βαρναβᾳ και τισιν αλλοις, αναβαινειν προς τους
ΑποϚολους και Πρεσβυτερους εις Ἱερουσαλημ, ὁπως κριθωσιν επ' αυτοις
(αυτων) περι του ζητηματος τουτου. But when Paul and Barnabas had no
small dissension and disputation with them, Paul said, with strong
assurance, that they should remain so as they had believed. But those
who came from Jerusalem charged Paul and Barnabas and certain others to
go up to the apostles and elders to Jerusalem, that a determination
might be made by them concerning this question.

And certain other of them - If this be the journey to which St. Paul
alludes, [Gal 2:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001.md), then he had Titus
with him; and how many elders went from the Church of Antioch we cannot
tell. This journey was 14 years after Paul's conversion, and was
undertaken by express revelation, as he informs us, [Gal
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#002.md), which revelation appears to have
been given to certain persons in the Church of Antioch, as we learn from
this verse, and not to Paul and Barnabas themselves.

[Acts 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 15:3</span></span>

Being brought on their way by the Church - That is; the members of the
Church provided them with all necessaries for their journey; for it does
not appear that they had any property of their own.

Declaring the conversion of the Gentiles - Much stress is laid on this:
it was a miracle of God's mercy that the Gentiles should be received
into the Church of God; and they had now the fullest proof that the
thing was likely to become general, by the conversion of Cornelius, the
conversion of the people of Antioch, of Cyprus, Pisidia, Pamphylia,
Lycaonia, etc., etc.

[Acts 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 15:4</span></span>

They were received of the Church - The whole body of Christian
believers.

The apostles - Either the whole or part of the twelve; though we read of
none but John, Peter, and James. See [Gal
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009.md).

And elders - Those who were officers in the Church, under the apostles.

They declared - To this council they gave a succinct account of the
great work which God had wrought by them among the Gentiles. This was
St. Paul's third journey to Jerusalem after his conversion. See an
account of his first journey, [Act
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#026.md), and of his second in [Act
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#030.md).

[Acts 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 15:5</span></span>

But there rose up certain of the sect of the Pharisees - This verse
appears to be part of the declaration made by Paul and Barnabas to this
council: for, having stated how God blessed their ministry among the
Gentiles, they proceed to declare how all the good work was likely to be
destroyed by certain Pharisees, who, having received the Christian
faith, came down to Antioch, and began to teach the necessity of
circumcision, etc., and thus filled the minds of the young converted
Gentiles with doubtful disputations.

[Acts 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 15:6</span></span>

The apostles and elders came together - This was the first council ever
held in the Christian Church; and we find that it was composed of the
apostles and elders simply.

[Acts 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 15:7</span></span>

When there had been much disputing - By those of the sect of the
believing Pharisees; for they strongly contended for circumcision, and
at the head of these, tradition tells us, was Cerinthus, a name famous
in the primitive Church, as one who labored to unite the law and the
Gospel, and to make the salvation promised by the latter dependent on
the performance of the rites and ceremonies prescribed by the former.
Though the apostles and elders were under the inspiration of the
Almighty, and could by this inspiration have immediately determined the
question, yet it was highly necessary that the objecting party should be
permitted to come forward and allege their reasons for the doctrines
they preached, and that these reasons should be fairly met by argument,
and the thing proved to be useless in itself, inexpedient in the present
case, and unsupported by any express authority from God, and serving no
purpose to the Gentiles, who in their uncircumcised state, by believing
in Christ Jesus, had been made partakers of the Holy Ghost.

Peter rose up, and said - This was after the matters in dispute had been
fully debated; and now the apostles, like judges, after hearing counsel
on both sides, proceed to give judgment on the case.

A good while ago - Αφ' ἡμερων αρχαιων, From the days of old: a phrase
which simply signifies some years ago; and, if he here refers to the
conversion of Cornelius, (see Acts 10:1-48), he must mean about ten
years before this time; but it is more likely that he refers to that
time when Christ gave him the keys of the kingdom of heaven, that be
might open the door of faith to the Gentiles.

God made choice among us - That is, he chose me to be the first apostle
of the Gentiles.

[Acts 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 15:8</span></span>

And God which knoweth the hearts - Ο καρδιογνωϚης Θεος. We had this
epithet of the Divine Being once before; see [Act
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#024.md), and the note there: it occurs no
where else in the New Testament.

Bare them witness - Considered them as proper or fit to receive the
Gospel of Christ. It is properly remarked by learned men, that μαρτυρειν
τινι, to bear witness to any person, signifies to approve, to testify in
behalf of. Here it signifies that, as God evidently sent the Gospel to
the Gentiles, and, by the preaching of it, conveyed the Holy Spirit to
them who believed, and as he can make no improper judgment of any who
knows all hearts and their secrets, therefore what he had done was
right: he saw that it was time for them to receive the Gospel; and he
saw that they might be safely trusted with this heavenly deposit; and
the experience of eighteen hundred years has justified the conduct of
God.

[Acts 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 15:9</span></span>

Put no difference between us and them - Giving them the Holy Spirit,
though uncircumcised, just as he had given it to us who were
circumcised: an evident proof that, in the judgment of God, circumcision
was no preparation to receive the Gospel of Christ. And as the
purification of the heart by the Holy Spirit was the grand object of the
religion of God, and that alone by which the soul could be prepared for
a blessed immortality, and the Gentiles had received that without
circumcision, consequently, the shadow could not be considered of any
worth, now the substance was communicated.

[Acts 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 15:10</span></span>

Now therefore why tempt ye God - A God, by giving the Holy Spirit to the
Gentiles, evidently shows he does not design them to be circumcised, in
order to become debtors to the law, to fulfill all its precepts, etc.,
why will ye provoke him to displeasure by doing what he evidently
designs shall not be done?

A yoke - which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear? - This does
not refer to the moral law - that was of eternal obligation - but to the
ritual law, which, through the multitude of its sacrifices, ordinances,
etc., was exceedingly burthensome to the Jewish people. And had not God,
by an especial providence, rendered both their fields and their flocks
very fruitful, they could not possibly have borne so painful a ritual.

There is a curious story in Midrash Shochar, told in Yalkut Simeoni,
part i. fol. 229, where Korah is represented as showing the oppressive
nature of the law, and avarice of its priests, in justification of his
rebellion. "There was," said he, "a widow in our neighbourbood who had
two orphan children: she had one field; and, when she began to plough
it, one came and said, Thou shalt not plough with an ox and an ass
together. When she went to sow it, he said, Thou shalt not sow thy field
with divers seeds. When she began to reap, and to gather the sheaves
together, he said, Leave a handful and the corners of the field for the
poor. When she prepared to thresh it, he said, Give me the
wave-offering, and the first and second tithes. She did as she was
commanded, and then went and sold her field, and bought two ewes, that
she might clothe herself and family with the wool, and get profit by the
lambs. When they brought forth their lambs, Aaron came and said, Give me
the firstlings, for the holy blessed God hath said, All the first born,
whatsoever openeth the womb, shall be thine. She yielded to his demands,
and gave him two lambs. When shearing time came, he said, Give me the
first fruits of the wool. When the widow had done this, she said, I
cannot stand before this man; I will kill my sheep and eat them. When
she had killed the sheep, Aaron came and said, Give me the shoulder, and
the jaws, and the ventricle. The widow said, Though I have killed my
sheep, I am not delivered from this man; I therefore consecrate the
whole to God. Then Aaron said, All belongs to me, for the holy blessed
God hath said, Every thing that is consecrated in Israel shall be his,
i.e. the priest's. He therefore took the whole carcasses, and marched
off, leaving the widow and her orphan daughters overwhelmed with
affliction." This is a terrible picture of the requisitions of the
Mosaic ritual; and, though exaggerated, it contains so many true
features that it may well be said, This is a yoke which neither we nor
our fathers were able to bear. See Schoettgen. In the same vexatious way
may the tithes of the national Church in this country be exacted, and in
this very way is the exaction frequently exercised. It is high time that
these abuses should be corrected.

[Acts 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 15:11</span></span>

Through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ we shall be saved - This
seems to be an answer to an objection, "Has not God designed to save us,
the Jews, by an observance of the law; and them, the Gentiles, by the
faith of the Gospel?" No: for we Jews can be saved no other way than
through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ; and this is the way in which
the Gentiles in question have been saved. There is but one way of
salvation for Jews and Gentiles, the grace, mercy, or favor coming by
and through the Lord Jesus, the Christ; this is now fully opened to the
Gentiles; and we believe we shall be saved in the same way.

[Acts 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 15:12</span></span>

All the multitude kept silence - The strong facts stated by St. Peter
could not be controverted. His speech may be thus analyzed:

1\. Circumcision is a sign of the purification of the heart.

2\. That purification can only be effected by the Holy Ghost.

3\. This Holy Spirit was hitherto supposed to be the portion of those
only who had received circumcision.

4\. But the Gentiles, who were never circumcised, nor kept any part of
the law of Moses, have had their hearts purified by faith in Christ
Jesus.

5\. As God, therefore, has given them the thing signified, he evidently
does not intend that the sign should be administered.

6\. Should we impose this burthensome rite, we should most evidently be
provoking God, who plainly shows us that he intends no more to save in
this way.

7\. Therefore it is evident that both Jews and Gentiles are to be saved
through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Gave audience to Barnabas and Paul - These apostles came forward next,
to corroborate what Peter had said, by showing the miracles and wonders
which God had by them wrought among the Gentiles. Peter stated facts:
Paul and Barnabas confirmed the statement.

[Acts 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 15:13</span></span>

James answered - He was evidently president of the council, and is
generally called bishop of Jerusalem. The rest either argued on the
subject, or gave their opinion; James alone pronounced the definitive
sentence. Had Peter been prince and head of the apostles, and of the
Church, he would have appeared here in the character of judge, not of
mere counsellor or disputant. Thy popish writers say that "James
presided because the council was held in his own church." These men
forget that there was not then what they term a Church on the face of
the earth. The Church, or assembly of believers, then met in private
houses; for there was no building for the exclusive purpose of Christian
worship then, nor till long after. These writers also forget that the
pope pretends to be the head of the catholic or universal Church; and,
consequently, no man can preside where he is present, but himself. Peter
did not preside here; and this was the first ecclesiastical council, and
now, if ever, he should have assumed his character of prince and chief;
but he did not; nor did any of the other apostles invite him to it,
which they would have done had they thought that Jesus Christ
constituted him head of the Church. From this very circumstance there is
the most demonstrative evidence that Peter was no pope, and that the
right of his pretended successor is a nonentity.

[Acts 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 15:14</span></span>

Simeon hath declared - It is remarkable that James does not give him
even the title which he received from our Lord at the time in which he
is supposed to have been made head of the Church, and vicar of Christ
upon earth; so that, it is evident, James did not understand our Lord as
giving Peter any such pre-eminence; and, therefore, he does not even
call him Peter, but simply Simeon. It is truly surprising that such a
vast number of important pretensions should rest on such slight
foundations! If tradition, no matter how interrupted or precarious, did
not lend its support, feeble as that necessarily must be, the cause
tried by plain Scripture would fall to the ground.

To take out of them a people for his name - To form among the Gentiles,
as he had among the Jews, a people called by his name and devoted to his
honor.

[Acts 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 15:15</span></span>

And to this agree the words of the prophets - Peter had asserted the
fact of the conversion of the Gentiles; and James shows that that fact
was the fulfillment of declarations made by the prophets.

[Acts 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 15:16</span></span>

After this I will return, and will build again, etc. - These two verses,
16th and 17th, are quoted from [Amo
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#011.md), [Amo
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#012.md), nearly as they now stand in the
best editions of the Septuagint, and evidently taken from that version,
which differs considerably from the Hebrew text. As St. James quoted
them as a prophecy of the calling of the Gentiles into the Church of
God, it is evident the Jews must have understood them in that sense,
otherwise they would have immediately disputed his application of them
to the subject in question, and have rejected his conclusion by denying
the premises. But that the words were thus understood by the ancient
Jews, we have their own testimony. In Sanhedr. fol. 69, we have these
remarkable words: "Rabbi Nachman said to Rabbi Isaac, 'Whence art thou
taught when Bar Naphli will come?' He saith unto him, 'Who is this Bar
Naphli?' The other replied, 'He is the Messiah.' 'Dost thou then call
the Messiah Bar Naphli?' 'Yes,' said he, 'for it is written, In that day
I will build again the tabernacle of David, הנפלת Hanopheleth, which is
falling down.'" This is evidently a quotation from [Amo
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#011.md), and a proof that the Jews
understood it to be a prophecy concerning the Messiah. See Lightfoot.

[Acts 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 15:17</span></span>

That the residue of men might seek - Instead of this, the Hebrew has,
That they may possess the remnant of Edom. Now it is evident that, in
the copy from which the Seventy translated, they found ידרשו yidreshu,
they might seek, instead of יירשו yireshu, they may possess, where the
whole difference between the two words is the change of the י yod for a
ד daleth, which might be easily done; and they found אדם adam, man, or
men, instead of אדום Edom, the Idumeans, which differs from the other
only by the insertion of ו vau between the two last letters. None of the
MSS. collated by Kennicott and De Rossi confirm these readings, in which
the Septuagint, Arabic, and St. James agree. It shows, however, that
even in Jerusalem, and in the early part of the apostolic age, the
Septuagint version was quoted in preference to the Hebrew text; or, what
is tantamount, was quoted in cases where we would have thought the
Hebrew text should have been preferred, because better understood. But
God was evidently preparing the way of the Gospel by bringing this
venerable version into general credit and use; which was to be the means
of conveying the truths of Christianity to the whole Gentile world. How
precious should this august and most important version be to every
Christian, and especially to every Christian minister! A version,
without which no man ever did or ever can critically understand the New
Testament. And I may add that, without the assistance afforded by this
version, there never could have been a correct translation of the Hebrew
text, since that language ceased to be vernacular, into any language.
Without it, even St. Jerome could have done little in translating the
Old Testament into Latin; and how much all the modern versions owe to
St. Jerome's Vulgate, which owes so much to the Septuagint, most
Biblical scholars know.

[Acts 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 15:18</span></span>

Known unto God are all his works from the beginning - As if he had said,
This is not a new counsel of God: he had purposed, from the time he
called the Israelites, to make the Gentiles partakers of the same grace
and mercy; and ultimately to destroy those rites and ceremonies which
separated them from each other. He therefore has sent the Gospel of his
Son, proclaiming equally peace to him that is afar off, the Gentiles,
and to him that is nigh, the Jews.

The whole of this verse is very dubious: the principal part of it is
omitted by the most ancient MSS., and Griesbach has left γνωϚα απ'
αιωνος doubtful, and has thrown εϚι τῳ Θεῳ παντα τα εργα αὑτου out of
the text. Of the former clause, Professor White, in his Crisews, says,
"forsitan delenda," "probably these words should be blotted out." And of
the latter clause he says, "certissime delenda," "most assuredly these
should be blotted out." Supposing the whole to be genuine, critics have
labored to find out the sense. Some very learned men, and particularly
Schleusner, contend that the word γνωϚα, from γινωσκειν, to know, should
be understood here in the same sense in which ידא yada is in many parts
of the Old Testament, which not only signifies to know, but to approve,
love, etc. They therefore would translate the passage thus: All the
works of God are ever dear unto him. And, if so, consequently we might
naturally expect him to be merciful to the Gentiles, as well as to the
Jews; and the evidence now afforded of the conversion of the Gentiles is
an additional proof that all God's works are equally dear to him.

[Acts 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 15:19</span></span>

Wherefore my sentence is - Διο εγω κρινω, Wherefore I judge. There is an
authority here that does not appear in the speech of St. Peter; and this
authority was felt and bowed to by all the council; and the decree
proposed by St. James adopted.

[Acts 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 15:20</span></span>

But that we write unto them - Four things are prohibited in this decree:

1\. Pollutions of idols;

2\. fornication;

3\. things strangled;

4\. blood.

By the first, Pollutions of Idols, or, as it is in [Act
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#025.md), meats offered to idols, not
only all idolatry was forbidden, but eating things offered in sacrifice
to idols, knowing that they were thus offered, and joining with
idolaters in their sacred feasts, which were always an incentive either
to idolatry itself, or to the impure acts generally attendant on such
festivals.

By the second, Fornication, all uncleanness of every kind was
prohibited; for πορνεια not only means fornication, but adultery,
incestuous mixtures, and especially the prostitution which was so common
at the idol temples, viz. in Cyprus, at the worship of Venus; and the
shocking disorders exhibited in the Bacchanalia, Lupercalia, and several
others.

By the third, Things Strangled, we are to understand the flesh of those
animals which were strangled for the purpose of keeping the blood in the
body, as such animals were esteemed a greater delicacy.

By the fourth, Blood, we are to understand, not only the thing itself,
for the reasons which I have assigned in the note on [Gen
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#004.md), and for others detailed at the
end of this chapter; but also all cruelty, manslaughter, murder, etc.,
as some of the ancient fathers have understood it.

Instead of του αἱματος, blood, some have conjectured that we should read
χοιρειας, swine's flesh; for they cannot see, first, that there can be
any harm in eating of blood; and, secondly, that, as the other three
things neither have nor can have any moral evil in them, it would seem
strange that they should be coupled with a thing which, on all hands, is
confessed to have much moral turpitude. Answers to such trifling
objections will be found at the end of the chapter. It is only necessary
to add that this χοιρειας, which is the critical emendation of Dr.
Bentley, is not supported by one MS. or version in existence.

At the close of this verse, the Codex Bezae, and several others, add a
fifth thing, And not to do to others what they would not have done to
themselves. Though this is a very ancient reading, it does not appear to
be genuine.

[Acts 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 15:21</span></span>

Moses of old time hath in every city - The sense of this verse seems to
be this: As it was necessary to write to the Gentiles what was strictly
necessary to be observed by them, relative to these points, it was not
so to the converted Jews; for they had Moses, that is, the law, preached
to them, κατα πολιν, in the city, that is, Antioch; and, by the reading
of the law in the synagogues every Sabbath day, they were kept in
remembrance of those institutions which the Gentiles, who had not the
law, could not know. Therefore, James thought that a letter to the
converted Gentiles would be sufficient, as the converted Jews had
already ample instruction on these points.

[Acts 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 15:22</span></span>

Then pleased it the apostles and elders, with the whole Church - James
determined what ought to be done; and the whole assembly resolved how
that should be done.

Chosen men of their own company - Paul and Barnabas were to return: they
could have witnessed to the Church at Antioch what was done at the
council at Jerusalem; but as it was possible that their testimony might
be suspected, from the part they had already taken in this question at
Antioch, it was necessary that a deputation from the council should
accompany them. Accordingly Judas and Silas are sent to corroborate by
their oral testimony what was contained in the letters sent from the
council.

[Acts 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 15:23</span></span>

Send greeting unto the brethren - of the Gentiles - There was no
occasion to send such a letter to the brethren which were of the Jews,
because that law which had been so long read in their synagogues taught
them all those things; and therefore the epistle is sent exclusively to
the Gentiles. The word greeting is in the original χαιρειν, to be well,
to be safe; a very usual form in Greek epistles, the word ευχομαι being
understood, I wish thee to be well.

[Acts 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 15:24</span></span>

Certain which went out from us - So the persons who produced these
doubtful disputations at Antioch, etc., had gone out from the apostles
at Jerusalem, and were of that Church: persons zealous for the law, and
yet, strange to tell, so conscientiously attached to the Gospel that
they risked their personal safety by professing it.

To whom we gave no such commandment - As, therefore, they went out from
that Church, they should have taught nothing which was not owned and
taught by it; much less should they have taught in opposition to it.

[Acts 15:26](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 15:26</span></span>

Men that have hazarded their lives - This was a high character of Paul
and Barnabas: they had already suffered much in the cause of Christ, and
exposed their lives to the most imminent danger, and were intent on the
same work, notwithstanding the increasing dangers in the way.

[Acts 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 15:27</span></span>

Judas and Silas - shall - tell you the same things - These were proofs
that the testimony of Paul and Barnabas was true; and that the letter
was not forged, as they could witness the same things which the letter
contained.

[Acts 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 15:28</span></span>

For it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us - The whole council had
met under his direction; had consulted under his influence; and gave
forth their decree from his especial inspiration.

Necessary things - They were necessary, howsoever burthensome they might
appear; and necessary, not only for the time, place, or occasion; but
for all times, all places, and all occasions. See this proved in the
observations at the end of this chapter.

[Acts 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 15:29</span></span>

Ye shall do well - But, if they did not keep themselves from these
things, they would do ill; that is, they would sin against God, whose
Spirit had commanded them to keep from these things. And who can do any
of these forbidden things, and keep either a guiltless or a tender
conscience?

Fare-well - An old English form of expressing good wishes and good will.
It is compounded of to go, and much, well, very much. Go well, go
prosperously! - tantamount with good speed! may you succeed well! may
God direct you! Like to that other form of sound words, God be with you!
corrupted now into good by to ye! And of the same meaning with adieu! a
Dieu, to God; that is, I commend you to God. All these terms savour not
only of good will, or benevolence, but also of piety. Our pious
ancestors believed that nothing was safe, nothing protected, nothing
prosperous, over which the shield of God was not extended; and,
therefore, in their familiar good wishes, they gave each other to God.
The Greek word ερῥωσθε, errhosthe, here used, from ῥωννυμι, to
strengthen, make strong, has nearly the same signification: be strong,
courageous, active, be in health, and be prosperous! What a pity that
such benevolent and pious wishes should degenerate into cool
formalities, or unmeaning compliments!

[Acts 15:31](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">act 15:31</span></span>

They rejoiced for the consolation - It was not a matter of small moment
to have a question on which such stress was laid decided by an apostolic
council, over which the Spirit of God presided.

[Acts 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 15:32</span></span>

Judas and Silas, being prophets - That is, being teachers in the Church.
This signification of the word prophet we have often already seen. See
the notes on [Act 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#027.md); [Act
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#001.md).

Exhorted the brethren - To abide steadily attached to God, and to each
other, in peace, love, and unity.

And confirmed them - In the blessed truths they had already received.

[Acts 15:33](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">act 15:33</span></span>

They were let go - That is, both had liberty to depart; but Silas chose
to stay a little longer with the brethren.

[Acts 15:34](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">act 15:34</span></span>

Notwithstanding it pleased Silas, etc. - This whole verse is wanting in
ABEG, a great number besides, with the Syriac, Arabic, Coptic, Slavonic,
Vulgate, and some of the fathers. It does not appear to have been
originally in the text.

[Acts 15:36](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">act 15:36</span></span>

Let us go - and visit our brethren in every city - This heavenly man
projected a journey to Cyprus, Pamphylia, Pisidia, Lycaonia, Salamis,
Paphos, Perga, Iconium, Lystra, Derbe, Antioch in Pisidia, and
elsewhere; for in all these places he had preached and founded Churches
in the preceding year. He saw it was necessary to water the seed he had
planted; for these were young converts, surrounded with impiety,
opposition, and superstition, and had few advantages among themselves.

[Acts 15:37](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">act 15:37</span></span>

Barnabas determined to take with them John - John Mark was his sister's
son; and natural affection might have led him to the partiality here
mentioned.

[Acts 15:38](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">act 15:38</span></span>

But Paul thought not good to take him with them - On this subject, see
the note on [Act 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#013.md).

[Acts 15:39](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">act 15:39</span></span>

The contention was so sharp between them - For all this sentence, there
is only in the Greek text εγενετο ουν παροξυσμος; there was therefore a
paroxysm, an incitement, a stirring up, from παροξυνω, compounded of
παρα, intensive, and οξυνω, to whet, or sharpen: there was a sharp
contention. But does this imply anger or ill-will on either side?
Certainly not. Here, these two apostles differed, and were strenuous,
each in support of the part he had adopted. "Paul," as an ancient Greek
commentator has it, "being influenced only with the love of
righteousness; Barnabas being actuated by love to his relative." John
Mark had been tried in trying circumstances, and he failed; Paul,
therefore, would not trust him again. The affection of Barnabas led him
to hope the best, and was therefore desirous to give him another trial.
Barnabas would not give up: Paul would not agree. They therefore agreed
to depart from each other, and take different parts of the work: each
had an attendant and companion at hand; so Barnabas took John Mark, and
sailed to Cyprus: Paul took Silas, and went into Syria. John Mark proved
faithful to his uncle Barnabas; and Silas proved faithful to his master
Paul. To all human appearance it was best that they separated; as the
Churches were more speedily visited, and the work of God more widely and
more rapidly spread. And why is it that most men attach blame to this
difference between Paul and Barnabas? And why is it that this is brought
in as a proof of the sinful imperfection of these holy apostles? Because
those who thus treat the subject can never differ with another without
feeling wrong tempers; and then, as destitute of good breeding as they
are of humility, they attribute to others the angry, proud, and wrathful
dispositions which they feel in themselves; and, because they cannot be
angry and sin not, they suppose that even apostles themselves cannot.
Thus, in fact, we are always bringing our own moral or immoral
qualifications to be a standard, by which we are to judge of the
characters and moral feelings of men who were actuated by zeal for God's
glory, brotherly kindness, and charity. Should any man say there was sin
in this contention between Paul and Barnabas, I answer, there is no
evidence of this in the text. Should he say, the word παροξυσμος,
paroxysm, denotes this, I answer, it does not. And the verb παροξυνομαι
is often used in a good sense. So Isocrates ad Demosth. cap. xx. μαλιϚα
δ' αν παροξυνθειης ορεχθηναι των καλων εργων· "But thou wilt be the more
stirred up to the love of good works." And such persons forget that this
is the very form used by the apostle himself, [Heb
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#024.md) : και κατανοωμεν αλληλους εις
παροξυσμον αγαπης και καλων εργων· which, these objectors would be
highly displeased with me, were I to translate, Let us consider one
another to an angry contention of love and good works. From these
examples, it appears that the word is used to signify incitement of any
kind; and, if taken in a medical sense, to express the burning fit of an
ague: it is also taken to express a strong excitement to the love of God
and man, and to the fruits by which such love can be best proved; and,
in the case before us, there was certainly nothing contrary to this pure
principle in either of those heavenly men. See also Kypke on [Heb
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#024.md).

[Acts 15:40](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">act 15:40</span></span>

Being recommended - unto the grace of God - Much stress has been laid
upon this, to show that Barnabas was in the wrong, and Paul in the
right, because "the brethren recommended Paul and Silas to the grace of
God; but they did not recommend Barnabas and John Mark: this proves that
the Church condemned the conduct of Barnabas, but approved that of
Paul." Now, there is no proof that the Church did not recommend Barnabas
to the grace of God, as well as Paul; but, as St. Luke had for the
present dropped the story of Barnabas, and was now going on with that of
Paul and Silas, he begins it at this point, viz. his being recommended
by the brethren to the grace of God; and then goes on to tell of his
progress in Syria, Derbe, Lystra, etc., etc. See the next chapter. And
with this verse should the following chapter begin; and this is the
division followed by the most correct copies of the Greek text.

[Acts 15:41](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">act 15:41</span></span>

Confirming the Churches - This was the object of his journey: they were
young converts, and had need of establishment; and there is no doubt
that, by showing them the decision made at the late council of
Jerusalem, their faith was greatly strengthened, their hope confirmed,
and their love increased. It was this consideration, no doubt, that led
some ancient MSS. and some versions to add here, They delivered them the
decrees of the apostles and elders to keep; which clause certainly was
not an original part of the text, but seems to have been borrowed from
the fourth verse of the following chapter. Some have thought that the
fourth and fifth verses of the next chapter really belong to this place;
or that the first, second, and third verses of it should be read in a
parenthesis; but of this there does not appear to be any particular
necessity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 16](act016.md)

</div>
