<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act024)  [Next](act026.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#001.md)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 25:0</span></span>

Porcius Festus being appointed governor of Judea, instead of Felix, the
Jews beseech him to have Paul brought up to Jerusalem, that he might be
tried there; they lying in wait to kill him on the way, [Act
25:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#001.md). Festus refuses, and desires
those who could prove any thing against him, to go with him to Caesarea,
[Act 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#004.md), [Act
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#005.md). Festus, having tarried at
Jerusalem about ten days, returns to Caesarea, and the next day Paul is
brought to his trial, and the Jews of Jerusalem bring many groundless
charges against him, against which he defends himself, [Act
25:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#006.md). In order to please the Jews,
Festus asks Paul if he be willing to go up to Jerusalem, and be tried
there, [Act 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#009.md). Paul refuses, and
appeals to Caesar, and Festus admits the appeal, [Act
25:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#010.md). King Agrippa, and Bernice
his wife, come to Caesarea to visit Festus, and are informed by him of
the accusations against Paul, his late trial, and his appeal from them
to Caesar, [Act 25:14-21](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#014.md). Agrippa
desires to hear Paul; and a hearing is appointed for the following day,
[Act 25:22](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#022.md). Agrippa, Bernice, the
principal officers and chief men of the city being assembled, Paul is
brought forth, [Act 25:23](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#023.md). Festus
opens the business with generally stating the accusations against Paul,
his trial on these accusations, the groundless and frivolous nature of
the charges, his own conviction of his innocence, and his desire that
the matter might be heard by the king himself, that he might have
something specifically to write to the emperor, to whom he was about to
send Paul, agreeably to his appeal, [Act
25:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#024.md).

[Acts 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 25:1</span></span>

Now when Festus was come into the province - By the province is meant
Judea; for, after the death of Herod Agrippa, Claudius thought it
imprudent to trust the government in the hands of his son Agrippa, who
was then but seventeen years of age; therefore Cuspius Fadus was sent to
be procurator. And when afterwards Claudius had given to Agrippa the
tetrarchate of Philip, that of Batanea and Abila, he nevertheless kept
the province of Judea more immediately in his own hands, and governed it
by procurators sent from Rome. Joseph. Ant. lib. xx. cap. 7, sec. 1.
Felix being removed, Porcius Festus is sent in his place; and having
come to Caesarea, where the Roman governor generally had his residence,
after he had tarried three days, he went up to Jerusalem, to acquaint
himself with the nature and complexion of the ecclesiastical government
of the Jews; no doubt, for the purpose of the better administration of
justice among them.

[Acts 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 25:2</span></span>

The high priest - informed him against Paul - They supposed that as
Felix, to please them, on the resignation of his government, had left
Paul bound, so Festus, on the assumption of it, would, to please them,
deliver him into their hand; but, as they wished this to be done under
the color of justice, they exhibited a number of charges against Paul,
which they hoped would appear to Festus a sufficient reason why a new
trial should be granted; and he be sent to Jerusalem to take this trial.
Their motive is mentioned in the succeeding verse.

[Acts 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 25:4</span></span>

Festus answered, that Paul should be kept at Caesarea - It is truly
astonishing that Festus should refuse this favor to the heads of the
Jewish nation, which, to those who were not in the secret, must appear
so very reasonable; and especially as, on his coming to the government,
it might be considered an act that was likely to make him popular; and
he could have no interest in denying their request. But God had told
Paul that he should testify of him at Rome; and he disposed the heart of
Festus to act as he did; and thus disappointed the malice of the Jews,
and fulfilled his own gracious design.

He - would depart shortly - So had the providence of God disposed
matters that Festus was obliged to return speedily to Caesarea; and thus
had not time to preside in such a trial at Jerusalem. And this reason
must appear sufficient to the Jews; and especially as he gave them all
liberty to come and appear against him, who were able to prove the
alleged charges.

[Acts 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 25:5</span></span>

Let them - which among you are able - Οἱ δυνατοι, Those who have
authority; for so is this word often used by good Greek authors, and by
Josephus. Festus seems to have said: "I have heard clamours from the
multitude relative to this man; but on such clamours no accusation
should be founded: yourselves have only the voice of the multitude as
the foundation of the request which you now make. I cannot take up
accusations which may affect the life of a Roman citizen on such
pretenses. Are there any respectable men among you; men in office and
authority, whose character is a pledge for the truth of their
depositions, who can prove any thing against him? If so, let these come
down to Caesarea, and the cause shall be tried before me; and thus we
shall know whether he be a malefactor or not."

[Acts 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 25:6</span></span>

When he had tarried - more than ten days - The strangeness of this mode
of expression suggests the thought that our printed text is not quite
correct in this place; and this suspicion is confirmed by an examination
of MSS. and versions: ἡμερας ου πλειους οκτω η δεκα, Not more than Eight
Or ten days, is the reading of ABC, several others of great
respectability, with the Coptic, Armenian, and Vulgate. Griesbach admits
this reading into the text: and of it Professor White says, Lectio
indubie genuina: "This is doubtless the genuine reading."

[Acts 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 25:7</span></span>

The Jews - laid many and grievous complaints against Paul - As they must
have perceived that the Roman governors would not intermeddle with
questions of their law, etc., they no doubt invented some new charges,
such as sedition, treason, etc., in order to render the mind of the
governor evil affected towards Paul; but their malicious designs were
defeated, for assertion would not go for proof before a Roman tribunal:
this court required proof, and the blood-thirsty persecutors of the
apostle could produce none.

[Acts 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 25:8</span></span>

While he answered for himself - In this instance St. Luke gives only a
general account, both of the accusations and of St. Paul's defense. But,
from the words in this verse, the charges appear to have been threefold:

1\. That he had broken the law.

2\. That he had defiled the temple.

3\. That he dealt in treasonable practices: to all of which he no doubt
answered particularly; though we have nothing farther here than this,
Neither against the law of the Jews, neither against the temple, nor yet
against Caesar, have I offended any thing at all.

[Acts 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 25:9</span></span>

Willing to do the Jews a pleasure - This was merely to please them, and
conciliate their esteem; for he knew that, as Paul was a Roman citizen,
he could not oblige him to take a new trial at Jerusalem.

[Acts 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 25:10</span></span>

I stand at Caesar's judgment seat - Every procurator represented the
person of the emperor in the province over which he presided; and, as
the seat of government was at Caesarea, and Paul was now before the
tribunal on which the emperor's representative sat, he could say, with
the strictest propriety, that he stood before Caesar's judgment seat,
where, as a freeman of Rome, he should be tried.

As thou very well knowest - The record of this trial before Felix was
undoubtedly left for the inspection of Festus; for, as he left the
prisoner to his successor, he must also leave the charges against him,
and the trial which he had undergone. Besides, Festus must be assured of
his innocence, from the trial through which he had just now passed.

[Acts 25:11](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 25:11</span></span>

For if I be an offender - If it can be proved that I have broken the
laws, so as to expose me to capital punishment, I do not wish to save my
life by subterfuges; I am before the only competent tribunal; here my
business should be ultimately decided.

No man may deliver me unto them - The words of the apostle are very
strong and appropriate. The Jews asked as a favor, χαριν, from Festus,
that he would send Paul to Jerusalem, [Act
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#003.md). Festus, willing to do the Jews
χαριν, this favor, asked Paul if he would go to Jerusalem, and there be
judged, [Act 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#009.md). Paul says, I have
done nothing amiss, either against the Jews or against Caesar; therefore
no man με δυναται αυτοις χαρισασθαι, can make a Present of me to them;
that is, favor them so far as to put my life into their hands, and thus
gratify them by my death. Festus, in his address to Agrippa, [Act
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#016.md), admits this, and uses the same
form of speech: It is not the custom of the Romans, χαριζεσθαι,
gratuitously to give up any one, etc. Much of the beauty of this passage
is lost by not attending to the original words. See on [Act
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#016) (note.md).

I appeal unto Caesar - A freeman of Rome, who had been tried for a
crime, and sentence passed on him, had a right to appeal to the emperor,
if he conceived the sentence to be unjust; but, even before the sentence
was pronounced, he had the privilege of an appeal, in criminal cases, if
he conceived that the judge was doing any thing contrary to the laws.
Ante sententiam appellari potest in criminali negotio, si judex contra
leges hoc faciat. - Grotius.

An appeal to the emperor was highly respected. The Julian law condemned
those magistrates, and others having authority, as violaters of the
public peace, who had put to death, tortured, scourged, imprisoned, or
condemned any Roman citizen who had appealed to Caesar. Lege Julia de vi
publica damnatur, qui aliqua potestate praeditus, Civem Romanum ad
Imperatorem appellantem necarit, necarive jusserit, torserit,
verberauerit, condemnaverit, in publica vincula duci jusserit. Pauli
Recept. Sent. lib. v. t. 26.

This law was so very sacred and imperative, that, in the persecution
under Trajan, Pliny would not attempt to put to death Roman citizens who
were proved to have turned Christians; hence, in his letter to Trajan,
lib. x. Ep. 97, he says, Fuerunt alii similis amentiae, quos, quia cives
Romani erant, annotavi in urbem remittendos. 'There were others guilty
of similar folly, whom, finding them to be Roman citizens, I have
determined to send to the city." Very likely these had appealed to
Caesar.

[Acts 25:12](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 25:12</span></span>

Conferred with the council - From this circumstance, we may learn that
the appeal of Paul to Caesar was conditional; else Festus could not have
deliberated with his council whether it should be granted; for he had no
power to refuse to admit such an appeal. We may, therefore, understand
Paul thus: "I now stand before a tribunal where I ought to be judged; if
thou refuse to hear and try this cause, rather than go to Jerusalem, I
appeal to Caesar." Festus, therefore, consulted with the council,
whether he should proceed to try the cause, or send Paul to Rome; and it
appears that the majority were of opinion that he should be sent to
Caesar.

Hast thou appealed unto Caesar, etc. - Rather, Thou hast appealed unto
Caesar, and to Caesar thou shalt go. The Jews were disappointed of their
hope; and Festus got his hand creditably drawn out of a business with
which he was likely to have been greatly embarrassed.

[Acts 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 25:13</span></span>

King Agrippa - This was the son of Herod Agrippa, who is mentioned [Act
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#001.md). Upon the death of his father's
youngest brother, Herod, he succeeded him in the kingdom of Chalcis, by
the favor of the Emperor Claudius: Jos. Antiq. lib. xx. cap. 4, s. 2;
and Bell. lib. ii. cap. 12, s. 1. Afterwards, Claudius removed him from
that kingdom to a larger one, giving him the tetrarchy of Philip, which
contained Trachonitis, Batanea, and Gaulonitis. He gave him, likewise,
the tetrarchy of Lysanias, and the province which Varus had governed.
Jos. Antiq. lib. xx. cap. 6, s. 1; Bell. lib. ii. cap. 19, s. 8. Nero
made a farther addition, and gave him four cities, Abila, Julias in
Peraea, Tarichaea and Tiberias in Galilee: Jos. Antiq. lib. xx. cap. 7,
s. 4; Bell. lib. ii. cap 13, s. 2. Claudius gave him the power of
appointing the high priest among the Jews; Joseph. Antiq. lib. xx. cap.
1, s. 3; and instances of his exercising this power may be seen in
Joseph. Antiq. lib. xx. cap. 7, s. 8, 11. This king was strongly
attached to the Romans, and did every thing in his power to prevent the
Jews from rebelling against them; and, when he could not prevail, he
united his troops to those of Titus, and assisted in the siege of
Jerusalem: he survived the ruin of his country several years. See Bishop
Pearce and Calmet.

Bernice, or, as she is sometimes called, Berenice, was sister of this
Agrippa, and of the Drusilla mentioned [Act
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#024.md) : She was at first married to
her uncle Herod, king of Chalcis, Jos. Antiq. lib. xix. cap. 9, s. 1;
and, on his death, went to live with her brother Agrippa, with whom she
was violently suspected to lead an incestuous life. Juvenal, as usual,
mentions this in the broadest manner - Sat. vi. ver. 155: -

Deinde adamas notissimus, et Berenices

In digito factus pretiosior: hunc dedit olim

Barbarus incestae, dedit hunc Agrippa sorori.

"Next, a most valuable diamond, rendered more precious by being put on
the finger of Berenice; a barbarian gave it to this incestuous woman
formerly; and Agrippa gave this to his sister."

Josephus mentions the report of her having criminal conversation with
her brother Agrippa, φημης επισχουσης, ὁτι τἀδελφῳ συνῃει. To shield
herself from this scandal, she persuaded Polemo, king of Cilicia, to
embrace the Jewish religion, and marry her; this he was induced to do on
account of her great riches; but she soon left him, and he revolted to
heathenism: see Jos. Antiq. lib. xx. cap. 7, s. 3. After this, she lived
often with her brother, and her life was by no means creditable; she
had, however, address to ingratiate herself with Titus Vespasian, and
there were even rumors of her becoming empress - propterque insignem
reginae Berenices amorem, cui etiam nuptias pollicitus ferebatur. -
Suet. in Vit. Titi. Which was prevented by the murmurs of the Roman
people: Berenicen statim ab urbe dimisit, invitus invitam. - Ibid.
Tacitus also, Hist. lib. ii. cap. 1, speaks of her love intrigue with
Titus. From all accounts she must have been a woman of great address;
and, upon the whole, an exceptionable character.

[Acts 25:14](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 25:14</span></span>

Declared Paul's cause unto the king - Festus knew that Agrippa was
better acquainted with such matters than he was; and he wished, in some
sort, to make him a party in this business.

[Acts 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 25:15</span></span>

Desiring to have judgment against him - Instead of δικην, judgment,
καταδικην, condemnation, sentence of death, is the reading of ABC, and
several others, which is probably genuine. This is evidently the meaning
of the place, whichever reading we prefer. Nothing could satisfy these
men but the death of the apostle. It was not justice they wanted, but
his destruction.

[Acts 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 25:16</span></span>

It is not the manner of the Romans to deliver any man to die -
Χαριζεσθαι τινα ανθρωπον, To Make a Present of any man; gratuitously to
give up the life of any man, through favor or caprice. Here is a
reference to the subject discussed on [Act
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#011.md).

Before that he which is accused have the accusers face to face, etc. -
For this righteous procedure the Roman laws were celebrated over the
civilized world. Appian, in his Hist. Roman., says: ου πατριον σφισιν
ακριτους καταδικαζεσθαι. It is not their custom to condemn men before
they have been heard. And Philo De Praesid. Rom., says: τοτε γαρ κοινους
ἑαυτους παρεχοντες δικαϚας εξ ισου, και των κατηγορων και απολογουμενων
ακουομενοι, μηδενος ακριτου προκαταγινωσκειν αξιουντες, εβραβευον ουτε
προς εχθραν, ουτε προς χαριν, αλλα προς την φυσιν της αληθειας, τα
δοξαντα ειναι δικαια. "For then, by giving sentence in common, and
hearing impartially both plaintiff and defendant, not thinking it right
to condemn any person unheard, they decided as appeared to them to be
just; without either enmity or favor, but according to the merits of the
case." See Bp. Pearce. England can boast such laws, not only in her
statute books, but in constant operation in all her courts of justice.
Even the king himself, were he so inclined, could not imprison nor
punish a man without the regular procedure of the law; and twelve honest
men, before whom the evidence has been adduced, the case argued, and the
law laid down and explained, are ultimately to judge whether the man be
guilty or not guilty. Here, in this favored country, are no arbitrary
imprisonments - no Bastiles - no lettres de cachet. Lex facit Regem: the
law makes the king, says Bracton, and the king is the grand executor and
guardian of the laws - laws, in the eyes of which the character,
property, and life of every subject are sacred.

[Acts 25:18](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 25:18</span></span>

They brought none accusation of such things as I supposed - It was
natural for Festus, at the first view of things, to suppose that Paul
must be guilty of some very atrocious crime. When he found that he had
been twice snatched from the hands of the Jews; that he had been brought
to Caesarea, as a prisoner, two years before; that he had been tried
once before the Sanhedrin, and once before the governor of the province;
that he had now lain two years in bonds; and that the high priest and
all the heads of the Jewish nation had united in accusing him, and whose
condemnation they loudly demanded; when, I say, he considered all this,
it was natural for him to suppose the apostle to be some flagitious
wretch; but when he had tried the case, and heard their accusations and
his defense, how surprised was he to find that scarcely any thing that
amounted to a crime was laid to his charge; and that nothing that was
laid to his charge could be proved!

[Acts 25:19](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 25:19</span></span>

Questions - of their own superstition - Περι της ιδιας δειδιδαιμονιας;
Questions concerning their own religion. Superstition meant something as
bad among the Romans as it does among us; and is it likely that Festus,
only a procurator, should thus speak to Agrippa, a King, concerning his
own religion? He could not have done so without offering the highest
insult. The word δεισιδαιμονια must therefore simply mean religion - the
national creed, and the national worship, as I have at large proved it
to mean, in the observations at the end of [Act
17:34](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#034.md).

And of one Jesus, which was dead, etc. - In this way does this poor
heathen speak of the death and resurrection of Christ! There are many
who profess Christianity that do not appear to be much farther
enlightened.

[Acts 25:20](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 25:20</span></span>

I doubted of such manner of questions - Such as, whether he had broken
their law, defiled their temple; or whether this Jesus, who was dead,
was again raised to life.

[Acts 25:21](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 25:21</span></span>

Unto the hearing of Augustus - Εις την του ΣεβαϚου διαγνωσιν; To the
discrimination of the emperor. For, although σεβαϚος is usually
translated Augustus, and the Roman emperors generally assumed this
epithet, which signifies no more than the venerable, the august, get
here it seems to be used merely to express the emperor, without any
reference to any of his attributes or titles.

[Acts 25:22](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 25:22</span></span>

I would also hear the man myself - A spirit of curiosity, similar to
that of Herod, [Luk 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#008.md).

As Herod, the father of this Agrippa, had been so active an instrument
in endeavoring to destroy Christianity, having killed James, and was
about to have put Peter to death also, had not God sent him to his own
place, there is no doubt that Agrippa had heard much about Christianity;
and as to St. Paul, his conversion was so very remarkable that his name,
in connection with Christianity, was known, not only throughout Judea,
but through all Asia Minor and Greece. Agrippa, therefore might
naturally wish to see and hear a man of whom he had heard so much.

[Acts 25:23](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 25:23</span></span>

With great pomp - Μετα πολλης φαντασιας; With much phantasy, great
splendor, great parade, superb attendance or splendid retinue: in this
sense the Greek word is used by the best writers. Wetstein has very
justly remarked, that these children of Herod the Great made this
pompous appearance in that very city where, a few years before, their
father, for his Pride, was smitten of God, and eaten up by worms! How
seldom do the living lay any of God's judgments to heart!

The place of hearing - A sort of audience chamber, in the palace of
Festus. This was not a trial of Paul; there were no Jews present to
accuse him, and he could not be tried but at Rome, as he had appealed to
Caesar. These grandees wished to hear the man speak of his religion, and
in his own defense, through a principle of curiosity.

[Acts 25:26](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 25:26</span></span>

I have no certain thing to write - Nothing alleged against him has been
substantiated.

Unto my Lord - The title Κυριος, Dominus, Lord, both Augustus and
Tiberius had absolutely refused; and forbade, even by public edicts, the
application of it to themselves. Tiberius himself was accustomed to say
that he was lord only of his slaves, emperor or general of the troops,
and prince of the senate. See Suetonius, in his life of this prince. The
succeeding emperors were not so modest; they affected the title. Nero,
the then emperor, would have it; and Pliny the younger is continually
giving it to Trajan in his letters.

[Acts 25:27](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 25:27</span></span>

For it seemeth to me unreasonable, etc. - Every reader must feel the
awkward situation in which Festus stood. He was about to send a prisoner
to Rome, to appear before Nero, though he had not one charge to support
against him; and yet he must be sent, for he had appealed to Caesar. He
hoped therefore that Agrippa, who was of the Jewish religion, would be
able to discern more particularly the merits of this case; and might,
after hearing Paul, direct him how to draw up those letters, which, on
sending the prisoner, must be transmitted to the emperor.

This chapter ends as exceptionably as the twenty-first. It should have
begun at [Act 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#013.md), and have been
continued to the end of the twenty-sixth chapter, or both chapters have
been united in one.

1\. From St. Paul's appeal to Caesar, we see that it is lawful to avail
ourselves, even in the cause of God, of those civil privileges with
which his mercy has blessed us. It is often better to fall into the
hands of the heathen than into the hands of those who, from mistaken
views of religion, have their hearts filled with bitter persecuting
zeal. Those who can murder a man, pretendedly for God's sake, because he
does not think exactly with them on ceremonial or speculative points of
divinity, have no portion of that religion which came down from God.

2\. The Jews endeavored by every means to deny the resurrection of our
Lord; and it seems to have been one part of their accusation against
Paul, that he asserted that the man, Jesus, whom they had crucified, was
risen from the dead. On this subject, a pious writer observes: "What a
train of errors and miseries does one single instance of deceit draw
after it; and what a judgment upon those, who, by corrupting the guards
of the sepulchre, the witnesses of the resurrection of our Lord, have
kept the whole nation in infidelity!" Thus it often happens in the world
that one bad counsel, one single lie or calumny, once established, is
the source of infinite evils.

3\. The grand maxim of the Roman law and government, to condemn no man
unheard, and to confront the accusers with the accused, should be a
sacred maxim with every magistrate and minister, and among all private
Christians. How many harsh judgments and uncharitable censures would
this prevent! Conscientiously practised in all Christian societies,
detraction, calumny, tale-bearing, whispering, backbiting,
misunderstandings, with every unbrotherly affection, would necessarily
be banished from the Church of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 26](act026.md)

</div>
