<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act007)  [Next](act009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#001.md)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 8:0</span></span>

A general persecution is raised against the Church, [Act
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#001.md). Stephen's burial, [Act
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#002.md). Saul greatly oppresses the
followers of Christ, [Act 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#003.md), [Act
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#004.md). Philip the deacon goes to
Samaria, preaches, works many miracles, converts many persons, and
baptizes Simon the sorcerer, [Act
8:5-13](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#005.md). Peter and John are sent by the
apostles to Samaria; they confirm the disciples, and by prayer and
imposition of hands they confer the Holy Spirit, [Act
8:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#014.md). Simon the sorcerer, seeing
this, offers them money, to enable him to confer the Holy Spirit, [Act
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#018.md), [Act
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#019.md). He is sharply reproved by Peter,
and exhorted to repent, [Act 8:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#020.md).
He appears to be convinced of his sin, and implores an interest in the
apostle's prayers, [Act 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#024.md). Peter
and John, having preached the Gospel in the villages of Samaria, return
to Jerusalem, [Act 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#025.md). An angel of
the Lord commands Philip to go towards Gaza, to meet an Ethiopian
eunuch, [Act 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#026.md). He goes, meets, and
converses with the eunuch, preaches the Gospel to him, and baptizes him,
[Act 8:27-38](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#027.md). The Spirit of God
carries Philip to Azotus, passing through which, he preaches in all the
cities till he comes to Caesarea, [Act
8:39](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#039.md), [Act
8:40](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#040.md).

[Acts 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 8:1</span></span>

Saul was consenting unto his death - So inveterate was the hatred that
this man bore to Christ and his followers that he delighted in their
destruction. So blind was his heart with superstitious zeal that he
thought he did God service by offering him the blood of a fellow
creature, whose creed he supposed to be erroneous. The word συνευδοκων
signifies gladly consenting, being pleased with his murderous work! How
dangerous is a party spirit; and how destructive may zeal even for the
true worship of God prove, if not inspired and regulated by the spirit
of Christ!

It has already been remarked that this clause belongs to the conclusion
of the preceding chapter; so it stands in the Vulgate, and so it should
stand in every version.

There was a great persecution - The Jews could not bear the doctrine of
Christ's resurrection; for this point being proved demonstrated his
innocence and their enormous guilt in his crucifixion; as therefore the
apostles continued to insist strongly on the resurrection of Christ, the
persecution against them became hot and general.

They were all scattered abroad - except the apostles - Their Lord had
commanded them, when persecuted in one city, to flee to another: this
they did, but, wherever they went, they proclaimed the same doctrines,
though at the risk and hazard of their lives. It is evident, therefore,
that they did not flee from persecution, or the death it threatened; but
merely in obedience to their Lord's command. Had they fled through the
fear of death, they would have taken care not to provoke persecution to
follow them, by continuing to proclaim the same truths that provoked it
in the first instance.

That the apostles were not also exiled is a very remarkable fact: they
continued in Jerusalem, to found and organize the infant Church; and it
is marvellous that the hand of persecution was not permitted to touch
them. Why this should be we cannot tell; but so it pleased the great
Head of the Church. Bp. Pearce justly suspects those accounts, in
Eusebius and others, that state that the apostles went very shortly
after Christ's ascension into different countries, preaching and
founding Churches. He thinks this is inconsistent with the various
intimations we have of the continuance of the apostles in Jerusalem; and
refers particularly to the following texts: [Act
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#001.md), [Act
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#014.md), [Act
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#025.md); [Act
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#026.md), [Act
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#027.md); [Act
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#001.md), [Act
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#002.md); [Act
12:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#001.md); [Act
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002.md), [Act
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#004.md), [Act
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#006.md), [Act
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#022.md), [Act
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#023.md); [Act
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#017.md), [Act
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#018.md); [Gal
1:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#017.md); [Gal
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001.md), [Gal
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009.md). The Church at Jerusalem was the
first Christian Church; and consequently, the boast of the Church of
Rome is vain and unfounded. From this time a new era of the Church
arose. Hitherto the apostles and disciples confined their labors among
their countrymen in Jerusalem. Now persecution drove the latter into
different parts of Judea, and through Samaria; and those who had
received the doctrine of Christ at the pentecost, who had come up to
Jerusalem from different countries to be present at the feast, would
naturally return, especially at the commencement of the persecution, to
their respective countries, and proclaim to their countrymen the Gospel
of the grace of God. To effect this grand purpose, the Spirit was poured
out at the day of pentecost; that the multitudes from different
quarters, partaking of the word of life, might carry it back to the
different nations among whom they had their residence. One of the
fathers has well observed, that "these holy fugitives were like so many
lamps, lighted by the fire of the Holy Spirit, spreading every where the
sacred flame by which they themselves had been illuminated."

[Acts 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 8:2</span></span>

Devout men carried Stephen to his burial - The Greek word, συνεκομισαν,
signifies not only to carry, or rather to gather up, but also to do
every thing necessary for the interment of the dead. Among the Jews, and
indeed among most nations of the earth, it was esteemed a work of piety,
charity, and mercy, to bury the dead. The Jews did not bury those who
were condemned by the Sanhedrin in the burying place of the fathers, as
they would not bury the guilty with the innocent; and they had a
separate place for those who were stoned, and for those that were burnt.
According to the Tract Sanh. fol. 45, 46, the stone wherewith any one
was stoned, the post on which he was hanged, the sword by which he was
beheaded, and the cord by which he was strangled, were buried in the
same place with the bodies of the executed persons. As these persons
died under the curse of the law, the instruments by which they were put
to death were considered as unclean and accursed, and therefore buried
with their bodies. Among the ancients, whatever was grateful or useful
to a person in life was ordinarily buried with him; thus the sword,
spear, shield, etc., of the soldier were put in the same grave; the
faithful dog of the hunter, etc., etc. And on this principle the wife of
a Brahman burns with the body of her deceased husband.

Made great lamentation over him - This was never done over any condemned
by the Sanhedrin - they only bemoaned such privately; this great
lamentation over Stephen, if the same custom then prevailed as
afterwards, is a proof that Stephen was not condemned by the Sanhedrin;
he probably fell a sacrifice to the fury of the bigoted incensed mob,
the Sanhedrin not interfering to prevent the illegal execution.

[Acts 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 8:3</span></span>

Saul made havoc of the Church - The word ελυμαινετο, from λυμαινω, to
destroy, devastate, ravage, signifies the act of ferocious animals, such
as bears, wolves, and the like, in seeking and devouring their prey.
This shows with what persevering rancour this man pursued the harmless
Christians; and thus we see in him what bigotry and false zeal are
capable of performing.

Entering into every house - For, however it might be to others, a
Christian man's house was not his castle.

Haling men and women - Neither sparing age nor sex in the professors of
Christianity. The word συρων signifies dragging them before the
magistrates, or dragging them to justice.

Committed them to prison - For, as the Romans alone had the power of
life and death, the Sanhedrin, by whom Saul was employed, [Act
26:10](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#010.md), could do no more than arrest
and imprison, in order to inflict any punishment short of death. It is
true, St. Paul himself says that some of them were put to death, see
[Act 26:10](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#010.md); but this was either done
by Roman authority, or by what was called the judgment of zeal, i.e.
when the mob took the execution of the laws into their own hands, and
massacred those whom they pretended to be blasphemers of God: for these
sanctified their murderous outrage under the specious name of zeal for
God's glory, and quoted the ensample of Phineas as a precedent. Such
persons as these formed a sect among the Jews; and are known in
ecclesiastical history by the appellation of Zealots or Sicarii.

[Acts 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 8:4</span></span>

They that were scattered - went every where preaching - Thus the very
means devised by Satan to destroy the Church became the very instruments
of its diffusion and establishment. What are counsel, or might, or
cunning, or rage, or malice, against the Lord, whether they are excited
by men or devils!

[Acts 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 8:5</span></span>

Then Philip - One of the seven deacons, [Act
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#005.md), called afterwards, Philip the
Evangelist, [Act 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#008.md).

The city of Samaria - At this time there was no city of Samaria
existing: according to Josephus, Ant. lib. xiii. cap. 10, sect. 3,
Hyrcanus had so utterly demolished it as to leave no vestige of it
remaining. Herod the Great did afterwards build a city on the same spot
of ground; but he called it ΣεβαϚη i.e. Augusta, in compliment to the
Emperor Augustus, as Josephus tells us, Ant. lib. xv. cap. 8, sect. 5;
War, lib. i. cap. 2. sect. 7; and by this name of Sebast, or Augusta,
that city, if meant here, would in all probability have been called, in
the same manner as the town called Strato's Tower, (which Herod built on
the sea coasts, and to which he gave the name of Caesarea, in compliment
to Augustus Caesar), is always called Caesarea, wherever it is mentioned
in the Acts of the Apostles. Bp. Pearce.

As Sychem was the very heart and seat of the Samaritan religion, and
Mount Gerizim the cathedral church of that sect, it is more likely that
it should be intended than any other. See Lightfoot. As the Samaritans
received the same law with the Jews, as they also expected the Messiah,
as Christ had preached to and converted many of that people, [Joh
4:39-42](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#039.md), it was very reasonable that
the earliest offers of salvation should be made to them, before any
attempt was made to evangelize the Gentiles. The Samaritans, indeed,
formed the connecting link between the Jews and the Gentiles; for they
were a mongrel people, made up of both sorts, and holding both Jewish
and Pagan rites. See the account of them on [Mat
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#005) (note.md).

[Acts 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 8:6</span></span>

The people with one accord gave heed - He had fixed their attention, not
only with the gravity and importance of the matter of his preaching, but
also by the miracles which he did.

[Acts 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 8:7</span></span>

For unclean spirits, crying with loud voice, came out of many that were
possessed - Hence it is evident that these unclean spirits were not a
species of diseases; as they are here distinguished from the paralytic
and the lame. There is nothing more certain than that the New Testament
writers mean real diabolic possessions by the terms unclean spirits,
devils, etc., which they use. It is absolute trifling to deny it. If we,
in our superior sagacity can show that they were mistaken, that is quite
a different matter!

[Acts 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 8:8</span></span>

There was great joy in that city - No wonder, when they heard such
glorious truths, and were the subjects of such beneficent miracles.

[Acts 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 8:9</span></span>

A certain man called Simon - In ancient ecclesiastical writers, we have
the strangest account of this man; they say that he pretended to be the
Father, who gave the law to Moses; that he came in the reign of Tiberius
in the person of the Son; that he descended on the apostles on the day
of pentecost, in flames of fire, in quality of the Holy Spirit; that he
was the Messiah, the Paraclete, and Jupiter; that the woman who
accompanied him, called Helena, was Minerva, or the first intelligence;
with many other extravagancies which probably never had an existence.
All that we know to be certain on this subject is, that he used sorcery,
that he bewitched the people, and that he gave out himself to be some
great one.

This might be sufficient, were not men prone to be wise above what is
written.

Our word sorcerer, from the French sorcier, which, from the Latin sors,
a lot, signifies the using of lots to draw presages concerning the
future; a custom that prevailed in all countries, and was practised with
a great variety of forms. On the word lot see the note, [Lev
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#008.md), [Lev
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#009.md); and [Jos
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#002.md).

The Greek word, μαγευων, signifies practising the rites or science of
the Magi, or Mughan, the worshippers of fire among the Persians; the
same as Majoos, and Majooseean, from which we have our word magician.
See the note on [Mat 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#001.md).

And bewitched the people of Samaria - εξιϚων, Astonishing, amazing, or
confounding the judgment of the people, from εξιϚημι, to remove out of a
place or state, to be transported beyond one's self, to be out of one's
wits; a word that expresses precisely the same effect which the tricks
or legerdemain of a juggler produce in the minds of the common people
who behold his feats. It is very likely that Simon was a man of this
cast, for the east has always abounded in persons of this sort. The
Persian, Arabian, Hindoo, and Chinese jugglers are notorious to the
present day; and even while I write this, (July, 1813), three Indian
jugglers, lately arrived, are astonishing the people of London; and if
such persons can now interest and amaze the people of a city so
cultivated and enlightened, what might not such do among the grosser
people of Sychem or Sebaste, eighteen hundred years ago?

That himself was some great one - That the feats which he performed
sufficiently proved that he possessed a most powerful supernatural
agency, and could do whatsoever he pleased.

[Acts 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 8:10</span></span>

This man is the great power of God - That is, he is invested with it,
and can command and use it. They certainly did not believe him to be
God; but they thought him to be endued with a great supernatural power.

There is a remarkable reading here in several MSS. which should not pass
unnoticed. In ABCDE, several others, together with the Ethiopic,
Armenian, later Syriac, Vulgate, Itala, Origen, and Irenaeus, the word
καλουμενη is added before μεγαλη, and the passage reads thus, This
person is that power of God which is Called the Great. This appears to
be the true reading; but what the Samaritans meant by that power of God
which they termed the Great, we know not. Simon endeavored to persuade
the people that he was a very great personage, and he succeeded.

[Acts 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 8:12</span></span>

But when they believed Philip - So it is evident that Philip's word came
with greater power then that of Simon; and that his miracles stood the
test in such a way as the feats of Simon could not.

[Acts 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 8:13</span></span>

Simon himself believed also - He was struck with the doctrine and
miracles of Philip - he saw that these were real; he knew his own to be
fictitious. He believed therefore that Jesus was the Messiah, and was in
consequence baptized.

Continued with Philip, and wondered - ΕξιϚατο, He was as much astonished
and confounded at the miracles of Philip as the people of Samaria were
at his legerdemain. It is worthy of remark that εξιϚατο comes from the
same root, εξιϚημι, as the word εξιϚων, in [Act
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#009.md), and, if our translation bewitched
be proper there, it should be retained here; and then we should read,
Then Simon himself believed and was baptized, and continued with Philip,
being Bewitched, beholding the miracles and signs which were done. We
may see, from this circumstance, how improper the term bewitched is, in
the 9th and 11th verses.

[Acts 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 8:14</span></span>

The word of God - The doctrine of the Lord Jesus Christ.

They sent unto them Peter and John - There was no individual ruler among
the apostles - there was not even a president of the council; and Peter,
far from being chief of the apostles, is one of those sent, with the
same commission and authority as John, to confirm the Samaritans in the
faith.

[Acts 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 8:15</span></span>

When they were come down - The very same mode of speaking, in reference
to Jerusalem formerly, obtains now in reference to London. The
metropolis in both cases is considered as the centre; and all parts, in
every direction, no matter how distant, or how situated, are represented
as below the metropolis. Hence we so frequently hear of persons going up
to Jerusalem: and going down from the same. So in London the people
speak of going down to the country; and, in the country, of going up to
London. It is necessary to make this remark, lest any person should be
led away with the notion that Jerusalem was situated on the highest
ground in Palestine. It is a mode of speech which is used to designate a
royal or imperial city.

Prayed for them, that they might receive the Holy Ghost - It seems
evident from this case, that even the most holy deacons, though full of
the Holy Ghost themselves, could not confer this heavenly gift on
others. This was the prerogative of the apostles, and they were only
instruments; but they were those alone by which the Lord chose to work.
They prayed and laid their hands on the disciples, and God sent down the
gift; so, the blessing came from God by the apostles, and not from the
apostles to the people. But for what purpose was the Holy Spirit thus
given? Certainly not for the sanctification of the souls of the people:
this they had on believing in Christ Jesus; and this the apostles never
dispensed. It was the miraculous gifts of the Spirit which were thus
communicated: the speaking with different tongues, and those
extraordinary qualifications which were necessary for the successful
preaching of the Gospel; and doubtless many, if not all, of those on
whom the apostles laid their hands, were employed more or less in the
public work of the Church.

[Acts 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 8:17</span></span>

Then laid they their hands on them - Probably only on some select
persons, who were thought proper for public use in the Church. They did
not lay hands on all; for certainly no hands in this way were laid on
Simon.

[Acts 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 8:18</span></span>

When Simon saw, etc. - By hearing these speak with different tongues and
work miracles.

He offered them money - Supposing that the dispensing this Spirit
belonged to them - that they could give it to whomsoever they pleased;
and imagining that, as he saw them to be poor men, they would not object
to take money for their gift; and it is probable that he had gained
considerably by his juggling, and therefore could afford to spare some,
as he hoped to make it all up by the profit which he expected to derive
from this new influence.

[Acts 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 8:20</span></span>

Thy money perish with thee - This is an awful declaration; and imports
thus much, that if he did not repent, he and his ill-gotten goods would
perish together; his money should be dissipated, and his soul go into
perdition.

That the gift of God may be purchased - Peter takes care to inform not
only Simon, but all to whom these presents may come, that the Spirit of
God is the gift of God alone, and consequently cannot be purchased with
money; for what reward can He receive from his creatures, to whom the
silver and the gold belong, the cattle on a thousand hills, the earth
and its fullness!

[Acts 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 8:21</span></span>

Thou hast neither part nor lot in this matter - Thou hast no part among
the faithful, and no lot in this ministry. That the word κληρος, which
we translate lot, is to be understood as implying a spiritual portion,
office, etc., see proved in the note on [Num
26:55](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#055) (note.md).

Thy heart is not right - It is not through motives of purity,
benevolence, or love to the souls of men, that thou desirest to be
enabled to confer the Holy Ghost; it is through pride, vain glory, and
love of money: thou wouldest now give a little money that thou mightest,
by thy new gift, gain much.

[Acts 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 8:22</span></span>

Repent therefore of this thy wickedness - St. Peter did not suppose his
case to be utterly hopeless; though his sin, considered in its motives
and objects, was of the most heinous kind.

If perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee - His sin, as
yet, only existed in thought and purpose; and therefore it is said, if
perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven.

[Acts 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 8:23</span></span>

The gall of bitterness - A Hebraism for excessive bitterness: gall,
wormwood, and such like, were used to express the dreadful effects of
sin in the soul; the bitter repentance, bitter regret, bitter
sufferings, bitter death, etc., etc., which it produces. In [Deu
29:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#018.md), idolatry and its consequences
are expressed, by having among them a root that beareth Gall and
Wormwood. And in [Heb 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#015.md), some
grievous sin is intended, when the apostle warns them, lest any root of
Bitterness springing up, trouble you, and thereby many be defiled.

Bond of iniquity - An allusion to the mode in which the Romans secured
their prisoners, chaining the right hand of the prisoner to the left
hand of the soldier who guarded him; as if the apostle had said, Thou
art tied and bound by the chain of thy sin; justice hath laid hold upon
thee, and thou hast only a short respite before thy execution, to see if
thou wilt repent.

[Acts 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 8:24</span></span>

Pray ye to the Lord for me - The words of Peter certainly made a deep
impression on Simon's mind; and he must have had a high opinion of the
apostle's sanctity and influence with God, when he thus commended
himself to their prayers. And we may hope well of his repentance and
salvation, if the reading of the Codex Bezae, and the margin of the
later Syriac may be relied on: Pray ye to the Lord for me, that none
(τουτων των κακων) Of All Those Evils which ye have spoken (μοι) To Me,
may come upon me: (ὁς πολλα κλαιων ου διελιμπανεν) Who Wept Greatly, and
Did Not Cease. That is, he was an incessant penitent. However favourably
this or any other MS. may speak of Simon, he is generally supposed to
have "grown worse and worse, opposing the apostles and the Christian
doctrine, and deceiving many cities and provinces by magical operations;
till being at Rome, in the reign of the Emperor Claudius, he boasted
that he could fly, and when exhibiting before the emperor and the
senate, St. Peter and St. Paul being present, who knew that his flying
was occasioned by magic, prayed to God that the people might be
undeceived, and that his power might fail; in consequence of which he
came tumbling down, and died soon after of his bruises." This account
comes in a most questionable shape, and has no evidence which can
challenge our assent. To me, it and the rest of the things spoken of
Simon the sorcerer appear utterly unworthy of credit. Calmet makes a
general collection of what is to be found in Justin Martyr, Irenaeus,
Tertullian; Eusebius, Theodoret, Augustine, and others, on the subject
of Simon Magus; and to him, if the reader think it worth the pains, he
may refer. The substance of these accounts is given above, and in the
note on [Act 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#009.md); and to say the least
of them they are all very dubious. The tale of his having an altar
erected to him at Rome, with the inscription, Simoni sancto deo, "To the
holy god Simon," has been founded on an utter mistake, and has been long
ago sufficiently confuted. See the inscriptions in Gruter, vol. i. p.
96, inscript. No. 5, 6, 7.

[Acts 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 8:25</span></span>

And they, when they had - preached - returned to Jerusalem - That is,
Peter and John returned, after they had borne testimony to and confirmed
the work which Philip had wrought.

[Acts 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 8:26</span></span>

Arise, and go toward the south - How circumstantially particular are
these directions! Every thing is so precisely marked that there is no
danger of the apostle missing his way. He is to perform some great duty;
but what, he is not informed. The road which he is to take is marked
out; but what he is to do in that road, or how far he is to proceed, he
is not told! It is God who employs him, and requires of him implicit
obedience. If he do his will, according to the present direction, he
shall know, by the issue, that God hath sent him on an errand worthy of
his wisdom and goodness. We have a similar instance of circumstantial
direction from God in [Act 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#011.md) :
Arise, go into the street called Straight, and inquire in the house of
Judas for one Saul of Tarsus, etc. And another instance, still more
particular, in [Act 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#005.md), [Act
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#006.md) : Send men to Joppa, and call for
one Simon, whose surname is Peter; he lodgeth with one Simon, a tanner,
whose house is by the sea side. God never sends any man on a message,
without giving him such directions as shall prevent all mistakes and
miscarriages, if simply and implicitly followed. This is also strictly
true of the doctrines contained in his word: no soul ever missed
salvation that simply followed the directions given in the word of God.
Those who will refine upon every thing, question the Divine testimony,
and dispute with their Maker, cannot be saved. And how many of this
stamp are found, even among Christians, professing strict godliness!

Gaza, which is desert - Αὑτη εϚιν ερημος, This it the desert, or this is
in the desert. Gaza was a town about two miles and a half from the
sea-side; it was the last town which a traveler passed through, when he
went from Phoenicia to Egypt, and was at the entrance into a wilderness,
according to the account given by Arrian in Exped. Alex. lib. ii. cap.
26, p. 102. \[Ed. Gronov.\]

That it was the last inhabited town, as a man goes from Phoenicia to
Egypt, επι τῃ αρχῃ της Ερημου, on the commencement of the desert. See
Bp. Pearce.

Dr. Lightfoot supposes that the word desert is added here, because at
that time the ancient Gaza was actually desert, having been destroyed by
Alexander, and μενουσα ερημος, remaining desert, as Strabo, lib. xvi. p.
1102, says; and that the angel mentioned this desert Gaza to distinguish
it from another city of the same name, in the tribe of Ephraim, not far
from the place where Philip now was. On this we may observe that,
although Gaza was desolated by Alexander the Great, as were several
other cities, yet it was afterwards rebuilt by Gabinius. See Josephus,
Ant. lib. xv. cap. 5, sect. 3. And writers of the first century
represent it as being flourishing and populous in their times. See
Wetstein.

Schoettgen thinks that ερημος, desert, should be referred, not to Gaza,
but to ὁδος, the way; and that it signifies a road that was less
frequented. If there were two roads to Gaza from Jerusalem, as some have
imagined, (see Rosenmuller), the eunuch might have chosen that which was
desert, or less frequented, for the sake of privacy in his journeying
religious exercises.

[Acts 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 8:27</span></span>

A man of Ethiopia - Ανηρ Αιθιοψ should be translated an Ethiopian, for
the reasons given on [Act 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#002.md).

An eunuch - See this word interpreted, on [Mat
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#012) (note.md). The term eunuch was
given to persons in authority at court, to whom its literal meaning did
not apply. Potiphar was probably an eunuch only as to his office; for he
was a married man. See [Gen 37:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#036.md);
[Gen 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#001.md). And it is likely that this
Ethiopian was of the same sort.

Of great authority - ΔυναϚης, A perfect lord chamberlain of the royal
household; or, rather, her treasurer, for it is here said, he had charge
of all her treasure, ην επι πασης της γαζης αυτης. The apparent Greek
word Γαζα, Gaza, is generally allowed to be Persian, from the authority
of Servius, who, in his comment on Aen. lib. i. ver. 118: -

Apparent rari nantes in gurgite vasto,

Arma virum, tabulaeque, et Troia Gaza per undas.

"And here and there above the waves are seen

Arms, pictures, precious goods, and floating men."

Dryden.

The words of Servius are: "Gaza Persicus sermo est, et significat
divitias; unde Gaza urbs in Palaestina dicitur, quod in ea Cambyses rex
Persarum cum Aegyptiis bellum inferret divitias suas condidit." Gaza is
a Persian word, and signifies Riches: hence Gaza, a city in Palestine,
was so called because Cambyses, king of Persia, laid up his treasures in
it, when he waged war with the Egyptians. The nearest Persian word of
this signification which I find is gunj, or ganz, and gunja, which
signify a magazine, store, hoard, or hidden treasure. The Arabic
kluzaneh, comes as near as the Persian, with the same meaning. Hence
makhzen, called magazen by the Spaniards, and magazine by the English; a
word which signifies a collection of stores or treasures, or the place
where they are laid up. It is scarcely necessary to remark that this
name is given also to certain monthly publications, which are, or
profess to be, a store of treasures, or repository of precious, or
valuable things.

But who was Candace? It is granted that she is not found in the common
lists of Ethiopic sovereigns with which we have been favored. But
neither the Abyssinians nor the Jews admitted women in their
genealogies. I shall not enter into this controversy, but shall content
myself with quoting the words of Mr. Bruce. "It is known," says he,
"from credible writers engaged in no controversy, that this Candace
reigned upon the Nile in Atbara, near Egypt. Her capital also, was taken
in the time of Augustus, a few years before the conversion of the slave
by Philip; and we shall have occasion often to mention her successors
and her kingdom, as existing in the reign of the Abyssinian kings, long
after the Mohammedan conquest: they existed when I passed through
Atbara, and do undoubtedly exist there to this day." - Bruce's Travels,
vol. ii. p. 431.

It does not appear, as some have imagined, that the Abyssinians were
converted to the Christian faith by this eunuch, nor by any of the
apostles; as there is strong historic evidence that they continued Jews
and Pagans for more than three hundred years after the Christian era.
Their conversion is with great probability attributed to Frumentius,
sent to Abyssinia for that purpose by Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria,
about a.d. 330. See Bruce as above.

The Ethiopians mentioned here are those who inhabited the isle or
peninsula of Meroe, above and southward of Egypt. It is the district
which Mr. Bruce calls Atbara, and which he proves formerly bore the name
of Meroe. This place, according to Diodorus Siculus, had its name from
Meroe, daughter of Cambyses, king of Persia, who died there in the
expedition which her father undertook against the Ethiopians. Strabo
mentions a queen in this very district named Candace: his words are
remarkable. Speaking of an insurrection of the Ethiopians against the
Romans he says: Τουτων δ' ησαν και οἱ βασιλισσης Ϛρατηγοι της Κανδακης,
ἡ καθ' ἡμας ηρξε των Αιθιοπων, ανδρικη τις γυνη, πεπηρωενη τον οφθαλμον,
"Among these were the officers of Queen Candace, who in our days reigned
over the Ethiopians. She was a masculine woman, and blind of one eye."
Though this could not have been the Candace mentioned in the text, it
being a little before the Christian era, yet it establishes the fact
that a queen of this name did reign in this place; and we learn from
others that it was a common name to the queens of Ethiopia. Pliny,
giving an account of the report made by Nero's messengers, who were sent
to examine this country, says, Aedificia oppidi (Meroes) pauca: regnare
faeminam Candacen; quod nomen multis jam annis ad reginas transiit.
Hist. Nat. lib. vi. cap. 29, ad fin. They reported that "the edifices of
the city were few: that a woman reigned there of the name of Candace;
which name had passed to their queens, successively, for many years." To
one of those queens the eunuch in the text belonged; and the above is
sufficient authority to prove that queens of this name reigned over this
part of Ethiopia.

Had come to Jerusalem for to worship - Which is a proof that he was a
worshipper of the God of Israel; but how came he acquainted with the
Jewish religion? Let us, for a little, examine this question. In [Kg1
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#001.md), etc., we have the account of the
visit paid to Solomon by the queen of Sheba, the person to whom our Lord
refers, [Mat 12:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#042.md), and [Luk
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#031.md). It has been long credited by
the Abyssinians that this queen, who by some is called Balkis, by others
Maqueda, was not only instructed by Solomon in the Jewish religion, but
also established it in her own empire on her return; that she had a son
by Solomon named Menilek, who succeeded her in the kingdom; and, from
that time till the present, they have preserved the Jewish religion. Mr.
Bruce throws some light upon this subject: the substance of what he says
is the following: "There can be no doubt of the expedition of the queen
of Sheba; as Pagan, Moor, Arab, Abyssinian, and all the countries round,
vouch for it, nearly in the terms of Scripture. Our Savior calls her
queen of the south; and she is called, in [Kg1
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#001.md), etc., [Ch2
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#001.md), etc., queen of Sheba or Saba; for
Saba, Azab, and Azaba, all signify the south: and she is said to have
come from the uttermost parts of the earth. In our Saviour's time the
boundaries of the known land, southward, were Raptam or Prassum; which
were the uttermost parts of the known earth, and were with great
propriety so styled by our Lord. The gold, myrrh, cassia, and
frankincense, which she brought with her, are all products of that
country. The annals of the Abyssinians state that she was a pagan when
she left Saba or Azab, to visit Solomon; and that she was there
converted and had a son by Solomon, who succeeded her in the kingdom, as
stated above. All the inhabitants of this country, whether Jews or
Christians, believe this; and, farther, that the 45th Psalm was a
prophecy of her journey to Jerusalem; that she was accompanied by a
daughter of Hiram from Tyre; and that the latter part of the Psalm is a
prophecy of her having a son by Solomon, and of his ruling over the
Gentiles." Travels, vol. ii. page 395, etc. All this being granted, and
especially the Scripture fact of the queen of Sheba's visit, and the
great probability, supported by uninterrupted tradition, that she
established the Jewish religion in her dominions on her return, we may
at once see that the eunuch in question was a descendant of those Jews;
or that he was a proselyte in his own country to the Jewish faith, and
was now come up at the great feast to worship God at Jerusalem. Mr.
Bruce may be right; but some think that Saba, in Arabia Felix, is meant:
see the note on [Mat 12:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#042.md).

[Acts 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 8:28</span></span>

Sitting in his chariot, read Esaias the prophet - He had gone to
Jerusalem to worship: he had profited by his religious exercises: and
even in travelling, he is improving his time. God sees his simplicity
and earnestness, and provides him an instructer, who should lead him
into the great truths of the Gospel, which, without such a one, he could
not have understood. Many, after having done their duty, as they call
it, in attending a place of worship, forget the errand that brought them
thither, and spend their time, on their return, rather in idle
conversation than in reading or conversing about the word of God. It is
no wonder that such should be always learning, and never able to come to
the knowledge of the truth.

[Acts 8:29](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 8:29</span></span>

Then the Spirit said unto Philip - This holy man having obeyed the first
direction he received from God, and gone southward without knowing the
reason why, it was requisite that he should now be informed of the
object of his mission: the Spirit said unto him, go near, and join
thyself, etc. The angel who had given him the first direction had
departed; and the influence of the Holy Spirit now completed the
information. It is likely that what the Spirit did in this case was by a
strong impression on his mind, which left him no doubt of its being from
God.

[Acts 8:30](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 8:30</span></span>

Heard him read the Prophet Esaias - The eunuch, it seems, was reading
aloud, and apparently in Greek, for that was the common language in
Egypt; and, indeed, almost in every place it was understood. And it
appears that it was the Greek version of the Septuagint that he was
reading, as the quotation below is from that version.

[Acts 8:31](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">act 8:31</span></span>

How can I, except some man should guide me? - This is no proof that "the
Scriptures cannot be understood without an authorized interpreter," as
some of the papistical writers assert. How could the eunuch know any
thing of the Gospel dispensation, to which this scripture referred? That
dispensation had not yet been proclaimed to him; he knew nothing about
Jesus. But where that dispensation has been published, where the four
Gospels and the apostolic epistles are at hand, every thing relative to
the salvation of the soul may be clearly apprehended by any simple,
upright person. There are difficulties, it is true, in different parts
of the sacred writings, which neither the pope nor his conclave can
solve; and several which even the more enlightened Protestant cannot
remove; but these difficulties do not refer to matters in which the
salvation of the soul is immediately concerned: they refer to such as
are common to every ancient author in the universe. These difficulties,
being understood, add to the beauty, elegance, and justness of the
language, thoughts, and turns of expression; and these, only the few who
are capable of understanding are able to relish. As to all the rest, all
that relates to faith and practice, all in which the present and eternal
interest of the soul is concerned, "the wayfaring man, though a fool,
(quite illiterate), shall not err therein."

That he would come up, and sit with him - So earnestly desirous was he
to receive instruction relative to those things which concerned the
welfare of his soul.

[Acts 8:32](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 8:32</span></span>

The place of the scripture - Περιοχη της γραφης, The section, or
paragraph.

[Acts 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">act 8:33</span></span>

In his humiliation, his judgment was taken away - He who was the
fountain of judgment and justice had no justice shown him (mercy he
needed not) in his humiliation; viz. that time in which he emptied
himself, and appeared in the form of a servant.

Who shall declare his generation - Την γενεαν αυτου: Answering to the
Hebrew דורו doro, which Bp. Lowth understands as implying his manner of
life. It was the custom among the Jews, when they were taking away any
criminal from judgment to execution, to call out and inquire whether
there was any person who could appear in behalf of the character of the
criminal - whether there was any who, from intimate acquaintance with
his manner of life, could say any thing in his favor? This circumstance
I have noticed before, and it has been particularly remarked in the case
of Stephen: see at [Act 7:60](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#060.md). In our
Lord's case, this benevolent inquiry does not appear to have been made;
and perhaps to this breach of justice, as well as of custom, the prophet
refers; and this shows how minutely the conduct of those bad men was
known seven hundred years before it took place. God can foreknow what he
pleases, and can do what he pleases; and all the operations of his
infinite mind are just and right. Some think that, who shall declare his
generation? refers to his eternal Sonship; others, to his miraculous
conception by the Holy Spirit, in the womb of the virgin; others, to the
multitudinous progeny of spiritual children which should be born unto
God, in consequence of his passion and meritorious death. Perhaps the
first, which refers to the usual custom in behalf of the criminal, is
the best and most natural sense.

[Acts 8:34](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">act 8:34</span></span>

Of whom speaketh the prophet this - This was a very natural inquiry: for
in the test itself, and in its circumstances, there was nothing that
could determine the meaning, so as to ascertain whether the prophet
meant himself or some other person; and the very inquiry shows that the
eunuch had thought deeply on the subject.

[Acts 8:35](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">act 8:35</span></span>

Began at the same scripture - He did not confine himself to this one
scripture, but made this his text, and showed, from the general tenor of
the sacred writings, that Jesus was the Christ, or Messiah; and that in
his person, birth, life, doctrine, miracles, passion, death, and
resurrection, the Scriptures of the Old Testament were fulfilled. This
preaching had the desired effect, for the eunuch was convinced of the
truth of Philip's doctrine, and desired to be baptized in the name of
Jesus.

[Acts 8:36](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">act 8:36</span></span>

See, here is water - He was not willing to omit the first opportunity
that presented itself of his taking upon himself the profession of the
Gospel. By this we may see that Philip had explained the whole of the
Christian faith to him, and the way by which believers were brought into
the Christian Church.

[Acts 8:37](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">act 8:37</span></span>

I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God - He believed that Jesus,
whom Philip preached to him, was The Christ or Messiah, and consequently
the Son of God.

This whole verse is omitted by ABCG, several others of the first
authority, Erpen's edit. of the Arabic, the Syriac, the Coptic, Sahidic,
Ethiopic, and some of the Slavonic: almost all the critics declare
against it as spurious. Griesbach has left it out of the text; and
Professor White in his Crisews says, "Hic versus certissime delendus,"
this verse, most assuredly, should be blotted out. It is found in E,
several others of minor importance, and in the Vulgate and Arabic. In
those MSS. where it is extant it exists in a variety of forms, though
the sense is the same.

[Acts 8:38](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">act 8:38</span></span>

And they went down - They alighted from the chariot into the water.
While Philip was instructing him, and he professed his faith in Christ,
he probably plunged himself under the water, as this was the plan which
appears to have been generally followed among the Jews in their
baptisms; but the person who had received has confession of faith was he
to whom the baptism was attributed, as it was administered by his
authority.

[Acts 8:39](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">act 8:39</span></span>

The Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip - Perhaps this means no more
than that the Holy Spirit suggested to the mind of Philip that he should
withdraw abruptly from the eunuch, and thus leave him to pursue his
journey, reflecting on the important incidents which had taken place.
Some suppose that the angel of the Lord, and the Spirit of the Lord, are
the same person throughout this chapter. There is a remarkable reading
in the Codex Alexandrinus which exists thus in two lines: -

ΠΝΑΑΓΙΟΝΕΠΕΠΕΞΕΝΕΠΙΤΟΝΕΥΝΟΥΧΟΝ

The Spirit of the Lord fell upon the eunuch:

ΑΓΓΕΛΟΞΔΕΚΥΗΡΠΑΞΕΝΤΟΝΦΙΛΙΠΠΟΝ.

But the angel of the Lord snatched away Philip.

This reading is found in several other MSS. and in some versions. Many
think that the Spirit or angel of God carried off Philip in some such
manner as the Apocrypha represents the transportation of Habakkuk, who
was taken up by the hair of the head, and carried from Judea to Babylon!
For such an interposition there was no need. When Philip had baptized
the eunuch, the Spirit of God showed him that it was not the will of God
that he should accompany the eunuch to Meroe, but, on the contrary, that
he should hasten away to Ashdod; as God had in that, and the neighboring
places, work sufficient to employ him in.

[Acts 8:40](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">act 8:40</span></span>

Philip was found at Azotus - Prom the time he left the eunuch, he was
not heard of till he got to Azotus, which, according to Dr. Lightfoot,
was about 34 miles from Gaza, and probably it was near Gaze that Philip
met the eunuch. The Azotus of the New Testament is the Ashdod of the
old. It was given by Joshua to the tribe of Judah, [Jos
15:47](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#047.md). It was one of the five
lordships which belonged to the Philistines, and is a seaport town on
the Mediterranean Sea, between Gaza on the south, and Joppa or Jaffa on
the north. Herodotus reports, lib. ii. cap. 157, that Psammeticus, king
of Egypt, besieged this city 29 years, which, if true, is the longest
siege which any city or fortress ever endured.

Preached in all the cities, till he cams to Caesarea - This was Caesarea
in Palestine, formerly called Strato's Tower, built by Herod the Great
in honor of Augustus. There was an excellent harbour here made by Herod;
and, after the destruction of Jerusalem, it became the capital of the
whole land of Judea. It must be always distinguished from Caesarea
Philippi, which was an inland town not far from the springs of Jordan.
Whenever the word Caesarea occurs without Philippi, the former is
intended. As Philip preached in all the cities of Palestine till he came
to Caesarea, he must have preached in the different cities of the
Philistine country, Ashdod, Akkaron, and Jamnia, and also in the
principal parts of Samaria, as these lay in his way from Gaza to
Caesarea. As there was a readier disposition to receive the word in
those places, the Spirit of the Lord, under whose guidance he acted, did
not suffer him to accompany the eunuch to Abyssinia. It appears, from
[Act 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#008.md), that Philip settled at
Caesarea, where he had a house and family, four of his unmarried
daughters being prophetesses. It is likely that his itinerant mission
ended here; though he continued occasionally to perform the work of an
evangelist, and to bring up his family in the knowledge and fear of God,
which is the most imperious duty that any master of a family can be
called on to perform, and which it is impossible for any man to
accomplish by substitute; and which none can neglect without endangering
his own salvation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 9](act009.md)

</div>
