<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act016)  [Next](act018.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#001.md)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 17:0</span></span>

Paul and his company, passing through Amphipolis and Apollonia, come to
Thessalonica, were they preach the Gospel to the Jews, several of whom
believe, [Act 17:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#001.md). Others raise a
mob, and bring Jason, who had received the apostles, before the
magistrates, who, having taken bail of him and his companions, dismiss
them, [Act 17:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#005.md). Paul and Silas are
sent away by night unto Berea, where they preach to the Jews, who gladly
receive the Gospel, [Act 17:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#010.md).
Certain Jews from Thessalonica, hearing that the Bereans had received
the Gospel, come thither and raise up a persecution, [Act
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#013.md). Paul is sent away by the
brethren to Athens, where he preaches to the Jews, [Act
17:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#014.md). He is encountered by the
Epicureans and Stoics, who bring him to the Areopagus, and desire him to
give a full explanation of his doctrine, [Act
17:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#018.md). The character of the
Athenians, [Act 17:21](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#021.md). Paul preaches
to them, and gives a general view of the essential principles of
theology, [Act 17:22-31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#022.md). Some mock,
some hesitate, and some believe, and, among the latter, Dionysias and
Damaris, [Act 17:32-34](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#032.md).

[Acts 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 17:1</span></span>

Passed through Amphipolis - This city was the metropolis of the first
division of Macedonia, as made by Paulus Aemilius: see the note on [Act
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#010.md). It was builded by Cimon, the
Athenian general, who sent 10,000 Athenians thither as a colony. It
stood in an island in the river Strymon, and had its name of Amphipolis
because included between the two grand branches of that river where they
empty themselves into the sea, the river being on both sides of the
city.

Apollonia - This was another city of Macedonia, between Amphipolis and
Thessalonica. It does not appear that St. Paul stopped at any of these
cities: and they are only mentioned by the historian as places through
which the apostles passed on their way to Thessalonica. It is very
likely that in these cities there were no Jews; and that might have been
the reason why the apostles did not preach the Gospel there, for we find
them almost constantly beginning with the Jews; and the Hellenist Jews,
living among the Gentiles, became the medium through which the Gospel of
Christ was conveyed to the heathen world.

Thessalonica - This was a celebrated city of Macedonia, situated on what
was called the Thermaic Gulf. According to Stephanus Byzantinus, it was
embellished and enlarged by Philip, king of Macedon, who called it
Thessalonica, the victory of Thessalia, on account of the victory he
obtained there over the Thessalians; but, prior to this, it was called
Thermae. But Strabo, Tzetzes, and Zonaras, say that it was called
Thessalonica, from Thessalonica, wife of Cassander, and daughter of
Philip. It is now in possession of the Turks, and is called Salonichi,
which is a mere corruption of the original name.

A synagogue of the Jews - Ἡ συναγωγη, The synagogue; for the article
here must be considered as emphatic, there probably being no other
synagogue in any other city in Macedonia. The Jews in different parts
had other places of worship called proseuchas. as we have seen, [Act
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#013.md). At Thessalonica alone they
appear to have had a synagogue.

[Acts 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 17:2</span></span>

As his manner was - He constantly offered salvation first to the Jews;
and for this purpose attended their Sabbath-days' meetings at their
synagogues.

[Acts 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 17:3</span></span>

Opening and alleging - Παρατιθεμνος, Proving by citations. His method
seems to have been this:

1st. He collected the scriptures that spoke of the Messiah.

2d. He applied these to Jesus Christ, showing that in him all these
scriptures were fulfilled, and that he was the Savior of whom they were
in expectation. He showed also that the Christ, or Messiah, must needs
suffer - that this was predicted, and was an essential mark of the true
Messiah. By proving this point, he corrected their false notion of a
triumphant Messiah, and thus removed the scandal of the cross.

[Acts 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 17:4</span></span>

The devout Greeks - That is, Gentiles who were proselytes to the Jewish
religion, so far as to renounce idolatry, and live a moral life, but
probably had not received circumcision.

[Acts 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 17:5</span></span>

The Jews which believed not, moved with envy, took unto them - Instead
of this sentence, the most correct MSS. and versions read simply,
προσλαβομενοι δε οἱ Ιουδαιοι. But the Jews taking, etc., leaving out the
words, ζηλωσαντες, απειθουντες, which believed not, moved with envy:
these words do not appear to be genuine; there is the strongest evidence
against them, and they should be omitted.

Certain lewd fellows of the baser sort - This is not a very intelligible
translation. The original is, των αγοραιων τινας ανδοας πονηρους. The
word αγοραιοι, which we translate the baser sort, is by Hesychius
explained, οἱ εν αγορᾳ αναϚρεφομενοι, those who transact business in
courts of justice. The same word is used by the Jews in Hebrew letters
to signify judges; and אגוריאות של גוים agorioth shel goyim, signifies
judges of the Gentiles. These were probably a low kind of lawyers, what
we would call pettifoggers, or attorneys without principle, who gave
advice for a trifle, and fomented disputes and litigations among the
people. The Itala version of the Codex Bezae calls them quosdam
forenses, certain lawyers. As the Jews, from their small number, could
not easily raise up a mob, they cunningly employed those unprincipled
men, who probably had a certain degree of juridical credit and
authority, to denounce the apostles as seditious men; and this was, very
likely, the reason why they employed those in preference to any others.
They were such as always attended forensic litigations, waiting for a
job, and willing to defend any side of a question for money. They were
wicked men of the forensic tribe.

Gathered a company, and set all the city on an uproar - And, after
having made this sedition and disturbance, charged the whole on the
peaceable and innocent apostles! This is precisely the same way that
persecution against the truth and followers of Christ is still carried
on. Some wicked man in the parish gets a wicked attorney and a constable
to head a mob, which they themselves have raised; and, having committed
a number of outrages, abusing men and women, haul the minister of Christ
to some magistrate who knows as little of his office as he cares for the
Gospel; they there charge the outrages which themselves have committed
on the preacher and his peaceable hearers; and the peacemaker, appointed
by a good king, according to the wise and excellent regulations of a
sound constitution, forgetting whose minister he is, neither administers
justice nor maintains truth; but, espousing the part of the mob,
assumes, ex officio, the character of a persecutor. The preacher is
imprisoned, his hearers fined for listening to that Gospel which has not
only made them wise unto salvation, but also peaceable and orderly
citizens, and which would have had the same effect on the unprincipled
magistrate, the parish squire, and the mob, had they heard it with the
same reverence and respect. Had I not witnessed such scenes, and such
prostitution of justice, I could not have described them.

Assaulted the house of Jason - This was the place where the apostles
lodged; and therefore his goods were clear spoil, and his person fair
game. This is a case which frequently occurs where the Gospel is
preached in its spirit and power. And, even in this moat favored
kingdom, the most scandalous excesses of this kind have been committed,
and a justice of the peace has been found to sanction the proceedings;
and, when an appeal has been made to the laws, a grand jury has been
found capable of throwing out the true bill!

[Acts 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 17:6</span></span>

These that have turned the world upside down are come hither also - The
very character our forefathers had for preaching that Gospel, in every
part of the land, by which the nation has been illuminated, the mob
disciplined into regularity and order, and the kingdom established in
the hands of the best of monarchs.

[Acts 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 17:7</span></span>

These all do contrary to the decrees of Caesar - Persecutors always
strive to affect the lives of the objects of their hatred, by accusing
them of sedition, or plots against the state.

That there is another king, one Jesus - How malevolent was this saying!
The apostles proclaimed Jesus as king - that is true; but never once
insinuated that his kingdom was of this world. The reverse they always
maintained.

[Acts 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 17:8</span></span>

And they troubled the people and the rulers - It is evident that there
was no disposition in either the people or the rulers to persecute the
apostles. But these wicked Jews, by means of the unprincipled, wicked
lawyers, those lewd fellows of the baser sort, threw the subject into
the form of law, making it a state question, in which form the rulers
were obliged to notice it; but they showed their unwillingness to
proceed in a matter which they saw proceeded from malice, by letting
Jason and his companions go off on bail.

[Acts 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 17:9</span></span>

Taken security - Λαβοντες το ἱκανον, Having taken what was sufficient,
or satisfactory. Sufficient for the present, to prove that the apostles
were upright, peaceable, and loyal men; and that Jason and his friends
were the like, and would be, at any time, forthcoming to answer for
their conduct. Perhaps this is the sense of the phrase in the text.

[Acts 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 17:10</span></span>

Sent away Paul and Silas by night - Fearing some farther machinations of
the Jews and their associates.

Berea - This was another city of Macedonia, on the same gulf with
Thessalonica; and not far from Pella, the birth place of Alexander the
Great.

[Acts 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 17:11</span></span>

These were more noble than those in Thessalonica - Ησαν ευγενεϚεροι,
Were of a better race, extraction, or birth, than those at Thessalonica;
but the word refers more to their conduct, as a proof of their better
disposition, than to their birth, or any peculiar lineal nobility. It
was a maxim among the Jews, that "none was of a noble spirit who did not
employ himself in the study of the law." It appears that the Bereans
were a better educated and more polished people than those at
Thessalonica; in consequence far from persecuting:

1\. They heard the doctrine of the Gospel attentively.

2\. They received this doctrine with readiness of mind: when the
evidence of its truth appeared to them sufficiently convincing, they had
too much dignity of mind to refuse their assent, and too much
ingenuousness to conceal their approbation.

3\. They searched the Scriptures, i.e. of the Old Testament, to see
whether these thing were so: to see whether the promises and types
corresponded with the alleged fulfillment in the person, works, and
sufferings of Jesus Christ.

4\. They continued in this work; they searched the Scriptures daily,
whether those things were so.

[Acts 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 17:12</span></span>

Therefore many of them believed - From the manner in which they heard,
received, and examined the word preached to them, it was not likely they
could be deceived. And, as it was the truth that was proclaimed to them,
it is no wonder that they apprehended, believed, and embraced it.

Of honorable women which were Greeks - Probably mere heathens are meant;
and these were some of the chief families in the place. Thus we find
that the preaching of Paul at Berea was made the instrument of
converting both Jews and Gentiles.

[Acts 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 17:13</span></span>

The Jews of Thessalonica - stirred up the people - With what implacable
malice did these men persecute the Gospel! And in the same spirit they
continue to the present day, though it is evidently the sole cause of
their wretchedness.

[Acts 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 17:14</span></span>

To go as it were to the sea - This passage is generally understood to
mean that the disciples took Paul towards the sea, as if he had intended
to embark, and return to Troas, but with the real design to go to
Athens. But it is more likely that his conductors, in order to his
greater safety, left the public or more frequented road, and took him
coastwise to Athens. Or, by taking a vessel at that part of the sea
nearest to Berea, they might have coasted it to Athens, which was quite
a possible case; and, as we do not hear of his stopping at any place on
his journey to preach, it is very probable that he went by sea to this
city. Though sleights and feints may be allowable in cases of life and
death, yet there does not appear an absolute necessity for any in this
case. And, as the text does not necessarily point any out, so we need
not have recourse to any. I take it for granted, therefore, that Paul
went by sea to Athens.

Silas and Timotheus abode there still - The persecution, it seems, was
directed principally against Paul. Lo! he stayeth his rough wind on the
day of his east wind. Silas and Timotheus, holy men, were left behind to
water the seed which Paul had planted.

[Acts 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 17:15</span></span>

Brought him unto Athens - This was one of the most celebrated cities in
the world, whether we consider its antiquity, its learning, its
political consequence, or the valor of its inhabitants. This city, which
was the capital of Attica, and the seat of the Grecian empire was
founded by Cecrops, about a.m. 2447, before Christ 1557, and was called
by him Cecropia. About thirteen or fourteen hundred years before Christ,
in the reign either of Erechtheus, or Erichthonius, it was called
Athens, from Αθηνη, a name of Minerva, to whom it was dedicated, and who
was always considered the protectress of the city. The whole city at
first was built upon a hill or rock, in the midst of a spacious plain;
but, in process of time, the whole plain was covered with buildings
which were called the lower city; while the ancient was called
Acropolis, or the upper city. In its most flourishing state this city
was not less than one hundred and seventy-eight stadia, or twenty-two
Roman miles in circumference. The buildings of Athens were the most
superb, and best executed, in the world; but every thing is now in a
state of ruin. Mr. Stuart, in his three folio vols. of the Antiquities
of Athens, has given correct representations of those that remain, with
many geographical notices of much importance. The greatest men that ever
lived, scholars, lawyers, statesmen, and warriors, were Athenians. Its
institutions, laws, and literature, were its own unrivalled boast, and
the envy of the world. The city still exists; the Acropolis in a state
of comparative repair. It is now in the hands of the Greeks; but the
Turks, who held it till lately, have turned the celebrated Parthenon, or
temple of Minerva, into a mosque. The inhabitants are reckoned at about
one thousand. Christianity, planted here by St. Paul, still subsists;
and about two-thirds of the inhabitants of Athens are Christians, who
have several churches or oratories here, and it is the residence of a
Greek bishop, who is a metropolitan. He who considers the ancient glory
of this city, whether in its heathen or Christian antiquity, cannot but
sigh over its present state.

[Acts 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 17:16</span></span>

He saw the city wholly given to idolatry - Κατειδωλον, Full of idols, as
the margin has it, and very properly. Whoever examines the remains of
this city, as represented by Mr. Stuart in his Antiquities, already
referred to, will be satisfied of the truth of St. Luke's remark: it was
full of idols. Bishop Pearce produces a most apposite quotation from
Pausanias, which confirms the observation: Ουκ ην αλλαχου τοσαυτα ιδειν
ειδωλα. There was no place where so many idols were to be seen. Paus. in
Attic. cap. xvii. 24.

Petronius, who was contemporary with St. Paul, in his Satyr. cap. xvii.,
makes Quartilla say of Athens: Utique nostra regio tam Praesentibus
Plena Est Numinibus, ut facilius possis Deum quam Hominem invenire. Our
region is so full of deities that you may more frequently meet with a
god than a man.

[Acts 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 17:17</span></span>

Disputed he in the synagogue with the Jews - Proving that Jesus was the
Messiah: and with the devout persons, probably heathens, proselyted to
the Jewish religion. And in the market: I suppose the αγορα here means
some such place as our exchange, where people of business usually met,
and where the philosophers conversed and reasoned. The agora was
probably like the Roman forum, and like places of public resort in all
countries, where people of leisure assembled to converse, hear the news,
etc.

[Acts 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 17:18</span></span>

Certain philosophers of the Epicureans - These were the followers of
Epicurus, who acknowledged no gods except in name, and absolutely denied
that they exercised any government over the world or its inhabitants;
and that the chief good consisted in the gratification of the appetites
of sense. These points the Epicureans certainly held; but it is not
clear that Epicurus himself maintained such doctrines.

And of the Stoics - These did not deny the existence of the gods; but
they held that all human affairs were governed by fate. They did not
believe that any good was received from the hands of their gods; and
considered, as Seneca asserts, that any good and wise man was equal to
Jupiter himself. Both these sects agreed in denying the resurrection of
the body; and the former did not believe in the immortality of the soul.

Epicurus, the founder of the Epicurean sect, was born at Athens, about
a.m. 3663, before Christ 341.

Zeno, the founder of the Stoic sect, was born in the isle of Cyprus,
about thirty years before Christ. His disciples were called Stoics from
the Στοα, a famous portico at Athens, where they studied. Besides these
two sects, there were two others which were famous at this time; viz.
the Academics and the Peripatetics. The founder of the first was the
celebrated Plato; and the founder of the second, the no less famous
Aristotle. These sects professed a much purer doctrine than the
Epicureans and Stoics; and it does not appear that they opposed the
apostles, nor did they enter into public disputations with them. Against
the doctrines taught by the Epicureans and Stoics, several parts of St.
Paul's discourse, in the following verses, are directly pointed.

What will this babbler say? - The word σπερμολογος, which we translate
babbler, signifies, literally, a collector of seeds, and is the "name of
a small bird the lives by picking up seeds on the road." The epithet
became applied to persons who collected the sayings of others, without
order or method, and detailed them among their companions in the same
way. The application of the term to prating, empty, impertinent persons,
was natural and easy, and hence it was considered a term of reproach and
contempt, and was sometimes used to signify the vilest sort of men.

A setter forth of strange gods - Ξενων δαιμονιων, Of strange or foreign
demons. That this was strictly forbidden, both at Rome and Athens, see
on [Act 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#021) (note.md).

There was a difference, in the heathen theology, between θεος, god, and
δαιμων, demon: the θεοι, were such as were gods by nature: the δαιμονια,
were men who were deified. This distinction seems to be in the mind of
these philosophers when they said that the apostles seemed to be setters
forth of strange demons, because they preached unto them Jesus, whom
they showed to be a man, suffering and dying, but afterwards raised to
the throne of God. This would appear to them tantamount with the
deification of heroes, etc., who had been thus honored for their
especial services to mankind. Horace expresses this in two lines, 2
Epist. i. 5: -

Romulus, et Liber pater, et cum Castore Pollux,

Post ingentia facta, deorum in templa recepti.

"Romulus, father Bacchus, with Castor and Pollux, for their eminent
services, have been received into the temples of the gods."

[Acts 17:19](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 17:19</span></span>

They took him, and brought him unto Areopagus - The Areopagus was a hill
not far from the Acropolis, already described, where the supreme court
of justice was held; one of the most sacred and reputable courts that
had ever existed in the Gentile world. It had its name, Αρειος παγος,
Areopagus, or the Hill of Mars, or Ares, from the circumstance,
according to poetic fiction, of Mars being tried there, by a court of
twelve gods, for the murder of Halirrhothius, son of Neptune: the
meaning of which is, that Ares, a Thessalian prince, having slain
Halirrhothius, the son of a neighboring prince, for having violated his
daughter Alcippe, was here tried by twelve judges, by whom he was
honourably acquitted: in the Athenian laws the death of the ravisher was
the regular forfeiture for his crime. The justice administered in this
court was so strict and impartial, that, it was generally allowed, both
the plaintiff and defendant departed satisfied with the decision.
"Innocence, when summoned before it, appeared without apprehension; and
the guilty, convicted and condemned, retired without daring to murmur."
The place in which the judges sat was uncovered; and they held their
sittings by night, to the end that nothing might distract their minds
from the great business on which they were to decide; and that the sight
of the accused might not affect them either with pity or aversion. In
reference to this, all pleaders were strictly forbidden to use any means
whatever to excite either pity or aversion, or to affect the passions;
every thing being confined to simple relation, or statement of facts.
When the two parties were produced before the court, they were placed
between the bleeding members of victims slain on the occasion, and were
obliged to take an oath, accompanied by horrible imprecations on
themselves and families, that they would testify nothing but truth.
These parties called to witness the eumenides, or furies, the punishers
of the perjured in the infernal world; and, to make the greater
impression on the mind of the party swearing, the temple dedicated to
these infernal deities was contiguous to the court, so that they
appeared as if witnessing the oaths and recording the appeal made to
themselves. When the case was fully heard, the judges gave their
decision by throwing down their flint pebbles, on two boards or tables,
one of which was for the condemnation, the other for the acquittal, of
the person in question.

[Acts 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 17:20</span></span>

Thou bringest - strange things to our ears - The doctrine of the
apostles was different from any they had ever heard: it was wholly
spiritual and divine; thus it was strange: it was contrary to their
customs and manners; and thus it was strange also. As it spoke much of
the exaltation and glory of Jesus Christ, they supposed him to be a
setter forth of strange gods: and, therefore, on the authority of the
laws, which forbade the introduction of any new deities, or modes of
worship, he was called before the Areopagus.

[Acts 17:21](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 17:21</span></span>

All the Athenians and strangers which were there - As Athens was
renowned for its wisdom and learning, it became a place of public resort
for philosophers and students from different parts of the then civilized
world. The flux of students was in consequence great; and these, having
much leisure time, would necessarily be curious to know what was passing
in the world, and would frequently assemble together, in places of
public resort, to meet with strangers just come to the city; and either,
as St. Luke says, to tell or hear some new thing.

"The Athenian writers give the same account of their fellow citizens.
Demosthenes, in his reply to Epist. Philippi, represents the Athenians
as πυνθανομενοι κατα την αγοραν, ει τι λεγεται νεωτερον; inquiring, in
the place of public resort, if there are any News. We find, likewise,
that when Thucydides, iii. 38, had said, μετα καινοτητος μεν λογου
απατασθαι αριϚοι, Ye are excellent in suffering yourselves to be
deceived by Novelty of speech, the old scholiast makes this remark upon
it, (almost in the words of St. Luke), ταυτα προς τους. Αθηναιους
αινιττεται, ουδεν τι μελετωντας, πλην λεγειν τι και ακουειν καινον; He
here blames the Athenians, who made it their only business to tell and
hear something that was New." - Bp. Pearce. This is a striking feature
of the city of London in the present day. The itch for news, which
generally argues a worldly, shallow, or unsettled mind, is wonderfully
prevalent: even ministers of the Gospel, negligent of their sacred
function, are become in this sense Athenians; so that the book of God is
neither read nor studied with half the avidity and spirit as a
newspaper. These persons, forgetful not only of their calling, but of
the very spirit of the Gospel, read the account of a battle with the
most violent emotions; and, provided the victory falls to their
favourite side, they exult and triumph in proportion to the number of
thousands that have been slain! It is no wonder if such become political
preachers, and their sermons be no better than husks for swine. To such
the hungry sheep look up, and are not fed. God pity such miserable
Athenians, and direct them to a more suitable employment!

[Acts 17:22](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 17:22</span></span>

Paul stood in the midst of Mars' hill - That is, in the midst of the
judges, who sat in the Areopagus.

Ye are too superstitious - Κατα παντα ὡς δεισιδαιμονεϚερους ὑμας θεωρω;
I perceive that in all respects ye are greatly addicted to religious
practices; and, as a religious people, you will candidly hear what I
have got to say in behalf of that worship which I practice and
recommend. See farther observations at the end of the chapter.

[Acts 17:23](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 17:23</span></span>

Beheld your devotions - Σεβασματα, The objects of your worship; the
different images of their gods which they held in religious veneration,
sacrificial instruments, altars, etc., etc.

To the Unknown God - ΑΓΝΩΣΤΩ ΘΕΩ. That there was an altar at Athens thus
inscribed, we cannot doubt after such a testimony; though St. Jerome
questions it in part; for he says St. Paul found the inscription in the
plural number, but, because he would not appear to acknowledge a
plurality of gods, he quoted it in the singular: Verum, quia Paulus non
pluribus Diis indigebat ignotis, sed uno tantum ignoto Deo, singulari
verbo usus est. Epist. ad Magn. This is a most foolish saying: had Paul
done so, how much would such a begging of the question have prejudiced
his defense in the minds of his intelligent judges! Oecumenius intimates
that St. Paul does not give the whole of the inscription which this
famous altar bore; and which he says was the following: Θεοις Ασιας και
Ευρωπης και Λιβυης, Θεῳ αγνωϚῳ και ξενῳ, To the gods of Asia, and
Europe, and Africa: To The Unknown and strange God. Several eminent men
suppose that this unknown god was the God of the Jews; and, as his name
יהוה was considered by the Jews as ineffable, the Θεος αγνωϚος may be
considered as the anonymous god; the god whose name was not known, and
must not be pronounced. That there was such a god acknowledged at Athens
we have full proof. Lucian in his Philopatris, cap. xiii. p. 769, uses
this form of an oath: νη τον αγνωϚον τον εν Αθηναις, I swear by the
Unknown God at Athens. And again, cap. xxix. 180: ἡμεις δε τον εν
Αθηναις αγνωϚον εφευροντες και προσκυνησαντες, χειρας εις ουρανον
εκτειναντες, τουτῳ ευχαριϚησομεν ὡς καταξιωθεντες, etc. We have found
out the Unknown god at Athens - and worshipped him with our hands
stretched up to heaven; and we will gave thanks unto him, as being
thought worthy to be subject to this power. Bp. Pearce properly asks, Is
it likely that Lucian, speaking thus, (whether in jest or in earnest),
should not have had some notion of there being at Athens an altar
inscribed to the unknown God? Philostratus, in vit. Apollon. vi. 3,
notices the same thing, though he appears to refer to several altars
thus inscribed: και ταυτα Αθηνῃσι, οὑ και αγνωϚων Θεων βωμοι ἱδρυνται,
And this at Athens, where there are Altars even to the Unknown Gods.
Pausanias, in Attic. cap. 1. p. 4, edit. Kuhn., says that at Athens
there are βωμοι Θεων των ονομαζομενων αγνωϚων, altars of gods which are
called, The Unknown ones. Minutius Felix says of the Romans, Aras
extruunt etiam ignotis numinibus. "They even build altars to Unknown
Divinities." And Tertullian, contra Marcion, says, Invenio plane Diis
ignotis aras prostitutas: sed Attica idolatria est. "I find altars
allotted to the worship of unknown gods: but this is an Attic idolatry."
Now, though in these last passages, both gods and altars are spoken of
in the plural number; yet it is reasonable to suppose that, on each, or
upon some one of them, the inscription αγνωϚῳ Θεῳ, To the unknown god,
was actually found. The thing had subsisted long and had got from Athens
to Rome in the days of Tertullian and Minutius Felix. See Bp. Pearce and
Dr. Cudworth, to whose researches this note is much indebted.

Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship - There is here a fine paronomasia,
or play on the words. The apostle tells them that (on their system) they
were a very religious people - that they had an altar inscribed, αγνωϚῳ
Θεῳ, to the unknown God: him therefore, says he, whom, αγνουντες, ye
unknowingly worship, I proclaim to you. Assuming it as a truth, that, as
the true God was not known by them, and that there was an altar
dedicated to the unknown god, his God was that god whose nature and
operations he now proceeded to declare. By this fine turn he eluded the
force of that law which made it a capital offense to introduce any new
god into the state, and of the breach of which he was charged, [Act
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#018.md); and thus he showed that he was
bringing neither new god nor new worship among them; but only explaining
the worship of one already acknowledged by the state, though not as yet
known.

[Acts 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 17:24</span></span>

God that made the world, etc. - Though the Epicureans held that the
world was not made by God, but was the effect of a fortuitous concourse
of atoms, yet this opinion was not popular; and the Stoics held the
contrary:

1\. St. Paul assumes, as an acknowledged truth, that there was a God who
made the world and all things.

2\. That this God could not be confined within temples made with hands,
as he was the Lord or governor of heaven and earth.

3\. That, by fair consequence, the gods whom they worshipped, which were
shut up in their temples could not be this God; and they must be less
than the places in which they were contained. This was a strong,
decisive stroke against the whole system of the Grecian idolatry.

[Acts 17:25](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 17:25</span></span>

Neither is worshiped with men's hands - This is an indirect stroke
against making of images, and offering of sacrifices: he is not
worshipped with human hands, as if he needed any thing, or required to
be represented under a particular form or attitude; nor has he required
victims for his support; for it is impossible that he should need any
thing who himself gives being, form, and life, to all creatures.

Giveth - life, and breath, and all things - These words are elegantly
introduced by St. Paul: God gives life, because he is the fountain of
it: he gives breath, the faculty of breathing or respiration, by which
this life is preserved; and though breathing or respiration, be the act
of the animal, yet the πνοην, the faculty of breathing, and extracting
from the atmosphere what serves as a pabulum of life, is given by the
influence of God, and the continued power thus to respire, and extract
that pure oxygen gas which is so evident a support of animal life, is as
much the continued gift of God as life itself is. But, as much more is
necessary to keep the animal machine in a state of repair, God gives the
τα παντα, all the other things which are requisite for this great and
important purpose, that the end for which life was given may be fully
answered. St. Paul also teaches that Divine worship is not enacted and
established for God, but for the use of his creatures: he needs nothing
that man can give him; for man has nothing but what he has received from
the hand of his Maker.

[Acts 17:26](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 17:26</span></span>

Hath made of one blood - In AB, some others, with the Coptic, Ethiopic,
Vulgate, Itala, Clement, and Bede, the word αἱματος, blood, is omitted.
He hath made of one (meaning Adam) all nations of men; but αἱμα, blood,
is often used by the best writers for race, stock, kindred: so Homer,
Iliad, vi. ver. 211:

Ταυτης τοι γενεης τε και αἱματος ευχομαι ειναι.

I glory in being of that same race and blood.

So Virgil, Aen. viii. ver. 142, says;

Sic genus amborum scindit se Sanguine ab uno.

Thus, from one stock, do both our stems divide.

See many examples of this form in Kypke. The Athenians had a foolish
notion that they were self-produced, and were the aboriginals of
mankind. Lucian ridicules this opinion, Αθηναιοι φασι τους πρωτους
ανθρωπους εκ της Αττικης αναφυναι, καθαπερ τα λαχανα. The Athenians say
that the first men sprung up in Attica, like radishes. Luc. Philo-pseud.
3.

To dwell on all the face of the earth - God in his wisdom produced the
whole human race from one man; and, having in his providence scattered
them over the face of the earth, by showing them that they sprang from
one common source, has precluded all those contentious wars and
bloodshed which would necessarily have taken place among the nations of
the world, as each in its folly might have arrogated to itself a higher
and more excellent origin than another.

And hath determined the times before appointed - Instead of
προτεταγμενους καιρους, the times before appointed, ABDE, and more than
forty others, with both the Syriac, all the Arabic, the Coptic,
Ethiopic, MS. Slavonian, Vulgate, and Itala, read προστεταγμενους
καιρους, the appointed times. The difference between the two words is
this: προτασσειν signifies to place before others; but προστασσειν is to
command, decree, appoint. The προστεταγμενοι καιροι, are the constituted
or decreed times; that is, the times appointed by his providence, on
which the several families should go to those countries where his wisdom
designed they should dwell. See Genesis 10:5-32; and see Pearce and
Rosenmuller.

And the bounds of their habitations - Every family being appointed to a
particular place, that their posterity might possess it for the purposes
for which infinite wisdom and goodness gave them their being, and the
place of their abode. Every nation had its lot thus appointed by God, as
truly as the Israelites had the land of Canaan. But the removal of the
Jews from their own land shows that a people may forfeit their original
inheritance, and thus the Canaanites have been supplanted by the Jews;
the Jews by the Saracens; the Saracens by the Turks; the Greeks by the
Romans; the Romans by the Goths and Vandals; and so of others. See the
notes on Genesis 11:1-32 (note).

[Acts 17:27](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 17:27</span></span>

That they should seek the Lord - This is a conclusion drawn from the
preceding statement. God, who is infinitely great and self-sufficient,
has manifested himself as the maker of the world, the creator,
preserver, and governor of men. He has assigned them their portion, and
dispensed to them their habitations, and the various blessings of his
providence, to the end that they should seek him in all his works.

Feel after him - Ψηλαφησειαν αυτον, That they might grope after him, as
a person does his way who is blind or blindfolded. The Gentiles, who had
not a revelation, must grope after God, as the principle of spiritual
life, that they might find him to be a Spirit, and the source of all
intellectual happiness; and the apostle seems to state that none need
despair of finding this fountain of goodness, because he is not far from
every one of us.

[Acts 17:28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 17:28</span></span>

For in him we live, and move, and have our being - He is the very source
of our existence: the principle of life comes from him: the principle of
motion, also, comes from him; one of the most difficult things in nature
to be properly apprehended; and a strong proof of the continual presence
and energy of the Deity.

And have our being - Και εσμεν, And we are: we live in him, move in him,
and are in him. Without him we not only can do nothing, but without him
we are nothing. We are, i.e. we continue to be, because of his
continued, present, all-pervading, and supporting energy. There is a
remarkable saying in Synopsis Sohar, p. 104. "The holy blessed God never
does evil to any man. He only withdraws his gracious presence from him,
and then he necessarily perisheth." This is philosophical and correct.

As certain also of your own poets - Probably he means not only Aratus,
in whose poem, entitled Phaenomena, the words quoted by St. Paul are to
be found literatim, του γαρ και γενος εσμεν; but also Cleanthus, in
whose Hymn to Jupiter the same words (Εκ σου γαρ γενος εσμεν) occur. But
the sentiment is found in several others, being very common among the
more enlightened philosophers. By saying your own poets, he does not
mean poets born at Athens, but merely Grecian poets, Aratus and
Cleanthus being chief.

We are also his offspring - Του γαρ και γενος εσμεν The Phaenomena of
Aratus, in which these words are found, begins thus: -

Εκ Διος αρχωμεσθα, τον ουδεποτ' ανδρες εωμεν

Αρῤητον· μεϚαι δε Διος πασαι μεν αγυιαι,

Πασαι δ' ανθρωπων αγοραι· μεϚη δε θαλασσα,

Και λιμενες· παντη δε Διος κεχρημεθα παντες·

ΤΟΥ ΓΑΡ ΚΑΙ ΓΕΝΟΣ ΕΣΜΕΝ ὁ δ' ηπιος ανθρωποισι

Δεξια σημαινει. κ. τ. λ.

With Jove we must begin; nor from him rove;

Him always praise, for all is full of Jove!

He fills all places where mankind resort,

The wide-spread sea, with every shelt'ring port.

Jove's presence fills all space, upholds this ball;

All need his aid; his power sustains us all.

For we his offspring are; and he in love

Points out to man his labor from above:

Where signs unerring show when best the soil,

By well-timed culture, shall repay our toil, etc., etc.

Aratus was a Cilician, one of St. Paul's own countrymen, and with his
writings St. Paul was undoubtedly well acquainted, though he had
flourished about 300 years before that time.

[Acts 17:29](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 17:29</span></span>

Forasmuch then as we are the offspring of God, etc. - This inference of
the apostle was very strong and conclusive; and his argument runs thus:
"If we are the offspring of God, he cannot be like those images of gold,
silver, and stone, which are formed by the art and device of man; for
the parent must resemble his offspring. Seeing, therefore, that we are
living and intelligent beings, He from whom we have derived that being
must be living and intelligent. It is necessary, also, that the object
of religious worship should be much more excellent than the worshipper;
but a man is, by innumerable degrees, more excellent than an image made
out of gold, silver, or stone; and yet it would be impious to worship a
man: how much more so to worship these images as gods! Every man in the
Areopagus must have felt the power of this conclusion; and, taking it
for granted that they had felt it, he proceeds: -

[Acts 17:30](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 17:30</span></span>

The times of this ignorance God winked at - He who has an indisputable
right to demand the worship of all his creatures has mercifully
overlooked those acts of idolatry which have disgraced the world and
debased man; but now, as he has condescended to give a revelation of
himself, he commands, as the sovereign, all men every where, over every
part of his dominions, to repent, μετανοειν, to change their views,
designs, and practices; because he hath appointed a day in which he will
judge the world in righteousness; and, as justice will then be done, no
sinner, no persevering idolater, shall escape punishment.

The word ὑπεριδειν, which we translate, to wink at, signifies simply to
look over; and seems to be here used in the sense of passing by, not
particularly noticing it. So God overlooked, or passed by, the times of
heathenish ignorance: as he had not given them the talent of Divine
revelation, so he did not require the improvement of that talent; but
now, as he had given them that revelation, he would no longer overlook,
or pass by, their ignorance or its fruits.

[Acts 17:31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">act 17:31</span></span>

He hath appointed a day - He has fixed the time in which he will judge
the world, though he has not revealed this time to man.

By that man whom he hath ordained - He has also appointed the judge, by
whom the inhabitants of the earth are to be tried.

Whereof he hath given assurance - ΠιϚιν παρασχων πασιν, Having given to
all this indubitable proof, that Jesus Christ shall judge the world, by
raising him from the dead. The sense of the argument is this: "Jesus
Christ, whom we preach as the Savior of men, has repeatedly told his
followers that he would judge the world; and has described to us, at
large, the whole of the proceedings of that awful time, [Mat
25:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#031.md), etc.; [Joh
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#025.md). Though he was put to death by
the Jews, and thus he became a victim for sin, yet God raised him from
the dead. By raising him from the dead, God has set his seal to the
doctrines he has taught: one of these doctrines is, that he shall judge
the world; his resurrection, established by the most incontrovertible
evidence, is therefore a proof, an incontestable proof, that he shall
judge the world, according to his own declaration."

[Acts 17:32](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 17:32</span></span>

When they heard of the resurrection, etc. - Paul undoubtedly had not
finished his discourse: it is likely that he was about to have
proclaimed salvation through Christ crucified; but, on hearing of the
resurrection of the body, the assembly instantly broke up; the
Epicureans mocking, εχλευαζον, began to laugh; and the Stoics saying
they would take another opportunity to hear him on that subject. And
thus the assembly became dissolved before the apostle had time to finish
his discourse, or to draw all the conclusions he had designed from the
premises he had laid down. St. Stephen's discourse was interrupted in a
similar manner. See [Act 7:54](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#054.md), and the
note there.

[Acts 17:33](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">act 17:33</span></span>

So Paul departed from among them - He could not be convicted of having
done any thing contrary to the law; and, when the assembly broke up, he
was permitted to go about his own business.

[Acts 17:34](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">act 17:34</span></span>

Certain men clave unto him - Became affectionately united to him, and
believed the doctrines he had preached.

Dionysius the Areopagite - There can be no doubt that this man was one
of the judges of this great court, but whether the president or
otherwise we cannot tell. Humanly speaking, his conversion must have
been an acquisition of considerable importance to the Christian
religion; for no person was a judge in the Areopagus who had not borne
the office of archon, or chief governor of the city; and none bore the
office of judge in this court who was not of the highest reputation
among the people for his intelligence and exemplary conduct. In some of
the popish writers we find a vast deal of groundless conjecture
concerning Dionysius, who, they say, was first bishop of Athens, and
raised to that dignity by Paul himself; that he was a martyr for the
truth; that Damaris was his wife, etc., etc., concerning which the
judicious Calmet says, Tout cela est de peu d' autorite. "All this has
little foundation."

1\. In addition to what has been said in the notes on this subject, I
may add, the original word δεισιδαιμονεϚερος, from δειδω, I fear, and
δαιμων, a demon, signifies, "greatly addicted to the worship of the
invisible powers;" for, as the word δαιμων signifies either a good or
evil spirit, and δειδω, I fear, signifies not only to fear in general,
but also to pay religious reverence, the word must be here taken in its
best sense; and so undoubtedly St. Paul intended it should; and so,
doubtless, his audience understood him; for it would have been very
imprudent to have charged them with superstition, which must have been
extremely irritating, in the very commencement of a discourse in which
he was to defend himself, and prove the truth of the Christian religion.
He stated a fact, acknowledged by the best Greek writers; and he
reasoned from that fact. The fact was that the Athenians were the most
religious people in Greece, or, in other words, the most idolatrous:
that there were in that city more altars, temples, sacrifices, and
religious services, than in any other place. And independently of the
authorities which may be quoted in support of this assertion, we may at
once perceive the probability of it from the consideration that Athens
was the grand university of Greece: that here philosophy and every thing
relating to the worship of the gods was taught; and that religious
services to the deities must be abundant. Look at our own universities
of Oxford and Cambridge; here are more prayers, more religious acts and
services, than in any other places in the nation, and very properly so.
These were founded to be seminaries of learning and religion; and their
very statutes suppose religion to be essential to learning; and their
founders were in general religious characters, and endowed them for
religious purposes. These, therefore, are not superstitious services;
for, as superstition signifies "unnecessary fears or scruples in
religion; observance of unnecessary and uncommanded rites or practices,"
- Johnson, it cannot be said of those services which are founded on the
positive command of God, for the more effectual help to religious
feelings, or as a preventive of immoral practices. I consider the
Athenians, therefore, acting in conformity to their own laws and
religious institutions; and Paul grants that they were much addicted to
religious performances: this he pays as a compliment, and then takes
occasion to show that their religion was defective: they had not a right
object of devotion; they did not know the true God; the true God was to
them the unknown God; and this an altar in their own city acknowledged.
He therefore began to declare that glorious Being to them whom they
ignorantly worshipped. As they were greatly addicted to religious
services, and acknowledged that there was a Being to them unknown, and
to whom they thought it necessary to erect an altar, they must,
consistently with their character as a religious people, and with their
own concession in the erection of this altar, hear quietly, patiently,
and candidly, a discourse on that God whose being they acknowledged, but
whose nature they did not know. Thus St. Paul, by acknowledging their
religious disposition, and seizing the fact of the altar being inscribed
to the unknown God, assumed a right which not a philosopher, orator, or
judge in the Areopagus could dispute, of bringing the whole subject of
Christianity before them, as he was now brought to his trial, and put on
his defense. The whole of this fine advantage, this grand stroke of
rhetorical prudence, is lost from the whole account, by our translation,
ye are in all things too superstitious, thus causing the defendant to
commence his discourse with a charge which would have roused the
indignation of the Greeks, and precluded the possibility of their
hearing any thing he had to say in defense of his conduct.

2\. That the original word, on the right interpretation of which I have
laid so much stress, is taken in a good sense, and signifies religious
worship and reverence, I shall show by several proofs; some of which may
be seen in Mr. Parkhurst, under the word Δεισιδαιμονια, which Suidas
explains by ευλαβεια περι το Θειον, reverence towards the Deity. And
Hesychius, by φοβοθεΐα, the fear of God. "In this good sense it is often
used by Diodorus Siculus. Herodotus says of Orpheus, he led men, εις
δεισιδαιμονιαν, to be religious; and exhorted them, επι το ευσεβειν, to
piety; where it is manifest that δεισιδαιμονια must mean religion, and
not superstition. But, what is more to the present purpose, the word is
used by Josephus, not only where a heathen calls the pagan religion
δεισιδαιμονιας, (Antiq. lib. xix. cap. 5. s. 3), or where the Jewish
religion is spoken of by this name, in several edicts that were made in
its favor by the Romans, (as in Antiq. lib. xiv. cap. 10, s. 13, 14, 16,
18, 19), but also where the historian is expressing his own thoughts in
his own words: thus, of King Manasseh, after his repentance and
restoration, he says, εσπουδαζεν πασῃ περι αυτον (Θεον) τῃ
δεισιδαιδαιμονιᾳ χρησθαι, he endeavored to behave in the Most Religious
manner towards God. Antiq. lib. x. cap. 3, s. 2. And, speaking of a riot
that happened among the Jews on occasion of a Roman soldier's burning
the book of the law, he observes that the Jews were drawn together on
this occasion, τῃ δεισιδαιμονιᾳ, by their religion, as if it had been by
an engine; οργανῳ τινι. - De Bell. lib. ii. cap. 12, s. 2." It would be
easy to multiply examples of this use of the word; but the reader may
refer, if necessary, to Wetstein, Pearce, and others.

3\. That the Athenians were reputed, in this respect, a devout people,
the following quotations may prove. Pausanias, in Attic. cap. xvii. p.
39, edit. Kuhn., says that the Athenians were not only more humane, αλλα
και ες θεους ευσεβειν, but more devout towards the gods; and again he
says, δηλα τε εναργως, ὁσοις πλεον τι ἑτερων ευσεβειας μετεϚιν, it
appears plainly how much they exceed others in the worship of the gods;
and, in cap. xxiv. p. 56, he says, Αθηναιοις περισσοτερον τι, η τοις
αλλοις, ες τα θεια εϚι σπουδης, that the Athenians are abundantly more
solicitous about Divine matters than others. And Josephus seals this
testimony by the assertion, contr. Apion, ii. 10: Αθηναιους ευσεβεϚατους
των Ἑλληνων παντες λεγουσι; Every body says that the Athenians are the
most religious people of all the Greeks. - See Bp. Pearce. From all
these authorities it is palpable that St. Paul must have used the term
in the sense for which I have contended.

4\. In the preceding notes, I have taken for granted that Paul was
brought to the Areopagus to be tried on the charge of setting forth
strange gods. Bp. Warburton denies that he was brought before the
Areopagus on any charge whatever; and that he was taken there that the
judges might hear him explain his doctrine, and not to defend himself
against a charge which he does not once notice in the whole of his
discourse. But there is one circumstance that the bishop has not
noticed, viz. that St. Paul was not permitted to finish his discourse,
and therefore could not come to those particular parts of the charge
brought against him which the bishop thinks he must have taken up most
pointedly, had he been accused, and brought there to make his defense.
The truth is, we have little more than the apostle's exordium, as he was
evidently interrupted in the prosecution of his defense. As to the
supposition that he was brought by philosophers to the Areopagus, that
they might the better hear him explain his doctrine, it appears to have
little ground; for they might have heard him to as great advantage in
any other place: nor does it appear that this court was ever used,
except for the solemn purposes of justice. But the question, whether
Paul was brought to the Areopagus that he might be tried by the judges
of that court, Bishop Pearce answers with his usual judgment and
discrimination. He observes:

1\. "We are told that one effect of his preaching was, that he converted
Dionysius the Areopagite, [Act 17:34](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#034.md);
and this seems to show that he, who was a judge of that court, was
present, and, if so, probably other judges were present also.

2\. If they who brought Paul to Areopagus wanted only to satisfy their
curiosity, they had an opportunity of doing that in the market,
mentioned [Act 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#017.md). Why then did
they remove him to another place?

3\. When it is said that they brought Paul to Areopagus, it is said that
they took him, επιλαβομενοι αυτοι, or rather, they laid hold on him, as
the Greek word is translated, [Luk
23:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#026.md); [Luk
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#020.md), [Luk
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#026.md), and as it ought to have been
here, in [Act 21:30](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#030.md), [Act
21:33](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#033.md), and especially in this latter
verse.

4\. It is observable that Paul, in his whole discourse at the Areopagus,
did not make the least attempt to move the passions of his audience, as
he did when speaking to Felix, [Act
24:25](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#025.md), and to Agrippa, [Act
26:29](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#029.md); but he used plain and grave
reasonings to convince his hearers of the soundness of his doctrine.

"Now, we are told by Quinctilian, in Inst. Orat. ii. 16, that Athenis
actor movere affectus vetabatur: the actor was forbidden to endeavor to
excite the passions. And again, in vi. 1, that Athenis affectus movere
etiam per praeconem prohibebatur orator: among the Athenians, the orator
was prohibited by the public crier to move the passions of his auditory.
And this is confirmed by Philostratus in procem. lib. i. de Vit.
Sophist.; and by Athenaeus, in Deipnosoph. xiii. 6. If, therefore, it
was strictly forbidden at Athens to move the affections of the courts of
justice, especially in that of the Areopagus, we see a good reason why
Paul made no attempt in that way; and, at the same time, we learn how
improperly the painters have done all they could, when they represent
Paul speaking at Athens, endeavoring both by his looks and gestures to
raise those several passions in his hearers which their faces are meant
to express."

I have only to add here, that, though St. Paul did not endeavor to
excite any passions in his address at the Areopagus, yet each sect of
the philosophers would feel themselves powerfully affected by every
thing in his discourse which tended to show the emptiness or falsity of
their doctrines; and, though he attempted to move no passions, yet, from
these considerations, their passions would be strongly moved. And this
is the idea which the inimitable Raphael took up in his celebrated
cartoon on this subject, and which his best copier, Mr. Thomas Holloway,
has not only engraved to the life, but has also described in language
only inferior to the cartoon itself; and, as it affords no mean comment
on the preceding discourse, my readers will be pleased to find it here.

By the cartoons of Raphael, we are to understand certain Scripture
pieces painted by Raphael d'Urbino, and now preserved in the palace at
Hampton court. They are allowed to be the chefs d'oeuvre in their kind.
They have been often engraved, but never so as to give an adequate
representation of the matchless originals, till Mr. Thomas Holloway, who
has completely seized the spirit of the artist, undertook this most
laborious work, in which he has been wholly engaged for several years;
and in which he has, for some time past, associated with himself Messrs.
Slann and Webb, two excellent artists, who had formerly been his own
pupils. The cartoon to which I have referred has been some time
finished, and delivered to the subscribers; and with it that elegant
description, from which the following is a copious extract: -

"The eye no sooner glances on this celebrated cartoon than it is
immediately struck with the commanding attitude of the speaker, and the
various emotions excited in his hearers.

"The interest which the first appearance of St. Paul at Athens had
occasioned, was not calculated to subside on a sudden; his doctrines
were too new, and his zeal too ardent. From the multitude it ascended to
the philosophers. The Epicureans and Stoics particularly assailed him.
Antecedently to the scene described in the picture, among the various
characters already encountered by the apostle, many undoubtedly, in
their speculations upon Divine subjects, had often imagined a sublimer
religion than that commonly acknowledged: such, therefore, would make it
their business to hear him again. Others, to whom truth was of less
value than the idle amusement of vain disquisition, felt no other motive
than curiosity. By far the greater part, however, obstinately bigoted to
their particular tenets, and abhorring innovation, regarded him as
impious, or a mere babbler: these also wished to hear him again, but
with no other than the insidious view, that, by a more regular and
explicit profession of his doctrines, he might expose his own
absurdities, or render himself obnoxious to the state. The drapery
accords with the majesty of the figure; and the light is so managed,
especially on the arms and hands, as greatly to assist the energy of the
action.

"The painter has proceeded, from the warmth of full conviction, through
various gradations, to the extremes of malignant prejudice, and
invincible bigotry.

"In the foreground, on the right, is Dionysius, who is recorded to have
embraced the new religion. With the utmost fervor in his countenance,
and with a kind of sympathetic action and unconscious eagerness, he
advances a step nearer. His eye is fixed on the apostle: he longs to
tell him his conversion, already perhaps preceded by conviction wrought
in his mind by the reasonings of the sacred teacher on previous
occasions, in the synagogue, and in the forum or marketplace. He appears
not only touched with the doctrine he receives, but expresses an evident
attachment to his instructer: he would become his host and protector.

"This figure is altogether admirable. The gracefulness of the drapery
and of the hair; the masculine beauty of the features; the perspective
drawing of the arms; the life and sentiment of the hands, the right one
especially, are inimitable.

"Behind is Damaris, mentioned with him as a fellow believer. This is the
only female in the composition; but the painter has fully availed
himself of the character, in assisting his principle of contrast; an
excellence found in all the works of Raphael. Her discreet distance, her
modest deportment, her pious and diffident eye, discovering a degree of
awe, the decorum and arrangement of her train, all interest the mind in
her favor.

"Next to these, but at come distance, is a Stoic. The first survey of
this figure conveys the nature of his peculiar philosophy - dignity and
austerity. Raphael has well understood what he meant in this instance to
illustrate. His head is sunk in his breast; his arms are mechanically
folded; his eyes, almost shut, glance towards the ground: he is absorbed
in reflection. In spite of his stoicism, discomposure and perplexity
invade his soul, mixed with a degree of haughty mortification.

"Sir Joshua Reynolds has observed that 'the same idea is continued
through the whole figure, even to the drapery, which is so closely
muffled about him that even his hands are not seen;' and that, 'by this
happy correspondence between the expression of the countenance and the
disposition of the parts, the figure appears to think from head to
foot.'

"Behind the Stoic are two young men, well contrasted in expression:
anger in the elder, and in the other, youthful pride, half abashed, are
finely discriminated.

"Beyond, in the same continued half circle with the Stoic, is perhaps
exhibited the most astonishing contrast ever imagined; that of
inexorable sternness, and complete placidity.

"Of the two figures, the first is denominated a Cynic, who, disappointed
in his expectation of the ridiculous appearance which he conceived the
apostle, when confronted, would make among them, abandons his mind to
rage. His formidable forehead concentrates its whole expression: with a
fixed frown and threatening eye, he surveys the object of his
indignation. He alone would engage to confute him, or punish his
temerity. His eager impatience and irritation are not discovered in his
features only; he raises his heel from the ground, and leans with a
firmer pressure on his crutch, which seems to bend beneath him.

"Pass from him to the more polished Epicurean. This figure exhibits
perfect repose of body and mind: no passions agitate the one; no action
discomposes the other. His hands, judiciously concealed beneath
beautiful drapery, shows there can be no possible motion or employment
for them. His feet seem to sleep upon the ground. His countenance, which
is highly pleasing, and full of natural gentleness, expresses only a
smile of pity at the fancied errors of the apostle, mingled with delight
derived from his eloquence. He waits, with an inclined head, in passive
and serene expectation. If a shrewd intelligence is discovered in his
eyes, it is too gentle to disturb the general expression of
tranquillity.

"Behind are two other young men: the first discovers a degree of
superciliousness with his vexation; his companion is more disgusted, and
more morose.

"These, and the two young figures previously described, are not
introduced merely to fill up the group; they may be intended as pupils
to the philosophers before them, though by some considered as young
Romans, who have introduced themselves from ennui or curiosity.

"Beyond is a character in whose mind the force of truth and eloquence
appears to have produced conviction; but pride, vanity, or
self-interest, impel him to dissemble. His finger, placed upon the upper
lip, shows that he has imposed silence upon himself.

"In the centre is seated a group from the academy. The skill of Raphael
in this instance is eminent. These figures are not only thrown into
shade, to prevent their interference with the principal figure; but,
from their posture, they contribute to its elevation, and at the same
time vary the line of the standing group.

"It seems as if the old philosopher in profile, on the left, had offered
some observations on the apostle's address; and that he was eagerly
listening to the reply of his sage friend, in whose features we behold
more of the spirit of mild philosophy. The action of his fingers denotes
his habit of reasoning, and regularity of argument. The middle figure
behind appears to be watching the effect which his remarks would
produce.

"The action of the young man, pointing to the apostle, characterizes the
keen susceptibility and impetuosity of his age. His countenance
expresses disgust, approaching to horror. The other young man turns his
head round, as though complaining of unreasonable interruption. The
drapery of both the front figures in this group is finely drawn: the
opening action of the knees in the one is beautifully followed and
described by the folds; in the other, the compression, in consequence of
the bent attitude, is equally executed; the turn of the head gives grace
and variety to the figure.

"The head introduced beyond, and rather apart, is intended to break the
two answering lines of the dark contour of the apostle's drapery, and
the building in the background.

"In the group placed behind the apostle, the mind is astonished at the
new character of composition. The finest light imaginable is thrown upon
the sitting figure; and, as necessary, a mass of shade is cast upon the
two others.

"It is difficult to ascertain what or whom Raphael meant by that
corpulent and haughty personage wearing the cap. His expression,
however, is evident: malice and vexation are depicted in his
countenance; his stride, and the action of his hand, are characteristic
of his temperament.

"The figure standing behind is supposed to be a magician. His dark hair
and beard, which seem to have been neglected, and the keen mysterious
gaze of his eye, certainly exhibit a mind addicted to unusual studies.
Under him, the only remaining figure is one who listens with malignant
attention, as though intending to report every thing. He has the aspect
of a spy. His eye is full of danger to the apostle; and he crouches
below that he may not be disturbed by communication.

"If this figure be considered with reference to Dionysius, it may be
remarked that Raphael has not only contrasted his characters, but even
the two ends of his picture. By this means the greatest possible force
is given to the subject. At the first survey, the subordinate contrasts
may escape the eye, but these greater oppositions must have their
effect.

"When, from this detailed display of the cartoon, the eye again glances
over the whole subject, including the dignity of the architecture; the
propriety of the statue of Mars, which faces his temple; the happy
management of the landscape, with the two conversation figures; the
result must be an acknowledgment that in this one effort of art is
combined all that is great in drawing, in expression, and in
composition." Holloway's description of Raphael's Cartoon of Paul
preaching at Athens.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 18](act018.md)

</div>
