<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act017)  [Next](act019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 18:0</span></span>

Paul, leaving Athens, comes to Corinth, meets with Aquila and Priscilla,
and labors with them at tent-making, [Act
18:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#001). He preaches, and proves that
Jesus was the Christ, [Act 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#004), [Act
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#005). The Jews oppose and blaspheme;
and he purposes to go to the Gentiles, [Act
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#006). Justus, Crispus, and several of
the Corinthians believe, [Act 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#007),
[Act 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#008). Paul has a vision, by which
he is greatly comforted, [Act 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#009),
[Act 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#010). He continues there a year
and six months, [Act 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#011). Gallio
being deputy of Achaia, the Jews make insurrection against Paul, and
bring him before the deputy, who dismisses the cause; whereupon the Jews
commit a variety of outrages, [Act
18:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#012). Paul sails to Syria, and
from thence to Ephesus, where he preaches, [Act
18:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#018). He leaves Ephesus - goes to
Caesarea, visits Antioch, Galatia, and Phrygia, [Act
18:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#021). Account of Apollos and his
preaching, [Act 18:24-28](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#024).

[Acts 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 18:1</span></span>

Paul departed from Athens - How long he stayed here, we cannot tell; it
is probable it could not be less than three months; but, finding that
the Gospel made little progress among the Athenians, he resolved to go
to Corinth.

Corinth was situated on the isthmus that connects Peloponnesus to
Attica; and was the capital of all Achaia, or Peloponnesus. It was most
advantageously situated for trade; for, by its two ports, the Lecheum
and Cenchreae, it commanded the commerce both of the Ionian and Aegean
Sea. It was destroyed by the Romans under Mummius, about one hundred and
forty-six years before Christ, in their wars with Attica; but was
rebuilt by Julius Caesar, and became one of the most considerable cities
of Greece. Like other kingdoms and states, it has undergone a variety of
revolutions: from the oppressive and destructive government of the Turks
it has been lately restored to that of the Greeks; but it is greatly
reduced, its whole population amounting only to between thirteen and
fourteen thousand souls. It is about 46 miles east of Athens, and 342
S.W. of Constantinople. Its public buildings were very superb; and there
the order called the Corinthian Order, in architecture, took its rise.

[Acts 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 18:2</span></span>

A certain Jew named Aquila - Some have supposed that this Aquila was the
same with the Onkelos, mentioned by the Jews. See the article in
Wolfius, Bibl. Hebr. vol. ii. p. 1147. We have no evidence that this Jew
and his wife were at this time converted to the Christian religion.
Their conversion was most likely the fruit of St. Paul's lodging with
them - Pontus. See the note on [Act
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#009).

Claudius had commanded all Jews to depart from Rome - This edict of the
Roman emperor is not mentioned by Josephus; but it is probably the same
to which Suetonius refers in his life of Claudius; where he says,
Judaeos, impulsore Chresto, assidue tumultuantes Roma expulit. "He
expelled the Jews from Rome, as they were making continual
insurrections, under their leader Chrestus." Who this Chrestus was we
cannot tell; probably Suetonius means Christ; but this I confess does
not appear to me likely. There might have been a Jew of the name of
Chrestus, who had made some disturbances, and, in consequence, Claudius
thought proper to banish all Jews from the city. But how could he intend
Christ, who was never at Rome? nor did any one ever personate him in
that city; and it is evident he could not refer to any spiritual
influence exerted by Christ on the minds of the people. Indeed he speaks
of Chrestus as being the person who was the cause of the disturbances.
It is no fictitious name, no name of an absent person, nor of a sect;
but of one who was well known by the disturbances which he occasioned,
and for which it is likely he suffered, and those of his nation were
expelled. This decree, which was made, not by the senate, but by the
emperor himself, continued only in force during his life, if so long;
for in a short time after this Rome again abounded with Jews.

[Acts 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 18:3</span></span>

He abode with them, and wrought - Bp. Pearce observes that it was a
custom among the Jews, even of such as had a better education than
ordinary, which was Paul's case, [Act
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#003), to learn a trade, that, wherever
they were, they might provide for themselves in case of necessity. And
though Paul, in some cases, lived on the bounty of his converts, yet he
chose not to do so at Ephesus, [Act
20:34](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#034); nor at Corinth or other places,
[Co1 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#012); [Co2
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#008), [Co2
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#009); [Th1
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#008); and this Paul did for a reason
which he gives in [Co2 11:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#009). While
he was at Corinth he was supplied, when his own labor did not procure
him enough, "by the brethren which came to him there from Macedonia." It
appears that the apostle had his lodging with Aquila and Priscilla; and
probably a portion of the profits of the business, after his board was
deducted. It was evidently no reproach for a man, at that time, to unite
public teaching with an honest useful trade. And why should it be so
now? May not a man who has acquired a thorough knowledge of the Gospel
way of salvation, explain that way to his less informed neighbors,
though he be a tent-maker, (what perhaps we would call a
house-carpenter), or a shoemaker, or any thing else? Even many of those
who consider it a cardinal sin for a mechanic to preach the Gospel, are
providing for themselves and their families in the same way. How many of
the clergy, and other ministers, are farmers, graziers, schoolmasters,
and sleeping partners in different trades and commercial concerns! A
tent-maker, in his place, is as useful as any of these. Do not ridicule
the mechanic because he preaches the Gospel to the salvation of his
neighbors, lest some one should say, in a language which you glory to
have learned, and which the mechanic has not, Mutato nomine, de Te
fabula narrator.

There are different opinions concerning that is meant here by the
σκηνοποιος, which we translate tent-maker. Some think it means a maker
of those small portable tents, formed of skins, which soldiers and
travelers usually carried with them on their journeys; others suppose
that these tents mere made of linen cloth. Some think that the trade of
St. Paul was making hangings or curtains, such as were used at the
theatres; others think the σκηνοποιος was a sort of umbrella-maker;
others, a weaver, etc., etc. In short, we know not what the trade was. I
have generally preferred the notion of a carpenter, or faber lignarius.
Whatever it was, it was an honest, useful calling, and Paul got his
bread by it.

[Acts 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 18:4</span></span>

He reasoned in the synagogue every Sabbath - Discoursed at large
concerning Jesus as the Messiah, proving this point from their own
Scriptures, collated with the facts of our Lord's life, etc.

And persuaded the Jews and the Greeks - Many, both Jews and proselytes,
were convinced of the truth of his doctrine. Among his converts was
Epenetus, the first fruit of his labor in Achaia, [Rom
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#005); and the family of Stephanas was
the next; and then Crispus and Caius, or Gaius; all of whom the apostle
himself baptized, [Co1 1:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#014). See on
[Act 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#008) (note).

[Acts 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 18:5</span></span>

When Silas and Timotheus were come - We have seen, [Act
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#013), that when Paul was obliged to
leave Berea, because of the persecution raised up against him in that
place, he left Silas and Timotheus behind; to whom he afterwards sent
word to rejoin him at Athens with all speed. It appears, from [Th1
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#010), that, on Timothy's coming to
Athens, Paul immediately sent him, and probably Silas with him, to
comfort and establish the Church at Thessalonica. How long they labored
here is uncertain, but they did not rejoin him till some time after he
came to Corinth. It appears that he was greatly rejoiced at the account
which Timothy brought of the Church at Thessalonica; and it must have
been immediately after this that he wrote his first epistle to that
Church, which is probably the first, in order of time, of all his
epistles.

Paul was pressed in spirit - Συνειχετο τῳ πνευματι, or he was
constrained by the Spirit of God, in an extraordinary manner, to testify
to the Jews that Jesus was the Christ. Instead of τῳ πνευματι, in the
spirit, τῳ λογῳ, in the word or doctrine, is the reading of ABDE, three
others; both the Syriac, Coptic, Vulgate, Basil, Chrysostom, and others.
Griesbach has received this reading into the text, and Bp. Pearce thus
paraphrases the verse: "And when Silas and Timotheus were come from
Macedonia, Paul set himself, together with them, wholly to the word;
i.e. he was fully employed, now that he had their assistance, it
preaching the Gospel, called the word in [Act
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#004); [Act
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#006), [Act
16:32](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#032); [Act
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#011). St. Luke seems to have intended
to express here something relating to St. Paul which was the consequence
of the coming of Silas and Timotheus; and that was rather labouring with
them more abundantly in preaching the word than his being "pressed in
spirit." This appears to be the true sense of the word, and that τῳ λογῳ
is the genuine reading there can be no doubt. Συνειχετο, which we
translate pressed, and which the Vulgate translates instabat, Bp. Pearce
thinks should be translated una cum illis instabat, he earnestly strove
together with them, τῳ λογῳ, in preaching the word. The true sense is
given by Calmet, Paul s'employoit a precher encore avec plus d'ardeur,
Paul was employed with more ardour in preaching, and testifying to the
Jews that Jesus was the Christ. From this time we hear no more of Silas;
probably he died in Macedonia.

[Acts 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 18:6</span></span>

When they opposed - Αντιτασσομενων, Systematically opposing, putting
themselves in warlike order against him: so the word implies.

And blasphemed - This is precisely the way in which they still act. They
have no arguments against Jesus being the Messiah; but, having made a
covenant with unbelief, as soon as they are pressed on this point, they
rail and blaspheme. - See the Tela ignea Satanae, by Wagenseil.

He shook his raiment - This was an action similar to that of shaking the
dust of the feet; see on [Mat 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#014)
(note). See a parallel act, and its signification, in [Neh
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#013) : Also I Shook My Lap, and said,
So shall God Shake every man From His House and From his Labor; even
thus shall he be Shaken Out and Emptied. St. Paul's act on this occasion
seems to have been the same with this of Nehemiah, and with the same
signification; and it is likely that he was led by a Divine impulse to
do it - thus signifying the shaking and emptying out of this disobedient
people, which took place about sixteen years afterwards.

Your blood be upon your own heads - That is, ye alone are the cause of
the destruction that is coming upon yourselves and upon your country.

I am clean - Καθαρος εγω, I am pure or innocent of your death and ruin.
I have proposed to you the Gospel of Jesus Christ - the only means by
which ye can be saved, and ye have utterly rejected it. I shall labor no
more with you; and, from henceforth, shall confine my labors to the
Gentiles. St. Paul must refer to the Jews and Gentiles of Corinth
particularly; for he preached to the Jews occasionally in other places;
see [Act 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#008), [Act
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#009); and several were brought to the
knowledge of the truth. But it seems as if the Jews from this time
systematically opposed the Gospel of Christ; and yet, general tenders of
this salvation were made to them wherever the apostles came; and when
they rejected them, the word was sent to the Gentiles; see [Act
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#008), [Act
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#009).

Pure from blood, or pure from guilt, is commonly expressed by καθαρος;
thus Heliodorus, lib. i. p. 49: Εις δευρο διετελεσα καθαραν εμαυτην απο
σης ὁμιλιας φυλαττουσα, Until now I have lived, preserving myself pure:
and Alciphron, lib. i. epist. 7, ad. fin.: Ουδε μιαναι λυθρῳ τας χειρας,
ἁς ἡ θαλαττα εκ παιδος εις δευρο καθαρας αδικηματων εφυλαξε, Nor to
stain with pollution the hands which a seafaring life has kept from a
child until now pure from iniquity.

[Acts 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 18:7</span></span>

And he departed thence - From his former lodging, or that quarter of the
city where he had dwelt before with Aquila and Priscilla; and went to
lodge with Justus, apparently a proselyte of the gate. This person is
called Titus, and Titus Justus, in several MSS. and versions.

[Acts 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 18:8</span></span>

Crispus the chief ruler of the synagogue - This person held an office of
considerable consequence; and therefore his conversion to Christianity
must have been very galling to the Jews. It belonged to the chief or
ruler of the synagogue to preside in all the assemblies, interpret the
law, decide concerning things lawful and unlawful, punish the
refractory, excommunicate the rebellious, solemnize marriages, and issue
divorces. It is likely that, on the conversion of Crispus, Sosthenes was
chosen to succeed him.

Many of the Corinthians - Those to whom the sacred historian refers were
probably Gentiles, and were the fruits of the apostle's labors after he
had ceased to preach among the Jews.

[Acts 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 18:9</span></span>

Then spake the Lord to Paul in the night by a vision - It is likely that
Paul was at this time much discouraged by the violent opposition of the
Jews, and probably was in danger of his life; see [Act
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#010); and might have been
entertaining serious thoughts of ceasing to preach, or leaving Corinth.
To prevent this, and comfort him, God was pleased to give him this
vision.

Be not afraid - That this comfort and assurance were necessary himself
shows us in his first epistle to these Corinthians, [Act
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#003) : I was with you in weakness, and
in fear, and in much trembling.

[Acts 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 18:10</span></span>

No man shall set on thee - Και ουδεις επιθησεται σοι, No man shall be
permitted to lay violent hands upon thee. It is very likely that the
Jews had conspired his death; and his preservation was an act of the
especial interposition of Divine Providence.

I have much people in this city - Εν τῃ πολει ταυτῃ, In this very city:
there are many here who have not resisted my Spirit, and consequently
are now under its teachings, and are ready to embrace my Gospel as soon
as thou shalt declare it unto them.

[Acts 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 18:11</span></span>

He continued there a year and six months - He was now confident that he
was under the especial protection of God, and therefore continued
teaching the word, τον λογον, the doctrine of God. It is very likely,
that it was during his stay here that he wrote his first epistle to the
Thessalonians, and the second not long after; and some think that the
epistle to the Galatians was written during his stay at Corinth.

[Acts 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 18:12</span></span>

When Gallio was the deputy of Achaia - The Romans comprehended, under
the name of Achaia, all that part of Greece which lay between Thessaly
and the southernmost coasts of Peloponnesus. Pausanias, in Attic. vii.
16, says that the Romans were accustomed to send a governor into that
country, and that they called him the governor of Achaia, not of Greece;
because the Achaeans, when they subdued Greece, were the leaders in all
the Grecian affairs see also Suetonius, in his life of Claudius, cap.
xxv., and Dio Cassius, lx. 24. Edit. Reimari.

Deputy - Ανθυπατευοντος, serving the office of Ανθυπατος, or deputy: see
the note on [Act 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#007).

Gallio - This deputy, or proconsul, was eldest brother to the celebrated
Lucius Annaeus Seneca, the stoic philosopher, preceptor of Nero, and who
is so well known among the learned by his works. The name of Gallio, was
at first Marcus Annaeus Novatus; but, having been adopted in the family
of Gallio, he took the name of Lucius Junius Gallio. He, and Annaeus
Mela his brother, father of the poet Lucan, shared in the disgrace of
their brother Seneca; and by this tyrant, Nero, whose early years were
so promising, the three brothers were put to death; see Tacitus, Annal.
lib. xv. 70, and xvi. 17. It was to this Gallio that Seneca dedicates
his book De Ira. Seneca describes him as a man of the most amiable mind
and manners: "Quem nemo non parum amat, etiam qui amare plus non potent;
nemo mortalium uni tam dulcis est, quam hic omnibus: cum interim tanta
naturalis boni vis est, uti artem simulationemque non redoleat:" vide
Senec. Praefat. ad Natural. Quaest. 4. He was of the sweetest
disposition, affable to all, and beloved by every man.

Statius, Sylvar. lib. ii. 7. ver. 30, Ode on the Birthday of Lucan, says
not a little in his favor, in a very few words: -

Lucanum potes imputare terris;

Hoc plus quam Senecam dedisse mundo,

Aut dulcem generasse Gallionem.

You may consider nature as having made greater efforts in producing
Lucan, than it has done in producing Seneca, or even the amiable Gallio.

And brought him to the judgment seat - They had no power to punish any
person in the Roman provinces, and therefore were obliged to bring their
complaint before the Roman governor. The powers that be are ordained of
God. Had the Jews possessed the power here, Paul had been put to death!

[Acts 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 18:13</span></span>

Persuaded men to worship God contrary to the law - This accusation was
very insidious. The Jews had permission by the Romans to worship their
own God in their own way: this the laws allowed. The Roman worship was
also established by the law. The Jews probably intended to accuse Paul
of acting contrary to both laws. "He is not a Jew, for he does not admit
of circumcision; he is not a Gentile, for he preaches against the
worship of the gods. He is setting up a worship of his own, in
opposition to all laws, and persuading many people to join with him: he
is therefore a most dangerous man, and should be put to death."

[Acts 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 18:14</span></span>

Paul was now about to open his mouth - He was about to enter on his
defense; but Gallio, perceiving that the prosecution was through envy
and malice, would not put Paul to any farther trouble, but determined
the matter as follows.

If it were a matter of wrong - Αδικημα, Of injustice; any thing contrary
to the rights of the subject.

Or wicked lewdness - Ῥᾳδιουργημα πονηρον, Destructive mischief. (See the
note on [Act 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#010), where the word is
explained.) Something by which the subject is grievously wronged; were
it any crime against society or against the state.

Reason would that I should bear with you - Κατα λογον αν ηνεσχομην ὑμων,
According to reason, or the merit of the case, I should patiently hear
you.

[Acts 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 18:15</span></span>

But if it be a question of words - Περι λογου, Concerning doctrine and
names - whether the person called Jesus be the person you call the
Messiah. And of your law - any particular nicety, concerning that law
which is peculiar to yourselves: Look ye to it - settle the business
among yourselves; the Roman government does not meddle with such
matters, and I will not take upon me to - decide in a case that does not
concern my office. As if he had said: "The Roman laws give religious
liberty to Jews and Greeks; but, if controversies arise among you on
these subjects, decide them among yourselves, or dispute about them as
much as you please." A better answer could not be given by man; and it
was highly becoming the acknowledged meekness, gentleness, and
benevolence of this amiable man. He concluded that the state had no
right to control any man's religious opinion; that was between the
object of his worship and his own conscience; and therefore he was not
authorized to intermeddle with subjects of this nature, which the law
left to every man's private judgment. Had all the rulers of the people
in every country acted as this sensible and benevolent Roman, laws
against liberty of conscience, concerning religious persecution, would
not be found to be, as they not are, blots and disgraces on the statute
books of almost all the civilized nations of Europe.

[Acts 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 18:16</span></span>

And he drave them from the judgment seat - He saw that their accusation
was both frivolous and vexatious, and he ordered them to depart, and the
assembly to disperse. The word απηλασεν, which we translate he drave,
does not signify here any act of violence on the part of Gallio or the
Roman officers, but simply an authoritative dismission.

[Acts 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 18:17</span></span>

Then all the Greeks took Sosthenes - As this man is termed the chief
ruler of the synagogue, it is probable that he had lately succeeded
Crispus in that office; see [Act 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#008);
and that he was known either to have embraced Christianity, or to have
favored the cause of St. Paul. He is supposed to be the same person whom
St. Paul associates with himself in the first epistle to the
Corinthians, [Co1 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001). Crispus might
have been removed from his presidency in the synagogue as soon as the
Jews found he had embraced Christianity, and Sosthenes appointed in his
place.

And, as he seems to have speedily embraced the same doctrine, the Jews
would be the more enraged, and their malice be directed strongly against
him, when they found that the proconsul would not support them in their
opposition to Paul.

But why should the Greeks beat Sosthenes? I have in the above note
proceeded on the supposition that this outrage was committed by the
Jews; and my reason for it is this: Οἱ Ἑλληνες, the Greeks, is omitted
by AB, two of the oldest and most authentic MSS. in the world: they are
omitted also by the Coptic and Vulgate, Chrysostom, and Bede. Instead of
Οἱ Ἑλληνες, three MSS., one of the eleventh, and two of the thirteenth
century, have Ιουδαιοι, the Jews; and it is much more likely that the
Jews beat one of their own rulers, through envy at his conversion, than
that the Greeks should do so; unless we allow, which is very probable,
(if Ἑλληνες, Greeks, be the true reading), that these Hellenes were
Jews, born in a Greek country, and speaking the Greek language.

And Gallio cared for none of those things - Και ουδεν τουτων τῳ Γαλλιωνι
εμελεν. And Gallio did not concern himself, did not intermeddle with any
of these things. As he found that it was a business that concerned their
own religion, and that the contention was among themselves, and that
they were abusing one of their own sect only, he did not choose to
interfere. He, like the rest of the Romans, considered the Jews a most
despicable people, and worthy of no regard; and their present conduct
had no tendency to cause him to form a different opinion of them from
that which he and his countrymen had previously entertained. It is not
very likely, however, that Gallio saw this outrage; for, though it was
before the judgment seat, it probably did not take place till Gallio had
left the court; and, though he might be told of it, he left the matter
to the lictors, and would not interfere.

The conduct of Gallio has been, in this case, greatly censured; and I
think with manifest injustice. In the business brought before his
tribunal, no man could have followed a more prudent or equitable course.
His whole conduct showed that it was his opinion, that the civil
magistrate had nothing to do with religious opinions or the concerns of
conscience, in matters where the safety of the state was not implicated.
He therefore refused to make the subject a matter of legal discussion.
Nay, he went much farther; he would not even interfere to prevent either
the Jews or the apostles from making proselytes. Though the complaint
against the apostles was, that they were teaching men to worship God
contrary to the law; see the note on [Act
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#015), yet, even in this case, he did
not think it right to exert the secular power to restrain the free
discussion and teaching of matters which concerned the rights of
conscience in things pertaining to the worship of the gods. As to his
not preventing the tumult which took place, we may say, if he did see
it, which is not quite evident, that he well knew that this could rise
to no serious amount; and the lictors, and other minor officers, were
there in sufficient force to prevent any serious riot, and it was their
business to see that the public peace was not broken, besides, as a
heathen, he might have no objection to permit this people to pursue a
line of conduct by which they were sure to bring themselves and their
religion into contempt. These wicked Jews could not disprove the
apostle's doctrine, either by argument or Scripture; and they had
recourse to manual logic, which was an indisputable proof of the badness
of their own cause, and the strength of that of their opponents.

But in consequence of this conduct Gallio has been represented as a man
perfectly careless and unconcerned about religion in general; and
therefore has been considered as a proper type or representative of even
professed Christians, who are not decided in their religious opinions or
conduct. As a heathen, Gallio certainly was careless about both Judaism
and Christianity. The latter he had probably never heard of but by the
cause now before his judgment seat; and, from any thing he could see of
the other, through the medium of its professors, he certainly could
entertain no favorable opinion of it: therefore in neither case was he
to blame. But the words, cared for none of those things, are both
misunderstood and misapplied: we have already seen that they only mean
that he would not intermeddle in a controversy which did not belong to
his province and sufficient reasons have been alleged why he should act
as he did. It is granted that many preachers take this for a text, and
preach useful sermons for the conviction of the undecided and lukewarm;
and it is to be deplored that there are so many undecided and careless
people in the world, and especially in reference to what concerns their
eternal interests. But is it not to be lamented, also, that there should
be preachers of God's holy word who attempt to explain passages of
Scripture which they do not understand? For he who preaches on Gallio
cared for none of those things, in the way in which the passage has,
through mismanagement, been popularly understood, either does not
understand it, or he wilfully perverts the meaning.

[Acts 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 18:18</span></span>

And Paul - tarried there yet a good while - The persecuting Jews plainly
saw, from the manner in which the proconsul had conducted this business,
that they could have no hope of raising a state persecution against the
apostles; and the laws provided so amply for the personal safety of
every Roman citizen that then were afraid to proceed any farther in
their violence. It would not be unknown that Paul was possessed of the
right of Roman citizenship; and therefore his person was sacred as long
as he did nothing contrary to the laws.

It is probable that at this time Paul stayed, on the whole, as Corinth,
about two years.

Having shorn his head in Cenchrea - But who was it that shore his head?
Paul or Aquila? Some think the latter, who had bound himself by the
Nazarite vow, probably before he became a Christian; and, being under
that vow, his conscience would not permit him to disregard it. There is
nothing in the text that absolutely obliges us to understand this action
as belonging to St. Paul. It seems to have been the act of Aquila alone;
and therefore both Paul and Priscilla are mentioned before Aquila; and
it is natural to refer the vow to the latter. Yet there are certainly
some weighty reasons why the vow should be referred to St. Paul, and not
to Aquila; and interpreters are greatly divided on the subject.
Chrysostom, Isidore of Seville, Grotius, Hammond, Zegerus, Erasmus,
Baronius, Pearce, Wesley, and others, refer the vow to Aquila. - Jerome,
Augustin, Bede, Calmet, Dodd, Rosenmuller, and others, refer it to St.
Paul. Each party has its strong reasons - the matter is doubtful - the
bare letter of the text determines nothing: yet I cannot help leaning to
the latter opinion. Perhaps it was from feeling the difficulty of
deciding which was under the vow that the Ethiopic and two Latin
versions, instead of κειραμενος, having shaved, in the singular, appear
to have read κειραμενοι, they shaved; and thus put both Paul and Aquila
under the vow.

Cenchrea. This was a port on the east side of the isthmus of Corinth,
opposite to the Lecheum, which was the other port on the west. And it is
likely that it was at Cenchrea that St. Paul took shipping for Syria, as
it would be more convenient her him, and a shorter passage to embark at
Cenchrea, in order to go by the Aegean Sea to Syria, than to embark at
the Lecheum, and sail down into the Mediterranean. This isthmus is
generally described now as dividing the Gulf of Lepanto, on the west,
from the Gulf of Engia, or Eginaon, on the east.

[Acts 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 18:19</span></span>

He came to Ephesus - Where it appears he spent but one Sabbath. It is
supposed that Paul left Aquila and Priscilla at this place, and that he
went on alone to Jerusalem; for it is certain they were at Ephesus when
Apollos arrived there. See [Act 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#024),
[Act 18:26](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#026).

Ephesus was at the time in which St. Paul visited it, one of the most
flourishing cities of Asia Minor. It was situated in that part anciently
called Ionia, but now Natolia. It abounded with the most eminent
orators, philosophers, etc., in the world; and was adorned with the most
splendid buildings. Here was that famous temple of Diana, reputed one of
the seven wonders of the world. This city is now under the dominion of
the Turks, and is in a state of almost entire ruin. The temple of
Minerva, which had long served as a Christian church, is now so
completely ruined that its site cannot be easily determined; though some
ruins of the walls are still standing, with five or six marble columns,
forty feet in length, and seven in diameter, all of one piece. It still
has a good harbour, and is about forty miles from Smyrna. In Chandler's
Travels in Asia Minor, some curious information is given concerning this
once eminent city. His account concludes thus: "The Ephesians are now a
few Greek peasants, living in extreme wretchedness, dependence, and
insensibility: the representative of an illustrious people, and
inhabiting the wrecks of their greatness: some beneath the vaults of the
Stadium, once the crowded scene of their diversions; and some live by
the abrupt precipice, in the sepulchres which received the ashes of
their ancestors. Such are the present citizens of Ephesus; and such is
the condition to which that renowned city has been gradually reduced.
Its streets are obscured and overgrown; a herd of goats was driven to it
for shelter from the sun at noon; and a noisy flight of crows from the
quarries seemed to insult its silence. We heard the partridge call in
the area of the theater, and of the Stadium. The glorious pomp of its
heathen worship is no longer remembered; and Christianity, which was
there nursed by apostles, and fostered by general councils, until it
increased to fullness of stature, barely lingers on, in an existence
hardly visible." Travels in Asia Minor, p. 130. Reader! This city was
once the capital of Asia Minor; and its ruins alone prove that it has
existed: and it was one of those seven Churches to which a letter was
expressly dictated by Jesus Christ himself! Ephesus is properly no more!
and the Church of Ephesus is blotted put of the map of Christianity! Be
silent and adore.

[Acts 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 18:21</span></span>

I must - keep this feast - Most likely the passover, at which he wished
to attend for the purpose of seeing many of his friends, and having the
most favorable opportunity to preach the Gospel to thousands who would
attend at Jerusalem on that occasion. The whole of this clause, I must
by all means keep this feast that cometh in Jerusalem, is wanting in
ABE, six others; with the Coptic, Ethiopic, Armenian, and Vulgate.
Griesbach leaves it in the text, with the mark of doubtfulness; and
Professor White, in his Crisews, says, probabiliter delenda. Without
this clause the verse will read thus: But he bade them farewell, saying,
I will return again unto you, if God will. And this he did before the
expiration of that same year, [Act
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#001), and spent three years with them,
[Act 20:31](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#031), extending and establishing
the Church at that place.

[Acts 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 18:22</span></span>

Landed at Caesarea - This must have been Caesarea in Palestine.

Gone up - To Jerusalem, though the name is not mentioned: but this is a
common form of speech in the evangelists, Jerusalem being always meant
when this expression was used; for the word αναβαινω, to go up, is often
used absolutely, to signify, to go to Jerusalem: e.g. Go ye Up unto this
feast; I Go not Up yet, [Joh 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#008). But
when his brethren were Gone Up, then Went he also Up unto the feast,
[Joh 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#010). There were certain Greeks -
that Came Up to worship, [Joh 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#020).
St. Paul himself uses a similar form of expression. There are yet but
twelve days since I Went Up to Jerusalem, for to worship, [Act
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#011). So all parts of England are
spoken of as being below London: so we talk of going up to London; and
people in London talk of going down to the country.

Saluted the Church - That is, the Church at Jerusalem, called
emphatically The Church, because it was the First Church - the Mother,
or Apostolic Church; and from it all other Christian Churches proceeded:
those in Galatia, Philippi, Thessalonica, Corinth, Ephesus, Rome, etc.
Therefore, even this last was only a daughter Church, when in its purest
state.

Went down to Antioch - That is, Antioch in Syria, as the word is
generally to be understood when without addition, so Caesarea is always
to be understood Caesarea in Palestine, when without the addition of
Philippi.

[Acts 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 18:23</span></span>

Went over all the country of Galatia and Phrygia - Both were provinces
of Asia Minor: see on [Act 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#010)
(note).

In order - Καθεξης, A word peculiar to St. Luke; see his Gospel, [Luk
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#003); [Luk
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#001); and his history of the Acts, [Act
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#024); [Act
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#004), and the place above; the only
places where this word occurs in the New Testament. It properly
signifies, in order, distinctly, particularly; from κατα, according to,
and ἑξη, order, as opposed to confusion, indistinctness, etc. If St.
Paul went up to Jerusalem at this time, which we are left to infer, for
Luke has not expressed it, ([Act
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#022)), it was his fourth journey
thither; and this is generally supposed to have been the twenty-first
year after his conversion. His first journey is mentioned [Act
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#026); his second, [Act
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#030); his third, [Act
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#004); and his fourth, [Act
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#022), the place above.

[Acts 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 18:24</span></span>

A certain Jew named Apollos - One MS., with the Coptic and Armenian,
calls him Apelles; and the Codex Bezae, Apollonius. It is strange that
we should find a Jew, not only with a Roman name, as Aquila, an eagle;
but with the name of one of the false gods, as Apollos or Apollo in the
text. Query: Whether the parents of this man were not originally
Gentiles, but converted to Judaism after their son Apollo (for so we
should write the word) had been born and named.

Born at Alexandria - This was a celebrated city of Egypt, built by
Alexander the Great, from whom it took its name. It was seated on the
Mediterranean Sea, between the Lake Mareotis and the beautiful harbour
formed by the Isle of Pharos, about twelve miles west of the Canopic
branch of the Nile, in lat. 31. 10'. N. This city was built under the
direction of Dinocrates, the celebrated architect of the temple of Diana
at Ephesus. It was in this city that Ptolemy Soter founded the famous
academy called the Museum, in which a society of learned men devoted
themselves to philosophical studies. Some of the most celebrated schools
of antiquity flourished here; and here was the Tower of Pharos, esteemed
one of the seven wonders of the world. Alexandria was taken by the
French, July 4, 1798, under the command of Bonaparte; and was
surrendered to the English under General, now Lord, Hutchinson, in 1801.
And, in consequence of the treaty of peace between France and England,
it was restored to the Turks. Near this place was the celebrated
obelisk, called Cleopatra's Needle; and the no less famous column,
called Pompey's Pillar. This city exhibits but very slender remains of
its ancient splendor.

An eloquent man - Having strong rhetorical powers; highly cultivated, no
doubt, in the Alexandrian schools.

Mighty in the Scriptures - Thoroughly acquainted with the law and
prophets; and well skilled in the Jewish method of interpreting them.

[Acts 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 18:25</span></span>

This man was instructed in the way of the Lord - Κατηχημενος; He was
catechized, initiated, in the way, the doctrine, of Jesus as the Christ.

Being fervent in the spirit - Being full of zeal to propagate the truth
of God, he taught diligently, ακριβως accurately, (so the word should be
translated), the things of Christ as far as he could know them through
the ministry of John the Baptist; for it appears he knew nothing more of
Christ than what John preached. Some suppose we should read ουκ, not,
before ακριβως, correctly, or accurately, because it is said that Aquila
and Priscilla expounded the way of the Lord, ακριβεϚερον, more
perfectly, rather more accurately; but of this emendation there is not
the slightest necessity; for surely it is possible for a man to teach
accurately what he knows; and it is possible that another, who possesses
more information on the subject than the former, may teach him more
accurately, or give him a larger portion of knowledge. Apollo knew the
baptism of John; but he knew nothing farther of Jesus Christ than that
baptism taught; but, as far as he knew, he taught accurately. Aquila and
Priscilla were acquainted with the whole doctrine of the Gospel: the
doctrine of Christ dying for our sins, and rising again for our
justification; and in this they instructed Apollo; and this was more
accurate information than what he had before received, through the
medium of John's ministry.

[Acts 18:26](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 18:26</span></span>

They took him unto them - This eloquent man, and mighty in the
Scriptures, who was even a public teacher, was not ashamed to be
indebted to the instructions of a Christian woman, in matters that not
only concerned his own salvation, but also the work of the ministry, in
which he was engaged. It is disgraceful to a man to be ignorant, when he
may acquire wisdom; but it is no disgrace to acquire wisdom from the
meanest person or thing. The adage is good: Despise not advice, even of
the meanest: the gaggling of geese preserved the Roman state.

[Acts 18:27](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 18:27</span></span>

When he was disposed to pass into Achaia - There is a very long and
important addition here in the Codex Bezae, of which the following is a
translation: But certain Corinthians, who sojourned at Ephesus, and
heard him, entreated him to pass over with them to their own country.
Then, when he had given his consent, the Ephesians wrote to the
disciples at Corinth, that they should receive this man. Who, when he
was come, etc. The same addition is found in the later Syriac, and in
the Itala version in the Codex Bezae.

Which had believed through grace - These words may either refer to
Apollo, or to the people at Corinth. It was through grace that they had
believed; and it was through grace that Apollo was enabled to help them
much.

The words δια της χαριτος, through grace, are wanting in the Codex
Bezae, the later Syriac, the Vulgate, one copy of the Itala, and in some
of the fathers. But this omission might have been the effect of
carelessness in the writers of those copies from which the foregoing
were taken: the words convey the same idea that is expressed by St.
Paul, [Co1 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006) : Paul planted, and
Apollos watered; but God gave the increase. Though this eminent man
became the instrument of mightily helping the believers in Corinth, yet
he was also the innocent cause of a sort of schism among them. For some,
taken by his commanding eloquence, began to range themselves on his
side, and prefer him to all other teachers. This evil St. Paul
reprehends and corrects in his first epistle to the Corinthians. St.
Jerome says that Apollo became bishop of Corinth.

[Acts 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 18:28</span></span>

He mightily convinced the Jews - Ευτονως διακατηλεγχετο; He vehemently
confuted the Jews; and that publicly, not in private conferences, but in
his public preaching: showing by the scriptures of the Old Testament,
which the Jews received as divinely inspired, that Jesus, who had lately
appeared among them, and whom they had crucified, was the Christ, the
promised Messiah, and that there was salvation in none other; and that
they must receive him as the Messiah, in order to escape the wrath to
come. This they refused to do; and we know the consequence. Their city
was sacked, their temple burnt, their whole civil and religious polity
subverted, more than a million of themselves killed, and the rest
scattered over the face of the earth.

1\. The Christian religion did not hide itself in corners and obscure
places at first, in order, privately, to get strength, before it dared
to show itself publicly. Error, conscious of its weakness, and that its
pretensions cannot bear examination, is obliged to observe such a
cautious procedure. With what caution, circumspection, and privacy, did
Mohammed propose his new religion! He formed a party by little and
little, in the most private manner, before he ventured to exhibit his
pretensions openly. Not so Christianity: it showed itself in the most
public manner, not only in the teaching of Christ, but also in that of
the apostles. Even after the crucifixion of our Lord, the apostles and
believers went to the temple, the most public place; and in the most
public manner taught and worked miracles. Jerusalem, the seat of the
doctors, the judge of religion, was the first place in which, by the
command of their Lord, the disciples preached Christ crucified. They
were, therefore, not afraid to have their cause tried by the most rigid
test of Scripture; and in the very place, too, where that Scripture was
best understood.

2\. When the same apostles. carried this Gospel to heathen countries,
did they go to the villages, among the less informed or comparatively
ignorant Greeks, in order to form a party, and shield themselves by
getting the multitude on their side? No! They went to Caesarea, to
Antioch, to Thessalonica, to Athens, to Corinth, to Ephesus; to the very
places where learning flourished most, where sciences were best
cultivated, where imposture was most likely to be detected, and where
the secular power existed in the most despotic manner, and could at once
have crushed them to nothing could they have been proved to be
impostors, or had they not been under the immediate protection of
Heaven! Hence it is evident that these holy men feared no rational
investigation of their doctrines, for they taught them in the face of
the most celebrated schools in the universe!

3\. They preached Christ crucified in Jerusalem, where it was the most
solemn interest of the Jews to disprove their doctrine, that they might
exculpate themselves from the murder of Jesus Christ. They preached the
same Christ, and the vanity of idolatry, in Athens, in Corinth, and in
Ephesus, where idolatry existed in the plenitude of its power; and where
all its interests required it to make the moat desperate and formidable
stand against those innovators. What but the fullest confidence of the
truth of what they preached, the fullest conviction of the Divinity of
their doctrine, and the supernatural influence of God upon their souls,
could ever have induced these men to preach Christ crucified, either at
Jerusalem, or at Athens? I scruple not to assert that the bold, public
manner in which the apostles preached the Gospel, among the Jews and
Greeks, is a most incontestable proof of the conviction they had of its
truth; and the success with which they were favored is a demonstration
that what they preached as truth God proved to be the truth, by
stretching forth his hand to heal, and causing signs and wonders to be
wrought in the name of the holy child Jesus. This is an additional proof
of the sincerity of the apostles, and of the truth of Christianity. If
Paul and Peter, Barnabas and Silas, had not had the fullest persuasion
that their doctrine was of God, they would never have ventured to
propose it before the Sanhedrin in Jerusalem, the literati of Corinth,
and the Stoics and inexorable judges of the Areopagus at Athens.

4\. We may be surprised to find that, even among the Jews as well as the
Gentiles, there were persons who used curious arts. Those were
inexcusable; these were to be pitied. Blind as every man is by nature,
yet he is conscious that without supernatural assistance he can neither
secure the good he needs, nor avoid the evil he fears: therefore, he
endeavors to associate to himself the influence of supernatural agents,
in order to preserve him in safety, and make him happy. Thus forsaking
and forgetting the fountain of living water, he hews out to himself
cisterns that can hold no water. The existence of magical arts and
incantations, whether real or pretended, prove the general belief of the
existence of a spiritual world, and man's consciousness of his own
weakness, and his need of supernatural help. When shall the eye be
directed solely to Him from whom alone true help can come, by whom evil
is banished, and happiness restored!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 19](act019)

</div>
