<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act005)  [Next](act007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 6:0</span></span>

The Hellenistic Jews complain against the Hebrews, that their widows
were neglected in the daily ministration, [Act
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001). To remedy the evil complained of,
the apostles appoint seven deacons to superintend the temporal affairs
of the Church, [Act 6:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#002). The
progress of the word of God in Jerusalem, [Act
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#007). Stephen, one of the deacons,
becomes very eminent, and confounds various Jews of the synagogues of
the Libertines, etc., [Act 6:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#008).
They suborn false witnesses against him, to get him put to death, [Act
6:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#011). He appears before the council
with an angelic countenance, [Act
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#015).

[Acts 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 6:1</span></span>

A murmuring of the Grecians against the Hebrews - Those who are here
termed Grecians, Ηλληνισται, or Hellenists, were Jews who sojourned now
at Jerusalem, but lived in countries where the Greek language was
spoken, and probably in general knew no other. They are distinguished
here from those called Hebrews, by which we are to understand native
Jews, who spoke what was then termed the Hebrew language, a sort of
Chaldaio-Syriac.

It has been remarked that Greek words ending in ιστης imply inferiority.
Ἑλληνες, Hellenes, was distinguished from Ἑλληνισται: the former implies
pure Greeks, native Greeks, who spoke the Greek tongue in its purity;
and the latter, Jews or others sojourning among the Greeks, but who
spoke the Greek language according to the Hebrew idiom. Pythagoras
divided his disciples into two classes; those who were capable of
entering into the spirit and mystery of his doctrine he called
Πυθαγορειοι, Pythagoreans; those who were of a different cast he termed
Πυθαγορισται, Pythagorists: the former were eminent and worthy of their
master; the latter only so so. The same distinction is made between
those called Αττικοι and Αττικισται, Attics and Atticists, the pure and
less pure Greeks, as between those called Ἑλληνες and Ἑλληνισται,
Hellenes and Hellenists, pure Greeks and Graecising Jews. See Jamblicus,
De Vit. Pyth. cap. 18, and Schoettgen on this place.

The cause of the murmuring mentioned here seems to have been this: When
all the disciples had put their property into a common stock, it was
intended that out of it each should have his quantum of supply. The
foreign or Hellenistic Jews began to be jealous, that their widows were
neglected in the daily ministration, that they either had not the
proportion, or were not duly served; the Palestine Jews being partial to
those of their own country. This shows that the community of goods could
never have been designed to become general. Indeed, it was no ordinance
of God; and, in any state of society, must be in general impracticable.
The apostles, hearing of this murmuring, came to the resolution
mentioned below.

[Acts 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 6:2</span></span>

It is not reason - Ουκ αρεστον εστι, it is not pleasing, proper, or
fitting, that we should leave the word of God, that we should give up
ourselves, or confide to others, the doctrine of salvation which God has
commanded us to preach unto the people.

And serve tables - Become providers of daily bread for your widows and
poor: others can do this, to whom our important office is not intrusted.

[Acts 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 6:3</span></span>

Wherefore - look ye out among you seven men - Choose persons in whom ye
can all confide, who will distribute the provisions impartially, and in
due time; and let these persons be the objects of the choice both of the
Hebrews and Hellenists, that all cause of murmuring and discontent may
be done away. Though seven was a sacred number among the Jews, yet there
does not appear to be any mystery intended here. Probably the seven men
were to take each his day of service; and then there would be a
superintendent for these widows, etc., for each day of the week.

Of honest report - Μαρτυρουμενους Persons to whose character there is
authentic testimony, well known and accredited.

Full of the Holy Ghost - Saved into the spirit of the Gospel
dispensation; and made partakers of that Holy Ghost by which the soul is
sanctified, and endued with those graces which constitute the mind that
was in Christ.

And wisdom - Prudence, discretion, and economy; for mere piety and
uprightness could not be sufficient, where so many must be pleased, and
where frugality, impartiality, and liberality, must ever walk hand in
hand.

Whom we may appoint - Instead of καταστησωμεν, we may appoint,
καταστησομεν, we shall appoint, is the reading of ABCDE, and several
others. It makes, however, very little difference in the sense.

[Acts 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 6:4</span></span>

We will give ourselves continually to prayer - Προσκαρτερησομεν, We will
steadfastly and invariably attend, we will carefully keep our hearts to
this work. The word is very emphatic.

To prayer. - See this defined, [Mat
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#005) (note). Even apostles could not
live without prayer; they had no independent graces; what they had could
not be retained without an increase; and for this increase they must
make prayer and supplication, depending continually on their God.

Ministry of the word - Διακονιᾳ του λογου, The deaconship of the word.
The continual proclamation of the Gospel of their Lord; and, to make
this effectual to the souls of the hearers, they must continue in
prayer: a minister who does not pray much, studies in vain.

The office of deacon, διακονος, came to the Christian from the Jewish
Church. Every synagogue had at least three deacons, which were called
פרנסים parnasim, from פרנס parnes, to feed, nourish, support, govern.
The פרנס parnas, or deacon, was a sort of judge in the synagogue; and,
in each, doctrine and wisdom were required, that they might be able to
discern and give right judgment in things both sacred and civil. The חזן
chazan, and שמש shamash, were also a sort of deacons. The first was the
priest's deputy; and the last was, in some cases, the deputy of this
deputy, or the sub-deacon. In the New Testament the apostles are called
deacons, [Co2 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#004); [Eph
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#007); [Col
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#023) : see also [Co2
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#015). Christ himself, the Shepherd
and Bishop of souls, is called the deacon of the circumcision, λεγω δε
Χριστον Ιησουν διακονον γεγενησθαι περιτομης, [Rom
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#008). As the word implies to minister
or serve, it was variously applied, and pointed out all those who were
employed in helping the bodies or souls of men; whether apostles,
bishops, or those whom we call deacons. Some remark that there were two
orders of deacons:

1\. Διακονοι της τραπιζης, deacons of the Table, whose business it was
to take care of the alms collected in the Church, and distribute them
among the poor, widows, etc.

2\. Διακονοι του λογου, deacons of the Word, whose business it was to
preach, and variously instruct the people. It seems that after the
persecution raised against the apostolic Church, in consequence of which
they became dispersed, the deaconship of tables ceased, as did also the
community of goods; and Philip, who was one of these deacons, who at
first served tables, betook himself entirely to preaching of the word:
see [Act 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#004), etc.

In the primitive Church, it is sufficiently evident that the deacons
gave the bread and wine in the Eucharist to the believers in the Church,
and carried it to those who were absent, Just. Mar. Apol. ii. p. 162;
they also preached, and in some cases administered baptism. See Suicer
on the words Διακονος, Κηρυσσω, and Βαπτισμα. But it appears they did
the two last by the special authority of the bishop. In the ancient
Roman Church, and in the Romish Church, the number of seven deacons, in
imitation of those appointed by the apostles, was kept up; and in the
council of Neocaesarea it was decreed that this number should never be
exceeded, even in the largest cities: vide Concil. Neocaesar. Canon.
xiv. other Churches varied this number; and the Church of Constantinople
had not less than one hundred. Deacons were ordained by the bishops, by
imposition of hands. None was ordained deacon till he was twenty-five
years of age, and we find that it was lawful for them to have wives. See
Suicer under the word Διακονος, and see the note on [Mat
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#026).

In the Church of England, (the purest and nearest to the apostolical
model in doctrine and discipline of all national Churches), a deacon
receives ordination by the imposition of the hands of a bishop, in
consequence of which he can preach, assist in the sacrament of the
Lord's Supper, and in general perform any sacred office, except
consecrating the elements, and pronouncing the absolution. No person in
this Church can be ordained deacon till he be twenty-three years of age,
unless by dispensation from the Abp. of Canterbury. There were
deaconesses, both in the apostolic and primitive Church, who had
principally the care of the women, and visited and ministered to them in
those circumstances in which it would have been improper for a deacon to
attend. They also assisted in preparing the female candidates for
baptism.

At present, the office for which the seven deacons were appointed is, in
the Church of England, filled by the churchwardens and overseers of the
poor; in other Churches and religious societies, by elders, stewards,
etc., chosen by the people, and appointed by the minister.

[Acts 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 6:5</span></span>

Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Ghost - A person every way
properly fitted for his work; and thus qualified to be the first martyr
of the Christian Church.

Nicolas, a proselyte of Antioch - A heathen Greek, who had not only
believed in the God of Israel, but had also received circumcision, and
consequently was a proselyte of the covenant; for, had he been only a
proselyte of the gate, the Jews could not have associated with him. On
the word proselyte, see the note on [Exo
12:43](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#043). As this is the only proselyte
mentioned here, we may presume that all the rest were native Jews. From
this Nicolas, it is supposed that the sect called Nicolaitans, mentioned
[Rev 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#006), [Rev
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#015), derived their origin. Dr.
Lightfoot doubts this, and rather inclines to derive the name "from
ניכולא nicola, let us eat together; those brutes encouraging each other
to eat meats offered to idols, like those in [Isa
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#013), who said, Let us eat flesh and
drink wine, etc." Both Irenaeus and Epiphanius derive this sect from
Nicolas the deacon. Clemens Alexandrinus gives this Nicolas a good
character, even while he allows that the sect who taught the community
of wives pretended to derive their origin from him. See on [Rev
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#006) (note).

[Acts 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 6:6</span></span>

And when they had prayed - Instead of και, and, the Codex Bezae reads
οἱτινες, who, referring the act of praying to the apostles, which
removes a sort of ambiguity. The apostles prayed for these persons, that
they might in every respect be qualified for their office, and be made
successful in it. And, when they had done this, they laid their hands
upon them, and by this rite appointed them to their office. So then, it
plainly appears that the choice of the Church was not sufficient: nor
did the Church think it sufficient; but, as they knew their own members
best, the apostles directed them, [Act
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#003), to choose those persons whom they
deemed best qualified, according to the criterion laid down by the
apostles themselves, that they should be of honest report, and full of
the Holy Ghost and wisdom. Let us examine the process of this business:

1\. There was an evident necessity that there should be more helpers in
this blessed work

2\. The apostles called the disciples together, that they might consider
of this necessity and provide for it, [Act
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#003).

3\. They directed the disciples to choose out from among themselves such
persons as they judged the most proper for the work.

4\. They gave them the criterion by which their choice should be
directed; not any man, not every man, not their nearest relative, or
best beloved friend; but such as were of honest report, whose public
character was known to be unblemished; and men who were full of the Holy
Ghost, the influence of which would keep all right within, and direct
their hearts into all truth; and men who were known to be men of
prudence and economy, for not every good and pious man may be proper for
such a work.

5\. Seven persons being chosen by the disciples, according to this
criterion, are presented to the apostles for their approbation and
confirmation.

6\. The apostles, receiving them from the hands of the Church,
consecrated them to God by prayer, imploring his blessing on them and
their labor.

7\. When this was done, they laid their hands upon them in the presence
of the disciples, and thus appointed them to this sacred and important
work; for it is evident they did not get their commission merely to
serve tables, but to proclaim, in connection with and under the
direction of the apostles, the word of life.

Let no man say that any of the things here enumerated was unnecessary,
and let no Church pretend or affect to do without them.

1\. No preacher or minister should be provided till there is a place for
him to labor in, and necessity for his labor.

2\. Let none be imposed upon the Church of Christ who is not of that
Church, well known and fully approved by that branch of it with which he
was connected.

3\. Let none be sent to publish salvation from sin, and the necessity of
a holy life, whose moral character cannot bear the strictest scrutiny
among his neighbors and acquaintance.

4\. Let none, however moral, or well reported of, be sent to convert
souls, who has not the most solid reason to believe that he is moved
thereto by the Holy Ghost.

5\. Let those who have the power to appoint see that the person be a man
of wisdom, i.e. sound understanding - for a witling or a blockhead,
however upright, will never make a Christian minister; and that he be a
man of prudence, knowing how to direct his own concerns, and those of
the Church of God, with discretion.

6\. Let no private person, nor number of private members in a Church,
presume to authorize such a person, though in every way qualified to
preach the Gospel; for even the one hundred and twenty primitive
disciples did not arrogate this to themselves.

7\. Let the person be brought to those to whom God has given authority
in the Church, and let them, after most solemnly invoking God, lay their
hands upon him, according to the primitive and apostolic plan, and thus
devote him to the work of the ministry.

8\. Let such a one from that moment consider himself the property of God
and his Church, and devote all his time, talents, and powers, to convert
sinners, and build up believers in their most holy faith.

9\. And let the Church of God consider such a person as legitimately and
divinely sent, and receive him as the ambassador of Christ.

[Acts 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 6:7</span></span>

The word of God increased - By such preachers as the apostles and these
deacons, no wonder the doctrine of God increased - became widely
diffused and generally known; in consequence of which, the number of the
disciples must be greatly multiplied: for God will ever bless his own
word, when ministered by those whom he has qualified to proclaim it.

A great company of the priests were obedient to the faith - This was one
of the greatest miracles wrought by the grace of Christ: that persons so
intent on the destruction of Christ, his apostles, and his doctrine,
should at last espouse that doctrine, is astonishing; and that they who
had withstood the evidence of the miracles of Christ should have yielded
to the doctrine of his death and resurrection, is worthy of note. And
from this we may learn that it is not by miracles that sinners are to be
converted unto God, but by the preaching of Christ dying for their
offenses, and rising again for their justification.

Instead of ἱερεων, priests, a few MSS., and the Syriac, read Ιουδαιων,
Jews; for the copyists seem to be struck here with two difficulties:

1\. That such persons as these priests could be converted.

2\. That the word οχλος, company, or multitude, could with propriety be
applied to this class, which must have been inconsiderable in their
numbers, when compared with the rest of the Jews.

To preserve the ancient reading, which is undoubtedly genuine, some have
altered the text by conjecture; and, by putting a comma after οχλος, and
a και before των ἱερεων, make the text read thus: And a great multitude,
and some of the priests, were obedient to the faith. This conjecture is
unnecessary, as there is no such difficulty here as to require so
desperate an expedient, which is not recommended by the evidence of a
single MS. or version.

1\. The grace of Christ Jesus can save even a murderous Jewish priest:
his death is a grand atonement for all crimes and for the worst of
sinners.

2\. In the twenty-four courses of priests, there was not a multitude
merely, but multitudes: indeed the number of ecclesiastics at Jerusalem
was enormous. A great company out of these might be converted, and yet
multitudes be left behind.

[Acts 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 6:8</span></span>

Stephen, full of faith and power - Instead of πιϚεως, faith, χαριτος,
grace, is the reading of ABD, several others, the Syriac of Erpen, the
Coptic, Armenian, Vulgate, and some of the fathers. This reading
Griesbach has admitted into the text. Some MSS. join both readings.
Stephen was full of faith - gave unlimited credence to the promises of
his Lord; he was full of grace - receiving the fulfillment of those
promises, he enjoyed much of the unction of the Divine Spirit, and much
of the favor of his God; and, in consequence, he was full of power,
δυναμεως, of the Divine energy by which he was enabled to work great
wonders and miracles among the people.

[Acts 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 6:9</span></span>

The synagogue - of the Libertines, etc. - That Jews and proselytes from
various countries had now come up to Jerusalem to bring offerings, and
to attend the feast of pentecost, we have already seen, [Act
2:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#009). The persons mentioned here
were foreign Jews, who appear to have had a synagogue peculiar to
themselves at Jerusalem, in which they were accustomed to worship when
they came to the public festivals.

Various opinions have been entertained concerning the Libertines
mentioned here: Bp. Pearce's view of the subject appears to me to be the
most correct.

"It is commonly thought that by this name is meant the sons of such Jews
as had been slaves, and obtained their freedom by the favor of their
masters; but it is to be observed that with these Libertines the
Cyrenians and Alexandrians are here joined, as having one and the same
synagogue for their public worship. And it being known that the
Cyrenians ([Act 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#010)) lived in Libya,
and the Alexandrians in the neighborhood of it, it is most natural to
look for the Libertines too in that part of the world. Accordingly we
find Suidas, in his Lexicon, saying, upon the word Λιβερτινοι, that it
is ονομα του εθνους, the name of a people. And in Gest. Collationis
Carthagine habitae inter Catholicos et Donatistas, published with
Optatus's works, Paris, 1679, (No. 201, and p. 57), we have these words:
Victor episcopus Ecclesiae Catholicae Libertinensis dixit, Unitas est
illic, publicam non latet conscientiam. Unity is there: all the world
knows it. From these two passages it appears that there was in Libya a
town or district called Libertina, whose inhabitants bore the name of
Λιβερτινοι, Libertines, when Christianity prevailed there. They had an
episcopal see among them, and the above-mentioned Victor was their
bishop at the council of Carthage, in the reign of the Emperor Honorius.
And from hence it seems probable that the town or district, and the
people, existed in the time of which Luke is here speaking. They were
Jews, (no doubt), and came up, as the Cyrenian and Alexandrian Jews did,
to bring their offerings to Jerusalem, and to worship God in the temple
there. Cunaeus, in his Rep. Hebr. ii. 23, says that the Jews who lived
in Alexandria and Libya, and all other Jews who lived out of the Holy
Land, except those of Babylon and its neighborhood, were held in great
contempt by the Jews who inhabited Jerusalem and Judea; partly on
account of their quitting their proper country, and partly on account of
their using the Greek language, and being quite ignorant of the other.
For these reasons it seems probable that the Libertines, Cyrenians, and
Alexendrians, had a separate synagogue; (as perhaps the Cilicians and
those of Asia had); the Jews of Jerusalem not suffering them to be
present in their synagogues, or they not choosing to perform their
public service in synagogues where a language was used which they did
not understand."

It is supposed, also, that these synagogues had theological, if not
philosophical, schools attached to them; and that it was the disciples
or scholars of these schools who came forward to dispute with Stephen,
and were enraged because they were confounded. For it is not an uncommon
custom with those who have a bad cause, which can neither stand the test
of Scripture nor reason, to endeavor to support it by physical when
logical force has failed; and thus: -

"Prove their doctrine orthodox,

By apostolic blows and knocks."

In the reign of Queen Mary, when popery prevailed in this country, and
the simplest women who had read the Bible were an overmatch for the
greatest of the popish doctors; as they had neither Scripture nor reason
to allege, they burned them alive, and thus terminated a controversy
which they were unable to maintain. The same cause will ever produce the
same effect: the Libertines, Cilicians, Cyrenians, and Alexandrians,
pursued this course: Stephen confounded them by Scripture and reason,
and they beat his brains out with stones! This was the most effectual
way to silence a disputant whose wisdom they could not resist. In the
same way were the Protestants treated, when by Scripture and reason they
had shown the absurdity and wickedness of that anti-christian system
which the fire and the sword were brought forth to establish. These
persecutors professed great concern at first for the souls of those whom
they variously tortured, and at last burned; but their tender mercies
were cruel, and when they gave up the body to the flames, they most
heartily consigned the soul to Satan. Scires sanguine natos: their
conduct proclaimed their genealogy.

[Acts 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 6:10</span></span>

They there not able to resist the wisdom, etc. - He was wise, well
exercised and experienced, in Divine things; and, as appears by his
defense, in the following chapter, well versed in the Jewish history.
The spirit by which he spake was the Holy Spirit, and its power was
irresistible. They were obliged either to yield to its teachings, or
were confounded by its truth. Several MSS. add to this verse, because he
reproved them with boldness, they could not resist the truth. This
reading is not genuine, though it exists (but in different forms) in
some good MSS.

[Acts 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 6:11</span></span>

Then they suborned men - Ὑπεβαλον. They made underhand work; got
associated to themselves profligate persons, who for money would swear
any thing.

Blasphemous words against Moses, and against God - This was the most
deadly charge they could bring against him. We have already seen, [Mat
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#004), that blasphemy, when against God,
signifies speaking impiously of his nature, attributes, or works; and,
when against men, it signifies speaking injuriously of their character,
blasting their reputation, etc. These false witnesses came to prove that
he had blasphemed Moses by representing him as an impostor, or the like;
and God, by either denying his being, his providence, the justice of his
government, etc.

[Acts 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 6:12</span></span>

And they - The Libertines, etc., mentioned before, stirred up the people
- raised a mob against him, and, to assist and countenance the mob, got
the elders and scribes to conduct it, who thus made themselves one with
the basest of the people, whom they collected; and then, altogether,
without law or form of justice, rushed on the good man, seized him, and
brought him to a council who, though they sat in the seat of judgment,
were ready for every evil work.

[Acts 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 6:13</span></span>

Against this holy place - The temple, that it shall be destroyed.

And the law - That it cannot give life, nor save from death. It is very
likely that they had heard him speak words to this amount, which were
all as true as the spirit from which they proceeded; but they gave them
a very false colouring, as we see in the succeeding verse.

[Acts 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 6:15</span></span>

Saw his face, as it had been the face of an angel - Sayings like this
are frequent among the Jewish writers, who represent God as
distinguishing eminent men by causing a glory to shine from their faces.
Rabbi Gedalia said that, "when Moses and Aaron came before Pharaoh, they
appeared like those angels which minister before the face of the Lord;
for their stature appeared greater, and the splendor of their faces was
like the sun, and their eyes like the wheels of the sun; their beard
like clusters of grapes, and their words like thunder and lightning; and
that, through fear of them, those who were present fell to the earth."

The like is said of Moses, in Debarim Rabba, fol. 75. that "when Sammael
(Satan) came to Moses, the splendor of his face was like the sun, and
himself resembled an angel of God." The reader may find several similar
sayings in Schoettgen.

It appears that the light and power of God which dwelt in his soul shone
through his face, and God gave them this proof of the falsity of the
testimony which was now before them; for, as the face of Stephen now
shone as the face of Moses did when he came down from the mount, it was
the fullest proof that he had not spoken blasphemous words either
against Moses or God, else this splendor of heaven had not rested upon
him.

The history of the apostolic Church is a series of wonders. Every thing
that could prevent such a Church from being established, or could
overthrow it when established, is brought to bear against it. The
instruments employed in its erection and defense had neither might nor
power, but what came immediately from God. They work, and God works with
them; the Church is founded and built up; and its adversaries, with
every advantage in their favor, cannot overthrow it. Is it possible to
look at this, without seeing the mighty hand of God in the whole? He
permits devils and wicked men to work - to avail themselves of all their
advantages, yet counterworks all their plots and designs, turns their
weapons against themselves, and promotes his cause by the very means
that were used to destroy it. How true is the saying, There is neither
might nor counsel against the Lord!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 7](act007)

</div>
