<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Amos Index](amo)  
  [Previous](amo006)  [Next](amo008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Amos Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#001)

[Amos](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">amo 7:0</span></span>

In this chapter God represents to Amos, by three several visions, the
judgments he is about to bring on Israel. The first is a plague of
locusts, threatening to cut of the hopes of the harvest by attacking it
in the time of the second growth; the first luxuriances of the crop
being probably mowed for the king's horses, [Amo
7:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#001). The next vision threatens a
judgment by fire, which would consume a great part, [Amo
7:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#004); and the third a total overthrow
of Israel, levelling it as it were by a line, [Amo
7:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#007). The rest of the chapter is a
denunciation of heavy judgments against Amaziah, priest of Beth-el, who
had brought an accusation to the king against the prophet, [Amo
7:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#010).

[Amos 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">amo 7:1</span></span>

Behold, he formed grasshoppers - גבי gobai is generally understood here
to signify locusts. See the notes on Joel 1 (note) and Joel 2 (note).

The shooting up of the latter growth - The early crop of grass had been
already mowed and housed. The second crop or rowing, as it is called in
some places, was not yet begun. By the king's mowings we may understand
the first crop, a portion of which the king probably claimed as being
the better hay; but the words may signify simply the prime crop, that
which is the best of the whole. Houbigant thinks the shearing of the
king's sheep is meant.

[Amos 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">amo 7:2</span></span>

By whom shall Jacob arise? - The locusts, the symbols of the many
enemies that had impoverished Jerusalem, having devoured much of the
produce of the land, were proceeding, till, at the intercession of the
prophet, they were removed. Then, seeing in the light of prophecy the
nation in every sense brought low, he cries, "By whom shall Jacob arise?
for he is small." Calmet justly remarks: "After the death of Jeroboam
the second, the kingdom, so flourishing and powerful before, was reduced
to such weakness that it was obliged to have recourse to strangers for
support. Menahem applied to Pul, king of Assyria, whence arose the final
misery of the state.

[Amos 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">amo 7:3</span></span>

The Lord repented - Changed his purpose of destroying them by the
locusts. See [Amo 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#006).

[Amos 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">amo 7:4</span></span>

The Lord God called to contend by fire - Permitted war, both civil and
foreign, to harass the land, after the death of Jeroboam the second.
These wars would have totally destroyed it, had not the prophet
interceded.

It devoured the great deep, and did eat up a part - We are here to
understand the partially destructive wars which afterwards took place;
for the Lord causes all these things to pass before the eyes of Amos in
the vision of prophecy; and intimates that, at the intercession of his
prophets, total ruin should be prevented.

[Amos 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">amo 7:7</span></span>

With a plumbline in his hand - This appears to be intended as an emblem
of strict justice, and intimated that God would now visit them according
to their iniquities.

[Amos 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">amo 7:8</span></span>

I will set a plumbline - I will visit them by justice without any
mixture of mercy.

[Amos 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">amo 7:9</span></span>

And the high places of Isaac shall be desolate - Their total destruction
is at hand. The high place of Isaac was Beer-sheba, where Isaac had
built an altar to the Lord, [Gen
26:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#025). This high place, which had been
abused to idolatrous uses, was demolished by Josiah, king of Judah, as
we read in [Kg2 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#008), for he defiled
all the high places from Geba to Beersheba.

I will rise against the house of Jeroboam - The Lord had promised to
Jehu, the ancestor of Jeroboam, that his family should sit on the throne
of Israel to the fourth generation. Zechariah, the son of Jeroboam, was
the fourth in order after Jehu; and on him the threatening in this verse
fell; for he was murdered by Shallum after he had reigned six months,
and in him the family became extinct. See [Kg2
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#030); [Kg2
15:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#008).

[Amos 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">amo 7:10</span></span>

Amaziah the priest of Beth-el - The idolatrous priest who had been
established by the king to maintain the worship of the golden calves
which Jeroboam the elder had set up at this place.

Amos hath conspired against thee - This was truly a lying prophet; there
is not one word of truth in this message which he sent to Jeroboam. Amos
had not conspired against the king - had not said that Jeroboam should
die by the sword - and had not said that Israel should be carried away
captive, though this last was implied in God's threatening and
afterwards delivered by this prophet; see [Amo
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#017).

[Amos 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">amo 7:12</span></span>

O thou seer - He pretends kindness to the prophet, and counsels him to
go into Judea, and prophesy there and be safe, even in the time that he
had accused him of high treason against Jeroboam. Hireling priests of
this kind have ever been the great enemies of the true prophets of God;
and when they could bring no charge of false doctrine or immorality
against them, have accused them of conspiring against the government;
and because they have preached against sin, have held them up as
exciting insurrection among the people.

[Amos 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">amo 7:13</span></span>

But prophesy not - at Beth-el - He must not speak against idolatry,
because that was the king's religion; and he who speaks against the
king's religion must be an enemy to the state. This was the doctrine
held in England by popish James 2 and his insidious Jesuit hireling
priests, till God in his mercy put this pitiful tyrant down, and with
him his false prophets, and the degrading superstition which they
endeavored to establish in these lands.

[Amos 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">amo 7:14</span></span>

I was no prophet - I am an extraordinary messenger of God. I am not
called to the prophetic office but for this occasion. I have no message
to Judah, and therefore need not go there. I have a message to Israel
alone, and I must faithfully deliver it.

For the account which Amos gives here of himself, see the introduction.

[Amos 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">amo 7:16</span></span>

Now therefore hear thou the word of the Lord - While he was speaking in
his own vindication, God seems to have inspired him with the awful
prediction which he immediately delivers.

[Amos 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">amo 7:17</span></span>

Thy wife shall be a harlot - As this was the word of the Lord, so it was
fulfilled; but as we have no farther account of this idolatrous priest,
so we cannot tell in what circumstances these threatenings were
executed.

1\. His wife was to be a public prostitute; she was probably such
already privately in the temple, as the wife of an idolatrous priest.

2\. His sons and daughters were to fall by the sword.

3\. Their inheritance was to be taken by strangers.

4\. And himself was to die a captive in a heathen land.

Israel shall surety go into captivity - He now declares fully what he
had not declared before, though Amaziah had made it a subject of
accusation. This particular was probably revealed at this instant, as
well as those which concerned Amaziah and his family.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Amos Chapter 8](amo008)

</div>
