<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Amos Index](amo)  
  [Previous](amo002)  [Next](amo004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Amos Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#001)

[Amos](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">amo 3:0</span></span>

This chapter begins with reproving the twelve tribes in general, [Amo
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#001), [Amo
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#002); and then particularly the kingdom
of Israel, whose capital was Samaria. Thee prophet assures them that,
while they were at variance with God, it would be unreasonable in them
to expect his presence or favor, [Amo
3:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#003). Other neighboring nations are
then called upon to take warning from the judgments about to be
inflicted upon the house of Israel, which would be so general that only
a small remnant should escape them, [Amo
3:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#009). The image used by the prophet
on this occasion, (see [Amo 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#012)), and
borrowed from his former calling, is very natural and significant, and
not a little dignified by the inspired writer's lofty air and manner.

[Amos 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">amo 3:1</span></span>

Against the whole family - That is, all, both the kingdoms of Israel and
Judah. In this all the twelve tribes are included.

[Amos 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">amo 3:2</span></span>

You only have I known - I have taken no other people to be my own
people. I have approved of you, loved you, fed, sustained, and defended
you; but because you have forsaken me, have become idolatrous and
polluted, therefore will I punish you. And the punishment shall be in
proportion to the privileges you have enjoyed, and the grace you have
abused.

[Amos 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">amo 3:3</span></span>

Can two walk together - While ye loved and served me, I dwelt in you and
walked among you. Now ye are become alienated from me, your nature and
mine are totally opposite. I am holy, ye are unholy. We are no longer
agreed, and can no longer walk together. I can no longer hold communion
with you. I must cast you out. The similes in this and the three
following verses are all chosen to express the same thing, viz., that no
calamities or judgments can fall upon any people but by the express will
of God, on account of their iniquities; and that whatever his prophets
have foretold, they have done it by direct revelation from their Maker;
and that God has the highest and most cogent reason for inflicting the
threatened calamities. This correctness of the prophets' predictions
shows that they and I are in communion.

[Amos 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">amo 3:4</span></span>

Will a lion roar - Should I threaten such a judgment without cause?

[Amos 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">amo 3:5</span></span>

Can a bird fall in a snare - Can ye, as a sinful people, fall into
calamities which I have not appointed?

Shall one take up a snare - and have taken nothing - Will the snare be
removed before it has caught the expected prey? - shall I remove my
judgments till they are fully accomplished? This is a curious passage,
and deserves farther consideration. The original, literally translated,
is nearly as follows: "Shall the trap arise from the ground; and
catching, shall it not catch?" Here is a plain allusion to such traps as
we employ to catch rats, foxes, etc. The jaws of the trap opening
backward, press strongly upon a spring so as to keep it down; and a key
passing over one jaw, and hooking on a table in the center, the trap
continues with expanded jaws, till any thing touch the table, when the
key, by the motion of the table, being loosened, the spring recovers all
its elastic power, and throws up the jaws of the trap, and their
serrated edges either close in each other, or on the prey that has moved
the table of the trap. Will then the jaws of such a trap suddenly spring
up from the ground, on which before they were lying flat, and catch
nothing? Shall they let the prey that was within them escape? Certainly
not. So my trap is laid for these offenders; and when it springs up,
(and they themselves will soon by their transgressions free the key),
shall not the whole family of Israel be inclosed in it? Most certainly
they shall. This is a singular and very remarkable passage, and, when
properly understood, is beautifully expressive.

[Amos 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">amo 3:6</span></span>

Shall a trumpet be blown - The sign of alarm and invasion.

And the people not be afraid? - Not take the alarm, and provide for
their defense and safety?

Shall there be evil in a city - Shall there be any public calamity on
the wicked, that is not an effect of my displeasure? The word does not
mean moral evil, but punishment for sin; calamities falling on the
workers of iniquity. Natural evil is the punishment of moral evil: God
sends the former when the latter is persisted in.

[Amos 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">amo 3:7</span></span>

Surely the Lord God will do nothing - In reference to the punishment,
correction, or blessing of his people: -

But he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets - They are in
strict correspondence with him, and he shows them things to come. Such
secrets of God are revealed to them, that they may inform the people;
that, by repentance and conversion, they may avoid the evil, and, by
walking closely with God, secure the continuance of his favor.

[Amos 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">amo 3:8</span></span>

The lion hath roared - God hath sent forth a terrible alarm, Who will
not fear? Can any hear such denunciations of Divine wrath and not
tremble?

The Lord God hath spoken - And those only who are in communion with him
have heard the speech. Who can but prophesy? Who can help proclaiming at
large the judgment threatened against the nation?

But I think נבא naba, here, is to be taken in its natural and ideal
signification, to pray, supplicate, or deprecate vengeance. The Lord
hath spoken of punishment - who can help supplicating his mercy, that
his judgments may be averted?

[Amos 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">amo 3:9</span></span>

Publish in the palaces - The housetops or flat roofs were the places
from which public declarations were made. See on [Isa
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#001) (note), and on [Mat
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#027) (note). See whether in those
places there be not tumults, oppressions, and rapine sufficient to
excite my wrath against them.

[Amos 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">amo 3:10</span></span>

For they know not to do right - So we may naturally say that they who
are doing wrong, and to their own prejudice and ruin, must certainly be
ignorant of what is right, and what is their own interest. But we say
again "There are none so blind as those who will not see." Their eyes,
saith the Lord, they have closed.

[Amos 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">amo 3:11</span></span>

An adversary, round about the land - Ye shall not be able to escape,
wherever ye turn, ye shall meet a foe.

[Amos 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">amo 3:12</span></span>

As the shepherd taketh out of the mouth of the lion - Scarcely any of
you shall escape; and those that do shall do so with extreme difficulty,
just as a shepherd, of a whole sheep carried away by a lion, can recover
no more than two of its legs, or a piece of its ear, just enough to
prove by the marks on those parts, that they belonged to a sheep which
was his own.

So shall the children of Israel be taken out - Those of them that escape
these judgments shall escape with as great difficulty, and be of as
little worth, as the two legs and piece of an ear that shall be snatched
out of the lion's mouth. We know that when the Babylonians carried away
the people into Chaldea they left behind only a few, and those the
refuse of the land.

In the corner of a bed - As the corner is the most honorable place in
the East, and a couch in the corner of a room is the place of the
greatest distinction; so the words in the text may mean, that even the
metropolitan cities, which are in the corner - in the most honorable
place - of the land, whether Samaria in Israel, or Damascus in Syria,
shall not escape these judgments; and if any of the distinguished
persons who dwell in them escape, it must be with as great difficulty as
the fragments above-mentioned have been recovered from a lion. The
passage is obscure. Mr. Harmer has taken great pains to illustrate it;
but I fear with but little success. A general sense is all we can arrive
at.

[Amos 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">amo 3:13</span></span>

Hear ye - This is an address to the prophet.

[Amos 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">amo 3:14</span></span>

In the day that I shall visit - When Josiah made a reformation in the
land he destroyed idolatry, pulled down the temples and altars that had
been consecrated to idol worship, and even burnt the bones of the
priests of Baal and the golden calves upon their own altars. See [Kg2
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#015), [Kg2
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#016), etc.

[Amos 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">amo 3:15</span></span>

I will smite the winter house with the summer house - I will not only
destroy the poor habitations and villages in the country, but I will
destroy those of the nobility and gentry as well as the lofty palaces in
the fortified cities in which they dwell in the winter season, as those
light and elegant seats in which they spend the summer season. Dr. Shaw
observes that "the hills and valleys round about Algiers are all over
beautified with gardens and country seats, whither the inhabitants of
better fashion retire during the heats of the summer season. They are
little white houses, shaded with a variety of fruit trees and
evergreens, which beside shade and retirement, afford a gay and
delightful prospect toward the sea. The gardens are all well stocked
with melons, fruits, and pot herbs of all kinds; and (which is chiefly
regarded in these hot countries) each of them enjoys a great command of
water."

And the houses of ivory - Those remarkable for their magnificence and
their ornaments, not built of ivory, but in which ivory vessels,
ornaments, and inlaying abounded. Thus, then, the winter houses and the
summer houses, the great houses and the houses of uncommon splendor,
shall all perish. There should be a total desolation in the land. No
kind of house should be a refuge, and no kind of habitation should be
spared. Ahab had at Samaria a house that was called the ivory house,
[Kg1 22:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#039). This may be particularly
referred to in this place. We cannot suppose that a house constructed
entirely of ivory can be intended.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Amos Chapter 4](amo004)

</div>
