<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Amos Index](amo)  
  [Previous](amo001)  [Next](amo003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Amos Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#001)

[Amos](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">amo 2:0</span></span>

The prophet goes on to declare the judgments of God against Moab, [Amo
2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#001); against Judah, [Amo
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#004), [Amo
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#005); and then against Israel, the
particular object of his mission. He enumerates some of their sins, [Amo
2:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#006), aggravated by God's
distinguishing regard to Israel, [Amo
2:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#009); and they are in consequence
threatened with dreadful punishments, [Amo
2:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#013). See [Kg2
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#019); [Kg2
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006).

[Amos 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">amo 2:1</span></span>

For three transgressions of Moab and for four - See an explanation of
this form [Amo 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#002). The land of the
Moabites lay to the east of the Dead Sea. For the origin of this people,
see [Gen 19:37](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#037).

He burned the bones on the king of Edom into lime - Possibly referring
to some brutality; such as opening the grave of one of the Idumean
kings, and calcining his bones. It is supposed by some to refer to the
fact mentioned [Kg2 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#026), when the
kings of Judah, Israel, and Idumea, joined together to destroy Moab. The
king of it, despairing to save his city, took seven hundred men, and
made a desperate sortie on the quarter where the king of Edom was; and,
though not successful, took prisoner the son of the king of Edom; and,
on their return into the city, offered him as a burnt-offering upon the
wall, so as to terrify the besieging armies, and cause them to raise the
siege. Others understand the son that was sacrificed to be the king of
Moab's own son.

[Amos 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">amo 2:2</span></span>

The palaces of Kirioth - This was one of the principal cities of the
Moabites.

Moab shall die with tumult - All these expressions seem to refer to this
city's being taken by storm, which was followed by a total slaughter of
its inhabitants.

[Amos 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">amo 2:3</span></span>

I will cut off the judge - It shall be so destroyed, that it shall never
more have any form of government. The judge here, שופט shophet, may
signify the chief magistrate. The chief magistrates of the Carthaginians
were called suffetes; probably taken from the Hebrew Judges, שופטים
shophetim.

[Amos 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">amo 2:4</span></span>

For three transgressions of Judah - We may take the three and four here
to any latitude; for this people lived in continual hostility to their
God, from the days of David to the time of Uzziah, under whom Amos
prophesied. Their iniquities are summed up under three general heads:

1\. They despised, or rejected the law of the Lord.

2\. They kept not his statutes.

3\. They followed lies, were idolaters, and followed false prophets
rather than those sent by Jehovah.

[Amos 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">amo 2:5</span></span>

I will send a fire upon Judah - This fire was the war made upon the Jews
by Nebuchadnezzar, which terminated with the sackage and burning of
Jerusalem and its palace the temple.

[Amos 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">amo 2:6</span></span>

For three transgressions of Israel, etc. - To be satisfied of the
exceeding delinquency of this people, we have only to open the
historical and prophetic books in any part; for the whole history of the
Israelites is one tissue of transgression against God. Their crimes are
enumerated under the following heads: -

1\. Their judges were mercenary and corrupt. They took bribes to condemn
the righteous; and even for articles of clothing, such as a pair of
shoes, they condemned the poor man, and delivered him into the hands of
his adversary.

2\. They were unmerciful to the poor generally. They pant after the dust
of the earth on the head of the poor; or, to put it on the head of the
poor; or, they bruise the head of the poor against the dust of the
earth. Howsoever the clause is understood, it shows them to have been
general oppressors of the poor, showing them neither justice nor mercy.

3\. They turn aside the way of the meek. They are peculiarly oppressive
to the weak and afflicted.

4\. They were licentious to the uttermost abomination; for in their idol
feasts, where young women prostituted themselves publicly in honor of
Astarte, the father and son entered into impure connections with the
same female.

5\. They were cruel in their oppressions of the poor; for the garments
or beds which the poor had pledged they retained contrary to the law,
Exodus 22:7-26, which required that such things should be restored
before the setting of the sun.

6\. They punished the people by unjust and oppressive fines, and served
their tables with wine bought by such fines. Or it may be understood of
their appropriating to themselves that wine which was allowed to
criminals to mitigate their sufferings in the article of death; which
was the excess of inhumanity and cruelty.

[Amos 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">amo 2:9</span></span>

Yet destroyed I the Amorite - Here follow general heads of God's mercies
to them, and the great things he had done for them.

1\. Bringing them out of Egypt.

2\. Miraculously sustaining them in the wilderness forty years.

3\. Driving out the Canaanites before them, and giving them possession
of the promised land.

4\. Raising up prophets among them to declare the Divine will.

5\. And forming the holy institution of the Nazarites among them, to
show the spiritual nature of his holy religion, [Amo
2:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#009).

[Amos 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">amo 2:12</span></span>

But ye gave the Nazarites wine - This was expressly forbidden in the
laws of their institution. See [Num
6:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#001).

Prophesy not - They would not worship God, and they would not hear the
voice of his prophets.

[Amos 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">amo 2:13</span></span>

Behold, I am pressed under you - The marginal reading is better:
"Behold, I will press your place, as a cart full of sheaves presseth." I
will bring over you the wheel of destruction; and it shall grind your
place - your city and temple, as the wheel of a cart laden with sheaves
presses down the ground, gravel, and stones over which it rolls.

[Amos 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">amo 2:14</span></span>

The flight shall perish from the swift - The swiftest shall not be able
to save himself from a swifter destruction. None, by might, by counsel,
or by fleetness, shall be able to escape from the impending ruin. In a
word, God has so fully determined to avenge the quarrel of his broken
covenant, that all attempts to escape from his judgments shall be
useless.

[Amos 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">amo 2:15</span></span>

Neither shall he that rideth the horse deliver himself - I believe all
these sayings, [Amo 2:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#013), are
proverbs, to show the inutility of all attempts, even in the best
circumstances, to escape the doom now decreed, because the cup of their
iniquity was full.

[Amos 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">amo 2:16</span></span>

Shall flee away naked - In some cases the alarm shall be in the night;
and even the most heroic shall start from his bed, and through terror
not wait to put on his clothes.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Amos Chapter 3](amo003)

</div>
