<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1)  
  [Previous](ch1021)  [Next](ch1023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#001)

[1 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch1 22:0</span></span>

David makes great preparations for building a temple to the Lord, [Ch1
22:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#001); gives the necessary directions
to Solomon concerning it, [Ch1
22:6-16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#006); and exhorts the princes of
Israel to assist in the undertaking, [Ch1
22:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#017).

[1 Chronicles 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch1 22:1</span></span>

David said, This is the house of the Lord - Till a temple is built for
his name, this place shall be considered the temple of God; and on this
altar, and not on that at Gibeon, shall the burnt-offerings of Israel be
made. David probably thought that this was the place on which God
designed that his house should be built; and perhaps it was this that
induced him to buy, not only the threshing-floor, but probably some
adjacent ground also, as Calmet supposes, that there might be sufficient
room for such a building.

[1 Chronicles 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ch1 22:2</span></span>

The strangers that were in the land - Those who had become proselytes to
the Jewish religion, at least so far as to renounce idolatry, and keep
what were called the seven Noahic precepts. These were to be employed in
the more servile and difficult parts of the work: see on [Kg1
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#021) (note). For the account of
building the temple, see 1 Kings 5-9 (note), and the notes there.

[1 Chronicles 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ch1 22:3</span></span>

Irons - for the nails, etc. - Iron for bolts, bars, hinges, etc., etc.

[1 Chronicles 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ch1 22:6</span></span>

Solomon - is young and tender - He is as yet without complete knowledge
and due experience; and it is necessary that I should make as much
preparation for the work as I possibly can; especially as the house is
to be exceedingly magnificent.

[1 Chronicles 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ch1 22:8</span></span>

Thou hast shed blood abundantly - Heathens, Jews, and Christians, have
all agreed that soldiers of any kind should have nothing to do with
Divine offices. Shedding of human blood but ill comports with the
benevolence of God or the spirit of the Gospel.

Aeneas, overpowered by his enemies, while fighting for his parents, his
family, and his country, finding farther resistance hopeless, endeavors
to carry off his aged father, his wife, young son, and his household
gods; but as he was just come from slaughter, he would not even handle
these objects of superstition, but confided them to his father, whom he
took on his shoulders, and carried out of the burning of Troy.

Tu, genitor, cape sacra manu, patriosque penates:

Me bello tanto digressum, et caede recenti,

Attrectare nefas; donec me flumine vivo Abluero.

Aen. ii., ver. 717.

"Our country gods, our relics, and the bands,

Hold you, my father, in your guiltless hands:

In me 'tis impious holy things to bear,

Red as I am with slaughter, new from war;

Till, in some living stream, I cleanse the guilt

Of dire debate, and blood in battle spilt."

Dryden.

See the note at the end of [Sa2 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#025)
(note).

[1 Chronicles 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ch1 22:9</span></span>

His name shall be Solomon - שלמה Shelomoh, from שלם shalam, he was
peaceable; and therefore, says the Lord, alluding to the name, I will
give Peace, שלום Shalom, in his days.

[1 Chronicles 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ch1 22:14</span></span>

In my trouble I have prepared - Notwithstanding ail the wars in which I
have been engaged, all the treacheries with which I have been
surrounded, all the domestic troubles with which I have been
overwhelmed, I never lost sight of this great object, the building of a
house for God, that his worship might be established in the land. I have
curtailed my expenses, and have lived in comparative poverty that I
might save all I possibly could for this building.

A hundred thousand talents of gold - A talent of gold weighed three
thousand shekels, and was worth five thousand and seventy-five pounds,
fifteen shillings, and seven pence half-penny. One hundred thousand such
talents would therefore amount to five hundred and seven millions, five
hundred and seventy-eight thousand, one hundred and twenty-five pounds
sterling. These sums are variously computed by several writers.

A thousand thousand talents of silver - A talent of silver weighed three
thousand shekels, and was worth three hundred and fifty-three pounds,
eleven shillings, and ten pence. A thousand thousand, or a million, of
such talents would amount to the immense sum of three hundred and
fifty-three millions, five hundred and ninety-one thousand, six hundred
and sixty-six pounds, thirteen shillings, and four pence, sterling; both
sums amounting to eight hundred and sixty-one millions, one hundred and
sixty-nine thousand, seven hundred and ninety-one pounds, thirteen
shillings, and four pence.

Thou mayest add thereto - Save as I have saved, out of the revenues of
the state, and thou mayest also add something for the erection and
splendor of this house. This was a gentle though pointed hint, which was
not lost on Solomon.

[1 Chronicles 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ch1 22:18</span></span>

Is not the Lord your God with you? - "Is not the Word of the Lord your
God your assistant?" - T.

Hath he not given you rest on every side? - David at this time was not
only king of Judea, but had also subdued most of the surrounding
nations.

Thus Solomon came to the Jewish throne with every possible advantage.
Had he made a proper use of his state and of his talents, he would have
been the greatest as well as the wisest of sovereigns. But alas! how
soon did this pure gold become dim! He began with an unlawful
matrimonial connection; this led him to a commerce that was positively
forbidden by the law of God: he then multiplied his matrimonial
connections with heathen women; they turned his heart away from God, and
the once wise and holy Solomon died a fool and an idolater.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles Chapter 23](ch1023)

</div>
