<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1)  
  [Previous](ch1009)  [Next](ch1011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#001)

[1 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch1 10:0</span></span>

A fatal battle between the Israelites and Philistines in Gilboa, in
which Saul is mortally wounded, and has three sons slain, [Ch1
10:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#001). The Israelites being totally
routed, the Philistines, coming to strip the dead, find Saul and has
three sons among the slain; they cut off Saul's head, and send it and
his armor about the country to the idol temples; and then fix them up in
the house of Dagon, [Ch1 10:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#007). The
men of Jabesh-gilead come by night, and take away the bodies of Saul and
has three sons, and bury them in Jabesh, [Ch1
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#011), [Ch1
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#012). The reason of Saul's tragical
death; the kingdom is transferred to David, [Ch1
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#013), [Ch1
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#014).

[1 Chronicles 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch1 10:1</span></span>

Now the Philistines fought against Israel - The reader will find the
same history in almost the same words, in [Sa1
31:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#001), to the notes on which he is
referred for every thing important in this.

[1 Chronicles 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ch1 10:6</span></span>

So Saul died - and all his house - Every branch of his family that had
followed him to the war was cut off; his three sons are mentioned as
being the chief. No doubt all his officers were slain.

[1 Chronicles 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ch1 10:11</span></span>

When all Jabesh-gilead heard - For a general account of the principles
of heroism and gratitude from which this action of the men of
Jabesh-gilead proceeded, see the note on [Sa1
31:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#011), [Sa1
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#012).

By the kindness of a literary friend, I am enabled to lay a farther
illustration of this noble act before the reader, which he will find at
the conclusion of the chapter.

[1 Chronicles 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ch1 10:13</span></span>

Saul died for his transgression - See the concluding observations on the
first book of Samuel ([Sa1 31:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#013)
(note)).

[1 Chronicles 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ch1 10:14</span></span>

Inquired not of the Lord - On these two last verses the Targum speaks
thus: "And Saul died for the transgression by which he transgressed
against the Word of the Lord, and because he did not keep the
commandment of the Lord when he warred against the house of Amalek; and
because he consulted Pythons, and sought oracular answers from them.
Neither did he ask counsel from before the Lord by Urim and Thummim, for
he had slain the priests that were in Nob; therefore the Lord slew him,
and transferred the kingdom to David the son of Jesse."

A Literary friend furnishes the following remarks: -

"The sacred writer, in the first book of Samuel, [Sa1
31:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#011), and [Ch1
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#011), [Ch1
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#012), after relating the defeat and
death of Saul, and the ignominious treatment of his remains, thus
concludes: -

"'And when the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead heard of that which the
Philistines had done to Saul, all the valiant men arose, and went all
night, and took the body of Saul, and the bodies of his sons, from the
wall of Beth-shan, and came to Jabesh, and burnt them there; and they
took the bones, and buried them under a tree at Jabesh, and fasted seven
days.'

"Often has this account been read with admiration of the bravery and
devotedness of the men of Jabesh-gilead, but without considering that
these men had any greater cause than others for honoring the remains of
their sovereign; but, on reflection, it will be perceived that the
strong impulse of gratitude prompted them to this honorable exertion.
They remembered their preservation from destruction, and, which to brave
men is more galling, from bearing marks of having been defeated, and
being deprived of the honorable hope of wiping off disgrace, or
defending their country at future seasons.

"Reading these verses in conjunction with the attack of Nahash, we
perceive the natural feelings of humanity, of honorable respect,
prompting the men of Jabesh to act as they did in rescuing the bones of
Saul and his family.

"The father of Grecian poetry relates in how great a degree the warriors
of ancient days honored the remains of their leaders; how severe were
the contests for the body of the fallen chief, more determined
oftentimes than the struggle for victory: this point of military honor
was possibly excited or heightened by the religious idea so prevalent in
his age, and after times, respecting the fate of the spirits of those
who were unburied.

"Homer wrote of events passing at no distant period from those recorded
in the first volume of Samuel; and these accounts mutually corroborate
each other, being in unison, not only with the feelings of humanity, but
with the customs of ancient nations. These may be farther illustrated by
comparing the conduct of the Philistines with regard to Saul and his
sons, with that of the hero of the Iliad towards Hector, the most
finished character of the poem. Saul had been a severe scourge to the
Philistines throughout a long series of years; the illustrious chief of
Troy had long warded off the ruin of his country, and destroyed the
flower of her foes, independently of his last victory over Patroclus,
which drew on his remains that dishonor which, however, fell only on his
destroyer.

"Should the siege of Troy be considered a fable, it may then be
concluded that Homer introduced into his poems the customs and manners
known to those for whose perusal he wrote, if these customs were not
prevalent among his readers; but anxiety for the body of the illustrious
dead, or regret for his death, has often caused success when all
exertions prior to this powerful stimulus have not availed; and this
even in our days.

"The Philistines had long been confined to the southwest angle of the
promised land, and in the earlier part of Saul's reign had suffered many
and severe losses; yet it appears by this chapter that, alone or in
conjunction with allies, they had been able to penetrate nearly to the
banks of the Jordan, to fight the battle on Mount Gilboa. This could
only have been effected by a march through great part of the kingdom of
Israel.

"Doubtless the attention of Saul in its defense might have been greatly
distracted by his pursuit and fear of David, which appeared to have
absorbed his whole mind; and it may account for the defenceless or
weakened state of his forces.

"These circumstances appear to corroborate the authenticity of these
books, independently of the many private transactions therein recorded;
particularly the interesting and singular friendship of Jonathan and
David, a transaction not likely to occur to a forger of a narrative.
J.W."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles Chapter 11](ch1011)

</div>
