<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2016)  [Next](ch2018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 17:0</span></span>

Jehoshaphat succeeds his father Asa, and reigns piously, and is
particularly blessed, [Ch2 17:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#001). He
establishes an itinerant ministry, for the instruction of the people,
through all the cities of Judah, which produces the most beneficial
effects, [Ch2 17:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#007). The Philistines
and Arabians bring him gifts, [Ch2
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#011). His greatness, [Ch2
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#012), [Ch2
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#013). The commanders of his troops,
[Ch2 17:14-19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#014).

[2 Chronicles 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 17:1</span></span>

Jehoshaphat - and strengthened himself against Israel - The kingdoms of
Israel and Judah were rivals from the beginning; sometimes one,
sometimes the other, prevailed. Asa and Baasha were nearly matched; but,
after Baasha's death, Israel was greatly weakened by civil contentions,
and Jehoshaphat got the ascendancy. See [Kg1
16:16-23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#016).

[2 Chronicles 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ch2 17:2</span></span>

The cities of Ephraim - This conquest from the kingdom of Israel is
referred to, [Ch2 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#008); but when it
was made we do not know.

[2 Chronicles 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ch2 17:3</span></span>

The Lord was with Jehoshaphat - "The Word of the Lord was Jehoshaphat's
Helper." - Targum.

[2 Chronicles 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ch2 17:7</span></span>

To teach in the cities of Judah - "To teach the fear of the Lord in the
cities of Judah." - Targum.

In these verses we find a remarkable account of an itinerant ministry
established by Jehoshaphat; and in this work he employed three classes
of men:

1\. The princes.

2\. The Levites.

3\. The priests.

We may presume that the princes instructed the people in the nature of
the civil law and constitution of the kingdom; the Levites instructed
them in every thing that appertained to the temple service, and ritual
law; and the priests instructed them in the nature and design of the
religion they professed. Thus the nation became thoroughly instructed in
their duty to God, to the king, and to each other. They became,
therefore, as one man; and against a people thus united, on such
principles, no enemy could be successful.

[2 Chronicles 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ch2 17:9</span></span>

Had the book of the law of the Lord with them - This was their text
book: it was the book of God; they taught it as such, and as such the
people received it. Its laws were God's laws, and the people felt their
obligation, and their consciences were bound. Thus they were obedient to
the laws of the land, on the principle of religion. In this they were
encouraged and confirmed by the example of all, both in Church and
state. The princes were not only pious, but were teachers of piety; the
Levites showed them the worth and excellence of their ritual
institutions; and the priests showed them the moral use they were to
make of the whole: and thus the people became obedient to God as well as
to the king, and kept all the civil ordinances, not merely for the sake
of a good king, but for the sake of a good and gracious God. By these
means the nation enjoyed peace and prosperity; and all insurrections,
seditions, and popular commotions, were prevented. The surrounding
nations, perceiving this, saw that there was no hope of subduing such a
people, so they made no war with Jehoshaphat, [Ch2
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#010). And they took care not to
provoke such a people to fall on them; therefore, it is said, The fear
of the Lord fell on all the kingdoms and lands that were round about
Judah. Such an itinerant ministry established in these kingdoms for
upwards of fourscore years, teaching the pure, unadulterated doctrines
of the Gospel, with the propriety and necessity of obedience to the
laws, has been the principal means, in the hand of God, of preserving
these lands from those convulsions and revolutions that have ruined and
nearly dissolved the European continent. The itinerant ministry, to
which this refers, is that which was established in these lands by the
late truly reverend, highly learned and cultivated, deeply pious and
loyal John Wesley, A.M., formerly a fellow of Lincoln College, Oxford,
whose followers are known by the name of Methodists; a people who are an
honor to their country, and a blessing to the government under which
they live.

[2 Chronicles 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ch2 17:11</span></span>

The Philistines brought - presents - They and the Arabians purchased
peace with the king of Judah by paying an annual tribute. The
Philistines brought silver, and no doubt different kinds of merchandise,
The Arabs, whose riches consisted in cattle, brought him flocks in great
abundance, principally rams and he-goats.

[2 Chronicles 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ch2 17:13</span></span>

He had much business in the cities - He kept the people constantly
employed; they had wages for their work; and by their labors the empire
was both enriched and strengthened.

[2 Chronicles 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ch2 17:14</span></span>

Adnah, the chief - He was generalissimo of all this host. These are the
numbers of the five battalions: under Adnah, three hundred thousand;
Jehohanan, two hundred and eighty thousand, Amasiah, two hundred
thousand; Eliada, two hundred thousand; Jehozabad, one hundred and
eighty thousand; in all, one million one hundred and sixty thousand.

[2 Chronicles 17:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ch2 17:19</span></span>

These waited on the king - They were disposable forces, always at the
king's command; and were independent of those by which the cities of
Judah were garrisoned.

There is not a sovereign in Europe or in the world but might read this
chapter with advantage.

1\. It shows most forcibly that true religion is the basis of the state,
and that, wherever it prospers, there the state prospers.

2\. It shows also that it is the wisdom of kings to encourage religion
with all their power and influence; for if the hearts of the subjects be
not bound and influenced by true religion, vain is the application of
laws, fines, imprisonments, or corporal punishment of any kind.

3\. A religious nation is ever a great nation; it is loved by its
friends, it is dreaded by its enemies.

4\. It is ever a peaceable and united nation: the blessings of religion,
and a wholesome and paternal government, are so fully felt and prized,
that all find it their interest to preserve and defend them. Harmony,
peace, piety, and strength, are the stability of such times. May Britain
know and value them!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 18](ch2018)

</div>
