<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2029)  [Next](ch2031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 30:0</span></span>

Hezekiah invites all Israel and Judah, and writes letters to Ephraim and
Manasseh to come up to Jerusalem, and hold a passover to the Lord, [Ch2
30:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#001). The posts go out with the
king's proclamation from Dan to Beer-sheba, and pass from city to city
through the coasts of Ephraim, Manasseh, and Zebulun, but are generally
mocked in Israel, [Ch2 30:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#005). Yet
several of Asher, Manasseh, and Zebulun, humble themselves, and come to
Jerusalem, [Ch2 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#011). But in Judah
they are all of one heart, [Ch2 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#012),
[Ch2 30:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#013). They take away the
idolatrous altars, kill the passover, sprinkle the blood, and, as
circumstances will permit, sanctify the people, [Ch2
30:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#014), [Ch2
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#015). Many having eaten of the
passover, who were not purified according to the law, Hezekiah prays for
them; and the Lord accepts his prayer, and heals them, [Ch2
30:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#016). Hezekiah exhorts them; and
they hold the feast seven additional days, fourteen in all, and the
people greatly rejoice, [Ch2 30:21-26](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#021).
The priests and the Levites bless the people, and God accepts their
prayers and thanksgivings, [Ch2 30:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#027).

[2 Chronicles 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 30:1</span></span>

Hezekiah sent to all Israel - It is not easy to find out how this was
permitted by the king of Israel; but it is generally allowed that
Hoshea, who then reigned over Israel, was one of their best kings. And
as the Jews allow that at this time both the golden calves had been
carried away by the Assyrians, - that at Dan by Tiglath-pileser, and
that at Bethel by Shalmaneser, - the people who chose to worship Jehovah
at Jerusalem were freely permitted to do it, and Hezekiah had
encouragement to make the proclamation in question.

[2 Chronicles 30:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ch2 30:2</span></span>

In the second month - In Ijar, as they could not celebrate it in Nisan,
the fourteenth of which month was the proper time. But as they could not
complete the purgation of the temple, till the sixteenth of that month,
therefore they were obliged to hold it now, or else adjourn it till the
next year, which would have been fatal to that spirit of reformation
which had now taken place. The law itself had given permission to those
who were at a distance, and could not attend to the fourteenth of the
first month, and to those who were accidentally defiled, and ought not
to attend, to celebrate the passover on the fourteenth of the second
month; see [Num 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#010), [Num
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#011). Hezekiah therefore, and his
counsellors, thought that they might extend that to the people at large,
because of the delay necessarily occasioned by the cleansing of the
temple, which was granted to individuals in such cases as the above, and
the result showed that they had not mistaken the mind of the Lord upon
the subject.

[2 Chronicles 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ch2 30:6</span></span>

So the posts went - רצים ratsim, the runners or couriers; persons who
were usually employed to carry messages; men who were light of foot, and
confidential.

[2 Chronicles 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ch2 30:9</span></span>

And will not turn away his face from you - Well expressed by the Targum:
"For the Lord your God is gracious and merciful, and will not cause his
majesty to ascend up from among you, if ye will return to his fear." The
shechinah, of which the Targumist speaks, is the dwelling of the Divine
Presence among men, and the visible symbol of that presence.

[2 Chronicles 30:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ch2 30:18</span></span>

A multitude of the people - had not cleansed themselves - As there were
men from Ephraim, Manasseh, Issachar, and Zebulun, they were excusable,
because they came from countries that had been wholly devoted to
idolatry.

The good Lord pardon every one - "The Lord, who is good, have mercy on
this people who err." - T.

[2 Chronicles 30:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">ch2 30:22</span></span>

Spake comfortably unto all the Levites - On such occasions the priests
and Levites had great fatigue, and suffered many privations; and
therefore had need of that encouragement which this prudent and pious
king gave. It is a fine and expressive character given of these men,
"They taught the good knowledge of God to the people." This is the great
work, or should be so, of every Christian minister. They should convey
that knowledge of God to the people by which they may be saved; that is,
the good knowledge of the Lord.

[2 Chronicles 30:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">ch2 30:25</span></span>

The strangers that come out of the land of Israel - That is, the
proselytes of the covenant who had embraced Judaism, and had submitted
to the rite of circumcision, for none others could be permitted to eat
of the passover.

[2 Chronicles 30:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">ch2 30:26</span></span>

Since the time of Solomon - there was not the like in Jerusalem - For
from that time the ten tribes had been separated from the true worship
of God, and now many of them for the first time, especially from Asher,
Issachar, Ephraim, Manasseh, and Zebulun, joined to celebrate the
passover.

[2 Chronicles 30:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">ch2 30:27</span></span>

And their voice was heard - God accepted the fruits of that pious
disposition which himself had infused.

And their prayer came up - As the smoke of their sacrifices ascended to
the clouds, so did their prayers, supplications, and thanksgivings,
ascend to the heavens. The Targum says: "Their prayer came up to the
dwelling-place of his holy shechinah, which is in heaven." Israel now
appeared to be in a fair way of regaining what they had lost; but alas,
how soon were all these bright prospects beclouded for ever!

It is not for the want of holy resolutions and heavenly influences that
men are not saved but through their own unsteadiness; they do not
persevere, they forget the necessity of continuing in prayer, and thus
the Holy Spirit is grieved, departs from them, and leaves them to their
own darkness and hardness of heart. When we consider the heavenly
influences which many receive who draw back to perdition, and the good
fruits which for a time they bore, it is blasphemy to say they had no
genuine or saving grace; they had it, they showed it, they trifled with
it, sinned against it, continued in their rebellions, and therefore are
lost.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 31](ch2031)

</div>
