<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2012)  [Next](ch2014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 13:0</span></span>

Abijah begins to reign over Judah, and has war with Jeroboam, [Ch2
13:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#001). His speech from Mount Zemaraim
to Jeroboam, before the commencement of hostilities, [Ch2
13:4-12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#004). While thus engaged, Jeroboam
despatches some troops which come on the rear of Abijah's army, [Ch2
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#013). Perceiving this, they cry unto
the Lord, and the Israelites are defeated with the loss of five hundred
thousand men, [Ch2 13:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#014). Abijah
retakes several cities from Jeroboam, who is smitten by the Lord, and
dies, [Ch2 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#019), [Ch2
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#020). Abijah's marriages and issue,
[Ch2 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#021), [Ch2
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#022).

[2 Chronicles 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ch2 13:2</span></span>

His mother's name - was Michaiah - See on [Ch2
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#020) (note).

[2 Chronicles 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ch2 13:3</span></span>

Abijah set the battle in array - The numbers in this verse and in the
seventeenth seem almost incredible. Abijah's army consisted of four
hundred thousand effective men; that of Jeroboam consisted of eight
hundred thousand; and the slain of Jeroboam's army were five hundred
thousand. Now it is very possible that there is a cipher too much in all
these numbers, and that they should stand thus: Abijah's army, forty
thousand; Jeroboam's eighty thousand; the slain, fifty thousand. Calmet,
who defends the common reading, allows that the Venice edition of the
Vulgate, in 1478; another, in 1489; that of Nuremberg, in 1521; that of
Basil, by Froben, in 1538; that of Robert Stevens, in 1546; and many
others, have the smaller numbers. Dr. Kennicott says: "On a particular
collation of the Vulgate version, it appears that the number of chosen
men here slain, which Pope Clement's edition in 1592 determines to be
five hundred thousand, the edition of Pope Sixtus, printed two years
before, determined to be only fifty thousand; and the two preceding
numbers, in the edition of Sixtus, are forty thousand and eighty
thousand. As to different printed editions, out of fifty-two, from the
year 1462 to 1592, thirty-one contain the less number. And out of
fifty-one MSS. twenty-three in the Bodleian library, four in that of
Dean Aldrich, and two in that of Exeter College, contain the less
number, or else are corrupted irregularly, varying only one or two
numbers."

This examination was made by Dr. Kennicott before he had finished his
collation of Hebrew MSS., and before De Rossi had published his Variae
Lectiones Veteris Testamenti; but from these works we find little help,
as far as the Hebrew MSS. are concerned. One Hebrew MS., instead of ארבע
מאות אלף arba meoth eleph, four hundred thousand, reads ארבע עשר אלף
arba eser eleph, fourteen thousand.

In all printed copies of the Hebrew, the numbers are as in the common
text, four hundred thousand, eight hundred thousand, and five hundred
thousand.

The versions are as follow: - The Targum, or Chaldee, the same in each
place as the Hebrew.

The Syriac in [Ch2 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#003) has four
hundred thousand young men for the army of Abijah, and eight hundred
thousand stout youth for that of Jeroboam. For the slain Israelites, in
[Ch2 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#017), it has five hundred
thousand, falsely translated in the Latin text quinque milia, five
thousand, both in the Paris and London Polyglots: another proof among
many that little dependence is to be placed on the Latin translation of
this version in either of the above Polyglots.

The Arabic is the same in all these cases with the Syriac, from which it
has been translated.

The Septuagint, both as it is published in all the Polyglots, and as far
as I have seen in MSS. is the same with the Hebrew text. So also is
Josephus.

The Vulgate or Latin version is that alone that exhibits any important
variations; we have had considerable proof of this in the
above-mentioned collations of Calmet and Kennicott. I shall beg liberty
to add others from my own collection.

In the Editio Princeps of the Latin Bible, though without date or place,
yet evidently printed long before that of Fust, in 1462, the places
stand thus: [Ch2 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#003). Cumque inisset
certamen, et haberet bellicosissimos viros, et electorum Quadraginta
milia: Iheroboam construxit e contra aciem Octoginta milia virorum;
"With him Abia entered into battle; and he had of the most warlike and
choice men forty thousand; and Jeroboam raised an army against him of
eighty thousand men." And in [Ch2
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#017) : Et corruerunt vulnerati ex
Israel, Quinquaginta milia virorum fortium; "And there fell down wounded
fifty thousand stout men of Israel." In the Glossa Ordinaria, by Strabo
Fuldensis, we have forty thousand and eighty thousand in the two first
instances, and five hundred thousand in the last. - Bib. Sacr. vol. ii.,
Antv. 1634.

In six ancient MSS. of my own, marked A, B, C, D, E, F. the text stands
thus: -

A. - Cumque inisset Abia certamen, et haberet bellicosissimos viros, et
electorum XL. MIL. Jeroboam instruxit contra aciem LXXX. MIL.

And in [Ch2 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#017) : Et corruerunt
vulnerati ex Israel L. MIL. virorum fortium. Here we have forty thousand
for the army of Abijah, and eighty thousand for that of Jeroboam, and
Fifty thousand for the slain of the latter.

B. -

Quadraginita milia Forty thousand Octoginta milia Eighty thousand
Quinquiaginta milia Fifty thousand

The numbers being here expressed in words at full length, there can be
no suspicion of mistake.

C. -

CCCC milia 400 thousand DCCC milibus 800 thousand D milia 500 thousand

This is the same as the Hebrew text, and very distinctly expressed.

D. -

xl\. m. 40,000 lxxx. m. 80,000 l. v. m. 50 and 5000

This, in the two first numbers, is the same as the others above; but the
last is confused, and appears to stand for fifty thousand and five
thousand. A later hand has corrected the two first cccc numbers in this
MS., placing over the first four CCCC, thus 40, thus changing forty into
four hundred; and over the second thus, dccc lxxx., thus changing eighty
into eight hundred. Over the latter number, which is evidently a mistake
of the scribe, there is no correction.

E. -

xl\. m. 40,000 Octoginta m. Eighty thousand l. m. 50,000

F. -

CCCC\. m. 400,000 DCCC. m. 800,000 D. m. 600,000

This also is the same as the Hebrew.

The reader has now the whole evidence which I have been able to collect
before him, and may choose; the smaller numbers appear to be the most
correct. Corruptions in the numbers in these historical books we have
often had cause to suspect, and to complain of.

[2 Chronicles 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ch2 13:4</span></span>

Stood up upon Mount Zemaraim - "Which was a mount of the tribe of the
house of Ephraim." - Targum. Jarchi thinks that Abijah went to the
confines of the tribe of Ephraim to attack Jeroboam. It could not be
Shomeron, the mount on which Samaria was built in the days of Omri king
of Israel, [Kg1 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#024).

[2 Chronicles 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ch2 13:5</span></span>

By a covenant of salt? - For ever. "For as the waters of the sea never
grow sweet, neither shall the dominion depart from the house of David."
- Targum. See my note on [Num 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#019)
(note).

[2 Chronicles 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ch2 13:7</span></span>

When Rehoboam was young and tender-hearted - Therefore he could not be
forty-one when he came to the throne; see the note on [Ch2
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#003). Children of Belial here
signifies men of the most abandoned principles and characters; or men
without consideration, education, or brains.

[2 Chronicles 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ch2 13:9</span></span>

A young bullock and seven rams - He who could provide these for his own
consecration was received into the order of this spurious and wicked
priesthood. Some think he who could give to Jeroboam a young bullock and
seven rams, was thereby received into the priesthood; this being the
price for which the priesthood was conferred. The former is most likely.

[2 Chronicles 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ch2 13:10</span></span>

The Lord is our God - We have not abandoned the Lord; and we still serve
him according to his own law.

[2 Chronicles 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ch2 13:12</span></span>

God himself is with us - Ye have golden calves; we have the living and
omnipotent Jehovah.

With - trumpets to cry alarm against you - This was appalling: When the
priests sound their trumpets, it will be a proof that the vengeance of
the Lord shall speedily descend upon you.

[2 Chronicles 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ch2 13:13</span></span>

But Jeroboam caused an ambushment - While Abijah was thus employed in
reproving them, Jeroboam divided his army privately, and sent a part to
take Abijah in the rear; and this must have proved fatal to the Jews,
had not the Lord interposed.

[2 Chronicles 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ch2 13:17</span></span>

Slain - five hundred thousand chosen men - Query, fifty thousand? This
was a great slaughter: see the note on [Ch2
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#003), where all these numbers are
supposed to be overcharged.

[2 Chronicles 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ch2 13:18</span></span>

Judah prevailed, because - "They depended on the Word of the God of
their fathers." - T.

[2 Chronicles 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ch2 13:19</span></span>

Beth-el - "Beth-lehem." - Targum.

Jeshanah - We know not where these towns lay.

[2 Chronicles 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ch2 13:20</span></span>

The Lord struck him, and he died - Who died? Abijah or Jeroboam? Some
think it was Jeroboam; some, that it was Abijah. Both rabbins and
Christians are divided on this point; nor is it yet settled. The
prevailing opinion is that Jeroboam is meant, who was struck then with
that disease of which he died about two years after; for he did not die
till two years after Abijah: see [Kg1
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#020); [Kg1
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#009). It seems as if Jeroboam was
meant, not Abijah.

[2 Chronicles 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ch2 13:21</span></span>

Married fourteen wives - Probably he made alliances with the neighboring
powers, by taking their daughters to him for wives.

[2 Chronicles 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">ch2 13:22</span></span>

Written in the story - במדרש bemidrash, "in the commentary;" this, as
far as I recollect, is the first place where a midrash or commentary is
mentioned. The margin is right.

His ways, and his sayings - The commentary of the prophet Iddo is lost.
What his sayings were we cannot tell; but from the specimen in this
chapter, he appears to have been a very able speaker, and one who knew
well how to make the best use of his argument.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 14](ch2014)

</div>
