<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2.md)  
  [Previous](ch2033)  [Next](ch2035.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 34](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#001.md)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 34:0</span></span>

Josiah reigns thirty-one years; destroys idolatry in Judah, as also in
Manasseh, Ephraim, Simeon, and even to Naphtali, [Ch2
34:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#001.md). He begins to repair the
temple, and collects money for the purpose, and employs workmen, [Ch2
34:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#008.md). Hilkiah the priest finds the
book of the law in the temple, which is read by Shaphan before the king,
[Ch2 34:14-19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#014.md). He is greatly troubled,
and consults Huldah the prophetess, [Ch2
34:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#020.md). Her exhortation, and message
to the king, [Ch2 34:23-28](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#023.md). He causes
it to be read to the elders of Judah, and they make a covenant with God,
[Ch2 34:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#029.md), [Ch2
34:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#032.md). Josiah reforms every
abomination, and the people serve God all his days, [Ch2
34:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#033.md).

[2 Chronicles 34:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ch2 34:2</span></span>

He declined neither to the right hand, nor to the left - He never
swerved from God and truth; he never omitted what he knew to be his duty
to God and his kingdom; he carried on his reformation with a steady
hand; timidity did not prevent him from going far enough; and zeal did
not lead him beyond due bounds. He walked in the golden mean, and his
moderation was known unto all men. He went neither to the right nor to
the left, he looked inward, looked forward, and looked upward. Reader,
let the conduct of this pious youth be thy exemplar through life.

[2 Chronicles 34:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ch2 34:4</span></span>

The altars of Baalim - How often have these been broken down, and how
soon set up again! We see that the religion of a land is as the religion
of its king. If the king were idolatrous, up went the altars, on them
were placed the statues, and the smoke of incense ascended in ceaseless
clouds to the honor of that which is vanity, and nothing to the world;
on the other hand, when the king was truly religious, down went the
idolatrous altars, broken in pieces were the images, and the sacrificial
smoke ascended only to the true God: in all these cases the people were
as one man with the king.

[2 Chronicles 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ch2 34:5</span></span>

He burnt the bones of the priests - כומריא kumeraiya, the kemarim, says
the Targum. See this word explained, [Kg2
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#005) (note.md).

[2 Chronicles 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ch2 34:6</span></span>

The cities of Manasseh - Even those who were under the government of the
Israelitish king permitted their idols and places of idolatry to be hewn
down and destroyed: after the truth was declared and acknowledged, the
spade and the axe were employed to complete the reformation.

[2 Chronicles 34:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ch2 34:9</span></span>

And they returned to Jerusalem - Instead of וישבו vaiyashubu, "they
returned," we should read יושבי yoshebey, "the inhabitants;" a reading
which is supported by many MSS., printed editions, and all the versions,
as well as by necessity and common sense. See the note on [Ch2
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#008.md), where a similar mistake is
rectified.

[2 Chronicles 34:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ch2 34:12</span></span>

All that could skill of instruments of music - Did the musicians play on
their several instruments to encourage and enliven the workmen? Is not
this a probable case from their mention here? If this were really the
case, instrumental music was never better applied in any thing that
refers to the worship of God. It is fabled of Orpheus, a most celebrated
musician, that such was the enchanting harmony of his lyre, that he
built the city of Thebes by it: the stones and timbers danced to his
melody; and by the power of his harmony rose up, and took their
respective places in the different parts of the wall that was to defend
the city! This is fable; but as all fable is a representation of truth,
where is the truth and fact to which this refers? How long has this
question lain unanswered! But have we not the answer now? It is known in
general, that the cities of Herculaneum and Pompeii were overwhelmed by
an eruption of Mount Vesuvius, about the seventy-ninth year of the
Christian era. It is also known that, in sinking for wells, the workmen
of the king of Naples lighted on houses, etc., of those overwhelmed
cities; that excavations have been carried on, and are now in the act of
being carried on, which are bringing daily to view various utensils,
pictures, and books, which have escaped the influence of the burning
lava; and that some of those parchment volumes have been unrolled, and
facsimiles of them engraved and published; and that our late Prince
Regent, afterwards George IV., king of Great Britain, expended
considerable sums of money annually in searching for, unrolling, and
deciphering those rolls. This I record to his great credit as the lover
of science and literature. Now, among the books that have been unrolled
and published, is a Greek Treatise on Music, by Philodemus; and here we
have the truth represented which lay hidden under the fables of Orpheus
and Amphion. This latter was a skillful harper, who was frequently
employed by the Theban workmen to play to them while engaged in their
labor, and for which they rewarded him out of the proceeds of that
labor. So powerful and pleasing was his music, that they went lightly
and comfortably through their work; and time and labor passed on without
tedium or fatigue; and the walls and towers were speedily raised. This,
by a metaphor, was attributed to the dulcet sounds of his harp; and
poetry seized on and embellished it, and mythology incorporated it with
her fabulous system. Orpheus is the same. By his skill in music he drew
stones and trees after him, i.e., he presided over and encouraged the
workmen by his skill in music. Yet how simple and natural is the
representation given by this ancient Greek writer of such matters! See
Philodemus, Col. viii. and ix. Orpheus, and Amphion, by their music,
moved the workmen to diligence and activity, and lessened and alleviated
their toil. May we not suppose, then, that skillful musicians among the
Levites did exercise their art among the workmen who were employed in
the repairs of the house of the Lord? May I be allowed a gentle
transition? Is it not the power and harmony of the grace of Jesus Christ
in the Gospel, that convert, change, and purify the souls of men, and
prepare them for and place them in that part of the house of God, the
New Jerusalem? A most beautiful and chaste allusion to this fact and
fable is made by an eminent poet, while praying for his own success as a
Christian minister, who uses all his skill as a poet and musician for
the glory of God: -

Thy own musician, Lord, inspire,

And may my consecrated lyre

Repeat the psalmist's part!

His Son and thine reveal in me,

And fill with sacred melody

The fibres of my heart.

So shall I charm the listening throng,

And draw the Living Stones along

By Jesus' tuneful name.

The living stones shall dance, shall rise,

And Form a City in the skies,

The New Jerusalem.

Charles Wesley.

[2 Chronicles 34:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ch2 34:14</span></span>

Found a book of the law - See on [Kg2
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#008) (note.md).

[2 Chronicles 34:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">ch2 34:22</span></span>

Huldah the prophetess - See on [Kg2
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#014) (note.md).

[2 Chronicles 34:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">ch2 34:27</span></span>

Because thine heart was tender - "Because thy heart was melted, and thou
hast humbled thyself in the sight of the Word of the Lord, מימרא דיי
meymera daya, when thou didst hear his words, ית פתגמוי yath pithgamoi,
against this place," etc. Here the Targum most evidently distinguishes
between מימרא meymera, the Personal Word, and פתגם pithgam, a word
spoken or expressed.

[2 Chronicles 34:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">ch2 34:28</span></span>

Gathered to thy grave in peace - See particularly the note on [Kg2
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#020) (note.md).

[2 Chronicles 34:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">ch2 34:30</span></span>

The king went - See on [Kg2 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#001.md)
(note).

[2 Chronicles 34:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">ch2 34:31</span></span>

Made a covenant - See on [Kg2 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#003.md)
(note). And see the notes on that and the preceding chapter, 2
Chronicles 33 (note), for the circumstances detailed here.

[2 Chronicles 34:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">ch2 34:32</span></span>

To stand to it - It is likely that he caused them all to arise when he
read the terms of the covenant, and thus testify their approbation of
the covenant itself, and their resolution to observe it faithfully and
perseveringly.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 35](ch2035.md)

</div>
