<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1001)  [Next](co1003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 2:0</span></span>

The apostle makes an apology for his manner of preaching, [Co1
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#001). And gives the reason why he
adopted that manner, [Co1 2:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#002). He
shows that this preaching, notwithstanding it was not with excellence of
human speech or wisdom, yet was the mysterious wisdom of God, which the
princes of this world did not know, and which the Spirit of God alone
could reveal, [Co1 2:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006). It is the
Spirit of God only that can reveal the things of God, [Co1
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#011). The apostles of Christ know the
things of God by the Spirit of God, and teach them, not in the words of
man's wisdom, but in the words of that Spirit, [Co1
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#012), [Co1
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#013). The natural man cannot discern
the things of the Spirit, [Co1 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014).
But the spiritual man can discern and teach them, because he has the
mind of Christ, [Co1 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#015), [Co1
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#016).

[1 Corinthians 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 2:1</span></span>

When I came to you - Acting suitably to my mission, which was to preach
the Gospel, but not with human eloquence, [Co1
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#017). I declared to you the testimony,
the Gospel, of God, not with excellency of speech, not with arts of
rhetoric, used by your own philosophers, where the excellence of the
speech recommends the matter, and compensates for the want of solidity
and truth: on the contrary, the testimony concerning Christ and his
salvation is so supremely excellent, as to dignify any kind of language
by which it may be conveyed. See the Introduction, Section 2.

[1 Corinthians 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co1 2:2</span></span>

I determined not to know any thing among you - Satisfied that the Gospel
of God could alone make you wise unto salvation, I determined to
cultivate no other knowledge, and to teach nothing but Jesus Christ, and
him crucified, as the foundation of all true wisdom, piety, and
happiness. No other doctrine shall I proclaim among you.

[1 Corinthians 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co1 2:3</span></span>

I was with you in weakness - It is very likely that St. Paul had not
only something in his speech very unfavourable to a ready and powerful
elocution, but also some infirmity of body that was still more
disadvantageous to him. A fine appearance and a fine voice cover many
weaknesses and defects, and strongly and forcibly recommend what is
spoken, though not remarkable for depth of thought or solidity of
reasoning. Many popular orators have little besides their persons and
their voice to recommend them. Louis XIV. styled Peter du Bosc le plus
beau parleur de son royaume, the finest speaker in his kingdom; and
among his own people he was styled l'orateur parfait, the perfect
orator. Look at the works of this French protestant divine, and you find
it difficult to subscribe to the above sayings. The difficulty is solved
by the information that the person of M. du Bosc was noble and princely,
and his voice full, harmonious, and majestic. Paul had none of these
advantages, and yet idolatry and superstition fell before him. Thus God
was seen in the work, and the man was forgotten.

In fear, and in much trembling - This was often the state of his mind;
dreading lest he should at any time be unfaithful, and so grieve the
Spirit of God; or that, after having preached to others, himself should
be a castaway. See [Co1 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#027).

An eminent divine has said that it requires three things to make a good
preacher; study, temptation, and prayer. The latter, no man that lives
near to God can neglect; the former, no man who endeavors rightly to
divide the word of truth will neglect; and with the second every man
will be more or less exercised whose whole aim is to save souls. Those
of a different cast the devil permits to pass quietly on in their own
indolent and prayerless way.

[1 Corinthians 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co1 2:4</span></span>

And my speech - Ὁ λογος μου, My doctrine; the matter of my preaching.

And my preaching - Το κηρυγμα μου, My proclamation, my manner of
recommending the grand but simple truths of the Gospel.

Was not with enticing words of man's wisdom - Ενπειθοις ανθρωπινης
σοφιας λογοις, With persuasive doctrines of human wisdom: in every case
I left man out, that God might become the more evident. I used none of
the means of which great orators avail themselves in order to become
popular, and thereby to gain fame.

But in demonstration of the Spirit - Αποδειξει, In the manifestation;
or, as two ancient MSS. have it, αποκαλυψει, in the revelation of the
Spirit. The doctrine that he preached was revealed by the Spirit: that
it was a revelation of the Spirit, the holiness, purity, and usefulness
of the doctrine rendered manifest: and the overthrow of idolatry, and
the conversion of souls, by the power and energy of the preaching, were
the demonstration that all was Divine. The greater part of the best
MSS., versions, and fathers, leave out the adjective ανθρωπινης, man's,
before σοφιας, wisdom: it is possible that the word may be a gloss, but
it is necessarily implied in the clause. Not with the persuasive
discourses, or doctrines of wisdom; i.e. of human philosophy.

[1 Corinthians 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co1 2:5</span></span>

That your faith should not stand - That the illumination of your souls
and your conversion to God might appear to have nothing human in it:
your belief, therefore, of the truths which have been proposed to you is
founded, not in human wisdom, but in Divine power: human wisdom was not
employed; and human power, if it had been employed, could not have
produced the change.

[1 Corinthians 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co1 2:6</span></span>

We speak wisdom among them that are perfect - By the εν τοις τελειοις,
among those that are perfect, we are to understand Christians of the
highest knowledge and attainments- those who were fully instructed in
the knowledge of God through Christ Jesus. Nothing, in the judgment of
St. Paul, deserved the name of wisdom but this. And though he apologizes
for his not coming to them with excellency of speech or wisdom, yet he
means what was reputed wisdom among the Greeks, and which, in the sight
of God, was mere folly when compared with that wisdom that came from
above. Dr. Lightfoot thinks that the apostle mentions a fourfold wisdom.

1\. Heathen wisdom, or that of the Gentile philosophers, [Co1
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#022), which was termed by the Jews
חכמה יונית chokmah yevanith, Grecian wisdom; and which was so
undervalued by them, that they joined these two under the same curse:
Cursed is he that breeds hogs; and cursed is he who teaches his son
Grecian wisdom. Bava Kama, fol. 82.

2\. Jewish wisdom; that of the scribes and Pharisees, who crucified our
Lord, [Co1 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008).

3\. The Gospel, which is called the wisdom of God in a mystery, [Co1
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#007).

4\. The wisdom, του αιωνος τουτου, of this world; that system of
knowledge which the Jews made up out of the writings of their scribes
and doctors. This state is called העולם הזה haolam hazzeh, this or the
present world; to distinguish it from העולם הבא haolam habba the world
to come; i.e. the days of the Messiah. Whether we understand the term,
this world, as relating to the state of the Gentiles, cultivated to the
uttermost in philosophical learning, or the then state of the Jews, who
had made the word of God of no effect by their traditions, which
contained a sort of learning of which they were very fond and very
proud, yet, by this Grecian and Jewish wisdom, no soul ever could have
arrived at any such knowledge or wisdom as that communicated by the
revelation of Christ. This was perfect wisdom; and they who were
thoroughly instructed in it, and had received the grace of the Gospel,
were termed τελειοι, the perfect. This, says the apostle, is not the
wisdom of this world, for that has not the manifested Messiah in it; nor
the wisdom of the rulers of this world - the chief men, whether
philosophers among the Greeks, or rabbins among the Jews (for those we
are to understand as implied in the term rulers, used here by the
apostle) these rulers came to nought; for they, their wisdom, and their
government, were shortly afterwards overturned in the destruction of
Jerusalem. This declaration of the apostle is prophetic. The ruin of the
Grecian superstition soon followed.

[1 Corinthians 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co1 2:7</span></span>

The wisdom of God in a mystery - The Gospel of Jesus Christ, which had
been comparatively hidden from the foundation of the world, (the
settling of the Jewish economy, as this phrase often means), though
appointed from the beginning to be revealed in the fullness of time.
For, though this Gospel was, in a certain sense, announced by the
prophets, and prefigured by the law, yet it is certain that even the
most intelligent of the Jewish rulers, their doctors, scribes, and
Pharisees, had no adequate knowledge of it; therefore it was still a
mystery to them and others, till it was so gloriously revealed by the
preaching of the apostles.

[1 Corinthians 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co1 2:8</span></span>

Which none of the princes of this world knew - Here it is evident that
this world refers to the Jewish state, and to the degree of knowledge in
that state: and the rulers, the priests, rabbins, etc., who were
principally concerned in the crucifixion of our Lord.

The Lord of glory - Or the glorious Lord, infinitely transcending all
the rulers of the universe; whose is eternal glory; who gave that
glorious Gospel in which his followers may glory, as it affords them
such cause of triumph as the heathens had not, who gloried in their
philosophers. Here is a teacher who is come from God; who has taught the
most glorious truths which it is possible for the soul of man to
conceive; and has promised to lead all the followers of his crucified
Master to that state of glory which is ineffable and eternal.

[1 Corinthians 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co1 2:9</span></span>

But, as it is written - The quotation is taken from [Isa
64:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#004). The sense is continued here from
verse seven, and λαλουμεν, we speak, is understood - We do not speak or
preach the wisdom of this world; but that mysterious wisdom of God, of
which the prophet said: Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have
entered into the heart of man the things which God has prepared for them
that love him. These words have been applied to the state of glory in a
future world; but they certainly belong to the present state, and
express merely the wondrous light, life, and liberty which the Gospel
communicates to them that believe in the Lord Jesus Christ in that way
which the Gospel itself requires. To this the prophet himself refers;
and it is evident, from the following verse, that the apostle also
refers to the same thing. Such a scheme of salvation, in which God's
glory and man's felicity should be equally secured, had never been seen,
never heard of, nor could any mind but that of God have conceived the
idea of so vast a project; nor could any power but his own have brought
it to effect.

[1 Corinthians 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co1 2:10</span></span>

But God hath revealed them unto us - A manifest proof that the apostle
speaks here of the glories of the Gospel, and not of the glories of the
future world.

For the Spirit searcheth all things - This is the Spirit of God, which
spoke by the prophets, and has now given to the apostles the fullness of
that heavenly truth, of which He gave to the former only the outlines.

Yea, the deep things of God - It is only the Spirit of God which can
reveal the counsels of God: these are the purposes which have existed in
His infinite wisdom and goodness from eternity; and particularly what
refers to creation, providence, redemption, and eternal glory, as far as
men and angels are concerned in these purposes. The apostles were so
fully convinced that the scheme of redemption proclaimed by the Gospel
was Divine, that they boldly asserted that these things infinitely
surpassed the wisdom and comprehension of man. God was now in a certain
way become manifest; many attributes of his, which to the heathen world
would have for ever lain in obscurity, (for the world by wisdom knew not
God), were now not only brought to light as existing in him, but
illustrated by the gracious displays which He had made of himself. It
was the Spirit of God alone that could reveal these things; and it was
the energy of that Spirit alone that could bring them all into effect -
stamp and seal them as attributes and works of God for ever. The
apostles were as truly conscious of their own inspiration as they were
that they had consciousness at all; and what they spoke, they spoke as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

[1 Corinthians 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co1 2:11</span></span>

For what man knoweth the things of a man - The word ανθρωπων in the
first clause is omitted by the Codex Alexandrinus, and one other; and by
Athanasius, Cyril, and Vigil of Tapsus. Bishop Pearce contends strongly
against the authenticity of the word, and reads the passage thus: "For
what is there that knoweth the things of a man, except the spirit of a
man that is in him?" "I leave out," says the learned bishop, "ανθρωπων,
with the Alexandrian MS., and read τις γαρ οιδεν τα του ανθρωπου;
because I conceive that the common reading is wide of St. Paul's
meaning; for to say, What man except the spirit of a man, is (I think)
to speak improperly, and to suppose that the spirit of a man is a man;
but it is very proper to say, What except the spirit of a man: τις is
feminine as well as masculine, and therefore may be supplied with ουσια,
or some such word, as well as with ανθρωπος." Though the authority for
omitting this word is comparatively slender, yet it must be owned that
its omission renders the text much more intelligible. But even one MS.
may preserve the true reading.

The spirit of a man knows the things of a man: that is, a man is
conscious of all the schemes, plans, and purposes, that pass in his own
mind; and no man can know these things but himself. So, the Spirit of
God, He whom we call the Third Person of the glorious Trinity, knows all
the counsels and determinations of the Supreme Being. As the Spirit is
here represented to live in God as the soul lives in the body of a man,
and as this Spirit knows all the things of God, and had revealed those
to the apostles which concern the salvation of the world, therefore what
they spoke and preached was true, and men may implicitly depend upon it.
The miracles which they did, in the name of Christ, were the proof that
they had that Spirit, and spoke the truth of God.

[1 Corinthians 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 2:12</span></span>

Now we have received, not the spirit of the world - We, who are the
genuine apostles of Christ, have received this Spirit of God, by which
we know the deep things of God; and, through the teaching of that
Spirit, we preach Christ crucified. We have not therefore received the
spirit of the world - of the Jewish teachers, who are all looking for a
worldly kingdom and a worldly Messiah, and interpret all the scriptures
of the Old Testament which relate to Him in a carnal and worldly sense.

That we might know the things - We receive this teaching that we may
know what those supereminently excellent things are which God has
purposed freely to give to mankind. It is evident that, as the apostle
means by princes of the world the rulers of the Jews, [Co1
2:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006), so by spirit of the world he
here means Jewish wisdom, or their carnal mode of interpreting the
sacred oracles, and their carnal expectation of a worldly kingdom under
the Messiah.

[1 Corinthians 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co1 2:13</span></span>

Which things also we speak - We dare no more use the language of the
Jews and the Gentiles in speaking of those glorious things, than we can
indulge their spirit. The Greek orators affected a high and florid
language, full of tropes and figures, which dazzled more than it
enlightened. The rabbins affected obscurity, and were studious to find
out cabalistical meanings, which had no tendency to make the people wise
unto salvation. The apostles could not follow any of these; they spoke
the things of God in the words of God; every thing was plain and
intelligible; every word well placed, clear, and nervous. He who has a
spiritual mind will easily comprehend an apostle's preaching.

Comparing spiritual things with spiritual - This is commonly understood
to mean, comparing the spiritual things under the Old Testament with the
spiritual things under the New: but this does not appear to be the
apostle's meaning. The word συγκρινοντες, which we translate comparing,
rather signifies conferring, discussing, or explaining; and the word
πνευματικοις should be rendered to spiritual men, and not be referred to
spiritual things. The passage therefore should be thus translated:
Explaining spiritual things to spiritual persons. And this sense the
following verse absolutely requires.

[1 Corinthians 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co1 2:14</span></span>

But the natural man - Ψυχικος, The animal man - the man who is in a mere
state of nature, and lives under the influence of his animal passions;
for the word ψυχη, which we often translate soul, means the lower and
sensitive part of man, in opposition to νους, the understanding or
rational part. The Latins use anima to signify these lower passions; and
animus to signify the higher. The person in question is not only one who
either has had no spiritual teaching, or has not profited by it; but one
who lives for the present world, having no respect to spiritual or
eternal things. This ψυχικος, or animal man, is opposed to the
πνευματικος, or spiritual man: and, as this latter is one who is under
the influence of the Spirit of God, so the former is one who is without
that influence.

The apostle did speak of those high and sublime spiritual things to
these animal men; but he explained them to those which were spiritual.
He uses this word in this sense, [Co1
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001); [Co1
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#011); and particularly in [Co1
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#015) of the present chapter: He that
is spiritual judgeth all things.

But the natural man - The apostle appears to give this - as a reason why
he explained those deep spiritual things to spiritual men; because the
animal man - the man who is in a state of nature, without the
regenerating grace of the Spirit of God, receiveth not the things of the
Spirit - neither apprehends nor comprehends them: he has no relish for
them; he considers it the highest wisdom to live for this world.
Therefore these spiritual things are foolishness to him; for while he is
in his animal state he cannot see their excellency, because they are
spiritually discerned, and he has no spiritual mind.

[1 Corinthians 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co1 2:15</span></span>

But he that is spiritual judgeth all things - He who has the mind of
Christ discerns and judges of all things spiritual: yet he himself is
not discerned by the mere animal man. Some suppose that the word
ανακρινεται should be understood thus: He examines, scrutinizes,
convinces, reproves, which it appears to mean in [Co1
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#024); and they read the verse thus:
The spiritual man - the well-taught Christian, convinces, i.e. can
easily convict, all men, (παντα, accusing), every animal man, of error
and vice; yet he himself is convicted of no man; his mind is
enlightened, and his life is holy; and therefore the animal man cannot
convict him of sin. This is a good sense, but the first appears the most
natural. See Pearce and Rosenmuller.

[1 Corinthians 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co1 2:16</span></span>

For who hath known the mind of the Lord - Who that is still an animal
man can know the mind of God? so as to instruct him, viz. the spiritual
man, the same that is spoken of, [Co1
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#015). But the words may be better
understood thus: How can the animal man know the mind of the Lord? and
how can any man communicate that knowledge which he has never acquired,
and which is foolishness to him, because it is spiritual, and he is
animal? This quotation is made from [Isa
40:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#013).

But we have the mind of Christ - He has endowed us with the same
disposition, being born again by his Spirit; therefore we are capable of
knowing his mind and receiving the teachings of his Spirit. These
teachings we do receive, and therefore are well qualified to convey them
to others.

The words, that he may instruct him, ὁς συμβιβασει αυτον, should be
translated that he may teach It: that is, the mind of God; not instruct
God, but teach his mind to others. And this interpretation the Hebrew
will also bear.

Bishop Pearce observes: "The principal questions here are,, what
συμβιβασει signifies, and what αυτον is relative to. The Hebrew word
which the Septuagint translate by these two is יודיענו yodiennu: now,
since ידיע yodia signifies as well to make known as to know, (and indeed
this is the most frequent sense of it in the Old Testament), the suffix
(postfix) נו nu, may relate to a thing, as well as to a person; and
therefore it may be rendered not by him, but by it, i.e. the mind of the
Lord. And in this sense the apostle seems to have used the words of the
Seventy; for, if we understand αυτον here to be the relative to Κυριου,
Lord, this verse contains no reason for what went before; whereas, if it
be a relative to νουν, mind, it affords a reason for what had been said
before, [Co1 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014)." The true
translation of the passage, as used by the apostle, appears to be this:
For who hath known the mind of the Lord, that he should Teach It? And
this translation agrees with every part of the context, and particularly
with what follows.

1\. This chapter might be considered a good model for a Christian
minister to regulate his conduct by, or his public ministry; because it
points out the mode of preaching used by St. Paul and the apostles in
general. This great apostle came not to the people with excellency of
speech and of wisdom, when he declared unto them the counsel of God.
They know little, either of the spirit of St. Paul or the design of the
Gospel, who make the chief excellence of their preaching to consist in
the eloquence of language, or depth of human reasoning. That may be
their testimony, but it is not God's. The enticing words of man's wisdom
are seldom accompanied by the demonstration and power of the Holy
Spirit.

2\. One justly remarks, that "the foolishness of preaching has its
wisdom, loftiness, and eloquence; but this consists in the sublimity of
its truths, the depth of its mysteries, and the ardour of the Spirit of
God." In this respect Paul may be said to have preached wisdom among
those which were perfect. The wisest and most learned men in the world,
who have seriously read the Bible, have acknowledged that there is a
depth and height of wisdom and knowledge in that book of God which are
sought in vain any where else: and indeed it would not be a revelation
from God were it not so. The men who can despise and ridicule this
sacred book are those who are too blind to discover the objects
presented to them by this brilliant light, and are too sensual to feel
and relish spiritual things. They, above all others, are incapable of
judging, and should be no more regarded when employed in talking against
the sacred writings than an ignorant peasant should be, who, not knowing
his alphabet, pretends to decry mathematical learning.

3\. A new mode of preaching has been diligently recommended, -
"Scriptural phraseology should be generally avoided where it is
antiquated, or conveys ideas inconsistent with modern delicacy." St.
Paul did not preach in the words which man's wisdom teacheth- such words
are too mean and too low for a religion so Divine. That which the Holy
Spirit alone can discover, he alone can explain. Let no man dare to
speak of God in any other way than he speaks of himself in his word. Let
us take care not to profane his truths and mysteries, either by such low
and abject ideas as are merely human, or by new and worldly expressions
altogether unworthy of the Spirit of God.

4\. It is the glory of God, and ought to be ours, not to be acceptable
to carnal men. The natural man always finds some pretense to excuse
himself from believing, by looking on the mysteries of religion as being
either too much above man or too much below God; the spiritual man
judges them to be so much the more credible, the less credible they are
to the natural man.

The opposition, contempt, and blindness of the world, with regard to the
things of God, render all its judgments concerning them liable to
exception: this blindness in spiritual things is the just punishment of
a carnal life. The principal part of the above is extracted from the
reflections of the pious Quesnel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 3](co1003)

</div>
