<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1011)  [Next](co1013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 12:0</span></span>

The apostle proceeds to the question of the Corinthians concerning
spiritual gifts, [Co1 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#001). He calls
to their remembrance their former state, and how they were brought out
of it, [Co1 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#002), [Co1
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#003). Shows that there are diversities
of gifts which proceed from the Spirit, [Co1
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#004). Diversities of administrations
which proceed from the Lord Jesus, [Co1
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#005). And diversities of operations
which proceed from God, [Co1 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#006).
What these gifts are, and how they are dispensed, [Co1
12:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#007). Christ is the Head, and the
Church his members; and this is pointed out under the similitude of the
human body, [Co1 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#012), [Co1
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#013). The relation which the members
of the body have to each other; and how necessary their mutual support,
[Co1 12:14-26](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#014). The members in the
Church, or spiritual body, and their respective offices, [Co1
12:27-30](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#027). We should earnestly covet
the best gifts, [Co1 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#031).

[1 Corinthians 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 12:1</span></span>

Now concerning spiritual gifts - This was a subject about which they
appear to have written to the apostle, and concerning which there were
probably some contentions among them. The words περι των πνευματικων may
as well be translated concerning spiritual persons, as spiritual gifts;
and indeed the former agrees much better with the context.

I would not have you ignorant - I wish you fully to know whence all such
gifts come, and for what end they are given, that each person may serve
the Church in the capacity in which God has placed him, that there may
be no misunderstandings and no schism in the body.

[1 Corinthians 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co1 12:2</span></span>

Ye were Gentiles - Previously to your conversion to the Christian faith;
ye were heathens, carried away, not guided by reason or truth, but
hurried by your passions into a senseless worship, the chief part of
which was calculated only to excite and gratify animal propensities.

Dumb idols - Though often supplicated, could never return an answer; so
that not only the image could not speak, but the god or demon pretended
to be represented by it could not speak: a full proof that an idol was
nothing in the world.

[1 Corinthians 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co1 12:3</span></span>

No man speaking by the Spirit of God - It was granted on all hands that
there could be no religion without Divine inspiration, because God
alone, could make his will known to men: hence heathenism pretended to
this inspiration; Judaism had it in the law and the prophets; and it was
the very essence of the Christian religion. The heathen priests and
priestesses pretended to receive, by inspiration from their god, the
answers which they gave to their votaries. And as far as the people
believed their pretensions, so far they were led by their teaching.

Both Judaism and heathenism were full of expectations of a future
teacher and deliverer; and to this person, especially among the Jews,
the Spirit in all the prophets gave witness. This was the Anointed One,
the Messiah who was manifested in the person of Jesus of Nazareth; and
him the Jews rejected, though he proved his Divine mission both by his
doctrines and his miracles. But as he did not come as they fancied he
would - as a mighty secular conqueror, they not only rejected but
blasphemed him; and persons among them professing to be spiritual men,
and under the influence of the Spirit of God, did so. But as the Holy
Spirit, through all the law and the prophets gave Testimony to the
Messiah, and as Jesus proved himself to be the Christ both by his
miracles and doctrines, no man under the inspiration of the Divine
Spirit could say to him anathema - thou art a deceiver, and a person
worthy of death, etc., as the Jews did: therefore the Jews were no
longer under the inspiration of the Spirit of God. This appears to be
the meaning of the apostle in this place. No man speaking by the Spirit,
etc.

And that no man can say that Jesus is the Lord - Nor can we demonstrate
this person to be the Messiah and the Savior of men, but by the Holy
Ghost, enabling us to speak with divers tongues, to work miracles; he
attesting the truth of our doctrines to them that hear, by enlightening
their minds, changing their hearts, and filling them with the peace and
love of God.

[1 Corinthians 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co1 12:4</span></span>

There are diversities of gifts - Χαρισματων· Gracious endowments,
leading to miraculous results; such as the gift of prophecy, speaking
different tongues, etc. And these all came by the extraordinary
influences of the Holy Spirit.

[1 Corinthians 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co1 12:5</span></span>

Differences of administrations - Διακονιων· Various offices in the
Church, such as apostle, prophet, and teacher; under which were probably
included bishop or presbyter, pastor, deacon, etc.; the qualifications
for such offices, as well as the appointments themselves, coming
immediately from the one Lord Jesus Christ.

[1 Corinthians 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co1 12:6</span></span>

Diversities of operations - Ενεργηματων· Miraculous influences exerted
on others; such as the expulsion of demons, inflicting extraordinary
punishments, as in the case of Ananias and Sapphira, Elymas the
sorcerer, etc., the healing of different diseases, raising the dead,
etc.: all these proceeded from God the Father, as the fountain of all
goodness and power, and the immediate dispenser of every good and
perfect gift.

In the three preceding verses we find more than an indirect reference to
the doctrine of the sacred Trinity.

Gifts are attributed to the Holy Spirit, [Co1
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#004).

Administrations to the Lord Jesus, [Co1
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#005).

Operations to God the Father, [Co1
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#006).

He who may think this fanciful must account for the very evident
distinctions here in some more satisfactory way.

[1 Corinthians 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co1 12:7</span></span>

The manifestation of the Spirit - Φανερωσις του Πνευματος. This is
variably understood by the fathers; some of them rendering φανερωσις by
illumination, others demonstration, and others operation. The apostle's
meaning seems to be this: Whatever gifts God has bestowed, or in what
various ways soever the Spirit of God may have manifested himself, it is
all for the common benefit of the Church. God has given no gift to any
man for his own private advantage, or exclusive profit. He has it for
the benefit of others as well as for his own salvation.

[1 Corinthians 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co1 12:8</span></span>

Word of wisdom - In all these places I consider that the proper
translation of λογος is doctrine, as in many other places of the New
Testament. It is very difficult to say what is intended here by the
different kinds of gifts mentioned by the apostle: they were probably
all supernatural, and were necessary at that time only for the benefit
of the Church. On the 8th, 9th, and 10th verses ([Co1
12:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008)), much may be seen in
Lightfoot, Whitby, Pearce, and others.

1\. By doctrine of wisdom we may understand, as Bp. Pearce and Dr.
Whitby observe, the mystery of our redemption, in which the wisdom of
God was most eminently conspicuous: see [Co1
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#007), [Co1
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#010); and which is called the manifold
wisdom of God, [Eph 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#010). Christ, the
great teacher of it, is called the wisdom of God, [Co1
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024); and in him are said to be
contained all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, [Col
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003). The apostles to whom this
doctrine was committed are called σοφοι, wise men; ([Mat
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#034)); and they are said to teach
this Gospel according to the wisdom given them, [Pe2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#015).

2\. By the doctrine of knowledge we may understand either a knowledge of
the types, etc., in the Old Testament; or what are termed mysteries; the
calling of the Gentiles, the recalling of the Jews, the mystery of
iniquity, of the beast, etc., and especially the mystical sense or
meaning of the Old Testament, with all its types, rites, ceremonies,
etc., etc.

3\. By faith, [Co1 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#009), we are to
understand that miraculous faith by which they could remove mountains,
[Co1 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#002); or a peculiar impulse, as
Dr: Whitby calls it, that came upon the apostles when any difficult
matter was to be performed, which inwardly assured them that God's power
would assist them in the performance of it. Others think that justifying
faith, received by means of Gospel teaching, is what is intended.

4\. Gifts of healing simply refers to the power which at particular
times the apostles received from the Holy Spirit to cure diseases; a
power which was not always resident in them; for Paul could not cure
Timothy, nor remove his own thorn in the flesh; because it was given
only on extraordinary occasions, though perhaps more generally than many
others.

5\. The working of miracles, ενεργηματα δυναμεων, [Co1
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#010). This seems to refer to the same
class as the operations, ενεργηματων, [Co1
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#006), as the words are the same; and
to signify those powers by which they were enabled at particular times
to work miraculously on others; ejecting demons, inflicting punishments
or judgments, as in the cases mentioned under [Co1
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#006). It is a hendyadis for mighty
operations.

6\. Prophecy. This seems to import two things:

1st, the predicting future events, such as then particularly concerned
the state of the Church and the apostles; as the dearth foretold by
Agabus, [Act 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#028); and the binding of
St. Paul, and delivering him to the Romans, [Act
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#010), etc.; and St. Paul's
foretelling his own shipwreck on Malta, [Act
27:25](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#025), etc. And

2ndly, as implying the faculty of teaching or expounding the Scriptures,
which is also a common acceptation of the word.

7\. Discerning of spirits. A gift by which the person so privileged
could discern a false miracle from a true one; or a pretender to
inspiration from him who was made really partaker of the Holy Ghost. It
probably extended also to the discernment of false professors from true
ones, as appears in Peter in the case of Ananias and his wife.

8\. Divers kinds of tongues. Γενη γλωσσων, Different languages, which
they had never learned, and which God gave them for the immediate
instruction of people of different countries who attended their
ministry.

9\. Interpretation of tongues. It was necessary that while one was
speaking the deep things of God in a company where several were present
who did not understand, though the majority did, there should be a
person who could immediately interpret what was said to that part of the
congregation that did not understand the language. This power to
interpret was also an immediate gift of God's Spirit, and is classed
here among the miracles.

[1 Corinthians 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co1 12:11</span></span>

But all these worketh that one and the self-same Spirit - All these
gifts are miraculously bestowed; they cannot be acquitted by human art
or industry, the different languages excepted; but they were given in
such a way, and in such circumstances, as sufficiently proved that they
also were miraculous gifts.

[1 Corinthians 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 12:12</span></span>

For as the body is one - Though the human body have many members, and
though it be composed of a great variety of parts, yet it is but one
entire system; every part and member being necessary to the integrity or
completeness of the whole.

So also is Christ - That is, So is the Church the body of Christ, being
composed of the different officers already mentioned, and especially
those enumerated, [Co1 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#028),
apostles, prophets, teachers, etc. It cannot be supposed that Christ is
composed of many members, etc., and therefore the term Church must be
understood, unless we suppose, which is not improbable, that the term Ὁ
Χριστος, Christ, is used to express the Church, or whole body of
Christian believers.

[1 Corinthians 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co1 12:13</span></span>

For by one Spirit are we all baptized, etc. - As the body of man, though
composed of many members, is informed and influenced by one soul; so the
Church of Christ, which is his body, though composed of many members, is
informed and influenced by one Spirit, the Holy Ghost; actuating and
working by his spiritual body, as the human soul does in the body of
man.

To drink into one Spirit - We are to understand being made partakers of
the gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost agreeably to the words of our
Lord, [Joh 7:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037), etc.: If any man
thirst, let him come unto me and drink: this he spake of the Spirit
which they that believed on him should receive.

On this verse there is a great profusion of various readings, which may
be found in Griesbach, but cannot be conveniently noticed here.

[1 Corinthians 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co1 12:14</span></span>

For the body is not one member - The mystical body, the Church, as well
as the natural body, is composed of many members.

[1 Corinthians 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co1 12:15</span></span>

If the foot shall say, etc. - As all the members of the body are
necessarily dependent on each other, and minister to the general support
of the system, so is it in the Church. All the private members are
intimately connected among themselves, and also with their pastors;
without which union no Church can subsist.

[1 Corinthians 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">co1 12:21</span></span>

And the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee - The
apostle goes on, with his principal object in view, to show that the
gifts and graces with which their different teachers were endowed were
all necessary for their salvation, and should be collectively used; for
not one of them was unnecessary, nor could they dispense with the least
of them; the body of Christ needed the whole for its nourishment and
support. The famous apologue of Menenius Agrippa, related by Livy, will
serve to illustrate the apostle's reasoning: the Roman people, getting
into a state of insurrection and rebellion against the nobility, under
pretext that the great men not only had all the honors but all the
emoluments of the nation, while they were obliged to bear all the
burdens, and suffer all the privations; they then in riotous assemblage
left their homes and went to Mount Aventine. Matters were at last
brought to such an issue, that the senators and great men were obliged
to fly from the city, and the public peace was on the point of being
utterly ruined: it was then thought expedient to send Menenius Agrippa
to them, who was high in their esteem, having vanquished the Sabines and
Samnites, and had the first triumph at Rome. This great general, who was
as eloquent as he was valiant, went to the Mons Sacer, to which the
insurgents had retired, and thus addressed them:

Tempore, quo in homine non, ut nunc emnia in unum consentiebant, sed
singulis membris suum cuique consilium, suus sermo fuerat, indignatas
reliquas partes, sua cura, suo labore ac ministerio ventri omnia quaeri;
ventrem, in medio quietum, nihil aliud, quam datis voluptatibus frui.
Conspirasse inde, ne manus ad os cibum ferrent, nec os acciperet datum,
nec dentes conficerent. Hac ira, dum ventrem fame domare vellent, ipsa
una membra totumque corpus ad extremam tabem venisse. lnde apparuisse,
ventris quoque haud segne ministerium esse: nec magis ali, quam alere
eum, reddentem in omnes corporis partes hunc, quo vivimus vigemusque,
divisum pariter in venas maturum, confecto cibo, sanquinem. T. Livii,
Histor. lib. ii. cap. 32.

"In that time in which the different parts of the human body were not in
a state of unity as they now are, but each member had its separate
office and distinct language, they all became discontented, because
whatever was procured by their care, labor, and industry, was spent on
the belly; while this, lying at ease in the midst of the body, did
nothing but enjoy whatever was provided for it. They therefore conspired
among themselves, and agreed that the hands should not convey food to
the mouth, that the mouth should not receive what was offered to it, and
that the teeth should not masticate whatever was brought to the mouth.
Acting on this principle of revenge, and hoping to reduce the belly by
famine, all the members, and the whole body itself, were at length
brought into the last stage of a consumption. It then plainly appeared
that the belly itself did no small service; that it contributed not less
to their nourishment than they did to its support, distributing to every
part that from which they derived life and vigor; for by properly
concocting the food, the pure blood derived from it was conveyed by the
arteries to every member."

This sensible comparison produced the desired effect; the people were
persuaded that the senators were as necessary to their existence as they
were to that of the senators, and that it required the strictest union
and mutual support of high and low to preserve the body politic. This
transaction took place about 500 years before the Christian era, and was
handed down by unbroken tradition to the time of Titus Livius, from whom
I have taken it, who died in the year of our Lord 17, about forty years
before St. Paul wrote this epistle. As his works were well known and
universally read among the Romans in the time of the apostle, it is very
probable that St. Paul had this famous apologue in view when he wrote
from the 14th verse to the end of the chapter.

[1 Corinthians 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">co1 12:22</span></span>

Those members - which seem to be more feeble - These, and the less
honorable and uncomely, mentioned in the next verses, seem to mean the
principal viscera, such as the heart, lungs, stomach, and intestinal
canal. These, when compared with the arms and limbs, are comparatively
weak; and some of them, considered in themselves, uncomely and less
honorable; yet these are more essential to life than any of the others.
A man may lose an eye by accident, and an arm or a leg may be amputated,
and yet the body live and be vigorous; but let the stomach, heart,
lungs, or any of the viscera be removed, and life becomes necessarily
extinct. Hence these parts are not only covered, but the parts in which
they are lodged are surrounded, ornamented, and fortified for their
preservation and defense, on the proper performance of whose functions
life so immediately depends.

[1 Corinthians 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">co1 12:24</span></span>

For our comely parts have no need - It would be easy to go into great
detail in giving an anatomical description of the different members and
parts to which the apostle refers, but it would not probably answer the
end of general edification; and to explain every allusion made by the
apostle, would require a minuteness of description which would not be
tolerated except in a treatise on the anatomy of the human body. My
readers will therefore excuse my entering into this detail.

[1 Corinthians 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">co1 12:25</span></span>

That there should be no schism in the body - That there should be no
unnecessary and independent part in the whole human machine, and that
every part should contribute something to the general proportion,
symmetry, and beauty of the body. So completely has God tempered the
whole together, that not the smallest visible part can be removed from
the body without not only injuring its proportions, but producing
deformity. Hence the members have the same care one for another. The
eyes and ears watch for the general safety of the whole; and they are
placed in the head, like sentinels in a tower, that they may perceive
the first approach of a foe, and give warning. The hands immediately on
an attack exert themselves to defend the head and the body; and the
limbs are swift to carry off the body from dangers against which
resistance would be vain. Even the heart takes alarm from both the eyes
and the ears; and when an attack is made on the body, every external
muscle becomes inflated and contracts itself, that, by thus collecting
and concentrating its force, it may the more effectually resist the
assailants, and contribute to the defense of the system.

[1 Corinthians 12:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">co1 12:26</span></span>

And whether one member suffer - As there is a mutual exertion for the
general defense, so there is a mutual sympathy. If the eye, the hand,
the foot, etc., be injured, the whole man grieves; and if by clothing,
or any thing else, any particular member or part is adorned,
strengthened, or better secured, it gives a general pleasure to the
whole man.

[1 Corinthians 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">co1 12:27</span></span>

Now ye are the body of Christ - The apostle, having finished his
apologue, comes to his application.

As the members in the human body, so the different members of the
mystical body of Christ. All are intended by him to have the same
relation to each other; to be mutually subservient to each other; to
mourn for and rejoice with each other. He has also made each necessary
to the beauty, proportion, strength, and perfection of the whole. Not
one is useless; not one unnecessary. Paul, Apollos, Kephas, etc., with
all their variety of gifts and graces, are for the perfecting of the
saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of
Christ, [Eph 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#012). Hence no teacher
should be exalted above or opposed to an other. As the eye cannot say to
the hand, I have no need of thee, so luminous Apollos cannot say to
laborious Paul, I can build up and preserve the Church without thee. The
foot planted on the ground to support the whole fabric, and the hands
that swing at liberty, and the eye that is continually taking in near
and distant prospects, are all equally serviceable to the whole, and
mutually helpful to and dependent on each other. So also are the
different ministers and members of the Church of Christ.

From a general acquaintance with various ministers of Christ, and a
knowledge of their different talents and endowments manifested either by
their preaching or writings, and with the aid of a little fancy, we
could here make out a sort of correspondency between their services and
the uses of the different members of the human body. We could call one
eye, because of his acute observation of men and things, and penetration
into cases of conscience and Divine mysteries. Another hand, from his
laborious exertions in the Church. Another foot, from his industrious
travels to spread abroad the knowledge of Christ crucified: and so of
others. But this does not appear to be any part of the apostle's plan.

[1 Corinthians 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">co1 12:28</span></span>

God hath set some in the Church - As God has made evident distinctions
among the members of the human body, so that some occupy a more eminent
place than others, so has he in the Church. And to prove this, the
apostle numerates the principal offices, and in the order in which they
should stand.

First, apostles - Αποστολους, from απο from, and στελλο, I send; to send
from one person to another, and from one place to another. Persons
immediately designated by Christ, and sent by him to preach the Gospel
to all mankind.

Secondarily, prophets - Προφητας, from προ, before, and φημι, I speak; a
person who, under Divine inspiration, predicts future events; but the
word is often applied to these who preach the Gospel. See on [Co1
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008) (note).

Thirdly, teachers - Διδασκαλους, from διδασκω, I teach; persons whose
chief business it was to instruct the people in the elements of the
Christian religion, and their duty to each other. See on [Rom
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#008) (note).

Miracles - Δυναμεις· Persons endued with miraculous gifts, such as those
mentioned [Mar 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#017), [Mar
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#018); casting out devils, speaking
with new tongues, etc. See on [Co1
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008) (note), and at the end of the
chapter, ([Co1 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#031) (note))

Gifts of healings - Χαρισματα ιαματων· Such as laying hands upon the
sick, and healing them, [Mar 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#018);
which, as being one of the most beneficent miraculous powers, was most
frequently conceded. See on [Co1 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008)
(note).

Helps - Αντιληψεις. Dr. Lightfoot conjectures that these were the
apostles' helpers; persons who accompanied them, baptized those who were
converted by them, and were sent by them to such places as they could
not attend to, being otherwise employed.

The Levites are termed by the Talmudists helps of the priests. The word
occurs [Luk 1:54](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#054); [Rom
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026).

Governments - Κυβερνησεις. Dr. Lightfoot contends that this word does
not refer to the power of ruling, but to the case of a person endued
with a deep and comprehensive mind, who is profoundly wise and prudent;
and he thinks that it implies the same as discernment of spirits, [Co1
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008) (note). He has given several
proofs of this use of the word in the Septuagint.

Diversities of tongues - Γενη γλωσσων· Kinds of tongues; that is,
different kinds. The power to speak, on all necessary occasions,
languages which they had not learned. See on [Co1
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008) (note).

[1 Corinthians 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">co1 12:29</span></span>

Are all apostles, etc. - That is: All are not apostles, all are not
prophets, etc.; God has distributed his various gifts among various
persons, each of whom is necessary for the complete edification of the
body of Christ. On these subjects see the notes on [Co1
12:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#007) (note).

[1 Corinthians 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">co1 12:31</span></span>

But covet earnestly - To covet signifies to desire earnestly. This
disposition towards heavenly things is highly laudable; towards earthly
things, is deeply criminal. A man may possess the best of all these
gifts, and yet be deficient in what is essentially necessary to his
salvation, for he may be without that love or charity which the apostle
here calls the more excellent way, and which he proceeds in the next
chapter to describe.

Some think that this verse should be read affirmatively, Ye earnestly
contend about the best gifts; but I show unto you a more excellent way;
i.e. get your hearts filled with love to God and man - love, which is
the principle of obedience, which works no ill to its neighbor, and
which is the fulfilling of the law. This is a likely reading, for there
were certainly more contentions in the Church of Corinth about the gifts
than about the graces of the Spirit.

1\. After all that has been said on the different offices mentioned by
the apostle in the preceding chapter, there are some of them which
perhaps are not understood. I confess I scarcely know what to make of
those which we translate helps and governments. Bishop Pearce, who could
neither see Church government nor state government in these words,
expresses himself thus: "These two words, after all that the
commentators say about them, I do not understand; and in no other part
of the New Testament is either of them, in any sense, mentioned as the
gift of the Spirit; especially it is observable that in [Co1
12:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#029), [Co1
12:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#030), where the gifts of the Spirit
are again enumerated, no notice is taken of any thing like them, while
all the other several parts are exactly enumerated. Perhaps these words
were put in the margin to explain δυναμεις, miracles or powers; some
taking the meaning to be helps, assistances, as in [Co2
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#009); others to be κυβερνησεις,
governments, as in [Rom 8:38](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#038); and from
being marginal explanations, they might have been at last incorporated
with the text." It must, however, be acknowledged that the omission of
these words is not countenanced by any MS. or version. One thing we may
fully know, that there are some men who are peculiarly qualified for
governing by either providence or grace; and that there are others who
can neither govern nor direct, but are good helpers. These characters I
have often seen in different places in the Church of God.

2\. In three several places in this chapter the apostle sums up the
gifts of the Spirit. Dr. Lightfoot thinks they answer to each other in
the following order, which the reader will take on his authority.

Verses 8, 9, and 10

[Co1 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008).

Is given

The word of Wisdom;

The word of Knowledge.

[Co1 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#009).

Faith;

Gifts of Healing.

[Co1 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#010).

Working of Miracles;

Prophecy;

Discerning of Spirits;

Divers kinds of Tongues;

Interpretation of Tongues.

Verse 28

[Co1 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#028).

God hath set some

First, Apostles;

Secondly, Prophets;

Thirdly, Teachers;

After that, Miracles;

The Gifts of Healings;

Helps;

Governments;

Divers kinds of Tongues.

Verses 29, and 30

[Co1 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#029).

Are all Apostles;

Prophets;

Teachers;

Miracles;

[Co1 12:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#030).

Gifts of Healing.

Speak with Tongues;

Interpret.

If the reader think that this is the best way of explaining these
different gifts and offices, he will adopt it; and he will in that case
consider,

1\. That the word or doctrine of wisdom comes from the apostles.

2\. The doctrine of knowledge, from the prophets.

3\. Faith, by means of the teachers.

4\. That working of miracles includes the gifts of healing.

5\. That to prophecy, signifying preaching, which it frequently does,
helps is a parallel.

6\. That discernment of spirits is the same with governments, which Dr.
Lightfoot supposes to imply a deeply comprehensive, wise, and prudent
mind.

7\. As to the gift of tongues, there is no variation in either of the
three places.

3\. It is strange that in this enumeration only three distinct officers
in the Church should be mentioned; viz. apostles, prophets, and
teachers. We do not know that miracles, gifts of healing, helps,
governments, and diversity of tongues, were exclusive offices; for it is
probable that apostles, prophets, and teachers wrought miracles
occasionally, and spoke with divers tongues. However, in all this
enumeration, where the apostle gives us all the officers and gifts
necessary for the constitution of a Church, we find not one word of
bishops, presbyters, or deacons; much less of the various officers and
offices which the Christian Church at present exhibits. Perhaps the
bishops are included under the apostles, the presbyters under the
prophets, and the deacons under the teachers. As to the other
ecclesiastical officers with which the Romish Church teems, they may
seek them who are determined to find them, any where out of the New
Testament.

4\. Mr. Quesnel observes on these passages that there are three sorts of
gifts necessary to the forming Christ's mystical body.

1\. Gifts of power, for the working of miracles, in reference to the
Father.

2\. Gifts of labor and ministry, for the exercise of government and
other offices, with respect to the Son.

3\. Gifts of knowledge, for the instruction of the people, with relation
to the Holy Ghost.

The Father is the principle and end of all created power; let us then
ultimately refer all things to him.

The Son is the Institutor and Head of all the hierarchical ministries;
let us depend upon him.

The Holy Ghost is the fountain and fullness of all spiritual graces; let
us desire and use them only in and by him.

There is nothing good, nothing profitable to salvation, unless it be
done in the power of God communicated by Christ Jesus, and in that
holiness of heart which is produced by his Spirit. Pastors are only the
instruments of God, the depositaries of the authority of Christ, and the
channels by whom the love and graces of the Spirit are conveyed. Let
these act as receiving all from God by Christ, through the Holy Ghost;
and let the Church receive them as the ambassadors of the Almighty.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 13](co1013)

</div>
