<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1.md)  
  [Previous](co1015)  [Next](co2000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001.md)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 16:0</span></span>

The apostle exhorts the Corinthians to make a contribution for the
relief of the poor Christians at Jerusalem; and directs to the best mode
of doing it, [Co1 16:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001.md). Promises to
pay them a visit after pentecost, [Co1
16:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#005.md). Gives directions about the
treatment of Timothy and Apollos, [Co1
16:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#010.md). And concerning watchfulness,
etc., [Co1 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#013.md), [Co1
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#014.md). Commends the house of
Stephanas, and expresses his satisfaction at the visit paid him by
Stephanas, Fortunatus and Achaicus, [Co1
16:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#015.md). Sends the salutations of
different persons, [Co1 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#019.md), [Co1
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#021.md). Shows the awful state of those
who were enemies to Christ, [Co1
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#022.md). And concludes the epistle with
the apostolical benediction, [Co1
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#023.md), [Co1
16:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#024.md).

[1 Corinthians 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co1 16:7</span></span>

I will not see you now by the way - From Ephesus to Corinth was merely
across the Aegean Sea, and comparatively a short passage.

[1 Corinthians 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co1 16:8</span></span>

I will tarry at Ephesus - And it is very probable that he did so; and
that all these journeys were taken as he himself had projected. See on
[Co1 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#005) (note.md).

[1 Corinthians 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co1 16:9</span></span>

A great door and effectual is opened - Θυοα γαρ μοι ανεωγε μεγαλη και
ενεργης· A great and energetic door is opened to me; that is, God has
made a grand opening to me in those parts, which I perceive will require
much labor; and besides, I shall have many adversaries to oppose me. So
Bp. Pearce understands the words ενεργης, not as signifying effectual,
but as implying full of labor. Door often signifies occasion or
opportunity; but here, the apostle may allude to the throwing open of
the great doors of the Circus Maximus before the chariot races began;
and the many adversaries may refer to the numerous competitors in those
races.

God gave him a grand opportunity to preach the Gospel; but he was not to
expect that either Satan or wicked men would leave him unmolested.

[1 Corinthians 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co1 16:10</span></span>

Now, if Timotheus come - Of Timothy we have heard before, [Co1
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#017.md). And we learn, from [Act
19:22](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#022.md), that Paul sent him with Erastus
from Ephesus to Macedonia. It is evident, therefore, in opposition to
the very exceptionable subscription at the end of this epistle, that the
epistle itself was not sent by Timothy, as there stated.

That he may be with you without fear - That he may be treated well, and
not perplexed and harassed with your divisions and jealousies; for he
worketh the work of the Lord - he is Divinely appointed, as I also am.

[1 Corinthians 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co1 16:11</span></span>

Let no man - despise him - Let none pretend to say that he has not full
authority from God to do the work of an evangelist.

But conduct him forth in peace - I believe, with Bp. Pearce, that this
clause should be translated and pointed thus: accompany him upon his
journey, that he may come unto me in peace, (εν ειρηνῃ, in safety), as
the word is used in [Mar 5:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#034.md); and
[Luk 7:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#050.md).

For I look for him with the brethren - Εκδεχομαι - αυτον μετα των
αδελφων. This clause should not be understood as if Paul was expecting
certain brethren with Timothy; but it was the brethren that were with
Paul that were looking for him; I, with the brethren, am looking for
him.

[1 Corinthians 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 16:12</span></span>

As touching our brother Apollos - It appears from this that the
brethren, of whom the apostle speaks in the preceding verse, were then
with him at Ephesus; I, with the brethren, greatly desired to come.

But his will was not at all to come - As there had been a faction set up
in the name of Apollos at Corinth, he probably thought it not prudent to
go thither at this time, lest his presence might be the means of giving
it either strength or countenance.

[1 Corinthians 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co1 16:13</span></span>

Watch ye - You have many enemies; be continually on your guard; be
always circumspect: -

1\. Watch against evil;

2\. Watch for opportunities to receive good;

3\. Watch for opportunities to do good;

4\. Watch over each other in love;

5\. Watch, that none may draw you aside from the belief and unity of the
Gospel.

Stand fast in the faith - Hold in conscientious credence what you have
already received as the truth of God; for it is the Gospel by which ye
shall be saved, and by which ye are now put into a state of salvation:
see [Co1 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#001.md), [Co1
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#002.md).

Quit you like men - Be not like children tossed to and fro with every
wind of doctrine; let your understanding receive the truth; let your
judgment determine on the absolute necessity of retaining it; and give
up life rather than give up the testimony of God.

Be strong - Put forth all the vigor and energy which God has given you
in maintaining and propagating the truth, and your spiritual strength
will increase by usage. The terms in this verse are all military: Watch
ye, γρηγορειτε, watch, and be continually on your guard, lest you be
surprised by your enemies; keep your scouts out, and all your sentinels
at their posts, lest your enemies steal a march upon you. See that the
place you are in be properly defended; and that each be alert to perform
his duty.

Stand fast in the faith - Στηκετε εν τῃ πιστει· Keep in your ranks; do
not be disorderly; be determined to keep your ranks unbroken; keep close
together. On your unity your preservation depends; if the enemy succeed
in breaking your ranks, and dividing one part of this sacred army from
another, your rout will be inevitable.

Quit yourselves like men - Ανδριζεσθε· When you are attacked, do not
flinch; maintain your ground; resist; press forward; strike home; keep
compact; conquer.

Be strong - Κραταιουαθε. If one company or division be opposed by too
great a force of the enemy, strengthen that division, and maintain your
position; if an attack is to be made on any part or intrenchment of the
foe, summon up all your courage, sustain each other; fear not, for fear
will enervate you. Your cause is good; it is the faith, the religion of
Jesus; he is your Captain in the field; and, should you even die in the
contest, the victory is yours.

[1 Corinthians 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co1 16:14</span></span>

Let all your things be done with charity - Let love to God, to man, and
to one another, be the motive of all your conduct.

[1 Corinthians 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co1 16:15</span></span>

Ye know the house of Stephanas - Ye know that Stephanas and his family
have addicted them to the help of the followers of Christ; they have
been the chief instruments of supporting the work of God in Achaia, of
which work they themselves have been the first fruits. See the note on
[Rom 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#005.md).

[1 Corinthians 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co1 16:16</span></span>

That ye submit yourselves unto such - That ye have due regard to them,
and consider them as especial instruments in the hand of God for
countenancing and carrying on his great work. The submission here
recommended does not imply obedience, but kind and courteous demeanour.
Kypke vindicates this sense of the word from [Eph
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#021.md); [Pe1
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#005.md).

[1 Corinthians 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co1 16:17</span></span>

I am glad of the coming of Stephanas, etc. - It was by these that the
Corinthians had sent that letter to the apostle, to answer which was a
main part of the design of St. Paul in this epistle.

Fortunatus - This man is supposed to have survived St. Paul; and to be
the same mentioned by Clement in his epistle to the Corinthians, sec.
59, as the bearer of that epistle from Clement at Rome to the Christians
at Corinth.

For that which was lacking on your part - This may either refer to
additional communications besides those contained in the letter which
the Corinthians sent to the apostle - which additional circumstances
were furnished by the persons above; and from them St. Paul had a fuller
account of their spiritual state than was contained in the letter - or
to some contributions on their part for the support of the apostle in
his peregrinations and labors.

[1 Corinthians 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co1 16:18</span></span>

They have refreshed my spirit and yours - They have been a means of
contributing greatly to my comfort; and what contributes to my comfort
must increase yours. This is probably the meaning of the apostle.

Therefore acknowledge ye them - Pay them particular respect, and let all
be held in esteem in proportion to their work and usefulness. When this
is made the rule of respect and esteem, then foolish and capricious
attachments will have no place. A man will then be honored in proportion
to his merit; and his merit will be estimated by his usefulness among
men.

[1 Corinthians 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co1 16:19</span></span>

The Churches of Asia salute you - i.e. The Churches in Asia Minor.
Ephesus was in this Asia, and it is clear from this that the apostle was
not at Philippi; had he been at Philippi, as the subscription states, he
would have said, The Churches of Macedonia, not the Churches of Asia,
salute you. How these places lay, in reference to each other, the reader
will at once perceive by consulting the map in Acts.

Aquila and Priscilla - Of these eminent persons we have heard before:
see [Act 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#002.md), [Act
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#018.md), [Act
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#026.md); and [Rom
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#003.md).

With the Church that is in their house - That is, the company of
believers who generally worshipped there. There were no churches or
chapels at that time built; and the assemblies of Christians were
necessarily held in private houses. It appears that Aquila and Priscilla
devoted their house to this purpose. The house of Philemon was of the
same kind; [Plm 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#002.md). So was likewise
the house of Nymphas, [Col 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#015.md). See
the note on [Rom 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#005.md).

[1 Corinthians 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">co1 16:20</span></span>

With a holy kiss - The ancient patriarchs, and the Jews in general, were
accustomed to kiss each other whenever they met; and this was a token of
friendship and peace with them, as shaking of hands is with us. The
primitive Christians naturally followed this example of the Jews. See
the note on [Rom 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#016.md).

[1 Corinthians 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">co1 16:21</span></span>

The salutation of me Paul with mine own hand - This should be rendered:
"The salutation is written by the hand of me Paul;" γεγραπται, is
written, being understood. It is very likely that the apostle wrote this
and the following verses with his own hand. The rest, though dictated by
him, was written by an amanuensis.

[1 Corinthians 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">co1 16:22</span></span>

If any man love not the Lord Jesus - This is directed immediately
against the Jews. From [Co1 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#003.md), we
find that the Jews, who pretended to be under the Spirit and teaching of
God, called Jesus αναθεμα, or accursed; i.e. a person who should be
devoted to destruction: see the note on [Co1
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#003.md). In this place the apostle
retorts the whole upon themselves, and says: If any man love not the
Lord Jesus Christ, let Him be αναθεμα, accursed, and devoted to
destruction. This is not said in the way of a wish or imprecation, but
as a prediction of what would certainly come upon them if they did not
repent, and of what did come on them because they did not repent; but
continued to hate and execrate the Lord Jesus; and of what still lies
upon them, because they continue to hate and execrate the Redeemer of
the world.

It is generally allowed that the apostle refers here to some of the
modes of excommunication among the Jews, of which there were three,
viz.: -

1\. Niddui נדוי, which signifies a simple separation or exclusion of a
man from the synagogue, and from his wife and family, for Thirty days.

2\. Cherem חרם which was inflicted on him who had borne the niddui, and
who had not, in the thirty days, made proper compensation, in order to
be reconciled to the synagogue. This was inflicted with dire
execrations, which he was informed must all come upon him if he did not
repent; but the cherem always supposed place for repentance.

3\. Shammatha שמתא: this was the direst of all, and cut off all hope of
reconciliation and repentance; after which the man was neither
reconcilable to the synagogue, nor acknowledged as belonging even to the
Jewish nation. See these different forms in Buxtorf's Rabbinical and
Talmudical Lexicon, under their respective words.

In the Lexicon just now quoted, Buxtorf gives a form of the cherem,
which he says he copied from an ancient Hebrew MS. Of this awful piece I
shall lay a translation before the reader.

"By the sentence of the Lord of lords, let P. the son of P. be
anathematized in both houses of judgment; the superior and inferior. Let
him be anathematized among the highest saints; let him be anathematized
among the seraphim and ophanim; and finally, let him be anathematized by
all the congregations of the great and the small! Let great and
continued plagues rest upon him; with great and horrible diseases! Let
his house be the habitation of dragons! and let his constellation be
darkened in the clouds! Let him be for indignation, and wrath, and
burning! Let his carcass be thrown to the wild beasts and serpents! Let
his enemies and his adversaries triumph over him! Let his silver and
gold be given to others! And let all his children be exposed at the
doors of their enemies! And let posterity be astonished at his day! Let
him be accursed by the mouth of Addiriron and Achtariel; by the mouth of
Sandalphon and Hadraniel; by the mouth of Ansisiel and Patchiel; by the
mouth of Seraphiel and Sagansael; by the mouth of Michael and Gabriel;
by the mouth of Raphael and Mesharetiel! Let him be anathematized by the
mouth of Zaafzavif, and by the mouth of Hafhavif, who is the great God;
and by the mouth of the seventy names of the supreme King; and lastly,
by the mouth of Tsortak the great chancellor.

"Let him he swallowed up like Korah and his companions! Let his soul
depart with fear and terror! Let the chiding of the Lord slay him! Let
him be confounded as Achitophel was in his counsel! Let the leprosy of
Gehazi be his leprosy! and let there be no resurrection of his ruins! In
the sepulchres of the children of Israel let him not be buried! Let his
wife be given to another, and let others bow themselves upon her in his
death! In this anathema, let P. the son of P. be; and let this be his
inheritance! But upon me and upon all Israel may God extend his peace
and blessing, Amen." To this is added the 18th, 19th, and 20th verses of
Deuteronomy 29, ([Deu 29:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#018).md) which
the reader may read at his leisure. There are many things in this cherem
which require a comment, but this is not the place.

Anathema, maran-atha - "Let him be accursed; our Lord cometh." I cannot
see the reason why these words were left untranslated. The former is
Greek, and has been already explained; the latter is Syriac maran-atha,
our Lord is coming: i.e. to execute the judgment denounced. Does not the
apostle refer to the last verse in the Bible? Lest I come and smite the
land (חרם cherem) with a curse? And does he not intimate that the Lord
was coming to smite the Jewish land with that curse? Which took place a
very few years after, and continues on that gainsaying and rebellious
people to the present day. What the apostle has said was prophetic, and
indicative of what was about to happen to that people. God was then
coming to inflict punishment upon them: he came, and they were broken
and dispersed.

[1 Corinthians 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">co1 16:23</span></span>

The grace of our Lord Jesus - May the favor, influence, mercy, and
salvation procured by Jesus Christ, be with you - prevail among you,
rule in you, and be exhibited by you, in your life and conversation!
Amen.

[1 Corinthians 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">co1 16:24</span></span>

My love be with you all in Christ Jesus - It appears exceedingly strange
that the apostle should say, My love be with you; as he said, The grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. We can easily conceive what the
latter means: the grace of Christ is an active, powerful, saving
principle; it is essential to the existence of the Christian Church that
this grace should be ever with it: and without this grace no individual
can be saved. But what could the love of the apostle do with them? Has
it any meaning? I confess I can see none, unless it be intended to say,
I love you; or, I continue to love you. The pronoun μου, my, is wanting
in the Codex Alexandrinus, and in 73, an excellent MS. in the Vatican,
written about the eleventh century. This will help us to a better sense,
for it either says, May love prevail among you! or supplying the word
Θεου God, as in [Co2 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#014.md), The love
of God be with you! This gives a sound sense; for the love of God is as
much a principle of light, life, and salvation, as the grace of Christ.
And probably ΜΟΥ, my, is a corruption for ΘΕΟΥ, of God. And this is the
more likely, because he uses this very form in the conclusion of his
second epistle to this Church, as we have seen above. I conclude,
therefore, that the reading of the two MSS. above is the true reading;
or else that μου is a corruption for Θεου, and that the verse should be
read thus: The love of God be with you all, in (or by) Christ Jesus.

Amen - So be it: but this word is wanting in most MSS. of repute, and
certainly was not written by the apostle.

1\. The subscription to this epistle in our common English Bibles, and
in the common editions of the Greek text, is palpably absurd. That it
was not written from Philippi, but from Ephesus, see the notes on [Co1
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#005.md), [Co1
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#008) (note.md), [Co1
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#010) (note.md), [Co1
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#019) (note.md); and that it could not be
written by Silvanus, and Fortunatus, and Achaicus, and Timotheus," needs
no proof. But this subscription is wanting in all the best MSS. and
versions, either in whole or in part. In some it is simply said, The
first to the Corinthians; in others, The first to the Corinthians is
finished; written from Ephesus - from Asia - from Ephesus of Asia - from
Philippi of Macedonia - from Philippi of Macedonia, and sent by the
hands of Timothy; so the Syriac. Written from Ephesus, by Stephanas and
Fortunatus; Coptic. Written from Philippi by Stephanas, and Fortunatus,
and Achaicus; Slavonic. Written, etc., by Paul and Sosthenes. Written
from the city of Philippi, and sent by Stephanas, and Fortunatus, and
Achaicus, and Timotheus; Arabic. There are other variations, which need
not be set down. Those only appear to be correct that state the epistle
to have been sent from Ephesus, of which there can be no reasonable
doubt.

2\. In closing my observations on this epistle, I feel it necessary once
more to call the reader's attention to the many difficulties contained
in it as an excuse for any thing he may find handled in an
unsatisfactory manner. Perhaps it will be of little consequence for him
to know that this epistle has cost me more labor and difficulty than any
portion of the same quantity which I have yet passed over either in the
Old or New Testament.

3\. It has been already noticed that the Church at Corinth had written
to the apostle for advice, direction, and information on a variety of
points; and that this epistle is, in the main, an answer to the epistle
from Corinth. Had we that epistle, all difficulty would vanish in this;
but, as the apostle only refers to their questions by mere catch words
from their letter, it is impossible to know, in all cases, what the
questions contained. To them the answers would be clear, because they
knew on what they had consulted him; to us the answers must be, as they
really are in some cases, necessarily obscure, because we know not the
whole bearing and circumstances of the questions. Indeed the epistle
contains more local matter, and more matter of private application, than
any other in the New Testament; and there is in it, on the whole, less
matter for general use than in most other parts of the sacred writings.
Yet it is both very curious and useful; it gives insight into several
customs, and not a few forms of speech, and matters relative to the
discipline of the primitive Church, which we can find nowhere else: and
it reads a very awful lesson to those who disturb the peace of society,
make schisms in the Church of Christ, and endeavor to set up one
preacher at the expense of another.

4\. It shows us also how many improper things may, in a state of
ignorance or Christian infancy, be consistent with a sincere belief in
the Gospel of Christ, and a conscientious and zealous attachment to it.

5\. In different parts of the epistle we find the apostle speaking very
highly of the knowledge of this Church; and its various gifts and
endowments. How then can we say that its blemishes arose from ignorance?
I answer, that certainly only a few of the people at Corinth could
possess those eminent spiritual qualifications; because the things that
are attributed to this Church in other places are utterly inconsistent
with that state of grace for which the apostle, in other places, appears
to give them credit. The solution of the difficulty is this: There were
in the Church at Corinth many highly gifted and very gracious people;
there were also there many more, who, though they might have been
partakers of some extraordinary gifts, had very little of that religion
which the apostle describes in the thirteenth chapter of this epistle.

6\. Besides, we must not suppose that eminent endowments necessarily
imply gracious dispositions. A man may have much light and little love;
he may be very wise in secular matters, and know but little of himself,
and less of his God. There is as truly a learned ignorance, as there is
a refined and useful learning. One of our old writers said, "Knowledge
that is not applying, is only like a candle which a man holds to light
himself to hell." The Corinthians abounded in knowledge, and science,
and eloquence, and various extraordinary gifts; but in many cases,
distinctly enough marked in this epistle, they were grossly ignorant of
the genius and design of the Gospel. Many, since their time, have put
words and observances in place of the weightier matters of the Law, and
the spirit of the Gospel. The apostle has taken great pains to correct
these abuses among the Corinthians, and to insist on that great,
unchangeable, and eternal truth, that love to God and man, filling the
heart, hallowing the passions, regulating the affections, and producing
universal benevolence and beneficence, is the fulfilling of all law; and
that all professions, knowledge, gifts, etc., without this, are
absolutely useless. And did this epistle contain no more than what is
found in the 13th chapter, yet that would be an unparalleled monument of
the apostle's deep acquaintance with God; and an invaluable record of
the sum and substance of the Gospel, left by God's mercy to the Church,
as a touchstone for the trial of creeds, confessions of faith, and
ritual observances, to the end of the world.

7\. I have often had occasion to note that the whole epistle refers so
much to Jewish affairs, customs, forms of speech, ceremonies, etc., that
it necessarily supposes the people to have been well acquainted with
them: from this I infer that a great majority of the Christian Church at
Corinth was composed of converted Jews; and it is likely that this was
the case in all the Churches of Asia Minor and Greece. Many Gentiles
were undoubtedly brought to the knowledge of the truth; but the chief
converts were from among the Hellenistic Jews. In many respects Jewish
phraseology prevails more in this epistle than even in that to the
Romans. Without attention to this it would be impossible to make any
consistent sense out of the 15th chapter, where the apostle treats so
largely on the doctrine of the resurrection, as almost every form and
turn of expression is Jewish; and we must know what ideas they attached
to such words and forms of speech, in order to enter into the spirit of
the apostle's meaning. His ignorance of this caused a late eminent
writer and philosopher to charge the apostle with "inconsistent
reasoning." Had he understood the apostle's language, he would not have
said so; and as he did not understand it, he should have said nothing. A
man may be qualified to make great and useful discoveries in the
doctrine of gases or factitious airs, who may be ill qualified to
elucidate the meaning of the Holy Spirit.

8\. Before I finish my concluding observations on this epistle, I must
beg leave to call the reader's attention once more to the concluding
words of the apostle: If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him
be anathema, maran-atha. These words have been as often misunderstood,
and perhaps as dangerously applied, as another passage in this epistle,
He that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to
himself, etc. Though I am ready to grant that the bad Christian, i.e.
the man who professes Christianity, and yet lives under the power of
sin, is in a very dangerous state; and that he who, while he credits
Christianity, is undecided as to the public part he should take in its
profession and practice, is putting his eternal interests to the most
awful hazard; yet I must also grant that the meaning generally put on
the words in question is not correct. The words apply to the gainsaying
and blasphemous Jews; to those who were calling Christ anathema, or
accursed; and cannot be applied to any person who respects his name, or
confides in him for his salvation; much less do they apply to him who
finds through the yet prevalence of evil in his heart, and the power of
temptation, that he has little, and, to his own apprehension, no love to
the Lord Jesus. The anathema of the apostle is denounced against him
only who gives the anathema to Christ: of this, not one of my readers is
capable. It is the duty of all to love him with an undivided heart: if
any be not yet able to do it, let him not be discouraged: if the Lord
cometh to execute judgment on him who calleth Jesus accursed, he cometh
also to fulfill the desire of them who fear him; to make them partake of
the Divine nature, and so cleanse their hearts by the inspiration of his
Holy Spirit, that they shall perfectly love him, and worthily magnify
his name.

[1 Corinthians 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 16:1</span></span>

The collection for the saints - Περι - της λογιας, from λεγω, to gather,
or collect; translated by the Vulgate, de collectis, a contribution made
by the rich for the relief of the poor. The Christians living at
Jerusalem, we may naturally suppose, were greatly straitened; as the
enmity of their countrymen to the Gospel of Christ led them to treat
those who professed it with cruelty, and spoil them of their goods; (see
[Heb 10:34](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#034.md); and [Rom
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#026.md); and see the note [Rom
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#027).md); and the apostle hereby teaches
that it was the duty of one Christian congregation to help another when
in distress.

[1 Corinthians 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co1 16:2</span></span>

Upon the first day of the week - The apostle prescribes the most
convenient and proper method of making this contribution.

1\. Every man was to feel it his duty to succor his brethren in
distress.

2\. He was to do this according to the ability which God gave him.

3\. He was to do this at the conclusion of the week, when he had cast up
his weekly earnings, and had seen how much God had prospered his labor.

4\. He was then to bring it on the first day of the week, as is most
likely, to the church or assembly, that it might be put in the common
treasury.

5\. We learn from this that the weekly contribution could not be always
the same, as each man was to lay by as God had prospered him: now, some
weeks he would gain more; others, less.

6\. It appears from the whole that the first day of the week, which is
the Christian Sabbath, was the day on which their principal religious
meetings were held in Corinth and the Churches of Galatia; and,
consequently, in all other places where Christianity had prevailed. This
is a strong argument for the keeping of the Christian Sabbath.

7\. We may observe that the apostle follows here the rule of the
synagogue; it was a regular custom among the Jews to make their
collections for the poor on the Sabbath day, that they might not be
without the necessaries of life, and might not be prevented from coming
to the synagogue.

8\. For the purpose of making this provision, they had a purse, which
was called ארנקי של צדקה Arneki shel tsedakah, "The purse of the alms,"
or what we would term, the poor's box. This is what the apostle seems to
mean when he says, Let him lay by him in store - let him put it in the
alms' purse, or in the poor's box.

9\. It was a maxim also with them that, if they found any money, they
were not to put it in their private purse, but in that which belonged to
the poor.

10\. The pious Jews believed that as salt seasoned food, so did alms,
riches; and that he who did not give alms of what he had, his riches
should be dispersed. The moth would corrupt the bags, and the canker
corrode the money, unless the mass was sanctified by giving a part to
the poor.

[1 Corinthians 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co1 16:3</span></span>

Whomsoever ye shall approve by your letters - Why should Paul require
letters of approbation in behalf of certain persons, when he himself
should be among them, and could have their characters viva voce? It is
probable that he refers here to letters of recommendation which they had
sent to him while he was away; and he now promises that when he should
come to Corinth, he would appoint these persons, whom they had
recommended, to carry the alms to Jerusalem. If δοκιμασητε, be read ye
shall have approved, as Bishop Pearce does, the difficulty will vanish.
Some MSS. and several versions join δι' επιστολων, by letters, to the
following words, and read the verse thus: When I come, those whom ye
shall approve I will send with letters to bring your liberality to
Jerusalem. This seems most natural.

[1 Corinthians 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co1 16:4</span></span>

And if it be meet, etc. - If it be a business that requires my
attendance, and it be judged proper for me to go to Jerusalem, I will
take those persons for my companions. On the delicacy with which St.
Paul managed the business of a collection for the poor, Archdeacon Paley
makes the following appropriate remarks: - "The following observations
will satisfy us concerning the purity of our apostle's conduct in the
suspicious business of a pecuniary contribution.

"1st. He disclaims the having received any inspired authority for the
directions which he is giving: 'I speak not by commandment, but by
occasion of the forwardness of others, and to prove the sincerity of
your love.' ([Co2 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#008)..md) Who, that had
a sinister purpose to answer by the recommending of subscriptions, would
thus distinguish, and thus lower the credit of his own recommendation?

"2nd. Although he asserts the general right of Christian ministers to a
maintenance from their ministry, yet he protests against the making use
of this right in his own person: 'Even so hath the Lord ordained, that
they who preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel; but I have used
none of these things; neither have I written these things that it should
be so done unto me; for it were better for me to die, than that any man
should make my glorying, i.e. my professions of disinterestedness,
void.' ([Co1 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#014.md), [Co1
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#015)..md)

"3rd. He repeatedly proposes that there should be associates with
himself in the management of the public bounty; not colleagues of his
own appointment, but persons elected for that purpose by the
contributors themselves. 'And when I come, whomsoever ye shall approve
by your letters, them will I send to bring your liberality unto
Jerusalem; and if it be meet that I go also, they shall go with me.'
([Co1 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#003.md), [Co1
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#004)..md) And in the second epistle, what
is here proposed we find actually done, and done for the very purpose of
guarding his character against any imputation that might be brought upon
it in the discharge of a pecuniary trust: 'And we have sent with him the
brother, whose praise is in the Gospel throughout all the Churches; and
not that only, but who was also chosen of the Churches to travel with us
with this grace, (gift), which is administered by us to the glory of the
same Lord, and the declaration of your ready mind: avoiding this, that
no man should blame us in this abundance which is administered by us;
providing for things honest, not only in the sight of the Lord, but also
in the sight of men:' i.e. not resting in the consciousness of our own
integrity, but, in such a subject, careful also to approve our integrity
to the public judgment. ([Co2
8:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#018).".md) Horae Paulinae, page 95.

[1 Corinthians 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co1 16:5</span></span>

I will come unto you, when I shall pass through Macedonia - St. Paul was
now at Ephesus; for almost all allow, in opposition to the subscription
at the end of this epistle that states it to have been written from
Philippi, that it was written from Ephesus: and this is supported by
many strong arguments; and the 8th verse here seems to put it past all
question: I will tarry at Ephesus; i.e. I am in Ephesus, and here I
purpose to remain until pentecost. Though Macedonia was not in the
direct way from Ephesus to Corinth, yet the apostle intended to make it
in his way. And it was because it was not in the direct road, but lay at
the upper end of the Aegean Sea, and very far out of his direct line,
that he says, I do pass through Macedonia - I have purposed to go
thither before I go to Corinth.

[1 Corinthians 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co1 16:6</span></span>

Yea, and winter with you - He purposed to stay till pentecost at
Ephesus; after that to go to Macedonia, and probably to spend the summer
there; and come in the autumn to Corinth, and there spend the winter.

That ye may bring me on my journey - That ye may furnish me with the
means of travelling. It appears that, in most cases, the different
Churches paid his expenses to other Churches; where this was not done,
then he labored at his business to acquire the means of travelling.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Introduction](co2000.md)

</div>
