<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1008)  [Next](co1010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 9:0</span></span>

St. Paul vindicates his apostleship, and shows that he has equal rights
and privileges with Peter and the brethren of our Lord; and that he is
not bound, while doing the work of an apostle, to labor with his hands
for his own support, [Co1 9:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#001). He
who labors should live by the fruit of his own industry, [Co1
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#007). For the law will not allow even
the ox to be muzzled which treads out the corn, [Co1
9:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#008). Those who minister in
spiritual things have a right to a secular support for their work, [Co1
9:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#011). He shows the disinterested
manner in which he has preached the Gospel, [Co1
9:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#015). Now he accommodated himself
to the prejudices of men, in order to bring about their salvation, [Co1
9:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#019). The way to heaven compared to
a race, [Co1 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#024). The qualifications
of those who may expect success in the games celebrated at Corinth, and
what that success implies, [Co1 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#025).
The apostle applies these things spiritually to himself; and states the
necessity of keeping his body in subjection, lest, after having
proclaimed salvation to others, he should become a castaway, [Co1
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#026), [Co1
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#027).

[1 Corinthians 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 9:1</span></span>

Am I not an apostle? - It is sufficiently evident that there were
persons at Corinth who questioned the apostleship of St. Paul; and he
was obliged to walk very circumspectly that they might not find any
occasion against him. It appears also that he had given them all his
apostolical labors gratis; and even this, which was the highest proof of
his disinterested benevolence, was produced by his opposers as an
argument against him. "Prophets, and all divinely commissioned men, have
a right to their secular support; you take nothing: - is not this from a
conviction that you have no apostolical right?" On this point the
apostle immediately enters on his own defense.

Am I not an apostle? Am I not free? - These questions are all designed
as assertions of the affirmative: I am an apostle; and I am free -
possessed of all the rights and privileges of an apostle.

Have I not seen Jesus Christ - From whom in his personal appearance to
me, I have received my apostolic commission. This was judged essentially
necessary to constitute an apostle. See [Act
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#014), [Act
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#015); [Act
26:16](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#016).

Are not ye my work - Your conversion from heathenism is the proof that I
have preached with the Divine unction and authority.

Several good MSS. and versions transpose the two first questions in this
verse, thus: Am I not free? am I not an apostle? But I cannot see that
either perspicuity or sense gains any thing by this arrangement. On the
contrary, it appears to me that his being an apostle gave him the
freedom or rights to which he refers, and therefore the common
arrangement I judge to be the best.

[1 Corinthians 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co1 9:2</span></span>

If I be not an apostle unto others - If there be other Churches which
have been founded by other apostles; yet it is not so with you.

The seal of mine apostleship are ye - Your conversion to Christianity is
God's seal to my apostleship. Had not God sent me, I could not have
profited your souls.

The σφραγις or seal, was a figure cut in a stone, and that set in a
ring, by which letters of credence and authority were stamped. The
ancients, particularly the Greeks, excelled in this kind of engraving.
The cabinets of the curious give ample proof of this; and the moderns
contend in vain to rival the perfection of those ancient masters.

In the Lord - The apostle shows that it was by the grace and influence
of God alone that he was an apostle, and that they were converted to
Christianity.

[1 Corinthians 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co1 9:3</span></span>

Mine answer to them - Ἡ εμη απολογια τοις εμε ανακρινουσιν· This is my
defense against those who examine me. The words are forensic; and the
apostle considers himself as brought before a legal tribunal, and
questioned so as to be obliged to answer as upon oath. His defense
therefore was this, that they were converted to God by his means. This
verse belongs to the two preceding verses.

[1 Corinthians 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co1 9:4</span></span>

Have we not power to eat and to drink? - Have we not authority, or
right, εξουσιαν, to expect sustenance, while we are labouring for your
salvation? Meat and drink, the necessaries, not the superfluities, of
life, were what those primitive messengers of Christ required; it was
just that they who labored in the Gospel should live by the Gospel; they
did not wish to make a fortune, or accumulate wealth; a living was all
they desired. It was probably in reference to the same moderate and
reasonable desire that the provision made for the clergy in this country
was called a living; and their work for which they got this living was
called the cure of souls. Whether we derive the word cure from cura,
care, as signifying that the care of all the souls in a particular
parish or place devolves on the minister, who is to instruct them in the
things of salvation, and lead them to heaven; or whether we consider the
term as implying that the souls in that district are in a state of
spiritual disease, and the minister is a spiritual physician, to whom
the cure of these souls is intrusted; still we must consider that such a
laborer is worthy of his hire; and he that preaches the Gospel should
live by the Gospel.

[1 Corinthians 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co1 9:5</span></span>

Have we not power to lead about a sister, a wife - The word εξουσιαν is
to be understood here, as above in [Co1
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#004), as implying authority or right;
and authority, not merely derived from their office, but from Him who
gave them that office; from the constitution of nature; and from
universal propriety or the fitness of things.

When the apostle speaks of leading about a sister, a wife, he means
first, that he and all other apostles, and consequently all ministers of
the Gospel, had a right to marry. For it appears that our Lord's
brethren James and Jude were married; and we have infallible evidence
that Peter was a married man, not only from this verse, but from [Mat
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#014), where his mother-in-law is
mentioned as being cured by our Lord of a fever.

And secondly, we find that their wives were persons of the same faith;
for less can never be implied in the word sister. This is a decisive
proof against the papistical celibacy of the clergy: and as to their
attempts to evade the force of this text by saying that the apostles had
holy women who attended them, and ministered to them in their
peregrinations, there is no proof of it; nor could they have suffered
either young women or other men's wives to have accompanied them in this
way without giving the most palpable occasion of scandal. And Clemens
Alexandrinus has particularly remarked that the apostles carried their
wives about with them, "not as wives, but as sisters, that they might
minister to those who were mistresses of families; that so the doctrine
of the Lord might without reprehension or evil suspicion enter into the
apartments of the women." And in giving his finished picture of his
Gnostic, or perfect Christian, he says: εσθιει, και πινει, και γαμει -
εικονας εχει τους Αποστολους, He eats, and drinks, and marries - having
the apostles for his example. Vid. Clem. Alex. Strom., lib. vii., c. 12.

On the propriety and excellence of marriage, and its superiority to
celibacy, see the notes on [Co1 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#001),
etc.

[1 Corinthians 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co1 9:6</span></span>

Or I only and Barnabas - Have we alone of all the apostles no right to
be supported by our converts? It appears from this,

1\. That the apostles did not generally support themselves by their own
labor.

2\. That Paul and Barnabas did thus support themselves.

Some of the others probably had not a business at which they could
conveniently work; but Paul and Barnabas had a trade at which they could
conveniently labor wherever they came.

[1 Corinthians 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co1 9:7</span></span>

Who goeth a warfare - at his own charges? - These questions, which are
all supposed from the necessity and propriety of the cases to be
answered in the affirmative, tend more forcibly to point out that the
common sense of man joins with the providence of God in showing the
propriety of every man living by the fruits of his labor. The first
question applies particularly to the case of the apostle, τις
στρατευεται ιδιοις οψωνιοις· Does a soldier provide his own victuals?
Οψωνιον is used to express the military pay or wages, by the Greek
writers; for the Roman soldiers were paid not only in money but in
victuals; and hence corn was usually distributed among them. See on [Luk
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#014) (note).

[1 Corinthians 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co1 9:8</span></span>

Say I these things as a man? - Is this only human reasoning? or does not
God say in effect the same things? See note on [Rom
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#019).

[1 Corinthians 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co1 9:9</span></span>

Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the ox - See this largely explained
in the note on [Deu 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#004) (note).

Doth God take care for oxen? - This question is to be understood thus:
Is it likely that God should be solicitous for the comfort of oxen, and
be regardless of the welfare of man? In this Divine precept the kindness
and providential care of God are very forcibly pointed out. He takes
care of oxen; he wills them all that happiness of which their nature is
susceptible; and can we suppose that he is unwilling that the human soul
shall have that happiness which is suited to its spiritual and eternal
nature? He could not reprobate an ox, because the Lord careth for oxen;
and surely he cannot reprobate a man. It may be said the man has sinned
but the ox cannot. I answer: The decree of reprobation is supposed to be
from all eternity; and certainly a man can no more sin before he exists,
than an ox can when he exists.

[1 Corinthians 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co1 9:10</span></span>

And he that thresheth in hope should be partaker of his hope - Instead
of ὁ αλοων της ελπιδος αυτου μετεχειν, επ' ελπιδι, many of the best MSS.
and versions read the passage thus: ὁ αλοων επ' ελπιδι του μετεχειν· And
he who thresheth in hope of partaking. "The words της ελπιδος, which are
omitted by the above, are," says Bp. Pearce, "superfluous, if not wrong;
for men do not live in hope to partake of their hope, but to partake of
what was the object and end of their hope. When these words are left
out, the former and latter sentence will be both of a piece, and more
resembling each other: for μετεχειν may be understood after the first
επ' ελπιδι, as well as after the last." Griesbach has left the words in
question out of the text.

[1 Corinthians 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co1 9:11</span></span>

If we have sown unto you spiritual things - If we have been the means of
bringing you into a state of salvation by the Divine doctrines which we
have preached unto you, is it too much for us to expect a temporal
support then we give ourselves up entirely to this work? Every man who
preaches the Gospel has a right to his own support and that of his
family while thus employed.

[1 Corinthians 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 9:12</span></span>

If others be partakers of this power - If those who in any matter serve
you have a right to a recompense for that service, surely we who have
served you in the most essential matters have a right to our support
while thus employed in your service.

We have not used this power - Though we had this right, we have not
availed ourselves of it, but have worked with our hands to bear our own
charges, lest any of you should think that we preached the Gospel merely
to procure a temporal support, and so be prejudiced against us, and thus
prevent our success in the salvation of your souls.

[1 Corinthians 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co1 9:13</span></span>

They which minister about holy things - All the officers about the
temple, whether priests, Levites, Nethinim, etc., had a right to their
support while employed in its service. The priests partook of the
sacrifices; the others had their maintenance from tithes, first fruits,
and offerings made to the temple; for it was not lawful for them to live
on the sacrifices. Hence the apostle makes the distinction between those
who minister about holy things and those who wait at the altar.

[1 Corinthians 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co1 9:14</span></span>

Even so hath the Lord ordained - This is evidently a reference to our
Lord's ordination, [Mat 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#010) : The
workman is worthy of his meat. And [Luk
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#007) : For the laborer is worthy of
his hire. And in both places it is the preacher of the Gospel of whom he
is speaking. It was a maxim among the Jews, "that the inhabitants of a
town where a wise man had made his abode should support him, because he
had forsaken the world and its pleasures to study those things by which
he might please God and be useful to men." See an ordinance to this
effect in the tract Shabbath, fol. 114.

[1 Corinthians 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co1 9:15</span></span>

Neither have I written, etc. - Though I might plead the authority of God
in the law, of Christ in the Gospel, the common consent of our own
doctors, and the usages of civil society, yet I have not availed myself
of my privileges; nor do I now write with the intention to lay in my
claims.

[1 Corinthians 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co1 9:16</span></span>

For though I preach the Gospel - I have cause of glorying that I preach
the Gospel free of all charges to you; but I cannot glory in being a
preacher of the Gospel, because I am not such either by my own skill or
power. I have received both the office, and the grace by which I execute
the office, from God. I have not only his authority to preach, but that
authority obliges me to preach; and if I did not, I should endanger my
salvation: yea, wo is unto me, if I preach not the Gospel. As every
genuine preacher receives his commission from God alone, it is God alone
who can take it away. Wo to that man who runs when God has not sent him;
and wo to him who refuses to run, or who ceases to run, when God has
sent him.

[1 Corinthians 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co1 9:17</span></span>

For if I do this thing willingly - If I be a cordial co-operator with
God, I have a reward, an incorruptible crown, [Co1
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#025). Or, if I freely preach this
Gospel without being burthensome to any, I have a special reward; but if
I do not, I have simply an office to fulfill, into which God has put me,
and may fulfill it conscientiously, and claim my privileges at the same
time; but then I lose that special reward which I have in view by
preaching the Gospel without charge to any.

This and the 18th verse have been variously translated: Sir Norton
Knatchbull and, after him, Mr. Wakefield translate the two passages
thus: For if I do this willingly, I have a reward; but if I am intrusted
with an office without my consent? what is my reward then? to make the
Gospel of Christ, whilst I preach it, without charge, in not using to
the utmost my privileges in the Gospel.

Others render the passage thus: But if I do it merely because I am
obliged to it, I only discharge an office that is committed to me, [Co1
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#018). For what then shall I be
rewarded? It is for this, that, preaching the Gospel of Christ, I preach
it freely, and do not insist on a claim which the Gospel itself gives
me.

[1 Corinthians 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co1 9:18</span></span>

That I abuse not my power - I am inclined to think that καταχρησασθαι is
to be understood here, not in the sense of abusing, but of using to the
uttermost - exacting every thing that a man can claim by law. How many
proofs have we of this in preachers of different denominations, who
insist so strongly and so frequently on their privileges, as they term
them, that the people are tempted to believe they seek not their souls'
interests, but their secular goods. Such preachers can do the people no
good. But the people who are most liable to think thus of their
ministers, are those who are unwilling to grant the common necessaries
of life to those who watch over them in the Lord. For there are such
people even in the Christian Church! If the preachers of the Gospel were
as parsimonious of the bread of life as some congregations and Christian
societies are of the bread that perisheth, and if the preacher gave them
a spiritual nourishment as base, as mean, and as scanty as the temporal
support which they afford him, their souls must without doubt have
nearly a famine of the bread of life.

[1 Corinthians 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co1 9:19</span></span>

For though I be free - Although I am under no obligation to any man, yet
I act as if every individual had a particular property in me, and as if
I were the slave of the public.

[1 Corinthians 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">co1 9:20</span></span>

Unto the Jews I became as a Jew - In [Act
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#003), we find that for the sake of the
unconverted Jews he circumcised Timothy. See the note on [Act
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#003).

To them that are under the law - To those who considered themselves
still under obligation to observe its rites and ceremonies, though they
had in the main embraced the Gospel, he became as if under the same
obligations; and therefore purified himself in the temple, as we find
related, [Act 21:26](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#026) (note).

After the first clause, to them that are under the law as under the law,
the following words, μη ων αυτος ὑπο νομον, not being myself under the
law, are added by ABCDEFG, several others; the later Syriac, Sahidic,
Armenian, Vulgate, and all the Itala; Cyril, Chrysostom, Damascenus, and
others; and on this evidence Griesbach has received them into the text.

[1 Corinthians 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">co1 9:21</span></span>

To them that are without law - The Gentiles, who had no written law,
though they had the law written in their hearts; see on [Rom
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#015) (note).

Being not without law to God - Instead of Θεῳ, To God, and Χριστῳ, To
Christ, the most important MSS. and versions have Θεου, Of God, and
Χριστου, Of Christ; being not without the law of God, but under the law
of Christ.

Them that are without law - Dr. Lightfoot thinks the Sadducees may be
meant, and that in certain cases, as far as the rites and ceremonies of
the Jewish religion were concerned, he might conform himself to them,
not observing such rites and ceremonies, as it is well known that they
disregarded them; for the doctor cannot see how the apostle could
conform himself in any thing to them that were without law, i.e. the
heathen. But,

1\. It is not likely that the apostle could conform himself to the
Sadducees; for what success could he expect among a people who denied
the resurrection, and consequently a future world, a day of judgment,
and all rewards and punishments?

2\. He might among the heathen appear as if he were not a Jew, and
discourse with them on the great principles of that eternal law, the
outlines of which had been written in their hearts, in order to show
them the necessity of embracing that Gospel which was the power of God
unto salvation to every one that believed.

[1 Corinthians 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">co1 9:22</span></span>

To the weak became I as weak - Those who were conscientiously
scrupulous, even in respect to lawful things.

I am made all things to all men - I assumed every shape and form
consistent with innocency and perfect integrity; giving up my own will,
my own way, my own ease, my own pleasure, and my own profit, that I
might save the souls of all. Let those who plead for the system of
accommodation on the example of St. Paul, attend to the end he had in
view, and the manner in which he pursued that end. It was not to get
money, influence, or honor, but to save Souls! It was not to get ease
but to increase his labors. It was not to save his life, but rather that
it should be a sacrifice for the good of immortal souls!

A parallel saying to this of St. Paul has been quoted from Achilles
Tatius, lib. v., cap. xix., where Clitophon says, on having received a
letter from Leucippe: Τουτοις εντυχων παντα εγινομην ὁμου, ανεφλεγομην,
ωχριων, εθαυμαζον, ηπιστουν, εχαιρον, ηχθομην· "When I read the
contents, I became all things at once; I was inflamed, I grew pale, I
was struck with wonder; I doubted, I rejoiced, became sad." The same
form of speech is frequent among Greek writers. I think this casts some
light on the apostle's meaning.

That I might by all means save some - On this clause there are some very
important readings found in the MSS. and versions. Instead of παντως
τινας σωσω, that I might by all means save some; παντας σωσω, that I
might save all, is the reading of DEFG, Syriac, Vulgate, Ethiopic, all
the Itala, and several of the fathers. This reading Bishop Pearce
prefers, because it is more agreeable to St. Paul's meaning here, and
exactly agrees with what he says, [Co1
10:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#033), and makes his design more
extensive and noble. Wakefield also prefers this reading.

[1 Corinthians 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">co1 9:23</span></span>

And this I do for the Gospel's sake - Instead of τουτο, this, παντα, all
things, (I do all things for the Gospel's sake), is the reading of
ABCDEFG, several others, the Coptic, Ethiopic, Vulgate, Itala, Armenian,
and Sahidic; the two latter reading ταυτα παντα, all these things.

Several of the fathers have the same reading, and there is much reason
to believe it to be genuine.

That I might be partaker thereof with you - That I might attain to the
reward of eternal life which it sets before me; and this is in all
probability the meaning of το ευαγγελιον, which we translate the Gospel,
and which should be rendered here prize or reward; this is a frequent
meaning of the original word, as may be seen in my preface to St.
Matthew: I do all this for the sake of the prize, that I may partake of
it with you.

[1 Corinthians 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">co1 9:24</span></span>

They which run in a race run all - It is sufficiently evident that the
apostle alludes to the athletic exercises in the games which were
celebrated every fifth year on the isthmus, or narrow neck of land,
which joins the Peloponnesus, or Morea, to the main land; and were
thence termed the Isthmian games. The exercises were running, wrestling,
boxing, throwing the discus or quoit, etc.; to the three first of these
the apostle especially alludes.

But one receiveth the prize? - The apostle places the Christian race in
contrast to the Isthmian games; in them, only one received the prize,
though all ran; in this, if all run, all will receive the prize;
therefore he says, So run that ye may obtain. Be as much in earnest to
get to heaven as others are to gain their prize; and, although only one
of them can win, all of you may obtain.

[1 Corinthians 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">co1 9:25</span></span>

Is temperate in all things - All those who contended in these exercises
went through a long state and series of painful preparations. To this
exact discipline Epictetus refers, cap. 35: Θελεις Ολυμπια νικησαι; Δει
σ' ευτακτειν, αναγκοτροφειν, απεχεσθαι, πεμματων, γυμναζεσθαι προς
αναγκην εν ὡρα τεταγμενη, εν καυματι, εν ψυχει, μη ψυχρον πινειν, μη
οινον ὡς ετυχεν· ἁπλως, ὡς ιατρῳ, παραδεδωκεναι σεαυτον τῳ επιστατη·
ειτα εις τον αγωνα παρερχεσθαι· κ. τ. λ. "Do you wish to gain the prize
at the Olympic games? - Consider the requisite preparations and the
consequences: you must observe a strict regimen; must live on food which
you dislike; you must abstain from all delicacies; must exercise
yourself at the necessary and prescribed times both in heat and in cold;
you must drink nothing cooling; take no wine as formerly; in a word, you
must put yourself under the directions of a pugilist, as you would under
those of a physician, and afterwards enter the lists. Here you may get
your arm broken, your foot put out of joint, be obliged to swallow
mouthfuls of dust, to receive many stripes, and after all be conquered."
Thus we find that these suffered much hardships in order to conquer, and
yet were uncertain of the victory.

Horace speaks of it in nearly the same way: -

Qui studet optatam cursu contingere metam,

Multa tulit fecitque puer: sudavit et alsit:

Abstinuit Venere et Baccho.

De Arte Poet., ver. 412.

A youth who hopes the Olympic prize to gain,

All arts must try, and every toil sustain;

Th' extremes of heat and cold must often prove;

And shun the weakening joys of wine and love.

Francis.

These quotations show the propriety of the apostle's words: Every man
that striveth for the mastery, παντα εγκρατευεται, is temperate, or
continent, in all things.

They do it to obtain a corruptible crown - The crown won by the victor
in the Olympian games was made of the wild olive; in the Pythian games
of laurel; in the Nemean games of parsley; and in the Isthmian games of
the pine. These were all corruptible, for they began to wither as soon
as they were separated from the trees, or plucked out of the earth. In
opposition to these, the apostle says, he contended for an incorruptible
crown, the heavenly inheritance. He sought not worldly honor; but that
honor which comes from God.

[1 Corinthians 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">co1 9:26</span></span>

I therefore so run, not as uncertainly - In the foot-course in those
games, how many soever ran, only one could have the prize, however
strenuously they might exert themselves; therefore, all ran uncertainly;
but it was widely different in the Christian course, if every one ran as
he ought, each would receive the prize.

The word αδηλως, which we translate uncertainly, has other meanings.

1\. It signifies ignorantly; I do not run like one ignorant of what he
is about, or of the laws of the course; I know that there is an eternal
life; I know the way that leads to it; and I know and feel the power of
it.

2\. It signifies without observation; the eyes of all the spectators
were fixed on those who ran in these races; and to gain the applause of
the multitude, they stretched every nerve; the apostle knew that the
eyes of all were fixed upon him.

1\. His false brethren waited for his halting:

2\. The persecuting Jews and Gentiles longed for his downfall:

3\. The Church of Christ looked on him with anxiety: And he acted in all
things as under the immediate eye of God.

Not as one that beateth the air - Kypke observes, that there are three
ways in which persons were said, αερα δερειν, to beat the air.

1\. When in practising for the combat they threw their arms and legs
about in different ways, thus practising the attitudes of offense and
defense. This was termed σκιαμαχια, fighting with a shadow. To this
Virgil alludes when representing Dares swinging his arms about, when he
rose to challenge a competitor in the boxing match: -

Talis prima Dares caput altum in praelia tollit,

Ostenditque humeros latos, alternaque jactat

Brachia protendens, et verberat ictibus auras.

Aen. v., ver. 375.

Thus, glorying in his strength, in open view

His arms around the towering Dares threw;

Stalked high, and laid his brawny shoulders bare,

And dealt his whistling blows in empty air.

Pitt.

2\. Sometimes boxers were to aim blows at their adversaries which they
did not intend to take place, and which the others were obliged to exert
themselves to prevent as much as if they had been really intended, and
by these means some dexterous pugilists vanquished their adversaries by
mere fatigue, without giving them a single blow.

3\. Pugilists were said to beat the air when they had to contend with a
nimble adversary, who, by running from side to side, stooping, and
various contortions of the body, eluded the blows of his antagonist; who
spent his strength on the air, frequently missing his aim, and sometimes
overturning himself in attempting to hit his adversary, when this, by
his agility, had been able to elude the blow. We have an example of this
in Virgil's account of the boxing match between Entellus and Dares, so
well told Aeneid. v., ver. 426, etc., and which will give us a proper
view of the subject to which the apostle alludes: viz. boxing at the
Isthmian games.

Constitit in digitos extemplo arrectus uterque,

Brachiaque ad superas interritus extulit auras.

Abduxere retro longe capita ardua ab ictu;

Immiscentque manus manibus, pugnamque lacessunt.

Ille (Dares) pedum melior motu, fretusque juventa;

Hic (Entellus) membris et mole valens; sed tarda trementi

Genua labant, vastos quatit aeger anhelitus artus.

Multa viri nequicquam inter se vulnera jactant,

Multa cavo lateri ingeminant, et pectore vasto

Dant sonitus; erratque aures et tempora circum

Crebra manus; duro crepitant sub vulnere malae,

Stat gravis Entellus, nisuque immotus eodem,

Corpore tela modo atque oculis vigilantibus exit.

Ille, velut celsam oppugnat qui molibus urbem,

Aut montana sedet circum castella sob armis;

Nunc hos, nunc illos aditus, omnemque pererrat

Arte locum, et variis assultibus irritus urget.

Ostendit dextram insurgens Entellus, et alte

Extulit: ille ictum venientem a vertice velox

Praevidit, celerique elapsus corpore cessit.

Entellus Vires In Ventum Effudit; et ultro

Ipse gravis, graviterque ad terram pontere vasto

Concidit: ut quondam cava concidit, aut Erymantho,

Aut Ida in magna, radicibus eruta pinus. -

Consurgunt studiis Teucri et Trinacria pubes;

It clamor coelo: primusque accurrit Acestes,

Aequaevumque ab humo miserans attollit amicum.

At non tardatus casu, neque territus heros,

Acrior ad pugnam redit, ac vim suscitat ira:

Tum pudor incendit vires, et conscia virtus;

Praecipitemque Daren ardens agit aequore toto;

Nunc dextra ingeminans ictus, nunc ille sinistra

Nec mora, nec requies: quam multa grandine nimbi

Culminibus crepitant; sic densis ictibus heros

Creber utraque manu pulsat versatque Dareta.

Both on the tiptoe stand, at full extent;

Their arms aloft, their bodies inly bent;

Their heads from aiming blows they bear afar,

With clashing gauntlets then provoke the war.

One (Dares) on his youth and pliant limbs relies;

One (Entellus) on his sinews, and his giant size.

The last is stiff with age, his motions slow;

He heaves for breath, he staggers to and fro. -

Yet equal in success, they ward, they strike;

Their ways are different, but their art alike.

Before, behind, the blows are dealt; around

Their hollow sides the rattling thumps resound;

A storm of strokes, well meant, with fury flies,

And errs about their temples, ears, and eyes:

Nor always errs; for oft the gauntlet draws

A sweeping stroke along the crackling jaws.

Hoary with age, Entellus stands his ground;

But with his warping body wards the wound;

His head and watchful eye keep even pace,

While Dares traverses and shifts his place;

And, like a captain who beleaguers round

Some strong-built castle, on a rising ground,

Views all the approaches with observing eyes;

This, and that other part, in vain he tries,

And more on industry than force relies.

With hands on high, Entellus threats the foe;

But Dares watched the motion from below,

And slipped aside, and shunned the long descending blow.

Entellus wastes his forces on the wind;

And thus deluded of the stroke designed,

Headlong and heavy fell: his ample breast,

And weighty limbs, his ancient mother pressed.

So falls a hollow pine, that long had stood

On Ida's height or Erymanthus' wood. -

Dauntless he rose, and to the fight returned;

With shame his cheeks, his eyes with fury burned:

Disdain and conscious virtue fired his breast,

And, with redoubled force, his foe he pressed;

He lays on loads with either hand amain,

And headlong drives the Trojan o'er the plain,

Nor stops, nor stays; nor rest, nor breath allows;

But storms of strokes descend about his brows;

A rattling tempest, and a hail of blows.

Dryden.

To such a combat as this the apostle most manifestly alludes: and in the
above description the reader will see the full force and meaning of the
words, So fight I, not as one that beateth the air - I have a real and a
deadly foe; and as I fight not only for my honor but for my life, I aim
every blow well, and do execution with each.

No man, who had not seen such a fight, could have given such a
description as that above; and we may fairly presume that when Virgil
was in Greece he saw such a contest at the Isthmian games, and therefore
was enabled to paint from nature.

Homer has the same image of missing the foe and beating the air, when
describing Achilles attempting to kill Hector, who, by his agility and
skill, (Poetice by Apollo), eluded the blow: -

Τρις μεν επιτ' επορουσε ποδαρκης διος Αχιλλευς

Εγχεΐ χαλκειῳ, τρις δ' ηερα τυψε βαθειαν.

Iliad, lib. xx., ver. 445

Thrice struck Pelides with indignant heart,

Thrice, in impressive air, he plunged the dart. -

Pope.

[1 Corinthians 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">co1 9:27</span></span>

But I keep under my body, etc. - This is an allusion, not only to
boxers, but also to wrestlers in the same games, as we learn from the
word ὑπωπιαζω, which signifies to hit in the eyes; and δουλαγωγω, which
signifies to trip, and give the antagonist a fall, and then keep him
down when he was down, and having obliged him to acknowledge himself
conquered, make him a slave. The apostle considers his body as an enemy
with which he must contend; he must mortify it by self-denial,
abstinence, and severe labor; it must be the slave of his soul, and not
the soul the slave of the body, which in all unregenerate men is the
case.

Lest - having preached to others - The word κηρυξας, which we translate
having preached, refers to the office of the κηρυξ, or herald, at these
games, whose business it was to proclaim the conditions of the games,
display the prizes, exhort the combatants, excite the emulation of those
who were to contend, declare the terms of each contest, pronounce the
name of the victors, and put the crown on their heads. See my
observations on this office in the notes at [Mat
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017).

Should be a castaway - The word αδοκιμος signifies such a person as the
βραβευται, or judges of the games, reject as not having deserved the
prize. So Paul himself might be rejected by the great Judge; and to
prevent this, he ran, he contended, he denied himself, and brought his
body into subjection to his spirit, and had his spirit governed by the
Spirit of God. Had this heavenly man lived in our days, he would by a
certain class of people have been deemed a legalist; a people who widely
differ from the practice of the apostle, for they are conformed to the
world, and they feed themselves without fear.

On the various important subjects in this chapter I have already spoken
in great detail; not, indeed, all that might be said, but as much as is
necessary. A few general observations will serve to recapitulate and
impress what has been already said.

1\. St. Paul contends that a preacher of the Gospel has a right to his
support; and he has proved this from the law, from the Gospel, and from
the common sense and consent of men. If a man who does not labor takes
his maintenance from the Church of God, it is not only a domestic theft
but a sacrilege. He that gives up his time to this labor has a right to
the support of himself and family: he who takes more than is sufficient
for this purpose is a covetous hireling. He who does nothing for the
cause of God and religion, and yet obliges the Church to support him,
and minister to his idleness, irregularities, luxury, avarice, and
ambition, is a monster for whom human language has not yet got a name.

2\. Those who refuse the laborer his hire are condemned by God and by
good men. How liberal are many to public places of amusement, or to some
popular charity, where their names are sure to be published abroad;
while the man who watches over their souls is fed with the most
parsimonious hand! Will not God abate this pride and reprove this
hard-heartedness?

3\. As the husbandman plows and sows in hope, and the God of providence
makes him a partaker of his hope, let the upright preachers of God's
word take example and encouragement by him. Let them labor in hope; God
will not permit them to spend their strength for nought. Though much of
their seed, through the fault of the bad ground, may be unfruitful, yet
some will spring up unto eternal life.

4\. St. Paul became all things to all men, that he might gain all. This
was not the effect of a fickle or man-pleasing disposition; no man was
ever of a more firm or decided character than St. Paul; but whenever he
could with a good conscience yield so as to please his neighbor for his
good to edification, he did so; and his yielding disposition was a proof
of the greatness of his soul. The unyielding and obstinate mind is
always a little mind: a want of true greatness always produces obstinacy
and peevishness. Such a person as St. Paul is a blessing wherever he
goes: on the contrary, the obstinate, hoggish man, is either a general
curse, or a general cross; and if a preacher of the Gospel, his is a
burthensome ministry. Reader, let me ask thee a question: If there be no
gentleness in thy manners, is there any in thy heart? If there be little
of Christ without, can there be much of Christ within?

5\. A few general observations on the Grecian games may serve to
recapitulate the subject in the four last verses.

1\. The Isthmian games were celebrated among the Corinthians; and
therefore the apostle addresses them, [Co1
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#024) : Know ye not, etc.

2\. Of the five games there used, the apostle speaks only of three.

Running; [Co1 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#024) : They which run in
a race; and [Co1 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#026) : I therefore so
run, not as uncertainly.

Wrestling, [Co1 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#025) : Every man that
striveth; ὁ αγωνιζομενος, he who wrestleth.

Boxing, [Co1 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#026), [Co1
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#027) : So fight I, not as one that
beateth the air; οὑτω πυκτευω, so fist I, so I hit; but I keep my body
under; ὑπωπιαζω, I hit in the eye, I make the face black and blue.

3\. He who won the race by running was to observe the laws of racing -
keeping within the white line which marked out the path or compass in
which they ran; and he was also to outrun the rest, and to come first to
the goal; otherwise he ran uncertainly, [Co1
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#024), [Co1
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#026), and was αδοκιμος, one to whom
the prize could not be judged by the judges of the games.

4\. The athletic combatants, or wrestlers, observed a set diet. See the
quotation from Epictetus, under [Co1
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#025). And this was a regimen both for
quantity and quality; and they carefully abstained from all things that
might render them less able for the combat; whence the apostle says they
were temperate in all things, [Co1
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#025).

5\. No person who was not of respectable family and connections was
permitted to be a competitor at the Olympic games. St. Chrysostom, in
whose time these games were still celebrated, assures us that no man was
suffered to enter the lists who was either a servant or a slave, ουδεις
αγωνιζεται δουλος, ουδεις στρατευεται οικετης· and if any such was found
who had got himself inserted on the military list, his name was erased,
and he was expelled and punished. Αλλ' εαν ἁλῳ δουλος ων, μετα τιμωριας
εκβαλλεται του των στρατιωτων καταολου. To prevent any person of bad
character from entering the list at the Olympic games, the kerux, or
herald, was accustomed to proclaim aloud in the theater when the
combatant was brought forth: Μη τις τουτου κατηγορει; ὡστε αυτον
αποσκευασαμενον της δουλειας την ὑποψιαν οὑτως εις τους αγωνας εμβηναι·
Who can accuse this man? For which he gives this reason: "that being
free from all suspicion of being in a state of slavery, (and elsewhere
he says of being a thief, or of corrupt morals), he might enter the
lists with credit." Chrysost. Homil. in Inscript. Altaris, etc., vol.
iii. page 59, Edit. Benedict.

6\. The boxers used to prepare themselves by a sort of σκιαμαχια, or
going through all their postures of defense and attack when no adversary
was before them. This was termed beating the air, [Co1
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#026); but when such came to the
combat, they endeavored to blind their adversaries by hitting them in
the eye, which is the meaning of ὑπωπιαζειν, as we have seen under [Co1
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#027).

7\. The rewards of all these exercises were only a crown made of the
leaves of some plant, or the bough of some tree; the olive, bay, laurel,
parsley, etc., called here by the apostle φθαρτον στεφανον, a
corruptible, withering, and fading crown; while he and his fellow
Christians expected a crown incorruptible and immortal, and that could
not fade away.

8\. On the subject of the possibility of St. Paul becoming a castaway,
much has been said in contradiction to his own words. He most absolutely
states the possibility of the case: and who has a right to call this in
question? The ancient Greek commentators, as Whitby has remarked, have
made a good use of the apostle's saying, Ει δε Παυλος τουτο δεδοικεν ὁ
τοσουτους διδαξας, τι αν ειποιμεν ἡμεις; "If Paul, so great a man, one
who had preached and labored so much, dreaded this, what cause have we
to fear lest this should befall us?"

9\. On the necessity of being workers together with God, in order to
avoid apostasy, Clemens Alexandrinus has some useful observations in his
Stromata, lib. vii., page 448, Edit. Oberthur: Ὡς δε, says he, ὁ ιατρος
ὑγειαν παρεχεται τοις συνεργουσι προς ὑγειαν, οὑτως και ὁ Θεος την
αΐδιον σωτηριαν τοις συνεργουσι προς γνωσιν τε και ευπραγιαν· "As a
physician gives health to those who cooperate with him in their cure; so
God also gives eternal salvation to them who are workers together with
him in knowledge and a godly life." "Therefore," says he, "it is well
said among the Greeks, that when a certain wrestler, who had long inured
his body to manly exercises, was going to the Olympic games, as he was
passing by the statue of Jupiter he offered up this prayer: Ει παντα, ω
Ζευ, δεοντως μοι τα προς τον αγωνα ταρεσκευασται, αποδος φερων δικαιως
την νικην εμοι· 'O Jupiter, if I have performed every thing as I ought
in reference to this contest, grant me the victory!'" May we not feel
something of this spirit in seeking the kingdom of God? And can any
thing of this kind be supposed to derogate from the glory of Christ? St.
Paul himself says, if a man contend for the mastery, yet is he not
crowned except he strive lawfully. Shall we pretend to be wiser than the
apostle; and say, that we may gain the crown, though we neither fight
the good fight nor finish the course?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 10](co1010)

</div>
