<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2.md)  
  [Previous](co2008)  [Next](co2010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#001.md)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 9:0</span></span>

St. Paul intimates that so ready were the Corinthians to make this
charitable contribution, that it was scarcely necessary for him to
write, [Co2 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#001.md), [Co2
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#002.md). But lest they should not be ready
when he came, he had sent the brethren, Titus, etc., beforehand; lest,
if any of the Macedonians should come with him, they should find them
not prepared, though he had boasted so much of their ready mind, [Co2
9:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#003.md). He gives them directions how
they shall contribute; and the advantage to be gained by it, in the
fulfillment of the promises of God, [Co2
9:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#006.md). He shows them that by this
means the poor shall be relieved, God glorified, their Christian temper
manifested, and the prayers of many engaged in their behalf, [Co2
9:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#012.md). And concludes with giving
thanks to God for his unspeakable gift, [Co2
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#015.md).

[2 Corinthians 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 9:1</span></span>

It is superfluous for me to write to you - I need not enlarge, having
already said enough. See the preceding chapter, (2 Corinthians 8
(note)).

[2 Corinthians 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co2 9:2</span></span>

I know the forwardness of your mind - You have already firmly purposed
to contribute to the support of the poor and suffering saints.

That Achaia was ready a year ago - The whole of the Morea was anciently
called Achaia, the capital of which was Corinth. The apostle means, not
only Corinth, but other Churches in different parts about Corinth; we
know there was a Church at Cenchrea, one of the ports on the Corinthian
Isthmus.

Your zeal hath provoked very many - Hearing that the Corinthians were so
intent on the relief of the sufferers in Palestine, other Churches, and
especially they of Macedonia, came forward the more promptly and
liberally.

[2 Corinthians 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co2 9:3</span></span>

Yet have I sent the brethren - Titus and his companions, mentioned in
the preceding chapter.

That, as I said, ye may be ready - And he wished them to be ready, that
they might preserve the good character he had given them: this was for
their honor; and if they did not take care to do so, he might be reputed
a liar; and thus both they and himself be ashamed before the
Macedonians, should any of them at this time accompany him to Corinth.

[2 Corinthians 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co2 9:5</span></span>

Whereof ye had notice before - Instead of προκατηγγελμενην, spoken of
before, BCDEFG, several others, with the Coptic, Vulgate, Itala, and
several of the fathers, have προεπηγγελμενην, what was promised before.
The sense is not very different; probably the latter reading was
intended to explain the former. See the margin.

Bounty, and not as of covetousness - Had they been backward, strangers
might have attributed this to a covetous principle; as it would appear
that they were loth to give up their money, and that they parted with it
only when they could not for shame keep it any longer. This is the
property of a covetous heart; whereas readiness to give is the
characteristic of a liberal mind. This makes a sufficiently plain sense;
and we need not look, as some have done, for any new sense of πλεονεξια,
covetousness, as if it were here to be understood as implying a small
gift.

[2 Corinthians 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co2 9:6</span></span>

He which soweth sparingly - This is a plain maxim: no man can expect to
reap but in proportion as he has sowed. And here almsgiving is
represented as a seed sown, which shall bring forth a crop. If the
sowing be liberal, and the seed good, the crop shall be so too.

Sowing is used among the Jews to express almsgiving: so they understand
[Isa 32:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#020.md) : Blessed are ye who sow
beside all waters; i.e. who are ready to help every one that is in need.
And [Hos 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#012.md), they interpret: Sow to
yourselves almsgiving, and ye shall reap in mercy - if you show mercy to
the poor, God will show mercy to you.

[2 Corinthians 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co2 9:7</span></span>

Not grudgingly, or of necessity - The Jews had in the temple two chests
for alms; the one was של תובה of what was necessary, i.e. what the law
required, the other was של נרבה of the free-will offerings. To escape
perdition some would grudgingly give what necessity obliged them; others
would give cheerfully, for the love of God, and through pity to the
poor. Of the first, nothing is said; they simply did what the law
required. Of the second, much is said; God loves them. The benefit of
almsgiving is lost to the giver when he does it with a grumbling heart.
And, as he does not do the duty in the spirit of the duty, even the
performance of the letter of the law is an abomination in the sight of
God.

To these two sorts of alms in the temple the apostle most evidently
alludes. See Schoettgen.

[2 Corinthians 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co2 9:8</span></span>

God is able to make all grace abound - We have already seen, [Co2
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#001.md) that the word χαρις, in the
connection in which the apostle uses it in these chapters, signifies a
charitable gift; here it certainly has the same meaning: God is able to
give you, in his mercy, abundance of temporal good; that, having a
sufficiency, ye may abound in every good work. This refers to the sowing
plenteously: those who do so shall reap plenteously - they shall have an
abundance of God's blessings.

[2 Corinthians 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co2 9:9</span></span>

He hath dispersed abroad - Here is still the allusion to the sower. He
sows much; not at home merely, or among those with whom he is
acquainted, but abroad - among the strangers, whether of his own or of
another nation. The quotation is taken from [Psa
112:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#009.md).

He hath given to the poor - This is the interpretation of he hath
scattered abroad; and therefore it is said, his righteousness remaineth
for ever - his good work is had in remembrance before God. By
righteousness we have already seen that the Jews understand almsgiving.
See the note on [Mat 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#001.md).

[2 Corinthians 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co2 9:10</span></span>

Now he that ministereth seed to the sower - The sower, as we have
already seen, is he that gives alms of what he hath; and God, who
requires him to give these alms, is here represented as providing him
with the means. As in the creation, if God had not created the earth
with every tree and plant with its seed in itself, so that a harvest
came, without a previous ploughing and sowing, there could have been no
seed to deposit in the earth; so, if God had not, in the course of his
providence, given them the property they had, it would be impossible for
them to give alms. And as even the well cultivated and sowed field would
be unfruitful if God did not, by his unseen energy and blessing, cause
it to bring forth, and bring to maturity; so would it have been with
their property: it could not have increased; for without his blessing
riches take wings and flee away, as an eagle towards heaven. Therefore,
in every sense, it is God who ministers seed to the sower, and
multiplies the seed sown. And as all this properly comes from God, and
cannot exist without him, he has a right to require that it be dispensed
in that way which he judges best.

The word ὁ - επιχορηγων, he that ministereth, is very emphatic; it
signifies he who leads up the chorus, from επι, to, and χορηγω, to lead
the chorus; it means also to join to, associate, to supply or furnish
one thing after another so that there be no want or chasm. Thus God is
represented, in the course of his providence, associating and connecting
causes and effects; keeping every thing in its proper place and state of
dependence on another, and all upon himself; so that summer and winter,
heat and cold, seed time and harvest, regularly succeed each other. Thus
God leads up this grand chorus of causes and effects: provides the seed
to the hand of the sower; gives him skill to discern the times when the
earth should be prepared for the grain, and when the grain should be
sowed; blesses the earth, and causes it to bring forth and bud, so that
it may again minister seed to the sower and bread to the eater; and, by
a watchful providence, preserves every thing. The figure is beautiful,
and shows us the grand system of causes and effects, all directed by and
under the immediate guidance and government of God himself.

There is a fine exemplification of this in the same figure thus produced
by the prophet. [Hos 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#021.md), [Hos
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#022.md) : I will hear, saith the Lord, I
will hear the heavens; and they shall hear the earth; and the earth
shall hear the corn, and the wine and the oil; and they shall hear
Jezreel. See the note at [Hos 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#021.md).

The fruits of your righteousness - Your beneficence; for so δικαιοσυνηis
here to be understood. See the note on [Mat
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#001.md), already referred to.

[2 Corinthians 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co2 9:11</span></span>

Being enriched in every thing - Observe, Why does God give riches? That
they may be applied to his glory, and the good of men. Why does he
increase riches? That those who have them may exercise all
bountifulness. And if they be enriched in every thing, what will be the
consequence if they do not exercise all bountifulness? Why, God will
curse their blessings; the rust shall canker them, and the moth shall
consume their garments. But if, on the other hand, they do thus apply
them, then they cause thanksgiving to God. The 9th and 10th verses
should be read in a parenthesis, for this verse connects with the
eighth.

[2 Corinthians 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 9:12</span></span>

For the administration of this service - The poor are relieved, see the
hand of God in this relief, and give God the glory of his grace.

[2 Corinthians 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co2 9:13</span></span>

By the experiment of this ministration - In this, and in the preceding
and following verses, the apostle enumerates the good effects that would
be produced by their liberal almsgiving to the poor saints at Jerusalem.

1\. The wants of the saints would be supplied.

2\. Many thanksgivings would thereby be rendered unto God.

3\. The Corinthians would thereby give proof of their subjection to the
Gospel. And,

4\. The prayers of those relieved will ascend up to God in the behalf of
their benefactors.

[2 Corinthians 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co2 9:14</span></span>

The exceeding grace of God in you - By the ὑπερβαλλουσαν χαριν,
superabounding or transcending grace, of God, which was in them, the
apostle most evidently means the merciful and charitable disposition
which they had towards the suffering saints. The whole connection,
indeed the whole chapter, proves this; and the apostle attributes this
to its right source, the grace or goodness of God. They had the means of
charity, but God had given these means; they had a feeling, and
charitable heart, but God was the author of it. Their charity was
superabundant, and God had furnished both the disposition, the occasion,
and the means by which that disposition was to be made manifest.

[2 Corinthians 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co2 9:15</span></span>

Thanks be unto God for his unspeakable gift - Some contend that Christ
only is here intended; others, that the almsgiving is meant.

After all the difference of commentators and preachers, it is most
evident that the ανεκδιηγητος δωρεα, unspeakable gift, is precisely the
same with the ὑπερβαλλουση χαρις, superabounding grace or benefit, of
the preceding verse. If therefore Jesus Christ, the gift of God s
unbounded love to man, be the meaning of the unspeakable gift in this
verse, he is also intended by the superabounding grace in the preceding.
But it is most evident that it is the work of Christ in them, and not
Christ himself, which is intended in the 14th verse ([Co2
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#014).md); and consequently, that it is
the same work, not the operator, which is referred to in this last
verse.

A Few farther observations may be necessary on the conclusion of this
chapter.

1\. Jesus Christ, the gift of God's love to mankind, is an unspeakable
blessing; no man can conceive, much less declare, how great this gift
is; for these things the angels desire to look into. Therefore he may be
well called the unspeakable gift, as he is the highest God ever gave or
can give to man; though this is not the meaning of the last verse.

2\. The conversion of a soul from darkness to light, from sin to
holiness, from Satan to God, is not less inconceivable. It is called a
new creation, and creative energy cannot be comprehended. To have the
grace of God to rule the heart, subduing all things to itself and
filling the soul with the Divine nature, is an unspeakable blessing; and
the energy that produced it is an unspeakable gift. I conclude,
therefore, that it is the work of Christ in the soul, and not Christ
himself, that the apostle terms the superabounding or exceeding great
grace, and the unspeakable gift; and Dr. Whitby's paraphrase may be
safely admitted as giving the true sense of the passage. "Thanks be unto
God for his unspeakable gift: i.e. this admirable charity (proceeding
from the work of Christ in the soul) by which God is so much glorified,
the Gospel receives such credit, others are so much benefited, and you
will be by God so plentifully rewarded." This is the sober sense of the
passage; and no other meaning can comport with it. The passage itself is
a grand proof that every good disposition in the soul of man comes from
God; and it explodes the notion of natural good, i.e. good which God
does not work, which is absurd; for no effect can exist without a cause;
and God being the fountain of good, all that can be called good must
come immediately from himself. See [Jam
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017.md).

3\. Most men can see the hand of God in the dispensations of his
justice, and yet these very seldom appear. How is it that they cannot
equally see his hand in the dispensations of his mercy, which are great,
striking, and unremitting? Our afflictions we scarcely ever forget; our
mercies we scarcely ever remember! Our hearts are alive to complaint,
but dead to gratitude. We have had ten thousand mercies for one
judgment, and yet our complaints to our thanksgivings have been ten
thousand to one! How is it that God endures this, and bears with us? Ask
his own eternal clemency; and ask the Mediator before the throne. The
mystery of our preservation and salvation can be there alone explained.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 10](co2010.md)

</div>
