<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2)  
  [Previous](co2005)  [Next](co2007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#001)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 6:0</span></span>

We should not receive the grace of God in vain, having such promises of
support from him, [Co2 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#001), [Co2
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#002). We should act so as to bring no
disgrace on the Gospel, [Co2 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#003). How
the apostles behaved themselves, preached, suffered, and rejoiced, [Co2
6:4-10](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#004). St. Paul's affectionate
concern for the Corinthians, [Co2
6:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#011). He counsels them not to be
yoked with unbelievers, and advances several arguments why they should
avoid them, [Co2 6:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#014). Exhorts them
to avoid evil companions and evil practices, on the promise that God
will be their Father and that they shall be his sons and his daughters,
[Co2 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#017), [Co2
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#018),

[2 Corinthians 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 6:1</span></span>

We then, as workers together with him - Συνεργουντες δε και
παρακαλουμεν. The two last words, with him, are not in the text, and
some supply the place thus: we then, as workers together With You, and
the Armenian version seems to have read it so; but no MS. has this
reading, and no other version. For my own part I see nothing wanting in
the text if we only suppose the term apostles; we, (i.e. apostles),
being fellow workers, also entreat you not to receive the grace of God
in vain.

By the grace of God, την χαριν του Θεου, this grace or benefit of God,
the apostle certainly means the grand sacrificial offering of Christ for
the sin of the world, which he had just before mentioned in speaking of
the ministry of reconciliation. We learn, therefore, that it was
possible to receive the grace of God and not ultimately benefit by it;
or, in other words, to begin in the Spirit and end in the flesh. Should
any one say that it is the ministry of reconciliation, that is, the
benefit of apostolic preaching, that they might receive in vain; I
answer, that the apostolic preaching, and the whole ministry of
reconciliation, could be no benefit to any man farther than it might
have been a means of conveying to him the salvation of God. And it is
most evident that the apostle has in view that grace or benefit that
reconciles us to God, and makes us Divinely righteous. And this, and all
other benefits of the death of Christ, may be received in vain.

[2 Corinthians 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co2 6:2</span></span>

For he saith - That is, God hath said it, by the prophet Isaiah, [Isa
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008); which place the apostle quotes
verbatim et literatim from the Septuagint. And from this we may at once
see what is the accepted time, and what the day of salvation. The advent
of the Messiah was the עת רצון eth ratson, the time of God's pleasure or
benevolence, of which all the faithful were in expectation; and the day
of salvation, יום שועה yom yeshuah, was the time in which this salvation
should be manifested and applied. The apostle therefore informs them
that this is the time predicted by the prophet; and the ministry of
reconciliation being exercised in full force is a proof that the
prophecy is fulfilled; and therefore the apostle confidently asserts,
Behold, Now is this accepted time, Now the Messiah reigns, Now is the
Gospel dispensation, and therefore Now is the day of salvation; that is,
the very time in which the power of God is present to heal, and in which
every sinner believing on the Lord Jesus may be saved.

I rather think that this second verse should be read immediately after
the last verse of the preceding chapter; as where it now stands it
greatly disturbs the connection between the first and the third verses.
I will set down the whole in the order in which I think they should
stand. [Co2 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#020) : Now then we are
ambassadors for Christ; as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you
in Christ's stead, to be reconciled to God. For he hath made him a
sin-offering for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him: for he saith, "I have heard thee in a time
accepted, and in the day of salvation have I succoured thee." Behold,
now is the accepted time; behold, now is the day of salvation.
Immediately after this, the sixth chapter will very properly commence,
and we shall see that the connection will be then undisturbed: -

We then, as fellow workers, beseech you also, that ye receive not this
grace of God in vain, giving no offense in any thing, that this ministry
be not blamed. This change of the place of the second verse, which every
one allows must, if it stand here, be read in a parenthesis, preserves
the whole connection of the apostle's discourse, and certainly sets his
argument before us in a stronger light. Let us review the whole:

1\. God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself, [Co2
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#018).

2\. He appointed the apostles to proclaim to mankind the doctrine of
reconciliation, [Co2 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#019).

3\. The apostles, in consequence, proclaim this doctrine; and show that
Christ was a sacrifice for sin, and that through him we may be perfectly
saved, [Co2 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#020), [Co2
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021).

4\. They show also that all this was agreeable to the declaration of God
by the prophet Isaiah, [Isa 49:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008),
where he predicts the days of the Messiah, and the grace then to be
communicated, [Co2 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#002).

5\. The apostle then, speaking in the person of all his fellow laborers,
who had this ministry of reconciliation intrusted to them, exhorts them
not to receive such a benefit of God in vain, [Co2
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#001).

6\. He exhorts those who had embraced the Gospel not to put a stumbling
block in the way of others, by acting irreligiously, lest this ministry
of reconciliation should be reproached on their account, [Co2
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#003).

7\. He shows what conscientious and scrupulous care he and his fellow
apostles took to preach and walk so that this ministry might have its
full effect, [Co2 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#004), etc.

This view of the subject, if I mistake not, shows a beautiful
consistency throughout the whole.

[2 Corinthians 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co2 6:3</span></span>

Giving no offense - The word προσκοπη, read προσκομμα, [Rom
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#013), signifies a stumbling block in
general, or any thing over which a man stumbles or falls; and here means
any transgression or scandal that might take place among the ministers,
or the Christians themselves, whereby either Jews or Gentiles might take
occasion of offense, and vilify the Gospel of Christ.

[2 Corinthians 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co2 6:4</span></span>

But in all things approving ourselves - The apostle now proceeds to show
how conscientiously himself and his fellow laborers acted, in order to
render the ministry of reconciliation effectual to the salvation of men.
They not only gave no offense in any thing, but they labored to manifest
themselves to be the genuine ministers of God, in much patience -
bearing calmly up under the most painful and oppressive afflictions.

In afflictions - Εν θλιψεσιν. This may signify the series of
persecutions and distresses in general; the state of cruel suffering in
which the Church of God and the apostles then existed.

In necessities - Εν αναγκαις· Straits and difficulties; including all
that want and affliction which arose from the impoverished state of the
Church.

In distresses - Εν στενοχωριαις. Such straits and difficulties as were
absolutely unavoidable and insurmountable. The word implies, being
reduced to a narrow place, driven to a corner, hemmed in on every side,
as the Israelites were at the Red Sea; the sea before them, Pharaoh and
his host behind them, and Egyptian fortresses on either hand. God alone
could bring them out of such difficulties, when their enemies themselves
saw that the wilderness had shut them in. So was it often with the
apostles; all human help failed, and their deliverance came from God
alone.

[2 Corinthians 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co2 6:5</span></span>

In stripes, in imprisonments - Of these the history of the Acts of the
Apostles gives ample testimony; and there were doubtless many instances
of persecution in various forms which are not on record.

In tumults - Ακαταστασιαις· Insurrections raised against them because of
the Gospel. It is more natural to understand the word thus, than of
agitations, or tossings to and fro in consequence of their unsettled
state of life; or because of persecution, which obliged them to flee
from place to place.

In labors - Both with our own hands to provide for ourselves the
necessaries of life, that we might not be chargeable to others; and in
labors to spread the Gospel of God through all countries where his
providence opened our way.

In watchings - Passing many nights without sleep or rest.

In fastings - Partly constrained through want of food; and partly
voluntary, as a means of obtaining an increase of grace both for
ourselves and for the Churches.

[2 Corinthians 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co2 6:6</span></span>

By pureness - Εν ἁγνοτητι· In simplicity of intention, and purity of
affection; together with that chastity and holiness of life which the
Gospel enjoins.

By knowledge - Of the Divine mysteries.

By long-suffering - Under all provocations.

By kindness - To our most virulent persecutors, and to all men.

By the Holy Ghost - There are doubts among learned men whether the
apostle here means that Spirit who is called the third person of the
holy Trinity; or some grace, disposition, or quality of the soul, which
was thus denominated, as implying a spirit wholly purified, and fitted
to be a habitation of God.

Schoettgen quotes a passage from Rabbi Bechai, in which it appears to
him to have this latter meaning: "Rabbi Pinchas, the son of Jair, said:
Reflection leads to sedulity; sedulity to innocence; innocence to
abstinence; abstinence to cleanness; cleanness to sanctity; sanctity to
the fear of sin; fear of sin to humility; humility to piety; and piety
to the Holy Spirit. Of these ten virtues five are external, or belong to
the body; and five internal, or belonging to the soul; but all men
prefer the tenth, which is רוח הקדש ruach hakkodesh, the Holy Spirit."
Even allowing Rabbi Pinchas to be a person on whose judgment we could
rely, and whose authority was decisive, there does not appear to me any
reason why we should depart from the usual meaning of the term from any
thing that is said here. It appears to me plain enough that the rabbi
means the constant indwelling of the Holy Spirit; and St. Paul, in this
place, may have the same thing in view, and with it the various gifts of
the Holy Spirit by which he was enabled to work miracles.

By love unfeigned - Εν αγαπῃ ανυποκριτῳ· Love without hypocrisy; such as
disposed us at all times to lay down our life for the brethren, and to
spend and be spent for the glory of God and the good of mankind.

[2 Corinthians 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co2 6:7</span></span>

By the word of truth - The doctrine of truth received immediately from
God, and faithfully and affectionately preached to men.

By the power of God - Confirming this doctrine, not only by the miracles
which we were enabled to work, but also by the application of that truth
to the souls of the people by the energy of God.

By the armor of righteousness - Such as that described by the apostle,
[Eph 6:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#013), which he calls there the
whole armor of God, consisting of the following pieces: the girdle of
truth, the breastplate of righteousness, the shoes of the Gospel of
peace, the shield of faith, the helmet of salvation, and the sword of
the Spirit.

On the right hand and on the left - Particularly, the shield and the
sword; the former on the left arm, the latter in the right hand. We have
the doctrine of truth, and the power of God, as an armor to protect us
on all sides, every where, and on all occasions.

It seems far-fetched to understand the right hand as signifying
prosperity, and the left as signifying adversity; as if the apostle had
said: We have this armor to defend us both in prosperity and adversity.
By the doctrine of the Gospel, and by the power of God, the apostles
were furnished with offensive and defensive weapons; they could ever
defend themselves, and discomfit their foes.

[2 Corinthians 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co2 6:8</span></span>

By honor and dishonor - By going through both; sometimes respected,
sometimes despised.

By evil report and good report - Sometimes praised, at other times
calumniated.

As deceivers - Said to carry about a false doctrine for our secular
emolument.

And yet true - Demonstrated by the nature of the doctrine, as well as by
our life and conversation, that we are true men; having nothing in view
but God's glory and the salvation of the world.

[2 Corinthians 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co2 6:9</span></span>

As unknown - Persons who are to be suspected as harbouring dark designs;
persons of neither birth, parentage, nor respectable connections in
life;

And yet well known - Proved by our whole conduct to have no such
designs, and demonstrated to be holy, upright, and useful, by the whole
train of our peregrinations, through which we can be readily traced from
place to place; having preached openly, and done nothing in a corner.

As dying - Through continual dangers, fatigues, and persecutions;

And, behold, we live - We are preserved by the mighty power of God in
the greatest dangers and deaths.

As chastened - As though we were disobedient children;

And not killed - Though we continue in the very same line of conduct
that is supposed to bring on us those chastisements, and which, if it
were criminal, would justly expose us to death for incorrigible
obstinacy; but our preservation is a proof that we please God.

[2 Corinthians 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co2 6:10</span></span>

As sorrowful - Considerate men supposing, from our persecuted state and
laborious occupation, (often destitute of the necessaries of life;
seldom enjoying its conveniences; and scarcely ever, its comforts), that
we must be the most miserable of all men.

Yet alway rejoicing - Having the consolation of God's Spirit at all
times, and a glorious prospect of a blessed immortality.

As poor - Destitute of all worldly good and secular interest,

Yet making many rich - By dispensing to them the treasures of salvation;
making them rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom.

The Gospel, when faithfully preached, and fully received, betters the
condition of the poor. It makes them sober; so they save what before
they profusely and riotously spent. It makes them diligent; and thus
they employ time to useful purposes which they before squandered away.
They therefore both save and gain by religion; and these must lead to an
increase of property. Therefore they are made rich; at least in
comparison with that sinful, profligate state in which they were before
they received the truth of the Gospel.

As having nothing - Being the most abject of the poor,

And yet possessing all things - That are really necessary to the
preservation of our lives. For the wants under which we labor for a time
are supplied again by a bountiful Providence. The man who possesses a
contented spirit possesses all things; for he is satisfied with every
dispensation of the providence of God; and "a contented mind is a
continual feast."

[2 Corinthians 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co2 6:11</span></span>

O ye Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you - I speak to you with the
utmost freedom and fluency, because of my affection for you.

Our heart is enlarged - It is expanded to take you and all your
interests in; and to keep you in the most affectionate remembrance.

The preceding verses contain a very fine specimen of a very powerful and
commanding eloquence.

[2 Corinthians 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 6:12</span></span>

Ye are not straitened in us - That is, Ye have not a narrow place in our
affections: the metaphor here is taken from the case of a person pent up
in a small or narrow place, where there is scarcely room to breathe.

Ye are straitened in your own bowels - I have not the same place in your
affections which you have in mine. The bowels are used in Scripture to
denote the most tender affections. See the note on [Mat
9:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#036).

[2 Corinthians 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co2 6:13</span></span>

Now for a recompense in the same - That you may, in some sort, repay me
for my affection towards you, I speak to you as unto my children, whom I
have a right to command, be ye also enlarged - love me as I love you.

[2 Corinthians 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co2 6:14</span></span>

Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers - This is a military
term: keep in your own ranks; do not leave the Christian community to
join in that of the heathens. The verb ἑτεροζυγειν signifies to leave
one's own rank, place, or order, and go into another; and here it must
signify not only that they should not associate with the Gentiles in
their idolatrous feasts, but that they should not apostatize from
Christianity; and the questions which follow show that there was a sort
of fellowship that some of the Christians had formed with the heathens
which was both wicked and absurd, and if not speedily checked would
infallibly lead to final apostasy.

Some apply this exhortation to pious persons marrying with those who are
not decidedly religious, and converted to God. That the exhortation may
be thus applied I grant; but it is certainly not the meaning of the
apostle in this place. Nevertheless, common sense and true piety show
the absurdity of two such persons pretending to walk together in a way
in which they are not agreed. A very wise and very holy man has given
his judgment on this point: "A man who is truly pious, marrying with an
unconverted woman, will either draw back to perdition, or have a cross
during life." The same may be said of a pious woman marrying an
unconverted man. Such persons cannot say this petition of the Lord's
prayer, Lead us not into temptation. They plunge into it of their own
accord.

For what fellowship, etc. - As righteousness cannot have communion with
unrighteousness, and light cannot dwell with darkness; so Christ can
have no concord with Belial, nor can he that believeth have any with an
infidel. All these points were self-evident; how then could they keep up
the profession of Christianity, or pretend to be under its influence,
while they associated with the unrighteous, had communion with darkness,
concord with Belial, and partook with infidels?

[2 Corinthians 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co2 6:16</span></span>

What agreement hath the temple of God with idols - Nothing could appear
more abominable to a Jew than an idol in the temple of God: here, then,
could be no agreement; the worship of the two is wholly incompatible. An
idolater never worships the true God; a Christian never worships an
idol. If ye join in idolatrous rites, it is impossible that ye should be
Christians.

Ye are the temple of the living God - God intends to make the heart of
every believer his own house.

I will dwell in them, and walk in them - The words are very emphatic:
ενοικησω εν αυτοις· I will inhabit in them. I will not be as a wayfaring
man, who turns aside to tarry as for a night, but I will take up my
constant residence with them; I will dwell in and among them.

I will be their God - They shall have no other God, they shall have none
besides me; and if they take me for their God, I will be to them all
that an infinite, eternal, and self-sufficient Being can be to his
intelligent offspring.

They shall be my people - If they take me for their God, their supreme
and eternal Good, I will take them for my people; and instruct,
enlighten, defend, provide for, support, and bless them, as if I had
none else to care for in the creation.

[2 Corinthians 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co2 6:17</span></span>

Wherefore come out from among them - Is it not plain from this and the
following verse that God would be their God only on the ground of their
taking him for such, and that this depended on their being separated
from the works and workers of iniquity? for God could not inhabit in
them if they had concord with Belial, a portion with infidels; etc.
Those who will have the promises of God fulfilled to them must come
under the conditions of these promises: if they are not separate - if
they touch the unclean thing, God will not receive them; and therefore
will not be their God, nor shall they be his people.

[2 Corinthians 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co2 6:18</span></span>

Will be a Father unto you - I will act towards you as the most
affectionate father can act towards his most tender and best beloved
child.

And ye shall be my sons and daughters - Ye shall all be of the household
of God, the family of heaven; ye shall be holy, happy, and continually
safe.

Saith the Lord Almighty - Κυριος παντοκρατωρ· The Lord, the Governor of
all things.

Earthly fathers, however loving and affectionate, may fail to provide
for their children, because every thing is not at their disposal; they
may frequently lack both the power and the means, though to will may be
present with them; but the Lord who made and who governs all things can
never lack will, power, nor means. The promise is sure to the children;
and the children are those who take the Almighty for their God. For the
promise belongs to no soul that is not separate from sinful ways, works,
and men; those who touch the unclean thing, i.e. who do what God
forbids, and hold communion with unrighteousness, can never stand in the
endearing relation of children to God Almighty: and this is most
forcibly stated by God himself, in these verses, and in the beginning of
the following chapter, the first verse of which should conclude this.

To the Jews the promises were originally made; they would not have God
for their God, but would work iniquity. What was the consequence? God
cast them off; and those who were joined to iniquity were separated from
him. "Then said God, Call his name Lo-ammi; for ye are not my people,
and I will not be your God." [Hos 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#009).
The Jews were therefore cast off, and the Gentiles taken in their place;
but even these, under the new covenant, are taken in expressly under the
same conditions as the apostle here most fully states. Those who apply
these words in any other way pervert their meaning, and sin against
their souls.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 7](co2007)

</div>
