<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2.md)  
  [Previous](co2000)  [Next](co2002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001.md)

St. Paul encourages them to trust in God in all adversities, from a
consideration of the support which he had granted them already in times
of afflictions; and expresses his strong confidence of their fidelity,
[Co2 1:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001.md). Mentions the heavy
tribulation which he had passed through in Asia; as also his
deliverance, [Co2 1:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#008.md). Shows in
what the exultation of a genuine Christian consists, [Co2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#012.md). Appeals to their own knowledge
of the truth of the things which he wrote to them, [Co2
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#013.md), [Co2
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#014.md). Mentions his purpose of visiting
them; and how sincere he was in forming it; and the reason why he did
not come, as he had purposed, [Co2
1:15-24](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#015.md).

[2 Corinthians 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 1:1</span></span>

Paul, an apostle - Paul, commissioned immediately by Jesus Christ
himself, according to the will of God, to preach the Gospel to the
Gentiles. See on [Co1 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001) (note.md).

In all Achaia - The whole of the Peloponnesus, or that country separated
from the main land by the Isthmus of Corinth. From this we may learn
that this epistle was not only sent to the Church at Corinth, but to all
the Churches in that country.

[2 Corinthians 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co2 1:2</span></span>

Grace be to you and peace - See [Rom
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007.md).

[2 Corinthians 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co2 1:3</span></span>

Blessed be God - Let God have universal and eternal praise:

1\. Because he is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the gift
of his endless love to man, [Joh 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016.md).

2\. Because he is the Father of mercies, ὁ Πατηρ των οικτιρμων, the
source whence all mercy flows, whether it respect the body or the soul,
time or eternity; the source of tender mercy; for so the word implies.
See on [Rom 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001) (note.md). And,

3\. Because he is the God of all comfort - the Fountain whence all
consolation, happiness, and bliss flow to angels and to men.

[2 Corinthians 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co2 1:4</span></span>

Who comforteth us - Who shows himself to be the God of tender mercy, by
condescending to notice us, who have never deserved any good at his
hand; and also the God of all consolation, by comforting us in all our
tribulation - never leaving us a prey to anxiety, carking care,
persecution, or temptation; but, by the comforts of his Spirit, bearing
us up in, through, and above, all our trials and difficulties.

That we may be able to comfort them - Even spiritual comforts are not
given us for our use alone; they, like all the gifts of God, are given
that they may be distributed, or become the instruments of help to
others. A minister's trials and comforts are permitted and sent for the
benefit of the Church. What a miserable preacher must he be who has all
his divinity by study and learning, and nothing by experience! If his
soul have not gone through all the travail of regeneration, if his heart
have not felt the love of God shed abroad in it by the Holy Ghost, he
can neither instruct the ignorant nor comfort the distressed. See [Co2
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#006.md).

[2 Corinthians 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co2 1:5</span></span>

The sufferings of Christ - Suffering endured for the cause of Christ:
such as persecutions, hardships, and privations of different kinds.

Our consolation also aboundeth - We stood as well, as firmly, and as
easily, in the heaviest trial, as in the lightest; because the
consolation was always proportioned to the trial and difficulty. Hence
we learn, that he who is upheld in a slight trial need not fear a great
one; for if he be faithful, his consolation shall abound, as his
sufferings abound. Is it not as easy for a man to lift one hundred
pounds' weight, as it is for an infant to lift a few ounces? The
proportion of strength destroys the comparative difficulty.

[2 Corinthians 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co2 1:6</span></span>

And whether we be afflicted - See on [Co2
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#004) (note.md).

Which is effectual - There is a strange and unusual variation in the
MSS. and versions in this passage. Perhaps the whole should be read
thus: For if we be afflicted, it is for your encouragement and
salvation; and if we be comforted, it is also for your encouragement,
which exerted itself by enduring the same sufferings which we also
suffer.

This transposition of the middle and last clauses is authorized by the
best MSS. and versions. The meaning seems to be this: While ye abide
faithful to God, no suffering can be prejudicial to you; on the
contrary, it will be advantageous; God having your comfort and salvation
continually in view, by all the dispensations of his providence: and
while you patiently endure, your salvation is advanced; sufferings and
consolations all becoming energetic means of accomplishing the great
design, for all things work together for good to them that love God. See
the variations in Griesbach.

[2 Corinthians 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co2 1:7</span></span>

And our hope of you is steadfast - We have no doubt of your continuing
in the truth; because we see that you have such a full, experimental
knowledge of it, that no sufferings or persecutions can turn you aside.
And we are sure that, as ye suffer, so shall ye rejoice.

[2 Corinthians 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co2 1:8</span></span>

Our trouble which came to us in Asia - To what part of his history the
apostle refers we know not: some think it is to the Jews lying in wait
to kill him, [Act 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#003.md); others, to the
insurrection raised against him by Demetrius and his fellow craftsmen,
[Act 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#023.md); others, to his fighting
with beasts at Ephesus, [Co1 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#032.md),
which they understand literally; and others think that there is a
reference here to some persecution which is not recorded in any part of
the apostle's history.

We were pressed out of measure, above strength - The original is
exceedingly emphatic: καθ' ὑπερβολην εβαρηθημεν ὑπερ δυναμιν· we were
weighed down beyond what is credible, even beyond what any natural
strength could support. There is no part of St. Paul's history known to
us which can justify these strong expressions, except his being stoned
at Lystra; which if not what is here intended, the facts to which he
refers are not on record. As Lystra was properly in Asia, unless he mean
Asia Minor, and his stoning at Lystra did most evidently destroy his
life, so that his being raised was an effect of the miraculous power of
God; he might be supposed to refer to this. See the notes on [Act
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#019.md), etc. But it is very likely that
the reference is to some terrible persecution which he had endured some
short time before his writing this epistle; and with the outlines of
which the Corinthians had been acquainted.

[2 Corinthians 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co2 1:9</span></span>

We had the sentence of death in ourselves - The tribulation was so
violent and overwhelming, that he had no hope of escaping death.

That we should not trust in ourselves - The tribulation was of such a
nature as to take away all expectation of help but from God alone.

But in God which raiseth the dead - This is very like the business at
Lystra; and would be sufficient to fix the apostle's reference to that
fact could the time and other circumstances serve.

[2 Corinthians 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co2 1:10</span></span>

Who delivered us from so great a death - For the circumstances were such
that no human power could avail.

Will yet deliver us - Having had such a signal evidence of His
interposition already, we will confide in him with an unshaken
confidence that he will continue to support and deliver.

[2 Corinthians 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co2 1:11</span></span>

Ye also helping together by prayer - Even an apostle felt the prayers of
the Church of God necessary for his comfort and support.

What innumerable blessings do the prayers of the followers of God draw
down on those who are the objects of them!

The gift bestowed - by the means of many persons - The blessings
communicated by means of their prayers.

Thanks may be given by many - When they who have prayed hear that their
prayers are so particularly answered, then all that have prayed will
feel themselves led to praise God for his gracious answers. Thus, the
prayers of many obtain the gift; and the thanksgiving of many
acknowledge the mercy.

The gift, or χαρισμα, which the apostle mentions, was his deliverance
from the dangers and deaths to which he was exposed.

[2 Corinthians 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 1:12</span></span>

For our rejoicing is this - Ἡ καυχησις. Our boasting, exultation,
subject of glorying.

The testimony of our conscience - Μαρτυριον της συνειδησεως· That
testimony or witness which conscience, under the light and influence of
the Spirit of God, renders to the soul of its state, sincerity, safety,
etc.

In simplicity - Ἁπλοτητι· from α, denoting unity or together, and πελω,
to be; or from α, negative, and πολυς, many; not compounded, having one
end in view, having no sinister purpose, no by end to answer. Instead of
ἁπλοτητι, many MSS. and versions have ἁγιοτητι, holiness.

In godly sincerity - Ειλικρινειᾳ Θεου· The sincerity of God: that is,
such a sincerity as comes from his work in the soul. Ειλικρινεια,
sincerity, and ειλικρινης, sincere, come from ειλη, the splendor, or
bright shining of the sun; and here signifies such simplicity of
intention, and purity of affection, as can stand the test of the light
of God shining upon it, without the discovery being made of a single
blemish or flaw.

Not with fleshly wisdom - The cunning and duplicity of man, who is
uninfluenced by the Spirit of God, and has his secular interest, ease,
profit, pleasure, and worldly honor in view.

But by the grace of God - Which alone can produce the simplicity and
godly sincerity before mentioned, and inspire the wisdom that comes from
above.

We have had our conversation - Ανεστραφημεν· We have conducted
ourselves. The word properly refers to the whole tenor of a man's life -
all that he does says, and intends; and the object or end he has in
view, and in reference to which he speaks, acts, and thinks; and is so
used by the best Greek writers. The verb αναστρεφω is compounded of ανα,
again, and στρεφω, to turn; a continual coming back again to the point
from which he set out; a circulation; beginning, continuing, and ending
every thing to the glory of God; setting out with Divine views, and
still maintaining them; beginning in the Spirit, and ending in the
Spirit; acting in reference to God, as the planets do in reference to
the sun, deriving all their light, heat, and motion from him; and
incessantly and regularly revolving round him. Thus acted Paul; thus
acted the primitive Christians; and thus must every Christian act who
expects to see God in his glory. The word conversation is not an unapt
Latinism for the Greek term, as conversatio comes from con, together,
and verto, I turn; and is used by the Latins in precisely the same sense
as the other is by the Greeks, signifying the whole of a man's conduct,
the tenor and practice of his life: and conversio astrorum, and
conversiones caelestes, is by Cicero used for the course of the stars
and heavenly bodies. - De Leg. c. 8: Caelum una conversione atque eadem,
ipse circum se torquetur et vertitur. - CIC de Univers., c. 8: "The
heaven itself is, with one and the same revolution, whirled about, and
revolves round itself."

In the world - Both among Jews and Gentiles have we always acted as
seeing Him who is invisible.

More abundantly to you-ward - That is, We have given the fullest proof
of this in our conduct towards you; You have witnessed the holy manner
in which we have always acted; and God is witness of the purity of the
motives by which we have been actuated; and our conscience tells us that
we have lived in uprightness before him.

[2 Corinthians 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co2 1:13</span></span>

Than what ye read - Viz. In the first epistle which he had sent them.

Or acknowledge - To be the truth of God; and which he hoped they would
continue to acknowledge, and not permit themselves to be turned aside
from the hope of the Gospel.

[2 Corinthians 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co2 1:14</span></span>

Have acknowledged us in part - Απο μερους may signify here not in part,
but some of you; and it is evident, from the distracted state of the
Corinthians, and the opposition raised there against the apostle, that
it was only a part of them that did acknowledge him, and receive and
profit by his epistles and advice.

We are your rejoicing, etc. - You boast of us as the ministers of Christ
through whom ye have believed; as we boast of you as genuine converts to
the Christian faith, and worthy members of the Church of God.

[2 Corinthians 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co2 1:15</span></span>

And in this confidence - Under the conviction or persuasion that this is
the case; that ye exult in us, as we do in you;

I was minded - I had purposed to come to you before, as he had
intimated, [Co1 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#005.md); for he had
intended to call on them in his way from Macedonia, but this purpose he
did not fulfill; and he gives the reason, [Co2
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#023.md).

A second benefit - He had been with them once, and they had received an
especial blessing in having the seed of life sown among them by the
preaching of the Gospel; and he had purposed to visit them again that
they might have a second blessing, in having that seed watered. Instead
of χαριν, grace or benefit, several MSS. read χαραν joy, pleasure; but
the word grace or benefit, seems to express the apostle's meaning best.

[2 Corinthians 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co2 1:16</span></span>

To pass by you into Macedonia - He had purposed to go to Macedonia
first, and then from Macedonia return to them, and probably winter in
Corinth. Therefore we must understand the δι' ὑμων, by you, as implying
that he would sail up the Aegean Sea, leaving Corinth to the west;
though he might have taken it in his way, and have gone by land through
Greece up to Macedonia. Some think that the meaning is, that he purposed
to take Achaia in his way to Macedonia, without calling at Corinth; but
Achaia was out of his way considerably, and he could scarcely go through
Achaia without passing close by Corinth. I consider the words,
therefore, as implying that he purposed not to call at Corinth at that
time, but to pass by it, as before stated.

[2 Corinthians 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co2 1:17</span></span>

Did I use lightness? - When I formed this purpose, was it without due
consideration? and did I abandon it through fickleness of mind?

That with me there should be yea, etc. - That I should act as carnal
men, who change their purposes, and falsify their engagements, according
as may seem best to their secular interest?

[2 Corinthians 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co2 1:18</span></span>

But as God is true - Setting the God of truth before my eyes, I could
not act in this way: and as sure as he is true, so surely were my
purposes sincere; and it was only my uncertainty about your state that
induced me to postpone my visit. See [Co2
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#023.md).

[2 Corinthians 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co2 1:19</span></span>

For the Son of God, etc. - If I could have changed my purpose through
carnal or secular interests then I must have had the same interest in
view when I first preached the Gospel to you, with Silvanus and
Timotheus. But did not the whole of our conduct prove that we neither
had, nor could have such interest in view?

[2 Corinthians 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">co2 1:20</span></span>

For all the promises of God - Had we been light, fickle, worldly-minded
persons; persons who could only be bound by our engagements as far as
comported with our secular interest; would God have confirmed our
testimony among you? Did we not lay before you the promises of God? And
did not God fulfill those promises by us - by our instrumentality, to
your salvation and his own glory? God is true; therefore every promise
of God is true; and consequently each must have its due fulfillment. God
will not make use of trifling, worldly men, as the instruments by which
he will fulfill his promises; but he has fulfilled them by us; therefore
we are just and spiritual men, else God would not have used us.

In him are yea, and in him amen - All the promises which God has made to
mankind are yea - true in themselves, and amen - faithfully fulfilled to
them who believe in Christ Jesus. The promises are all made in reference
to Christ; for it is only on the Gospel system that we can have promises
of grace; for it is only on that system that we can have mercy.
Therefore, the promise comes originally by Christ, and is yea; and it
has its fulfillment through Christ, and is amen; and this is to the
glory of God, by the preaching of the apostles.

From what the apostle says here, and the serious and solemn manner in
which he vindicates himself, it appears that his enemies at Corinth had
made a handle of his not coming to Corinth, according to his proposal,
to defame his character, and to depreciate his ministry; but he makes
use of it as a means of exalting the truth and mercy of God through
Christ Jesus; and of showing that the promises of God not only come by
him, but are fulfilled through him.

[2 Corinthians 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">co2 1:21</span></span>

Now he which stablisheth us with you - It is God that has brought both
us and you to this sure state of salvation through Christ; and he has
anointed us, giving us the extraordinary influences of the Holy Ghost,
that we might be able effectually to administer this Gospel to your
salvation. Through this unction we know and preach the truth, and are
preserved by it from dissimulation and falsity of every kind.

[2 Corinthians 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">co2 1:22</span></span>

Who hath also sealed us - Not only deeply impressed His truth and image
upon our hearts; but, by the miraculous gifts of the Holy Spirit,
attested the truth of our extraordinary unction or calling to the
ministry.

And given the earnest of the Spirit - Τον αρραβωνα του Πνευματος. From
this unction and sealing we have a clear testimony in our souls, the
Divine Spirit dwelling constantly in us, of our acceptance with God, and
that our ways please him. The αρῥαβων of the apostle is the same as the
ערבן erabon of Moses, [Gen 38:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#017.md), [Gen
38:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#018.md), [Gen
38:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#020.md), which we there translate
pledge. The word properly signifies an earnest of something promised; a
part of the price agreed for between a buyer and seller, by giving and
receiving of which the bargain was ratified; or a deposit, which was to
be restored when the thing promised was given. From the use of the term
in Genesis, which the apostle puts here in Greek letters, we may at once
see his meaning above, and in [Eph
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#014.md); the Holy Spirit being an earnest
in the heart, and an earnest of the promised inheritance means a
security given in hand for the fulfillment of all God's promises
relative to grace and eternal life. We may learn from this, that eternal
life will be given in the great day to all who can produce the arrhabon,
or pledge. He who is found then with the earnest of God's Spirit in his
heart, shall not only be saved from death, but have that eternal life of
which it is the pledge, the earnest, and the evidence. Without this
arrhabon there can be no glory. See the whole case of Judah and Tamar,
[Gen 38:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#015) (note.md), etc., and the notes
there.

[2 Corinthians 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">co2 1:23</span></span>

I call God for a record upon my soul - The apostle here resumes the
subject which he left [Co2 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#016.md), and
in the most solemn manner calls God to witness, and consequently to
punish, if he asserted any thing false, that it was through tenderness
to them that he did not visit Corinth at the time proposed. As there
were so many scandals among them, the apostle had reason to believe that
he should be obliged to use the severe and authoritative part of his
function in the excommunication of those who had sinned, and delivering
them over to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, etc.; but to give
them space to amend, and to see what effect his epistle might produce,
(not having heard as yet from them), he proposed to delay his coming. It
is plain, as several commentators have observed,

1\. That St. Paul's doctrine had been opposed by some of Corinth, [Co1
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#012.md). His apostleship questioned,
[Co1 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#001.md), [Co1
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#002.md), and [Co2
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#013.md).

2\. Himself despised, and treated as a person who, because of the
consciousness he had of his own worthlessness, dared not to come, [Co1
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#018.md). His letters, say they, are
weighty and powerful - full of boastings of what he can and what he will
do; but his bodily presence is weak, and his speech contemptible, [Co2
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#010.md).

3\. This being the state in which his reputation was then at Corinth,
and he having promised to come to them, [Co1
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#005.md), he could not but think it
necessary to vindicate his failing them by reasons which should be both
convincing and kind, such as those contained in the preceding verses.
See Dodd and others.

[2 Corinthians 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">co2 1:24</span></span>

Not for that we have dominion over your faith - I will not come to
exercise my apostolical authority in punishing them who have acted
sinfully and disorderly; for this would be to several of you a cause of
distress, the delinquents being friends and relatives; but I hope to
come to promote your joy, to increase your spiritual happiness, by
watering the seed which I have already sowed. This I think to be the
meaning of the apostle. It is certain that the faith which they had
already received was preached by the apostles; and, therefore, in a
certain sense, according to our meaning of the term, they had a right to
propound to them the articles which they ought to believe; and to forbid
them, in the most solemn manner, to believe any thing else as
Christianity which was opposed to those articles. In that sense they had
dominion over their faith; and this dominion was essential to them as
apostles. But shall any others - persons who are not apostles, who are
not under the unerring and infallible influence of the Holy Ghost,
arrogate to themselves this dominion over the faith of mankind; not only
by insisting on them to receive new doctrines, taught nowhere by
apostles or apostolic men; but also threatening them with perdition if
they do not credit doctrines which are opposed to the very spirit and
letter of the word of God? These things men, not only not apostles, but
wicked, profligate, and ignorant, have insisted on as their right. Did
they succeed? Yes, for a time; and that time was a time of thick
darkness; a darkness that might be felt; a darkness producing nothing
but misery, and lengthening out and deepening the shadow of death. But
the light of God shone; the Scriptures were read; those vain and wicked
pretensions were brought to the eternal touchstone: and what was the
consequence? The splendor of truth pierced, dissipated, and annihilated
them for ever!

British Protestants have learned, and Europe is learning that the Sacred
Writings, and they alone, contain what is necessary to faith and
practice; and that no man, number of men, society, church, council,
presbytery, consistory, or conclave, has dominion over any man's faith.
The word of God alone is his rule, and to its Author he is to give
account of the use he has made of it.

For by faith ye stand - You believe not in us, but in God. We have
prescribed to you on his authority, what you are to believe; you
received the Gospel as coming from Him, and ye stand in and by that
faith.

The subjects in this chapter which are of the most importance have been
carefully considered in the preceding notes. That alone of the apostle's
oath has been passed by with general observations only. But, that it is
an oath has been questioned by some. An oath, properly speaking, is an
appeal to God, as the Searcher of the hearts for the truth of what is
spoken; and an appeal to Him, as the Judge of right and wrong, to punish
the falsity and perjury. All this appears to be implied in the awful
words above: I call God for a record upon my soul; and this is not the
only place in which the apostle uses words of the same import. See [Rom
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#009.md); [Rom
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001.md), and the note on [Rom
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001) (note.md).

On this subject I have spoken pretty much at large at the end of the
sixth chapter of Deuteronomy; but as it appears that there I have made a
mistake in saying that the people called Quakers hold up their hand in a
court of justice, when called upon to make affirmation, I take this
opportunity to correct that expression, and to give the form of the
oath, for so the law considers it, which the statute (7 and 8 of William
III., cap. 34, sec. 1) required of this sect of Christians: "I, A. B.,
do declare in the presence of almighty God, the witness of the truth of
what I say." Though this act was only intended at first to continue in
force for seven years, yet it was afterwards made perpetual. See Burn,
vol. iii., page 654.

A more solemn and more awful form of an oath was never presented nor
taken by man than this; no kissing of the book, holding up of the hand,
nor laying hand on the Bible, can add either solemnity or weight to such
an oath! It is as awful and as binding as any thing can be; and him, who
would break this, no obligation can bind.

But the religious people in question found their consciences aggrieved
by this form, and made application to have another substituted for it;
in consequence of this the form has undergone a little alteration, and
the solemn affirmation which is to stand instead of an oath taken in the
usual manner, as finally settled by the 8th Geo., cap. 6, is the
following: "I, A. B., do solemnly, sincerely, and truly declare and
affirm." Burn, vol. iii., page 656.

It may be well to examine this solemn affirmation, and see whether it
does not contain the essential principles of an oath; and whether it
should not be reputed by all people, as being equal to any oath taken in
the common form, and sufficiently binding on every conscience that
entertains the belief of a God, and the doctrine of a future state. The
word solemnly refers to the presence and omniscience of God, before whom
the affirmation is made; and the word sincerely to the consciousness
that the person has of the uprightness of his own soul, and the total
absence of guile and deceit; and the word truly refers to the state of
his understanding as to his knowledge of the fact in question. The word
declare refers to the authority requiring, and the persons before whom
this declaration is made; and the term affirm refers back to the words
solemnly, sincerely, and truly, on which the declaration and affirmation
are founded. This also contains all that is vital to the spirit and
essence of an oath; and the honest man, who takes or makes it, feels
that there is no form used among men by which his conscience can be more
solemnly bound. As to the particular form, as long as it is not absurd
or superstitious, it is a matter of perfect indifference as to the thing
itself as long as the declaration or affirmation contains the spirit and
essence of an oath; and that the law considers this as an oath, is
evident from the following clause: "That if any one be convicted of
having wilfully or falsely made this declaration or affirmation, such
offender shall incur the same penalties and forfeitures as are enacted
against persons convicted of wilful and corrupt perjury." I believe it
may be said with strict truth, that few instances can be produced where
this affirmation, which I must consider as a most solemn oath, was
corruptly made by any accredited member of that religious society for
whose peace and comfort it was enacted. And when this most solemn
affirmation is properly considered, no man of reason will say that the
persons who take it are not bound by a sufficient and available oath.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 2](co2002.md)

</div>
