<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2)  
  [Previous](co2011)  [Next](co2013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#001)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 12:0</span></span>

St. Paul mentions some wonderful revelations which he had received from
the Lord, [Co2 12:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#001). He speaks of
his suffering in connection with these extraordinary revelations, that
his character might be duly estimated, [Co2
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#006). That he might not be too much
exalted, a messenger of Satan is sent to buffet him; his prayer for
deliverance, and the Divine answer, [Co2
12:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007). He exults in sufferings and
reproaches, and vindicates his apostleship, [Co2
12:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#010). Promises to come and visit
them, [Co2 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#014), [Co2
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#015). Answers some objections, [Co2
12:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#016). And expresses his
apprehensions that when he visits them he shall find many evils and
disorders among them, [Co2 12:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#019).

[2 Corinthians 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 12:1</span></span>

It is not expedient for me - There are several various readings on this
verse which are too minute to be noticed here; they seem in effect to
represent the verse thus: "If it be expedient to glory, (which does not
become me), I will proceed to visions," etc. The plain meaning of the
apostle, in this and the preceding chapter, in reference to glorying is,
that though to boast in any attainments, or in what God did by him, was
in all possible cases to be avoided, as being contrary to the humility
and simplicity of the Gospel; yet the circumstances in which he was
found, in reference to the Corinthian Church, and his detractors there,
rendered it absolutely necessary; not for his personal vindication, but
for the honor of the Gospel, the credit of which was certainly at stake.

I will come to visions - Οπτασιας· Symbolical representations of
spiritual and celestial things, in which matters of the deepest
importance are exhibited to the eye of the mind by a variety of emblems,
the nature and properties of which serve to illustrate those spiritual
things.

Revelations - Αποκαλυψεις· A manifestation of things not before known,
and such as God alone can make known, because they are a part of his own
inscrutable counsels.

[2 Corinthians 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co2 12:2</span></span>

I knew a man in Christ - I knew a Christian, or a Christian man; for to
such alone God now revealed himself, for vision and prophecy had been
shut up from the Jews.

Fourteen years ago - On what occasion or in what place this transaction
took place we cannot tell; there are many conjectures among learned men
concerning it, but of what utility can they be when every thing is so
palpably uncertain? Allowing this epistle to have been written some time
in the year 57, fourteen years counted backward will lead this
transaction to the year 42 or 43, which was about the time that Barnabas
brought Paul from Tarsus to Antioch, [Act
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#025), [Act
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#026), and when he and Paul were sent
by the Church of Antioch with alms to the poor Christians at Jerusalem.
It is very possible that, on this journey, or while in Jerusalem, he had
this vision, which was intended to be the means of establishing him in
the faith, and supporting him in the many trials and difficulties
through which he was to pass. This vision the apostle had kept secret
for fourteen years.

Whether in the body I cannot tell - That the apostle was in an ecstasy
or trance, something like that of Peter, [Act
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#009), etc., there is reason to
believe; but we know that being carried literally into heaven was
possible to the Almighty. But as he could not decide himself, it would
be ridiculous in us to attempt it.

Caught up to the third heaven - He appeared to have been carried up to
this place; but whether bodily he could not tell, or whether the spirit
were not separated for the time, and taken up to the third heaven, he
could not tell.

The third heaven - The Jews talk of seven heavens, and Mohammed has
received the same from them; but these are not only fabulous but absurd.
I shall enumerate those of the Jews.

1\. The Velum, or curtain, וילון - "Which in the morning is folded up,
and in the evening stretched out." [Isa
40:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#022) : He stretcheth out the heavens
as a Curtain, and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell in.

2\. The firmament, or Expanse, רקיע - "In which the sun, moon, stars,
and constellations are fixed." [Gen
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#017) : And God placed them in the
Firmament of heaven.

3\. The Clouds, or Ether, שקים - "Where the mill-stones are which grind
the manna for the righteous." [Psa
78:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#023), etc.: Though he had commended
the Clouds from above, and opened the doors of heaven, and had rained
down manna, etc.

4\. The Habitation, זבול - "Where Jerusalem, and the temple, and the
altar, were constructed and where Michael the great prince stands and
offers sacrifices." [Kg1 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#013) : I have
surely built thee a House To Dwell In, a settled place for thee to abide
in for ever. "But where is heaven so called?" Answer: In [Isa
63:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#015) : Look down from Heaven, and
behold from the Habitation, מזבול, of thy holiness.

5\. The Dwelling-Place, מעון - "Where the troops of angels sing
throughout the night, but are silent in the day time, because of the
glory of the Israelites." [Psa 42:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#008) :
The Lord will command his loving-kindness in the day time, and in the
night his song shall be with me. "But how is it proved that this means
heaven? "Answer: From [Deu 26:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#015). Look
down from thy holy habitation, ממעון, the Dwelling-Place of thy
holiness; and from heaven, השמים, and bless thy people Israel.

6\. The Fixed Residence, מבון - "Where are the treasures of snow and
hail, the repository of noxious dews, of drops, and whirlwinds; the
grotto of exhalations," etc. "But where are the heavens thus
denominated?" Answer: In [Kg1 8:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#039),
[Kg1 8:49](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#049), etc.: Then hear thou in
Heaven thy Dwelling - Place, מכון שבת, thy Fixed Residence.

7\. The Araboth, ערבות - "Where are justice, judgment, mercy, the
treasures of life; peace and blessedness; the souls of the righteous,
the souls and spirits which are reserved for the bodies yet to be
formed, and the dew by which God is to vivify the dead." [Psa
89:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#014), [Isa
59:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#017); [Psa
36:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#009), [Jdg
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#024); [Psa
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#004); [Sa1
25:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#029); [Isa
57:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#020) : All of which are termed
Araboth, [Psa 68:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#004). Extol him who
rideth on the heavens, בערבות ba Araboth, by his name Jah.

All this is sufficiently unphilosophical, and in several cases
ridiculous.

In the sacred writings three heavens only are mentioned. The first is
the atmosphere, what appears to be intended by רקיע rekia, the firmament
or expansion, [Gen 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#006). The second,
the starry heaven; where are the sun, moon, planets, and stars; but
these two are often expressed under the one term שמים shamayim, the two
heavens, or expansions, and in [Gen
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#017), they appear to be both expressed
by רקיע השמים rekia hashshamayim, the firmament of heaven. And, thirdly,
the place of the blessed, or the throne of the Divine glory, probably
expressed by the words שמי השמים shemei hashshamayim, the heavens of
heavens. But on these subjects the Scripture affords us but little
light; and on this distinction the reader is not desired to rely.

Much more may be seen in Schoettgen, who has exhausted the subject; and
who has shown that ascending to heaven, or being caught up to heaven, is
a form of speech among the Jewish writers to express the highest degrees
of inspiration. They often say of Moses that he ascended on high,
ascended on the firmament, ascended to heaven; where it is evident they
mean only by it that he was favored with the nearest intimacy with God,
and the highest revelations relative to his will, etc. If we may
understand St. Paul thus, it will remove much of the difficulty from
this place; and perhaps the unspeakable words, [Co2
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#004), are thus to be understood. He
had the most sublime communications from God, such as would be improper
to mention, though it is very likely that we have the substance of these
in his epistles. Indeed, the two epistles before us seem, in many
places, to be the effect of most extraordinary revelations.

[2 Corinthians 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co2 12:4</span></span>

Caught up into paradise - The Jewish writers have no less than four
paradises, as they have seven heavens; but it is needless to wade
through their fables. On the word paradise see the note on [Gen
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#008). The Mohammedans call it jennet
alferdoos, the garden of paradise, and say that God created it out of
light, and that it is the habitation of the prophets and wise men.

Among Christian writers it generally means the place of the blessed, or
the state of separate spirits. Whether the third heaven and paradise be
the same place we cannot absolutely say; they probably are not; and it
is likely that St. Paul, at the time referred to, had at least two of
these raptures.

Which it is not lawful for a man to utter - The Jews thought that the
Divine name, the Tetragrammaton יהוה Yehovah, should not be uttered, and
that it is absolutely unlawful to pronounce it; indeed they say that the
true pronunciation is utterly lost, and cannot be recovered without an
express revelation. Not one of them, to the present day, ever attempts
to utter it; and, when they meet with it in their reading, always supply
its place with אדני Adonai, Lord. It is probable that the apostle refers
to some communication concerning the Divine nature and the Divine
economy, of which he was only to make a general use in his preaching and
writing. No doubt that what he learned at this time formed the basis of
all his doctrines.

Cicero terms God illud inexprimible, that inexpressible Being. And
Hermes calls him ανεκλαλητος, αρῥητος, σιωπῃ φωνουμενος· The ineffable,
the unspeakable, and that which is to be pronounced in silence. We
cannot have views too exalted of the majesty of God; and the less
frequently we pronounce his name, the more reverence shall we feel for
his nature. It is said of Mr. Boyle that he never pronounced the name of
God without either taking off his hat or making a bow. Leaving out
profane swearers, blasphemers, and such like open-faced servants of
Satan, it is distressing to hear many well intentioned people making
unscripturally free with this sacred name.

[2 Corinthians 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co2 12:5</span></span>

Of such a one will I glory - Through modesty he does not mention
himself, though the account can be understood of no other person; for,
did he mean any other, the whole account would be completely irrelevant.

[2 Corinthians 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co2 12:6</span></span>

I shall not be a fool - Who that had got such honor from God would have
been fourteen years silent on the subject?

I will say the truth - I speak nothing but truth; and the apostle seems
to have intended to proceed with something else of the same kind, but,
finding some reason probably occurring suddenly, says, I forbear - I
will say no more on this subject.

Lest any man should think of me above - The apostle spoke of these
revelations for two purposes: first, lest his enemies might suppose they
had cause to think meanly of him; and, secondly, having said thus much,
he forbears to speak any farther of them, lest his friends should think
too highly of him. It is a rare gift to discern when to speak, and when
to be silent; and to know when enough is said on a subject, neither too
little nor too much.

[2 Corinthians 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co2 12:7</span></span>

And lest I should be exalted - There were three evils to be guarded
against:

1\. The contempt of his gifts and call by his enemies.

2\. The overweening fondness of his friends. And, Self-exultation.

A thorn in the flesh - The word σκολοψ signifies a stake, and
ανασκολοπιζεσθαι, to be tied to a stake by way of punishment; and it is
used, says Schoettgen, to signify the most oppressive afflictions.
Whatever it was, it was τῃ σαρκι, in the flesh, i.e. of an outward kind.
It was neither sin nor sinfulness, for this could not be given him to
prevent his being exalted above measure; for sin never had and never can
have this tendency. What this thorn in the flesh might be has given
birth to a multitude of conjectures: Tertullian thought it dolor
auriculae, the ear ache; Chrysostom, κεφαλαλγια, the head ache; Cyprian,
carnis et corporis multa ac gravia tormenta, many and grievous bodily
torments. I believe the apostle to refer simply to the distresses he had
endured through the opposition he met with at Corinth; which were as
painful and grievous to him as a thorn in his flesh, or his being bound
to a stake; for, if he could have devoted himself to destruction, [Rom
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003), for his rebellious and
unbelieving countrymen, what must he have suffered on account of an
eminent Church being perverted and torn to pieces by a false teacher!
God permitted this to keep the apostle humble, and at last completely
delivered the Church out of the hands and influence of this deceiver;
none, not even the incestuous person, having been turned finally out of
the way by the false doctrines there preached.

The messenger of Satan - Another mode of expressing what he calls the
thorn in the flesh; and he seems most plainly to refer to the false
apostle at Corinth. The apostle himself was, as he styles himself to
this Church, αποστολος Ιησου Χριστου, [Co2
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001), the apostle of Jesus Christ. The
person in question is styled here αγγελος Σαταν, the apostle or angel of
Satan. It is almost impossible to mistake the apostle's meaning and
reference. Jesus Christ sent Paul to proclaim his truth, and found a
Church at Corinth. Satan, the adversary of God's truth, sent a man to
preach lies at the same place, and turn the Church of God into his own
synagogue; and by his teaching lies and calumnies the apostle was
severely buffeted. We need seek no other sense for these expressions.
Many, however, think that the apostle had really some bodily infirmity
that rendered him contemptible, and was the means of obstructing the
success of his ministry; and that the false apostle availed himself of
this to set St. Paul at nought, and to hold him out to ridicule. I have
shown this, elsewhere, to be very unlikely.

The best arguments in favor of this opinion may be found in Whitby; but
I forbear to transcribe them because I think the meaning given above is
more correct. No infirmity of body nor corporeal sufferings can affect
and distress a minister of the Gospel, equally to the perversion or
scattering of a flock, which were the fruit of innumerable labors,
watchings, fastings, prayers, and tears.

[2 Corinthians 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co2 12:8</span></span>

I besought the Lord - That is, Christ, as the next verse absolutely
proves, and the Socinians themselves confess. And if Christ be an object
of prayer in such a case as this, or indeed in any case, it is a sure
proof of his divinity; for only an omniscient Being can be made an
object of prayer.

Thrice - Several suppose this to be a certain number for an uncertain;
as if he had said, I often besought Christ to deliver me from this
tormentor: or, which is perhaps more likely, the apostle may refer to
three solemn, fixed, and fervent applications made to Christ at
different times; at the last of which he received the answer which he
immediately subjoins. It is worthy of remark, that our Lord in his agony
acted in the same way: at three different times he applied to God that
the cup might depart from him; and in each application he spoke the same
words, [Mat 26:39-44](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039). There is,
therefore, a manifest allusion to our Lord's conduct in these words of
the apostle.

[2 Corinthians 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co2 12:9</span></span>

My grace is sufficient for thee - Thou shalt not be permitted to sink
under these afflictions. Thy enemies shall not be able to prevail
against thee.

My strength is made perfect in weakness - The more, and the more
violently, thou art afflicted and tried, being upheld by my power, and
prospered in all thy labors, the more eminently will my power be seen
and acknowledged. For the weaker the instrument I use, the more the
power of my grace shall be manifested. See at the end of this chapter,
([Co2 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#021) (note)).

Will I rather glory in my infirmities - Therefore, his infirmities do
not mean his corruptions, or sins, or sinfulness of any kind; for it
would be blasphemous for any man to say, I will rather glory that God
leaves my corruptions in me, than that he should take them away.

That the power of Christ may rest upon me - Επισκηνωσῃ επ' εμε· That it
may overshadow me as a tent, or tabernacle; affording me shelter,
protection, safety, and rest. This expression is like that, [Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014) : And the word was made flesh,
και εσκηνωσεν εν ἡμιν and made his tabernacle among us - full of grace
and truth. The same eternal Word promised to make his tabernacle with
the apostle, and gives him a proof that he was still the same - full of
grace and truth, by assuring him that his grace should be sufficient for
him. Paul, knowing that the promise of grace could not fail, because of
the Divine truth, says: Most gladly, therefore, will I rather glory in
my afflictions, that such a power of Christ may overshadow and defend
me.

The words are also similar to those of the Prophet Isaiah, [Isa
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#005) : On all the glory shall be a
defense. God gives the glory, and God gives the defense of that glory.
The apostle had much glory or honor; both Satan and his apostles were
very envious; in himself the apostle, as well as all human beings, was
weak, and therefore needed the power of God to defend such glory. Grace
alone can preserve grace. When we get a particular blessing we need
another to preserve it; and without this we shall soon be shorn of our
strength, and become as other men. Hence the necessity of continual
watchfulness and prayer, and depending on the all-sufficient grace of
Christ. See on [Co2 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#030) (note)

[2 Corinthians 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co2 12:10</span></span>

Therefore I take pleasure - I not only endure them patiently, but am
pleased when they occur; for I do it for Christ's sake - on his account;
for on his account I suffer. For when I am weak - most oppressed with
trials and afflictions, then am I strong; God supporting my mind with
his most powerful influences, causing me to rejoice with joy unspeakable
and full of glory.

[2 Corinthians 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co2 12:11</span></span>

I am become a fool in glorying - It is not the part of a wise or
gracious man to boast; but ye have compelled me - I have been obliged to
do it, in order to vindicate the cause of God.

I ought to have been commended of you - You should have vindicated both
myself and my ministry against the detractors that are among you.

The very chiefest apostles - See [Co2
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#001).

Though I be nothing - Though I have been thus set at nought by your
false apostle; and though, in consequence of what he has said, some of
you have been ready to consider me as nothing - what we call good for
nothing. This must be the meaning of the apostle, as the following
verses prove.

A kind of technical meaning has been imposed on these words, of which
many good people seem very fond. I am nothing - I am all sin,
defilement, and unworthiness in myself; but Jesus Christ is all in all.
This latter clause is an eternal truth; the former may be very true
also; the person who uses it may be all sin, defilement, etc., but let
him not say that the apostle of the Gentiles was so too, because this is
not true; it is false, and it is injurious to the character of the
apostle and to the grace of Christ; besides, it is not the meaning of
the text, and the use commonly made of it is abominable, if not wicked.

[2 Corinthians 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 12:12</span></span>

The signs of an apostle were wrought among you - Though I have been
reputed as nothing, I have given the fullest proof of my Divine mission
by various signs, wonders, and miracles, and by that patience which I
have manifested towards you: though I had power from God to inflict
punishment on the transgressors, I have in every case forborne to do it.
Is the man nothing who wrought such miracles among you?

[2 Corinthians 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co2 12:13</span></span>

For what is it wherein you were inferior - This is a fine, forcible, yet
delicate stroke. It was your duty and your interest to have supported
your apostle; other Churches have done so: I did not require this from
you; in this respect all other Churches are superior to you. I am the
cause of your inferiority, by not giving you an opportunity of
ministering to my necessities: forgive me the wrong I have done you. It
is the privilege of the Churches of Christ to support the ministry of
his Gospel among them. Those who do not contribute their part to the
support of the Gospel ministry either care nothing for it, or derive no
good from it.

[2 Corinthians 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co2 12:14</span></span>

The third time I am ready - That is, this is the third time that I am
ready - have formed the resolution, to visit you. He had formed this
resolution twice before, but was disappointed. See [Co1
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#005), and [Co2
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#015), [Co2
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#016). He now formed it a third time,
having more probability of seeing them now than he had before. See [Co2
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#002).

I seek not yours, but you - I seek your salvation, I desire not your
property; others have sought your property, but not your salvation. See
[Co2 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#020).

For the children ought not to lay up for the parents - You may have many
teachers, but you have but one Father; for in Christ Jesus I have
begotten you through the Gospel; see [Co1
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#015). Ye are my children, and I am
your father. You have not contributed to my support, but I have been
labouring for your life. I will act towards you as the loving father who
works hard, and lays up what is necessary to enable his children to get
their bread.

[2 Corinthians 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co2 12:15</span></span>

And I will very gladly spend and be spent for you - I will continue to
act as a loving father, who spends all he has upon his children, and
expends his own strength and life in providing for them the things
necessary for their preservation and comfort.

Though the more abundantly I love you - I will even act towards you with
the most affectionate tenderness, though it happen to me, as it often
does to loving fathers, that their disobedient children love them less,
in proportion as their love to them is increased. Does it not frequently
happen that the most disobedient child in the family is that one on
which the parents' tenderness is more especially placed? See the parable
of the prodigal son. It is in the order of God that it should be so,
else the case of every prodigal would be utterly deplorable. The
shepherd feels more for the lost sheep than for the ninety-nine that
have not gone astray.

If I be asked, "Should Christian parents lay up money for their
children?" I answer: It is the duty of every parent who can, to lay up
what is necessary to put every child in a condition to earn its bread.
If he neglect this, he undoubtedly sins against God and nature. "But
should not a man lay up, besides this, a fortune for his children, if he
can honestly?" I answer: Yes, if there be no poor within his reach; no
good work which he can assist; no heathen region on the earth to which
he can contribute to send the Gospel of Jesus; but not otherwise. God
shows, in the course of his providence, that this laying up of fortunes
for children is not right; for there is scarcely ever a case where money
has been saved up to make the children independent and gentlemen, in
which God has not cursed the blessing. It was saved from the poor, from
the ignorant, from the cause of God; and the canker of his displeasure
consumed this ill-saved property.

[2 Corinthians 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co2 12:16</span></span>

But be it so, I did not burden you - That is: You grant that I did not
burden you, that I took nothing from you, but preached to you the Gospel
freely; but you say that, Being Crafty, I caught you with guile; i.e.
getting from you, by means of others, what I pretended to be unwilling
to receive immediately from yourselves.

Many persons suppose that the words, being crafty, I caught you with
guile, are the words of the apostle and not of his slanderers; and
therefore have concluded that it is lawful to use guile, deceit, etc.,
in order to serve a good and a religious purpose. This doctrine is
abominable; and the words are most evidently those of the apostle's
detractors, against which he defends his conduct in the two following
verses.

[2 Corinthians 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co2 12:17</span></span>

Did I make a gain of you - Did any person I ever sent to preach the
Gospel to you, or help you in your Christian course, ever get any thing
from you for me? Produce the proof if you can.

[2 Corinthians 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co2 12:18</span></span>

I desired Titus - I never sent any to you but Titus and another brother;
[Co2 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#006), [Co2
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#018). And did Titus make a gain of
you? Did he get any thing from you, either for himself or for me? You
know he did not. He was actuated by the same spirit, and he walked in
the same steps.

[2 Corinthians 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co2 12:19</span></span>

Think ye that we excuse ourselves - Απολογουμεθα; That we make an
apology for our conduct; or, that I have sent Titus and that brother to
you because I was ashamed or afraid to come myself?

We speak before God in Christ - I have not done so; I speak the truth
before God; he is judge whether I was actuated in this way by any
sinister or unworthy motive.

For your edifying - Whatever I have done in this or any other way, I
have done for your edifying; not for any emolument to myself or friends.

[2 Corinthians 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">co2 12:20</span></span>

I fear, lest, when I come - I think the present time is used here for
the past; the apostle seems most evidently to be giving them the reason
why he had not come to them according to his former purposes, and why he
sent Titus and his companion. He was afraid to come at that time lest he
should have found them perverted from the right way, and he be obliged
to make use of his apostolical rod, and punish the offenders; but,
feeling towards them the heart of a tender father, he was unwilling to
use the rod; and sent the first epistle to them, and the messengers
above mentioned, being reluctant to go himself till he had satisfactory
evidence that their divisions were ended, and that they had repented for
and put away the evils that they had committed; and that he should not
be obliged to bewail them who had sinned so abominably, and had not
repented for their crimes. If this verse be understood in this way, all
difficulty will vanish; otherwise, what is here said does seem to
contradict what is said, [Co2 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#006),
[Co2 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#016), etc.; as well as many
things both in the eighth and ninth chapters.

Debates, envyings - From these different expressions, which are too
plain to need interpretation, we see what a distracted and divided state
the Church at Corinth must have been in. Brotherly love and charity seem
to have been driven out of this once heavenly assembly. These debates,
etc., are precisely the opposites to that love which the apostle
recommends and explains by its different properties in the 13th chapter
of his first epistle.

Mr. Wakefield translates the original thus: strifes, rivalries,
passions, provocations, slanders, whisperings, swellings, quarrels.

[2 Corinthians 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">co2 12:21</span></span>

Lest, when I come again - And even after all that has been done for you,
I fear that when I do come - when I pay you my second visit, my God will
humble me - will permit me to be affected with deep sorrow through what
I may see among you; as I have been by the buffetings of the apostle of
Satan, who has perverted you. Humiliation is repeatedly used for
affliction, and here ταπεινωσῃ has certainly that meaning.

Have sinned already - Προημαρτηκοτων· Who have sinned before; who were
some of the first offenders, and have not yet repented.

Of the uncleanness, etc. - There must have been a total relaxation of
discipline, else such abominations could not have been tolerated in the
Christian Church. And although what is here spoken could only be the
ease of a few; yet the many were ill disciplined, else these must have
been cast out. On the whole, this Church seems to have been a
composition of excellences and defects, of vices and virtues; and should
not be quoted as a model for a Christian Church.

1\. From St. Paul we receive two remarkable sayings of our Lord, which
are of infinite value to the welfare and salvation of man; which are
properly parts of the Gospel, but are not mentioned by any evangelist.
The first is in [Act 20:35](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#035) : I have
showed you, the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, It Is More Blessed
to Give than to Receive. Every liberal heart feels this in bestowing its
bounty; and every poor man, who is obliged to receive help, and whose
independency of spirit is still whole in him, feels this too. To the
genuine poor, it is more burdensome to receive a kindness, than it is to
the generous man who gives it. The second is recorded in the ninth verse
of this chapter: He said unto me, My Grace Is Sufficient for Thee; for
My Strength Is Made Perfect in Weakness. Of these two most blessed
sayings, St. Paul is the only evangelist. This last is of general
application. In all states and conditions of life God's grace is
sufficient for us. If in any case we miscarry, it is because we have not
sought God earnestly. Let no man say that he is overcome by sin through
want of grace; God's grace was sufficient for him, but he did not apply
for it as did St. Paul, and therefore he did not receive it. Men often
lay the issue of their own infidelity to the charge of God, they excuse
their commission of sin through their scantiness of grace; whereas the
whole is owing to their carelessness, and refusal to be saved in God's
own way; and in this way alone will God save any man, because it is the
only effectual way.

2\. The apostle must have been brought into a blessed state of
subjection to God, when he could say, I take pleasure in infirmities;
that is, in afflictions and sufferings of different kinds. Though this
language was spoken on earth, we may justly allow, with one, that he
learned it in Heaven.

3\. St. Paul preached the Gospel without being burdensome. In every case
the laborer is worthy of his hire. He who labors for the cause of God
should be supported by the cause of God; but wo to that man who
aggrandizes himself and grows rich by the spoils of the faithful! And to
him especially who has made a fortune out of the pence of the poor! In
such a man's heart the love of money must have its throne. As to his
professed spirituality, it is nothing; he is a whited sepulchre, and an
abomination in the sight of the Lord. If a man will love the world, (and
he does love it who makes a fortune by the offerings of the poor), the
love of the Father is not in him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 13](co2013)

</div>
