<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2.md)  
  [Previous](co2009)  [Next](co2011.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#001.md)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 10:0</span></span>

The apostle vindicates himself against the aspersions cast on his person
by the false apostle; and takes occasion to mention his spiritual might
and authority, [Co2 10:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#001.md). He shows
them the impropriety of judging after the outward appearance, [Co2
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#007.md). Again refers to his apostolical
authority, and informs them that when he again comes among them he will
show himself in his deeds as powerful as his letters intimated, [Co2
10:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#008.md). He shows that these false
teachers sat down in other men's labors, having neither authority nor
influence from God to break up new ground, while he and the apostles in
general had the regions assigned to them through which they were to sow
the seed of life; and that he never entered into any place where the
work was made ready to his hand by others, [Co2
10:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#012.md). He concludes with intimating
that the glorying of those false apostles was bad; that they had nothing
but self-commendation; and that they who glory should glory in the Lord,
[Co2 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#017.md), [Co2
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#018.md).

[2 Corinthians 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 10:1</span></span>

I Paul myself beseech you by the meekness - Having now finished his
directions and advices relative to the collection for the poor, he
resumes his argument relative to the false apostle, who had gained
considerable influence by representing St. Paul as despicable in his
person, his ministry, and his influence. Under this obloquy the apostle
was supported by the meekness and gentleness of Christ; and through the
same heavenly disposition he delayed inflicting that punishment which,
in virtue of his apostolical authority, he might have inflicted on him
who had disturbed and labored to corrupt the Christian Church.

Who in presence am base among you, but being absent am bold toward you -
He seems to quote these as the words of his calumniator, as if he had
said; "This apostle of yours is a mere braggadocio; when he is among
you, you know how base and contemptible he is; when absent, see how he
brags and boasts." The word ταπεινος, which we render base, signifies
lowly, and, as some think, short of stature. The insinuation is, that
when there was danger or opposition at hand, St. Paul acted with great
obsequiousness, fearing for his person and authority, lest he should
lose his secular influence. See the following verse.

[2 Corinthians 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co2 10:2</span></span>

Some, which think of us as if we walked according to the flesh - As it
is customary for cowards and overbearing men to threaten the weak and
the timid when present; to bluster when absent; and to be very
obsequious in the presence of the strong and courageous. This conduct
they appear to have charged against the apostle, which he calls here
walking after the flesh - acting as a man who had worldly ends in view,
and would use any means in order to accomplish them.

[2 Corinthians 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co2 10:3</span></span>

Though we walk in the flesh - That is: Although I am in the common
condition of human nature, and must live as a human being, yet I do not
war after the flesh - I do not act the coward or the poltroon, as they
insinuate. I have a good cause, a good captain, strength at will, and
courage at hand. I neither fear them nor their master.

[2 Corinthians 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co2 10:4</span></span>

The weapons of our warfare - The apostle often uses the metaphor of a
warfare to represent the life and trials of a Christian minister. See
[Eph 6:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#010.md); [Ti1
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#018.md); [Ti2
2:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#003.md).

Are not carnal - Here he refers to the means used by the false apostle
in order to secure his party; he calumniated St. Paul, traduced the
truth, preached false and licentious doctrines, and supported these with
sophistical reasonings.

But mighty through God - Our doctrines are true and pure, they come from
God and lead to him, and he accompanies them with his mighty power to
the hearts of those who hear them; and the strong holds - the apparently
solid and cogent reasoning of the philosophers, we, by these doctrines,
pull down; and thus the fortifications of heathenism are destroyed, and
the cause of Christ triumphs wherever we come; and we put to flight the
armies of the aliens.

[2 Corinthians 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co2 10:5</span></span>

Casting down imaginations - Λογισμους· Reasonings or opinions. The Greek
philosophers valued themselves especially on their ethic systems, in
which their reasonings appeared to be very profound and conclusive; but
they were obliged to assume principles which were either such as did not
exist, or were false in themselves, as the whole of their mythologic
system most evidently was: truly, from what remains of them we see that
their metaphysics were generally bombast; and as to their philosophy, it
was in general good for nothing. When the apostles came against their
gods many and their lords many with the One Supreme and Eternal Being,
they were confounded, scattered, annihilated; when they came against
their various modes of purifying the mind - their sacrificial and
mediatorial system, with the Lord Jesus Christ, his agony and bloody
sweat, his cross and passion, his death and burial, and his glorious
resurrection and ascension, they sunk before them, and appeared to be
what they really were, as dust upon the balance, and lighter than
vanity.

Every high thing - Even the pretendedly sublime doctrines, for instance,
of Plato, Aristotle, and the Stoics in general, fell before the simple
preaching of Christ crucified.

The knowledge of God - The doctrine of the unity and eternity of the
Divine nature, which was opposed by the plurality of their idols, and
the generation of their gods, and their men-made deities. It is amazing
how feeble a resistance heathenism made, by argument or reasoning,
against the doctrine of the Gospel! It instantly shrunk from the Divine
light, and called on the secular power to contend for it! Popery sunk
before Protestantism in the same way, and defended itself by the same
means. The apostles destroyed heathenism wherever they came; the
Protestants confuted popery wherever their voice was permitted to be
heard.

Bringing into captivity every thought - Heathenism could not recover
itself; in vain did its thousands of altars smoke with reiterated
hecatombs, their demons were silent, and their idols were proved to be
nothing in the world. Popery could never, by any power of
self-reviviscence, restore itself after its defeat by the Reformation:
it had no Scripture, consecutively understood; no reason, no argument;
in vain were its bells rung, its candles lighted, its auto da fe's
exhibited; in vain did its fires blaze; and in vain were innumerable
human victims immolated on its altars! The light of God penetrated its
hidden works of darkness, and dragged its three-headed Cerberus into
open day; the monster sickened, vomited his henbane, and fled for refuge
to his native shades.

The obedience of Christ - Subjection to idols was annihilated by the
progress of the Gospel among the heathens; and they soon had but one
Lord, and his name one. In like manner the doctrines of the reformation,
mighty through God, pulled down - demolished and brought into captivity,
the whole papal system; and instead of obedience to the pope, the
pretended vicar of God upon earth, obedience to Christ, as the sole
almighty Head of the Church, was established, particularly in Great
Britain, where it continues to prevail. Hallelujah! the Lord God
Omnipotent reigneth!

[2 Corinthians 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co2 10:6</span></span>

And having in a readiness to revenge all disobedience - I am ready,
through this mighty armor of God, to punish those opposers of the
doctrine of Christ, and the disobedience which has been produced by
them.

When your obedience is fulfilled - When you have in the fullest manner,
discountenanced those men, and separated yourselves from their
communion. The apostle was not in haste to pull up the tares, lest he
should pull up the wheat also.

All the terms in these two verses are military. Allusion is made to a
strongly fortified city, where the enemy had made his last stand;
entrenching himself about the walls; strengthening all his redoubts and
ramparts; raising castles, towers, and various engines of defense and
offense upon the walls; and neglecting nothing that might tend to render
his strong hold impregnable. The army of God comes against the place and
attacks it; the strong holds οχυροματα, all the fortified places, are
carried. The imaginations, λογισμοι, engines, and whatever the
imagination or skill of man could raise, are speedily taken and
destroyed. Every high thing, παν ὑψωμα, all the castles and towers are
sapped, thrown down and demolished; the walls are battered into
breaches; and the besieging army, carrying every thing at the point of
the sword, enter the city, storm and take the citadel. Every where
defeated, the conquered submit, and are brought into captivity,
αιχμαλωτιζοντες, are led away captives; and thus the whole government is
destroyed.

It is easy to apply these things, as far as may be consistent with the
apostle's design. The general sense I have given in the preceding notes.

[2 Corinthians 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co2 10:7</span></span>

Do ye look on things after the outward appearance? - Do not be carried
away with appearances; do not be satisfied with show and parade.

If any man trust to himself that he is Christ's - Here, as in several
other places of this and the preceding epistle, the τις, any or certain,
person, most evidently refers to the false apostle who made so much
disturbance in the Church. And this man trusted to himself - assumed to
himself that he was Christ's messenger: it would not do to attempt to
subvert Christianity at once; it had got too strong a hold of Corinth to
be easily dislodged; he therefore pretended to be on Christ's side, and
to derive his authority from him.

Let him of himself - Without any authority, certainly, from God; but, as
he arrogates to himself the character of a minister of Christ, let him
acknowledge that even so we are Christ's ministers; and that I have, by
my preaching, and the miracles which I have wrought, given the fullest
proof that I am especially commissioned by him.

[2 Corinthians 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co2 10:8</span></span>

For, though I should boast, etc. - I have a greater authority and
spiritual power than I have yet shown, both to edify and to punish; but
I employ this for your edification in righteousness, and not for the
destruction of any delinquent. "This," says Calmet, "is the rule which
the pastors of the Church ever propose to themselves in the exercise of
their authority; whether to enjoin or forbid, to dispense or to oblige,
to bind or to loose. They should use this power only as Jesus Christ
used it - for the salvation, and not for the destruction, of souls."

[2 Corinthians 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co2 10:9</span></span>

That I may not seem, etc. - This is an elliptical sentence, and may be
supplied thus: "I have not used this authority; nor will I add any more
concerning this part of the subject, lest I should seem, as my adversary
has insinuated, to wish to terrify you by my letters.

[2 Corinthians 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co2 10:10</span></span>

For his letters, say they, are weighty and powerful - He boasts of high
powers, and that he can do great things. See on [Co2
10:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#001) (note.md).

But his bodily presence is weak - When you behold the man, you find him
a feeble, contemptible mortal; and when ye hear him speak, his speech, ὁ
λογος, probably, his doctrine, εξουθενημενος, is good for nothing; his
person, matter, and manner, are altogether uninteresting, unimpressive,
and too contemptible to be valued by the wise and the learned. This
seems to be the spirit and design of this slander.

Many, both among the ancients and moderns, have endeavored to find out
the ground there was for any part of this calumny; as to the moral
conduct of the apostle, that was invulnerable; his motives, it is true,
were suspected and denounced by this false apostle and his partisans;
but they could never find any thing in his conduct which could support
their insinuations.

What they could not attach to his character, they disingenuously
attached to his person and his elocution.

If we can credit some ancient writers, such as Nicephorus, we shall find
the apostle thus described:

Παυλος μικρος ην και συνεσταλμενος το του σωματος μεγεθος· και ὡσπερ
αγκυλον αυτο κεκτημενος· σμικρον δε, και κεκυφος· την οφιν λευκος, και
το προσωπον προφερης, ψιλος την κεφαλην, κ. τ. λ.

Nicephor., lib. ii., cap. 17.

"Paul was a little man, crooked, and almost bent like a bow; with a pale
countenance, long and wrinkled; a bald head; his eyes full of fire and
benevolence; his beard long, thick, and interspersed with grey hairs, as
was his head, etc."

I quote from Calmet, not having Nicephorus at hand.

An old Greek writer, says the same author, whose works are found among
those of Chrysostom, tom. vi. hom. 30, page 265, represents him thus: -
Παυλος ὁ τριπηχυς ανθρωπος, και των ουρανων ἁπτομενος· "Paul was a man
of about three cubits in height, (four feet six), and yet, nevertheless,
touched the heavens." Others say that "he was a little man, had a bald
head, and a large nose." See the above, and several other authorities in
Calmet. Perhaps there is not one of these statements correct: as to
Nicephorus, he is a writer of the fourteenth century, weak and
credulous, and worthy of no regard. And the writer found in the works of
Chrysostom, in making the apostle little more than a pigmy, has rendered
his account incredible.

That St. Paul could be no such diminutive person we may fairly presume
from the office he filled under the high priest, in the persecution of
the Church of Christ; and that he had not an impediment in his speech,
but was a graceful orator, we may learn from his whole history, and
especially from the account we have, [Act
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#012.md), where the Lycaonians took him
for Mercury, the god of eloquence, induced thereto by his powerful and
persuasive elocution. In short, there does not appear to be any
substantial evidence of the apostle's deformity, pigmy stature, bald
head, pale and wrinkled face, large nose, stammering speech, etc., etc.
These are probably all figments of an unbridled fancy, and foolish
surmisings.

[2 Corinthians 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co2 10:11</span></span>

Such as we are in word - A threatening of this kind would doubtless
alarm the false apostle; and it is very likely that he did not await the
apostle's coming, as he would not be willing to try the fate of Elymas.

[2 Corinthians 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 10:12</span></span>

We dare not make ourselves, etc. - As if he had said: I dare neither
associate with, nor compare myself to, those who are full of
self-commendation. Some think this to be an ironical speech.

But they, measuring themselves by themselves - They are not sent of God;
they are not inspired by his Spirit; therefore they have no rule to
think or act by. They are also full of pride and self-conceit; they look
within themselves for accomplishments which their self-love will soon
find out; for to it real and fictitious are the same. As they dare not
compare themselves with the true apostles of Christ, they compare
themselves with each other; and, as they have no perfect standard, they
can have no excellence; nor can they ever attain true wisdom, which is
not to be had from looking at what we are but to what we should be; and
if without a directory, what we should be will never appear, and
consequently our ignorance must continue. This was the case with these
self-conceited false apostles; but ου συνιουσιν, are not wise, Mr.
Wakefield contends, is an elegant Graecism signifying they are not aware
that they are measuring themselves by themselves, etc.

[2 Corinthians 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co2 10:13</span></span>

Things without our measure - There is a great deal of difficulty in this
and the three following verses, and there is a great diversity among the
MSS.; and which is the true reading can scarcely be determined. Our
version is perhaps the plainest that can be made of the text. By the
measure mentioned here, it seems as if the apostle meant the commission
he received from God to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles; a measure or
district that extended through all Asia Minor and Greece, down to
Achaia, where Corinth was situated, a measure to reach even unto you.
But the expressions in these verses are all agonistical, and taken from
the stadium or race course in the Olympic and Isthmian games. The
μετρον, or measure, was the length of the δρομος, or course; and the
κανων, rule or line, [Co2 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#015.md), [Co2
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#016.md), was probably the same with the
γραμμα, or white line, which marked out the boundaries of the stadium;
and the verbs reach unto, stretch out, etc., are all references to the
exertions made to win the race. As this subject is so frequently alluded
to in these epistles, I have thought it of importance to consider it
particularly in the different places where it occurs.

[2 Corinthians 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co2 10:14</span></span>

For we stretch not ourselves beyond - We have not proceeded straight
from Macedonia through Thessaly, and across the Adriatic Gulf into
Italy, which would have led us beyond you westward; but knowing the mind
of our God we left this direct path, and came southward through Greece,
down into Achaia, and there we planted the Gospel. The false apostle has
therefore got into our province, and entered into our labors, and there
boasts as if the conversion of the heathen Achaians had been his own
work. As there is an allusion here to the stadium, and to the Olympic
games in general, we may consider the apostle as laying to the charge of
the disturber at Corinth that he had got his name surreptitiously
inserted on the military list; that he was not striving lawfully; had no
right to the stadium, and none to the crown. See the observations at the
end of 1 Corinthians 9; ([Co1 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#027.md)
(note)) and the note on [Co2 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#013.md) of
this chapter; ([Co2 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#013) (note).md).

[2 Corinthians 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co2 10:15</span></span>

Not boasting of things without our measure - We speak only of the work
which God has done by us; for we have never attempted to enter into
other men's labors, and we study to convert those regions assigned to us
by the Holy Spirit. We enter the course lawfully, and run according to
rule. See above.

When your faith is increased - When you receive more of the life and
power of godliness, and when you can better spare me to go to other
places.

We shall be enlarged by you - Μεγαλυνθηναι probably signifies here to be
praised or commended; and the sense would be this; We hope that shortly,
on your gaining an increase of true religion, after your long
distractions and divisions, you will plainly see that we are the true
messengers of God to you, and that in all your intercourse with your
neighbors, or foreign parts, you will speak of this Gospel preached by
us as a glorious system of saving truth; and that, in consequence, the
heathen countries around you will be the better prepared to receive our
message; and thus our rule or district will be abundantly extended. This
interpretation agrees well with the following verse.

[2 Corinthians 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co2 10:16</span></span>

To preach the Gospel in the regions beyond you - He probably refers to
those parts of the Morea, such as Sparta, etc., that lay southward of
them; and to Italy, which lay on the west; for it does not appear that
he considered his measure or province to extend to Libya, or any part of
Africa. See the Introduction, Section 12.

Not to boast in another man's line - So very scrupulous was the apostle
not to build on another man's foundation, that he would not even go to
those places where other apostles were labouring. He appears to think
that every apostle had a particular district or province of the heathen
world allotted to him, and which God commissioned him to convert to the
Christian faith. No doubt every apostle was influenced in the same way;
and this was a wise order of God; for by these means the Gospel was more
quickly spread through the heathen provinces than it otherwise would
have been. The apostles had deacons or ministers with them whose
business it was to water the seed sown; but the apostles alone, under
Christ, sowed and planted.

[2 Corinthians 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co2 10:17</span></span>

He that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord - Instead of boasting or
exulting even in your own success in preaching the Gospel, as none can
be successful without the especial blessing of God, let God who gave the
blessing have the glory. Even the genuine apostle, who has his
commission immediately from God himself, takes no praise to himself from
the prosperity of his work, but gives it all to God. How little cause
then have your uncommissioned men to boast, to whom God has assigned no
province, and who only boast in another man's line of things made ready
to their hand!

[2 Corinthians 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co2 10:18</span></span>

Not he that commendeth himself - Not the person who makes a parade of
his own attainments; who preaches himself, and not Christ Jesus the
Lord; and, far from being your servant for Christ's sake, affects to be
your ruler; not such a one shall be approved of God, by an especial
blessing on his labors; but he whom the Lord commendeth, by giving him
the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Spirit, and converting the heathen
by his ministry. These were qualifications to which the false apostle at
Corinth could not pretend. He had language and eloquence, and show and
parade; but he had neither the gifts of an apostle nor an apostle's
success.

1\. Dr. Whitby observes that the apostle, in the 13th, 14th, 15th, and
16th verses, ([Co2 10:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#013).md) endeavors
to advance himself above the false apostles in the three following
particulars: -

(1.) That whereas they could show no commission to preach to the
Corinthians, no measure by which God had distributed the Corinthians to
them as their province, he could do so. We have a measure to reach even
to you, [Co2 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#013.md).

(2.) That whereas they went out of their line, leaping from one Church
to another, he went on orderly, in the conversion of the heathens, from
Judea through all the interjacent provinces, till he came to Corinth.

(3.) Whereas they only came in and perverted the Churches where the
faith had already been preached, and so could only boast of things made
ready to their hands, [Co2 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#016.md), he
had labored to preach the Gospel where Christ had not been named, lest
he should build on another man's foundation, [Rom
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#020.md).

2\. We find that from the beginning God appointed to every man his
promise, and to every man his labor; and would not suffer even one
apostle to interfere with another. This was a very wise appointment; for
by this the Gospel was not only more speedily diffused over the heathen
nations, as we have already remarked, but the Churches were better
attended to, the Christian doctrine preserved in its purity, and the
Christian discipline properly enforced. What is any men's work is no
man's in particular; and thus the work is neglected. In every Church of
God there should be some one who for the time being has the care of it,
who may be properly called its pastor; and who is accountable for its
purity in the faith, and its godly discipline.

3\. Every man who ministers in holy things should be well assured of his
call to the work; without this he can labor neither with confidence nor
comfort. And he should be careful to watch over the flock, that no
destroying wolf be permitted to enter the sacred fold, and that the
fences of a holy discipline be kept in proper repair.

4\. It is base, abominable, and deeply sinful, for a man to thrust
himself into other men's labors, and, by sowing doubtful disputations
among a Christian people, distract and divide them, that he may get a
party to himself. Such persons generally act as the false apostle at
Corinth; preach a relaxed morality; place great stress upon certain
doctrines which flatter and soothe self-love; calumniate the person,
system of doctrines, and mode of discipline, of the pastor who perhaps
planted that Church, or who in the order of God's providence has the
oversight of it. This is an evil that has prevailed much in all ages of
the Church; there is at present much of it in the Christian world, and
Christianity is disgraced by it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 11](co2011.md)

</div>
