<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2.md)  
  [Previous](co2002)  [Next](co2004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#001.md)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 3:0</span></span>

The apostle shows, in opposition to his detractors, that the faith and
salvation of the Corinthians were sufficient testimony of his Divine
mission; that he needed no letters of recommendation, the Christian
converts at Corinth being a manifest proof that he was an apostle of
Christ, [Co2 3:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#001.md). He extols the
Christian ministry, as being infinitely more excellent than that of
Moses, [Co2 3:4-12](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#004.md). Compares the
different modes of announcing the truth under the law and under the
Gospel: in the former it was obscurely delivered; and the veil of
darkness, typified by the veil which Moses wore, is still on the hearts
of the Jews; but when they turn to Christ this veil shall be taken away,
[Co2 3:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#013.md). On the contrary, the
Gospel dispensation is spiritual; leads to the nearest views of heavenly
things; and those who receive it are changed into the glorious likeness
of God by the agency of his Spirit, [Co2
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#017.md), [Co2
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018.md).

[2 Corinthians 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 3:1</span></span>

Do we begin again to commend ourselves - By speaking thus of our
sincerity, Divine mission, etc., is it with a design to conciliate your
esteem, or ingratiate ourselves in your affections? By no means.

Or need we - epistles of commendation - Are we so destitute of
ministerial abilities and Divine influence that we need, in order to be
received in different Churches, to have letters of recommendation?
Certainly not. God causes us to triumph through Christ in every place;
and your conversion is such an evident seal to our ministry as leaves no
doubt that God is with us.

Letters of commendation - Were frequent in the primitive Church; and
were also in use in the apostolic Church, as we learn from this place.
But these were, in all probability, not used by the apostles; their
helpers, successors, and those who had not the miraculous gifts of the
Spirit, needed such letters and they were necessary to prevent the
Churches from being imposed on by false teachers. But when apostles
came, they brought their own testimonials, the miraculous gifts of the
Holy Spirit.

[2 Corinthians 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co2 3:2</span></span>

Ye are our epistle - I bear the most ardent love to you. I have no need
to be put in remembrance of you by any epistles or other means; ye are
written in my heart - I have the most affectionate remembrance of you.

Known and read of all men - For wherever I go I mention you; speak of
your various gifts and graces; and praise your knowledge in the Gospel.

[2 Corinthians 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co2 3:3</span></span>

Manifestly declared to be the epistle of Christ - Ye are in our hearts,
and Christ has written you there; but yourselves are the epistle of
Christ; the change produced in your hearts and lives, and the salvation
which you have received, are as truly the work of Christ as a letter
dictated and written by a man in his work.

Ministered by us - Ye are the writing, but Christ used me as the pen;
Christ dictated, and I wrote; and the Divine characters are not made
with ink, but by the Spirit of the living God; for the gifts and graces
that constitute the mind that was in Christ are produced in you by the
Holy Ghost.

Not in tables of stone - Where men engrave contracts, or record events;
but in fleshly tables of the heart - the work of salvation taking place
in all your affections, appetites, and desires; working that change
within that is so signally manifested without. See the parts of this
figurative speech:

1\. Jesus Christ dictates.

2\. The apostle writes.

3\. The hearts of the Corinthians are the substance on which the writing
is made. And,

4\. The Holy Spirit produces that influence by which the traces are
made, and the mark becomes evident.

Here is not only an allusion to making inscriptions on stones, where one
dictates the matter, and another cuts the letters; (and probably there
were certain cases where some colouring matter was used to make the
inscription the more legible; and when the stone was engraved, it was
set up in some public place, as monuments, inscriptions, and contracts
were, that they might be seen, known, and read of all men); but the
apostle may here refer to the ten commandments, written by the finger of
God upon two tables of stone; which writing was an evidence of the
Divine mission of Moses, as the conversion of the Corinthians was an
evidence of the mission of St. Paul. But it may be as well to take the
words in a general sense, as the expression is not unfrequent either in
the Old Testament, or in the rabbinical writers. See Schoettgen.

[2 Corinthians 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co2 3:4</span></span>

Such trust have we - We have the fullest conviction that God has thus
accredited our ministry; and that ye are thus converted unto him, and
are monuments of his mercy, and proofs of the truth of our ministry.

[2 Corinthians 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co2 3:5</span></span>

Not that we are sufficient of ourselves - We do not arrogate to
ourselves any power to enlighten the mind or change the heart, we are
only instruments in the hand of God. Nor was it possible for us apostles
to think, to invent, such a scheme of salvation as is the Gospel; and if
we even had been equal to the invention, how could we have fulfilled
such promises as this scheme of salvation abounds with? God alone could
fulfill these promises, and he fulfils only those which he makes
himself. All these promises have been amen-ratified and fulfilled to you
who have believed on Christ Jesus according to our preaching; therefore,
ye are God's workmanship and it is only by God's sufficiency that we
have been able to do any thing. This I believe to be the apostle's
meaning in this place, and that he speaks here merely of the Gospel
scheme, and the inability of human wisdom to invent it; and the words
λογισασθαι τι, which we translate to think any thing, signify, properly,
to find any thing out by reasoning; and as the Gospel scheme of
salvation is the subject in hand, to that subject the words are to be
referred and limited. The words, however, contain also a general truth;
we can neither think, act, nor be, without God. From him we have
received all our powers, whether of body or of mind, and without him we
can do nothing. But we may abuse both our power of thinking and acting;
for the power to think, and the power to act, are widely different from
the act of thinking, and the act of doing. God gives us the power or
capacity to think and act, but he neither thinks nor acts for us. It is
on this ground that we may abuse our powers, and think evil, and act
wickedly; and it is on this ground that we are accountable for our
thoughts, words, and deeds.

[2 Corinthians 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co2 3:6</span></span>

Who hath made us able ministers - This is a more formal answer to the
question, Who is sufficient for these things? προς ταυτα τις ἱκανος;
[Co1 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#016.md). God, says the apostle, has
made us able ministers; ἱκανωσεν ἡμας διακονους, he has made us
sufficient for these things; for the reader will observe that he uses
the same word in both places. We apostles execute, under the Divine
influence, what God himself has devised. We are ministers of the new
covenant; of this new dispensation of truth, light, and life, by Christ
Jesus; a system which not only proves itself to have come from God, but
necessarily implies that God himself by his own Spirit is a continual
agent in it, ever bringing its mighty purposes to pass. On the words
καινη διαθηκη, new covenant, see the Preface to the gospel of St.
Matthew.

Not of the letter, but of the Spirit - The apostle does not mean here,
as some have imagined, that he states himself to be a minister of the
New Testament, in opposition to the Old; and that it is the Old
Testament that kills, and the New that gives life; but that the New
Testament gives the proper meaning of the Old; for the old covenant had
its letter and its spirit, its literal and its spiritual meaning. The
law was founded on the very supposition of the Gospel; and all its
sacrifices, types, and ceremonies refer to the Gospel. The Jews rested
in the letter, which not only afforded no means of life, but killed, by
condemning every transgressor to death. They did not look at the spirit;
did not endeavor to find out the spiritual meaning; and therefore they
rejected Christ, who was the end of the law for justification; and so
for redemption from death to every one that believes. The new covenant
set all these spiritual things at once before their eyes, and showed
them the end, object, and design of the law; and thus the apostles who
preached it were ministers of that Spirit which gives life.

Every institution has its letter as well as its spirit, as every word
must refer to something of which it is the sign or significator. The
Gospel has both its letter and its spirit; and multitudes of professing
Christians, by resting in the Letter, receive not the life which it is
calculated to impart. Water, in baptism, is the letter that points out
the purification of the soul; they who rest in this letter are without
this purification; and dying in that state they die eternally. Bread and
wine in the sacrament of the Lord's Supper, are the letter; the atoning
efficacy of the death of Jesus, and the grace communicated by this to
the soul of a believer, are the spirit. Multitudes rest in this letter,
simply receiving these symbols, without reference to the atonement, or
to their guilt; and thus lose the benefit of the atonement and the
salvation of their souls. The whole Christian life is comprehended by
our Lord under the letter, Follow me. Does not any one see that a man,
taking up this letter only, and following Christ through Judea, Galilee,
Samaria, etc., to the city, temple, villages, seacoast, mountains, etc.,
fulfilled no part of the spirit; and might, with all this following,
lose his soul? Whereas the Spirit, viz. receive my doctrine, believe my
sayings, look by faith for the fulfillment of my promises, imitate my
example, would necessarily lead him to life eternal. It may be safely
asserted that the Jews, in no period of their history, ever rested more
in the letter of their law than the vast majority of Christians are
doing in the letter of the Gospel. Unto multitudes of Christians Christ
may truly say: Ye will not come unto me that ye may have life.

[2 Corinthians 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co2 3:7</span></span>

The ministration of death - Here the apostle evidently intends the law.
It was a ministration, διακονια or service of death. It was the province
of the law to ascertain the duty of man; to assign his duties; to fix
penalties for transgressions, etc.; and by it is the knowledge of sin.
As man is prone to sin, and is continually committing it, this law was
to him a continual ministration of death. Its letter killed; and it was
only the Gospel to which it referred that could give life, because that
Gospel held out the only available atonement.

Yet this ministration of death (the ten commandments, written on stones;
a part of the Mosaic institutions being put for the whole) was glorious
- was full of splendor; for the apostle refers to the thunderings, and
lightnings, and luminous appearances, which took place in the giving of
the law; so that the very body of Moses partook of the effulgence in
such a manner that the children of Israel could not look upon his face;
and he, to hide it, was obliged to use a veil. All this was intended to
show the excellency of that law, as an institution coming immediately
from God: and the apostle gives it all its heightenings, that he may
compare it to the Gospel, and thereby prove that, glorious as it was, it
had no glory that could be compared with that of the Gospel; and that
even the glory it had was a glory that was to be done away - to be
absorbed, as the light of the stars, planets, and moon, is absorbed in
the splendor of the sun. See the notes on Romans 7 (note); and see those
on Exodus 19 (note), Exodus 20 (note), and [Exo
34:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#029) (note.md), etc., where this subject
is treated in all its details.

[2 Corinthians 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co2 3:8</span></span>

The ministration of the Spirit - The Gospel dispensation, which gives
the true spiritual sense of the law.

Be rather glorious? - Forasmuch as the thing signified is of infinitely
more consequence than that by which it is signified. The Thing bread
will preserve a man alive; the Word bread can give life to nothing.

[2 Corinthians 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co2 3:9</span></span>

The ministration of condemnation - The law, which ascertained sin, and
condemned it to just punishment.

The ministration of righteousness - The Gospel, the grand business of
which was to proclaim the doctrine δικαιοσυνης, of justification; and to
show how God could be just and yet the justifier of him who believeth in
Jesus.

Exceed in glory - For great, glorious, and awful as the law may be, in
its opposition to sin, which is a reproach to man, and a dishonor to
God; and in its punishment of sin; yet it must be vastly exceeded by
that system which, evidencing an equal abhorrence of sin, finds out a
method to forgive it; to take away its guilt from the conscience, and
remove all its infection from the soul. That this could be done the law
pointed out by its blood of bulls and of goats: but every considerate
mind must see that it was impossible for these to take away sin; it is
the Gospel that does what the law signified; and forasmuch as the
performance of a promise is greater than the promise itself, and the
substance of a man is greater than the shadow projected by that
substance; so is the Gospel of Jesus Christ greater than the law, with
all its promises, types, ceremonies, and shadows.

[2 Corinthians 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co2 3:10</span></span>

For even that which was made glorious - The law, which was exhibited for
a time in great glory and splendor, partly when it was given, and partly
by the splendor of God in the tabernacle and first temple; but all this
ceased and was done away; was intended to give place to the Gospel; and
has actually given place to that system; so that now, in no part of the
world is that law performed, even by the people who are attached to it
and reject the Gospel.

The glory that excelleth - The Gospel dispensation, giving supereminent
displays of the justice, holiness, goodness, mercy, and majesty of God.

[2 Corinthians 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co2 3:11</span></span>

For if that which is done away, etc. - Here is another striking
difference between the law and the Gospel. The former is termed το
καταργουμενον, that which is counterworked and abolished; the latter το
μενον, that which continues, which is not for a particular time, place,
and people, as the law was; but for All times, all places, and all
people. As a great, universal, and permanent Good vastly excels a good
that is small, partial, and transitory; so does the Gospel dispensation,
that of the law.

[2 Corinthians 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 3:12</span></span>

Seeing - we have such hope - Such glorious prospects as those blessings
which the Gospel sets before us, producing such confidence, as the
fulfillment of so many promises has already done, that God will still
continue to work for us and by us;

We use great plainness of speech - Πολλῃ παρῥησιᾳ χρωμεθα· We speak not
only with all confidence, but with all imaginable plainness; keeping
back nothing; disguising nothing; concealing nothing: and here we differ
greatly from the Jewish doctors, and from the Gentile philosophers, who
affect obscurity, and endeavor, by figures, metaphors, and allegories,
to hide every thing from the vulgar. But we wish that all may hear; and
we speak so that all may understand.

[2 Corinthians 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co2 3:13</span></span>

And not as Moses - The splendor of Moses' countenance was so great that
the Israelites could not bear to look upon his face, and therefore he
was obliged to veil his face: this, it appears, he did typically, to
represent the types and shadows by which the whole dispensation of which
he was the minister was covered. So that the Israelites could not
steadfastly look - could not then have the full view or discernment of
that in which the Mosaic dispensation should issue and terminate.

[2 Corinthians 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co2 3:14</span></span>

But their minds were blinded - By resting in the letter, shutting their
eyes against the light that was granted to them, they contracted a
hardness or stupidity of heart. And the veil that was on the face of
Moses, which prevented the glory of his face from shining out, may be
considered as emblematical of the veil of darkness and ignorance that is
on their hearts, and which hinders the glory of the Gospel from shining
in.

Until this day remaineth the same veil - They are still ignorant of the
spiritual meaning and intention of their own law, called here παλαια
διαθηκη, the old covenant. See the word explained in the preface to St.
Matthew.

In the reading of the Old Testament - Here is an evident allusion to the
conduct of the Jews in their synagogues: when they read the law they
cover their whole head with a veil, which they term the טלית tallith,
veil, from טלל talal, to cover; and this voluntary usage of theirs, the
apostle tells us, is an emblem of the darkness of their hearts while
they are employed even in sacred duties.

Which veil is done away in Christ - It is only by acknowledging Christ
that the darkness is removed, and the end and spiritual meaning of the
law discerned.

[2 Corinthians 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co2 3:16</span></span>

When it shall turn to the Lord - When the Israelitish nation shall turn
to the Lord Jesus, the veil shall be taken away; the true light shall
shine; and they shall see all things clearly.

There is an evident allusion here to the case of Moses, mentioned [Exo
34:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#034.md). When he came from the Lord, and
spoke to the Israelites, he put the veil over his face; but when he
returned to speak with the Lord, then he took off the veil. So, when the
Israelitish nation shall return to speak with and pray to the Lord
Jesus, the veil of darkness and ignorance shall be taken away from their
hearts; but never before that time. The words seem to imply:

1\. That there will be a conversion of the Jews to Christianity; and,

2\. That this conversion will be en masse; that a time will come when
the whole nation of the Jews, in every place, shall turn to Christ; and
then the Gentiles and Jews make one fold, under one Shepherd and Bishop
of all souls.

[2 Corinthians 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co2 3:17</span></span>

Now the Lord is that Spirit - In [Co2
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006.md), [Co2
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#008.md), the word το πνευμα, spirit,
evidently signifies the Gospel; so called because it points out the
spiritual nature and meaning of the law; because it produces spiritual
effects; and because it is especially the dispensation of the Spirit of
God. Here Jesus Christ is represented as that Spirit, because he is the
end of the law for justification to every one that believes; and because
the residue of the Spirit is with him, and he is the dispenser of all
its gifts, graces, and influences.

And where the Spirit of the Lord is - Wherever this Gospel is received,
there the Spirit of the Lord is given; and wherever that Spirit lives
and works, there is liberty, not only from Jewish bondage, but from the
slavery of sin - from its power, its guilt, and its pollution. See [Joh
8:33-36](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#033) (note.md), and the notes there.

[2 Corinthians 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co2 3:18</span></span>

But we all, with open face - The Jews were not able to look on the face
of Moses, the mediator of the old covenant, and therefore he was obliged
to veil it; but all we Christians, with face uncovered, behold, as
clearly as we can see our own natural face in a mirror, the glorious
promises and privileges of the Gospel of Christ; and while we
contemplate, we anticipate them by desire and hope, and apprehend them
by faith, and are changed from the glory there represented to the
enjoyment of the thing which is represented, even the glorious image -
righteousness and true holiness - of the God of glory.

As by the Spirit of the Lord - By the energy of that Spirit of Christ
which gives life and being to all the promises of the Gospel; and thus
we are made partakers of the Divine nature and escape all the
corruptions that are in the world. This appears to me to be the general
sense of this verse: its peculiar terms may be more particularly
explained.

The word κατοπτριζομενοι, catoptrizomenoi, acting on the doctrine of
catoptries, which we translate beholding in a glass, comes from κατα,
against, and οπτομαι, I look; and properly conveys the sense of looking
into a mirror, or discerning by reflected light. Now as mirrors, among
the Jews, Greeks, and Romans, were made of highly polished metal, (see
the note on [Co1 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012).md), it would
often happen, especially in strong light, that the face would be greatly
illuminated by this strongly reflected light; and to this circumstance
the apostle seems here to allude. So, by earnestly contemplating the
Gospel of Jesus, and believing on him who is its Author, the soul
becomes illuminated with his Divine splendor, for this sacred mirror
reflects back on the believing soul the image of Him whose perfections
it exhibits; and thus we see the glorious form after which our minds are
to be fashioned; and by believing and receiving the influence of his
Spirit, μεταμορφουμεθα, our form is changed, την αυτην εικονα, into the
same image, which we behold there; and this is the image of God, lost by
our fall, and now recovered and restored by Jesus Christ: for the
shining of the face of God upon us, i.e. approbation, through Christ, is
the cause of our transformation into the Divine image.

Dr. Whitby, in his notes on this chapters produces six instances in
which the apostle shows the Gospel to be superior to the law; I shall
transcribe them without farther illustration: -

1\. The glory appearing on mount Sinai made the people afraid of death,
saying: Let not God speak to us any more, lest we die; [Exo
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#019.md); [Deu
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#016.md); and thus they received the
spirit of bondage to fear, [Rom 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015.md).
Whilst we have given to us the spirit of power, and love, and of a sound
mind, [Ti2 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#007.md); and the spirit of
adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father! and to this difference the
Epistle to the Hebrews alludes, [Heb
12:18-24](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#018.md).

2\. Moses, with all his glory, was only the minister of the law, written
on tables of stone; the apostles are ministers of the Gospel, written on
the hearts of believers. Moses gave the Jews only the letter that
killeth; the apostles gave the Gospel, which is accompanied with the
spirit that gives life.

3\. The glory which Moses received at the giving of the law did more and
more diminish, because his law was to vanish away; but the glory which
is received from Christ is an increasing glory; the doctrine and the
Divine influence remaining for ever.

4\. The law was veiled under types and shadows; but the Gospel has
scarcely any ceremonies; baptism and the Lord's Supper being all that
can be properly called such: and Believe, Love, Obey, the great precepts
of the Gospel, are delivered with the utmost perspicuity. And indeed the
whole doctrine of Christ crucified is made as plain as human language
can make it.

5\. The Jews only saw the shining of the face of Moses through a veil;
but we behold the glory of the Gospel of Christ, in the person of Christ
our Lawgiver, with open face.

6\. They saw it through a veil, which prevented the reflection or
shining of it upon them; and so this glory shone only on the face of
Moses, but not at all upon the people. Whereas the glory of God, in the
face of Jesus Christ, shines as in a mirror which reflects the image
upon Christian believers, so that they are transformed into the same
image, deriving the glorious gifts and graces of the Spirit, with the
Gospel, from Christ the Lord and Distributor of them, [Co1
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#005.md); and so, the glory which he had
from the Father he has given to his genuine followers, [Joh
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#022.md). It is, therefore, rather with
true Christians as it was with Moses himself, concerning whom God speaks
thus: With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in
dark speeches; and the similitude of the Lord (την δοξαν Κυριου, the
glory of the Lord) shall he behold; [Num
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#008.md). For as he saw the glory of God
apparently, so we with open face behold the glory of the Lord: as he, by
seeing of this glory, was changed into the same likeness, and his face
shone, or was δεδοξασμενη, made glorious; so we, beholding the glory of
the Lord in the face of Jesus Christ, [Co2
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#006.md), are changed into the same glory.

Thus we find that in every thing the Gospel has a decided superiority
over the law and its institutions.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 4](co2004.md)

</div>
