<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2.md)  
  [Previous](co2010)  [Next](co2012.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#001.md)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 11:0</span></span>

The apostle apologizes for expressing his jealousy relative to the true
state of the Corinthians; still fearing lest their minds should have
been drawn aside from the simplicity of the Gospel, [Co2
11:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#001.md); From this he takes occasion to
extol his own ministry, which had been without charge to them, having
been supported by the Churches of Macedonia while he preached the Gospel
at Corinth, [Co2 11:4-11](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#004.md). Gives the
character of the false apostles, [Co2
11:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#012.md). Shows what reasons he has to
boast of secular advantages of birth, education, Divine call to the
ministry, labors in that ministry, grievous persecutions, great
sufferings, and extraordinary hazards, vv. 16-33.

[2 Corinthians 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 11:1</span></span>

Would to God ye could bear with me - Οφελον ηνειχεσθε μου μικρον. As the
word God is not mentioned here, it would have been much better to have
translated the passage literally thus: I wish ye could bear a little
with me. The too frequent use of this sacred name produces a familiarity
with it that is not at all conducive to reverence and godly fear.

In my folly - In my seeming folly; for, being obliged to vindicate his
ministry, it was necessary that he should speak much of himself, his
sufferings, and his success. And as this would appear like boasting; and
boasting is always the effect of an empty, foolish mind; those who were
not acquainted with the necessity that lay upon him to make this
defense, might be led to impute it to vanity. As if he had said: Suppose
you allow this to be folly, have the goodness to bear with me; for
though I glory, I should not be a fool, [Co2
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#006.md). And let no man think me a fool
for my boasting, [Co2 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#016.md).

[2 Corinthians 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co2 11:2</span></span>

I am jealous over you, etc. - The apostle evidently alludes either to
the שושבינים shoshabinim or paranymphs among the Hebrews, whose office
is largely explained in the notes on [Joh
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#029.md), and the observations at the end
of that chapter (see note at [Joh
3:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#036).md); or to the harmosyni, a sort of
magistrates among the Lacedemonians who had the care of virgins, and
whose business it was to see them well educated, kept pure, and properly
prepared for married life.

That I may present you as a chaste virgin - The allusion is still kept
up; and there seems to be a reference to [Lev
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#014.md), that the high priest must not
marry any one that was not a pure virgin. Here, then, Christ is the high
priest, the spouse or husband; the Corinthian Church the pure virgin to
be espoused; the apostle and his helpers the shoshabinim, or harmosyni,
who had educated and prepared this virgin for her husband, and espoused
her to him. See the observations already referred to at the end of the
third chapter of John. ([Joh 3:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#036.md)
(note))

[2 Corinthians 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co2 11:3</span></span>

As the serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty - This is a strong
reflection on the false apostle and his teaching: he was subtle,
πανουργος and by his subtlety (πανουργια, from παν, all, and εργον,
work; his versatility of character and conduct, his capability of doing
all work, and accommodating himself to the caprices, prejudices, and
evil propensities of those to whom he ministered) he was enabled to
corrupt the minds of the people from the simplicity of the Gospel of
Christ; or, to follow the metaphor, he had seduced the pure, chaste,
well educated virgin, from her duty, affection, and allegiance to her
one only true husband, the high priest, Jesus Christ. And here he seems
to intimate that the serpent had seduced the mind of Eve from her
affections and allegiance to Adam, her true husband; and certainly from
God, her creator and governor. See at the end of the chapter (note).

[2 Corinthians 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co2 11:4</span></span>

For if he that cometh - The false apostle, who came after St. Paul had
left Corinth.

Preacheth another Jesus - Who can save more fully and more powerfully
than that Jesus whom I have preached.

Or if ye receive another spirit - And if in consequence of believing in
this new saviour ye receive another spirit, the gifts, graces, and
consolations of which are greater than those which ye have received from
the Holy Ghost, which has been given to you on your believing on the
Christ whom we preached.

Or another Gospel - Containing more privileges, spiritual advantages,
and stronger excitements to holiness, than that which we have preached
and which ye have accepted, ye might well bear with him. This would be a
sufficient reason why you should not only bear with him, but prefer him
to me.

Others think that the last clause should be rendered, Ye might well bear
with Me - notwithstanding he brought you another Jesus, spirit, and
gospel, ye might bear with me, who have already ministered so long to
and done so much for you. But the former sense seems best.

[2 Corinthians 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co2 11:5</span></span>

I was not - behind the very chiefest apostles - That is: The most
eminent of the apostles have not preached Christ, ministered the spirit,
explained and enforced the doctrines of the Gospel in a more powerful
and effectual manner than I have done.

[2 Corinthians 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co2 11:6</span></span>

But though I be rude in speech - Ιδιωτης τῳ λογῳ Though I speak like a
common unlettered man, in plain unadorned phrase, studying none of the
graces of eloquence; yet I am not unskilled in the most profound
knowledge of God, of spiritual and eternal things, of the nature of the
human soul, and the sound truths of the Gospel system: ye yourselves are
witnesses of this, as in all these things I have been thoroughly
manifested among you.

Inspired men received all their doctrines immediately from God, and
often the very words in which those doctrines should be delivered to the
world; but in general the Holy Spirit appears to have left them to their
own language, preventing them from using any expression that might be
equivocal, or convey a contrary sense to that which God intended.

That St. Paul wrote a strong, nervous, and sufficiently pure language,
his own writings sufficiently testify; but the graces of the Greek
tongue he appears not to have studied, or at least he did not think it
proper to use them; for perhaps there is no tongue in the world that is
so apt to seduce the understanding by its sounds and harmony, as the
Greek. It is not an unusual thing for Greek scholars to the present day
to be in raptures with the harmony of a Greek verse, the sense of which
is but little regarded, and perhaps is little worth! I should suppose
that God would prevent the inspired writers from either speaking or
writing thus, that sound might not carry the hearer away from sense; and
that the persuasive force of truth might alone prevail, and the
excellence of the power appear to be of God and not of man. Taking up
the subject in this point of view, I see no reason to have recourse to
the supposition, or fable rather, that the apostle had an impediment in
his speech, and that he alludes to this infirmity in the above passage.

[2 Corinthians 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co2 11:7</span></span>

Have I committed an offense in abasing myself - Have I transgressed in
labouring with my hands that I might not be chargeable to you? and
getting my deficiencies supplied by contributions from other Churches,
while I was employed in labouring for your salvation? Does your false
apostle insinuate that I have disgraced the apostolic office by thus
descending to servile labor for my support? Well; I have done this that
you might be exalted - that you might receive the pure doctrines of the
Gospel, and be exalted to the highest pitch of intellectual light and
blessedness. And will you complain that I preached the Gospel gratis to
you? Surely not. The whole passage is truly ironical.

[2 Corinthians 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co2 11:8</span></span>

I robbed other Churches - This part of the sentence is explained by the
latter, taking wages to do you service. The word οψωνιον signifies the
pay of money and provisions given daily to a Roman soldier. As if he had
said: I received food and raiment, the bare necessaries of life, from
other Churches while labouring for your salvation. Will you esteem this
a crime?

[2 Corinthians 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co2 11:9</span></span>

And when I was present with you - The particle και which we translate
and, should be rendered for in this place: For when I was with you, and
was in want, I was chargeable to no man. I preferred to be, for a time,
even without the necessaries of life, rather than be a burden to you. To
whom was this a reproach, to me or to you?

The brethren which came from Macedonia - He probably refers to the
supplies which he received from the Church at Philippi, which was in
Macedonia; of which he says, that in the beginning of the Gospel no
Church communicated with me, as concerning giving and receiving, but you
only; for even at Thessalonica ye sent once and again to my necessity,
[Phi 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#015.md), [Phi
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#016.md). See the Introduction, Section 6.

[2 Corinthians 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co2 11:10</span></span>

As the truth of Christ is in me - Εστιν αληθεια Χριστου εν εμοι· The
truth of Christ is in me. That is: I speak as becomes a Christian man,
and as influenced by the Gospel of Christ. It is a solemn form of
asseveration, if not to be considered in the sense of an oath.

In the regions of Achaia - The whole of the Peloponnesus, or Morea, in
which the city of Corinth stood. From this it appears that he had
received no help from any of the other Churches in the whole of that
district.

[2 Corinthians 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co2 11:11</span></span>

Wherefore - Why have I acted thus? and why do I propose to continue to
act thus? is it because I love you not, and will not permit you to
contribute to my support? God knoweth the contrary; I do most
affectionately love you.

[2 Corinthians 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 11:12</span></span>

But what I do, etc. - I act thus that I may cut off occasion of
glorying, boasting, or calumniating from them - the false prophets and
his partisans, who seek occasion - who would be glad that I should
become chargeable to you, that it might in some sort vindicate them who
exact much from you; for they bring you into bondage, and devour you,
[Co2 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#020.md).

Nothing could mortify these persons more than to find that the apostle
did take nothing, and was resolved to take nothing; while they were
fleecing the people. It is certain that the passage is not to be
understood as though the false apostles took nothing from the people, to
whatever disinterestedness they might pretend, for the apostle is
positive on the contrary; and he was determined to act so that his
example should not authorize these deceivers, who had nothing but their
self-interest in view, to exact contribution from the people; so that if
they continued to boast, they must be bound even as the apostle, taking
nothing for their labors; which could never comport with their views of
gain and secular profit.

[2 Corinthians 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co2 11:13</span></span>

For such are false apostles - Persons who pretend to be apostles, but
have no mission from Christ.

Deceitful workers - They do preach and labor, but they have nothing but
their own emolument in view.

Transforming themselves - Assuming as far as they possibly can,
consistently with their sinister views, the habit, manner, and doctrine
of the apostles of Christ.

[2 Corinthians 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co2 11:14</span></span>

And no marvel - Και ου θαυμαστον· And no wonder; it need not surprise
you what the disciples do, when you consider the character of the
master.

Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light - As in [Co2
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#003.md) the apostle had the history of
the temptation and fall of man particularly in view, it is very likely
that here he refers to the same thing. In what ever form Satan appeared
to our first mother, his pretensions and professions gave him the
appearance of a good angel; and by pretending that Eve should get a
great increase of light, that is, wisdom and understanding, he deceived
her, and led her to transgress. It is generally said that Satan has
three forms under which he tempts men:

1\. The subtle serpent.

2\. The roaring lion.

3\. The angel of light.

He often, as the angel of light, persuades men to do things under the
name of religion, which are subversive of it. Hence all the
persecutions, faggots, and fires of a certain Church, under pretense of
keeping heresy out of the Church; and hence all the horrors and
infernalities of the inquisition. In the form of heathen persecution,
like a lion he has ravaged the heritage of the Lord. And by means of our
senses and passions, as the subtle serpent, he is frequently deceiving
us, so that often the workings of corrupt nature are mistaken for the
operations of the Spirit of God.

[2 Corinthians 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co2 11:15</span></span>

Whose end shall be according to their works - A bad way leads to a bad
end. The way of sin is the way to hell.

[2 Corinthians 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co2 11:16</span></span>

Let no man think me a fool - See the note on [Co2
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#001.md). As the apostle was now going to
enter into a particular detail of his qualifications, natural, acquired,
and spiritual; and particularly of his labors and sufferings; he thinks
it necessary to introduce the discourse once more as he did [Co2
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#001.md).

[2 Corinthians 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co2 11:17</span></span>

I speak it not after the Lord - Were it not for the necessity under
which I am laid to vindicate my apostleship, my present glorying would
be inconsistent with my Christian profession of humility, and knowing no
one after the flesh.

[2 Corinthians 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co2 11:18</span></span>

Seeing that many glory after the flesh - Boast of external and secular
things.

[2 Corinthians 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co2 11:19</span></span>

Ye suffer fools gladly, seeing ye yourselves are wise - A very fine
irony. Ye are so profoundly wise as to be able to discern that I am a
fool. Well, it would be dishonorable to you as wise men to fall out with
a fool; you will therefore gladly bear with his impertinence and
foolishness because of your own profound wisdom.

[2 Corinthians 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">co2 11:20</span></span>

For ye suffer - As you are so meek and gentle as to submit to be brought
into bondage, to have your property devoured, your goods taken away,
yourselves laid in the dust, so that others may exalt themselves over
you, yea, and will bear from those the most degrading indignity; then of
course, you will bear with one who has never insulted, defrauded,
devoured, taken of you, exalted himself against you, or offered you any
kind of indignity; and who only wishes you to bear his confident
boasting, concerning matters which he can substantiate.

The expressions in this verse are some evidence that the false apostle
was a Judaizing teacher. You suffer, says the apostle, if a man,
καταδουλοι, bring you into bondage, probably meaning to the Jewish rites
and ceremonies, [Gal 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#009.md); [Gal
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#001.md). If he devour you; as the
Pharisees did the patrimony of the widows, and for a pretense made long
prayers; if a man take of you, exact different contributions,
pretendedly for the temple at Jerusalem, etc. If he exalt himself,
pretending to be of the seed of Abraham, infinitely higher in honor and
dignity than all the families of the Gentiles; if he smite you on the
face - treat you with indignity, as the Jews did the Gentiles,
considering them only as dogs, and not fit to be ranked with any of the
descendants of Jacob.

[2 Corinthians 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">co2 11:21</span></span>

I speak as concerning reproach - Dr. Whitby thus paraphrases this verse:
"That which I said of smiting you upon the face, I speak as concerning
the reproach they cast upon you as profane and uncircumcised, whereas
they all profess to be a holy nation; as though we had been weak -
inferior to them in these things, not able to ascribe to ourselves those
advantages as well as they. Howbeit, whereinsoever any is bold, and can
justly value himself on these advantages, I am bold also, and can claim
the same distinctions, though I speak foolishly in setting any value on
those things; but it is necessary that I should show that such men have
not even one natural good that they can boast of beyond me."

[2 Corinthians 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">co2 11:22</span></span>

Are they Hebrews - Speaking the sacred language, and reading in the
congregation from the Hebrew Scriptures? the same is my own language.

Are they Israelites - Regularly descended from Jacob, and not from Esau?
I am also one.

Are they the seed of Abraham - Circumcised, and in the bond of the
covenant? So am I. I am no proselyte, but I am a Hebrew of the Hebrews
both by father and mother; and can trace my genealogy, through the tribe
of Benjamin, up to the father of the faithful.

[2 Corinthians 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">co2 11:23</span></span>

Are they ministers of Christ - So we find that these were professors of
Christianity; and that they were genuine Jews, and such as endeavored to
incorporate both systems, and, no doubt, to oblige those who had
believed to be circumcised; and this appears to have been the bondage
into which they had brought many of the believing Corinthians.

I am more - More of a minister of Christ than they are, and have given
fuller proofs of it. I have suffered persecution for the cross of
Christ, and of the Jews too; and had I preached up the necessity of
circumcision, I should have been as free from opposition as these are.

In labors more abundant - Far from sitting down to take my ease in a
Church already gathered into Christ; I travel incessantly, preach every
where, and at all risks, in order to get the heathen brought from the
empire of darkness into the kingdom of God's beloved Son.

In stripes above measure - Being beaten by the heathen, who had no
particular rule according to which they scourged criminals; and we find,
from [Act 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#022.md), [Act
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#023.md), that they beat Paul
unmercifully with many stripes. See the note on [Act
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#022.md).

In prisons more frequent - See [Act
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#011.md), and the whole of the apostle's
history; and his long imprisonment of at least two years at Rome, [Act
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#016.md), [Act
28:30](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#030.md). It does not appear that there
is any one instance of a false apostle having been imprisoned for the
testimony of Christ; this was a badge of the true apostles.

In deaths oft - That is, in the most imminent dangers. See [Co1
15:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#031.md); [Co2
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#011.md). And see the apostle's history in
the Acts.

[2 Corinthians 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">co2 11:24</span></span>

Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one - That is, he
was five times scourged by the Jews, whose law ([Deu
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#003).md) allowed forty stripes; but they,
pretending to be lenient, and to act within the letter of the law,
inflicted but thirty-nine.

To except one stripe from the forty was a very ancient canon among the
Jews, as we learn from Josephus, Antiq. lib. iv. ch. viii. sec. 21, who
mentions the same thing: πληγας μιας λειπουσης τεσσαπακοντα· forty
stripes, excepting one.

The Mishna gives this as a rule, Mish., Maccoth, fol. 22, 10:

"How often shall he, the culprit, be smitten?

Ans. ארבעים תמר אתר forty stripes, wanting one; i.e. with the number
which is highest to forty."

Frequently a man was scourged according to his ability to bear the
punishment; and it is a canon in the Mishna, "That he who cannot bear
forty stripes should receive only eighteen, and yet be considered as
having suffered the whole punishment." They also thought it right to
stop under forty, lest the person who counted should make a mistake, and
the criminal get more than forty stripes, which would be injustice, as
the law required only forty.

The manner in which this punishment was inflicted is described in the
Mishna, fol. 22, 2: "The two hands of the criminal are bound to a post,
and then the servant of the synagogue either pulls or tears off his
clothes till he leaves his breast and shoulders bare. A stone or block
is placed behind him on which the servant stands; he holds in his hands
a scourge made of leather, divided into four tails. He who scourges lays
one third on the criminal's breast, another third on his right shoulder,
and another on his left. The man who receives the punishment is neither
sitting nor standing, but all the while stooping; and the man smites
with all his strength, with one hand." The severity of this punishment
depends on the nature of the scourge, and the strength of the
executioner.

It is also observed that the Jews did not repeat scourgings except for
enormous offenses. But they had scourged the apostle five times; for
with those murderers no quarter would be given to the disciples, as none
was given to the Master. See Schoettgen.

[2 Corinthians 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">co2 11:25</span></span>

Thrice was I beaten with rods - This was under the Roman government, as
their lictors beat criminals in this way. We hear of the apostle's being
treated thus once, namely at Philippi, [Act
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#022.md). See Section 9 of the
Introduction.

Once was I stoned - Namely, at Lystra, [Act
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#019.md), etc.

A night and a day I have been in the deep - To what this refers we
cannot tell; it is generally supposed that in some shipwreck not on
record the apostle had saved himself on a plank, and was a whole day and
night on the sea, tossed about at the mercy of the waves. Others think
that βυθος, the deep, signifies a dungeon of a terrible nature at
Cyzicum, in the Propontis, into which Paul was cast as he passed from
Troas. But this is not likely.

[2 Corinthians 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">co2 11:26</span></span>

In journeyings often - He means the particular journeys which he took to
different places, for the purpose of propagating the Gospel.

In perils of waters - Exposed to great dangers in crossing rivers; for
of rivers the original, ποταμων, must be understood.

Of robbers - Judea itself, and perhaps every other country, was
grievously infested by banditti of this kind; and no doubt the apostle
in his frequent peregrinations was often attacked, but, being poor and
having nothing to lose, he passed unhurt, though not without great
danger.

In perils by mine own countrymen - The Jews had the most rooted
antipathy to him, because they considered him an apostate from the true
faith, and also the means of perverting many others. There are several
instances of this in the Acts; and a remarkable conspiracy against his
life is related, [Act 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#012.md), etc.

In perils by the heathen - In the heathen provinces whither he went to
preach the Gospel. Several instances of these perils occur also in the
Acts.

In perils in the city - The different seditions raised against him;
particularly in Jerusalem, to which Ephesus and Damascus may be added.

Perils in the wilderness - Uninhabited countries through which he was
obliged to pass in order to reach from city to city. In such places it
is easy to imagine many dangers from banditti, wild beasts, cold,
starvation, etc.

Perils in the sea - The different voyages he took in narrow seas, such
as the Mediterranean, about dangerous coasts, and without compass.

False brethren - Persons who joined themselves to the Church, pretending
faith in Christ, but intending to act as spies, hoping to get some
matter of accusation against him. He no doubt suffered much also from
apostates.

[2 Corinthians 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">co2 11:27</span></span>

In weariness and painfulness - Tribulations of this kind were his
constant companions. Lord Lyttleton and others have made useful
reflections on this verse: "How hard was it for a man of a genteel and
liberal education, as St. Paul was, to bear such rigours, and to wander
about like a vagabond, hungry and almost naked, yet coming into the
presence of persons of high life, and speaking in large and various
assemblies on matters of the utmost importance!" Had not St. Paul been
deeply convinced of the truth and absolute certainty of the Christian
religion, he could not have continued to expose himself to such
hardships.

[2 Corinthians 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">co2 11:28</span></span>

Beside those things that are without - Independently of all these
outward things, I have innumerable troubles and mental oppressions.

Which cometh upon me - Ἡ επισυατασις· This continual press of business;
this insurrection of cases to be heard, solved, and determined, relative
to the doctrine, discipline, state, persecution, and supply of all the
Churches.

All his perils were little in comparison of what he felt relative to the
peace, government, and establishment of all the Churches among the
Gentiles; for as he was the apostle of the Gentiles, the government of
all the Churches among these fell in some sort on him, whether they were
of his own planting or of the planting of others. See [Col
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#001.md). None but a conscientious
minister, who has at heart the salvation of souls, can enter into the
apostle's feelings in this place.

[2 Corinthians 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">co2 11:29</span></span>

Who is weak - What Church is there under persecution, with which I do
not immediately sympathize? or who, from his weakness in the faith, and
scrupulousness of conscience, is likely to be stumbled, or turned out of
the way, to whom I do not condescend, and whose burden I do not bear?

Who is offended - Or likely to be turned out of the way, and I burn not
with zeal to restore and confirm him? This seems to be the sense of
these different questions.

[2 Corinthians 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">co2 11:30</span></span>

I will glory - which concern mine infirmities - I will not boast of my
natural or acquired powers; neither in what God has done by me; but
rather in what I have suffered for him.

Many persons have understood by infirmities what they call the
indwelling sin of the apostle, and say that "he gloried in this, because
the grace of Christ was the more magnified in his being preserved from
ruin, notwithstanding this indwelling adversary." And to support this
most unholy interpretation, they quote those other words of the apostle,
[Co2 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#009.md) : Most gladly therefore will
I rather glory in my infirmities, my indwelling corruptions, that the
power of Christ, in chaining the fierce lion, may rest upon me. But it
would be difficult to produce a single passage in the whole New
Testament where the word ασθενεια, which we translate infirmity, has the
sense of sin or moral corruption. The verb ασθενεω signifies to be weak,
infirm, sick, poor, despicable through poverty, etc. And in a few places
it is applied to weakness in the faith, to young converts, who are poor
in religious knowledge, not yet fully instructed in the nature of the
Gospel; [Rom 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#019.md); [Rom
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#001.md), [Rom
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#002.md). And it is applied to the works
of the law, to point out their inability to justify a sinner, [Rom
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003.md). But to inward sin, and inward
corruption it is never applied. I am afraid that what these persons call
their infirmities may rather be called their strengths; the prevailing
and frequently ruling power of pride, anger, ill-will, etc.; for how few
think evil tempers to be sins! The gentle term infirmity softens down
the iniquity; and as St. Paul, so great and so holy a man, say they, had
his infirmities, how can they expect to be without theirs? These should
know that they are in a dangerous error; that St. Paul means nothing of
the kind; for he speaks of his sufferings, and of these alone. One word
more: would not the grace and power of Christ appear more conspicuous in
slaying the lion than in keeping him chained? in destroying sin, root
and branch; and filling the soul with his own holiness, with love to God
and man, with the mind - all the holy heavenly tempers, that were in
himself; than in leaving these impure and unholy tempers, ever to live
and often to reign in the heart? The doctrine is discreditable to the
Gospel, and wholly antichristian.

[2 Corinthians 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">co2 11:31</span></span>

The God and Father of our Lord - Here is a very solemn asseveration; an
appeal to the ever blessed God for the truth of what he asserts. It is
something similar to his asseveration or oath in [Co2
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#010.md) of this chapter; see also [Rom
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005.md), and [Gal
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#020.md). And from these and several other
places we learn that the apostle thought it right thus to confirm his
assertions on these particular occasions. But here is nothing to
countenance profane swearing, or taking the name of God in vain, as many
do in exclamations, when surprised, or on hearing something unexpected,
etc.; and as others do who, conscious of their own falsity, endeavor to
gain credit by appeals to God for the truth of what they say. St. Paul's
appeal to God is in the same spirit as his most earnest prayer. This
solemn appeal the apostle makes in reference to what he mentions in the
following verses. This was a fact not yet generally known.

[2 Corinthians 11:32](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">co2 11:32</span></span>

In Damascus the governor under Aretas - For a description of Damascus
see the note on [Act 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#002.md). And for the
transaction to which the apostle refers see [Act
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#023.md). As to King Aretas, there were
three of this name. The first is mentioned 2 Maccabeans [Act
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#008.md). The second by Josephus, Antiq. l.
xiii. c. 15, sec. 2; and l. xvi. c. 1, sec. 4. The third, who is the
person supposed to be referred to here, was the father-in-law of Herod
Antipas, of whom see the notes, [Act
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#023.md), etc.

But it is a question of some importance, How could Damascus, a city of
Syria, be under the government of an Arabian king? It may be accounted
for thus: Herod Antipas, who married the daughter of Aretas, divorced
her, in order to marry Herodias, his brother Philip's wife. Aretas, on
this indignity offered to his family, made war upon Herod. Herod applied
to Tiberius for help, and the emperor sent Vitellius to reduce Aretas,
and to bring him alive or dead to Rome. By some means or other Vitellius
delayed his operations, and in the meantime Tiberius died; and thus
Aretas was snatched from ruin, Joseph., Antiq. lib. xviii. c. 5. What
Aretas did in the interim is not known; but it is conjectured that he
availed himself of the then favorable state of things, made an irruption
into Syria, and seized on Damascus. See Rosenmuller; and see the
introduction to this epistle, Section 2.

The governor - Εθναρχης· Who this ethnarch was, we cannot tell. The word
ethnarch signifies the governor of a province, under a king or emperor.

Desirous to apprehend me - The enemies of the apostle might have
represented him to the governor as a dangerous spy, employed by the
Romans.

[2 Corinthians 11:33](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">co2 11:33</span></span>

Through a window in a basket - Probably the house was situated on the
wall of the city. See the notes on this history, [Act
9:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#023) (note.md).

In [Co2 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002.md) of this chapter the
apostle most evidently alludes to the history of the temptation, and
fall of Adam and Eve, as related in [Gen
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#001.md), etc.; and which fall is there
attributed to the agency of a being called נחש nachash, here, and in
other places, translated οφις, serpent. In my notes on Genesis I have
given many, and, as I judge, solid reasons, why the word cannot be
understood literally of a serpent of any kind; and that most probably a
creature of the simia or ape genus was employed by the devil on this
occasion. The arguments on this subject appeared to me to be
corroborated by innumerable probabilities; but I left the conjecture
afloat, (for I did not give it a more decisive name), and placed it in
the hands of my readers to adopt, reject, or amend, as their judgments
might direct them. To several this sentiment appeared a monstrous
heresy! and speedily the old serpent had a host of defenders. The very
modest opinion, or conjecture, was controverted by some who were both
gentlemen and scholars, and by several who were neither; by some who
could not affect candour because they had not even the appearance of it,
but would affect learning because they wished to be reputed wise. What
reason and argument failed to produce they would supply with ridicule;
and as monkey was a convenient term for this purpose, they attributed it
to him who had never used it. What is the result? They no doubt believe
that they have established their system; and their arguments are to them
conclusive. They have my full consent; but I think it right to state
that I have neither seen nor heard of any thing that has the least
tendency to weaken my conjecture, or produce the slightest wavering in
my opinion. Indeed their arguments, and mode of managing them, have
produced a very different effect on my mind to what they designed. I am
now more firmly persuaded of the probability of my hypothesis than ever.
I shall, however, leave the subject as it is: I never proposed it as an
article of faith; I press it on no man. I could fortify it with many
additional arguments if I judged it proper; for its probability appears
to me as strong as the utter improbability of the common opinion, to
defend which its abettors have descended to insupportable conjectures,
of which infidels have availed themselves, to the discredit of the
sacred writings. To those who choose to be wise and witty, and wish to
provoke a controversy, this is my answer: I am doing a great work, so
that I cannot come down. Why should the work cease, while I leave it and
come Down to You? [Neh 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#003.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 12](co2012.md)

</div>
