<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2)  
  [Previous](co2006)  [Next](co2008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 7:0</span></span>

The apostle's inference from the preceding exhortation, [Co2
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001). He presses them to receive him
with affection, because of his great love towards them, [Co2
7:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#002). He tells them what distress he
felt on their account in Macedonia, till he had met with Titus, and
heard of their prosperity, [Co2 7:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#006).
He rejoices that his first epistle was made the means of their
reformation, [Co2 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#008), [Co2
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#009). States how they were affected by
his letter, and the process of their reformation, [Co2
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#010), [Co2
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#011). Shows why he had written to
them, [Co2 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#012). Rejoices that his
boasting of them to Titus is found to be a truth; and takes occasion to
mention the great affection of Titus for them, and his own confidence in
them, [Co2 7:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#013).

[2 Corinthians 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 7:1</span></span>

Having therefore these promises - The promises mentioned in the three
last verses of the preceding chapter, to which this verse should
certainly be joined.

Let us cleanse ourselves - Let us apply to him for the requisite grace
of purification; and avoid every thing in spirit and practice which is
opposite to the doctrine of God, and which has a tendency to pollute the
soul.

Filthiness of the flesh - The apostle undoubtedly means, drunkenness,
fornication, adultery, and all such sins as are done immediately against
the body; and by filthiness of the spirit, all impure desires, unholy
thoughts, and polluting imaginations. If we avoid and abhor evil
inclinations, and turn away our eyes from beholding vanity, incentives
to evil being thus lessened, (for the eye affects the heart), there will
be the less danger of our falling into outward sin. And if we avoid all
outward occasions of sinning, evil propensities will certainly be
lessened. All this is our work under the common aids of the grace of
God. We may turn away our eyes and ears from evil, or we may indulge
both in what will infallibly beget evil desires and tempers in the soul;
and under the same influence we may avoid every act of iniquity; for
even Satan himself cannot, by any power he has, constrain us to commit
uncleanness, robbery, drunkenness, murder, etc. These are things in
which both body and soul must consent. But still withholding the eye,
the ear, the hand, and the body in general, from sights, reports, and
acts of evil, will not purify a fallen spirit; it is the grace and
Spirit of Christ alone, powerfully applied for this very purpose, that
can purify the conscience and the heart from all dead works. But if we
do not withhold the food by which the man of sin is nourished and
supported, we cannot expect God to purify our hearts. While we are
striving against sin, we may expect the Spirit of God to purify us by
his inspiration from all unrighteousness, that we may perfectly love and
magnify our Maker. How can those expect God to purify their hearts who
are continually indulging their eyes, ears, and hands in what is
forbidden, and in what tends to increase and bring into action all the
evil propensities of the soul?

Perfecting holiness - Getting the whole mind of Christ brought into the
soul. This is the grand object of a genuine Christian's pursuit. The
means of accomplishing this are,

1\. Resisting and avoiding sin, in all its inviting and seducing forms.

2\. Setting the fear of God before our eyes, that we may dread his
displeasure, and abhor whatever might excite it, and whatever might
provoke him to withhold his manna from our mouth. We see, therefore,
that there is a strong and orthodox sense in which we may cleanse
ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit, and thus
perfect holiness in the fear of God.

[2 Corinthians 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co2 7:2</span></span>

Receive us - Χωρησατε ἡμας. This address is variously understood.
Receive us into your affections - love us as we love you. Receive us as
your apostles and teachers; we have given you full proof that God hath
both sent and owned us. Receive, comprehend, what we now say to you, and
carefully mark it.

We have wronged no man - We have never acted contrary to the strictest
justice.

We have corrupted no man - With any false doctrine or pernicious
opinion.

We have defrauded no man - Of any part of his property. But what have
your false teachers done? They have beguiled you from the simplicity of
the truth, and thus corrupted your minds. [Co2
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#003). They have brought you into
bondage; they have taken of you; devoured you; exalted themselves
against you, and ye have patiently suffered all this. [Co2
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#020). It is plain that he refers here
to the false apostle or teacher which they had among them.

[2 Corinthians 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co2 7:3</span></span>

I speak not this to condemn you - I do not speak to reproach but to
correct you. I wish you to open your eyes and see how you are corrupted,
spoiled, and impoverished by those whom ye have incautiously preferred
to the true apostles of Jesus Christ.

I have said before, that ye are in our hearts - He has in effect and
substance said this, [Co2 1:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#006)
(note); [Co2 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#004) (note), [Co2
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#012) (note); [Co2
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#002) (note), and [Co2
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#013) (note); where see the passages at
length, and the notes.

To die and live with you - An expression which points out the strongest
affection, as in cases where love blinds us to the faults of those whom
we love, and causes us to prefer them to all others; like that in
Horace: -

Quanquam sidere pulchrior

llle est, tu levior cortice, et improbo

Iracundior Adria.

Tecum vivere amem, tecum obeam tibens.

Odar. lib. iii. Od. ix. ver. 21.

"Though he exceed in beauty far

The rising lustre of a star;

Though light as cork thy fancy strays,

Thy passions wild as angry seas

When vex'd with storms; yet gladly I

With thee would live, with thee would die."

Francis.

From all appearance there never was a Church less worthy of an apostle's
affections than this Church was at this time; and yet no one ever more
beloved. The above quotation applies to this case in full force.

[2 Corinthians 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co2 7:4</span></span>

Great is my boldness of speech - He seems to refer to the manner in
which he spoke of them to others.

Great is my glorying of you - They had probably been very loving and
affectionate previously to the time in which they were perverted by
their false apostle. He therefore had boasted of them in all the
Churches.

I am filled with comfort - My affection for you has still the most
powerful ascendancy in my soul. Here we may see the affection of the
most tender father to his children.

I am exceeding joyful - Ὑπερπερισσευομαι· I superabound in joy; I have a
joy beyond expression. Ὑπερπερισσευω is an extremely rare verb. I have
not met with it in any Greek author; and it occurs no where in the New
Testament but here and in [Rom 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020).

In all our tribulation - Perhaps επι here should be rendered under
instead of in, as it signifies, [Mar
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#026); [Luk
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#002); [Act
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#028). Under all our tribulations, I
feel inexpressible joy on your account.

[2 Corinthians 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co2 7:5</span></span>

When we were come into Macedonia - St. Paul, having left Ephesus, came
to Troas, where he stopped some time; afterwards he came to Macedonia,
whence he wrote this epistle,

Our flesh had no rest - So exceedingly anxious was he to know the
success of his first epistle to them.

Without were fightings - The oppositions of pagans, Jews, and false
brethren.

Within were fears - Uncertain conjectures relative to the success of his
epistle; fears lest the severity of it should alienate their affections
utterly from him; fears lest the party of the incestuous person should
have prevailed; fears lest the teaching of the false apostle should have
perverted their minds from the simplicity of the truth; all was
uncertainty, all apprehension; and the Spirit of God did not think
proper to remove the causes of these apprehensions in any extraordinary
way.

[2 Corinthians 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co2 7:6</span></span>

Comforted us by the coming of Titus - Who brought him a most
satisfactory account of the success of his epistle, and the good state
of the Corinthian Church.

[2 Corinthians 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co2 7:7</span></span>

He told us your earnest desire - To see me, and correct what was amiss
among yourselves.

Your mourning - Because you had sinned.

Your fervent mind - The zeal you felt to testify your affectionate
regard for me.

[2 Corinthians 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co2 7:8</span></span>

I do not repent, though I did repent - Though I had many doubts in my
mind concerning the success of my letter; and though I grieved that I
was obliged to write with so much severity, the case absolutely
requiring it; yet now I am not sorry that I have written that letter,
because I find it has completely answered the end for which it was sent.

[2 Corinthians 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co2 7:9</span></span>

Ye sorrowed to repentance - Ye had such a sorrow as produced a complete
change of mind and conduct. We see that a man may sorrow, and yet not
repent.

Made sorry after a godly manner - It was not a sorrow because ye were
found out, and thus solemnly reprehended, but a sorrow because ye had
sinned against God, and which consideration caused you to grieve more
than the apprehension of any punishment.

Damage by us in nothing - Your repentance prevented that exercise of my
apostolic duty, which would have consigned your bodies to destruction,
that your souls might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.

[2 Corinthians 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co2 7:10</span></span>

For godly sorrow - That which has the breach of God's holy law for its
object.

Worketh repentance - A thorough change of mind unto salvation, because
the person who feels it cannot rest till he finds pardon through the
mercy of God.

But the sorrow of the world worketh death - Sorrow for lost goods, lost
friends, death of relatives, etc., when it is poignant and deep,
produces diseases, increases those that already exist, and often leads
men to lay desperate hands on themselves. This sorrow leads to
destruction, the other leads to salvation; the one leads to heaven, the
other to hell.

[2 Corinthians 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co2 7:11</span></span>

What carefulness it wrought in you - Carefulness of obeying my
directions, [Co2 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#015); yea, what
clearing of yourselves from guilt by inflicting censures on the guilty
person, and putting away evil from among you, [Co1
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#013); yea, what indignation against
him who had dishonored his profession, and defiled the Church; yea, what
fear of my displeasure, and the rod which I threatened, [Co1
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#021); yea, what vehement desire to
rectify what was amiss in this matter, [Co2
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#007); yea, what zeal for me; yea, what
revenge in punishing the delinquent. See Whitby.

In all things, etc. - In the whole of your conduct in this affair since
ye have received my letter, ye have approved yourselves to be clear,
ἁγνους; not only to be clear of contumacy and obstinate persistence in
your former conduct, but to have done all in the compass of your power
to rectify the abuses which had crept in among you. The Corinthians were
not clear, i.e. innocent or void of blame in the fact, but they were
clear of all blame in their endeavors to remove the evil.

[2 Corinthians 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 7:12</span></span>

Not for his cause that had done the wrong - viz. the incestuous person.

Nor for his cause that suffered wrong - Some think the apostle means
himself; others, that he means the Church at Corinth, the singular being
put for the plural; others, the family of the incestuous person; and
others, the father of the incestuous person. If this latter opinion be
adopted, it would seem to intimate that the father of this person was
yet alive, which would make the transgression more flagrant; but these
words might be spoken in reference to the father, if dead, whose cause
should be vindicated; as his injured honor might be considered, like
Abel's blood, to be crying from the earth.

But that our care for you - might appear - It was not to get the
delinquent punished, nor merely to do justice to those who had suffered
in this business, that the apostle wrote his epistle to them, but that
they might have the fullest proof of his fatherly affection for them,
and his concern for the honor of God; and that they might thereby see
how unnatural their opposition to him was, and what cause they had to
prefer him, who was ready to give up his life in their service, to that
false apostle or teacher who was corrupting their minds, leading them
from the simplicity of the truth, and making a gain of them.

[2 Corinthians 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co2 7:13</span></span>

For the joy of Titus - Titus, who had now met St. Paul in Macedonia,
gave him the most flattering accounts of the improved state of the
Corinthian Church; and indeed their kind usage of Titus was a full proof
of their affection for St. Paul.

[2 Corinthians 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co2 7:14</span></span>

For if I have boasted - The apostle had given Titus a very high
character of this Church, and of their attachment to himself; and
doubtless this was the case previously to the evil teacher getting among
them, who had succeeded in changing their conduct, and changing in a
great measure their character also; but now they return to themselves,
resume their lost ground, so that the good character which the apostle
gave them before, and which they had for a time forfeited, is now as
applicable to them as ever. Therefore his boasting of them is still
found a truth.

[2 Corinthians 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co2 7:15</span></span>

And his inward affection - Τα σπλαγχνα αυτου· Those bowels of his - his
most tender affection. For the meaning of this word see the note on [Mat
9:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#036).

Whilst he remembereth the obedience of you all - This is a very natural
picture; he represents Titus as overjoyed even while he is delivering
his account of the Corinthian Church. He expatiated on it with extreme
delight, and thereby showed at once both his love for St. Paul and his
love for them. He loved them because they so loved the apostle; and he
loved them because they had shown such kindness to himself; and he loved
them because he found so many excellent and rare gifts, joined to so
much humility, producing such an exemplary and holy life.

With fear and trembling ye received him - Ye reverenced his authority;
ye were obedient to his directions; and ye dreaded lest any thing should
be undone or ill done which he had delivered to you in the name of God.

[2 Corinthians 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co2 7:16</span></span>

I have confidence in you, in all things - It appears that the apostle
was now fully persuaded, from the accounts given by Titus, that every
scandal had been put away from this Church; that the faction which had
long distracted and divided them was nearly broken; that all was on the
eve of being restored to its primitive purity and excellence; and that
their character was now so firmly fixed, that there was no reason to
apprehend that they should be again tossed to and fro with every wind of
doctrine.

1\. Thus a happy termination was put to an affair that seemed likely to
ruin the Christian Church, not only at Corinth, but through all Greece;
for, if this bad man, who had been chief in opposing the apostle's
authority, bringing in licentious doctrines, and denying the
resurrection of the dead, had ultimately succeeded at Corinth, his
doctrine and influence might soon have extended over Greece and Asia
Minor, and the great work of God which had been wrought in those parts
would have been totally destroyed. This one consideration is sufficient
to account for the apostle's great anxiety and distress on account of
the divisions and heresies at Corinth. He knew it was a most pernicious
leaven; and, unless destroyed, must destroy the work of God. The loss of
the affections of the Church at Corinth, however much it might affect
the tender, fatherly heart of the apostle, cannot account for the awful
apprehensions, poignant distress, and deep anguish, which he, in
different parts of these epistles, so feelingly describes; and which he
describes as having been invariably his portion from the time that he
heard of their perversion, till he was assured of their restoration by
the account brought by Titus.

2\. A scandal or heresy in the Church of God is ruinous at all times,
but particularly so when the cause is in its infancy; and therefore the
messengers of God cannot be too careful to lay the foundation well in
doctrine, to establish the strictest discipline, and to be very cautious
whom they admit and accredit as members of the Church of Christ. It is
certain that the door should be opened wide to admit penitent sinners;
but the watchman should ever stand by, to see that no improper person
enter in. Christian prudence should ever be connected with Christian
zeal. It is a great work to bring sinners to Christ; it is a greater
work to preserve them in the faith; and it requires much grace and much
wisdom to keep the Church of Christ pure, not only by not permitting the
unholy to enter, but by casting out those who apostatize or work
iniquity. Slackness in discipline generally precedes corruption of
doctrine; the former generating the latter.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 8](co2008)

</div>
