<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Colossians Index](col.md)  
  [Previous](col000)  [Next](col002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Colossians Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#001.md)

The salutation of Paul and Timothy to the Church at Colosse, [Col
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#001.md), [Col
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#002.md). They give thanks to God for the
good estate of that Church, and the wonderful progress of the Gospel in
every place, [Col 1:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#003.md); having
received particulars of their state from Epaphroditus, which not only
excited their gratitude, but led them to pray to God that they might
walk worthy of the Gospel; and they give thanks to Him who had made them
meet for an inheritance among the saints in light, [Col
1:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#007.md). This state is described as a
deliverance from the power of darkness, and being brought into the
kingdom of God's dear Son, [Col 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#013.md),
[Col 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#014.md). The glorious character of
Jesus Christ, and what He has done for mankind, [Col
1:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015.md). The salvation which the
Colossians had received, and of which the apostle had been the minister
and dispenser, [Col 1:21-26](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#021.md). The sum
and substance of the apostle's preaching, and the manner in which he
executed his ministry, [Col 1:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#027.md).

[Colossians 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">col 1:1</span></span>

Paul, an apostle - by the will of God - As the word αποστολος, apostle,
signifies one sent, an envoy or messenger, any person or persons may be
the senders: but the word is particularly restrained to the messengers
of the everlasting Gospel, sent immediately from God himself; and this
is what St. Paul particularly remarks here when he calls himself an
apostle by the will of God; signifying that he had derived his
commission from an express volition or purpose of the Almighty.

And Timotheus - Though Timothy is here joined in the salutation, yet he
has never been understood as having any part in composing this epistle.
He has been considered as the amanuensis or scribe of the apostle.

[Colossians 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">col 1:2</span></span>

To the saints - Those who professed Christianity. See the note on [Eph
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001.md).

Which are at Colosse - Instead of εν Κολοσσαις, at Colosse, or among the
Colossians, ABC, and many other excellent MSS., with both the Syriac,
Coptic, Slavonic, Origen, Gregory Nyssen, Amphilochus, Theodoret,
Damascenus, Theophylact, and others, read εν Κολασσαις in Colassa, or
among the Colassians; and this is most probably the true reading. That
this city perished by an earthquake, a short time after the date of this
epistle, we have the testimony of Eusebius. That which at present is
supposed to occupy the site of this ancient city is called Konos. For
other particulars see the preface to this epistle.

Grace be unto you - See on [Rom 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007.md)
(note).

And the Lord Jesus Christ - This clause is omitted by many MSS., several
versions, and some of the fathers. Griesbach has left it out of the
text, not, in my opinion, on sufficient evidence.

[Colossians 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">col 1:3</span></span>

We give thanks to God - Who is the author of all good; and from whom the
grace, which has produced your conversion, has sprung by his mission of
Christ Jesus. See the note on [Eph
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#015.md), [Eph
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#016) (note.md).

[Colossians 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">col 1:4</span></span>

Since we heard of your faith - This is very similar to [Eph
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#015.md). And it is certain that the
apostle seems to have considered the Church at Ephesus, and that at
Colassa to have been nearly in the same state, as the two epistles are
very similar in their doctrine and phraseology.

[Colossians 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">col 1:6</span></span>

Which is come unto you - The doctrine of the Gospel is represented as a
traveler, whose object it is to visit the whole habitable earth; and,
having commenced his journey in Judea, had proceeded through Syria and
through different parts of Asia Minor, and had lately arrived at their
city, every where proclaiming glad tidings of great joy to all people.

As it is in all the world - So rapid is this traveler in his course,
that he had already gone nearly through the whole of the countries under
the Roman dominion; and will travel on till he has proclaimed his
message to every people, and kindred, and nation, and tongue.

In the beginning of the apostolic age, the word of the Lord had
certainly free course, did run and was glorified. Since that time the
population of the earth has increased greatly; and, to follow the
metaphor, the traveler still continues in his great journey. It is, the
glory of the present day that, by means of the British and Foreign Bible
Society, Bibles are multiplied in all the languages of Europe; and by
means of the Christian missionaries, Carey, Marshman, and Ward, whose
zeal, constancy, and ability, have been rarely equalled, and perhaps
never surpassed, the sacred writings have been, in the compass of a few
years, translated into most of the written languages of India, in which
they were not previously extant. In this labor they have been ably
seconded by the Rev. Henry Martyn, one of the East India Company's
chaplains, who was taken to his great reward just when he had completed
a pure and accurate version of the New Testament into Persian. The Rev.
R. Morrison, at Canton, has had the honor to present the whole of the
New Testament, in Chinese, to the immense population of that greatest
empire of the earth. May that dark people receive it, and walk in the
light of the Lord! And, by means of the Wesleyan missionaries, the
sacred writings have been printed and widely circulated in the
Singhalese and Indo- Portuguese, through the whole of the island of
Ceylon, and the pure word of the Gospel has been preached there, and
also on the whole continent of India, to the conversion of multitudes.
Let every reader pray that all these noble attempts may be crowned with
unlimited success, till the earth is filled both with the knowledge and
glory of the Lord. Talia secla currite! Amen.

And bringeth forth fruit - Wherever the pure Gospel of Christ is
preached, it is the seed of the kingdom, and must be fruitful in all
those who receive it by faith, in simplicity of heart.

After καρποφορουμενον, bringeth forth fruit, ABCD\*EFG, many others,
both the Syriac, Erpen's Arabic, the Coptic, Sahidic, Ethiopic,
Armenian, Slavonic, Vulgate, and Itala, together with many of the
fathers, add και αυξανομενον, and increaseth. It had not only brought
forth fruit, but was multiplying its own kind; every fruit containing
seed, and every seed producing thirty, sixty, or a hundredfold. This
reading is very important, and is undoubtedly genuine.

The grace of God in truth - Ye were fruitful, and went on increasing in
the salvation of God, from the time that ye heard and acknowledged this
doctrine to be of God, to spring from the grace or benevolence of God;
and received it in truth, sincerely and uprightly, as his greatest gift
to man.

[Colossians 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">col 1:7</span></span>

As ye also learned of Epaphras - who is for you - Who this Epaphras was
we cannot tell; only it is likely that he was a Colossian, and became,
by the call and grace of Christ, a deacon of this Church, faithfully
labouring with the apostle, to promote its best interests. Some think
that he is the same with Epaphroditus, Epaphras being a contraction of
that name, as Demas is of Demetrius; and it is remarkable that one of
the Slavonic versions has Epaphroditus in this place. That he was a
Colossian is evident from [Col 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#012.md) :
Epaphras, who is one of you, ὁ εξ ὑμων· some think that he was the first
who preached the Gospel among this people, and hence called an apostle.
He was raised up among themselves to be their minister in the absence of
the apostle, and he showed himself to be worthy of this calling by a
faithful discharge of his ministry, and by labouring fervently for them
all, and pressing them forward, that they might stand perfect and
complete in all the will of God.

[Colossians 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">col 1:8</span></span>

Your love in the Spirit - So we preached, and so ye believed. The
heavenly flame in the heart of this minister communicated itself to
those who heard him; it was like priest like people. They enjoyed a
spiritual, energetic ministry, and they were a spiritual people; they
had a loving spirit, and love through the Spirit of God which dwelt in
them. And of this love of theirs in the Spirit, and particularly towards
the apostle, Epaphras gave full proof, not only by describing to the
apostle the affection they felt for him, but in presenting to him those
supplies which their love to him caused them to furnish.

[Colossians 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">col 1:9</span></span>

For this cause - See on [Eph 1:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#015.md)
(note), where the same sentiment occurs.

That ye might be filled - Nothing could satisfy the apostle, either for
himself or his hearers, but the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel
of peace. The Colossians had knowledge, but they must have more; it is
their privilege to be filled with it. As the bright shining of the sun
in the firmament of heaven fills the whole world with light and heat, so
the light of the Sun of righteousness is to illuminate their whole
souls, and fill them with Divine splendor, so that they might know the
will of God, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding; in a word, that
they might have such a knowledge of Divine things as the Spirit of truth
can teach to the soul of man.

[Colossians 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">col 1:10</span></span>

That ye might walk worthy of the Lord - Suitably to your Christian
profession, exemplifying its holy doctrines by a holy and useful life.
See the notes on [Eph 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#001.md); and on [Phi
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#027) (note.md).

Unto all pleasing - Doing every thing in the best manner, in the most
proper time, and in a becoming spirit. Even a good work may be marred
and rendered fruitless by being done improperly, out of season, or in a
temper of mind that grieves the Holy Spirit.

Being fruitful in every good work - See on [Col
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#006) (note.md). St. Paul exhorts the
Christians at Colosse,

1\. To walk - to be active in their Christian calling.

2\. To walk worthily - suitably to the dignity of that calling, and to
the purity of that God who had called them into this state of salvation.

3\. To do every thing unto all pleasing; that God might be pleased with
the manner, the time, the motive, disposition, design, and object of
every act.

4\. That they should be fruitful; mere harmlessness would not be
sufficient; as God had sown good seed, he expected good fruit.

5\. That every work should be good; they must not be fruitful in some
works and fruitless in others.

6\. That they should increase in religious knowledge as time rolled on,
knowing, by genuine Christian experience, more of God, of his love, and
of his peace, day by day.

[Colossians 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">col 1:11</span></span>

Strengthened with all might - That they might be able to walk worthy of
the Lord, bring forth fruit, etc. See the notes on [Eph
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#013.md), etc.

According to his glorious power - According to that sufficiency of
strength which may be expected from him who has all power both in the
heavens and in the earth.

Unto all patience - Relieving, hoping, and enduring all things.

With joyfulness - Feeling the continual testimony that ye please God,
which will be a spring of perpetual comfort. See the notes on [Eph
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#002.md).

[Colossians 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">col 1:12</span></span>

Giving thanks unto the Father - Knowing that ye have nothing but what ye
have received from his mere mercy, and that in point of merit ye can
never claim any thing from him.

Which hath made us meet - Ἱκανωσαντι· Who has qualified us to be
partakers, etc. Instead of ἱκανωσαντι, some MSS. and versions have
καλεσαντι, called; and B (the Codex Vaticanus) has both readings. Giving
thanks unto the Father, who hath called and qualified us to be
partakers.

Of the inheritance - Εις την μεριδα του κληρου. A plain allusion to the
division of the promised land by lot among the different families of the
twelve Israelitish tribes. The κληρος was the lot or inheritance
belonging to the tribe; the μερις was the portion in that lot which
belonged to each family of that tribe. This was a type of the kingdom of
God, in which portions of eternal blessedness are dispensed to the
genuine Israelites; to them who have the circumcision of the heart by
the Spirit, whose praise is of God, and not of man.

Of the saints in light - Light, in the sacred writings, is used to
express knowledge, felicity, purity, comfort, and joy of the most
substantial kind; here it is put to point out the state of glory at the
right hand of God. As in Egypt, while the judgments of God were upon the
land, there was a darkness which might be felt yet all the Israelites
had light in their dwellings; so in this world, while the darkness and
wretchedness occasioned by sin remain, the disciples of Christ are light
in the Lord, walk as children of the light and of the day, have in them
no occasion of stumbling, and are on their way to the ineffable light at
the right hand of God. Some think there is an allusion here to the
Eleusinian mysteries, celebrated in deep caves and darkness in honor of
Ceres; but I have already, in the notes to the Epistle to the Ephesians,
expressed my doubts that the apostle has ever condescended to use such a
simile. The phraseology of the text is frequent through various parts of
the sacred writings, where it is most obvious that no such allusion
could possibly be intended.

[Colossians 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">col 1:13</span></span>

Delivered us from the power of darkness - Darkness is here personified,
and is represented as having εξουσια, power, authority, and sway; all
Jews and Gentiles, which had not embraced the Gospel, being under this
authority and power. And the apostle intimates here that nothing less
than the power of God can redeem a man from this darkness, or prince of
darkness, who, by means of sin and unbelief, keeps men in ignorance,
vice, and misery.

Translated us into the kingdom, etc - He has thoroughly changed our
state, brought us out of the dark region of vice and impiety, and placed
us in the kingdom under the government of his dear Son, Υἱου της αγαπης
αὑτου, the Son of his love; the person whom, in his infinite love, he
has given to make an atonement for the sin of the world.

[Colossians 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">col 1:14</span></span>

In whom we have redemption - Who has paid down the redemption price,
even his own blood, that our sins might be cancelled, and we made fit to
be partakers of the inheritance among the saints in light.

The clause, δια του αἱματος αυτου, Through his blood, is omitted by
ABCDEFG, and by most others of weight and importance; by the Syriac,
Arabic of Erpen, Coptic, Ethiopic, Sahidic, some copies of the Vulgate
and by the Itala; and by most of the Greek fathers. Griesbach has left
it out of the text. It is likely that the reading here is not genuine;
yet that we have redemption any other way than through the sacrifice of
Christ, the Scriptures declare not. The same phrase is used [Eph
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#007.md), where there is no various reading
in any of the MSS., versions, or fathers.

The forgiveness of sins - Αφεσιν των ἁμαρτιων· The taking away of sins;
all the power, guilt, and infection of sin. All sin of every kind, with
all its influence and consequences.

[Colossians 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">col 1:15</span></span>

Who is the image of the invisible God - The counterpart of God Almighty,
and if the image of the invisible God, consequently nothing that
appeared in him could be that image; for if it could be visible in the
Son, it could also be visible in the Father; but if the Father be
invisible, consequently his image in the Son must be invisible also.
This is that form of God of which he divested himself; the ineffable
glory in which he not only did not appear, as to its splendor and
accompaniments, but concealed also its essential nature; that
inaccessible light which no man, no created being, can possibly see.
This was that Divine nature, the fullness of the Godhead bodily, which
dwelt in him.

The first-born of every creature - I suppose this phrase to mean the
same as that, [Phi 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009.md) : God hath
given him a name which is above every name; he is as man at the head of
all the creation of God; nor can he with any propriety be considered as
a creature, having himself created all things, and existed before any
thing was made. If it be said that God created him first, and that he,
by a delegated power from God, created all things, this is most flatly
contradicted by the apostle's reasoning in the 16th and 17th verses. As
the Jews term Jehovah בכורו של עולם becoro shel olam, the first-born of
all the world, or of all the creation, to signify his having created or
produced all things; (see Wolfius in loc.) so Christ is here termed, and
the words which follow in the 16th and 17th verses are the proof of
this. The phraseology is Jewish; and as they apply it to the supreme
Being merely to denote his eternal pre-existence, and to point him out
as the cause of all things; it is most evident that St. Paul uses it in
the same way, and illustrates his meaning in the following words, which
would be absolutely absurd if we could suppose that by the former he
intended to convey any idea of the inferiority of Jesus Christ.

[Colossians 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">col 1:16</span></span>

For by him were all things created, etc - These two verses contain parts
of the same subject. I shall endeavor to distinguish the statements of
the apostle, and reason from them in such a way as the premises shall
appear to justify, without appealing to any other scripture in proof of
the doctrine which I suppose these verses to vindicate.

Four things are here asserted:

1\. That Jesus Christ is the Creator of the universe; of all things
visible and invisible; of all things that had a beginning, whether they
exist in time or in eternity.

2\. That whatsoever was created was created For himself; that he was the
sole end of his own work.

3\. That he was prior to all creation, to all beings, whether in the
visible or invisible world.

4\. That he is the preserver and governor of all things; for by him all
things consist.

Now, allowing St. Paul to have understood the terms which he used, he
must have considered Jesus Christ as being truly and properly God.

I. Creation is the proper work of an infinite, unlimited, and
unoriginated Being; possessed of all perfections in their highest
degrees; capable of knowing, willing, and working infinitely,
unlimitedly, and without control: and as creation signifies the
production of being where all was absolute nonentity, so it necessarily
implies that the Creator acted of and from himself; for as, previously
to this creation, there was no being, consequently he could not be
actuated by any motive, reason, or impulse, without himself; which would
argue there was some being to produce the motive or impulse, or to give
the reason. Creation, therefore, is the work of him who is unoriginated,
infinite, unlimited, and eternal. But Jesus Christ is the Creator of all
things, therefore Jesus Christ must be, according to the plain
construction of the apostle's words, truly and properly God.

II\. As, previously to creation, there was no being but God,
consequently the great First Cause must, in the exertion of his creative
energy, have respect to himself alone; for he could no more have respect
to that which had no existence, than he could be moved by nonexistence,
to produce existence or creation. The Creator, therefore, must make
every thing For himself.

Should it be objected that Christ created officially or by delegation, I
answer: This is impossible; for, as creation requires absolute and
unlimited power, or omnipotence, there can be but one Creator; because
it is impossible that there can be two or more Omnipotents, Infinites,
or Eternals. It is therefore evident that creation cannot be effected
officially, or by delegation, for this would imply a Being conferring
the office, and delegating such power; and that the Being to whom it was
delegated was a dependent Being; consequently not unoriginated and
eternal; but this the nature of creation proves to be absurd.

1\. The thing being impossible in itself, because no limited being could
produce a work that necessarily requires omnipotence.

2\. It is impossible, because, if omnipotence be delegated, he to whom
it is delegated had it not before, and he who delegates it ceases to
have it, and consequently ceases to be God; and the other to whom it was
delegated becomes God, because such attributes as those with which he is
supposed to be invested are essential to the nature of God. On this
supposition God ceases to exist, though infinite and eternal, and
another not naturally infinite and eternal becomes such; and thus an
infinite and eternal Being ceases to exist, and another infinite and
eternal Being is produced in time, and has a beginning, which is absurd.
Therefore, as Christ is the Creator, he did not create by delegation, or
in any official way.

Again, if he had created by delegation or officially, it would have been
for that Being who gave him that office, and delegated to him the
requisite power; but the text says that all things were made By him and
For him, which is a demonstration that the apostle understood Jesus
Christ to be truly and essentially God.

III\. As all creation necessarily exists in time, and had a
commencement, and there was an infinite duration in which it did not
exist, whatever was before or prior to that must be no part of creation;
and the Being who existed prior to creation, and before all things - all
existence of every kind, must be the unoriginated and eternal God: but
St. Paul says, Jesus Christ was before all things; ergo, the apostle
conceived Jesus Christ to be truly and essentially God.

IV\. As every effect depends upon its cause, and cannot exist without
it; so creation, which is an effect of the power and skill of the
Creator, can only exist and be preserved by a continuance of that energy
that first gave it being. Hence, God, as the Preserver, is as necessary
to the continuance of all things, as God the Creator was to their
original production. But this preserving or continuing power is here
ascribed to Christ, for the apostle says, And by him do all things
consist; for as all being was derived from him as its cause, so all
being must subsist by him, as the effect subsists by and through its
cause. This is another proof that the apostle considered Jesus Christ to
be truly and properly God, as he attributes to him the preservation of
all created things, which property of preservation belongs to God alone;
ergo, Jesus Christ is, according to the plain obvious meaning of every
expression in this text, truly, properly, independently, and essentially
God.

Such are the reasonings to which the simple letter of these two verses
necessarily leads me. I own it is possible that I may have
misapprehended this awful subject, for humanum est errare et nescire;
but I am not conscious of the slightest intentional flaw in the
argument. Taking, therefore, the apostle as an uninspired man, giving
his own view of the Author of the Christian religion, it appears, beyond
all controversy, that himself believed Christ Jesus to be God; but
considering him as writing under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, then
we have, from the plain grammatical meaning of the words which he has
used, the fullest demonstration (for the Spirit of God cannot lie) that
he who died for our sins and rose again for our justification, and in
whose blood we have redemption, was God over all. And as God alone can
give salvation to men, and God only can remit sin; hence with the
strictest propriety we are commanded to believe on the Lord Jesus, with
the assurance that we shall be saved. Glory be to God for this
unspeakable gift! See my discourse on this subject.

[Colossians 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">col 1:18</span></span>

He is the head of the body - What the apostle has said in the two
preceding verses refers to the Divine nature of Jesus Christ; he now
proceeds to speak of his human nature, and to show how highly that is
exalted beyond all created things, and how, in that, he is head of the
Church - the author and dispenser of light, life, and salvation, to the
Christian world; or, in other words, that from him, as the man in whom
the fullness of the Godhead bodily dwelt, all the mercy and salvation of
the Gospel system is to be received.

The beginning, the first-born from the dead - In [Co1
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#020.md), Christ is called the
first-fruits of them that slept; and here, the chief and first-born from
the dead; he being the first that ever resumed the natural life, with
the employment of all its functions, never more to enter the empire of
death, after having died a natural death, and in such circumstances as
precluded the possibility of deception. The αρχη, chief, head, or first,
answers in this verse to the απαρχη, or first-fruits, [Co1
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#020.md). Jesus Christ is not only the
first who rose from the dead to die no more, but he is the first-fruits
of human beings; for as surely as the first-fruits were an indication
and pledge of the harvest, so surely was the resurrection of Christ the
proof that all mankind should have a resurrection from the dead.

That in all - he might have the pre-eminence - That he might be
considered, in consequence of his mediatorial office, as possessing the
first place in and being chief over all the creation of God; for is it
to be wondered at that the human nature, with which the great Creator
condescended to unite himself, should be set over all the works of his
hands?

[Colossians 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">col 1:19</span></span>

For it pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell - As the
words, the Father are not in the text, some have translated the verse
thus: For in him it seemed right that all fullness should dwell; that
is, that the majesty, power, and goodness of God should be manifested in
and by Christ Jesus, and thus by him the Father reconciles all things to
himself. The πληρωμα, or fullness, must refer here to the Divine nature
dwelling in the man Christ Jesus.

[Colossians 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">col 1:20</span></span>

And, having made peace through the blood of his cross - Peace between
God and man; for man being in a sinful state, and there being no peace
to the wicked, it required a reconciliation to be made to restore peace
between heaven and earth; but peace could not be made without an
atonement for sin, and the consequence shows that the blood of Christ
shed on the cross was necessary to make this atonement.

To reconcile all things unto himself - The enmity was on the part of the
creature; though God is angry with the wicked every day, yet he is never
unwilling to be reconciled. But man, whose carnal mind is enmity to God,
is naturally averse from this reconciliation; it requires, therefore,
the blood of the cross to atone for the sin, and the influence of the
Spirit to reconcile the transgressor to him against whom he has
offended! See the notes on [Co2 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#019.md),
etc.

Things in earth, or things in heaven - Much has been said on this very
obscure clause; but, as it is my object not to write dissertations but
notes, I shall not introduce the opinions of learned men, which have as
much ingenuity as variety to recommend them. If the phrase be not a kind
of collective phrase to signify all the world, or all mankind, as Dr.
Hammond supposed the things in heaven may refer, according to some, to
those persons who died under the Old Testament dispensation, and who
could not have a title to glory but through the sacrificial death of
Christ: and the apostle may have intended these merely to show that
without this sacrifice no human beings could be saved, not only those
who were then on the earth, and to whom in their successive generations
the Gospel should be preached, but even those who had died before the
incarnation; and, as those of them that were faithful were now in a
state of blessedness, they could not have arrived there but through the
blood of the cross, for the blood of calves and goats could not take
away sin. After all, the apostle probably means the Jews and the
Gentiles; the state of the former being always considered a sort of
Divine or celestial state, while that of the latter was reputed to be
merely earthly, without any mixture of spiritual or heavenly good. It is
certain that a grand part of our Lord's design, in his incarnation and
death, was to reconcile the Jews and the Gentiles, and make them one
fold under himself, the great Shepherd and Bishop of souls. That the
enmity of the Jews was great against the Gentiles is well known, and
that the Gentiles held them in supreme contempt is not less so. It was
therefore an object worthy of the mercy of God to form a scheme that
might reconcile these two grand divisions of mankind; and, as it was his
purpose to reconcile and make them one, we learn from this circumstance,
as well as from many others, that his design was to save the whole human
race.

[Colossians 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">col 1:21</span></span>

And you, that were sometime alienated - All men are alienated from God,
and all are enemies in their minds to him, and show it by their wicked
works; but this is spoken particularly of the Gentiles. The word
απαλλοτριοω, which we render to alienate, to give to another, to
estrange, expresses the state of the Gentiles: while the Jews were, at
least by profession, dedicated to God, the Gentiles were alienated, that
is, given up to others; they worshipped not the true God, but had gods
many and lords many, to whom they dedicated themselves, their religious
service, and their property. The verb αλλοτριοω, to alienate, being
compounded here with the preposition απο, from, signifies to abalienate,
to estrange utterly, to be wholly the property of another. Thus the
Gentiles had alienated themselves from God, and were alienated or
rejected by him, because of their wickedness and idolatry.

Enemies in your mind - They had the carnal mind, which is enmity against
God; and this was expressed in their outward conduct by wicked works.
See the note on [Rom 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#010.md). The mind is
taken here for all the soul, heart, affections, passions, etc.

[Colossians 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">col 1:22</span></span>

In the body of his flesh - By Christ's assumption of a human body, and
dying for man, he has made an atonement for sin, through which men
become reconciled to God and to each other.

To present you holy - Having saved you from your sins.

Unblamable - Having filled you with his Spirit, and written his law in
your hearts, so that his love, shed abroad in your hearts, becomes the
principle and motive to every action. The tree therefore being good, the
fruit is also good.

And unreprovable - For, being filled with love, joy, peace, meekness,
gentleness, and goodness, against these there is no law; and as they
were called to love God with all their heart, soul, mind, and strength,
and their neighbor as themselves, the whole spirit and design of the law
was fulfilled in them, for love is the fulfilling of the law.

In his sight - At the day of judgment. None can enjoy heaven who have
not been reconciled to God here, and shown forth the fruits of that
reconciliation in being made holy and unblamable, that, when they come
to be judged, they may be found unreprovable.

[Colossians 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">col 1:23</span></span>

If ye continue in the faith - This will be the case if you, who have
already believed in Christ Jesus, continue in that faith, grounded in
the knowledge and love of God, and settled - made firm and perseveringly
steadfast, in that state of salvation.

And be not moved away - Not permitting yourselves to be seduced by false
teachers.

The hope of the Gospel - The resurrection of the body, and the
glorification of it and the soul together, in the realms of blessedness.
This is properly the Gospel Hope.

To every creature which is under heaven - A Hebraism for the whole human
race, and particularly referring to the two grand divisions of mankind,
the Jews and Gentiles; to both of these the Gospel had been preached,
and to each, salvation by Christ had been equally offered. And as none
had been excluded from the offers of mercy, and Jesus Christ had tasted
death for every man, and the Jews and Gentiles, in their great corporate
capacity, had all been invited to believe the Gospel; therefore, the
apostle concludes that the Gospel was preached to every creature under
heaven, as being offered without restrictions or limitations to these
two grand divisions of mankind, including the whole human race.

[Colossians 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">col 1:24</span></span>

Rejoice in my sufferings for you - St. Paul always considers his
persecutions, as far as the Jews were concerned in them, as arising from
this simple circumstance - his asserting that God had chosen the
Gentiles, and called them to enjoy the very same privileges with the
Jews, and to constitute one Church with them.

It was on this account that the Jews attempted his life at Jerusalem,
when, in order to save it, he was obliged to appeal to Caesar; the
consequences of which persecution he was now suffering in his
imprisonment in Rome. See on [Col 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#002.md)
(note).

That which is behind of the afflictions of Christ - I have still some
afflictions to pass through before my race of glory be finished;
afflictions which fall on me on account of the Gospel; such as Christ
bore from the same persecuting people.

It is worthy of remark that the apostle does not say παθηματα, the
passion of Christ, but simply θλιψεις, the afflictions; such as are
common to all good men who bear a testimony against the ways and
fashions of a wicked world. In these the apostle had his share, in the
passion of Christ he could have none. He trod the wine press alone, of
the people there were none with him.

His body's sake - Believers, both of Jews and Gentiles, who form that
one body, of which Christ is the head.

[Colossians 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">col 1:25</span></span>

Whereof I am made a minister - Having received especial commission from
God to preach salvation to the Gentiles.

According to the dispensation - Κατα την οικονομιαν· According to the
Gospel economy or institution; the scheme or plan of salvation by Christ
crucified.

To fulfill the word of God - The Greek πληρωσαι τον λογον του Θεου may
be translated, fully to preach the doctrine of God. See [Rom
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#019.md), and the note there. Were we to
take the word in its common meaning, it might signify to accomplish the
purpose of God, as predicted by the prophets.

[Colossians 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">col 1:26</span></span>

The mystery which hath been hid - The mystery is this: that God had
designed to grant the Gentiles the same privileges with the Jews, and
make them his people who were not his people. That this is what St. Paul
means by the mystery, see [Eph 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#003.md),
etc.

Made manifest to his saints - It is fully known to all who have embraced
the doctrine of Christ crucified; to all Christians.

[Colossians 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">col 1:27</span></span>

The riches of the glory - God manifests to these how abundantly glorious
this Gospel is among the Gentiles; and how effectual is this doctrine of
Christ crucified to the salvation of multitudes.

Which is Christ in you, the hope of glory - In this and the following
verse there are several remarkable particulars: -

I. We find here the sum and substance of the apostle's preaching.

1\. He preached Christ, as the only Savior of sinners.

2\. He proclaimed this Christ as being in them; for the design of the
Gospel is to put men in possession of the Spirit and power of Christ, to
make them partakers of the Divine nature, and thus prepare them for an
eternal union with himself. Should it be said that the preposition εν
should be translated among, it amounts to the same; for Christ was among
them, to enlighten, quicken, purify, and refine them, and this he could
not do without dwelling in them.

3\. He preached this present and indwelling Christ as the hope of glory;
for no man could rationally hope for glory who had not the pardon of his
sins, and whose nature was not sanctified; and none could have pardon
but through the blood of his cross; and none could have glorification
but through the indwelling, sanctifying Spirit of Christ.

II\. We see the manner in which the apostles preached.

1\. They warned every one - they showed every man his danger; they
proved that both Jews and Gentiles were under sin; and that the wrath of
God was revealed against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men;
that time and life were uncertain; and that now was the day of
salvation.

2\. They taught every man in all wisdom - they considered the world in a
state of ignorance and darkness, every man being through sin ignorant of
himself and God; and the apostles taught them to know themselves, viz.,
that they were sinners, wretched, helpless, and perishing; and they
taught them to know God, in his purity, justice, and truth, and in his
mercy through Christ Jesus. Thus they instructed men in all wisdom; for
the knowledge of a man's self and his God constitutes all that is
essentially necessary to be known for present and eternal happiness.

III\. The end which the apostles had in view in thus preaching Christ:
to present every man perfect in Christ Jesus. The words τελειον εν
Χριστῳ, perfect in or through Christ, signify two things:

1\. That they should be thoroughly instructed in the doctrines of
Christianity, so that they should know the truth as it is in Jesus.

2\. That they should be made partakers of the grace of the Gospel, so
that they might be saved from all their sins, and be filled with His
fullness. The succeeding chapter amply proves that nothing less than
this entered into the apostle's design. Men may dispute as they please
about Christian perfection, but without it no soul shall ever see God.
He who is not saved from all sin here, cannot, to his joy, see God
hereafter. This perfection of which the apostle speaks, and to which he
labored to bring all men, was something to be attained in and through
Christ. The apostles preached Christ in the people; and they preached
him as crucified for mankind. He who died for them was to live in them,
and fill their whole souls with his own purity. No indwelling sin can be
tolerated by an indwelling Christ; for he came into the world to save
his people from their sins.

IV\. We see who were the objects of the apostle's ministry: the Jews and
Gentiles; παντα ανθρωπον, every man, the whole human race. Every man had
sinned; and for every sinner Christ had died; and he died for them that
they might be saved from all their sins. The apostles never restrained
the offers of salvation; they made them frankly to all, believing that
it was the will of God that all should believe and be saved: hence they
warned and taught every man that they might, at the day of judgment,
present every man perfect in Christ Jesus; for, although their own
personal ministry could not reach all the inhabitants of the earth, yet
it is by the doctrines which they preached, and by the writings which
they have left on record, that the earth is to be filled with the
knowledge and glory of God, and the souls of men brought to the
enjoyment of the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel of peace.

[Colossians 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">col 1:29</span></span>

Whereunto I also labor - In order to accomplish this end, I labor with
the utmost zeal and earnestness; and with all that strength with which
God has most powerfully furnished me. Whoever considers the original
words, αγωνιζομενος κατα την ενεργειαν αυτου την ενεργουμενην - εν
δυναμει, will find that no verbal translation can convey their sense.
God worked energetically in St. Paul, and he wrought energetically with
God; and all this was in reference to the salvation of mankind.

1\. The preceding chapter contains the highest truths in the Christian
religion, conveyed in language peculiar to this apostle; a language
never taught by man, clothing ideas as vast as the human mind can grasp,
and both coming immediately from that inspiration of the Almighty which
giveth understanding.

2\. What the apostle says on the Godhead of Christ has already been
distinctly noted; and from this we must conclude that, unless there be
some secret way of understanding the 16th and 17th verses, which God has
nowhere revealed, taken in their sober and rational sense and meaning
they must for ever settle this very important point. Let any man of
common sense and reason hear these words, whose mind had not been
previously warped by any sentiment on the subject, and who only knew, in
religious matters, this one great truth, that there is a God, and that
he made and governs all things; and then let him be asked, Of whom doth
the apostle speak this? Would he not immediately answer, He speaketh of
God? As to the difficulties on this subject, we must consider them
difficulties rather to our limited intellect, than as belonging to the
subject. We can know but little of an infinite and eternal Being;
nothing, properly speaking, but what himself is pleased to reveal. Let
us receive, this with gratitude and reverence. See my discourse on the
sum and substance of apostolic preaching.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Colossians Chapter 2](col002.md)

</div>
