<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Colossians Index](col.md)  
  [Previous](col001)  [Next](col003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Colossians Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#001.md)

[Colossians](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">col 2:0</span></span>

The apostle shows his great concern for the Church at Colosse and at
Laodicea; and exhorts them to steadfastness in the faith, and to beware
of being seduced by specious and enticing words, [Col
2:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#001.md). And to walk in Christ, as they
had been taught, and to abound in faith and holiness, [Col
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#006.md), [Col
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#007.md). To beware of false teachers, who
strove to pervert the Gospel, and to lead their minds from him in whom
the fullness of the Godhead dwells; with whom they were filled; by whom
they had received spiritual circumcision; and into whom they were
baptized and were quickened, and raised from a death of sin to a life of
righteousness, [Col 2:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008.md). He points
out their former state, and the great things which Christ had done for
them, [Col 2:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#013.md). Warns them against
particular tenets of the Judaizing teachers relative to meats, drinks,
holydays, festivals, and the specious pretences of deceivers, [Col
2:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016.md). And shows that all the things
taught by these, though they had a show of wisdom, yet perished in the
using, and were the commandments and doctrines of men, [Col
2:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#020.md).

[Colossians 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">col 2:1</span></span>

What great conflict - The word αγων, which we here render conflict, is
to be understood as implying earnest care and solicitude, accompanied,
undoubtedly, with the most fervent application to the throne of grace in
their behalf. The αγωνιζομενος of the preceding verse gave the apostle
occasion to use the word αγων here. He agonized with God, and his agony
was for them.

Laodicea - A city of Asia Minor, on the borders of Caria, Phrygia, and
Lydia. It was originally called Diospolis, or the city of Jupiter, and
afterwards Rhoas; but obtained the name of Laodicea from Laodice, the
wife of Antiochus. It is now called Ladik. It was formerly celebrated
for its commerce, and the fine black wool of its sheep. Colosse, or the
city of the Colossians, lay between it and Hierapolis. This Hierapolis
was also a town of Phrygia, famous for its hot baths: it is now called
Bambukholasi.

As many as have not seen my face in the flesh - From this it has been
conjectured that St. Paul had never been at either Colosse or Laodicea,
and this, from the letter of the text, appears probable; and yet, his
having passed more than once through this country, preaching and
strengthening the Churches, renders it very improbable. It is,
therefore, most likely that we should understand the apostle as speaking
collectively; that he had the most earnest concern, not only for the
welfare of those Churches with which he was acquainted, such as Colosse
and Laodicea, but also for those to whom he was not personally known.

[Colossians 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">col 2:2</span></span>

That their hearts might be comforted - That they might have continual
happiness in God, having constant affiance in him.

Being knit together in love - The word συμβιβασθεντων, or
συμβιβασθεντες, which is the true reading, but both of equal import
here, signifies being united, as the beams or the timbers of a building,
by mortices and pins. The visible Church of Christ cannot be in union
with God unless it have unity in itself, and without love this unity is
impossible.

Unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding - That is, that
they might have the most indubitable certainty of the truth of
Christianity, of their own salvation, and of the general design of God
to admit the Gentiles into his Church. This is the grand mystery of God,
which was now laid open by the preaching of the Gospel.

And of the Father, and of Christ - These words are variously written in
different MSS., versions, and fathers: The mystery of God - of God in
Christ - of God who is in Christ - of God concerning Christ - of God who
is Christ - of the God Christ - of God and Christ - of God the Father of
Christ - of God the Father, and our Lord Christ - of God and the Father
of Christ - of God the Father, in Christ - of the God Christ Jesus,
Father and Lord, etc., etc., etc.

This great variety of versions leaves the strongest presumption that the
words in question are glosses which have crept into the text, and are of
no authority. Griesbach has left them out of the text.

[Colossians 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">col 2:3</span></span>

In whom are hid - Or rather in which; referring to the mystery mentioned
above. In this glorious scheme of Christianity all the treasures - the
abundance and excellency, of wisdom and knowledge are contained. No
scheme of salvation, or Divine knowledge, ever equalled in its depth and
excellency the Gospel plan. A scheme which the wisdom of God alone could
devise, and which his power and infinite mercy alone could accomplish.

[Colossians 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">col 2:4</span></span>

Lest any man should beguile you - The word παραλογιζηται means to
deceive by sophistry or subtle reasoning, in which all the conclusions
appear to be fairly drawn from the premises, but the premises are either
assumed without evidence, or false in themselves; but this not being
easily discovered, the unthinking or unwary are carried away by the
conclusions which are drawn from these premises. And this result is
clearly intimated by the term πιθανολογια, enticing words, plausible
conclusions or deductions from this mode of reasoning. The apostle seems
to allude to the Gentile philosophers, who were notorious for this kind
of argumentation. Plato and Socrates are not free from it.

[Colossians 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">col 2:5</span></span>

For though I be absent in the flesh - It is hardly possible that such
words as these in this verse could have been used to perfect strangers;
they argue a considerable knowledge of the people, and a knowledge
founded on personal acquaintance. The original is exceedingly soft and
musical: -

Ει γαρ και τη σαρκι απειμι,

Αλλα τῳ πνευματι συν ὑμιν ειμι,

Χαιρων και βλεπων ὑμων την ταξιν, κ.τ.λ.

The whole verse shows that this Church was sound in doctrine, and strict
in discipline. They had steadfast faith in Christ, and regular order or
discipline among themselves.

[Colossians 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">col 2:6</span></span>

As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus - Many persons lay a certain
stress on the words as and so, and make various fine heads of discourses
from them; viz. As ye received Christ in a spirit of humility, so walk
in him; as ye received him in a spirit of faith, so walk in him, etc.,
etc. This may be all proper in itself; but nothing of the kind was
intended by the apostle. His meaning is simply this: Seeing ye have
embraced the doctrine of Christ, continue to hold it fast, and not
permit yourselves to be turned aside by sophistical or Judaizing
teachers.

[Colossians 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">col 2:7</span></span>

Rooted and built up in him - It is not usual with the apostle to employ
this double metaphor, taken partly from the growth of a tree and the
increase of a building. They are to be rooted; as the good seed had been
already sown, it is to take root, and the roots are to spread far, wide,
and deep. They are to be grounded; as the foundation has already been
laid, they are to build thereon. In the one case, they are to bear much
fruit; in the other, they are to grow up to be a habitation of God
through the Spirit. See the notes on [Eph
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#021.md), [Eph
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#022) (note.md); [Eph
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#017) (note.md).

Abounding therein with thanksgiving - No limitation is ever set to the
operations of God on the soul, or to the growth of the soul in the
knowledge, love, and image of God. Those who are brought into such a
state of salvation should abound in gratitude and loving obedience, as
they grow in grace.

[Colossians 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">col 2:8</span></span>

Beware lest any man spoil you - The word συλαγωγων, from συλη, prey, and
αγειν, to lead or carry away, signifies to rob, or spoil of their goods,
as if by violence or rapine. Their goods were the salvation they had
received from Christ; and both the Gentile and Jewish teachers
endeavored to deprive them of these, by perverting their minds, and
leading them off from the truths of Christianity.

Philosophy and vain deceit - Or, the vain or empty deceit of philosophy;
such philosophizing as the Jewish and Gentile teachers used. As the term
philosophy stood in high repute among the Gentiles, the Jews of this
time affected it; and both Philo and Josephus use the word to express
the whole of the Mosaic institutions. So the former: Ὁι κατα Μωσην
φιλοσοφουντες· "Those who embraced the philosophy of Moses;" Phil., De
Nomin. Mutand. And the latter; Τρια παρα Ιουδαιοις ειδη φιλοσοφειται·
"There are three systems of philosophy among the Jews," (Bell. Jud.,
lib. ii. cap 8, sec. 2), meaning the Pharisees, Sadducees, and Essenes,
as immediately follows. The Jewish philosophy, such as is found in the
Cabala, Midrashim, and other works, deserves the character of vain
deceit, in the fullest sense and meaning of the words. The inspired
writers excepted, the Jews have ever been the most puerile, absurd, and
ridiculous reasoners in the world. Even Rabbi Maymon, or Maimonides, the
most intelligent of them all, is often in his master piece (the Moreh
Nevochim, the Teacher of the Perplexed) most deplorably empty and vain.

After the rudiments of the world - According to the doctrine of the
Jewish teachers; or, according to the Mosaic institutions, as explained
and glossed by the scribes, Pharisees, and rabbins in general. We have
often seen that העולם הזה haolam hazzeh, this world, of which του κοσμου
τουτου is a literal translation, is frequently used to express the
Jewish system of rites, ceremonies, and institutions in general; what
the apostle calls the tradition of men, namely, what men, unauthorized
by God, have taught as doctrines received from him. Our Lord frequently
refers to and condemns these traditions.

Not after Christ - Not according to the simple doctrine of Christ, viz.:
He died for our offenses; believe on the Lord Jesus, and thou shalt be
saved.

[Colossians 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">col 2:9</span></span>

For in him dwelleth all the fullness - This is opposed to the vain or
empty doctrine of the Gentile and Jewish philosophers: there is a
fullness in Christ suited to the empty, destitute state of the human
soul, but in the philosophy of the Jews and Gentiles nothing like this
was found; nor indeed in the more refined and correct philosophy of the
present day. No substitute has ever been found for the grace of the Lord
Jesus, and those who have sought for one have disquieted themselves in
vain.

By the Godhead or Deity, Θεοτης, we are to understand the state or being
of the Divine nature; and by the fullness of that Deity, the infinite
attributes essential to such a nature.

Bodily - Συματικως signifies truly, really; in opposition to typically,
figuratively. There was a symbol of the Divine presence in the Hebrew
tabernacle, and in the Jewish temple; but in the body of Christ the
Deity, with all its plenitude of attributes, dwelt really and
substantially: for so the word σωματικως means; and so it was understood
by the ancient Greek fathers, as is fully shown by Suicer, in his
Thesaurus, under the word.

"The fullness of the Godhead dwelt in Christ 'bodily,' as opposed to the
Jewish tabernacle, or temple; truly and really, in opposition to types
and figures; not only effectively, as God dwells in good men, but
substantially or personally, by the strictest union, as the soul dwells
in the body; so that God and man are one Christ." See Parkhurst.

[Colossians 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">col 2:10</span></span>

And ye are complete in him - Και εστε εν αυτῳ πεπληρωμενοι· And, ye are
filled with him. Our word complete quite destroys the connection
subsisting in the apostle's ideas. The philosophy of the world was
empty, κενη, but there was a πληρωμα, or fullness, in Christ; the
Colossians were empty - spoiled and deprived of every good, while
following the empty philosophy and groundless traditions of Jewish and
Gentile teachers; but since they had received Christ Jesus they were
πεπληρωμενοι, filled with him. This is the true meaning of the word, and
by this the connection and assemblage of ideas in the apostle's mind are
preserved. No fanciful completeness in Christ, of a believer, while
incomplete in himself, is either expressed or intended by St. Paul. It
is too bad a doctrine to exist in the oracles of God.

The head of all principality - See the notes on [Col
1:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016) (note.md).

[Colossians 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">col 2:11</span></span>

In whom also ye are circumcised - All that was designed by circumcision,
literally performed, is accomplished in them that believe through the
Spirit and power of Christ. It is not a cutting off of a part of the
flesh, but a putting off the body of the sins of the flesh, through the
circumcision of Christ; he having undergone and performed this, and all
other rites necessary to qualify him to be a mediator between God and
man; for, being made under the law, he was subject to all its
ordinances, and every act of his contributed to the salvation of men.
But by the circumcision of Christ, the operation of his grace and Spirit
may be intended; the law required the circumcision of the flesh, the
Gospel of Christ required the circumcision of the heart. The words των
ἁμαρτιων, of the sins, are omitted by ABCD\*EFG, several others, by the
Coptic, Ethiopic, Armenian, Vulgate, and Itala; and by Clement,
Athanasius, Basil, Cyril, and several others. Griesbach has omitted
them.

[Colossians 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">col 2:12</span></span>

Buried with him in baptism - Alluding to the immersions practised in the
case of adults, wherein the person appeared to be buried under the
Water, as Christ was buried in the heart of the earth. His rising again
the third any, and their emerging from the water, was an emblem of the
resurrection of the body; and, in them, of a total change of life.

The faith of the operation of God - They were quickened, changed, and
saved, by means of faith in Christ Jesus; which faith was produced by
the operation or energy of God. Believing is the act of the soul; but
the grace or power to believe comes from God himself.

[Colossians 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">col 2:13</span></span>

And you, being dead in your sins - See the notes on [Eph
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#001.md), etc.

The uncircumcision of your flesh - This must refer to that part of the
Colossian Church which was made up of converted heathens, for the
heathens alone were uncircumcised.

[Colossians 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">col 2:14</span></span>

Blotting out the hand-writing of ordinances - By the hand-writing of
ordinances the apostle most evidently means the ceremonial law: this was
against them, for they were bound to fulfill it; and it was contrary to
them, as condemning them for their neglect and transgression of it. This
law God himself has blotted out.

Blotting out the hand-writing is probably an allusion to [Num
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#023.md), where the curses written in the
book, in the case of the woman suspected of adultery, are directed to be
blotted out with the bitter waters. And there can be little doubt of a
farther allusion, viz., to the custom of discharging the writing from
parchment by the application of such a fluid as the muriatic acid, which
immediately dissolves those ferruginous calces which constitute the
blackening principle of most inks. But the East India inks, being formed
only of simple black, such as burnt ivory, or cork, and gum water, may
be wiped clean off from the surface of the paper or parchment by the
application of a wet sponge, so as to leave not one legible vestige
remaining: this I have often proved.

Nailing it to his cross - When Christ was nailed to the cross, our
obligation to fulfill these ordinances was done away. There may be
another reference here to some ancient mode of annulling legal
obligations, by nailing them to a post; but I do not recollect at
present an instance or example. Antiquated laws are said to have been
thus abrogated.

[Colossians 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">col 2:15</span></span>

And having spoiled principalities and powers - Here is an allusion to
the treatment of enemies when conquered: they are spoiled of their
armor, so much the word απεκδυειν implies; and they are exhibited with
contumely and reproach to the populace, especially when the victor has
the honor of a triumph; to the former of which there is an allusion in
the words εδειγματισεν εν παρῥησιᾳ, making a public exhibition of them;
and to the latter in the words θριαμβευσας αυτους, triumphing over them.
And the principalities and powers refer to the emperors, kings, and
generals taken in battle, and reserved to grace the victor's triumph. It
is very likely that by the αρχας και εξουσιας, principalities and
powers, over whom Christ triumphed, the apostle means the נשיאות nesioth
and רשות roshoth, who were the rulers and chiefs in the Sanhedrin and
synagogues, and who had great authority among the people, both in making
constitutions and explaining traditions. The propagation of Christianity
in Judea quite destroyed their spiritual power and domination; just as
the propagation of Protestantism, which was Christianity revived,
destroyed, wherever it appeared, the false doctrine and domination of
the pope of Rome.

In it - The words εν αυτῳ refer rather to Christ, than to the cross, if
indeed they be genuine; of which there is much reason to doubt, as the
versions and fathers differ so greatly in quoting them. Griesbach has
left them out of the text.

[Colossians 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">col 2:16</span></span>

Let no man - judge you in meat, or in drink - The apostle speaks here in
reference to some particulars of the hand-writing of ordinances, which
had been taken away, viz., the distinction of meats and drinks, what was
clean and what unclean, according to the law; and the necessity of
observing certain holydays or festivals, such as the new moons and
particular sabbaths, or those which should be observed with more than
ordinary solemnity; all these had been taken out of the way and nailed
to the cross, and were no longer of moral obligation. There is no
intimation here that the Sabbath was done away, or that its moral use
was superseded, by the introduction of Christianity. I have shown
elsewhere that, Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy, is a command
of perpetual obligation, and can never be superseded but by the final
termination of time. As it is a type of that rest which remains for the
people of God, of an eternity of bliss, it must continue in full force
till that eternity arrives; for no type ever ceases till the antitype be
come. Besides, it is not clear that the apostle refers at all to the
Sabbath in this place, whether Jewish or Christian; his σαββατων, of
sabbaths or weeks, most probably refers to their feasts of weeks, of
which much has been said in the notes on the Pentateuch.

[Colossians 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">col 2:17</span></span>

Which are a shadow - All these things were types, and must continue in
force till the Christ, whom they represented, came; the apostle
therefore says that the body - the substance or design of them was of
Christ - pointed him out, and the excellent blessings which he has
procured. The word σκια, shadow, is often used to express any thing
imperfect or unsubstantial; while the term σωμα, body, was used in the
opposite sense, and expressed any thing substantial, solid, and firm.
The law was but the shadow or representation of good things to come;
none should rest in it; all that it pointed out is to be sought and
obtained in Christ.

[Colossians 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">col 2:18</span></span>

Let no man beguile you - Μηδεις ὑμας καταβραβευετω· Let no man take the
prize from you which the βραβευς, brabeus, or judge in the contests, has
assigned you, in consequence of your having obtained the victory. This
any reader will see, is an allusion to the Olympic and Isthmian games,
and to the prizes assigned to these who had obtained the victory in one
or more of the contests which there took place. The Colossians had
fought and conquered under the direction of Christ, and he, as the sole
judge in this contest, had assigned to them the prize; the false
teachers, affecting great modesty, humility, and sanctity, endeavored to
turn them aside from the Gospel, and to induce them to end in the flesh
who had begun in the Spirit. Against these the apostle warns them.

In a voluntary humility and worshiping of angels - This is a difficult
passage, and in order to explain it, I shall examine the meaning of some
of the principal terms of the original. The word θελειν, to will,
signifies also to delight; and ταπειμοφροσυνη signifies not only
lowliness or humility of mind, but also affliction of mind; and
ταπεινουν την ψυχην, [Lev 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#020.md), [Lev
16:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#031.md), and in many other places,
signifies to afflict the soul by fasting, and self-abnegation; and
θρησκεια signifies reverence and modesty. Hence the whole passage has
been paraphrased thus: Let no man spoil you of the prize adjudged to
you, who delights in mortifying his body, and walking with the apparent
modesty of an angel, affecting superior sanctity in order to gain
disciples; intruding into things which he has not seen; and,
notwithstanding his apparent humility, his mind is carnal, and he is
puffed up with a sense of his superior knowledge and piety. It is very
likely that the apostle here alludes to the Essenes, who were remarkably
strict and devout, spent a principal part of their time in the
contemplation of the Divine Being, abstained from all sensual
gratifications, and affected to live the life of angels upon earth. With
their pretensions all the apostle says here perfectly agrees, and on
this one supposition the whole of the passage is plain and easy. Many
have understood the passage as referring to the adoration of angels,
which seems to have been practised among the Jews, who appear (from
Tobit, xii. 15; Philo, in lib. de Somn.; Josephus, War. lib. ii. cap. 8,
sec. 7) to have considered them as a sort of mediators between God and
man; presenting the prayers of men before the throne; and being, as
Philo says, μεγαλου Βασιλεως οφθαλμοι και ωτα, the eyes and ears of the
great King. But this interpretation is not so likely as the foregoing.

[Colossians 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">col 2:19</span></span>

And not holding the Head - Not acknowledging Jesus Christ as the only
Savior of mankind, and the only Head or chief of the Christian Church,
on whom every member of it depends, and from whom each derives both
light and life. For a farther explanation of these words see the notes
on [Eph 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#016.md), where the figures and
phraseology are the same.

[Colossians 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">col 2:20</span></span>

If ye be dead with Christ - See the notes on [Rom
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#003.md), [Rom
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#005) (note.md).

From the rudiments of the world - Ye have renounced all hope of
salvation from the observance of Jewish rites and ceremonies, which were
only rudiments, first elements, or the alphabet, out of which the whole
science of Christianity was composed. We have often seen that the world
and this world signify the Jewish dispensation, or the rites,
ceremonies, and services performed under it.

Why, as though living in the world - Why, as if ye were still under the
same dispensation from which you have been already freed, are ye subject
to its ordinances, performing them as if expecting salvation from this
performance?

[Colossians 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">col 2:21</span></span>

Touch not; taste not; handle not - These are forms of expression very
frequent among the Jews. In Maccoth, fol. xxi. 1: "If they say to a
Nazarite, Don't drink, don't drink; and he, notwithstanding, drinks; he
is guilty. If they say, Don't shave, don't shave; and he shaves,
notwithstanding; he is guilty. If they say, Don't put on these clothes,
don't put on these clothes; and he, notwithstanding, puts on
heterogeneous garments; he is guilty." See more in Schoettgen.

[Colossians 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">col 2:22</span></span>

Which all are to perish with the using - These are not matters of
eternal moment; the different kinds of meats were made for the body, and
go with it into corruption: in like manner, all the rites and ceremonies
of the Jewish religion now perish, having accomplished the end of their
institution; namely, to lead us to Christ, that we might be justified by
faith.

After the commandments and doctrines of men? - These words should follow
the 20th verse, of which they form a part; and it appears from them that
the apostle is here speaking of the traditions of the elders, and the
load of cumbrous ceremonies which they added to the significant rites
prescribed by Moses.

[Colossians 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">col 2:23</span></span>

Which things have indeed a show of wisdom - All these prescriptions and
rites have indeed the appearance of wisdom, and are recommended by
plausible reasons; but they form a worship which God has not commanded,
and enjoin macerations of the body, accompanied with a humiliation of
spirit, that are neither profitable to the soul, nor of any advantage to
the body; so that the whole of their religion is nothing worth.

What is here termed will-worship, εθελοθρησκεια, signifies simply a mode
of worship which a man chooses for himself, independently of the
revelation which God has given. The whole system of Deism is an
εθελοθρησκεια, a worship founded in the will or caprices of man, and not
in the wisdom or will of God; and it is just as profitable to body and
soul as that of which the apostle speaks. God will be served in his own
way; it is right that he should prescribe to man the truths which he is
to believe, and the ordinances which he is to use. To refuse to receive
his teaching in order to prefer our own fancies, is to light a farthing
candle as a substitute for the noonday sun. From the beginning of the
world God has prescribed the worship which was best pleasing to himself,
and never left a matter of such moment to man. The nations which have
either not had a revelation, or refused to receive that which God has
given, show, by their diversity of worship, superstition, absurdity, and
in many cases cruelty, what the state of the whole would have been, had
not God, in his infinite mercy, blessed it with a revelation of his
will. God has given directions concerning his worship; and he has
appointed the seventh day for the peculiar exercises of spiritual
duties: other times he has left to man's convenience; and they abuse the
text who say that the appointment of particular times and places for
religious service is will-worship. God prescribes the thing, and leaves
it to man, except in the case of the Sabbath, to appoint the time and
the place; nor is it possible to be too frequent in God's worship, any
more than to be too fervent.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Colossians Chapter 3](col003.md)

</div>
