<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan007)  [Next](dan009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#001)

[Daniel](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">dan 8:0</span></span>

This chapter contains Daniel's vision of the ram and he-goat, [Dan
8:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#001); referring, as explained by the
angel, to the Persian and Grecian monarchies, [Dan
8:15-26](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#015). The little horn mentioned in
the ninth verse, (or fierce king, as interpreted in the twenty-third),
is supposed by some to denote Antiochus Epiphanes; but seems more
properly to apply to the Roman power in general, by which the polity and
temple of the Jews were destroyed, on account of the great
transgressions of these ancient people of God; and particularly because
of their very obstinate and unaccountable rejection of the glorious
doctrines of Christianity, which had been preached among them by Jesus
Christ and his apostles, and the truth of which God had attested "by
signs and wonders, and by divers miracles and gifts of the Holy Ghost."
Daniel is then informed of the two thousand and three hundred prophetic
days (that is, years) which must elapse before the sanctuary be
cleansed; or, in other words, before righteousness shall prevail over
the whole earth. This period is supposed, with considerable probability
to have had its commencement when Alexander the Great invaded Asia, in
the year before Christ 334. This will bring the close of it to about the
end of the Sixth chiliad of the world; when, as already observed, some
astonishing changes are expected to take place in the moral condition of
the human race; when the power of Antichrist, both Papal and Mohammedan,
shall be totally annihilated, and universal dominion given to the saints
of the Most High. The chapter concludes with the distress of Daniel on
account of the fearful judgments with which his country should be
visited in after ages, [Dan 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#027).

[Daniel 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 8:1</span></span>

In the third year of the reign of - Belshazzar - We now come once more
to the Hebrew, the Chaldee part of the book being finished. As the
Chaldeans had a particular interest both in the history and prophecies
from [Dan 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#004) to the end of chap. 7,
the whole is written in Chaldee, but as the prophecies which remain
concern times posterior to the Chaldean monarchy, and principally relate
to the Church and people of God generally, they are written in the
Hebrew language, this being the tongue in which God chose to reveal all
his counsels given under the Old Testament relative to the New.

[Daniel 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">dan 8:2</span></span>

I saw in a vision - Daniel was at this time in Shushan, which appears to
have been a strong place, where the kings of Persia had their summer
residence. It was the capital of the province of Elam or the Elymais;
which province was most probably added to the Chaldean territories by
Nebuchadnezzar; see [Jer 49:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#034), [Jer
49:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#035). Here was Daniel's ordinary
residence; and though here at this time, he, in vision, saw himself on
the banks of the river Ulai. This is the same as the river Euleus, which
divided Shushan or Susiana from Elymais.

[Daniel 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">dan 8:3</span></span>

A ram which had two horns - In the former vision there were four beasts,
pointing out four empires; in this we have but two, as only two empires
are concerned here, viz., the Grecian and the Persian. The Babylonish
empire is not mentioned; its fate was before decided, and it was now at
its close.

By the ram, the empire of the Medes and Persians was pointed out, as
explained by the angel Gabriel, [Dan
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#020); and particularly Cyrus, who was
the founder of that empire. Cyrus was the son of Cambyses, king of
Persia; and grandson of Astyages, king of Media, by his daughter
Mandane, who had been given in marriage to Cambyses. Cyrus marrying
Roxana, the daughter and only child of his uncle Cyaxares, called in
Scripture Ahasuerus, succeeded to both crowns, and thus united Media and
Persia. A ram was the symbol of the Persians; and a ram's head with two
horns, one higher than the other, appears as such in different parts of
the ruins of Persepolis. See the plates of these ruins in the supplement
to the seventh volume of the ancient part of the Universal History.

This ram had two horns; that is, two kingdoms, viz., Media and Persia;
but one was higher than the other; and the higher came up last. Media,
signified by the shorter horn, was the more ancient of the two kingdoms.
Persia, the higher horn, had come up but lately, and was of little
historic or political consequence till the time of Cyrus; but in the
reigns of this prince and his immediate successors, Persia attained a
political consequence greatly superior to that possessed at any time by
the kingdom of Media; therefore, it is said to have been the higher, and
to have come up last.

[Daniel 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">dan 8:4</span></span>

I saw the ram pushing westward - The Persians, who are signified by the
ram, as well as their founder Cyrus, pushed their conquests west, north
and south. The principal theater of their wars, says Calmet, was against
the Scythians, northward; against the Greeks, westward; and against the
Egyptians, southward.

He did according to his will - There was no other nation at that time
that could stay the progress of the Persian arms.

[Daniel 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">dan 8:5</span></span>

Behold, a he-goat - This was Alexander the Great; and a goat was a very
proper symbol of the Grecian or Macedonian people. Bp. Newton very
properly observes that, two hundred years before the time of Daniel,
they were called Aegeadae, the goats' people; the origin of which name
is said to be as follows: Caranus, their first king, going with a
multitude of Greeks to seek a new habitation in Macedonia, was advised
by an oracle to take the goats for his guides; and afterwards, seeing a
herd of goats flying from a violent storm, he followed them to Edessa,
and there fixed the seat of his empire, and made the goats his ensigns
or standards; and called the place Aege or Aegea, the goats' town; and
the people Aegeadae, the goats' people; names which are derived from
αιξ, αιγος, a goat. The city Aege or Aegea, was the usual burying-place
of the Macedonian kings; and, in reference to this origin, Alexander
called his son by Roxana, Alexander Aegus, Alexander the goat. All this
shows the very great propriety of the symbol here used.

Came from the west - Europe lies westward of Asia.

On the face of the whole earth - Carrying every thing before him.

Touched not the ground - Seemed to fly from conquest to conquest. By the
time Alexander was thirty years of age he had conquered all Asia: and,
because of the rapidity of his conquests, he is represented as a leopard
with four wings, in the preceding vision.

A notable horn between his eyes - This, says the angel, is the first
king, [Dan 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#021), that is, the first
kingdom of the Greeks in Asia, which was erected by Alexander; and
continued some years in his brother Philip Aridaeus, and in his two
young sons, Alexander Aegus and Hercules. See Newton.

[Daniel 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">dan 8:6</span></span>

And he came to the ram - This and the following verse give an account of
the overthrow of the Persian empire by Alexander.

And ran unto him in the fury of his power - The conflicts between the
Greeks and the Persians were excessively severe. Alexander first
vanquished the generals of Darius, at the river Granicus, in Phrygia; he
next attacked and totally routed Darius, at the straits of Issus, in
Cilicia; and afterwards at the plains of Arbela, in Assyria. One can
hardly read these words, says Bp. Newton, "the ram - which I had seen
standing by the river, ran unto him in the fury of his power," without
having the image of Darius' army standing and guarding the river
Granicus and of Alexander on the other side, with his forces plunging in
swimming across the stream, and rushing on the enemy, with all the fire
and fury that can be conceived.

[Daniel 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">dan 8:7</span></span>

And brake his two horns - Subdued Persia and Media; sacked and burnt the
royal city of Persepolis, the capital of the Persian empire, and, even
in its ruins, one of the wonders of the world to the present day. This
he did because "he was moved with choler" against Darius, who had
endeavored to draw off his captains with bribes, and had labored to
induce some of his friends to assassinate him. Alexander, finding this,
would listen to no proposals of peace; and was determined never to rest
till he had destroyed Darius and his whole empire. In Media, Darius was
seized and made prisoner by some of his own treacherous subjects, and
afterwards basely murdered.

There was no power in the ram to stand before him - Alexander's
victories over the Persians were as easy as they were rapid and
decisive.

He cast him down to the ground, and stamped upon him - Totally destroyed
the family, and overturned the whole monarchy.

[Daniel 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">dan 8:8</span></span>

The he-goat waxed very strong - He had subdued nearly the whole of the
then known world.

The great horn was broken - Alexander died in the height of his
conquests, when he was but about thirty-three years of age. His natural
brother, Philip Aridaeus, and his two sons, Alexander Aegus and
Hercules, kept up the show and name of the Macedonian kingdom for a
time; but they were all murdered within fifteen years; and thus the
great horn, the Macedonian kingdom, was broken, Alexander's family being
now cut off.

And for it came up four notable ones - The regal family being all dead,
the governors of provinces usurped the title of kings; and Antigonus,
one of them, being slain at the battle of Ipsus, they were reduced to
four, as we have already seen.

1\. Seleucus, who had Syria and Babylon, from whom came the Seleucidae,
famous in history.

2\. Lysimachus, who had Asia Minor.

3\. Ptolemy, son of Lagus, who had Egypt, from whom sprang the Lagidae.
And,

4\. Cassander, who had Greece and the neighboring countries. These held
dominion towards the four winds of heaven.

Cassander had the western parts, Lysimachus had the northern regions,
Ptolemy possessed the southern countries, and Seleucus had the eastern
provinces.

[Daniel 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">dan 8:9</span></span>

Out of one of them came forth a little horn - Some think that Antiochus
Epiphanes is meant; but Bp. Newton contends that it is the Roman
government that is intended; and although very great at its zenith, yet
very little in its rising.

Waxed - great toward the south - The Romans made Egypt a province of
their empire, and it continued such for some centuries.

Toward the east - They conquered Syria, and made it a province.

Toward the pleasant land - Judea, so called [Psa
106:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#024); [Jer
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#019); [Dan
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#016), [Dan
11:41](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#041). It is well known that they took
Judea, and made it a province; and afterwards burnt the city and the
temple, and scattered the Jews over the face of the earth.

[Daniel 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">dan 8:10</span></span>

The host of heaven - The Jewish hierarchy. The stars, the priests and
Levites. The powers or host of heaven are probably intended by our Lord,
[Mat 24:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#029), to signify the whole
Jewish hierarchy.

[Daniel 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">dan 8:11</span></span>

Even to the prince of the host - They seemed, in this case, to fight
against God himself.

The daily sacrifice was taken away - By the destruction of the city and
temple; and has never been restored from that day until now.

[Daniel 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">dan 8:12</span></span>

And a host was given him - That is, power; or perhaps the host of heaven
- the priesthood - the whole sacrificial system, by reason of
transgression. They had filled up the measure of their iniquities, in
rejecting the Lord that bought them; and the daily sacrifice, being no
longer of use, was given up with the rest to destruction.

Cast down the truth - Probably the whole Jewish ritual and religion.

Practiced, and prospered - Prosperity or success followed all their
acts.

[Daniel 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">dan 8:13</span></span>

One saint speaking, and another saint said - One angel asked another how
long the sanctuary was to be trodden down?

[Daniel 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">dan 8:14</span></span>

Unto two thousand and three hundred days - Though literally it be two
thousand three hundred evenings and mornings. Yet I think the prophetic
day should be understood here, as in other parts of this prophet, and
must signify so many years. If we date these years from the vision of
the he-goat, (Alexander's invading Asia), this was A.M. 3670, b.c. 334;
and two thousand three hundred years from that time will reach to a.d.
1966, or one hundred and forty-one years from the present a.d. 1825.
This will bring it near to the time mentioned [Dan
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025) (note), where see the note.

[Daniel 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">dan 8:15</span></span>

As the appearance of a man - Supposed to be the Messiah.

[Daniel 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">dan 8:17</span></span>

At the time of the end shall be the vision - Or, as Houbigant, "The
vision shall have an end at the proper time."

[Daniel 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">dan 8:20</span></span>

The ram which thou sagest - See this explained under the vision itself,
[Dan 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#003) (note), etc.

[Daniel 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">dan 8:22</span></span>

But not in his power - The four kingdoms which shall arise out of the
Macedonian empire shall not be of Alexander's power or family, nor have
his strength and dignity.

[Daniel 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">dan 8:23</span></span>

When the transgressors are come to the full - When the utmost
degradation has taken place, by the buying and selling of the high
priesthood; for Onias was ejected for a sum of money, to make room for
wicked Jason; and Jason again was supplanted for a greater sum by a
worse man, if possible, than himself, Menelaus; and the golden vessels
of the temple were sold to pay for this sacrilegious purchase. Thus
transgressions were come to the full, before the Romans had commission
to destroy Jerusalem and its temple, etc.

A king of fierce countenance - The Roman government, as before; for king
is often taken for kingdom or empire.

Understanding dark sentences - Very learned and skillful in all things
relating to government and its intrigues. The learning of Rome is
proverbial to the present time.

[Daniel 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">dan 8:24</span></span>

But not by his own power - The strength of the other kingdoms consisted
in themselves; but the Roman empire, as a horn or kingdom of the goat,
was not mighty by its own power - was not strong by virtue of the goat,
but drew its nourishment and strength from Rome and Italy. There grew
the trunk and body of the tree; though the branches extended over
Greece, Asia, Syria, and Egypt. - Bp. Newton.

Shall destroy wonderfully - In the taking of Jerusalem by the Romans
ninety-seven thousand Jews were made captives, and eleven hundred
thousand were slain. So they destroyed this once mighty and holy people!

[Daniel 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">dan 8:26</span></span>

He shall cause craft to prosper - They subdued as many by their
diplomatic skill and political intrigues as they did by the sword.

He shall also stand up against the Prince of princes - Against Christ,
for it was by the Roman authority that he was condemned to death and
crucified; and their persecutions had nearly destroyed the Christian
religion; but the house was founded on a rock.

But he shall be broken without hand - The tide was turned by the
invisible hand of God; and thus heathen Rome was overcome, and converted
to Christianity.

The vision of the evening and the morning which was told is true - That
mentioned in [Dan 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#014).

For it shall be for many days - Not less than two thousand three hundred
years!

[Daniel 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">dan 8:27</span></span>

Daniel fainted - To foresee the desolations that were coming on the
land, the city, the temple, and the people.

Did the king's business - Transacted the affairs of state that belonged
to my department, after having been sick for certain days through the
effects of this vision. He had a pious and feeling heart; and he was
distressed for the desolations that were coming upon his people.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 9](dan009)

</div>
