<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Daniel Index](dan.md)  
  [Previous](dan000)  [Next](dan002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001.md)

This chapter begins with giving a short account of Nebuchadnezzar's
conquest of Judea, when Jehoiakim became tributary to him; and
consequently the seventy years' captivity and vassalage began, [Dan
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001.md), [Dan
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#002.md). On this expedition (taking Egypt
in his way) the king of Babylon set out towards the end of the third
year of Jehoiakim, but did not take Jerusalem before the ninth month of
the year following. Hence the seeming discrepancy between Daniel and
Jeremiah, ([Jer 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#001).md), the one
computing from the time of his setting out on the expedition, and the
other from the time in which the purpose of it was accomplished. We have
next an account of the manner in which Daniel and his companions were
brought up at the king's court, [Dan
1:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#003.md). They reject the daily provision
of meat granted by the king, lest they should be defiled, and are
allowed to live on pulse, [Dan 1:8-16](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#008.md).
Their great proficiency in the wisdom of that time, [Dan
1:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#017.md). Daniel flourishes till the
reign of Cyrus the Persian, [Dan 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#021.md).

[Daniel 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 1:1</span></span>

In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim - This king was raised to
the throne of Judea in the place of his brother Jehoahaz, by
Pharaoh-necho, king of Egypt, [Kg2
23:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#034.md), and continued tributary to
him during the first three years of his reign; but in the fourth, which
was the first of Nebuchadnezzar, [Jer
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#001.md), Nebuchadnezzar completely
defeated the Egyptian army near the Euphrates, [Jer
46:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#002.md); and this victory put the
neighboring countries of Syria, among which Judea was the chief, under
the Chaldean government. Thus Jehoiakim, who had first been tributary to
Egypt, became now the vassal of the king of Babylon, [Kg2
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#001.md).

At the end of three years Jehoiakim rebelled against Nebuchadnezzar,
who, then occupied with other wars, did not proceed against Jerusalem
till three years after, which was the eleventh and last of Jehoiakim,
[Kg2 23:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#036.md).

There are some difficulties in the chronology of this place. Calmet
takes rather a different view of these transactions. He connects the
history thus: Nabopolassar, king of Babylon, finding that one of his
lords whom he had made governor of Coelesyria and Phoenicia had revolted
from him, and formed an alliance with the king of Egypt, sent
Neubuchadnezzar his son, whom he invested with the authority of king, to
reduce those provinces, as was customary among the easterns when the
heir presumptive was sent on any important expedition or embassy. This
young prince, having quelled the insurrection in those parts, marched
against Jerusalem about the end of the third or beginning of the fourth
year of the reign of Jehoiakim, king of Judah. He soon took the city,
and put Jehoiakim in chains with the design of carrying him to Babylon;
but, changing his mind, he permitted him to resume the reins of
government under certain oppressive conditions. At this year, which was
A.M. 3398, the seventy years of the Babylonish captivity commence.
Nabopolassar dying in the interim, Nebuchadnezzar was obliged to return
speedily to Babylon, leaving his generals to conduct the Jewish captives
to Babylon, among whom were Daniel and his companions.

[Daniel 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">dan 1:2</span></span>

Part of the vessels of the house of God - He took the richest and finest
of them for the service of his god Bel, and left what were necessary for
carrying on the public worship of Jehovah, (for he did not attempt to
alter the civil or religious constitution of Judea); for leaving
Jehoiakim on the throne, he only laid the land under tribute. The
Chaldeans carried these sacred vessels away at three different times.

1\. In the war spoken of in this place.

2\. In the taking of Jerusalem and Jeconiah a few months after, [Kg2
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#013.md).

3\. Eleven fears after, under the reign of Zedekiah, when the city and
temple were totally destroyed, and the land ruined, [Kg2
25:8-16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#008.md).

The land of Shinar - This was the ancient name of Babylon. See [Gen
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#002.md).

The treasure house of his god - This was Bel, who had a splendid temple
in Babylon, and was the tutelar god of the city and empire.

[Daniel 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">dan 1:3</span></span>

Master of his eunuchs - This word eunuchs signifies officers about or in
the palace whether literally eunuchs or not.

[Daniel 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">dan 1:4</span></span>

Children - ילדים yeladim, youths, young men; and so the word should be
rendered throughout this book.

Skilled in all wisdom - Rather, persons capable of every kind of
literary accomplishment, that they might be put under proper
instruction. And as children of the blood and of the nobles mere most
likely, from the care usually taken of their initiatory education, to
profit most by the elaborate instruction here designed, the master of
the eunuchs, the king's chamberlain, was commanded to choose the youths
in question out of such.

[Daniel 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">dan 1:5</span></span>

A daily provision - Athenaeus, lib. iv., c. 10, says: The kings of
Persia, (who succeeded the kings of Babylon, on whose empire they had
seized), were accustomed to order the food left at their own tables to
be delivered to their courtiers.

So nourishing them three years - This was deemed a sufficient time to
acquire the Chaldee language, and the sciences peculiar to that people.
I suppose they had good introductory books, able teachers, and a proper
method; else they would have been obliged, like us, to send their
children seven years to school, and as many to the university, to teach
them any tolerable measure of useful and ornamental literature! O how
reproachful to the nations of Europe, and particularly to our own, is
this backward mode of instruction. And what is generally learned after
this vast expense of time and money? A little Latin, Greek, and
mathematics; perhaps a little moral philosophy; and by this they are
entitled, not qualified, to teach others, and especially to teach the
people the important science of salvation! To such shepherds, (and there
are many such), the hungry sheep look up, and are not fed; and if all
are not such, no thanks to our plan of national education.

[Daniel 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">dan 1:6</span></span>

Now among these - There were no doubt several noble youths from other
provinces: but the four mentioned here were Jews, and are supposed to
have all been of royal extraction.

[Daniel 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">dan 1:7</span></span>

Unto whom the prince of the eunuchs gave names - This change of names,
Calmet properly remarks, was a mark of dominion and authority. It was
customary for masters to impose new names upon their slaves; and rulers
often, on their ascending the throne, assumed a name different from that
which they had before.

דניאל Daniel signifies "God is my Judge." This name they changed into
בלטשאצר Belteshatstsar; in Chaldee, "The treasure of Bel," or "The
despository of the secrets (or treasure) of Bel."

הנניה Hananiah signifies, "The Lord has been gracious to me," or "He to
whom the Lord is gracious." This name was changed into שדרך Shadrach,
Chaldee, which has been variously translated: "The inspiration of the
sun;" "God the author of evil, be propitious to us;" "Let God preserve
us from evil."

מישאל Mishael signifies "He who comes from God." Him they called מישך
Meshach, which in Chaldee signifies, "He who belongs to the goddess
Sheshach," a celebrated deity of the Babylonians, mentioned by Jeremiah,
[Jer 25:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#026.md).

עזריה Azariah, which signifies "The Lord is my Helper," they changed
into אבד נגו Abed-Nego, which in Chaldee is "the servant of Nego," who
was one of their divinities; by which they meant either the sun, or the
morning star; whether Jupiter or Venus.

The vicious pronunciation of this name should be carefully avoided; I
mean that which lays the accent on the first syllable, and hurries so
the end, without attending to the natural division of the word
Abed-Nego.

[Daniel 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">dan 1:8</span></span>

But Daniel - would not defile himself - I have spoken of this resolution
in the introduction. The chief reasons why Daniel would not eat meat
from the royal table were probably these three: -

1\. Because they ate unclean beasts, which were forbidden by the Jewish
law.

2\. Because they ate, as did the heathens in general, beasts which had
been strangled, or not properly blooded.

3\. Because the animals that were eaten were first offered as victims to
their gods. It is on this account that Athenaeus calls the beasts which
here served up at the tables of the Persian kings, ἱερια, victims, lib.
4 c. 10, p. 145.

[Daniel 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">dan 1:11</span></span>

Then said Daniel to Melzar - Melzar was an officer under Ashpenaz, whose
office it was to attend to the food, clothing, etc., of these royal
captives. Others think מלצר meltsar, master of the inn or hotel, the
name of an office.

[Daniel 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">dan 1:12</span></span>

Give us pulse to eat - הזרעים hazzeraim, seeds or grain, such as barley,
wheat, rye, and peas, etc. Though a vegetable diet might have produced
that healthiness of the system in general, and of the countenance
particularly, as mentioned here; yet we are to understand that there was
an especial blessing of God in this, because this spare diet was taken
on a religious account.

[Daniel 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">dan 1:17</span></span>

As for these four children - Young men or youths. Our translation gives
a false idea.

In all visions and dreams - That is, such as are Divine; for as to
dreams in general, they have as much signification as they have
connection, being the effects of the state of the body, of the mind, or
of the circumstances of the dreamer. A dream may be considered
supernatural, if it have nothing preposterous, nothing monstrous, and
nothing irregular. If the whole order and consequences of the things be
preserved in them, from beginning to end, then we may presume they are
supernatural. In such dreams Daniel had understanding.

[Daniel 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">dan 1:18</span></span>

Now at the end of the days - That is, at the end of three years, [Dan
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#005.md).

[Daniel 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">dan 1:19</span></span>

And among them all - All the young noble captives from different
nations.

Therefore stood they before the king - It appears that only four were
wanting.

[Daniel 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">dan 1:20</span></span>

Magicians and astrologers - Probably the same as philosophers and
astronomers among us.

[Daniel 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">dan 1:21</span></span>

The first year of king Cyrus - That is, to the end of the Chaldean
empire. And we find Daniel alive in the third year of Cyrus, see [Dan
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#001.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 2](dan002.md)

</div>
