<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Daniel Index](dan.md)  
  [Previous](dan010)  [Next](dan012.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#001.md)

[Daniel](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">dan 11:0</span></span>

This chapter gives a more particular explanation of those events which
were predicted in the eighth chapter. The prophet had foretold the
partition of Alexander's kingdom into four parts. Two of these, in which
were included Egypt and Syria, the one to the north, the other to the
south, in respect of Judea, appear to take up the chief attention of the
prophet, as his people were particularly concerned in their fate; these
being the countries in which by far the greatest number of the Jews
were, and still are, dispersed. Of these countries he treats (according
to the views of the most enlightened expositors) down to the conquest of
Macedon, A.M. 3836, b.c. 168, when he begins to speak of the Romans, vv.
1-30; and then of the Church under that power, [Dan
11:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#031.md). This leads him to speak of
Antichrist, who was to spring up in that quarter, [Dan
11:36-39](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#036.md); and of those powers which at
the Time of the end, or the latter days of the Roman monarchy, (as this
term is generally understood), were to push at it, and overthrow many
countries, [Dan 11:40-43](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#040.md). By the king
of the South, in the fortieth verse, the dominion of the Saracens, or
Arabs, is supposed to be intended, which was an exceeding great plague
to the Roman empire in the east, and also to several papistical
countries, for the space of one hundred and fifty years, i.e. from a.d.
612, when Mohammed and his followers first began their depredations, to
a.d. 762, when Bagdad was built, and made the capital of the caliphs of
the house of Abbas, from which epoch the Saracens became a more settled
people. By the king of the North in the same verse the prophet is
supposed by some to design that great scourge of eastern Christendom,
the Ottoman or Othman empire, by which, after about a hundred and fifty
years of almost uninterrupted hostilities, the Roman empire in the east
was completely overturned, a.d. 1453. The chapter concludes with a
prediction of the final overthrow of this northern power, and of the
manner in which this great event shall be accomplished, [Dan
11:44](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#044.md), [Dan
11:45](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#045.md). But it should be observed that,
notwithstanding the very learned observations of Bishop Newton and
others upon this chapter, their scheme of interpretation presents very
great and insurmountable difficulties; among which the very lengthy
detail of events in the Syrian and Egyptian histories, comprising a
period of less than two hundred years, and the rather uncouth transition
to the incomparably greater transactions in Antichristian times, and of
much longer duration, which are passed over with unaccountable brevity,
are not the least. On all these subjects, however, the reader must judge
for himself. See the notes.

[Daniel 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 11:1</span></span>

In the first year of Darius the Mede - This is a continuation of the
preceding discourse. Bp. Newton, who is ever judicious and instructing,
remarks: It is the usual method of the Holy Spirit to make the latter
prophecies explanatory of the former; and thus revelation "is a shining
light, that shineth more and more unto the perfect day." The four great
empires shown to Nebuchadnezzar, under the symbol of a great image, were
again more particularly represented to Daniel under the forms of four
great wild beasts. In like manner, the memorable events that were
revealed to Daniel in the vision of the ram and he-goat, are here more
clearly revealed in this last vision by an angel; so that this latter
prophecy may not improperly be said to be a comment on the former. It
comprehends many signal events. The types, figures, and symbols of the
things are not exhibited in this, as in most other visions, and then
expounded by the angel; but the angel relates the whole: and, not by way
of vision, but by narration, informs Daniel of that which is noted in
the Scripture of truth, [Dan 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#021.md).

[Daniel 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">dan 11:2</span></span>

There shall stand up yet three kings - Gabriel had already spoken of
Cyrus, who was now reigning; and after him three others should arise.
These were,

1\. Cambyses, the son of Cyrus.

2\. Smerdis, the Magian, who was an impostor, who pretended to be
another son of Cyrus. And,

3\. Darius, the son of Hystaspes, who married Mandane, the daughter of
Cyrus.

Cambyses reigned seven years and five months; Smerdis reigned only seven
months; and Darius Hystaspes reigned thirty-six years.

The fourth shall be far richer than they all - This was Xerxes, the son
of Darius, of whom Justin says. "He had so great an abundance of riches
in his kingdom, that although rivers were dried up by his numerous
armies, yet his wealth remained unexhausted."

He shall stir up all against the realm of Grecia - His military strength
was such, that Herodotus, who lived in that time, informs us that his
army amounted to five millions, two hundred and eighty-three thousand,
two hundred and twenty men. Besides these, the Carthaginians furnished
him with an army of three hundred thousand men, and a fleet of two
hundred ships. He led an army against the Greeks of eight hundred
thousand men, and twelve hundred and seven ships, with three banks of
rowers each. As he marched along, he obliged all the people of the
countries through which he passed to join him.

[Daniel 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">dan 11:3</span></span>

A mighty king shall stand up - This was Alexander the great. It is not
said that this mighty king shall stand up against Xerxes, for he was not
born till one hundred years after that monarch; but simply that he
should stand up, i.e., that he should reign in Greece.

[Daniel 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">dan 11:4</span></span>

His kingdom shall be broken - Shall, after his death, be divided among
his four chief generals, as we have seen before. See [Dan
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#022.md).

And not to his posterity - The family of Alexander had a most tragical
end:

1\. His wife Statira was murdered soon after his death by his other wife
Roxana.

2\. His brother Aridaeus who succeeded him, was killed, together with
his wife Euridice, by command of Olympias, Alexander's mother, after he
had been king about six years and some months.

3\. Olympias herself was killed by the soldiers in revenge.

4\. Alexander Aegus, his son, together with his mother Roxana, was slain
by order of Cassander.

5\. Two years after, his other son Hercules, with his mother Barsine,
was privately murdered by Polysperchon; so that in fifteen years after
his death not one of his family or posterity remained alive!

"Blood calls for blood." He (Alexander) was the great butcher of men. He
was either poisoned, or killed himself by immoderate drinking, when he
was only thirty-two years and eight months old: and a retributive
Providence destroyed all his posterity, so that neither root nor branch
of them was left on the face of the earth. Thus ended Alexander, the
great butcher; and thus ended his family and posterity.

[Daniel 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">dan 11:5</span></span>

The king of the south - This was Ptolemy Lagus, one of his generals, who
had the government of Egypt, Libra, etc., which are on the south of
Judea. He was strong, for he had added Cyprus, Phoenicia, Caria, etc.,
to his kingdom of Egypt.

And one of his princes - shall be strong above him - This was Seleucus
Nicator, who possessed Syria, Babylon, Media, and the neighboring
countries. This was the king of the north, for his dominions lay north
of Judea.

[Daniel 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">dan 11:6</span></span>

In the end of years - Several historical circumstances are here passed
by.

The king's daughter of the south - Berenice, daughter of Ptolemy
Philadelphus, king of Egypt, was married to Antiochus Theos, king of
Syria. These two sovereigns had a bloody war for some years; and they
agreed to terminate it by the above marriage, on condition that
Antiochus would put away his wife Laodice and her children, which he
did; and Berenice having brought an immense fortune to her husband, all
things appeared to go on well for a tine.

But she shall not retain the power of the arm - זרע zaro, her posterity,
shall not reign in that kingdom.

But she shall be given up - Antiochus recalled his former wife Laodice
and her children, and she, fearing that he might recall Berenice, caused
him to be poisoned and her to be murdered, and set her son Callinicus
upon the throne.

And they that brought her - Her Egyptian women, striving to defend their
mistress, were many of them killed.

And he that begat her - Or, as the margin, "he whom she brought forth;"
the son being murdered, as well as the mother, by order of Laodice.

And he that strengthened her - Probably her father Ptolemy, who was
excessively fond of her, and who had died a few years before.

[Daniel 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">dan 11:7</span></span>

But out of a branch of her roots - A branch from the same root from
which she sprang. This was Ptolemy Euergetes, her brother, who, to
avenge his sister's death, marched with a great army against Seleucus
Callinicus, took some of his best places, indeed all Asia, from Mount
Taurus to India, and returned to Egypt with an immense booty, forty
thousand talents of silver, precious vessels, and images of their gods
two thousand five hundred, without Callinicus daring to offer him
battle. I can but touch on these historic facts, for fear of extending
these notes to an immoderate length.

[Daniel 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">dan 11:8</span></span>

He shall continue more years - Seleucus Callinicus died (an exile) by a
fall from his horse; and Ptolemy Euergetes survived him four or five
years. - Bp. Newton.

[Daniel 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">dan 11:9</span></span>

So the king of the south - Ptolemy Euergetes: -

Shall come into his kingdom - That of Seleucus Callinicus.

And shall return - Having heard that a sedition had taken place in
Egypt, Ptolemy Euergetes was obliged to return speedily in order to
repress it; else he had wholly destroyed the kingdom of Callinicus.

[Daniel 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">dan 11:10</span></span>

But his sons shall be stirred up - That is, the sons of Callinicus, who
were Seleucus Ceraunus and Antiochus, afterwards called the Great.

Shall assemble a multitude - Seleucus Ceraunus did assemble a multitude
of forces in order to recover his father's dominions; but, not having
money to pay them, they became mutinous, and he was poisoned by two of
his own generals. His brother Antiochus was then proclaimed king; so
that one only of the sons did certainly come, and overflow, and pass
through; he retook Seleucia, and regained Syria. He then returned, and
overcame Nicolaus the Egyptian general; and seemed disposed to invade
Egypt, as he came even to his fortress, to the frontiers of Egypt.

[Daniel 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">dan 11:11</span></span>

The king of the south - Ptolemy Philopater, who succeeded his father
Euergetes.

Shall come forth and fight with him - He did come forth to Raphia, where
he was met by Antiochus, when a terrible battle was fought between these
two kings.

And he (Antiochus, the king of the north) shall set forth a great
multitude - Amounting to sixty-two thousand foot, six thousand horse,
and one hundred and two elephants; but yet the multitude was given into
his hand, the hand of the king of the south; for Ptolemy gained a
complete victory. Raphia, and other neighbouring towns, declared for the
victor; and Antiochus was obliged to retreat with his scattered army to
Antioch, from which he sent to solicit a peace. See 3 Maccabees 1:1-6,
and Polybius, lib. v.

[Daniel 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">dan 11:12</span></span>

His heart shall be lifted up - Had Ptolemy improved his victory, he
might have dispossessed Antiochus of his whole empire; but giving way to
pride, and a criminally sensual life, he made peace on dishonorable
terms; and though he had gained a great victory, yet his kingdom was not
strengthened by it, for his subjects were displeased, and rebelled
against him, or at least became considerably disaffected.

[Daniel 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">dan 11:13</span></span>

The king of the north shall return - after certain years - In about
fourteen years Antiochus did return, Philopater being dead, and his son
Ptolemy Epiphanes being then a minor. He brought a much larger army and
more riches; these he had collected in a late eastern expedition.

[Daniel 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">dan 11:14</span></span>

Many stand up against the king of the south - Antiochus, and Philip king
of Macedon, united together to overrun Egypt.

Also the robbers of thy people - The Jews, who revolted from their
religion, and joined Ptolemy, under Scopas: -

Shall exalt themselves to establish the vision - That is, to build a
temple like that of Jerusalem, in Egypt, hoping thereby to fulfil a
prediction of Isaiah, [Isa 30:18-25](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#018.md),
which seemed to intimate that the Jews and the Egyptians should be one
people. They now revolted from Ptolemy, and joined Antiochus; and this
was the means of contributing greatly to the accomplishment of
prophecies that foretold the calamities that should fall upon the Jews.

But they shall fall - For Scopas came with a great army from Ptolemy;
and, while Antiochus was engaged in other parts, reduced Coelesyria and
Palestine, subdued the Jews, placed guards on the coasts of Jerusalem,
and returned with great spoils to Egypt.

[Daniel 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">dan 11:15</span></span>

So the king of the north - Antiochus came to recover Judea. Scopas was
sent by Ptolemy to oppose him; but he was defeated near the fountains of
Jordan, and was obliged to take refuge in Sidon with ten thousand men.
Antiochus pursued and besieged him; and he was obliged by famine to
surrender at discretion, and their lives only were spared. Antiochus
afterwards besieged several of the fenced cities, and took them; in
short, carried all before him; so that the king of the south, Ptolemy,
and his chosen people, his ablest generals, were not able to oppose him.

[Daniel 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">dan 11:16</span></span>

He shall stand in the glorious land - Judea. For he reduced Palestine;
and the Jews supplied him with provisions, and assisted him to reduce
the garrison that Scopas had left in the citadel of Jerusalem.

Which by his hand shall be consumed - Or, which shall be perfected in
his hand. For Antiochus showed the Jews great favor: he brought back
those that were dispersed, and reestablished them in the land; freed the
priests and Levites from all tribute, etc.

[Daniel 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">dan 11:17</span></span>

He shall also set his face to enter - Antiochus purposed to have marched
his army into Egypt; but he thought it best to proceed by fraudulence,
and therefore proposed a treaty of marriage between him and his daughter
Cleopatra, called here the daughter of women, because of her great
beauty and accomplishments. And this he appeared to do, having "upright
ones with him." Or, as the Septuagint have it και ευθεια παντα μετ'
αυτου ποιησει, "and he will make all things straight with him;" that is,
he acted as if he were influenced by nothing but the most upright views.
But he intended his daughter to be a snare to Ptolemy, and therefore
purposed to corrupt her that she might betray her husband.

But she shall not stand on his side - On the contrary, her husband's
interests became more dear to her than her father's; and by her means
Ptolemy was put upon his guard against the intentions of Antiochus.

[Daniel 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">dan 11:18</span></span>

Shall he turn his face unto the isles - Antiochus had fitted out a great
fleet of one hundred large ships and two hundred smaller, and with this
fleet subdued most of the maritime places on the coast of the
Mediterranean, and took many of the isles, Rhodes, Samos, Euboea,
Colophon, and others.

But a prince for his own behalf - Or, a captain. The consul Acilius
Glabrio caused the reproach to cease; beat and routed his army at the
straits of Thermopylae, and expelled him from Greece. So he obliged him
to pay the tribute which he hoped to impose on others; for he would
grant him peace only on condition of paying the expense of the war,
fifteen thousand talents; five hundred on the spot, - two thousand five
hundred when the peace should be ratified by the senate, - and the
remaining twelve thousand in twelve years, each year one thousand. See
Polybius in his Legations, and Appian in the Wars of Syria. And thus: -

Without his own reproach - Without losing a battle, or taking a false
step, Acilius caused the reproach which he was bringing upon the Romans
to turn upon himself.

[Daniel 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">dan 11:19</span></span>

Be shall turn his face toward the fort of his own land - After this
shameful defeat, Antiochus fled to Sardis, thence to Apamea, and the
next day got into Syria, and to Antioch, his own fort, whence he sent
ambassadors to treat for peace; and was obliged to engage to pay the
immense sum of money mentioned above.

But he shall stumble and fall - Being under the greatest difficulties
how to raise the stipulated sums, he marched into his eastern provinces
to exact the arrears of taxes; and, attempting to plunder the temple of
Jupiter Belus at Elymais, he was opposed by the populace, and he and his
attendants slain. This is the account that Diodorus Siculus, Strabo, and
Justin give of his death. But it is variously related by others; some
saying that he was assassinated by some of his own people whom he had
punished for being drunk at a feast. - So Aurelius Victor. St. Jerome
says he lost his life in a battle against the inhabitants of Elymais. In
short, the manner of his death is uncertain; and perhaps even this
circumstance is referred to by the prophet, when he says, "He shall
stumble and fall, and Not Be Found."

[Daniel 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">dan 11:20</span></span>

Then shall stand up in his estate a raiser of taxes - Seleucus
Philopater succeeded his father Antiochus. He sent his treasurer
Heliodorus to seize the money deposited in the temple of Jerusalem,
which is here called the glory of the kingdom, see 2 Maccabees 9:23. He
was so cramped to pay the annual tax to the Romans, that he was obliged
to burden his subjects with continual taxes.

He shall be destroyed, neither in anger - fighting against an enemy, nor
in battle - at the head of his troops; but basely and treacherously, by
the hand of Heliodorus his treasurer, who hoped to reign in his stead.

[Daniel 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">dan 11:21</span></span>

In his estate shall stand up a vile person - This was Antiochus,
surnamed Epiphanes - the Illustrious. They did not give him the honor of
the kingdom: he was at Athens, on his way from Rome, when his father
died; and Heliodorus had declared himself king, as had several others.
But Antiochus came in peaceably, for he obtained the kingdom by
flatteries. He flattered Eumenes, king of Pergamus, and Attalus his
brother, and got their assistance. He flattered the Romans, and sent
ambassadors to court their favor, and pay them the arrears of the
tribute. He flattered the Syrians, and gained their concurrence; and as
he flattered the Syrians, so they flattered him, giving him the epithet
of Epiphanes - the Illustrious. But that he was what the prophet here
calls him, a vile person, is fully evident from what Polybius says of
him, from Athenians, lib. v.: "He was every man's companion: he resorted
to the common shops, and prattled with the workmen: he frequented the
common taverns, and ate and drank with the meanest fellows, singing
debauched songs," etc., etc. On this account a contemporary writer, and
others after him, instead of Epiphanes, called him Epimanes - the
Madman.

[Daniel 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">dan 11:22</span></span>

And with the arms of a flood - The arms which were overflown before him
were his competitors for the crown. They were vanquished by the forces
of Eumenes and Attalus; and were dissipated by the arrival of Antiochus
from Athens, whose presence disconcerted all their measures.

The prince of the covenant - This was Onias, the high priest, whom he
removed, and put Jason in his place, who had given him a great sum of
money; and then put wicked Menelaus in his room, who had offered him a
larger sum. Thus he acted deceitfully in the league made with Jason.

[Daniel 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">dan 11:23</span></span>

He shall come up - From Rome, where he had been a hostage for the
payment of the tax laid on his father.

Shall become strong with a small people - At first he had but few to
espouse his cause when he arrived at Antioch, the people having been
greatly divided by the many claimants of the crown; but being supported
by Eumenes and Attalus, his few people increased, and he became strong.

[Daniel 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">dan 11:24</span></span>

He shad enter peaceably even upon the fattest places - The very richest
provinces - Coelesyria and Palestine.

He shall do that which his fathers have not done, nor his fathers'
fathers - He became profuse in his liberalities, and scattered among
them the prey of his enemies, the spoil of temples, and the riches of
his friends, as well as his own revenues. He spent much in public shows,
and bestowed largesses among the people. We are told in 1 Maccabees
3:30, that "in the liberal giving of gifts he abounded above all the
kings that went before him." These are nearly the words of the prophet;
and perhaps without any design to copy them on the part of the
apocryphal writer. He would sometimes go into the streets, and throw
about a handful of money, crying out, "Let him take it, to whom Fortune
sends it."

He shall forecast his devices - As Eulaeus and Lenaeus, who were the
guardians of the young Egyptian king Ptolemy Philometer, demanded from
Antiochus the restitution of Coelesyria and Palestine, which he refused,
he foresaw that he might have a war with that kingdom; and therefore he
forecast devices - fixed a variety of plans to prevent this; visited the
strong holds and frontier places to see that they were in a state of
defense. And this he did for a time - he employed some years in hostile
preparations against Egypt.

[Daniel 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">dan 11:25</span></span>

He shall stir up his power - Antiochus marched against Ptolemy, the king
of the south, (Egypt), with a great army; and the Egyptian generals had
raised a mighty force.

Stirred up to battle - The two armies met between Pelusium and Mount
Casius; but he (the king of the south) could not stand - the Egyptian
army was defeated. The next campaign he had greater success; he routed
the Egyptian army, took Memphis, and made himself master of all Egypt,
except Alexandria, see 1 Maccabees 1:16-19. And all these advantages he
gained by forecasting devices; probably by corrupting his ministers and
captains. Ptolemy Macron gave up Cyprus to Antiochus; and the
Alexandrians were led to renounce their allegiance to Ptolemy
Philometer, and took Euergetes, or Physcon his younger brother, and made
him king in his stead. All this was doubtless by the corruptions of
Antiochus. See below.

[Daniel 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">dan 11:26</span></span>

Yea, they that feed of the portion of his meat - This is the proof of
what has been last noted, that the intrigues of Antiochus, corrupting
the ministers and officers of Ptolemy, were the cause of all the
disasters that felt on the Egyptian king. They that fed of the portion
of his meat - who were in his confidence and pay, and possessed the
secrets of the state, betrayed him; and these were the means of
destroying him and his army, so that he was defeated, as was before
observed.

[Daniel 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">dan 11:27</span></span>

And both these kings' hearts shall be to do mischief - That is,
Antiochus, and Ptolemy Philometer, who was nephew to the former, and
whose interest he now pretended to have much at heart, since the
Alexandrians had renounced their allegiance to him, and set his younger
brother Euergetes upon the throne. When Antiochus came to Memphis, he
and Philometer had frequent conferences at the same table; and at these
times they spoke lies to each other, Antiochus professing great
friendship to his nephew and concern for his interests, yet in his heart
designing to ruin the kingdom by fomenting the discords which already
subsisted between the two brothers. On the other hand, Philometer
professed much gratitude to his uncle for the interest he took in his
affairs, and laid the blame of the war upon his minister Eulaeus; while
at the same time he spoke lies, determining as soon as possible to
accommodate matters with his brother, and join all their strength
against their deceitful uncle.

But it shall not prosper - Neither succeeded in his object; for the end
of the appointed time was not yet come.

[Daniel 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">dan 11:28</span></span>

Then shall he return onto his land with great riches - Antiochus did
return, laden with riches, from the spoils that he took in Egypt; see 1
Maccabees 1:19, 20. And hearing that there had been a report of his
death, at which the citizens of Jerusalem had made great rejoicings: -

His heart shall be against the holy covenant - He was determined to take
a severe revenge, and he had an ostensible pretext for it, for Jason,
who had been deprived of the high priesthood, hearing the report of the
death of Antiochus, raised forces, marched against Jerusalem, took it,
and obliged Menelaus, the high priest, to shut himself up in the castle.
Antiochus brought a great army against Jerusalem; took it by storm; slew
forty thousand of the inhabitants; sold as many more for slaves; boiled
swine's flesh, and sprinkled the temple and the altar with the broth;
broke into the holy of holies; took away the golden vessels and other
sacred treasures, to the value of one thousand eight hundred talents;
restored Menelaus to his office; and made one Philip, a Phrygian,
governor of Judea. 1 Maccabees 1:24; 2 Maccabees 5:21. Prideaux and
Newton. These are what we term exploits; which having finished, he
returned to his own land.

[Daniel 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">dan 11:29</span></span>

At the time appointed he shall return - Finding that his treachery was
detected, and that the two brothers had united their counsel and
strength for their mutual support, he threw off the mask; and having
collected a great army early in the spring, he passed through
Coelesyria; entered Egypt; and the inhabitants of Memphis having
submitted to him, he came by easy marches to Alexandria. But, says the
prophet, "it shall not be as the former or as the latter:" he had not
the same success as the former, when he overthrew the Egyptian army at
Pelusium; nor as the latter, when he took Memphis, and subdued all
Egypt, except Alexandria. See the reason.

[Daniel 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">dan 11:30</span></span>

For the ships of Chittim shall come against him - Chittim is well known
to mean the Roman empire. Antiochus, being now in full march to besiege
Alexandria, and within seven miles of that city, heard that ships were
arrived there from Rome, with legates from the senate. He went to salute
them. They delivered to him the letters of the senate, in which he was
commanded, on pain of the displeasure of the Roman people, to put an end
to the war against his nephews. Antiochus said he would go and consult
his friends; on which Popilius, one of the legates, took his staff, and
instantly drew a circle round Antiochus on the sand where he stood, and
commanded him not to pass that circle till he had given a definitive
answer. Antiochus, intimidated, said, he would do whatever the senate
enjoined; and in a few days after began his march, and returned to
Syria. This is confirmed by Polybius, Livy, Velleius, Paterculus,
Valerius Maximus, and Justin.

Therefore he shall be grieved - "Grieving and groaning," says Polybius;
both mortified, humbled, and disappointed.

Have indignation against the holy covenant - For he vented his rage
against the Jews; and he sent his general, Apollonius, with twenty-two
thousand men against Jerusalem, plundered and set fire to the city,
pulled down the houses round about it, slew much of the people, and
built a castle on an eminence that commanded the temple, and slew
multitudes of the poor people who had come up to worship, polluted every
place, so that the temple service was totally abandoned, and all the
people fled from the city. And when he returned to Antioch he published
a decree that all should conform to the Grecian worship; and the Jewish
worship was totally abrogated, and the temple itself consecrated to
Jupiter Olympius. How great must the wickedness of the people have been
when God could tolerate this!

In the transacting of these matters he had intelligence with them that
forsake the holy covenant; with wicked Menelaus the high priest; and the
apostate Jews united with him, who gave from time to time such
information to Antiochus as excited him against Jerusalem the temple,
and the people. See 1 Maccabees 1:41, 62; 2 Maccabees 6:1-9; confirmed
by Josephus, War, book 1 chap. 1, s. 1. The concluding reflection of Bp.
Newton here is excellent: -

"It may be proper to stand a little here, and reflect how particular and
circumstantial this prophecy is, concerning Egypt and Syria, from the
death of Alexander to the time of Antiochus Epiphanes. There is not so
concise, comprehensive, and regular an account of their kings and
affairs to be found in any authors of those times. The prophecy is
really more perfect than any history, and is so wonderfully exact, not
only to the time of Antiochus Epiphanes, but likewise equally so beyond
that time, that we may conclude in the words of the inspired writer, 'No
one could thus declare the times and seasons, but he who hath them in
his own power.'"

[Daniel 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">dan 11:31</span></span>

And arms shall stand on his part - After Antiochus, arms, that is, the
Romans, shall stand up: for arms in this prophecy every where denote
military potter, and standing up, the power in activity and conquering.
Both Sir Isaac Newton and Bp. Newton agree, that what follows is spoken
of the Romans. Hitherto Daniel has described the actions of the kings of
the north and of the south, that of the kings of Syria and Egypt; but,
upon the conquest of Macedon by the Romans, he has left off describing
the actions of the Greeks, and begun to describe those of the Romans in
Greece, who conquered Macedon, Illyricum, and Epirus, in the year of the
era of Nabonassar, 580. Thirty-five years after, by the will of Attalus,
they inherited all Asia westward of Mount Taurus; sixty-five years after
they conquered the kingdom of Syria, and reduced it into a province; and
thirty-four years after they did the same to Egypt. By all these steps
the Roman arms stood up over the Greeks; and after ninety-five years
more, by making war upon the Jews, they polluted the sanctuary of
strength, - the temple, (so called by reason of its fortifications), and
took away the daily sacrifice and placed the abomination that maketh
desolate, or of the desolator; for that this abomination was thus placed
after the time of Christ, appears from [Mat
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#015.md).

In the sixteenth year of the Emperor Adrian, a.d. 132, they placed this
abomination by building a temple to Jupiter Capitolinus, where the
temple of God in Jerusalem stood; upon which the Jews, under Barchocab,
rose up against the Romans. But in this war they had fifty cities
demolished, nine hundred and fifty of their best towns destroyed, and
eighty thousand men were slain by the sword; and in the end of the war,
a.d. 136, were banished Judea on pain of death; and thenceforth the land
became desolate. See Observations on Daniel, and Bp. Newton on the
Prophecies.

[Daniel 11:32](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">dan 11:32</span></span>

Such as do wickedly against the covenant - This if understood of the
Christian Jews, for the New had now succeeded to the Old, the whole of
the Jewish ritual having been abolished, and Jerusalem filled with
heathen temples. And he - the Roman power, did all he could by
flatteries, as well as threats, to corrupt the Christians, and cause
them to sacrifice to the statues of the emperors.

But the people that do know their God - The genuine Christians.

Shall be strong - Shall be strengthened by his grace and Spirit.

And do exploits - Continue steadfast in all temptations, hold fast their
faith, and enjoy a good conscience.

[Daniel 11:33](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">dan 11:33</span></span>

And they that understand - The apostles and primitive Christians in
general, who understood from the prophets, and his own actions, that
Jesus was the true Messiah.

Instruct many - Preach the Gospel every where, and convert multitudes to
the faith.

Yet they shall fall by the sword, and by flame, by captivity, and by
spoil, many days - They were exposed to the malice and fury of their
enemies, during Ten State Persecutions, and suffered all kinds of
tortures, with but little intermission, for three hundred years. -
Newton.

[Daniel 11:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">dan 11:34</span></span>

Now when they shall fall - When the storm of the tenth persecution under
Diocletian, which lasted ten years, fell upon them, they were sorely
oppressed.

They shall be holpen with a little help - By Constantine; who, while he
removed all persecution, and promoted the temporal prosperity of the
Christian Church, yet added little to its spiritual perfection and
strength. For many, now seeing the Christians in prosperity: -

Cleave to them with flatteries - Became Christians Because the Emperor
was such.

[Daniel 11:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">dan 11:35</span></span>

And some of them of understanding - Disputes on certain points of
religion soon agitated the Christian Church; and now, having no outward
persecution, they began to persecute each other. And many excellent men,
men of understanding, fell victims because they would not embrace
erroneous doctrines, when professed by the state. But this was
permitted: -

To try them, and to purge, and to make them white - To bring all to the
pure profession, possession, and practice of Christianity.

To the time of the end - To the time that God shall cause pure and
undefiled religion every where to prevail. But when is the time
appointed for this?

[Daniel 11:36](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">dan 11:36</span></span>

And the king shall do according to his will - This may apply to
Antiochus, who exalted himself above every god, called himself a god,
sported with all religion, profaned the temple, etc., etc. But others
think an antichristian power in the Church is intended; for in the
language of this prophecy king is taken for power, a kingdom, etc. That
such a power did spring up in the Church that acted in an arbitrary
manner against all laws, human and Divine, is well known. This power
showed itself in the Greek emperors in the east, and in the bishops of
Rome in the west. And this is to continue.

Till the indignation be accomplished: for that that is determined shall
be done - This is the same as what was called in [Dan
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#019.md), the last end of the indignation;
and [Dan 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027.md), the consummation; and
means the end or consummation of God's indignation against the Jews. And
this seems more clearly expressed, [Dan
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#007.md) : "When he shall have
accomplished to scatter the power of the holy people." We see this still
subsisting in the Church of Rome; and it was a saying of Rabbi David
Kimchi, "When Rome shall be laid waste, then shall be redemption for
Israel." For the destruction of Rome and the restoration of the Jews
shall fall out about the same time. - Bp. Newton.

[Daniel 11:37](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">dan 11:37</span></span>

Neither shall he regard the God of his fathers - That God who sent the
evangelists and apostles to preach the pure doctrine. These true fathers
of the Christian Church, and their God, this Church has not regarded,
but put councils, and traditions, and apocryphal writings in their
place.

Nor the desire of women - Both the Greek and Latin Church, in their
antichristian enactments, have discouraged, and in several cases
proscribed, marriage, under the pretense of greater chastity, to the
discredit of God's ordinance, and Christianity itself.

Nor regard any god - For the mandates and decrees of that Church have
been often in defiance of God and his word, for it has magnified itself
above all power and authority in heaven and on earth. It professes to
hold the keys, and to open and shut heaven at pleasure, both to states
and individuals.

[Daniel 11:38](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">dan 11:38</span></span>

Shall he honor the god of forces - מעזים mauzzim, or gods protectors, as
in the margin; worshipping saints and angels as guardians, and
protectors, and mediators; leaving out, in general, the true God, and
the only Mediator, Jesus Christ.

And a god whom his fathers knew not - For these gods guardians, the
Virgin Mary, saints and angels, were utterly unknown as mediators and
invocable guardians in the primitive apostolic Church.

Shall he honor with gold, and silver, and with precious stones - How
literally does this apply to the Church of Rome! See the house of our
lady at Loretto; the shrines of saints; the decorated images, costly
apparel, gold, jewels, etc., profusely used about images of saints
angels, and the blessed virgin, in different popish churches. This
superstition began to prevail in the fourth century, and was established
in 787, by the seventh general council; for in that the worship of
images was enacted.

[Daniel 11:39](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">dan 11:39</span></span>

In the most strong holds with a strange god - Bishop Newton proposed the
following translation, after justly finding fault with our common
Version: "Thus shall he do to the defenders of Mauzzim, together with
the strange god whom he shall acknowledge: he shall multiply honor, and
he shall cause him to rule over many; and the earth he shall divide for
a reward." The defenders of Mauzzim, these saint and angel gods
protectors, were the monks, priests, and bishops; of whom it may be
truly said, "They were increased with honor, ruled over many, and
divided the land for gain." They have been honored and reverenced almost
to adoration; their jurisdiction was extended over the purses and
consciences of men; they have been enriched with the noblest buildings
and largest endowments, and the choicest lands have been appropriated
for Church lands. These are points of such public notoriety, that they
require no proof. - Newton.

[Daniel 11:40](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">dan 11:40</span></span>

At the time of the end shall the king of the south push at him - These
kings are to be understood in reference to the times of which the
prophet speaks. While the kingdoms of Egypt and Syria were subsisting,
the king of the south and the north applied to them exclusively: but
they did not exist at the time of which the prophet speaks; therefore
other southern and northern powers must be sought. These we may find in
the Saracens, who were of the Arabians, who came from the south, headed
by the false prophet Mohammed, who pushed at him - made war on the Greek
emperor Heraclius, and with amazing rapidity deprived him of Egypt,
Syria, and many of his finest provinces.

And the king of the north - The Turks, who were originally Scythians,
seized on the remains of the Greek empire; and in process of time
rendered themselves masters of the whole. They are represented as coming
like a whirlwind, with chariots, and with horsemen; their armies being
chiefly composed of cavalry.

And with many ships - With these they got possession of many islands and
maritime countries; and were so powerful in their fleets, that they
entirely defeated the Venetians; and at last their fleets became of the
utmost consequence to them in besieging, and afterwards taking,
Constantinople, a.d. 1453, which they hold to the present day. So they
entered into the countries, and overflowed, rendering themselves masters
of all Asia Minor and Greece.

[Daniel 11:41](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">dan 11:41</span></span>

He shall enter also into the glorious land - Entirely subdue Judea.

And many countries shall be overthrown - Aleppo, Damascus, Gaza, and
many other cities were forced to submit to them; and they hold them
still.

But these shalt escape - Edom and Moab, and the chief of the children of
Ammon - These and other Arabians they have never been able to subdue.
They still occupy the deserts; and receive a yearly pension of forty
thousand crowns of gold from the Ottoman emperors, to permit the
caravans, with the pilgrims for Mecca, to have a free passage.

[Daniel 11:42](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">dan 11:42</span></span>

He shall stretch forth his hand - He - the Ottoman emperors, have
stretched forth the hand, not only on European, but also upon Asiatic
and African countries. Egypt - has not escaped; it is a province of the
Turkish government, as are also Fez, Morocco, Algiers, and many other
African countries. And as the prophecy says they "got power over the
silver and gold, and the precious things of Egypt," so it was; for when
Selim conquered Egypt, a.d. 1517, he took all its spoils; and the
immense sums drawn from it to the present day, and the wretchedness of
the land in consequence, are almost incredible.

The Libyans and the Ethiopians - The Cushim - unconquered Arabs, all
sought their friendship; and many of them are tributary to the present
time.

[Daniel 11:44](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#044.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">dan 11:44</span></span>

But tidings out of the east and out of the north shall trouble him -
This part of the prophecy is allowed to be yet unfulfilled; and what is
portented, the course of prophetic events will show. Were we to
understand it as applying to Antiochus, then the news might be of the
preparations which he heard, that the provinces of the east, and
Artaxerxes, king of Armenia, on the north were intending to rise up
against him. But if the Turkish power be understood, as in the preceding
verses, it may mean that the Persians on the east, and the Russians on
the north, will at some time greatly embarrass the Ottoman government.
And how completely has this been fulfilled; first, by the total
destruction of the Egyptian fleet, by the combined fleets of England,
France, and Russia, in the Bay of Navarino; and, secondly, by the total
overthrow of the Turkish army by the Russians, in the years 1828 and
1829, when the sultan was obliged to accept any conditions that the
emperor of Russia was pleased to give! \[N.B. - The former part of this
note was written for the first edition of this work, printed in 1825\].

[Daniel 11:45](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#045.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">dan 11:45</span></span>

He shalt plant the tabernacles - He shall make a last stand in Judea,
and there shall his power be smitten.

He shall come to his end, and none shall help him - All his confederate
and tributary kingdoms, states, and provinces shall desert him and leave
that government to come to a shameful end.

In the interpretation of this chapter I have generally followed Bp.
Newton, in his most excellent Dissertations on the Prophecies,
consulting other eminent authors occasionally.

From the beginning of the chapter to the end of [Dan
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#030.md) all is very clear and plain,
relative to the Grecian, Syrian, and Egyptian histories; from the
thirty-first verse to the end, the mode of interpretation is not so
satisfactory, in its application to the times since Christ. Yet possibly
these alone may be intended; though the whole might be, with
considerable ease, applied to the remaining part of the Syrian and
Egyptian history. It is a wonderful piece of prophecy, and of great
utility to the cause of Divine revelation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 12](dan012.md)

</div>
