<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu.md)  
  [Previous](deu007)  [Next](deu009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#001.md)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 8:0</span></span>

An exhortation to obedience from a consideration of God's past mercies,
[Deu 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#001.md), [Deu
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#002.md). Man is not to live by bread only,
but by every word of God, [Deu 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#003.md).
How God provided for them in the wilderness, [Deu
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#004.md). The Lord chastened them that they
might be obedient, [Deu 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#005.md), [Deu
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#006.md). A description of the land into
which they were going, [Deu 8:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#007.md).
Cautions lest they should forget God in their prosperity, [Deu
8:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#010.md), and lest they should
attribute that prosperity to themselves, and not to God, [Deu
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#017.md), [Deu
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#018.md). The terrible judgments that
shall fall upon them, should they prove unfaithful, [Deu
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#019.md), [Deu
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#020.md).

[Deuteronomy 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 8:2</span></span>

Thou shalt remember all the way - The various dealings of God with you;
the dangers and difficulties to which ye were exposed, and from which
God delivered you; together with the various miracles which he wrought
for you, and his longsuffering towards you.

[Deuteronomy 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 8:3</span></span>

He - suffered thee to hunger, and fed thee - God never permits any
tribulation to befall his followers, which he does not design to turn to
their advantage. When he permits us to hunger, it is that his mercy may
be the more observable in providing us with the necessaries of life.
Privations, in the way of providence, are the forerunners of mercy and
goodness abundant.

[Deuteronomy 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 8:4</span></span>

Thy raiment waxed not old, etc. - The plain meaning of this
much-tortured text appears to me to be this: "God so amply provided for
them all the necessaries of life, that they never were obliged to wear
tattered garments, nor were their feet injured for lack of shoes or
sandals." If they had carvers, engravers, silversmiths, and jewelers
among them, as plainly appears from the account we have of the
tabernacle and its utensils, is it to be wondered at if they also had
habit and sandal makers, etc., etc., as we are certain they had weavers,
embroiderers, and such like? And the traffic which we may suppose they
carried on with the Moabites, or with travelling hordes of Arabians,
doubtless supplied them with the materials; though, as they had
abundance of sheep and neat cattle, they must have had much of the
materials within themselves. It is generally supposed that God, by a
miracle, preserved their clothes from wearing out: but if this sense be
admitted, it will require, not one miracle, but a chain of the most
successive and astonishing miracles ever wrought, to account for the
thing; for as there were not less than 600,000 males born in the
wilderness, it would imply, that the clothes of the infant grew up with
the increase of his body to manhood, which would require a miracle to be
continually wrought on every thread, and on every particle of matter of
which that thread was composed. And this is not all; it would imply that
the clothes of the parent became miraculously lessened to fit the body
of the child, with whose growth they were again to stretch and grow,
etc. No such miraculous interference was necessary.

[Deuteronomy 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 8:8</span></span>

A land of wheat, etc. - On the subject of this verse I shall introduce
the following remarks, which I find in Mr. Harmer's Observations on the
Fertility of the Land of Judea, vol. iii., p. 243.

"Hasselquist tells us that he ate olives at Joppa (upon his first
arrival in the Holy Land) which were said to grow on the Mount of
Olives, near Jerusalem; and that, independently of their oiliness, they
were of the best kind he had tasted in the Levant. As olives are
frequently eaten in their repasts, the delicacy of this fruit in Judea
ought not to be forgotten; and the oil that is gotten from these trees
much less, because still more often made use of. In the progress of his
journey he found several fine vales, abounding with olive trees. He saw
also olive trees in Galilee; but none farther, he says, than the
mountain where it is supposed our Lord preached his sermon.

"The fig trees in the neighborhood of Joppa, Hasselquist goes on to
inform us, were as beautiful as any he had seen in the Levant.

"The reason why pomegranates are distinctly mentioned, in this
description of the productions of the land of promise, may be their
great usefulness in forming cooling drinks, for they are used among the
Asiatics nearly in the same way that we use lemons; see vol. ii., 145.

"Honey is used in large quantities in these countries; and Egypt was
celebrated for the assiduous care with which the people there managed
their bees. Maillet's account of it is very amusing. 'There are,' says
he, 'abundance of bees in that country; and a singular manner of feeding
them, introduced by the Egyptians of ancient times, still continues
there. Towards the end of October, when the Nile, upon its decrease,
gives the peasants an opportunity of sowing the lands, sainfoin is one
of the first things sown, and one of the most profitable. As the Upper
Egypt is hotter than the Lower, and the inundation there goes sooner off
the lands, the sainfoin appears there first. The knowledge they have of
this causes them to send their bee-hives from all parts of Egypt, that
the bees may enjoy, as soon as may be, the richness of the flowers,
which grow in this part of the country sooner than in any other district
of the kingdom. The hives, upon their arrival at the farther end of
Egypt, are placed one upon another in the form of pyramids, in boats
prepared for their reception, after having been numbered by the people
who place them in the boats. The bees feed in the fields there for some
days; afterwards, when it is believed they have nearly collected the
honey and wax, which were to be found for two or three leagues round,
they cause the boats to go down the stream, two or three leagues lower,
and leave them there, in like manner, such a proportion of time as they
think to be necessary for the gathering up the riches of that canton. At
length, about the beginning of February, after having gone the whole
length of Egypt, they arrive at the sea, from whence they are conducted,
each of them, to their usual place of abode; for they take care to set
down exactly, in a register, each district from whence the hives were
carried in the beginning of the season, their number and the names of
the persons that sent them, as well as the number of the boats, where
they are ranged according to the places they are brought from. What is
astonishing in this affair is, that with the greatest fidelity of memory
that can be imagined, each bee finds its own hive, and never makes any
mistake. That which is still more amazing to me is, that the Egyptians
of old should be so attentive to all the advantages deducible from the
situation of their country; that after having observed that all things
came to maturity sooner in Upper Egypt, and much later in Lower, which
made a difference of above six weeks between the two extremities of
their country, they thought of collecting the wax and the honey so as to
lose none of them, and hit upon this ingenious method of making the bees
do it successively, according to the blossoming of the flowers, and the
arrangement of nature.'"

If this solicitude were as ancient as the dwelling of Israel in Egypt,
they must have been anxious to know whether honey, about which they took
such care in Egypt, was plentiful in the land of promise; and they must
have been pleased to have been assured it was. It continues to be
produced there in large quantities: Hasselquist, in the progress of his
journey from Acra to Nazareth, tells us that he found "great numbers of
bees, bred thereabouts, to the great advantage of the inhabitants." He
adds, "they make their bee-hives, with little trouble, of clay, four
feet long, and half a foot in diameter, as in Egypt. They lay ten or
twelve of them, one on another, on the bare ground, and build over every
ten a little roof." Mr. Maundrell, observing also many bees in the Holy
Land, takes notice that by their means the most barren places in other
respects of that country become useful, perceiving in many places of the
great salt plain near Jericho a smell of honey and wax as strong as if
he had been in an apiary.

By Hasselquist's account it appears, that the present inhabitants of
Palestine are not strangers to the use of hives. They are constructed of
very different materials from ours, but just the same with the Egyptian
hives. They seem to be an ancient contrivance; and indeed so simple an
invention must be supposed to be as old as the days of Moses, when arts,
as appears from his writings, of a much more elevated nature were known
in Egypt. I cannot then well persuade myself to adopt the opinion of
some of the learned, that those words of Moses, in [Deu
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#013.md), He made him to suck honey out
of the rock, and oil cut of the flinty rock, are to be understood of his
causing Israel to dwell in a country where sometimes they might find
honey-comb in holes of the rock. It is very possible that in that hot
country these insects, when not taken due care of, may get into hollow
places of the rocks, and form combs there, as they sometimes construct
them in ours in hollow trees, though I do not remember to have met with
any traveler that has made such an observation. But would this have been
mentioned with so much triumph by Moses in this place? The quantities of
honey produced after this manner could be but small, compared with what
would be collected in hives properly managed; when found, it must often
cost a great deal of pains to get the honey out of these little cavities
in the hard stone, and much the greatest part must be absolutely lost to
the inhabitants. The interpretation is the more strange, because when it
is said in the next clause, "and oil out of the flinty rock," it is
evidently meant that they should have oil produced in abundance by olive
trees growing on flinty rocks; and consequently, the sucking honey out
of the rock should only mean their enjoying great quantities of honey,
produced by bees that collected it from flowers growing among the rocks:
the rocky mountains of this country, it is well known, produce an
abundance of aromatic plants proper for the purpose. Nor does Asaph, in
the close of the eighty-first Psalm, speak, I apprehend, of honey found
in cavities of rocks; nor yet is he there describing it as collected
from the odoriferous plants that grow in the rocky hills of those
countries, if the reading of our present Hebrew copies be right: but the
prophet tells Israel that, had they been obedient, God would have fed
them with the fat of wheat, and with the rock of honey would he have
satisfied them, that is, with the most delicious wheat, and with the
richest, most invigorating honey, in large quantities, both for eating
and making agreeable drink. Its reviving, strengthening quality appears
in the story of Jonathan, Saul's son, [Sa1
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#027.md); as the using the term rock to
signify strength, etc., appears in a multitude of places. The rock of a
sword, [Psa 89:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#043.md), for the edge of the
sword, in which its energy lies, is, perhaps, as strange an expression
to western ears.

I shall have occasion to speak of the excellence of the grapes of Judea
in a succeeding chapter; I may therefore be excused from pursuing the
farther examination of the productions of this country, upon giving my
reader a remark of Dr. Shaw's to this purpose, that it is impossible for
pulse, wheat, or grain of any kind, to be richer or better tasted than
what is sold at Jerusalem. Only it may not be amiss to add, with respect
to this country's being well watered, that the depth, תהם tehom, spoken
of in this passage, seems to mean reservoirs of water filled by the
rains of winter, and of great use to make their lands fertile; as the
second word תעלתיה tealotheiha seems to mean wells, or some such sort of
conveniences, supplied by springs, and the first word; נהרתיה
naharotheiha rivers or running streams, whether carrying a larger or
smaller body of water. What an important part of this pleasing
description, especially in the ears of those that had wandered near
forty years in a most dry and parched wilderness! I will only add,
without entering into particulars, that the present face of the country
answers this description.

[Deuteronomy 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 8:9</span></span>

A land whose stones are iron - Not only meaning that there were iron
mines throughout the land, but that the loose stones were strongly
impregnated with iron, ores of this metal (the most useful of all the
products of the mineral kingdom) being every where in great plenty.

Out of whose hills thou mayest dig brass - As there is no such thing in
nature as a brass mine, the word נחשת nechosheth should be translated
copper; of which, by the addition of the lapis calaminaris, brass is
made. See on [Exo 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#003) (note.md).

[Deuteronomy 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 8:15</span></span>

Who led thee through that - terrible wilderness - See the account of
their journeying in the notes, [Exo
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#001) (note), etc.; Numbers 21 (note.md),
etc.

Fiery serpents - Serpents whose bite occasioned a most violent
inflammation, accompanied with an unquenchable thirst, and which
terminated in death. See on [Num 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#006.md)
(note).

[Deuteronomy 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 8:16</span></span>

Who fed thee - with manna - See this miracle described in [Exo
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#013) (note.md), etc.

[Deuteronomy 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 8:18</span></span>

God - giveth thee power to get wealth - Who among the rich and wealthy
believes this saying? Who gives wisdom, understanding, skill, bodily
strength, and health? Is it not God? And without these, how can wealth
be acquired? Whose is providence? Who gives fertility to the earth? And
who brings every proper purpose to a right issue? Is it not God? And
without these also can wealth be acquired? No. Then the proposition in
the text is self-evident: it is God that giveth power to get wealth, and
to God the wealthy man must account for the manner in which he has
expended the riches which God hath given him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 9](deu009.md)

</div>
