<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu003)  [Next](deu005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 4:0</span></span>

Exhortations to obedience, [Deu 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#001).
Nothing to be added to or taken from the testimonies of God, [Deu
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#002). The people are exhorted to
recollect how God had destroyed the ungodly among them, [Deu
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#003); and preserved those who were
faithful, [Deu 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#004). The excellence of
the Divine law, [Deu 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#005), [Deu
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#006). No nation in the world could
boast of any such statutes, judgments, etc., [Deu
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#007), [Deu
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#008). They are exhorted to obedience by
the wonderful manifestations of God in their behalf, [Deu
4:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#009). Moses exhorts them to beware
of idolatry, and to make no likeness of any thing in heaven or earth as
an object of adoration, [Deu 4:14-20](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#014).
He informs them that he must die in that land as God had refused to let
him go into the promised land, being angry with him on their account,
[Deu 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#021), [Deu
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#022). Repeats his exhortation to
obedience, [Deu 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#023), [Deu
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#024). Predicts the judgments of God
against them, should they turn to idolatry, [Deu
4:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#025). Promises of God's mercy to
the penitent, [Deu 4:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#029). The grand
and unparalleled privileges of the Israelites, [Deu
4:32-40](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#032). Moses severs three cities on
the east side of Jordan for cities of refuge, [Deu
4:41](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#041), [Deu
4:42](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#042). Their names, [Deu
4:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#043). When and where Moses gave these
statutes and judgments to Israel, [Deu
4:44-49](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#044).

[Deuteronomy 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 4:1</span></span>

Hearken - unto the statutes - Every thing that concerned the rites and
ceremonies of religion; judgments - all that concerned matters of civil
right and wrong.

[Deuteronomy 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 4:2</span></span>

Ye shall not add - Any book, chapter, verse or word, which I have not
spoken; nor give any comment that has any tendency to corrupt, weaken,
or destroy any part of this revelation.

Neither shall ye diminish - Ye shall not only not take away any larger
portion of this word, but ye shall not take one jot or tittle from the
Law; it is that word of God that abideth for ever.

[Deuteronomy 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 4:6</span></span>

Keep - and do them; for this is your wisdom - There was no mode of
worship at this time on the face or the earth that was not wicked,
obscene, puerile, foolish, or ridiculous, except that established by God
himself among the Israelites. And every part of this, taken in its
connection and reference, may be truly called a wise and reasonable
service.

The nations - and say, Surely this great nation is a wise and
understanding people - Almost all the nations in the earth showed that
they had formed this opinion of the Jews, by borrowing from them the
principal part of their civil code. Take away what Asia and Europe,
whether ancient or modern, have borrowed from the Mosaic laws, and you
leave little behind that can be called excellent.

[Deuteronomy 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 4:9</span></span>

Only take heed to thyself - Be circumspect and watchful.

Keep thy soul diligently - Be mindful of thy eternal interests. Whatever
becomes of the body, take care of the soul.

Lest thou forget - God does his work that they may be had in everlasting
remembrance; and he that forgets them, forgets his own mercies. Besides,
if a man forget the work of God on his soul, he loses that work.

Lest they depart from thy heart - It is not sufficient to lay up Divine
things in the memory, they must be laid up in the heart. Thy word have I
hidden in my heart, says David, that I might not sin against thee. The
life of God in the soul of man can alone preserve the soul to life
everlasting; and this grace must be retained all the days of our life.
When Adam fell, his condition was not meliorated by the reflection that
he had been once in paradise; nor does it avail Satan now that he was
once an angel of light. Those who let the grace of God depart from their
hearts, lose that grace; and those who lose the grace, fall from the
grace; and as some have fallen and risen no more, so may others;
therefore, take heed to thyself, etc. Were it impossible for men finally
to fall from the grace of God, exhortations of this kind had never been
given, because they would have been unnecessary, and God never does an
unnecessary thing.

But teach them thy sons - If a man know the worth of his own soul, he
will feel the importance of the salvation of the souls of his family.
Those who neglect family religion, neglect personal religion; if more
attention were paid to the former, even among those called religious
people, we should soon have a better state of civil society. On family
religion God lays much stress; and no head of a family can neglect it
without endangering the final salvation of his own soul. See the note at
the conclusion of [Gen 18:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#032) (note),
[Gen 19:38](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#038) (note), and [Deu
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#007) (note).

[Deuteronomy 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 4:15</span></span>

Ye saw no manner of similitude - Howsoever God chose to appear or
manifest himself, he took care never to assume any describable form. He
would have no image worship, because he is a Spirit, and they who
worship him must worship him in Spirit and in truth. These outward
things tend to draw the mind out of itself, and diffuse it on sensible,
if not sensual, objects; and thus spiritual worship is prevented, and
the Holy Ghost grieved. Persons acting in this way can never know much
of the religion of the heart.

[Deuteronomy 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 4:16</span></span>

The likeness of male or female - Such as Baal-peor and the Roman
Priapus, Ashtaroth or Astarte, and the Greek and Roman Venus; after whom
most nations of the world literally went a whoring.

[Deuteronomy 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 4:17</span></span>

The likeness of any beast, etc. - Such as the Egyptian god Apis, who was
worshipped under the form of a white bull; the ibis and hawk, among the
fowls, had also Divine honors paid to them; serpents and the crocodile
among reptiles; besides monkeys, dogs, cats, the scarabaeus, leeks, and
onions! See this explained at large, [Exo
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#004) (note).

[Deuteronomy 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 4:19</span></span>

When thou seest the sun, and the moon, and the stars - The worship of
the heavenly bodies was the oldest species of idolatry. Those who had
not the knowledge of the true God were led to consider the sun, moon,
planets, and stars, as not only self-existing, but the authors of all
the blessings possessed by mankind. The knowledge of a rational system
of astronomy served to destroy this superstition; and very little of it
remains now in the world, except among a few Christian and Mohammedan
astrologers; those miserable sinners who endeavor, as much as possible,
to revive the old idolatry, while vainly professing to believe in the
true God! Nor is it to be doubted that God will proceed with them as he
has done of old with the worshippers of the host of heaven. Sound
philosophy is next in importance to sound divinity; and next to the
study of the work of grace is that of the operations of God in nature;
for these visible things make known his eternal power and Godhead.

[Deuteronomy 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">deu 4:20</span></span>

Out of the iron furnace - From this mention of the word iron furnace
there can be little doubt that the Israelites were employed in Egypt in
the most laborious works of metallurgy. Digging, smelting, and forging
of iron in so hot a climate must have been oppressive work indeed.

[Deuteronomy 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 4:21</span></span>

The Lord was angry with me - And if with me, so as to debar me from
entering into the promised land, can you think to escape if guilty of
greater provocations?

[Deuteronomy 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">deu 4:24</span></span>

Thy God is a consuming fire - They had seen him on the mount as an
unconsuming fire, while appearing to Moses, and giving the law; and they
had seen him as a consuming fire in the case of Korah, Dathan, Abiram,
and their company. They had, therefore, every good to expect from his
approbation, and every evil to dread from his displeasure.

[Deuteronomy 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">deu 4:26</span></span>

I call heaven and earth to witness against you - A most solemn method of
adjuration, in use among all nations in the world. So Virgil, Aen., lib.
xii., ver. 176, etc.

Tum pius Aeneas stricto sic ense precatur:

Esto nunc Sol testis et haec mihi terra vocanti -

Fontesque fluviosque voco, quaeque aetheris alti

Relllgio, et quae caeruleo sunt numina ponto, etc.

"Then the great Trojan prince unsheathed his sword,

And thus, with lifted hands, the gods adored:

Thou land for which I wage this war, and thou

Great source of day, be witness to my vow! -

Almighty king of heaven and queen of air,

Propitious now and reconciled by prayer, -

Ye springs, ye floods, ye various powers who lie

Beneath the deep, or tread the golden sky, -

Hear and Attest!"

Pitt.

God and man being called upon to bear testimony to the truth of what was
spoken, that if there was any flaw or insincerity, it might be detected;
and if any crime, it might not go unpunished. Such appeals to God, for
such purposes, show at once both the origin and use of oaths. See the
note on [Deu 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013).

[Deuteronomy 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">deu 4:27</span></span>

The Lord shall scatter you among the nations - This was amply verified
in their different captivities and dispersions.

[Deuteronomy 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">deu 4:28</span></span>

There ye shall serve gods - wood and stone - This was also true of the
Israelites, not only in their captivities, but also in their own land.
And it may now be literally the case with the ten tribes who were
carried away captive by the Assyrians, and of whose residence no man at
present knows any thing with certainty. That they still exist there can
be no doubt; but they are now, most probably, so completely incorporated
with the idolaters among whom they dwell, as to be no longer distinguish
able: yet God can gather them.

[Deuteronomy 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">deu 4:29</span></span>

But if from thence thou shalt seek the Lord - God is longsuffering, and
of tender mercy; and waits, ever ready, to receive a backsliding soul
when it returns to him. Is not this promise left on record for the
encouragement and salvation of lost Israel?

[Deuteronomy 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">deu 4:30</span></span>

When thou art in tribulation in the latter days - Are not these the
times spoken of? And is there not still hope for Israel? Could we see
them become zealous for their own law and religious observances - could
we see them humble themselves before the God of Jacob - could we see
them conduct their public worship with any tolerable decency and decorum
- could we see them zealous to avoid every moral evil, inquiring the
road to Zion, with their faces thitherward; then might we hope that the
redemption of Israel was at hand: but alas! there is not the most
distant evidence of any thing of the kind, except in a very few solitary
instances. They are, perhaps, in the present day, more lost to every
sacred principle of their own institutions than they have ever been
since their return from the Babylonish captivity. By whom shall Jacob
arise? for in this sense he is small - deeply fallen, and greatly
degraded.

[Deuteronomy 4:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">deu 4:33</span></span>

Did ever people hear the voice of God - It seems to have been a general
belief that if God appeared to men, it was for the purpose of destroying
them; and indeed most of the extraordinary manifestations of God were in
the way of judgment; but here it was different; God did appear in a
sovereign and extraordinary manner; but it was for the deliverance and
support of the people.

1\. They heard his voice speaking with them in a distinct, articulate
manner.

2\. They saw the fire, the symbol of his presence, the appearances of
which demonstrated it to be supernatural.

3\. Notwithstanding God appeared so terrible, yet no person was
destroyed, for he came, not to destroy, but to save.

[Deuteronomy 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">deu 4:34</span></span>

From the midst of another nation - This was a most extraordinary thing,
that a whole people, consisting of upwards of 600,000 effective men,
besides women and children, should, without striking a blow, be brought
out of the midst of a very powerful nation, to the political welfare of
which their services were so essential; that they should be brought out
in so open and public a manner; that the sea itself should be
supernaturally divided to afford this mighty host a passage; and that,
in a desert utterly unfriendly to human life, they should be sustained
for forty years. These were such instances of the almighty power and
goodness of God as never could be forgotten.

In this verse Moses enumerates seven different means used by the
Almighty in effecting Israel's deliverance.

1\. Temptations, מסת massoth, from נשה nasah, to try or prove; the
miracles which God wrought to try the faith and prove the obedience of
the children of Israel.

2\. Signs, אתת othoth, from אתה athah, to come near; such signs as God
gave them of his continual presence and especial providence,
particularly the pillar of cloud and pillar of fire, keeping near to
them night and day, and always directing their journeys, showing them
when and where to pitch their tents, etc., etc.

3\. Wonders, מופתים mophethim, from יפת yaphath, to persuade; persuasive
facts and events, says Parkhurst, whether strictly miraculous, and
exceeding the powers of nature, as [Exo
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#009); [Exo
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#009), [Exo
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#010); or not, as [Isa
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#003); [Eze
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#006), [Eze
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#011). It probably means typical
representations: in this signification the word is used, [Zac
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#008). Joshua, the high priest, and his
companions were אנשי מופת anshey mopheth, typical men, raised up by God
as types of Christ, and proofs that God would bring his servant The
Branch. All the dealings of God with this people, and even the people
themselves, were types - present significators of distant facts and
future occurrences.

4\. War, מלחמה milchamah, hostile engagements; such as those with the
Amalekites, the Amorites, and the Bashanites, in which the hand of God
was seen rather than the hand of man.

5\. A Mighty Hand, יד חזקה yad chazakah; one that is strong to deal its
blows, irresistible in its operations, and grasps its enemies hard, so
that they cannot escape, and protects its friends so powerfully that
they cannot be injured. Neither stratagem nor policy was used in this
business, but the openly displayed power of God.

6\. A Stretched-Out Arm, זרוע נטויה ,mrA zeroa netuyah; a series of
almighty operations, following each other in quick astonishing
succession. Let it be noted that in the Scriptures,

1\. The finger of God denotes any manifestation of the Divine power,
where effects are produced beyond the power of art or nature.

2\. The hand of God signifies the same power, but put forth in a more
signal manner.

3\. The arm of God, the Divine omnipotence manifested in the most
stupendous miracles.

4\. The arm of God stretched out, this same omnipotence exerted in a
continuation of stupendous miracles, both in the way of judgment and
mercy. In this latter sense it appears to be taken in the text: the
judgments were poured out on the Egyptians; the mercies wrought in favor
of the Israelites.

7\. Great Terrors, מוראים גדלים moraim gedolim; such terror, dismay, and
consternation as were produced by the ten plagues, to which probably the
inspired penman here alludes: or, as the Septuagint has it, εν ὁραμασιν
μεγαλοις, with great or portentous sights; such as that when God looked
out of the cloud upon the Egyptians, and their chariot wheels were taken
off, [Exo 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#024), [Exo
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#025). More awful displays of God's
judgments, power, and might, were never witnessed by man.

[Deuteronomy 4:41](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">deu 4:41</span></span>

Then Moses severed three cities - See the law relative to the cities of
refuge explained, [Num 35:11](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#011) (note),
etc.

[Deuteronomy 4:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">deu 4:43</span></span>

Bezer in the wilderness - As the cities of refuge are generally
understood to be types of the salvation provided by Christ for sinners;
so their names have been thought to express some attribute of the
Redeemer of mankind. See them explained [Jos
20:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#007) (note).

I Suppose the last nine verses of this chapter to have been added by
either Joshua or Ezra.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 5](deu005)

</div>
