<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu.md)  
  [Previous](deu013)  [Next](deu015.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#001.md)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 14:0</span></span>

The Israelites are not to adopt superstitious customs in mourning, [Deu
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#001.md), [Deu
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#002.md). The different kinds of clean and
unclean animals, vv. 3-20. Nothing to be eaten that dieth of itself,
[Deu 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#021.md). Concerning offerings
which, from distance cannot be carried to the altar of God, and which
may be turned into money, [Deu
14:22-26](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#022.md). The Levite is not to be
forsaken, [Deu 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#027.md). The third year's
tithe for the Levite, stranger, widow, etc., [Deu
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#028.md), [Deu
14:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#029.md).

[Deuteronomy 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 14:1</span></span>

Ye are the children of the Lord - The very highest character that can be
conferred on any created beings; ye shall not cut yourselves, i. e.,
their hair, for it was a custom among idolatrous nations to consecrate
their hair to their deities, though they sometimes also made incisions
in their flesh.

[Deuteronomy 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 14:4</span></span>

These are the beasts which ye shall eat - On Leviticus 11. I have
entered into considerable detail relative to the clean and unclean
animals there mentioned. For the general subject, the reader is referred
to the notes on that chapter; but as there are particulars mentioned
here which Moses does not introduce in Leviticus, it will be necessary
to consider them in this place.

The ox - שור shor: Bos, fifth order Pecora, of the genus Mammalia,
species 41. This term includes all clean animals of the beeve kind; not
only the ox properly so called, but also the bull, the cow, heifer, and
calf.

The sheep - שה seh: Ovis, fifth order Pecora, of the genus Mammalia,
species 40; including the ram, the wether, the ewe, and the lamb.

The goat - עז az: Capra, fifth order Pecora, of the genus Mammalia,
species 39; including the he-goat, she-goat, and kid. The words in the
text, שה כשבים seh chesabim, signify the lamb or young of sheep; and שה
עזים seh izzim, the young or kid of goats: but this is a Hebrew idiom
which signifies every creature of the genus, as בן אנוש ben enosh and בן
אדם ben adam, son of man, signify any human being. See [Psa
144:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#003.md); [Job
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/job025.htm#006.md).

The flesh of these animals is universally allowed to be the most
wholesome and nutritive. They live on the very best vegetables; and
having several stomachs, their food is well concocted, and the chyle
formed from it the most pure because the best elaborated, as it is well
refined before it enters into the blood. On ruminating or chewing the
cud, see the note on [Lev 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#003.md).

[Deuteronomy 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 14:5</span></span>

The hart - איל aiyal, the deer, according to Dr. Shaw: see the note on
[Deu 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#015.md).

The roebuck - צבי tsebi, generally supposed to be the antelope,
belonging to the fifth order Pecora, genus Mammalia, and species 38. It
has round twisted spiral horns, hairy tufts on the knees, browses on
tender shoots, lives in hilly countries, is fond of climbing rocks, and
is remarkable for its beautiful black eyes. The flesh is good and well
flavoured.

The fallow deer - יחמור yachmur, from חמר chamar, to be troubled,
disturbed, disordered: this is supposed to mean, not the fallow deer,
but the bubalus or buffalo, which is represented by Dr. Shaw, and other
travelers and naturalists, as a sullen, malevolent, and spiteful animal,
capricious, ferocious, and every way brutal. According to the Linnaean
classification, the buffalo belongs to the fifth order Pecora, genus
Mammalia, species bos. According to [Kg1
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#023.md), this was one of the animals
which was daily served up at the table of Solomon. Though the flesh of
the buffalo is not considered very delicious, yet in the countries where
it abounds it is eaten as frequently by all classes of persons as the ox
is in England. The yachmur is not mentioned in the parallel place,
Leviticus 11.

The wild goat - אקו akko. It is not easy to tell what creature is
intended by the akko. Dr. Shaw supposed it to be a kind of very timorous
goat, known in the East by the name fishtall and serwee, and bearing a
resemblance both to the goat and the stag, whence the propriety of the
name given it by the Septuagint and Vulgate, tragelaphus, the goat-stag;
probably the rupicapra or rock-goat. The word is found nowhere else in
the Hebrew Bible.

The pygarg - דישן dishon. As this word is nowhere else used, we cannot
tell what animal is meant by it. The word pygarg πυγαργος, literally
signifies white buttocks, and is applied to a kind of eagle with a white
tail; but here it evidently means a quadruped. It was probably some kind
of goat, common and well known in Judea.

The wild ox - תאו teo. This is supposed to be the oryx of the Greeks,
which is a species of large stag. It may be the same with the bekker el
wash, described by Dr. Shaw as "a species of the deer kind, whose horns
are exactly in the fashion of our stag, but whose size is only between
the red and fallow deer." In [Isa
51:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#020.md) a creature of the name of תוא to
is mentioned, which we translate wild bull; it may be the same creature
intended above, with the interchange of the two last letters.

The chamois - זמר zemer. This was probably a species of goat or deer,
but of what kind we know not: that it cannot mean the chamois is evident
from this circumstance, "that the chamois inhabits only the regions of
snow and ice, and cannot bear the heat." - Buffon. The Septuagint and
Vulgate translate it the Camelopard, but this creature is only found in
the torrid zone and probably was never seen in Judea; consequently could
never be prescribed as a clean animal, to be used as ordinary food. I
must once more be permitted to say, that to ascertain the natural
history of the Bible is a hopeless case. Of a few of its animals and
vegetables we are comparatively certain, but of the great majority we
know almost nothing. Guessing and conjecture are endless, and they have
on these subjects been already sufficiently employed. What learning,
deep, solid, extensive learning, and judgment could do, has already been
done by the incomparable Bochart in his Hierozoicon. The learned reader
may consult this work, and, while he gains much general information,
will have to regret that he can apply so little of it to the main and
grand question. As I have consulted every authority within my reach, on
the subject of the clean and unclean animals mentioned in the law, and
have detailed all the information I could collect in my notes on
Leviticus 11, I must refer my readers to what I have there laid down.

[Deuteronomy 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">deu 14:13</span></span>

The vulture after his kind - The word דאה daah is improperly translated
vulture [Lev 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#014.md), and means a kite
or glede. The word דיה daiyah in this verse is not only different from
that in Leviticus, but means also a different animal, properly enough
translated vulture. See the note on [Lev
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#014.md).

[Deuteronomy 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 14:21</span></span>

Thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mother's milk - Mr.

Calmet thinks that this precept refers to the paschal lamb only, which
was not to be offered to God till it was weaned from its mother; but see
the note on [Exo 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#019.md).

[Deuteronomy 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 14:22</span></span>

Thou shalt truly tithe - Meaning the second tithe which themselves were
to eat, [Deu 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#023.md), for there was a
first tithe that was given to the Levites, out of which they paid a
tenth part to the priests, [Num
18:24-28](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#024.md); [Neh
10:37](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#037.md), [Neh
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#038.md). Then of that which remained,
the owners separated a second tithe, which they ate before the Lord the
first and second year; and in the third year it was given to the Levites
and to the poor, [Deu 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#028.md), [Deu
14:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#029.md). In the fourth and fifth years
it was eaten again by the owners, and in the sixth year was given to the
poor. The seventh year was a Sabbath to the land, and then all things
were common, [Exo 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#010.md), [Exo
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#011.md), where see the notes, [Exo
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#011) (note.md), and see Ainsworth on
this verse.

[Deuteronomy 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">deu 14:26</span></span>

Or for strong drink - What the sikera or strong drink of the Hebrews
was, see in the note on [Lev 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#009.md)
(note). This one verse sufficiently shows that the Mosaic law made ample
provision for the comfort and happiness of the people.

[Deuteronomy 14:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">deu 14:29</span></span>

And the Levite (because he hath no part nor inheritance - And hence much
of his support depended on the mere freewill-offerings of the people.
God chose to make his ministers thus dependent on the people, that they
might be induced (among other motives) to labor for their spiritual
profiting, that the people, thus blessed under their ministry, might
feel it their duty and privilege to support and render them comfortable.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 15](deu015.md)

</div>
