<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu019)  [Next](deu021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 20:0</span></span>

Directions concerning campaigns, [Deu
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#001). The priest shall encourage the
people with the assurance that God will accompany and fight for them,
[Deu 20:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#002). The officers shalt
dismiss from the army all who had just built a new house, but had not
dedicated it, [Deu 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#005). All who had
planted a vineyard, but had not yet eaten of its fruits, [Deu
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#006). All who had betrothed a wife,
but had not brought her home, [Deu
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#007). And all who were timid and
faint-hearted, [Deu 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#008). The
commanders to be chosen after the timid, etc., had retired, [Deu
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#009). No city to be attacked till they
had proclaimed conditions of peace to it, provided it be a city beyond
the bounds of the seven Canaanitish nations; if it submitted, it was to
become tributary; if not, it was to be besieged, sacked, and all the
males put to the sword; the women, children, and cattle to be taken as
booty, [Deu 20:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#010). No such offers
to be made to the cities of the Canaanites; of them nothing shall be
preserved, and the reason, [Deu
20:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#016). In besieging a city no trees
to be cut down but those which do not bear fruit, [Deu
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#019), [Deu
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#020).

[Deuteronomy 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 20:1</span></span>

When thou goest out to battle - This refers chiefly to the battles they
were to have with the Canaanites, in order to get possession of the
promised land; for it cannot be considered to apply to any wars which
they might have with the surrounding nations for political reasons, as
the Divine assistance could not be expected in wars which were not
undertaken by the Divine command.

[Deuteronomy 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 20:2</span></span>

The priest shall approach, and speak unto the people - The priest on
these occasions was the representative of that God whose servant he was,
and whose worship he conducted. It is remarkable that almost all ancient
nations took their priests with them to battle, as they did not expect
success without having the object of their adoration with them, and they
supposed they secured his presence by having that of his representative.

[Deuteronomy 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 20:5</span></span>

That hath built a new house, and hath not dedicated it? - From the title
of [Psa 30:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#001), - A Psalm or Song at
the Dedication of the House of David - it is evident that it was a
custom in Israel to dedicate a new house to God with prayer, praise, and
thanksgiving; and this was done in order to secure the Divine presence
and blessing, for no pious or sensible man could imagine he could dwell
safely in a house that was not under the immediate protection of God.
Hence it has been a custom in the most barbarous nations to consecrate a
part of a new house to the deity they worshipped. The houses of the
inhabitants of Bonny, in Africa, are generally divided into three
apartments: one is a kind of state room or parlour; another serves for a
common room, or kitchen; and the third is dedicated to the Juju, the
serpent god, which they worship; for even those savages believe that in
every house their god should have his temple! At the times of dedication
among the Jews, besides prayer and praise, a feast was made, to which
the relatives and neighbors were invited. Something of this custom is
observed in some parts of our own country in what is called warming the
house; but in these cases the feasting only is kept up - the prayer and
praise forgotten! so that the dedication appears to be rather more to
Bacchus than to Jehovah, the author of every good and perfect gift.

[Deuteronomy 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 20:7</span></span>

Betrothed a wife, and hath not taken her? - It was customary among the
Jews to contract matrimony, espouse or betroth, and for some
considerable time to leave the parties in the houses of their respective
parents: when the bridegroom had made proper preparations, then the
bride was brought home to his house, and thus the marriage was
consummated. The provisions in this verse refer to a case of this kind;
for it was deemed an excessive hardship for a person to be obliged to go
to battle, where there was a probability of his being slain, who had
left a new house unfinished; a newly purchased heritage half tilled; or
a wife with whom he had just contracted marriage. Homer represents the
case of Protesilaus as very afflicting, who was obliged to go to the
Trojan war, leaving his wife in the deepest distress, and his house
unfinished.

Του δε και αμφιδρυφης αλοχος Φυλακῃ ελελειπτο,

Και δομος ἡμιτελης· τον δ' εκτανε Δαρδανος ανηρ,

Νηος αποθρωσκοντα πολυ πρωτιστον Αχαιων.

Iliad, 1. ii., ver. 100.

"A wife he left,

To rend in Phylace her bleeding cheeks,

And an unfinish'd mansion: first he died

Of all the Greeks; for as he leap'd to land,

Long ere the rest, a Dardan struck him dead."

Cowper.

[Deuteronomy 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 20:8</span></span>

What man is there that is fearful and faint - hearted? - The original רך
rach, signifies tender or soft-hearted. And a soft heart the man must
have who, in such a contest, after such a permission, could turn his
back upon his enemies and his brethren. However, such were the troops
commanded by Gideon in his war against the Midianites; for after he gave
this permission, out of 32,000 men only 10,000 remained to fight! [Jdg
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#003). There could be no deception in a
business of this kind; for the departure of the 22,000 was the fullest
proof of their dastardliness which they could possibly give.

[Deuteronomy 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 20:10</span></span>

Proclaim peace unto it - Interpreters are greatly divided concerning the
objects of this law. The text, taken in connection with the context,
(see [Deu 20:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#015)), appears to state
that this proclamation or offer of peace to a city is only to be
understood of those cities which were situated beyond the limits of the
seven anathematized nations, because these latter are commanded to be
totally destroyed. Nothing can be clearer than this from the bare letter
of the text, unless some of the words, taken separately, can be shown to
have a different meaning. For the common interpretation, the following
reasons are given.

God, who knows all things, saw that they were incurable in their
idolatry; that the cup of their iniquity was full; and as their Creator,
Sovereign, and Judge, he determined to destroy them from off the face of
the earth, "lest they should teach the Israelites to do after all their
abominations," [Deu 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#018). After all,
many plausible arguments have been brought to prove that even these
seven Canaanitish nations might be received into mercy, provided they,

1\. Renounced their idolatry;

2\. Became subject to the Jews; and,

3\. Paid annual tribute: and that it was only in case these terms were
rejected, that they were not to leave alive in such a city any thing
that breathed, [Deu 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#016).

[Deuteronomy 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 20:17</span></span>

But thou shalt utterly destroy them - The above reasoning will gain
considerable strength, provided we could translate כי החרם תחרימם ki
hacharem tacharimem, thou shalt utterly subdue them - slaying them if
they resist, and thus leaving nothing alive that breathed; or totally
expel them from the land, or reduce them to a state of slavery in it,
that they might no longer exist as a people. This certainly made them an
anathema as a nation, wholly destroying their political existence.
Probably this was so understood by the Gibeonites, viz., that they
either must be slain or utterly leave the land, which last was certainly
in their power, and therefore, by a stratagem, they got the princes of
Israel to make a league with them. When the deceit was discovered, the
Israelites, though not bound by their oath, because they were deceived
by the Gibeonites, and therefore were under no obligation to fulfill
their part of the covenant; yet, though they had this command before
their eyes, did not believe that they were bound to put even those
deceivers to death; but they destroyed their political existence, by
making them hewers of wood and drawers of water to the congregation; i.
e., slaves to the Israelites. (See Joshua 9). Rahab and her household
also were spared. So that it does not appear that the Israelites
believed that they were bound to put every Canaanite to death. Their
political existence was under the anathema, and this the Hebrews
annihilated.

That many of the Canaanites continued in the land even to the days of
Solomon, we have the fullest proof; for we read, [Ch2
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2008.htm#007) : "All the people of the land that
were left of the Hittites, Amorites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites,
who were left in the land, whom the children of Israel consumed not,
them did Solomon make to pay tribute to this day." Thus Solomon
destroyed their political existence, but did not consider himself bound
by the law of God to put them to death.

[Deuteronomy 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 20:19</span></span>

(For the tree of the field is man's life) to employ them in the siege -
The original is exceedingly obscure, and has been variously translated,
כי האדם עץ השדה לבא מפניך במצור ki haadam ets hassadeh labo mippaneycha
bammatsor. The following are the chief versions: For, O man, the trees
of the field are for thee to employ Them in the siege - or, For it is
man, and the tree of the field, that must go before thee for a bulwark -
or, For it is a tree, and not men, to increase the number of those who
come against thee to the siege - or, lastly, The tree of the field (is
as) a man, to go before thy face for a bulwark. The sense is
sufficiently clear, though the strict grammatical meaning of the words
cannot be easily ascertained: it was a merciful provision to spare all
fruit-bearing trees, because they yielded the fruit which supported
man's life; and it was sound policy also, for even the conquerors must
perish if the means of life were cut off.

It is diabolic cruelty to add to the miseries of war the horrors of
famine; and this is done where the trees of the field are cut down, the
dykes broken to drown the land, the villages burnt, and the crops
wilfully spoiled. O execrable war! subversive of all the charities of
life!

There are several curious particulars in these verses:

1\. The people had the most positive assurances from God that their
enemies should not be able to prevail against them by strength, numbers,
nor stratagem, because God should go with them to lead and direct them,
and should fight for them; and against his might none could prevail.

2\. All such interferences were standing proofs of the being of God, of
his especial providence, and of the truth of their religion.

3\. Though God promised them such protection, yet they were to expect it
in the diligent use of their own prudence and industry. The priests, the
officers, and the people, had their respective parts to act in this
business; if they did their duty respectively, God would take care that
they should be successful. Those who will not help themselves with the
strength which God has already given them, shall not have any farther
assistance from him. In all such cases, the parable of the talents
affords an accurate rule.

4\. Their going to war against their enemies must not deprive them of
mercy and tenderness towards their brethren. He who had built a house
and had not yet dwelt in it, who had planted a vineyard and had not
eaten of its fruits, who had betrothed a wife and had not yet taken her
to his house, was not obliged to go to battle, lest he should fall in
the war, and the fruits of his industry and affection be enjoyed by
others. He who was faint-hearted was also permitted to return, lest he
should give way in the heat of battle, and his example have a fatal
influence on others.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 21](deu021)

</div>
