<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu000)  [Next](deu002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

Introduction to the book, [Deu 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001),
[Deu 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#002). Moses addresses the people
in the fortieth year after the exodus from Egypt, [Deu
1:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#003); and shows how God had spoken to
them in Horeb, and the directions he gave them, [Deu
1:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#006). How, at the commandment of the
Lord, he had appointed officers, judges, etc., to share the government
with him, [Deu 1:9-18](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#009). Of their
travels in the terrible wilderness, [Deu
1:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#019). The people's request to have
spies sent to search out the land, [Deu
1:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#022). Of their murmuring and
rebellion when they heard the report of the spies, [Deu
1:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#026). How Moses encouraged them,
[Deu 1:29-33](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#029). The displeasure of the
Lord against them because of their murmurings, and his purpose to
exclude them from the good land, and give it to their children only,
[Deu 1:34-40](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#034). How they repented, and
yet, without the authority of God, went against the Amorites, by whom
they were defeated, [Deu 1:41-44](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#041).
Their return to Kadesh, where they abode many days, [Deu
1:45](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#045), [Deu
1:46](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#046).

[Deuteronomy 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 1:1</span></span>

These be the words which Moses spake - The five first verses of this
chapter contain the introduction to the rest of the book: they do not
appear to be the work of Moses, but were added probably either by Joshua
or Ezra.

On this side Jordan - בעבר beeber, at the passage of Jordan, i. e., near
or opposite to the place where the Israelites passed over after the
death of Moses. Though עבר eber is used to signify both on this side and
on the other side, and the connection in which it stands can only
determine the meaning; yet here it signifies neither, but simply the
place or ford where the Israelites passed over Jordan.

In the plain - That is, of Moab; over against the Red Sea - not the Red
Sea, for they were now farther from it than they had been: the word sea
is not in the text, and the word סוף suph, which we render red, does not
signify the Red Sea, unless joined with ים yam, sea; here it must
necessarily signify a place in or adjoining to the plains of Moab.
Ptolemy mentions a people named Sophonites, that dwelt in Arabia
Petraea, and it is probable that they took their name from this place;
but see the note from Lightfoot, Numbers 20 (note), at the end.

Paran - This could not have been the Paran which was contiguous to the
Red Sea, and not far from Mount Horeb; for the place here mentioned lay
on the very borders of the promised land, at a vast distance from the
former.

Dizahab - The word should be separated, as it is in the Hebrew, די זהב
Di Zahab. As Zahab signifies gold, the Septuagint have translated it τα
χρυσια, the gold mines; and the Vulgate ubi aurum est plurimum, where
there is much gold. It is more likely to be the name of a place.

[Deuteronomy 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 1:2</span></span>

There are eleven days' journey - The Israelites were eleven days in
going from Horeb to Kadesh-barnea, where they were near the verge of the
promised land; after which they were thirty-eight years wandering up and
down in the vicinity of this place, not being permitted, because of
their rebellions, to enter into the promised rest, though they were the
whole of that time within a few miles of the land of Canaan!

[Deuteronomy 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 1:3</span></span>

The fortieth year - This was a melancholy year to the Hebrews in
different respects; in the first month of this year Miriam died, Numbers
20; on the first day of the fifth month Aaron died, [Num
33:38](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#038); and about the conclusion of it,
Moses himself died.

[Deuteronomy 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 1:5</span></span>

Began Moses to declare this law - Began, הואיל hoil, willingly
undertook; to declare, באר beer, to make bare, clear, etc., fully to
explain, this law. See the conclusion of the preface.

[Deuteronomy 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 1:6</span></span>

Ye have dwelt long enough, etc. - They came to Sinai in the third month
after their departure from Egypt, [Exo
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#001), [Exo
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#002); and left it the twentieth of the
second month of the second year, so it appears they had continued there
nearly a whole year.

[Deuteronomy 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 1:7</span></span>

Go to the mount of the Amorites - On the south of the land of Canaan,
towards the Dead Sea.

Land of the Canaanites - That is, Phoenicia, the country of Sidon, and
the coasts of the Mediterranean Sea from the country of the Philistines
to Mount Libanus. The Canaanites and Phoenicians are often confounded.

The river Euphrates - Thus Moses fixes the bounds of the land, to which
on all quarters the territories of the Israelites might be extended,
should the land of Canaan, properly so called, be found insufficient for
them. Their South border might extend to the mount of the Amorites;
their West to the borders of the Mediterranean Sea; their North to
Lebanon; and their East border to the river Euphrates: and to this
extent Solomon reigned; see [Kg1 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#021).
So that in his time, at least, the promise to Abraham was literally
fulfilled; see below.

[Deuteronomy 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 1:10</span></span>

Ye are this day as the stars of heaven for multitude - This was the
promise God made to Abraham, [Gen
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005), [Gen
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#006); and Moses considers it now as
amply fulfilled. But was it really so? Many suppose the expression to be
hyperbolical; and others, no friends to revelation, think it a vain
empty boast, because the stars, in their apprehension, amount to
innumerable millions. Let us consider this subject. How many in number
are the stars which appear to the naked eye? for it is by what appears
to the naked eye we are to be governed in this business, for God brought
Abraham forth abroad, i. e., out of doors, and bade him look towards
heaven, not with a telescope, but with his naked eyes, [Gen
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005). Now I shall beg the objector to
come forth abroad, and look up in the brightest and most favorable
night, and count the stars - he need not be terrified at their
abundance; the more they are, the more he can count; and I shall pledge
myself to find a male Israelite in the very last census taken of this
people, Numbers 26, for every star he finds in the whole upper
hemisphere of heaven. The truth is, only about 3,010 stars can be seen
by the naked eye in both the northern and southern hemispheres; and the
Israelites, independently of women and children, were at the above time
more than 600,000. And suppose we even allow that, from the late
discoveries of Dr. Herschel and others with telescopes which have
magnified between 35 and 36,000 times, there may be 75 millions of stars
visible by the help of such instruments, which is the highest
calculation ever made, yet still the Divine word stands literally true:
St. Matthew says, Deuteronomy 1, that the generations from Abraham to
Christ were 42; now we find at the second census that the fighting men
among the Hebrews amounted to 603,000; and the Israelites, who have
never ceased to be a distinct people, have so multiplied as far to
exceed the number of all the fixed stars taken together.

[Deuteronomy 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">deu 1:13</span></span>

Take you wise men - חכמים chachamim, such as had gained knowledge by
great labor and study. Understanding נבנים nebonim, persons of
discernment, judicious men. Known, ידעים yeduim, persons practiced in
the operations of nature, capable of performing curious and important
works.

[Deuteronomy 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 1:15</span></span>

Captains over thousands, etc. - What a curious and well-regulated
economy was that of the Israelites! See its order and arrangement:

1\. God, the King and Supreme Judge;

2\. Moses, God's prime minister;

3\. The priests, consulting him by Urim and Thummim;

4\. The chiefs or princes of the twelve tribes;

5\. Chilliarchs, or captains over thousands;

6\. Centurions, or captains over hundreds;

7\. Tribunes, or captains over fifty men;

8\. Decurions, or captains over ten men; and,

9\. Officers, persons who might be employed by the different chiefs in
executing particular commands.

All these held their authority from God, and yet were subject and
accountable to each other. See the notes on Numbers 2 (note).

[Deuteronomy 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 1:17</span></span>

Ye shall not respect persons - Heb. faces. Let not the bold, daring
countenance of the rich or mighty induce you to give an unrighteous
decision; and let not the abject look of the poor man induce you either
to favor him in an unrighteous cause, or to give judgment against him at
the demand of the oppressor. Be uncorrupt and incorruptible, for the
judgment is God's; ye minister in the place of God, act like Him.

[Deuteronomy 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 1:22</span></span>

We will send men before us - See on Numbers 13 (note).

[Deuteronomy 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">deu 1:28</span></span>

Cities - walled up to heaven - That is, with very high walls which could
not be easily scaled. High walls around houses, etc., in these parts of
Arabia are still deemed a sufficient defense against the Arabs, who
scarcely ever attempt any thing in the way of plunder but on horseback.
The monastery on Mount Sinai is surrounded with very high walls without
any gate; in the upper part of the wall there is a sort of window, or
opening, from which a basket is suspended by a pulley, by which both
persons and goods are received into and sent from the place. It is the
same with the convent of St. Anthony, in Egypt; and this sort of wall is
deemed a sufficient defense against the Arabs, who, as we have already
observed, scarcely ever like to alight from their horses.

[Deuteronomy 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">deu 1:30</span></span>

The Lord - shall fight for you - In the Targum of Onkelos, it is, the
Word of the Lord shall fight for you. In a great number of places the
Targums or Chaldee paraphrases use the term מימרא דיי meimera dayeya or
Yehovah, the Word of the Lord, exactly in the same way in which St. John
uses the term Λογος Logos in the first chapter of his Gospel. Many
instances of this have already occurred.

[Deuteronomy 1:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">deu 1:34</span></span>

The Lord - was wroth - That is, his justice was incensed, and he
evidenced his displeasure against you; and he could not have been a just
God if he had not done so.

[Deuteronomy 1:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">deu 1:36</span></span>

Caleb - wholly followed the Lord - See on [Num
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#024) (note).

[Deuteronomy 1:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">deu 1:37</span></span>

The Lord was angry with me - See on [Num
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#012) (note), etc., where a particular
account is given of the sin of Moses.

[Deuteronomy 1:44](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">deu 1:44</span></span>

The Amorites - chased you - See the note on [Num
14:40](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#040) : as bees do - by irresistible
numbers.

[Deuteronomy 1:46](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">deu 1:46</span></span>

According unto the days that ye abode there - They had been a long time
at this place, see [Num 13:27](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#027); [Num
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001), [Num
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#014), [Num
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#021). And some think that the words
mean, "Ye abode as long at Kadesh, when you came to it the second time,
as ye did at the first." Or, according to others, "While ye were in that
part of the desert, ye encamped at Kadesh."

1\. As one grand object of the law of God was to instruct the people in
those things which were calculated to promote their peace and insure
their prosperity; and as they were apt to lose sight of their spiritual
interests, without a due attention to which their secular interest could
not be promoted; Moses, not only in this chapter, but through the whole
book, calls upon them to recollect their former miserable situation, in
which they held neither life nor property but at the will of a merciless
tyrant, and the great kindness and power of God manifested in their
deliverance from a bondage that was as degrading as it was oppressive.
These things properly remembered would lead them to prize their
blessings, and duly appreciate the mercy of their Maker.

2\. But it was not only this general display of God's kindness, in the
grand act of their deliverance from Egypt, that he wished them to keep
constantly in view, but also that gracious providence which was
manifested in every step they took; which directed all their movements,
provided for all their wants, continually showing what they should do,
how they should do it, and also the most proper time and place for every
act, whether religious or civil. By bringing before them in one point of
view the history of almost forty years, in which the strangest and most
stupendous occurrences had taken place that had ever been exhibited to
the world, he took the readiest way to impress their minds, not only
with their deep obligation to God, but also to show them that they were
a people on whom their Maker had set his heart to do them good, and that
if they feared him they should lack nothing that was good. He lays out
also before them a history of their miscarriages and rebellion, and the
privations and evils they had suffered in consequence, that this might
act as a continual warning, and thus become, in the hands of God, a
preventive of crimes.

3\. If every Christian were thus to call his past life into review, he
would see equal proofs of God's gracious regards to his body and soul;
equal proofs of eternal mercy in providing for his deliverance from the
galling yoke and oppressive tyranny of sin, as the Israelites had in
their deliverance from Egypt; and equal displays of a most gracious
providence, that had also been his incessant companion through all the
changes and chances of this mortal life, guiding him by its counsel,
that he might be at last received into glory. O reader, remember what
God has done for thee during thy forty, fifty, etc., years! He has
nourished, fed, clothed, protected, and saved thee. How often and how
powerfully has his Spirit striven with thee! How often and how
impressively thou hast heard his voice in his Gospel and in his
providences! Remember the good resolutions thou hast made, the
ingratitude and disobedience that have marked thy life; how his vows are
still upon thee, and how his mercy still spares thee! And wilt thou live
so as to perish for ever? God forbid! He still waits to be gracious, and
rejoices over thee to do thee good. Learn from what is before thee how
thou shouldst fear, love, believe in, and obey thy God. The Lamb of God,
that taketh away the sin of the world, is still before the throne; and
whosoever cometh unto God through him shall in nowise be cast out. He
who believes these things with an upright heart will soon be enabled to
live a sanctified life.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 2](deu002)

</div>
