<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu026)  [Next](deu028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 27:0</span></span>

Moses commands the people to write the law upon stones, when they shall
come to the promised land, [Deu
27:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#001). And to set up these stones on
Mount Ebal, [Deu 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#004); and to build an
altar of unhewn stones, and to offer on it burnt-offerings and
peace-offerings, [Deu 27:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#005). The
words to be written plainly, and the people to be exhorted to obedience,
[Deu 27:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#008). The six tribes which
should stand on Mount Gerizim to bless the people, [Deu
27:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#011), [Deu
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#012). Those who are to stand upon
Mount Ebal to curse the transgressors, [Deu
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#013). The different transgressors
against whom the curses are to be denounced, [Deu
27:14-26](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#014).

[Deuteronomy 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 27:2</span></span>

Thou shalt set thee up great stones - How many is not specified,
possibly twelve, and possibly only a sufficient number to make a surface
large enough to write the blessings and the curses on.

Plaster them with plaster - Perhaps the original ושדת אתם בשיד vesadta
otham bassid should be translated, Thou shalt cement them with cement,
because this was intended to be a durable monument. In similar cases it
was customary to set up a single stone, or a heap, rudely put together,
where no cement or mortar appears to have been used; and because this
was common, it was necessary to give particular directions when the
usual method was not to be followed. Some suppose that the writing was
to be in relievo, and that the spaces between the letters were filled up
by the mortar or cement. This is quite a possible case, as the Eastern
inscriptions are frequently done in this way. There is now before me a
large slab of basaltes, two feet long by sixteen inches wide, on which
there is an inscription in Persian, Arabic, and Tamul; in the two former
the letters are all raised, the surface of the stone being dug out, but
the Tamul is indented. A kind of reddish paint had been smeared over the
letters to make them more apparent. Two Arabic marbles in the University
of Oxford have the inscriptions in relievo, like those on the slab of
basalt in my possession. In the opinion of some even this case may cast
light upon the subject in question

[Deuteronomy 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 27:3</span></span>

All the words of this law - After all that has been said by ingenious
critics concerning the law ordered to be written on these stones, some
supposing the whole Mosaic law to be intended, others, only the
decalogue, I am fully of opinion that the (תורה torah) law or ordinance
in question simply means the blessings and curses mentioned in this and
in the following chapter; and indeed these contained a very good epitome
of the whole law in all its promises and threatenings, in reference to
the whole of its grand moral design. See at the end of this chapter,
[Deu 27:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#026) (note).

[Deuteronomy 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 27:4</span></span>

Set up these stones - in Mount Ebal - So the present Hebrew text, but
the Samaritan has Mount Gerizim. Dr. Kennicott has largely defended the
reading of the Samaritan in his second dissertation on the present state
of the Hebrew text, and Dr. Parry has defended the Hebrew against the
Samaritan in his Case between Gerizim and Ebal fairly stated. So has J.
H. Verschuir, in his Dissert. Critica. Many still think Dr. Kennicott's
arguments unanswerable, and have no doubt that the Jews have here
corrupted the text through their enmity to the Samaritans. On all hands
it is allowed that Gerizim abounds with springs, gardens, and orchards,
and that it is covered with a beautiful verdure, while Ebal is as naked
and as barren as a rock. On this very account the former was highly
proper for the ceremony of blessing, and the latter for the ceremony of
cursing.

[Deuteronomy 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 27:12</span></span>

These shall stand upon Mount Gerizim to bless the people - Instead of
upon Mount, etc., we may translate by, as the particle על al is
sometimes used; for we do not find that the tribes did stand on either
mount, for in [Jos 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#033), when this
direction was reduced to practice, we find the people did not stand on
the mountains, but over against them on the plain. See the observations
at the end of this chapter, [Deu 27:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#026)
(note).

[Deuteronomy 27:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 27:15</span></span>

Cursed be the man, etc. - Other laws, previously made, had prohibited
all these things; and penal sanctions were necessarily understood; but
here God more openly declares that he who breaks them is cursed - falls
under the wrath and indignation of his Maker and Judge. See the note on
[Exo 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#004).

[Deuteronomy 27:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 27:16</span></span>

Setteth light by his father or his mother - See the note on [Exo
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#012).

[Deuteronomy 27:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 27:17</span></span>

Removeth his neighbor's landmark - See before on [Deu
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#014) (note), and on [Exo
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#017) (note). And for all the rest of
these curses, see the notes on Exodus 20 (note), and the observations at
the end of it.

[Deuteronomy 27:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 27:18</span></span>

The blind to wander out of the way - A sin against the sixth
commandment. See on [Exo 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#013) (note).

[Deuteronomy 27:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">deu 27:26</span></span>

That confirmeth not all the words of this law - The word כל col, All, is
not found in any printed copy of the Hebrew text; but the Samaritan
preserves it, and so do six MSS. in the collections of Kennicott and De
Rossi, besides several copies of the Chaldee Targum. The Septuagint
also, and St. Paul in his quotation of this place, [Gal
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#010). St. Jerome says that the Jews
suppressed the word, that it might not appear that they were bound to
fulfill All the precepts in the law of Moses.

1\. Dr. Kennicott, who contends that it was the Decalogue that was
written on the stones mentioned in this chapter, says, "If we examine
these twelve curses, they will appear to contain a strong enforcement of
the ten commands; and it is highly probable that the curses were here
proclaimed principally to secure obedience to the commandments, as will
be made more clear by the table: -

The first, second, third, and fourth Commandments

[Gal 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#015) - Cursed be the man that
maketh any graven or molten image, an abomination to the Lord, etc.

The fifth Commandment

[Gal 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#016) - Cursed be he that setteth
light by his father or his mother.

The sixth Commandment

[Gal 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#025) - Cursed be he that taketh
reward to slay an innocent person.

[Gal 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#024) - Cursed be he that smiteth
his neighbor secretly.

[Gal 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#018) - Cursed be he that maketh
the blind to wander out of the way.

The seventh Commandment

[Gal 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#020) - Cursed be he that lieth
with his father's wife.

[Gal 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#021) - Cursed be he that lieth
with any beast.

[Gal 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#022) - Cursed be he that lieth
with his sister.

[Gal 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#023) - Cursed be he that lieth
with his mother-in-law.

The eighth Commandment

[Gal 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#017) - Cursed be he that removeth
his neighbor's landmark.

The ninth Commandment

[Gal 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019) - Cursed be he that
perverteth the judgment of the stranger, fatherless, and widow.

The tenth Commandment

[Gal 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#026) - Cursed be he that
confirmeth not all the words of this law to do them."

Many will think this arrangement fanciful; and the analogy far from
being natural.

2\. In pronouncing these blessings and curses, the Talmud says, six
tribes went up towards the top of Mount Gerizim, and six towards the top
of Mount Ebal; and the priests and the Levites, and the ark stood
beneath in the midst. The priests encompassed the ark, and the Levites
stood around about the priests; and all Israel on this side and on that;
see [Jos 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#033). Then they turned their
faces towards Mount Gerizim and pronounced the blessings, Blessed be the
man, etc., and those on each side answered Amen! then they turned their
faces towards Mount Ebal, and pronounced the curse, Cursed be the man,
etc., and those on each side answered Amen! till they had finished the
blessings and the curses; and afterwards they brought stones and built
an altar. Some suppose that the Levites were divided into two grand
bodies, part standing at or on Mount Gerizim, and part on Mount Ebal,
and that with each division were some of the priests. The whole Dr.
Parry supposes to have been arranged in the following manner: -

3\. It is worthy of remark that Moses assigns to the children of Rachel
and Leah, the two mothers of the family, the office of blessing the
people, as being the most honorable; and these he places on Mount
Gerizim. On the contrary, he assigns the office of cursing the people to
the sons of Zilpah and Bilhah, as being the least honorable office; but
with these he joins Zebulun, the youngest of Leah's sons, and Reuben,
the eldest. As there must be six tribes on each mountain, it was
necessary that while six of the sons of Rachel and Leah, the legitimate
wives, should be employed in blessing, two tribes descending from the
same mothers should be joined to the other four who proceeded from the
handmaids in order to make up the number six. The question is, which two
of the more honorable tribes should be joined to the four least
honorable, in order to complete the number six? Zebulun is chosen,
because being the sixth and youngest of all Leah's sons, he was the
least honorable of those who proceeded from the free woman; and Reuben
is chosen, who, though the eldest of Jacob's sons, and entitled to the
birthright, had lost it by his transgression. And hence he, in his
posterity, was degraded, and was obliged to pronounce the curse, Cursed
is he that lieth with his father's wife. See [Gen
49:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#003) (note), and [Gen
35:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#022) (note), and the notes on both
places.

4\. It is strange how long the disgrace consequent on some flagrant
transaction of a parent may cleave to his posterity! See this
exemplified in the posterity of Reuben. Hence, with great propriety we
may pray, Remember not, Lord, our offenses, nor the offenses of our
forefathers; neither take thou vengeance of our sins." - Litany. For the
offenses of our forefathers may be so remembered against their
posterity, that God, in the course of his providence, may still keep up
a controversy in secular matters with the descendants (though even
pious) of unholy ancestors; for as all men are seminally included in the
parents, they come into the world depraved with their depravity, and in
some sort liable to their curses, though not so far as to affect their
eternal interests without the addition of their own personal offenses.
Thus God may be said to visit the sins of the fathers upon the children,
even unto the third and fourth generation; as he may have a controversy
with the land for the evil which has been done in it, and for which no
proper atonement has been made. Why is it that at this moment Spain is
suffering the most afflictive and cruel desolations? What has she done
to merit all this? Is she more wicked than all the European nations
because she suffers such things? Here is the mystery: Nations, as such,
can only be punished in this world. Look at the torrents of innocent
blood shed by their ancestors in South America 300 years ago; and see
now and adore the awful hand of retributive justice! (December, 1811).
We often see persons tried and afflicted, for whose distresses we can
give no legitimate reason. We find others who, though they rise early,
sit up late, work hard, eat the bread of carefulness, and have a full
knowledge of their business, yet never get on in life. Who can account
for this? Shall we say that some injustice in their ancestors has
brought down the displeasure of God upon the earthly possessions that
descended in that line, so that the goods ill gotten shall never be
permitted to multiply? I knew an honest man, dead many years since, who
by great diligence, punctuality, and integrity in his business, had
acquired considerable property. Some time before his death, having by
will divided his substance among his sons and his daughters, he
expressed himself thus: "Children, you need not fear the curse of God on
this property; every penny of it was honestly earned." Many years have
since elapsed, and the blessing of God has been in the basket and in the
store of all his children. Parents! leave nothing behind you that you
cannot say before your God, with a clear conscience, "This has been
honestly earned." If all bequests of a contrary description were to be
deducted from last wills and testaments, the quantum of descending
property would be, in many cases, small indeed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 28](deu028)

</div>
