<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ecclesiastes Index](ecc.md)  
  [Previous](ecc000)  [Next](ecc002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ecclesiastes Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001.md)

The prophet shows that all human courses are vain, [Ecc
1:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001.md). The creatures are continually
changing, [Ecc 1:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#005.md). There is nothing
new under the sun, [Ecc 1:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#009.md). Who
the prophet was, his estate and his studies, [Ecc
1:12-18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#012.md).

[Ecclesiastes 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ecc 1:1</span></span>

The words of the Preacher - Literally, "The words of Choheleth, son of
David, king of Jerusalem." But the Targum explains it thus: "The words
of the prophecy, which Choheleth prophesied; the same is Solomon, son of
David the king, who was in Jerusalem. For when Solomon, king of Israel,
saw by the spirit of prophecy that the kingdom of Rehoboam his son was
about to be divided with Jeroboam, the son of Nebat; and the house of
the sanctuary was about to be destroyed, and the people of Israel sent
into captivity; he said in his word - Vanity of vanities is all that I
have labored, and David my father; they are altogether vanity." The word
קהלת Koheleth is a feminine noun, from the root קהל kahal, to collect,
gather together, assemble; and means, she who assembles or collects a
congregation; translated by the Septuagint, ekklhsiasthv, a public
speaker, a speaker in an assembly; and hence translated by us a
preacher. In my old MS. Bible it is explained thus: a talker to the
peple; or togyder cleping.

[Ecclesiastes 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ecc 1:2</span></span>

Vanity of vanities - As the words are an exclamation, it would be better
to translate, O vanity of vanities! Emptiness of emptinesses.

True, substantial good is not to be found in any thing liable to change
and corruption.

The author referred to in the introduction begins his paraphrase thus: -

"O vain deluding world! whose largest gifts

Thine emptiness betray, like painted clouds,

Or watery bubbles: as the vapor flies,

Dispersed by lightest blast, so fleet thy joys,

And leave no trace behind. This serious truth

The royal preacher loud proclaims, convinced

By sad experience; with a sigh repeats

The mournful theme, that nothing here below

Can solid comfort yield: 'tis all a scene.

Of vanity, beyond the power of words

To express, or thought conceive. Let every man

Survey himself, then ask, what fruit remains

Of all his fond pursuits? What has he gain'd,

By toiling thus for more than nature's wants

Require? Why thus with endlness projects rack'd

His heated brain, and to the laboring mind,

Repose denied? Why such expense of time,

That steals away so fast, and ne'er looks back?Could man his wish
obtain, how short the space

For his enjoyment! No less transient here

The time of his duration, than the things

Thus anxiously pursued. For, as the mind,

In search of bliss, fix'd on no solid point,

For ever fluctuates; so our little frames,

In which we glory, haste to their decline,

Nor permanence can find. The human race

Drop like autumnal leaves, by spring revived:

One generation from the stage of life

Withdraws, another comes, and thus makes room

For that which follows. Mightiest realms decay,

Sink by degrees; and lo! new form'd estates

Rise from their ruins. Even the earth itself,

Sole object of our hopes and fears,

Shall have its period, though to man unknown."

[Ecclesiastes 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ecc 1:3</span></span>

What profit hath a man - What is the sum of the real good he has gained
by all his toils in life? They, in themselves, have neither made him
contented nor happy.

[Ecclesiastes 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ecc 1:4</span></span>

One generation passeth away - Men succeed each other in unceasing
generations: but the earth is still the same; it undergoes no change
that leads to melioration, or greater perfection. And it will continue
the same לעולם leolam, during the whole course of time; till the end of
all things arrives.

[Ecclesiastes 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ecc 1:5</span></span>

, [Ecc 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#006.md)

These verses are confused by being falsely divided. The first clause of
the sixth should be joined to the fifth verse.

"The sun also ariseth, and the sun goeth down, and hasteth to his place
where he ariseth; going to the south, and circulating to the north."

[Ecclesiastes 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ecc 1:6</span></span>

"The wind is continually whirling about, and the wind returneth upon its
whirlings."

It is plain, from the clause which I have restored to the fifth verse,
that the author refers to the approximations of the sun to the northern
and southern tropics, viz., of Cancer and Capricorn.

All the versions agree in applying the first clause of the sixth verse
to the sun, and not to the wind. Our version alone has mistaken the
meaning. My old MS. Bible is quite correct:

The sunne riisith up, and goth doun, and to his place turnith agein; and
there agein riising, goth about bi the south, and then agein to the
north.

The author points out two things here:

1\. Day and night, marked by the appearance of the sun above the
horizon; proceeding apparently from east to west; where he sinks under
the horizon, and appears to be lost during the night.

2\. His annual course through the twelve signs of the zodiac, when, from
the equinoctial, he proceeds southward to the tropic of Capricorn; and
thence turneth about towards the north, till he reaches the tropic of
Cancer; and so on.

[Ecclesiastes 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ecc 1:7</span></span>

All the rivers run into the sea; yet the sea is not full - The reason
is, nothing goes into it either by the; rivers or by rain, that does not
come from it: and to the place whence the rivers come, whether from the
sea originally by evaporation, or immediately by rain, thither they
return again; for the water exhaled from the sea by evaporation is
collected in the clouds, and in rain, etc., falls upon the tops of the
mountains; and, filtered through their fissures, produce streams,
several of which uniting, make rivers, which flow into the sea. The
water is again evaporated by the sun; the vapors collected are
precipitated; and, being filtered through the earth, become streams,
etc., as before.

[Ecclesiastes 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ecc 1:8</span></span>

All things are full of labor - It is; impossible to calculate how much
anxiety, pain, labor, and fatigue are necessary in order to carry on the
common operations of life. But an endless desire of gain, and an endless
curiosity to unfitness a variety of results, cause men to, labor on. The
eye sees much, but wishes to, see more. The ear hears of many things;
but is curious to have the actual knowledge of them. So desire and
curiosity carry men, under the Divine providence, through all the labors
and pains of life.

[Ecclesiastes 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ecc 1:9</span></span>

The thing that hath been - Every thing in the whole economy of nature
has its revolutions; summer and winter, heat and cold, rain and drought,
seedtime and autumn, with the whole system of corruption and generation,
alternately succeed each other, so that whatever has been shall be
again. There is really, physically, and philosophically, nothing
absolutely new under the sun, in the course of sublunary things. The
same is the case in all the revolutions of the heavens.

[Ecclesiastes 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ecc 1:10</span></span>

Is there any thing, etc. - The original is beautiful. "Is there any
thing which will say, See this! it is new?" Men may say this of their
discoveries, etc.; but universal nature says, It is not new. It has
been, and it will be.

[Ecclesiastes 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ecc 1:11</span></span>

There is no remembrance - I believe the general meaning to be this:
Multitudes of ancient transactions have been lost, because they were not
recorded; and of many that have been recorded, the records are lost. And
this will be the case with many others which are yet to occur. How many
persons, not much acquainted with books, have supposed that certain
things were their own discoveries, which have been written or printed
even long before they were born! Dutens, in his Origin of the
Discoveries attributed to the Moderns, has made a very clear case.

[Ecclesiastes 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ecc 1:12</span></span>

I the Preacher was king - This is a strange verse, and does not admit of
an easy solution. It is literally, "I, Choheleth, have been king over
Israel, in Jerusalem." This book, as we have already seen, has been
conjectured by some to have been written about the time that Ptolemy
Philadelphus formed his great library at Alexandria, about two hundred
and eighty-five years before our Lard; and from the multitude of Jews
that dwelt there, and resorted to that city for the sake of commerce, it
was said there was an Israel in Alexandria. See the introduction.

It has also been conjectured from this, that if the book were written by
Solomon, it was intended to be a posthumous publication. "I that was
king, still continue to preach and instruct you." Those who suppose the
book to have been written after Solomon's fall, think that he speaks
thus through humility. "I was once worthy of the name of king: but I
fell into all evil; and, though recovered, I am no longer worthy of the
name." I am afraid this is not solid.

[Ecclesiastes 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ecc 1:13</span></span>

And I gave my heart to seek and search - While Solomon was faithful to
his God he diligently cultivated his mind. His giving himself to the
study of natural history, philosophy, poetry, etc., are sufficient
proofs of it. He had not intuitive knowledge from God; but he had a
capacity to obtain every kind of knowledge useful to man.

This sore travail - This is the way in which knowledge is to be
acquired; and in order to investigate the operations of nature, the most
laborious discussions and perplexing experiments must be instituted, and
conducted to their proper results. It is God's determination that
knowledge shall be acquired in no other way.

[Ecclesiastes 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ecc 1:14</span></span>

Behold, all is vanity - After all these discussions and experiments,
when even the results have been the most successful, I have found only
rational satisfaction; but not that supreme good by which alone the soul
can be made happy.

O curas hominum! O quantum est in rebus inane!

"How anxious are our cares, and yet how vain

The bent of our desires!"

Pers. Sat. i., 5: 1.

[Ecclesiastes 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ecc 1:15</span></span>

That which is crooked cannot be made straight - There are many apparent
irregularities and anomalies in nature for which we cannot account; and
there are many defects that cannot be supplied. This is the impression
from a general view of nature; but the more we study and investigate its
operations, the more we shall be convinced that all is a consecutive and
well-ordered whole; and that in the chain of nature not one link is
broken, deficient, or lost.

[Ecclesiastes 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ecc 1:16</span></span>

I communed with mine own heart - Literally, "I spoke, I, with my heart,
saying." When successful in my researches, but not happy in my soul,
though easy in my circumstances, I entered into my own heart, and there
inquired the cause of my discontent. He found that, though -

1\. He had gotten wisdom beyond all men;

2\. Wealth and honors more than any other;

3\. Practical wisdom more than all his predecessors;

4\. Had tried pleasure and animal gratification, even to their extremes;
yet after all this he had nothing but vexation of spirit.

None of these four things, nor the whole of them conjoined, could afford
him such a happiness as satisfies the soul. Why was all this? Because
the soul was made for God, and in the possession of him alone can it
find happiness.

[Ecclesiastes 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ecc 1:17</span></span>

To know madness and folly - הוללות ושכלות holloth vesichluth. Παραβολας
και επιστημην, "Parables and science." - Septuagint. So the Syriac;
nearly so the Arabic.

"What were error and foolishness." - Coverdale. Perhaps gayety and
sobriety may be the better meaning for these two difficult words. I can
scarcely think they are taken in that bad sense in which our translation
exhibits them. "I tried pleasure in all its forms; and sobriety and
self-abnegation to their utmost extent." Choheleth paraphrases, "Even
fools and madmen taught me rules."

[Ecclesiastes 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ecc 1:18</span></span>

For in much wisdom is much grief - The more we know of ourselves the
less satisfied shall we be with our own hearts; and the more we know of
mankind the less willing shall we be to trust them, and the less shall
we admire them.

Be that increaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow - And why so? Because,
independently of God, the principal objects of knowledge are natural and
moral evils.

The Targum gives a curious paraphrase here: "The man who multiplies
wisdom, when he sins and is not converted to repentance, multiplies the
indignation of God against himself; and the man who adds science, and
yet dies in his childhood, adds grief of heart to his relatives." A man
in science; a foolish child in conduct. How pained must they be who had
the expense of his education! But there are many men-children of this
sort in every age and country.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes Chapter 2](ecc002.md)

</div>
