<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ecclesiastes Index](ecc)  
  [Previous](ecc004)  [Next](ecc006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ecclesiastes Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#001)

[Ecclesiastes](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ecc 5:0</span></span>

The reverence to be observed in attending Divine worship, [Ecc
5:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#001). We should be faithful to over
engagements, [Ecc 5:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#004). The
oppression of the innocent, 8. The king dependent on the produce of the
soil, [Ecc 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#009). Against covetousness,
[Ecc 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#010), [Ecc
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#011). The peace of the honest laborer,
[Ecc 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#012). The evil effect of riches,
[Ecc 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#013), [Ecc
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#014). Man cannot carry his property to
the grave, [Ecc 5:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#015). We should
thankfully enjoy the blessings of God, [Ecc
5:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#018).

[Ecclesiastes 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ecc 5:1</span></span>

Keep thy foot - This verse the Hebrew and all the versions join to the
preceding chapter.

Solomon, having before intimated, though very briefly, that the only
cure against human vanity is a due sense of religion, now enters more
largely on this important subject, and gives some excellent directions
with regard to the right performance of Divine service, the nature of
vocal and mental prayer, the danger of rash vows, etc. - C.

The whole verse might be more literally translated thus: -

"Guard thy steps as thou art going to the house of God; and approach to
hearken, and not to give the sacrifice of fools, for none of them have
knowledge about doing evil." "They offer gifts for their sins, and do
not turn from their evil works; for they know not (they distinguish not)
between good and evil." See the Chaldee.

[Ecclesiastes 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ecc 5:2</span></span>

Be not rash with thy mouth - Do not hasten with thy mouth; weigh thy
words, feel deeply, think much, speak little.

"When ye approach his altar, on your lips

Set strictest guard; and let your thoughts be pure,

Fervent, and recollected. Thus prepared,

Send up the silent breathings of your souls,

Submissive to his will."

C.

[Ecclesiastes 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ecc 5:3</span></span>

For a dream cometh - That is, as dreams are generally the effect of the
business in which we have been engaged during the day; so a multitude of
words evidence the feeble workings of the foolish heart.

[Ecclesiastes 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ecc 5:4</span></span>

When thou vowest a vow - When in distress and difficulty, men are apt to
promise much to God if he will relieve them; but generally forget the
vow when the distress or trouble is gone by.

[Ecclesiastes 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ecc 5:5</span></span>

Better is it that thou shouldest not vow, etc. - We are under constant
obligations to live to God; no vow can make it more so. Yet, there may
be cases in which we should bind ourselves to take up some particular
cross, to perform some particular duty, to forego some particular
attachment that does not tend to bring our souls nearer to God. Then, if
fully determined, and strong in faith relative to the point, bind and
hold fast; but if not fully, rationally, and conscientiously determined,
"do not suffer thy mouth to cause thy soul to sin."

[Ecclesiastes 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ecc 5:6</span></span>

Neither say thou before the angel, that it was an error - Nor think of
saying "before the cruel angel, who shall exercise authority over thee
in the judgment of the great day, that thou didst it through ignorance."
- Chaldee. I believe by the angel nothing else is intended than the
priest, whose business it was to take cognizance of vows and offerings.
See [Lev 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#004), [Lev
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#005). In [Mal
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007), the priest is called the "angel
of the Lord of hosts."

[Ecclesiastes 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ecc 5:7</span></span>

In - dreams - are - divers vanities; but fear thou God - If, by the
disturbed state of thy mind during the day, or by Satanic influence,
thou dream of evil, do not give way to any unreasonable fears, or gloomy
forebodings, of any coming mischief: - Fear God. Fear neither the dream
nor its interpretation; God, will take care of and protect thee. Most
certainly, he that fears God need fear nothing else. Well may an upright
soul say to Satan himself, I fear God; and because I fear him, I do not
fear thee.

[Ecclesiastes 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ecc 5:8</span></span>

If thou seest the oppression of the poor - For this was a frequent case
under all governments; and especially in the provinces or colonies which
being far from the seat of government, were generally oppressed by the
sovereign's deputies.

Marvel not at the matter - החפץ hachephets, the will, i.e., of God;
which permits such evils to take place; for all things shall work
together for good to them that love him.

"Marvel not

Ye righteous, if his dispensations here

Unequal seem. What, though disorders reign?

He still presides, and with unerring hand

Directs the vast machine. His wisdom can

From discord harmony produce; and make

Even vice itself subservient to his ends."

[Ecclesiastes 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ecc 5:9</span></span>

The profit of the earth is for all - The earth, if properly cultivated,
is capable of producing food for every living creature; and without
cultivation none has a right to expect bread.

The king himself is served by the field - Without the field he cannot
have supplies for his own house; and, unless agriculture flourish, the
necessary expenses of the state cannot be defrayed. Thus, God joins the
head and feet together; for while the peasant is protected by the king
as executor of the laws, the king himself is dependent on the peasant;
as the wealth of the nation is the fruit of the laborer's toil.

[Ecclesiastes 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ecc 5:10</span></span>

He that loveth silver shall not be satisfied with silver - The more he
gets, the more he would get; for the saying is true: -

Crescit amor nummi, quantum ipsa pecunia crescit.

"The love of money increases, in proportion as money itself increases."

[Ecclesiastes 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ecc 5:11</span></span>

When goods increase - An increase of property always brings an increase
of expense, by a multitude of servants; and the owner really possesses
no more, and probably enjoys much less, than he did, when every day
provided its own bread, and could lay up no store for the next. But if
he have more enjoyment, his cares are multiplied; and he has no kind of
profit. "This also is vanity."

[Ecclesiastes 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ecc 5:12</span></span>

The sleep of a laboring man is sweet - His labor is healthy exercise. He
is without possessions, and without cares; his sleep, being undisturbed,
is sound and refreshing.

[Ecclesiastes 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ecc 5:13</span></span>

Riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt - This may be the case
through various causes:

1\. He may make an improper use of them, and lose his health by them.

2\. He may join in an unfortunate partnership and lose all.

3\. His riches may excite the desire of the robber; and he may spoil him
of his goods, and even take away his life.

4\. Or, he may leave them to his son, who turns profligate; spends the
whole, and ruins both his body and soul. I have seen this again and
again.

[Ecclesiastes 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ecc 5:14</span></span>

And he begetteth a son, and there is nothing in his hand - He has been
stripped of his property by unfortunate trade or by plunderers; and he
has nothing to leave to his children.

[Ecclesiastes 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ecc 5:15</span></span>

As he came forth - However it may be, he himself shall carry nothing
with him into the eternal world. If he die worth millions, those
millions are dead to him for ever; so he has had no real profit from all
his labors, cares, anxieties, and vast property!

[Ecclesiastes 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ecc 5:17</span></span>

All his days also he eateth in darkness - Even his enjoyments are
embittered by uncertainty. He fears for his goods; the possibility of
being deprived of them fills his heart with anguish. But instead of יאכל
yochel, "he shall eat," ילך yelech, "he shall walk," is the reading of
several MSS. He walks in darkness - he has no evidence of salvation.
There is no ray of light from God to penetrate the gloom; and all beyond
life is darkness impenetrable!

And wrath with his sickness - His last hours are awful; for,

"Counting on long years of pleasure here,

He's quite unfurnish'd for the world to come."

Blair.

He is full of anguish at the thought of death; but the fear of it is
horrible. But if he have a sense of God's wrath in his guilty
conscience, what horror can be compared with his horror!

[Ecclesiastes 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ecc 5:18</span></span>

Behold that which I have seen - This is the result of my observations
and experience. God gives every man, in the course of his providence,
the necessaries of life; and it is his will that he should thankfully
use them.

For it is his portion - What is requisite for him in the lower world;
without them his life cannot subsist, and earthly blessings are as truly
the portion of his body and animal life, as the salvation of God is the
portion of his soul.

[Ecclesiastes 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ecc 5:20</span></span>

For he shall not much remember - The person who acts in this way,
extracts all the good requisite from life. He passes through things
temporal so as not to lose those that are eternal: -

"Calm and serene, the road of life to him,

Or long or short, rugged or smooth, with thorns

O'erspread, or gay with flowers, is but a road.

Such fare as offers grateful he accepts,

And smiling to his native home proceeds."

C.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes Chapter 6](ecc006)

</div>
