<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ecclesiastes Index](ecc.md)  
  [Previous](ecc008)  [Next](ecc010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ecclesiastes Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#001.md)

[Ecclesiastes](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ecc 9:0</span></span>

No men knows, by any present sign, what is before him, [Ecc
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#001.md). All things happen alike to all,
[Ecc 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#002.md), [Ecc
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#003.md). Comparison of the state of the
dead and the living, [Ecc 9:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#004.md). Enjoy
God's mercies, and live to his glory, [Ecc
9:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#007.md). The race is not to the swift,
nor the battle to the strong, [Ecc
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#011.md). Man is ignorant of futurity,
[Ecc 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#012.md), [Ecc
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#013.md). The account of the little city,
and the poor wise man, [Ecc 9:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#014.md).

[Ecclesiastes 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ecc 9:1</span></span>

The righteous, and the wise, and their works, are in the hand of God -
This is a continuation of the preceding subject; and here the wise man
draws a conclusion from what he had seen, and from the well-known
character of God, that the righteous, the wise, and their conduct, were
all in the hand of God, protected by his power, and safe in his
approbation: but we cannot judge from the occurrences which take place
in life who are the objects of God's love or displeasure.

[Ecclesiastes 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ecc 9:2</span></span>

All things come alike to all - This is very generally true; but God
often makes a difference and his faithful followers witness many
interventions of Divine Providence in their behalf. But there are
general blessings, and general natural evils, that equally affect the
just and the unjust. But in this all is right; the evils that are in
nature are the effects of the Fall of man; and God will not suspend
general laws, or alter them, to favor individual cases. Nor does he
design that his approbation or disapprobation shall be shown by any of
these occurrences. Every holy man has a testimony of God's approbation
in his own heart; and this makes him truly happy, let outward things be
as they may. And, in general, what the wicked suffer is the fruit of
their own doings. But the general state of nature as to what are called
natural evils, is just as it ought to be. There is evil enough to show
that man has fallen from God, and good enough to show that God deals
with him in mercy. I cannot see that there is any rational cause for me
to stumble at the dispensations of Divine Providence on these accounts.

[Ecclesiastes 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ecc 9:3</span></span>

The heart of the sons of men is full of evil - No wonder then that the
curse of God should be frequent in the earth.

[Ecclesiastes 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ecc 9:4</span></span>

For to him that is joined to all the living there is hope - While a man
lives he hopes to amend, and he hopes to have a better lot; and thus
life is spent, hoping to grow better, and hoping to get more. The
Vulgate has, "There is none that shall live always, nor has any hope of
such a thing." Perhaps the best translation is the following: "What,
therefore, is to be chosen? In him that is living there is hope." Then
choose that eternal life which thou hopest to possess.

A living dog is better than a dead lion - I suppose this was a proverb.
The smallest measure of animal existence is better than the largest of
dead matter. The poorest living peasant is infinitely above Alexander
the Great.

[Ecclesiastes 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ecc 9:5</span></span>

The living know that they shall die - This is so self-evident that none
can doubt it; and therefore all that have this conviction should prepare
for death and eternal blessedness.

But the dead know not any thing - Cut off from life, they know nothing
of what passes under the sun. Their day of probation is ended, and
therefore they can have no farther reward in living a holy life; nor can
they be liable to any farther punishment for crimes in a state of
probation, that being ended.

[Ecclesiastes 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ecc 9:6</span></span>

Also their love, and their hatred - It is evident that he speaks here of
the ignorance, want of power, etc., of the dead, in reference only to
this life. And though they have no more a portion under the sun, yet he
does not intimate that they have none anywhere else. A man threatens to
conquer kingdoms, etc. He dies; what are his threats?

[Ecclesiastes 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ecc 9:7</span></span>

Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy - Do not vex and perplex yourselves
with the dispensations and mysteries of Providence; enjoy the blessings
which God has given you, and live to his glory; and then God will accept
your works.

[Ecclesiastes 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ecc 9:8</span></span>

Let thy garments be always white - The Jews wore white garments on
festal occasions, as emblems of joy and innocence. Be always pure, and
always happy. The inhabitants of India are all dressed in clean white
cotton, and to this is the allusion in the text.

The Targum says: "At all times let thy garments be washed and pure from
the stain of sin. Acquire a good name, which is likened to the oil of
anointing, that blessings may be called down up thy head, and goodness
not forsake thee."

[Ecclesiastes 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ecc 9:9</span></span>

Live joyfully with the wife whom thou lovest - Marry prudently, keep
faithfully attached to the wife thou hast chosen, and rejoice in the
labor of thy hands.

Some understand this as the words of the libertine objector: "Live
joyfully with the woman whom thou lovest best." But this does not
comport so well with the scope of the place.

[Ecclesiastes 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ecc 9:10</span></span>

Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do - Examine here the What the How, and
the Why.

I. What is necessary to be done in this life, in reference to another?

1\. Turn from sin.

2\. Repent.

3\. Frequent the ordinances of God, and associate with the upright.

4\. Read the Scriptures.

5\. Pray for pardon.

6\. Believe on the Lord Jesus, that thou mayest obtain it.

7\. Look for the gift of the Holy Spirit.

8\. Bring forth in their seasons the fruits of it -

\(1\) Repentance,

\(2\) Faith; and

\(3\) The Holy Spirit.

9\. Live to get good.

10\. And to do good.

11\. And refer every purpose and act to the eternal world.

II\. How should these be done? With thy might.

1\. Be fully convinced of the necessity of these things.

2\. Be determined to act according to this conviction.

3\. Then act with all thy strength; put forth all thy power in avoiding
evil, repenting of sin, etc., etc.

III\. Why should this be done?

1\. Because thou art a dying man.

2\. Thou art going into the grave.

3\. When thou leavest this life, thy state of probation, with all its
advantages, is eternally ended.

4\. If thou die in sin, where God is thou shalt never come. For,

1\. There is no work by which thou mayest profit;

2\. No device by which thou mayest escape punishment;

3\. No knowledge of any means of help; and,

4\. No wisdom - restoration of the soul to the favor and image of God,
in that grave whither thou goest. Therefore, work while it is called
to-day.

My old MS. Bible translates this nervously: Whatever thinge may thin
hond don, besily wirch: for nouther were, ne resoun, ne wisdom, ne
keennyng schuln be a nentis hell, whither thou gost. Properly speaking,
every sinner is going to hell, and the wisdom of God calls upon him to
turn and live.

[Ecclesiastes 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ecc 9:11</span></span>

The race is not to the swift - It is not by swiftness, nor by strength
and valor, that races are gained and battles won. God causes the lame
often to take the prey, the prize; and so works that the weak overthrow
the strong; therefore, no man should confide in himself. All things are
under the government, and at the disposal of God.

But time and chance - עת eth, time or opportunity, and פגע pega,
incident or occurrence: -

Happeneth to them all - Every man has what may be called time and space
to act in, and opportunity to do a particular work. But in this Time and
Opportunity there is Incident, what may fall in; and Occurrence, what
may meet and frustrate an attempt. These things should be wisely
weighed, and seriously balanced; for those four things belong to every
human action. While you have Time, seek an Opportunity to do what is
right; but calculate on hinderances and oppositions, because time and
opportunity have their Incident and Occurrence. Coverdale translates
this verse well: "I sawe that in runnynge, it helpeth not to be swift;
in batayll, it helpeth not to be stronge; to fedynge, it helpeth not to
be wyse; to riches, it helpeth not to be sutyll; to be had in favoure,
it helpeth not to be connynge; but that all lyeth in time and fortune."

[Ecclesiastes 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ecc 9:12</span></span>

As the birds that are caught - Man acts so heedlessly, notwithstanding
all his wisdom, and all his warnings, that he is often taken, as a fish
is, by the baited hook; and the bird by the baited snare. And thus, an
evil time, like the snare, gin, trap, hook, falleth suddenly upon them;
and they are taken in a moment, and have no means of escaping. How
frequently do we see these comparisons illustrated!

[Ecclesiastes 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ecc 9:14</span></span>

There was a little city, and few men within it - Here is another proof
of the vanity of sublunary things; the ingratitude of men, and the
little compensation that genuine merit receives. The little history
mentioned here may have either been a fact, or intended as an
instructive fable. A little city, with few to defend it, being besieged
by a great king and a powerful army, was delivered by the cunning and
address on a poor wise man; and afterwards his townsmen forgot their
obligation to him.

Those who spiritualize this passage, making the little city the Church,
the few men the Apostles, the great king the Devil, and the poor wise
man Jesus Christ, abuse the text.

But the Targum is not less whimsical: "The little city is the human
body; few men in it, few good affections to work righteousness; the
great king, evil concupiscence, which, like a strong and powerful king,
enters into the body to oppress it, and besieges the heart so as to
cause it to err; built great bulwarks against it - evil concupiscence
builds his throne in it wheresoever he wills, and causes it to decline
from the ways that are right before God; that it may be taken in the
greatest nets of hell, that he may burn it seven times, because of its
sins. But there is found in it a poor wise man - a good, wise, and holy
affection, which prevails over the evil principle, and snatches the body
from the judgment of hell, by the strength of its wisdom. Yet, after
this deliverance, the man did not remember what the good principle had
done for him; but said in his heart, I am innocent," etc.

What a wonderful text has this been in the hands of many a modern
Targumist; and with what force have the Keachonians preached Christ
crucified from it!

Such a passage as this receives a fine illustration from the case of
Archimedes saving the city of Syracuse from all the Roman forces
besieging it by sea ana land. He destroyed their ships by his
burning-glasses, lifted up their galleys out of the water by his
machines, dashing some to pieces, and sinking others. One man's wisdom
here prevailed for a long time against the most powerful exertions of a
mighty nation. In this case, wisdom far exceeded strength. But was not
Syracuse taken, notwithstanding the exertions of this poor wise man? No.
But it was betrayed by the baseness of Mericus, a Spaniard, one of the
Syracusan generals. He delivered the whole district he commanded into
the hands of Marcellus, the Roman consul, Archimedes having defeated
every attempt made by the Romans, either by sea or land: yet he
commanded no company of men, made no sorties, but confounded and
destroyed them by his machines. This happened about 208 years before
Christ, and nearly about the time in which those who do not consider
Solomon as the author suppose this book to have been written. This wise
man was not remembered; he was slain by a Roman soldier while deeply
engaged in demonstrating a new problem, in order to his farther
operations against the enemies of his country. See Plutarch, and the
historians of this Syracusan war.

When Alexander the Great was about to destroy the city Lampsacus, his
old master Anaximenes came out to meet him. Alexander, suspecting his
design, that he would intercede for the city, being determined to
destroy it, swore that he would not grant him any thing he should ask.
Then said Anaximenes, "I desire that you will destroy this city."
Alexander respected his oath, and the city was spared. Thus, says
Valerius Mancimus, the narrator, (lib. 7: c. iii., No. 4. Extern)., by
this sudden turn of sagacity, this ancient and noble city was preserved
from the destruction by which it was threatened. "Haec velocitas
sagacitatis oppidum vetusta nobilitate inclytum exitio, cui destinatum
erat, subtraxit."

A stratagem of Jaddua, the high priest, was the means of preserving
Jerusalem from being destroyed by Alexander, who, incensed because they
had assisted the inhabitants of Gaza when he besieged it, as soon as he
had reduced it, marched against Jerusalem, with the determination to
raze it to the ground; but Jaddua and his priests in their sacerdotal
robes, meeting him on the way, he was so struck with their appearance
that he not only prostrated himself before the high priest, and spared
the city, but also granted it some remarkable privileges. But the case
of Archimedes and Syracuse is the most striking and appropriate in all
its parts. That of Anaximenes and Lampsacus is also highly illustrative
of the maxim of the wise man: "Wisdom is better than strength."

[Ecclesiastes 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ecc 9:16</span></span>

The poor man's wisdom is despised, and his words are not heard - I
cannot help pursuing this illustration a little farther. The soldier who
found Archimedes busily employed in drawing figures upon the sand, put
to him some impertinent question, withal rudely obtruding himself on his
operations. To whom this wonderful mathematician replied, "Stand off,
soldier, and do not spoil my diagram;" on which the bloody savage struck
him dead!

[Ecclesiastes 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ecc 9:17</span></span>

The words of wise men are heard in quiet - In the tumult of war the
words of Archimedes were not heard; and his life was lost.

[Ecclesiastes 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ecc 9:18</span></span>

Wisdom is better than weapons of war - So proved in the case of
Archimedes.

But one sinner - Such as the Roman butcher above mentioned.

Destroyeth much good - Such as were the life and skill of the Syracusan
mathematician. One sinner has often injured the work of God; one
stumbling-block has sometimes destroyed a revival of religion. Sin acts
like a ferment; whatever comes in contact with it, it assimilates to
itself.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes Chapter 10](ecc010.md)

</div>
