<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ecclesiastes Index](ecc.md)  
  [Previous](ecc002)  [Next](ecc004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ecclesiastes Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#001.md)

[Ecclesiastes](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ecc 3:0</span></span>

Every thing has its time and season, [Ecc
3:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#001.md). Men are exercised with labor,
[Ecc 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#009.md), [Ecc
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#010.md). Every thing is beautiful in its
season, [Ecc 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#011.md). Men should enjoy
thankfully the gifts of God, [Ecc
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#012.md), [Ecc
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#013.md). What God does is for ever, [Ecc
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#014.md). There is nothing new, [Ecc
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#015.md). The corruption of judgment; but
the judgments of God are right, [Ecc
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#016.md), [Ecc
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#017.md). Man is brutish, and men and
brutes die in like manner, [Ecc
3:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#018.md). Man may enjoy the fruit of
his own labors, [Ecc 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#022.md).

[Ecclesiastes 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ecc 3:1</span></span>

To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose - Two
general remarks may be made on the first eight verses of this chapter.

1\. God by his providence governs the world, and has determined
particular things and operations to particular times. In those times
such things may be done with propriety and success; but if we neglect
the appointed seasons, we sin against this providence, and become the
authors of our own distresses.

2\. God has given to man that portion of duration called Time; the space
in which all the operations of nature, of animals, and intellectual
beings, are carried on; but while nature is steady in its course, and
animals faithful to their instincts, man devotes it to a great variety
of purposes; but very frequently to that for which God never made time,
space, or opportunity. And all we can say, when an evil deed is done,
is, there was a time in which it was done, though God never made it for
that purpose.

To say any farther on this subject is needless, as the words themselves
give in general their own meaning. The Jews, it is true, see in these
times and seasons all the events of their own nation, from the birth of
Abraham to the present times; and as to fathers and their followers,
they see all the events and states of the Christian Church in them!

It is worthy of remark, that in all this list there are but two things
which may be said to be done generally by the disposal of God, and in
which men can have but little influence: the time of birth, and the time
of death. But all the others are left to the option of man, though God
continues to overrule them by his providence. The following paraphrase
will explain all that is necessary to be generally understood: -

[Ecclesiastes 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ecc 3:2</span></span>

A time to be born, and a time to die - plant -

"As in its mother's womb the embryo lies

A space determined; to full growth arrived,

From its dark prison bursts, and sees the light;

So is the period fix'd when man shall drop

Into the grave - A time there is to plant,

And sow; another time to pluck and reap.

Even nations have their destined rise and fall:

Awhile they thrive; and for destruction ripe,

When grown, are rooted up like wither'd plants."

[Ecclesiastes 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ecc 3:3</span></span>

A time to kill, - heal, - break down, - build up -

"The healing art, when out of season used,

Pernicious proves, and serves to hasten death.

But timely medicines drooping nature raise,

And health restore - Now, Justice wields her sword

With wholesome rigour, nor the offender spares:

But Mercy now is more expedient found.

On crazy fabrics ill-timed cost bestow'd

No purpose answers, when discretion bids

To pull them down, and wait a season fit

To build anew."

[Ecclesiastes 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ecc 3:4</span></span>

A time to weep, - laugh, - mourn, - dance -

\- "When private griefs affect

The heart, our tears with decent sorrow flow;

Nor less becoming, when the public mourns,

To vent the deepest sighs. But all around

When things a smiling aspect bear, our souls

May well exult; 'tis then a time for joy."

[Ecclesiastes 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ecc 3:5</span></span>

A time to cast away stones, - to gather stones, - to embrace, - to
refrain -

"One while domestic cares abortive prove,

And then successful. Nature now invites

Connubial pleasures: but, when languid grown,

No less rejects."

[Ecclesiastes 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ecc 3:6</span></span>

A time to get, - to lose, - to keep, - to cast away -

\- "Commerce produces wealth,

Whilst time of gaining lasts; from every point

Blow prosperous gales. Now heaven begins to lower,

And all our hopes are blasted. Prudence bids,

One while, our treasure to reserve, and then

With liberal hand to scatter wide. How oft

In raging storms, the owner wisely casts

Into the deep his precious merchandise,

To save the foundering bark!

[Ecclesiastes 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ecc 3:7</span></span>

A time to rend, - sew, - keep silence, - speak - -

"Intestine broils

And factions rend a state: at length the breach

Is heal'd, and rest ensues. Wisdom restrains

The tongue, when words are vain: but now,

'Tis time to speak, and silence would be criminal."

[Ecclesiastes 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ecc 3:8</span></span>

A time to love, - hate, - of war, - of peace -

"Love turns to hatred; interest or caprice

Dissolves the firmest knot by friendship tied.

O'er rival nations, with revenge inflamed,

Or lust of power, fell Discord shakes awhile

Her baleful torch: now smiling Peace returns."

The above paraphrase on the verses cited contains a general view of the
principal occurrences of time, in reference to the human being, from his
cradle to his grave, through all the operations of life.

[Ecclesiastes 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ecc 3:9</span></span>

What profit hath he - What real good, what solid pleasure, is derived
from all the labors of man? Necessity drives him to the principal part
of his cares and toils; he labors that he may eat and drink; and he eats
and drinks that he may be preserved alive, and kept from sickness and
pain. Love of money, the basest of all passions, and restless ambition,
drive men to many labors and expedients, which perplex and often destroy
them. He, then, who lives without God, travails in pain all his days.

[Ecclesiastes 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ecc 3:10</span></span>

I have seen the travail - Man is a sinner; and, because he is such, he
suffers.

[Ecclesiastes 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ecc 3:11</span></span>

Beautiful in his time - God's works are well done; there are order,
harmony, and beauty in them all. Even the caterpillar is a finished
beauty in all the changes through which it passes, when its structure is
properly examined, and the ends kept in view in which each change is to
issue. Nothing of this kind can be said of the works of man. The most
finished works of art are bungling jobs, when compared with the meanest
operation of nature.

He hath set the world in their heart - העולם haolam, that hidden time -
the period beyond the present, - Eternity. The proper translation of
this clause is the following: "Also that eternity hath he placed in
their heart, without which man could not find out the work which God
hath made from the commencement to the end." God has deeply rooted the
idea of eternity in every human heart; and every considerate man sees,
that all the operations of God refer to that endless duration. See [Ecc
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#014.md). And it is only in eternity that
man will be able to discover what God has designed by the various works
he has formed.

[Ecclesiastes 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ecc 3:12</span></span>

I know that there is no good in them, but, etc. - Since God has so
disposed the affairs of this world, that the great events of providence
cannot be accelerated or retarded by human cares and anxieties, submit
to God; make a proper use of what he has given: do thyself no harm, and
endeavor as much as possible to do others good.

Enjoy, and bless thyself; let others share

The transient blessing: 'tis the gift of God.

[Ecclesiastes 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ecc 3:14</span></span>

I know that whatsoever God doeth, it shall be for ever - לעולם leolam,
for eternity; in reference to that grand consummation of men and things
intimated in [Ecc 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#011.md). God has
produced no being that he intends ultimately to destroy. He made every
thing in reference to eternity; and, however matter may be changed and
refined, animal and intellectual beings shall not be deprived of their
existence. The brute creation shall be restored, and all human spirits
shall live for ever; the pure in a state of supreme and endless
blessedness, the impure in a state of indestructible misery.

Nothing can be put to it - No new order of beings, whether animate or
inanimate, can be produced. God will not create more; man cannot add.

Nor any thing taken from it - Nothing can be annihilated; no power but
that which can create can destroy. And whatever he has done, he intended
to be a means of impressing a just sense of his being, providence,
mercy, and judgments, upon the souls of men. A proper consideration of
God's works has a tendency to make man a religious creature; that is, to
impress his mind with a sense of the existence of the Supreme Being, and
the reverence that is due to him. In this sense the fear of God is
frequently taken in Scripture. The Hebrew of this clause is strongly
emphatic: והאלהים עשה שייראו מלפניו vehaelohim asah sheiyireu
millephanaiv;

"And the gods he hath done, that they might fear from before his faces."
Even the doctrine of the eternal Trinity in Unity may be collected from
numberless appearances in nature. A consideration of the herb trefoil is
said to have been the means of fully convincing the learned Erasmus of
the truth of the assertion, These Three are One: and yet three distinct.
He saw the same root, the same fibres, the same pulpy substance, the
same membraneous covering, the same color, the same taste, the same
smell, in every part; and yet the three leaves distinct: but each and
all a continuation of the stem, and proceeding from the same root. Such
a fact as this may at least illustrate the doctrine. An intelligent
shepherd, whom he met upon the mountains, is said to have exhibited the
herb, and the illustration while discoursing on certain difficulties in
the Christian faith. When a child, I heard a learned man relate this
fact.

[Ecclesiastes 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ecc 3:15</span></span>

That which hath been is now - God governs the world now, as he has
governed it from the beginning; and the revolutions and operations of
nature are the same now, that they have been from the beginning. What we
see now, is the same as has been seen by those before us.

And God requireth that which is past - i.e., That it may return again in
its proper order. The heavens themselves, taking in their great
revolutions, show the same phenomena. Even comets are supposed to have
their revolutions, though some of them are hundreds of years in going
round their orbits.

But in the economy of grace, does not God require that which is past?
Whatever blessing or influence God gives to the soul of man, he intends
shall remain and increase; and it will, if man be faithful. Reader,
canst thou produce all the secret inspirations of his Spirit, all the
drawings of his love, his pardoning mercy, his sanctifying grace, the
heavenly-mindedness produced in thee, thy holy zeal, thy spirit of
prayer, thy tender conscience, the witness of the Spirit, which thou
didst once receive and enjoy? Where are they? God requireth that which
is past.

[Ecclesiastes 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ecc 3:16</span></span>

The plate of judgment, that wickedness was there - The abuse of power,
and the perversion of judgment, have been justly complained of in every
age of the world. The following paraphrase is good: -

"But what enjoyment can our labors yield,

When e'en the remedy prescribed by heaven

To cure disorders proves our deadliest bane?

When God's vicegerents, destined to protect

The weak from insolence of power, to guard

Their lives and fortunes, impious robbers turn?

And, or by force or fraud, deprive of both? -

To what asylum shall the injured fly

From her tribunal, where perverted law

Acquits the guilty, the innocent condemns?"

C.

[Ecclesiastes 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ecc 3:17</span></span>

For there is a time there for every purpose - Man has his time here
below, and God shall have his time above. At his throne the judged shall
be rejudged, and iniquity for ever close her mouth.

[Ecclesiastes 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ecc 3:18</span></span>

That they might see that they themselves are beasts - The author of
Choheleth has given a correct view of this difficult verse, by a proper
translation: "I said in my heart, reflecting on the state of the sons of
men, O that God would enlighten them, and make them see that even they
themselves are like beasts." These words are to be referred to those in
authority who abused their power; particularly to the corrupt
magistrates mentioned above.

[Ecclesiastes 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ecc 3:19</span></span>

For that which befalleth the sons of men befalleth beasts - From the
present comparison of great men to beasts, the author takes occasion to
enforce the subject by mentioning the state of mankind in general, with
respect to the mortality of their bodies; and then, by an easy
transition, touches in the next verse on the point which is of such
infinite consequence to religion.

As the one dieth, so dieth the other - Animal life is the same both in
the man and in the beast.

They have all one breath - They respire in the same way; and when they
cease to respire, animal life becomes extinct.

Befalleth beasts - This is wanting in six of Kennicott's and De Rossi's
MSS.

[Ecclesiastes 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ecc 3:20</span></span>

All go unto one place -

"Man was born

To die, nor aught exceeds in this respect

The vilest brute. Both transient, frail, and vain,

Draw the same breath; alike grow old, decay,

And then expire: both to one grave descend;

There blended lie, to native dust return'd."

\- C.

[Ecclesiastes 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ecc 3:21</span></span>

Who knoweth the spirit of man - I think the meaning of this important
verse is well taken by the above able writer: -

The nobler part of man, 'tis true, survives

The frail corporeal frame: but who regards

The difference? Those who live like beasts, as such

Would die, and be no more, if their own fate

Depended on themselves. Who once reflects,

Amidst his revels, that the human soul,

Of origin celestial, mounts aloft,

While that of brutes to earth shall downward go?"

The word רוח ruach, which is used in this and the nineteenth verse, has
two significations, breath and spirit. It signifies spirit, or an
incorporeal substance, as distinguished from flesh, or a corporeal one,
[Kg1 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#021.md), [Kg1
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#022.md), and [Isa
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#003.md). And it signifies the spirit or
soul of man, [Psa 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#006.md); [Isa
57:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#016.md), and in this book, [Ecc
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#007.md), and in many other places. In
this book it is used also to signify the breath, spirit, or soul of a
beast. While it was said in verse 19, they have all one breath, i.e.,
the man and the beast live the same kind of animal life; in this verse,
a proper distinction is made between the רוח ruach, or soul of man, and
the רוח ruach, or soul of the beast: the one goeth upwards, the other
goeth downwards. The literal translation of these important words is
this: "Who considereth the רוח ruach) immortal spirit of the sons of
Adam, which ascendeth? it is from above; (היא למעלה hi lemalah); and the
spirit or breath of the cattle which descendeth? it is downwards unto
the earth," i.e., it tends to the earth only. This place gives no
countenance to the materiality of the soul; and yet it is the strongest
hold to which the cold and fruitless materialist can resort.

Solomon most evidently makes an essential difference between the human
soul and that of brutes. Both have souls, but of different natures: the
soul of man was made for God, and to God it shall return: God is its
portion, and when a holy soul leaves the body, it goes to paradise. The
soul of the beast was made to derive its happiness from this lower
world. Brutes shall have a resurrection, and have an endless enjoyment
in a new earth. The body of man shall arise, and join his soul that is
already above; and both enjoy final blessedness in the fruition of God.
That Solomon did not believe they had the same kind of spirit, and the
same final lot, as some materialists and infidels say, is evident from
[Ecc 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#007.md) : "The spirit shall return
unto God who gave it."

[Ecclesiastes 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">ecc 3:22</span></span>

A man should rejoice in his own works - Do not turn God's blessings into
sin by perverseness and complaining; make the best of life. God will
sweeten its bitters to you, if you be faithful. Remember this is the
state to prepare for glory; and the evils of life may be so sanctified
to you as to work for your good. Though even wretched without, you may
be happy within; for God can make all grace to abound towards you. You
may be happy if you please; cry to God, who never rejects the prayer of
the humble, and gives his Holy Spirit to all them that ask him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes Chapter 4](ecc004.md)

</div>
