<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ephesians Index](eph.md)  
  [Previous](eph000)  [Next](eph002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ephesians Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001.md)

The apostle's salutation to the Church, [Eph
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001.md), [Eph
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#002.md). He blesses God for calling the
Gentiles to the adoption of children by Jesus Christ, by whose
sacrificial death both they and the Jews find redemption, [Eph
1:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#003.md). He shows that it was through
the great abundance of God's wisdom and goodness that the Gentiles were
called into a state of salvation, and that they should receive the Holy
Spirit as the earnest of their inheritance, [Eph
1:8-15](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#008.md). He praises God for their
conversion, and prays that they may be farther enlightened, that they
may see the glory of Christ, and partake of the blessings procured by
his passion and exaltation, [Eph
1:16-23](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#016.md).

[Ephesians 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eph 1:1</span></span>

To the saints which are at Ephesus - As some learned men think that this
epistle was written to the Church of the Laodiceans, and that the words
εν Εφεσῳ, in Ephesus, were not originally in this epistle, the
consideration of the subject has appeared to be more proper for the
preface; and to that the reader is referred for a particular discussion
of this opinion. By the term saints we are to understand those who in
that place professed Christianity, and were members of the Christian
Church. Saint properly signifies a holy person, and such the Gospel of
Christ requires every man to be, and such every true believer is, both
in heart and life; but saint appears to have been as ordinary a
denomination of a believer in Christ in those primitive times, as the
term Christian is now. Yet many had the name who had not the thing.

The faithful in Christ Jesus - Πιστοις· the believers - the persons who
received Christ as the promised Messiah, and the Savior of the world,
and continued in the grace which they had received.

[Ephesians 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eph 1:2</span></span>

Grace be to you - See the note on [Rom
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007.md).

[Ephesians 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eph 1:3</span></span>

Blessed be the God - See the note on [Co2
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#003.md), where the same form is used.

With all spiritual blessings - With the pure doctrines of the Gospel,
and the abundant gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost, justifying,
sanctifying, and building us up on our most holy faith.

In heavenly places - Εν τοις επουρανιοις· In heavenly things, such as
those mentioned above; they were not yet in heavenly places, but they
had abundance of heavenly things to prepare them for heavenly places.
Some think the word should be understood as signifying blessings of the
most exalted or excellent kind, such as are spiritual in opposition to
those that are earthly, such as are eternal in opposition to those that
are temporal; and all these in, through and by Christ. We have already
seen, on [Gal 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026.md), that the heavenly
Jerusalem, or Jerusalem which is from above, is used by the Jews to
signify the days of the Messiah, and that state of grace and glory which
should follow the Levitical worship and ceremonies; and it is possible
that St. Paul may use the word επουρανια, heavenly things, in this
sense: God hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
things, or in this heavenly state, in which life and immortality are
brought to light by the Gospel. This is apparently the preferable sense.

[Ephesians 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eph 1:4</span></span>

According as he hath chosen us in him - As he has decreed from the
beginning of the world, and has kept in view from the commencement of
the religious system of the Jews, (which the phrase sometimes means), to
bring us Gentiles to the knowledge of this glorious state of salvation
by Christ Jesus. The Jews considered themselves an elect or chosen
people, and wished to monopolize the whole of the Divine love and
beneficence. The apostle here shows that God had the Gentiles as much in
the contemplation of his mercy and goodness as he had the Jews; and the
blessings of the Gospel, now so freely dispensed to them, were the proof
that God had thus chosen them, and that his end in giving them the
Gospel was the same which he had in view by giving the law to the Jews,
viz. that they might be holy and without blame before him. And as his
object was the same in respect to them both, they should consider that,
as he loved them, so they should love one another: God having provided
for each the same blessings, they should therefore be ἁγιους, holy -
fully separated from earth and sin, and consecrated to God and αμωμους,
without blame - having no spot nor imperfection, their inward holiness
agreeing with their outward consecration. The words are a metaphor taken
from the perfect and immaculate sacrifices which the law required the
people to bring to the altar of God. But as love is the fulfilling of
the law, and love the fountain whence their salvation flowed, therefore
love must fill their hearts towards God and each other, and love must be
the motive and end of all their words and works.

[Ephesians 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eph 1:5</span></span>

Having predestinated us - Προορισας. As the doctrine of eternal
predestination has produced much controversy in the Christian world, it
may be necessary to examine the meaning of the term, that those who do
use it may employ it according to the sense it has in the oracles of
God. The verb προοριζω, from προ, before, and ὁριζω, I define, finish,
bound, or terminate, whence ὁρος, a boundary or limit, signifies to
define beforehand, and circumscribe by certain bounds or limits; and is
originally a geographical term, but applied also to any thing concluded,
or determined, or demonstrated. Here the word is used to point out God's
fixed purpose or predetermination to bestow on the Gentiles the blessing
of the adoption of sons by Jesus Christ, which adoption had been before
granted to the Jewish people; and without circumcision, or any other
Mosaic rite, to admit the Gentiles to all the privileges of his Church
and people. And the apostle marks that all this was fore-determined by
God, as he had fore-determined the bounds and precincts of the land
which he gave them according to the promise made to their fathers; that
the Jews had no reason to complain, for God had formed this purpose
before he had given the law, or called them out of Egypt; (for it was
before the foundation of the world, [Eph
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004).md); and that, therefore, the conduct
of God in calling the Gentiles now - bringing them into his Church, and
conferring on them the gifts and graces of the Holy Spirit, was in
pursuance of his original design; and, if he did not do so, his eternal
purposes could not be fulfilled; and that, as the Jews were taken to be
his peculiar people, not because they had any goodness or merit in
themselves; so the Gentiles were called, not for any merit they had, but
according to the good pleasure of his will; that is, according to his
eternal benevolence, showing mercy and conferring privileges in this new
creation, as he had done in the original creation; for as, in creating
man, he drew every consideration from his own innate eternal
benevolence, so now, in redeeming man, and sending the glad tidings of
salvation both to the Jews and the Gentiles, be acted on the same
principles, deriving all the reasons of his conduct from his own
infinite goodness.

This argument was exceedingly conclusive, and must silence the Jews on
the ground of their original, primitive, and exclusive rights, which
they were ever ready to plead against all pretensions of the Gentiles.
If therefore God, before the foundation of the Jewish economy, had
determined that the Gentiles, in the fullness of time, should be called
to and admitted into all the privileges of the Messiah's kingdom, then
the exclusive salvation of the Jews was chimerical; and what God was
doing now, by the preaching of the apostles in the Gentile world, was in
pursuance of his original design. This same argument St. Paul repeatedly
produces in his Epistle to the Romans; and a proper consideration of it
unlocks many difficulties in that epistle. See the notes on [Rom
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029.md), [Rom
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#030) (note.md); and elsewhere, in the
course of that epistle, where this subject is handled. But why is the
word προορισας, fore-determined, limited, or circumscribed, used here?
Merely in reference to the settlement of the Israelites in the promised
land. God assigned to them the portions which they were to inherit; and
these portions were described, and their bearings, boundaries,
vicinities to other portions, extent and length, as exactly ascertained
as they could be by the most correct geographical map. As God,
therefore, had dealt with the Jews in making them his peculiar people,
and when he divided the earth among the sons of Noah reserved to himself
the twelve portions which he afterwards gave to the twelve tribes; (see
on [Deu 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#008) (note).md); and as his
dealings with them were typical of what he intended to do in the calling
and salvation of the Gentiles; so he uses the terms by which their
allotment and settlement were pointed out to show that, what he had thus
designed and typified, he had now fulfilled according to the original
predetermination; the Gentiles having now the spiritual inheritance
which God had pointed out by the grant made of the promised land to the
children of Israel. This is the grand key by which this predestination
business is unlocked. See on [Eph 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#011.md)
(note).

[Ephesians 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eph 1:6</span></span>

To the praise of the glory of his grace - Δοξης της χαριτος αὑτου· The
glory of his grace, for χαρις ενδοξος, his glorious or illustrious
grace, according to the Hebrew idiom. But the grace or mercy of God is
peculiarly illustrated and glorified in the plan of redemption by Christ
Jesus. By the giving of the Law, God's justice and holiness were
rendered most glorious; by the giving of the Gospel, his grace and mercy
are made equally conspicuous.

Wherein he hath made us accepted in the Beloved - This translation of εν
ᾑ εχαριτωσεν ἡμας εν τῳ Ηγαπημενῳ is not clear; with which he has
graciously favored us through the Beloved, is at once more literal and
more intelligible. Whitby, Macknight, and Wakefield translate the
passage in nearly the same way.

In the Beloved must certainly mean in Christ, who is termed God's
beloved Son, [Mat 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017.md); but several
excellent MSS., such as D\*EFG, the later Syriac, the Ethiopic, Vulgate,
Itala, with several of the fathers, add, υιῳ αυτου, his beloved Son.
This is the meaning, whether the reading be received or rejected.

[Ephesians 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eph 1:7</span></span>

In whom we have redemption - God has glorified his grace by giving us
redemption by the blood of his Son, and this redemption consists in
forgiving and delivering us from our sins; so then Christ's blood was
the redemption price paid down for our salvation: and this was according
to the riches of his grace; as his grace is rich or abundant in
benevolence, so it was manifested in beneficence to mankind, in their
redemption by the sacrifice of Christ, the measure of redeeming grace
being the measure of God's own eternal goodness.

It may not be useless to remark that, instead of της χαριτος αυτου, his
grace, the Codex Alexandrinus and the Coptic version have της
χρηστοτητος, his goodness.

[Ephesians 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eph 1:8</span></span>

Wherein he hath abounded - That is, in the dispensation of mercy and
goodness by Christ Jesus.

In all wisdom and prudence - Giving us apostles the most complete
instructions in heavenly things by the inspiration of his Spirit; and at
the same time prudence, that we might know when and where to preach the
Gospel so that it might be effectual to the salvation of those who heard
it. Nothing less than the Spirit of God could teach the apostles that
wisdom by which they were to instruct a dark and sinful world; and
nothing less than the same Spirit could inspire them with that prudence
which was necessary to be exercised in every step of their life and
ministry. Every wise man is not a prudent man, and every prudent man is
not a wise man. Wisdom and prudence may be expected in an apostle who is
constantly living under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost. "Wisdom,"
according to Sir William Temple, "is that which makes men judge what are
the best ends, and what the best means to attain them; and gives a man
advantage of counsel and direction." "Prudence is wisdom applied to
practice; or that discreet, apt suiting as well of actions as words, in
their due place, time, and manner. Every minister of Christ needs these
still; and if he abide not under the influence of both, not only his
prayers but his ministerial labors will be all hindered.

[Ephesians 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eph 1:9</span></span>

Having made known unto us the mystery - That the Gentiles should ever be
received into the Church of God, and have all the privileges of the
Jews, without being obliged to submit to circumcision, and perform the
rites and ceremonies of the Jewish law was a mystery - a hidden thing
which had never been published before; and now revealed only to the
apostles. It was God's will that it should be so, but that will he kept
hidden to the present time. A mystery signifies something hidden, but it
ceases to be a mystery as soon as it is revealed. See the note on [Mat
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#011.md); and particularly that on [Rom
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025) (note.md).

Good pleasure - Την ευδοκιαν· That benevolent design which he had
purposed in himself, not being induced by any consideration from
without.

[Ephesians 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eph 1:10</span></span>

In the dispensation of the fullness of times - Εις οικονομιαν του
πληρωματος των καιρων. The word οικονομια, which is the same as our word
economy, signifies, as Dr. Macknight has well observed, "the plan which
the master of a family, or his steward, has established for the
management of the family;" it signifies, also, a plan for the management
of any sort of business: and here it means the dispensation of the
Gospel, that plan by which God has provided salvation for a lost world;
and according to which he intends to gather all believers, both Jews and
Gentiles, into one Church under Jesus Christ, their head and governor.
See the note on [Mat 24:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#045.md), where the
word and the office are particularly explained.

The fullness of times - By this phrase we are to understand either the
Gospel dispensation, which is the consummation of all preceding
dispensations, and the last that shall be afforded to man; or that
advanced state of the world which God saw to be the most proper for the
full manifestation of those benevolent purposes which he had formed in
himself relative to the salvation of the world by Jesus Christ.

That he might gather together in one - Ανακεφαλαιωσασθαι, from ανα,
again, and κεφαλαιοω, to reduce to one sum; to add up; to bring
different sums together, and fractions of sums, so as to reduce them
under one denomination; to recapitulate the principal matters contained
in a discourse. Here it means the gathering together both Jews and
Gentiles, who have believed in Christ, into one Church and flock. See
the preceding note.

All things - which are in heaven, and which are on earth - This clause
is variously understood: some think, by things in heaven the Jewish
state is meant and by things on earth the Christian. The Jews had been
long considered a Divine or heavenly people; their doctrine, their
government, their constitution, both civil and ecclesiastical, were all
Divine or heavenly: as the powers of the heavens, [Mat
24:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#029.md), [Luk
21:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#026.md), mean the Jewish rulers in
Church and state, it is very possible that the things which are in
heaven mean this same state; and as the Gentiles were considered to have
nothing Divine or heavenly among them, they may be here intended by the
earth, out of the corruption of which they are to be gathered by the
preaching of the Gospel. But there are others who imagine that the
things in heaven mean the angelical hosts; and the things on earth
believers of all nations, who shall all be joined together at last in
one assembly to worship God throughout eternity. And some think that the
things in heaven mean the saints who died before Christ's advent, and
who are not to be made perfect till the resurrection, when the full
power and efficacy of Christ shall be seen in raising the bodies of
believers and uniting them with their holy souls, to reign in his
presence for ever. And some think that, as the Hebrew phrase שמים והארץ
shamayim vehaarets, the heavens and the earth, signifies all creatures,
the words in the text are to be understood as signifying all mankind,
without discrimination of peoples, kindreds, or tongues; Jews, Greeks,
or barbarians. All that are saved of all nations, (being saved in the
same way, viz. by faith in Christ Jesus, without any distinction of
nation or previous condition), and all gathered into one Church or
assembly.

I believe that the forming one Church out of both Jews and Gentiles is
that to which the apostle refers. This agrees with what is said, [Eph
2:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014.md).

[Ephesians 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eph 1:11</span></span>

In whom - Christ Jesus; also we - believing Jews have obtained an
inheritance - what was promised to Abraham and his spiritual seed, viz.
the adoption of sons, and the kingdom of heaven, signified by the
privileges under the Mosaic dispensation, and the possession of the
promised land, but all these privileges being forfeited by the rebellion
and unbelief of the Jews, they are now about to be finally cut off, and
the believing part to be re-elected, and put in possession of the
blessings promised to Abraham and his spiritual seed, by faith; for
without a re-election, they cannot get possession of these spiritual
privileges.

Being predestinated - God having determined to bring both Jews and
Gentiles to salvation, not by works, nor by any human means or schemes,
but by Jesus Christ; that salvation being defined and determined before
in the Divine mind, and the means by which it should be brought about
all being according to his purpose, who consults not his creatures, but
operates according to the counsel of his own will, that being ever wise,
gracious, and good.

The original reference is still kept up here in the word προορισθεντες,
being predestinated, as in the word προορισας [Eph
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#005.md). And as the apostle speaks of
obtaining the inheritance, he most evidently refers to that of which the
promised land was the type and pledge. And as that land was assigned to
the Israelites by limit and lot, both of which were appointed by God so
the salvation now sent to the Gentiles was as expressly their lot or
portion, as the promised land was that of the people of Israel. All this
shows that the Israelites were a typical people; their land, the manner
of possessing it, their civil and religious code, etc., etc., all
typical; and that in, by, and through them, God had fore-determined,
fore-described, and fore-ascertained a greater and more glorious people,
among whom the deepest counsels of his wisdom should be manifested, and
the most powerful works of his eternal mercy, grace, holiness, goodness,
and truth, be fully exhibited. Thus there was nothing fortuitous in the
Christian scheme; all was the result of infinite counsel and design. See
on [Eph 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#005) (note.md).

[Ephesians 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eph 1:12</span></span>

That we - Jews, now apostles and messengers of God, to whom the first
offers of salvation were made, and who were the first that believed in
Christ.

Should be to the praise of his glory - By being the means of preaching
Christ crucified to the Gentiles, and spreading the Gospel throughout
the world.

[Ephesians 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eph 1:13</span></span>

In whom ye also trusted - Ye Gentiles, having heard from us the word,
τον λογον, the doctrine, of the truth, which is the Gospel, or glad
tidings, of your salvation, have believed, as we Jews have done, and
received similar blessings to those with which God has favored us.

In whom also, εν ὡ, through whom, Christ Jesus, after that ye had
believed, viz. that he was the only Savior, and that through his blood
redemption might be obtained, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of
promise; that is, The Holy Spirit, which is promised to them who believe
on Christ Jesus, was given to you, and thus you were ascertained to be
the children of God, for God has no child who is not a partaker of the
Holy Ghost, and he who has this Spirit has God's seal that he belongs to
the heavenly family. It was customary among all nations, when a person
purchased goods of any kind, to mark with his seal that which he had
bought, in order that he might know it, and be able to claim it if mixed
with the goods of others; to this custom the apostle may here allude but
it was also customary to set a seal upon what was dedicated to God, or
what was to be offered to him in sacrifice. See this proved in the note
on [Joh 6:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#027.md). The Jews themselves
speak of the seal of God, which they term אמת emeth, truth, and which
they consider as a representation of the unoriginated and endless
perfections of God. As the apostle is here speaking of the doctrine of
truth, which came by the Holy Spirit, and is sealed on the souls of
believers by this Spirit, he may have in view the Jewish notion, which
is at once both correct and elevated. This Spirit of truth, [Joh
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#017.md), who leads into all truth, [Joh
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#013.md), and teaches all things, [Joh
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026.md), makes the impression of his own
eternal purity and truth in the souls of them who believe, and thus they
bear the seal of God Almighty. And they who in the day of judgment are
found to bear this seal - Truth; truth in the inward parts, having truly
repented, truly believed, and having been in consequence truly
justified, and truly sanctified; and having walked in truth and
sincerity towards God and man; these are sealed to the day of
redemption; for, having this seal, they are seen to have a right to
eternal life.

[Ephesians 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eph 1:14</span></span>

Which is the earnest of our inheritance - This Holy Spirit, sealing the
soul with truth and righteousness, is the earnest, foretaste, and pledge
of the heavenly inheritance. And he who can produce this earnest - this
witness of the Spirit, in the day of judgment, shall have an abundant
entrance into the holiest. On the αρῥαβων, or earnest, see the notes on
[Gen 38:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#017) (note.md), etc., and on [Co2
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#022) (note.md).

The redemption of the purchased possession - That is, till the time when
body and soul are redeemed from all their miseries, and glorified in the
kingdom on heaven.

The redemption of the purchased possession - Απολυτρωσις της
περιποιησεως is variously understood; and indeed the original is
variously translated. Dr. Whitby has observed that the verb πεειποιειν
signifies to save alive; and he refers the περιποιησις, here, to the
redemption of the body from corruption, and to its final glorification
with the soul.

All those who believe in Christ Jesus are considered as his peculiar
people and property, and to them eternal glory is promised. The Spirit
of promise, which is given them, is a pledge that they shall have a
resurrection from the dead, and eternal blessedness; the redemption, or
bringing to life of the body, cannot take place till the day of
judgment, but the Holy Spirit promises this redemption, and is now in
their hearts an earnest or pledge of this complete restoration at the
great day, which will then be, in an especial manner, to the praise of
his glory, viz. of Christ, who has bought them by his blood.

[Ephesians 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eph 1:15</span></span>

Faith in the Lord Jesus - Cordial reception of the Christian religion,
amply proved by their love to all the saints - to all the Christians.
Perhaps love here implies, not only the kind affection so called, but
also all the fruits of love - benevolence, and kind offices of every
description.

[Ephesians 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eph 1:16</span></span>

Cease not to give thanks - The apostle intimates, so fully satisfied was
he of the genuineness of their conversion, and of their steadiness since
their conversion, that it was to him a continual cause of thanksgiving
to God, who had brought them into that state of salvation; and of
prayer, that they might be preserved blameless to the end.

Making mention of you - While praying for the prosperity of the
Christian cause generally, he was led, from his particular affection for
them, to mention them by name before God.

[Ephesians 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eph 1:17</span></span>

That the God of our Lord Jesus - Jesus Christ, as man and mediator, has
the Father for his God and Father: and it is in reference to this that
he himself says: I ascend unto my Father and your Father, and to my God
and your God; [Joh 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017.md).

The Father of glory - The author and giver of that glory which you
expect at the end of your Christian race. This may be a Hebraism for
glorious Father, but the former appears to be the best sense.

The Spirit of wisdom and revelation - I pray that God may give you his
Holy Spirit, by whom his will is revealed to men, that he may teach and
make you wise unto salvation, that you may continue to acknowledge him,
Christ Jesus, as your only Lord and Savior.

[Ephesians 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eph 1:18</span></span>

The eyes of your understanding being enlightened - The understanding is
that power or faculty in the soul by which knowledge or information is
received, and the recipient power is here termed the Eyes of the
understanding; and we learn from this that ὁπερ ὁ οφθαλμος εν τῳ σωματι,
τουτο ὁ νους εν τῃ ψυχη, as Philo expresses it: What the eye is to the
body, the understanding is to the soul; and that as the eye is not light
in itself, and can discern nothing but by the means of light shining,
not only on the objects to be viewed, but into the eye itself; so the
understanding of man can discern no sacred thing of or by itself, but
sees by the influence of the Spirit of wisdom and revelation; for
without the influence of God's Holy Spirit no man ever became wise unto
salvation, no more than a man ever discerned an object, (no matter how
perfect soever his eye might have been), without the instrumentality of
light.

Instead of της διανοιας, of your understanding, της καρδιας, of your
heart, is the reading of ABDEFG, and several others; also both the
Syriac, all the Arabic, the Coptic, the Ethiopic, Armenian, Sahidic,
Slavonian, Vulgate, and Itala, besides several of the fathers. The eyes
of your Heart is undoubtedly the true reading.

The hope of his calling - That you may clearly discern the glorious and
important objects of your hope, to the enjoyment of which God has called
or invited you.

The riches of the glory of his inheritance - That you may understand
what is the glorious abundance of the spiritual things to which you are
entitled, in consequence of being made children of God; for if children,
then heirs, heirs of that glorious inheritance which God has provided
for the saints - for all genuine Christians, whether formerly Jews or
Gentiles. On the chief subject of this verse, see the notes on [Gal
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#006.md), [Gal
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#007) (note.md).

[Ephesians 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eph 1:19</span></span>

The exceeding greatness of his power - As the apostle is here speaking
of the glorious state of believers after death, the exceeding greatness
of his power, or that power which surpasses all difficulties, being
itself omnipotent, is to be understood of that might which is to be
exerted in raising the body at the last day; as it will require the same
power or energy which he wrought in Christ, when he raised his body from
the grave, to raise up the bodies of all mankind; the resurrection of
the human nature of Christ being a proof of the resurrection of mankind
in general.

According to the working of his mighty power - Κατα την ενεργειαν του
κρατους της ισχυος αυτου· According to the energy of the power of his
might. We may understand these words thus: Might, ισχυς, is the state or
simple efficiency of this attribute in God; Power, κρατος, is this might
or efficiency in action; Energy, ενεργεια, is the quantum of force,
momentum, or velocity, with which the power is applied. Though they
appear to be synonymous terms they may be thus understood: passive power
is widely different from power in action; and power in action will be in
its results according to the energy or momentum with which it is
applied. The resurrection of the dead is a stupendous work of God; it
requires his might in sovereign action; and when we consider that all
mankind are to be raised and changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an
eye, then the momentum, or velocity, with which the power is to be
applied must be inconceivably great. All motion is in proportion to the
quantity of matter in the mover, and the velocity with which it is
applied. The effect here is in proportion to the cause and the energy he
puts forth in order to produce it. But such is the nature of God's power
in action, that it is perfectly inconceivable to us; and even these
astonishingly strong words of the apostle are to be understood as used
in condescension to human weakness.

[Ephesians 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eph 1:20</span></span>

Set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places - Gave him, as
mediator between God and man, the highest honors and dignities, [Phi
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009.md); in which state of exaltation he
transacts all the affairs of his Church, and rules the universe. The
right hand is the place of friendship, honor, confidence, and authority.

[Ephesians 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eph 1:21</span></span>

Far above all principality - The difficulty in this verse does not arise
from the words themselves, the meaning of each being easily understood,
but from the sense in which the apostle uses them. Some think he has
reference here to the different orders among good and evil angels; he is
superior to all the former, and rules all the latter. Others think he
refers to earthly governments; and as αρχη, principality, the first
word, signifies the most sovereign and extensive kind of dominion; and
κυριοτης, lordship, the last word, signifies the lowest degree of
authority; hence we are to understand that to our Lord, in his human
nature, are subjected the highest, the intermediate, and the lowest
orders of beings in the universe. - Chandler. Others imagine that the
apostle has in view, by whatsoever is named in this world, all the
dignitaries of the Jewish Church; and by what is named in the world to
come, all the dignities that should be found in the Christian Church.

Schoettgen supposes that the "apostle's αρχη (for αρχοντες, the abstract
for the concrete) means the same as the נשיאים Nesiim among the Jews,
whose chief business it was to clear and decide all contentions which
arose concerning traditions and legal controversies.

"That εξουσια, power, is the same as צורבא tsorba, he who possesses
authority to propound, expound, persuade, convince, and refute.

"That δυναμις, might, answers to רבנות rabbanoth, signifying all the
class of rabbins, whose office it was to expound the law, and teach the
people generally.

"And that κυριοτης, dominion, answers to מר mar, which signifies a
person above the lower orders of men. And he observes that Jesus Christ,
after his resurrection, called fishermen, publicans, and men from the
lowest orders of the people, to the work of the ministry; and made them
instruments of confounding and overturning all the Jewish rulers,
rabbins, and doctors. And that in the world which is to come - the
successive ages of Christianity, he should ever be exalted above all
those powers and authorities which Antichrist might bring into the
Christian Church; such as popes, cardinals, wicked archbishops, bishops,
deans, and canons; and all those who among the schoolmen were termed
seraphic doctors, angelic doctors, most illuminated, most perfect, and
irrefragable doctors. And although Wiclif, Huss, Luther, Melancthon, and
the rest of the reformers, were men of little or no note when compared
with the rulers of the popish Church, so eminently did the power of
Christ work in and by them, that the pope and all his adjutants were
every where confounded, and their power and authority annihilated in
several entire regions."

It is certain that the apostle means that all created power, glory, and
influence, are under Christ; and hence it is added:

[Ephesians 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eph 1:22</span></span>

And hath put all things under his feet - All beings and things are
subject to him, whether they be thrones, dominions, principalities, or
powers, [Col 1:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016.md); [Col
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#010.md); for he, God the Father, has
given him to be head - chief, and supreme, over all, to the Church, the
Church having no ruler but Jesus Christ; others may be officers in his
Church, but he alone is head and supreme.

[Ephesians 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eph 1:23</span></span>

Which is his body - As he is head over all things, he is head to the
Church; and this Church is considered as the body of which he is
especially the head; and from him, as the head, the Church receives
light, life, and intelligence.

And is the fullness of him - That in which he especially manifests his
power, goodness, and truth; for though he fills all the world with his
presence, yet he fills all the members of his mystical body with wisdom,
goodness, truth, and holiness, in an especial manner. Some understand
the fullness or πληρωμα, here, as signifying the thing to be filled; so
the Christian Church is to be filled by him, whose fullness fills all
his members, with all spiritual gifts and graces. And this corresponds
with what St. John says, [Joh 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016.md) :
And of his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace. And with
what is said, [Col 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009.md), [Col
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#010.md) : Ye are complete in him; και
εστε εν αυτῳ πεπληρωμενοι· And ye are in him filled full; i.e. with
gifts and grace.

How, in any other sense, the Church can be said to be the fullness of
him who fills all in all, is difficult to say. However, as Jesus Christ
is represented to be the head, and the Church, the body under that head,
the individuals being so many members in that body; and as it requires a
body and members to make a head complete; so it requires a Church, or
general assembly of believers, to make up the body of Christ. When,
therefore, the Jews and Gentiles are brought into this Church, the body
may be said to be complete; and thus Christ has his visible fullness
upon earth, and the Church may be said to be the fullness of him, etc.
See [Eph 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#010.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians Chapter 2](eph002.md)

</div>
