<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ephesians Index](eph)  
  [Previous](eph005)  [Next](phi000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ephesians Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#001)

[Ephesians](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eph 6:0</span></span>

Children should obey their parents, that they may live long and be
happy, [Eph 6:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#001). Parents should be
tender towards their children, [Eph
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#004). Servants should show all
obedience and fidelity to their masters, [Eph
6:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#005). And masters should treat their
servants with humanity, [Eph 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#009). All
should be strong in the Lord, and be armed with his armor, because of
their wily, powerful, and numerous foes, [Eph
6:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#010). The different parts of the
Christian armor enumerated, [Eph
6:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#014). The necessity of all kinds of
prayer and watchfulness, [Eph 6:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#018).
Tychicus is commissioned to inform the Ephesians of the apostle's
affairs, [Eph 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#021), [Eph
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#022). The apostolic benediction and
farewell, [Eph 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#023), [Eph
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#024).

[Ephesians 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eph 6:1</span></span>

Children, obey your parents - This is a duty with which God will never
dispense; he commands it, and one might think that gratitude, from a
sense of the highest obligations, would most strongly enforce the
command.

In the Lord - This clause is wanting in several reputable MSS., and in
same versions. In the Lord may mean, on account of the commandment of
the Lord; or, as far as the parents commands are according to the will
and word of God. For surely no child is called to obey any parent if he
give unreasonable or unscriptural commands.

[Ephesians 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eph 6:2</span></span>

Honor thy father - See the notes on [Exo
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#012), etc., where this subject,
together with the promises and threatenings connected with it, is
particularly considered, and the reasons of the duty laid down at large.

[Ephesians 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eph 6:4</span></span>

Fathers, provoke not your children to wrath - Avoid all severity; this
will hurt your own souls, and do them no good; on the contrary, if
punished with severity or cruelty, they will be only hardened and made
desperate in their sins. Cruel parents generally have bad children. He
who corrects his children according to God and reason will feel every
blow on his own heart more sensibly than his child feels it on his body.
Parents are called to correct; not to punish, their children. Those who
punish them do it from a principle of revenge; those who correct them do
it from a principle of affectionate concern.

Bring them up, etc - Εκτρεφετε αυτα εν παιδειᾳ και νουθεσια Κυριου·
literally, Nourish them in the discipline and instruction of the Lord.
The mind is to be nourished with wholesome discipline and instruction,
as the body is with proper food. Παιδεια, discipline, may refer to all
that knowledge which is proper for children, including elementary
principles and rules for behavior, etc. Νουθεσια, instruction, may imply
whatever is necessary to form the mind; to touch, regulate, and purify
the passions; and necessarily includes the whole of religion. Both these
should be administered in the Lord - according to his will and word, and
in reference to his eternal glory. All the important lessons and
doctrines being derived from his revelation, therefore they are called
the discipline and instruction of the Lord.

[Ephesians 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eph 6:5</span></span>

Servants, be obedient - Though δουλος frequently signifies a slave or
bondman, yet it often implies a servant in general, or any one bound to
another, either for a limited time, or for life. Even a slave, if a
Christian, was bound to serve him faithfully by whose money he was
bought, howsoever illegal that traffic may be considered. In heathen
countries slavery was in some sort excusable; among Christians it is an
enormity and a crime for which perdition has scarcely an adequate state
of punishment.

According to the flesh - Your masters in secular things; for they have
no authority over your religion, nor over your souls.

With fear and trembling - Because the law gives them a power to punish
you for every act of disobedience.

In singleness of your heart - Not merely through fear of punishment, but
from a principle of uprightness, serving them as you would serve Christ.

[Ephesians 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eph 6:6</span></span>

Not with eye-service - Not merely in their presence, when their eye is
upon you, as unfaithful and hypocritical servants do, without consulting
conscience in any part of their work.

Doing the will of God - Seeing that you are in the state of servitude,
it is the will of God that you should act conscientiously in it.

[Ephesians 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eph 6:7</span></span>

With good will - Μετ' ευνοιας· With cheerfulness; do not take up your
service as a cross, or bear it as a burden; but take it as coming in the
order of God's providence, and a thing that is pleasing to him.

[Ephesians 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eph 6:8</span></span>

Whatsoever good thing any man doeth - Though your masters should fail to
give you the due reward of your fidelity and labor, yet, as ye have done
your work as unto the Lord, he will take care to give you the proper
recompense.

Whether he be bond - A slave, bought with money;

Or free - A person who has hired himself of his own free accord.

[Ephesians 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eph 6:9</span></span>

Ye masters, do the same things unto them - Act in the same affectionate,
conscientious manner towards your slaves and servants, as they do
towards you.

Forbearing threatening - If they should transgress at any time, lean
more to the side of mercy than justice; and when ye are obliged to
punish, let it be as light and as moderate as possible; and let revenge
have no part in the chastisement, for that is of the devil, and not of
God.

The words, forbearing threatening; ανιεντες την απειλην, signify to
mitigate, relax, or not exact threatening; that is, the threatened
punishment. The sense is given above.

In Shemoth Rabba, sect. 21, fol. 120, there is a good saying concerning
respect of persons: "If a poor man comes to a rich man to converse with
him, he will not regard him; but if a rich man comes he will hear and
rehear him. The holy and blessed God acts not thus; for all are alike
before him, women, slaves, the poor, and the rich."

Knowing that your Master also is in heaven - You are their masters, God
is yours. As you deal with them, so God will deal with you; for do not
suppose, because their condition on earth is inferior to yours, that God
considers them to be less worthy of his regard than you are; this is not
so, for there is no respect of persons with Him.

[Ephesians 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eph 6:10</span></span>

Finally - Having laid before you, your great and high calling, and all
the doctrines and precepts of the Gospel, it is necessary that I should
show you the enemies that will oppose you, and the strength which is
requisite to enable you to repel them.

Be strong in the Lord - You must have strength, and strength of a
spiritual kind, and such strength too as the Lord himself can furnish;
and you must have this strength through an indwelling God, the power of
his might working in you.

[Ephesians 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eph 6:11</span></span>

Put on the whole armor of God - Ενδυσασθε την πανοπλιαν του Θεου. The
apostle considers every Christian as having a warfare to maintain
against numerous, powerful, and subtle foes; and that therefore they
would need much strength, much courage, complete armor, and skill to use
it. The panoply which is mentioned here refers to the armor of the heavy
troops among the Greeks; those who were to sustain the rudest attacks,
who were to sap the foundations of walls, storm cities, etc. Their
ordinary armor was the shield, the helmet, the sword, and the greaves or
brazen boots. To all these the apostle refers below. See on [Eph
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#013) (note).

The wiles of the devil - Τας μεθοδειας του διαβολου· The methods of the
devil; the different means, plans, schemes, and machinations which he
uses to deceive, entrap, enslave, and ruin the souls of men. A man's
method of sinning is Satan's method of ruining his soul. See on [Eph
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#014) (note).

[Ephesians 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eph 6:12</span></span>

For we wrestle not against flesh and blood - Ουκ εστιν ἡμιν ἡ παλη προς
αἱμα και σαρκα· Our wrestling or contention is not with men like
ourselves: flesh and blood is a Hebraism for men, or human beings. See
the note on [Gal 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#016).

The word παλη implies the athletic exercises in the Olympic and other
national games; and παλαιστρα was the place in which the contenders
exercised. Here it signifies warfare in general.

Against principalities - Αρχας· Chief rulers; beings of the first rank
and order in their own kingdom.

Powers - Εξουσιας, Authorities, derived from, and constituted by the
above.

The rulers of the darkness of this world - Τους κοσμοκρατορας του
σκοτους του αιωνος τουτου· The rulers of the world; the emperors of the
darkness of this state of things.

Spiritual wickedness - Τα πνευματικα της πονηριας· The spiritual things
of wickedness; or, the spiritualities of wickedness; highly refined and
sublimed evil; disguised falsehood in the garb of truth; Antinomianism
in the guise of religion.

In high places - Εν τοις επουρανιοις· In the most sublime stations. But
who are these of whom the apostle speaks? Schoettgen contends that the
rabbins and Jewish rulers are intended. This he thinks proved by the
words του αιωνος τουτου, of this world, which are often used to
designate the Old Testament, and the Jewish system; and the words εν
τοις επουρανιοις, in heavenly places, which are not unfrequently used to
signify the time of the New Testament, and the Gospel system.

By the spiritual wickedness in heavenly places, he thinks false
teachers, who endeavored to corrupt Christianity, are meant; such as
those mentioned by St. John, [Jo1 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#019)
: They went out from us, but they were not of us, etc. And he thinks the
meaning may be extended to all corrupters of Christianity in all
succeeding ages. He shows also that the Jews called their own city שר של
עולם sar shel olam, κοσμοκρατωρ, the ruler of the world; and proves that
David's words, [Psa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002), The kings of
the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, are
applied by the apostles, [Act 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#026), to
the Jewish rulers, αρχοντες, who persecuted Peter and John for preaching
Christ crucified. But commentators in general are not of this mind, but
think that by principalities, etc., we are to understand different
orders of evil spirits, who are all employed under the devil, their
great head, to prevent the spread of the Gospel in the world, and to
destroy the souls of mankind.

The spiritual wickedness are supposed to be the angels which kept not
their first estate; who fell from the heavenly places but are ever
longing after and striving to regain them; and which have their station
in the regions of the air. "Perhaps," says Mr. Wesley, "the
principalities and powers remain mostly in the citadel of their kingdom
of darkness; but there are other spirits which range abroad, to whom the
provinces of the world are committed; the darkness is chiefly spiritual
darkness which prevails during the present state of things, and the
wicked spirits are those which continually oppose faith, love, and
holiness, either by force or fraud; and labor to infuse unbelief, pride,
idolatry, malice, envy, anger, and hatred." Some translate the words εν
τοις επουρανιοις, about heavenly things; that is: We contend with these
fallen spirits for the heavenly things which are promised to us; and we
strive against them, that we may not be deprived of those we have.

[Ephesians 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eph 6:13</span></span>

Wherefore - Because ye have such enemies to contend with, take unto you
- assume, as provided and prepared for you, the whole armor of God;
which armor if you put on and use, you shall be both invulnerable and
immortal. The ancient heroes are fabled to have had armor sent to them
by the gods; and even the great armor-maker, Vulcan, was reputed to be a
god himself. This was fable: What Paul speaks of is reality. See before
on [Eph 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#011) (note).

That ye may be able to withstand - That ye may not only stand fast in
the liberty wherewith Christ hath made you free, but also discomfit all
your spiritual foes; and continuing in your ranks, maintain your ground
against them, never putting off your armor, but standing always ready
prepared to repel any new attack.

And having done all, to stand - Και ἁπαντα κατεργασαμενοι στηναι·
rather, And having conquered all, stand: this is a military phrase, and
is repeatedly used in this sense by the best Greek writers. So Dionys.
Hal. Ant., lib. vi., page 400: Και παντα πολεμια εν ολιγῳ κατεργασαμενοι
χρονῳ· "Having in a short time discomfited all our enemies, we returned
with numerous captives and much spoil." See many examples in Kypke. By
evil day we may understand any time of trouble, affliction, and sore
temptation.

As there is here allusion to some of the most important parts of the
Grecian armor, I shall give a short account of the whole. It consisted
properly of two sorts:

1\. Defensive armor, or that which protected themselves.

2\. Offensive armor, or that by which they injured their enemies. The
apostle refers to both.

I. Defensive Armor

Περικεφαλαια, the Helmet; this was the armor for the head, and was of
various forms, and embossed with a great variety of figures. Connected
with the helmet was the crest or ridge on the top of the helmet, adorned
with several emblematic figures; some for ornament, some to strike
terror. For crests on ancient helmets we often see the winged lion, the
griffin, chimera, etc. St. Paul seems to refer to one which had an
emblematical representation of hope.

Ζωμα, the Girdle; this went about the loins, and served to brace the
armor tight to the body, and to support daggers, short swords, and such
like weapons, which were frequently stuck in it. This kind of girdle is
in general use among the Asiatic nations to the present day.

Θωραξ, the Breast-Plate; this consisted of two parts, called πτερυγες or
wings: one covered the whole region of the thorax or breast, in which
the principal viscera of life are contained; and the other covered the
back, as far down as the front part extended.

Κνημιδες, Greaves or brazen boots, which covered the shin or front of
the leg; a kind of solea was often used, which covered the sole, and
laced about the instep, and prevented the foot from being wounded by
rugged ways, thorns, stones, etc.

Χειριδες, Gauntlets; a kind of gloves that served to defend the hands,
and the arm up to the elbow.

Ασπις, the clypeus or Shield; it was perfectly round, and sometimes made
of wood, covered with bullocks' hides; but often made of metal. The
aspis or shield of Achilles, made by Vulcan, was composed of five
plates, two of brass, two of tin, and one of gold; so Homer, Il. U. v.
270: -

\- επει πεντε πτυχας ηλασε Κυλλοποδιων,

Τας δυο χαλκειας, δυο δ' ενδοθι κασσιτεροιο,

Την δε μιαν χρυσην.

Five plates of various metal, various mold,

Composed the shield; of brass each outward fold,

Of tin each inward, and the middle gold.

Of shields there were several sorts:

Γερῥων or γερρα, the gerron; a small square shield, used first by the
Persians.

Λαισηΐον, Laiseion; a sort of oblong shield, covered with rough hides,
or skins with the hair on.

Πελτη, the Pelta; a small light shield, nearly in the form of a
demicrescent, with a small ornament, similar to the recurved leaves of a
flower de luce, on the center of a diagonal edge or straight line; this
was the Amazonian shield.

Θυρεος, the scutum or Oblong Shield; this was always made of wood, and
covered with hides. It was exactly in the shape of the laiseion, but
differed in size, being much larger, and being covered with hides from
which the hair had been taken off. It was called θυρεος from θυρα, a
door, which it resembled in its oblong shape; but it was made curved, so
as to embrace the whole forepart of the body. The aspis and the thureos
were the shields principally in use; the former for light, the latter
for heavy armed troops.

II\. Offensive Armor, or Weapons;the Following Were Chief:

Εγχος, enchos, the Spear; which was generally a head of brass or iron,
with a long shaft of ash.

Δορυ, the Lance; differing perhaps little from the former, but in its
size and lightness; being a missile used, both by infantry and cavalry,
for the purpose of annoying the enemy at a distance.

Ξιφος, the Sword; these were of various sizes, and in the beginning all
of brass. The swords of Homer's heroes are all of this metal.

Μαχαιρα, called also a sword, sometimes a knife; it was a short sword,
used more frequently by gladiators, or in single combat. What other
difference it had from the xiphos I cannot tell.

Αξινη, from which our word Axe; the common battle-axe.

Πελεκυς, the Bipen; a sort of battle-axe, with double face, one opposite
to the other.

Κορυνη, an iron club or mace, much used both among the ancient Greeks
and Persians.

Τοξον, the Bow; with its pharetra or quiver, and its stock or sheaf of
arrows.

Σφενδονη, the Sling; an instrument in the use of which most ancient
nations were very expert, particularly the Hebrews and ancient Greeks.

The arms and armor mentioned above were not always in use; they were
found out and improved by degrees. The account given by Lucretius of the
arms of the first inhabitants of the earth is doubtless as correct as it
is natural.

Arma antiqua manus, ungues, dentesque fuere,

Et lapides, et item silvarum fragmina rami,

Et flammae, atque ignes postquam sunt cognita primum:

Posterius ferri vis est, aerisque reperta:

Sed prius aeris erat quam ferri cognitus usus:

Quo facilis magis est natura, et copia major.

De Rerum Nat., lib. v. ver. 1282.

Whilst cruelty was not improved by art,

And rage not furnished yet with sword or dart;

With fists, or boughs, or stones, the warriors fought;

These were the only weapons Nature taught:

But when flames burnt the trees and scorched the ground,

Then brass appeared, and iron fit to wound.

Brass first was used, because the softer ore,

And earth's cold veins contained a greater store.

Creech.

I have only to observe farther on this head,

1\. That the ancient Greeks and Romans went constantly armed;

2\. That before they engaged they always ate together; and

3\. That they commenced every attack with prayer to the gods for
success.

[Ephesians 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eph 6:14</span></span>

Stand therefore - Prepare yourselves for combat, having your loins girt
about with truth. He had told them before to take the whole armor of
God, [Eph 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#013), and to put on this
whole armor. Having got all the pieces of it together, and the defensive
parts put on, they were then to gird them close to their bodies with the
ζωμα or girdle, and instead of a fine ornamented belt, such as the
ancient warriors used, they were to have truth. The Gospel of Jesus
Christ is the truth of God; unless this be known and conscientiously
believed no man can enter the spiritual warfare with any advantage or
prospect of success. By this alone we discover who our enemies are, and
how they come on to attack us; and by this we know where our strength
lies; and, as the truth is great, and must prevail, we are to gird
ourselves with this against all false religion, and the various winds of
doctrine by which cunning men and insidious devils lie in wait to
deceive. Truth may be taken here for sincerity; for if a man be not
conscious to himself that his heart is right before God, and that he
makes no false pretences to religion, in vain does he enter the
spiritual lists. This alone can give him confidence: -

\- Hic murus aheneus esto,

Nil conscire sibi, nulla pallescere culpa.

Let this be my brazen wall; that no man can reproach me with a crime,
and that I am conscious of my own integrity.

The breast-plate of righteousness - What the θωραξ or breast-plate was,
see before. The word righteousness, δικαισυνη, we have often had
occasion to note, is a word of very extensive import: it signifies the
principle of righteousness; it signifies the practice of righteousness,
or living a holy life; it signifies God's method of justifying sinners;
and it signifies justification itself. Here it may imply a consciousness
of justification through the blood of the cross; the principle of
righteousness or true holiness implanted in the heart; and a holy life,
a life regulated according to the testimonies of God. As the
breast-plate defends the heart and lungs, and all those vital
functionaries that are contained in what is called the region of the
thorax; so this righteousness, this life of God in the soul of man,
defends every thing on which the man's spiritual existence depends.
While he possesses this principle, and acts from it, his spiritual and
eternal life is secure.

[Ephesians 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eph 6:15</span></span>

Your feet shod - The κνημιδες, or greaves, have been already described;
they were deemed of essential importance in the ancient armor; if the
feet or legs are materially wounded, a man can neither stand to resist
his foe, pursue him if vanquished, nor flee from him should he have the
worst of the fight.

That the apostle has obedience to the Gospel in general in view, there
can be no doubt; but he appears to have more than this, a readiness to
publish the Gospel: for, How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet
of him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth Peace; that bringeth
good tidings of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion,
Thy God reigneth! [Isa 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007); [Rom
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#015).

The Israelites were commanded to eat the passover with their feet shod,
to show that they were ready for their journey. And our Lord commands
his disciples to be shod with sandals, that they might be ready to go
and publish the Gospel, as the Israelites were to go to possess the
promised land. Every Christian should consider himself on his journey
from a strange land to his own country, and not only stand every moment
prepared to proceed, but be every moment in actual progress towards his
home.

The preparation of the Gospel - The word ἑτοιμασια which we translate
preparation, is variously understood: some think it means an habitual
readiness in walking in the way prescribed by the Gospel; others that
firmness and solidity which the Gospel gives to them who conscientiously
believe its doctrines; others, those virtues and graces which in the
first planting of Christianity were indispensably necessary to those who
published it.

Should we take the word preparation in its common acceptation, it may
imply that, by a conscientious belief of the Gospel, receiving the
salvation provided by its author, and walking in the way of obedience
which is pointed out by it, the soul is prepared for the kingdom of
heaven.

The Gospel is termed the Gospel of peace, because it establishes peace
between God and man, and proclaims peace and good will to the universe.
Contentions, strife, quarrels, and all wars, being as alien from its
nature and design, as they are opposed to the nature of Him who is love
and compassion to man.

[Ephesians 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eph 6:16</span></span>

Above all, (Επι πασιν, over all the rest of the armor), taking the
shield of faith - In the word θυρεος, thureos, the apostle alludes to
the great oblong shield, or scutum, which covers the whole body. See its
description before. And as faith is the grace by which all others are
preserved and rendered active, so it is properly represented here under
the notion of a shield, by which the whole body is covered and
protected. Faith, in this place, must mean that evidence of things
unseen which every genuine believer has, that God, for Christ's sake,
has blotted out his sins, and by which he is enabled to call God his
Father, and feel him to be his portion. It is such an appropriating
faith as this which can quench any dart of the devil.

The fiery darts of the wicked - Βελος, a dart, signifies any kind of
missile weapon; every thing that is projected to a distance by the hand,
as a javelin, or short spear; or by a bow, as an arrow; or a stone by a
sling.

The fiery darts - Τα βελη τα πεπυρωμενα. It is probable that the apostle
alludes to the darts called falarica, which were headed with lead, in or
about which some combustible stuff was placed that took fire in the
passage of the arrow through the air, and often burnt up the enemy's
engines, ships, etc.; they were calculated also to stick in the shields
and set them on fire. Some think that poisoned arrows may be intended,
which are called fiery from the burning heat produced in the bodies of
those who were wounded by them. To quench or extinguish such fiery darts
the shields were ordinarily covered with metal on the outside, and thus
the fire was prevented from catching hold of the shield. When they stuck
on a shield of another kind and set it on fire, the soldier was obliged
to cast it away, and thus became defenceless.

The fiery darts of the wicked, του πονηρου, or devil, are evil thoughts,
and strong injections, as they are termed, which in the unregenerate
inflame the passions, and excite the soul to acts of transgression.
While the faith is strong in Christ it acts as a shield to quench these.
He who walks so as to feel the witness of God's Spirit that he is his
child, has all evil thoughts in abhorrence; and, though they pass
through his mind, they never fix in his passions. They are caught on
this shield, blunted, and extinguished.

[Ephesians 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eph 6:17</span></span>

Take the helmet of salvation - Or, as it is expressed, [Th1
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#008), And for a helmet, the hope of
salvation. It has already been observed, in the description of the
Grecian armor, that on the crest and other parts of the helmet were a
great variety of emblematical figures, and that it is very likely the
apostle refers to helmets which had on them an emblematical
representation of hope; viz. that the person should be safe who wore it,
that he should be prosperous in all his engagements, and ever escape
safe from battle. So the hope of conquering every adversary and
surmounting every difficulty, through the blood of the Lamb, is as a
helmet that protects the head; an impenetrable one, that the blow of the
battle-axe cannot cleave. The hope of continual safety and protection,
built on the promises of God, to which the upright follower of Christ
feels he has a Divine right, protects the understanding from being
darkened, and the judgment from being confused by any temptations of
Satan, or subtle arguments of the sophistical ungodly. He who carries
Christ in his heart cannot be cheated out of the hope of his heaven,

The sword of the Spirit - See what is said before on ξιφος and μαχαιρα,
in the account of the Greek armor ([Eph
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#013) (note)). The sword of which St.
Paul speaks is, as he explains it, the word of God; that is, the
revelation which God has given of himself, or what we call the Holy
Scriptures. This is called the sword of the Spirit, because it comes
from the Holy Spirit, and receives its fulfillment in the soul through
the operation of the Holy Spirit. An ability to quote this on proper
occasions, and especially in times of temptation and trial, has a
wonderful tendency to cut in pieces the snares of the adversary. In
God's word a genuine Christian may have unlimited confidence, and to
every purpose to which it is applicable it may be brought with the
greatest effect. The shield, faith, and the sword - the word of God, or
faith in God's unchangeable word, are the principal armor of the soul.
He in whom the word of God dwells richly, and who has that faith by
which he knows that he has redemption, even the forgiveness of sins,
need not fear the power of any adversary. He stands fast in the liberty
wherewith Christ hath made him free. Some suppose that του Πνευματος, of
the Spirit, should be understood of our own spirit or soul; the word of
God being the proper sword of the soul, or that offensive weapon the
only one which the soul uses. But though it is true that every Christian
soul has this for its sword, yet the first meaning is the most likely.

[Ephesians 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eph 6:18</span></span>

Praying always - The apostle does not put praying among the armor; had
he done so he would have referred it, as he has done all the rest, to
some of the Grecian armor; but as he does not do this, therefore we
conclude that his account of the armor is ended, and that now, having
equipped his spiritual soldier, he shows him the necessity of praying,
that he may successfully resist those principalities, powers, the rulers
of the darkness of this world, and the spiritual wickednesses in
heavenly places, with whom he has to contend. The panoply, or whole
armor of God, consists in,

1\. the girdle;

2\. the breast-plate;

3\. the greaves;

4\. the shield;

5\. the helmet; and

6\. the sword. He who had these was completely armed.

And as it was the custom of the Grecian armies, before they engaged, to
offer prayers to the gods for their success, the apostle shows that
these spiritual warriors must depend on the Captain of their salvation,
and pray with all prayer, i.e. incessantly, being always in the spirit
of prayer, so that they should be ever ready for public, private,
mental, or ejaculatory prayer, always depending on Him who can alone
save, and who alone can destroy.

When the apostle exhorts Christians to pray with all prayer, we may at
once see that he neither means spiritual nor formal prayer, in exclusion
of the other. Praying, προσευχομενοι, refers to the state of the spirit
as well as to the act.

With all prayer - Refers to the different kinds of prayer that is
performed in public, in the family, in the closet, in business, on the
way, in the heart without a voice, and with the voice from the heart.
All those are necessary to the genuine Christian; and he whose heart is
right with God will be frequent in the whole. "Some there are," says a
very pious and learned writer, who use only mental prayer or
ejaculations, and think they are in a state of grace, and use a way of
worship far superior to any other; but such only fancy themselves to be
above what is really above them; it requiring far more grace to be
enabled to pour out a fervent and continued prayer, than to offer up
mental aspirations." Rev. J. Wesley.

And supplication - There is a difference between προσευχη, prayer, and
δεησις, supplication. Some think the former means prayer for the
attainment of good; the latter, prayer for averting evil. Supplication
however seems to mean prayer continued in, strong and incessant
pleadings, till the evil is averted, or the good communicated. There are
two things that must be attended to in prayer.

1\. That it be εν παντι καιρῳ, in every time, season, or opportunity;

2\. That it should be εν Πνευματι, in or through the Spirit - that the
heart should be engaged in it, and that its infirmities should be helped
by the Holy Ghost,

Watching thereunto - Being always on your guard lest your enemies should
surprise you. Watch, not only against evil, but also for opportunities
to do good, and for opportunities to receive good. Without watchfulness,
prayer and all the spiritual armor will be ineffectual.

With all perseverance - Being always intent on your object, and never
losing sight of your danger, or of your interest. The word implies
stretching out the neck, and looking about, in order to discern an enemy
at a distance.

For all saints - For all Christians; for this was the character by which
they were generally distinguished.

[Ephesians 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eph 6:19</span></span>

And for me, that utterance may be given unto me - Ἱνα μοι δοθειη λογος.
Kypke has proved by many examples that λογον διδοναι signifies
permission and power to defend one's self in a court of justice; and
this sense of the phrase is perfectly applicable to the case of St.
Paul, who was an ambassador in bonds, ([Eph
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#020)), and expected to be called to a
public hearing, in which he was not only to defend himself, but to prove
the truth and excellency of the Christian religion. And we learn, from
[Phi 1:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#012), that he had his desire
in this respect; for the things which happened to him fell out to the
furtherance of the Gospel, so that his bonds in Christ were manifest in
all the palace, and in all other places. Thus God had enabled him to
make a most noble defense, by which the Gospel acquired great credit.

The mystery of the Gospel - The whole doctrine of Christ, not fully
revealed previously to that time.

[Ephesians 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eph 6:20</span></span>

An ambassador in bonds - An ambassador being the representative of his
king, his person was in all civilized countries held sacred. Contrary to
the rights of nations, this ambassador of the King of heaven was put in
chains! He had however the opportunity of defending himself, and of
vindicating the honor of his Master. See above.

As I ought to speak - As becomes the dignity and the importance of the
subject.

[Ephesians 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eph 6:21</span></span>

That ye also - As well as other Churches to whom I have communicated the
dealings both of God and man to me.

May know my affairs - May be acquainted with my situation and
circumstances.

And how I do - How I employ my time, and what fruit there is of my
apostolical labors.

Tychicus, a beloved brother - We learn, from [Act
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#004), that Tychicus was of Asia, and
that he was a useful companion of St. Paul. See the note on [Act
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#004).

This same person, and with the same character and commendation, is
mentioned in the Epistle to the Colossians, [Col
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#007). He is mentioned also in [Tit
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#012), and in [Ti2
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#012); from all these places it is
evident that he was a person in whom the apostle had the highest
confidence, and that he was a very eminent minister of Christ.

[Ephesians 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eph 6:22</span></span>

Whom I have sent - for the same purpose - Namely, that the Ephesians
might know his affairs, and those of the Church at Rome: messengers of
this kind frequently passed between the Churches in those ancient times.

Comfort your hearts - By showing you how powerfully he was upheld in all
his tribulations, and how God turned his bonds to the furtherance of the
Gospel. This must have been great consolation to all the followers of
God; and particularly to those in Ephesus or Laodicea, or to whomsoever
the epistle was directed. The question, To whom was it sent? is divided
between the Ephesians and the Laodiceans. Dr. Lardner has argued
strongly in favor of the former; Dr. Paley not less so in favor of the
latter.

[Ephesians 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eph 6:23</span></span>

Peace be to the brethren - If the epistle were really sent to the
Ephesians, a people with whom the apostle was so intimately acquainted,
it is strange that he mentions no person by name. This objection, on
which Dr. Paley lays great stress, (see the preface to this epistle),
has not been successfully answered.

Peace - All prosperity, and continual union with God and among
yourselves; and love to God and man, the principle of all obedience and
union; with faith, continually increasing, and growing stronger and
stronger, from God the Father, as the fountain of all our mercies, and
the Lord Jesus Christ, through whose sacrifice and mediation they all
come.

[Ephesians 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">eph 6:24</span></span>

Grace be with all them - May the Divine favor, and all the benedictions
flowing from it, be with all them who love our Lord Jesus Christ, who
has so loved us as to give his life to redeem ours, and to save us unto
life eternal.

In sincerity - Εν αφθαρσια· In incorruptibility. Those who show the
genuineness of their love, by walking before him in holiness of life.
Many profess to love our Lord Jesus who are corrupt in all their ways;
on these the grace or favor of God cannot rest; they profess to know
him, but in works deny him. Such can neither expect favor here, nor
hereafter.

Amen - This is wanting in ABFG, and some others. It is, however, more
likely to be a genuine subscription here than most others of its kind.
The apostle might have sealed his most earnest wish by this word, which
means not so much, so be it! or may it be so! but rather implies the
faithfulness of him who had given the promises, and whose prerogative it
was to give effect to the prayers which his own Spirit had inspired.

The principal subscriptions to this epistle are the following: To the
Ephesians. The Epistle to the Ephesians is finished. To the Ephesians,
written from Rome. To the Ephesians, written from Rome by Tychicus.
(This is the subscription which we have followed; and it is that of the
larger number of modern MSS. and editions.) The Epistle to the
Ephesians, written from Rome, and sent by Tychicus - Syriac. To the
Ephesians. - aethiopic. Vulgate, no subscription. The end of this
epistle, which was written from Rome by Tychicus. Praise be to God for
ever. Amen. - Arabic. Written at Rome, and sent by Tychicus. - Coptic.
The Sahidic is defective. The Epistle to the Ephesians is ended, which
was written at Rome by Tychicus. - Philoxenian Syriac.

We have had already occasion to observe that the subscriptions to the
sacred books were not written by the authors themselves, but were added
in a much later age, and generally by unskillful hands. They are
consequently not much to be depended on, and never should be quoted as a
part of the Divine oracles.

1\. It may be supposed that on the principal subject of this concluding
chapter, the armor of God, I should have been much more diffuse. I
answer, my constant aim is just to say enough, and no more, on any
point. Whether I attain this, in general, or not, I can still say it is
what I have desired. As to the Christian armor, it does not appear to me
that the apostle has couched such a profusion of mystical meaning in it
as to require a huge volume to explain. I believe the Ephesians did not
understand it so; nor did the primitive Church of God. Men of rich
imaginations may write large volumes on such subjects; but when they
come to be fairly examined, they will be found not to be explanations of
the text, on which they professedly treat, but immense bodies of
divinity, in which the peculiar creed of the writer, both with respect
to doctrine and discipline, is amply set forth. Mr. Gurnal's Christian
Armor contains a great many excellences; but surely it does not require
such a volume to explain the five verses of this chapter, in which the
apostle speaks of the spiritual armor. The grand design of the apostle
was to show that truth, righteousness, obedience to the Gospel, faith in
our Lord Jesus Christ, a well grounded hope of salvation, a thorough
knowledge of the word of God, and a continual dependence on and
application to him by prayer, were essentially necessary to every soul
who desired to walk uprightly in this life, and finally to attain
everlasting blessedness. This is the obvious meaning of the apostle; in
this sense it was understood by the Ephesians, and by the primitive
Church; we may amplify it as we please.

2\. In two or three places, in the preceding notes, I have referred to a
piece on a very remarkable rule relative to the Greek article, to be
introduced at the end. From the labors of several learned men this
subject has acquired considerable importance, and has excited no small
interest among Biblical critics. The late benevolent, learned, and
excellent Mr. Granville Sharp was, I believe, the first who brought this
subject fairly before the public; he was followed by the Rev. Dr.
Wordsworth, a learned and intelligent clergyman of the Established
Church.

The Rev. Dr. Middleton, late bishop of Calcutta, has presented the
subject in all its force and excellence, fortified by innumerable
proofs, and a great variety of critical disquisition. The principal
design of these writers was to exhibit a new and substantial mode of
proving the Divinity of our Lord and Savior. Their works are before the
public, and within the reach of all who are capable of judging of this
mode of proof.

The piece which I now subjoin is the result of the researches of one of
my literary friends, H. S. Boyd, Esq., author of Translations from
Chrysostom, etc., who has read the Greek writers, both sacred and
profane, with peculiar attention; and has collected a vast number of
additional examples, both from prose and poetic writers, for the
confirmation and illustration of the rule in question, and in support of
the great doctrine of the Godhead of Christ.

The critical reader, who has entered into this subject, will be glad to
see such a number of pointed examples brought within his reach, which at
once serve the purpose both of philology and divinity. The learned
author has transmitted them to me for the purpose of insertion in this
place; but want of room has obliged me to omit several of his
quotations.

I would not wish the reader to suppose that these are the only proofs of
the grand doctrine of the Godhead of Christ; they are not: the Holy
Scripture, in its plain, obvious meaning, independently of such
criticism, affords the most luminous and convincing proofs of the
doctrine in question; but this is no sufficient reason that we should
reject any additional light which may come to us in the way of Divine
Providence.

Finished the correction for a new edition, Dec. 15th, 1831.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philippians Introduction](phi000)

</div>
