<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Esther Index](est.md)  
  [Previous](est007)  [Next](est009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#001.md)

[Esther](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">est 8:0</span></span>

Ahasuerus invests Mordecai with the offices and dignities possessed by
Haman, [Est 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#001.md), [Est
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#002.md). Esther begs that the decree of
destruction gone out against the Jews may be reversed, [Est
8:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#003.md). He informs her that the acts
that had once passed the kings seal cannot be reversed; but he instructs
her and Mordecai to write other letters in his name, and seal them with
his seal, and send them to all the provinces in the empire, giving the
Jews full liberty to defend themselves; which is accordingly done; and
the letters are sent off with the utmost speed to all the provinces: in
consequence, the Jews prepare for their own defense, [Est
8:8-14](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#008.md). Mordecai appears publicly in
the dress of his high office, [Est
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#015.md). The Jews rejoice in every place;
and many of the people become Jews, because the fear of the Jews had
fallen upon them, [Est 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#016.md), [Est
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#017.md).

[Esther 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 8:1</span></span>

The king - give the house of Haman - As Haman was found guilty of
treasonable practices against the peace and prosperity of the king and
his empire, his life was forfeited and his goods confiscated. And as
Mordecai had been the means of preserving the king's life, and was the
principal object of Haman's malice, it was but just to confer his
property upon him, as well as his dignity and office, as Mordecai was
found deserving of the former, and fit to discharge the duties of the
latter.

[Esther 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">est 8:2</span></span>

The king took off his ring - In the ring was the seal of the king.
Giving the ring to Mordecai was tantamount to giving him the seal of the
kingdom, and constituting him the same as lord chancellor among us.

[Esther 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">est 8:6</span></span>

To see the destruction of my kindred? - She had now informed the king
that she was cousin to Mordecai, and consequently a Jewess; and though
her own life and that of Mordecai were no longer in danger, Haman being
dead, yet the decree that had gone forth was in full force against the
Jews; and if not repealed, their destruction would be inevitable.

[Esther 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">est 8:8</span></span>

May no man reverse - Whatever had passed the royal signet could never be
revoked; no succeeding edict could destroy or repeal a preceding one:
but one of a similar nature to the Jews against the Persians, as that to
the Persians was against the Jews, might be enacted, and thus the Jews
be enabled legitimately to defend themselves; and, consequently, placed
on an equal footing with their enemies.

[Esther 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">est 8:9</span></span>

The month Sivan - This answers to a part of our May and June.

[Esther 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">est 8:10</span></span>

On mules, camels, and young dromedaries - What these beasts were is
difficult to say. The word רכש rechesh, which we translate mules,
signifies a swift chariot horse.

The strange word אחשתרנים achashteranim is probably a Persian word, but
perhaps incurably corrupted. The most likely derivation is that of
Bochart, from the Persian akhash, huge, large, rough, and aster, a mule;
large mules.

The words בני הרמכים beney harammachim, the sons of mares, which we
translate dromedaries, are supposed to signify mules, produced between
the he ass and the mare, to distinguish them from those produced between
the stallion and the ass, But there is really so much confusion about
these matters, and so little consent among learned men as to the
signification of these words, and even the true knowledge of them is of
such little importance, that we may well rest contented with such names
as our modern translations have given us. They were, no doubt, the
swiftest and hardiest beasts that the city or country could produce.

[Esther 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">est 8:11</span></span>

To destroy, to slay, and to cause to perish - The same words as in
Haman's decree: therefore the Jews had as much authority to slay their
enemies, as their enemies had to slay them.

Little ones and women - This was the ordinary custom, to destroy the
whole family of those convicted of great crimes; and whether this was
right or wrong, it was the custom of the people, and according to the
laws. Besides, as this edict was to give the Jews the same power against
their enemies as they had by the former decree against them, and the
women and children were there included; consequently they must be
included here.

[Esther 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">est 8:14</span></span>

The decree was given at Shushan - The contrary effect which it was to
produce considered, this decree was in every respect like the former.
See [Est 3:8-15](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#008.md).

[Esther 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">est 8:15</span></span>

Blue and white - Probably stripe interchanged with stripe; or blue faced
and bordered with white fur.

A great crown of gold - A large turban, ornamented with gold, jewels,
etc.

Fine linen and purple - See on [Gen
41:42](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#042) (note.md). The בץ buts, here
mentioned, is most probably the same with the byssus of the ancients;
supposed to be the beautiful tuft or beard, growing out of the side of
the pinna longa, a very large species of muscle, found on the coasts of
the Mediterranean Sea, of which there are a pair of gloves in the
British Museum. This byssus I have described elsewhere.

Shushan - was glad - Haman was too proud to be popular; few lamented his
fall.

[Esther 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">est 8:17</span></span>

Many - became Jews; for - fear - These were a species of converts not
likely to bring much honor to true religion: but the sacred historian
states the simple fact. They did profess Judaism for fear of the Jews,
whether they continued steady in that faith or not.

It is only the Gospel which will not admit of coercion for the
propagation and establishment of its doctrines. It is a spiritual
system, and can be propagated only by spiritual influence. As it
proclaims holiness of heart and life, which nothing but the Spirit of
God can produce, so it is the Spirit of God alone that can persuade the
understanding and change the heart. If the kingdom of Christ were of
this world, then would his servants fight. But it is not from hence.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 9](est009.md)

</div>
