<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Esther Index](est)  
  [Previous](est003)  [Next](est005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#001)

[Esther](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">est 4:0</span></span>

On hearing the king's decree to exterminate the Jews, Mordecai mourns,
and clothes himself in sackcloth, [Est
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#001), [Est
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#002). The Jews are filled with
consternation, [Est 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#003). Esther,
perceiving Mordecai in distress at the palace gate, sends her servant
Hatach to inquire the reason, [Est
4:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#004). Hatach returns with the
information, and also the express desire of Mordecai that she should go
instantly to the king, and make supplication in behalf of her people,
[Est 4:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#007). Esther excuses herself on
the ground that she had not been called by the king for thirty days
past; and that the law was such that any one approaching his presence,
without express invitation, should be put to death, unless the king
should, in peculiar clemency, stretch out to such persons the golden
scepter, [Est 4:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#010). Mordecai
returns an answer, insisting on her compliance, [Est
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#013), [Est
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#014). She then orders Mordecai to
gather all the Jews of Shushan, and fast for her success three days,
night and day, and resolves to make the attempt, though at the risk of
her life, [Est 4:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#015).

[Esther 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 4:1</span></span>

Mordecai rent his clothes - He gave every demonstration of the most
poignant and oppressive grief. Nor did he hide this from the city; and
the Greek says that he uttered these words aloud: Αιρεται εθνος μηδεν
ηδικηκος, A people are going to be destroyed, who have done no evil!

[Esther 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">est 4:2</span></span>

Before the king's gate - He could not enter into the gate, of the place
where the officers waited, because he was in the habit of a mourner; for
this would have been contrary to law.

[Esther 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">est 4:3</span></span>

Fasting, and weeping, and wailing - How astonishing, that in all this
there is not the slightest intimation given of praying to God!

[Esther 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">est 4:4</span></span>

Sent raiment - She supposed that he must have been spoiled of his
raiment by some means; and therefore sent him clothing.

[Esther 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">est 4:5</span></span>

Then called Esther for Hatach - This eunuch the king had appointed to
wait upon her, partly, as is still the case in the East, to serve her,
and partly, to observe her conduct; for no despot is ever exempt from a
twofold torture, jealousy and suspicion.

[Esther 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">est 4:8</span></span>

That she should go in unto the king - The Greek adds, "Remember the time
of your low estate, and in what manner you have been nourished, and
carried in my arms; and that Haman, who is next to the king, has got a
decree for our destruction. Pray, therefore, to the Lord, and plead with
the king, that we may be delivered from death." But there is not a word
of this either in the Hebrew, Syriac, or Vulgate.

[Esther 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">est 4:11</span></span>

Into the inner court - We have already seen that the Persian sovereigns
affected the highest degree of majesty, even to the assuming of Divine
honors. No man nor woman dared to appear unveiled before them, without
hazarding their lives; into the inner chamber of the harem no person
ever entered but the king, and the woman he had chosen to call thither.
None even of his courtiers or ministers dared to appear there; nor the
most beloved of his concubines, except led thither by himself, or
ordered to come to him. Here was Esther's difficulty; and that
difficulty was now increased by the circumstance of her not having been
sent for to the king's bed for thirty days. In the last verse of the
preceding chapter we find that the king and Haman sat down to drink. It
is very likely that this wicked man had endeavored to draw the king's
attention from the queen, that his affection might be lessened, as he
must have known something of the relationship between her and Mordecai;
and consequently viewed her as a person who, in all probability, might
stand much in the way of the accomplishment of his designs. I cannot but
think that he had been the cause why Esther had not seen the king for
thirty days.

[Esther 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">est 4:13</span></span>

Think not - that thou shalt escape - This confirms the suspicion that
Haman knew something of the relationship between Mordecai and Esther;
and therefore he gives her to understand that, although in the king's
palace, she should no more escape than the Jews.

[Esther 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">est 4:14</span></span>

Then shall there enlargement and deliverance arise - He had a confidence
that deliverance would come by some means; and he thought that Esther
would be the most likely; and that, if she did not use the influence
which her providential station gave her, she would be highly culpable.

And who knoweth whether thou art come - As if he had said, "Is it likely
that Divine providence would have so distinguished thee, and raised thee
from a state of abject obscurity, merely for thy own sake? Must it not
have been on some public account! Did not he see what was coming? and
has he not put thee in the place where thou mayest counteract one of the
most ruinous purposes ever formed?" Is there a human being who has not
some particular station by an especial providence, at some particular
time, in which he can be of some essential service to his neighbor, in
averting evil or procuring good, if he be but faithful to the grace and
opportunity afforded by this station? Who dares give a negative to these
questions? We lose much, both in reference to ourselves and others, by
not adverting to our providental situation and circumstances. While on
this subject, I will give the reader two important sayings, from two
eminent men, both keen observers of human nature, and deeply attentive
in all such cases to the operations of Divine providence: -

"To every thing there is a season; and a time to every purpose under
heaven. Therefore withhold not good from them to whom it is due, when it
is in the power of thy hand to do it."

Solomon.

There is a tide in the affairs of men,

Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune;

Omitted, all the voyage of their life

Is bound in shallows, and in miseries.

Shakespeare.

Has there not been a case, within time of memory, when evil was designed
against a whole people, through the Hamans who had poisoned the ears of
well-intentioned men; in which one poor man, in consequence of a
situation into which he was brought by an astonishing providence, used
the influence which his situation gave him; and, by the mercy of his
God, turned the whole evil aside? By the association of ideas the
following passage will present itself to the reader's memory, who may
have any acquaintance with the circumstance: -

"There was a little city, and few men within it; and there came a great
king against it, and besieged it, and built great bulwarks against it.
Now there was found in it a poor wise man, and he by his wisdom
delivered the city; yet no man remembered that same poor man!"

"Then said, I, Ah, Lord God! They say of me, Doth He Not Speak
Parables?" Rem acu tetigi.

[Esther 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">est 4:16</span></span>

Fast ye for me, and neither eat nor drink three days - What a strange
thing, that still we hear nothing of prayer, nor of God! What is the
ground on which we can account for this total silence? I know it not.
She could not suppose there was any charm in fasting, sackcloth
garments, and lying on the ground. If these were not done to turn away
the displeasure of God, which seemed now to have unchained their enemies
against them, what were they done for?

If I perish, I perish - If I lose my life in this attempt to save my
people, I shall lose it cheerfully. I see it is my duty to make the
attempt; and, come what will, I am resolved to do it. She must, however,
have depended much on the efficacy of the humiliations she prescribed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 5](est005)

</div>
