<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Esther Index](est)  
  [Previous](est008)  [Next](est010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#001)

[Esther](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">est 9:0</span></span>

On the thirteenth of the month Adar the Jews destroy their enemies, and
the governors of the provinces assist them, [Est
9:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#001). They slay five hundred in
Shushan, and kill the ten sons of Haman, but take no spoil, [Est
9:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#006). The king is informed of the
slaughter in Shushan, [Est 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#011). He
desires to know what Esther requests farther; who begs that the Jews may
be permitted to act on the following day as they had done on the
preceding, and that Haman's sons may be hanged upon the gallows; which
is granted; and they slay three hundred more in Shushan, and in the
other provinces seventy-five thousand, [Est
9:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#012). A recapitulation of what was
done; and of the appointment of the feast of Purim to be observed
through all their generations every year, [Est
9:17-28](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#017). Esther writes to confirm this
appointment, [Est 9:29-32](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#029).

[Esther 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 9:1</span></span>

Now in the twelfth month - What a number of providences, and none of
them apparently of an extraordinary nature, concurred to preserve a
people so signally, and to all human appearance so inevitably, doomed to
destruction! None are ever too low for God to lift up, or too high for
God to cast down. Must not these heathens have observed that the
uncontrollable hand of an Almighty Being had worked in behalf of the
Jews? And must not this have had a powerful tendency to discredit the
idolatry of the country?

[Esther 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">est 9:3</span></span>

And all the rulers of the provinces - Mordecai being raised to the
highest confidence of the king, and to have authority over the whole
realm, these officers assisted the Jews, no doubt, with the troops under
their command, to overthrow those who availed themselves of the former
decree to molest the Jews. For it does not appear that the Jews slew any
person who did not rise up to destroy them. See [Est
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#005).

[Esther 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">est 9:6</span></span>

And in Shushan - It is strange that in this city, where the king's mind
must have been so well known, there should be found five hundred persons
to rise up in hostility against those whom they knew the king
befriended!

[Esther 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">est 9:10</span></span>

The ten sons of Haman - Their names are given above. And it is remarked
here, and in [Est 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#016), where the
account is given of the number slain in the provinces, that the Jews
laid no hands on the spoil. They stood for their lives, and gave full
proof that they sought their own personal safety, and not the property
of their enemies, though the decree in their favor gave them authority
to take the property of all those who were their adversaries, [Est
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#011).

[Esther 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">est 9:13</span></span>

Let Haman's ten sons be hanged - They had been slain the preceding day,
and now she requests that they may be exposed on posts or gibbets, as a
terror to those who sought the destruction of the Jews.

[Esther 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">est 9:15</span></span>

And slew three hundred men - Esther had probably been informed by
Mordecai that there were still many enemies of the Jews who sought their
destruction, who had escaped the preceding day; and, therefore, begs
that this second day be added to the former permission. This being
accordingly granted, they found three hundred more, in all eight
hundred. And thus Susa was purged of all their enemies.

[Esther 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">est 9:18</span></span>

The Jews - assembled - on the thirteenth - and on the fourteenth - These
two days they were employed in slaying their enemies; and they rested on
the fifteenth.

[Esther 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">est 9:19</span></span>

The Jews of the villages - They joined that to the preceding day, and
made it a day of festivity, and of sending portions to each other; that
is, the rich sent portions of the sacrifices slain on this occasion to
the poor, that they also might be enabled to make the day a day of
festivity; that as the sorrow was general, so also might the joy be.

It is worthy of remark that the ancient Itala or Ante-hieronymian
version of this book omits the whole of these nineteen verses. Query,
Were they originally in this book?

[Esther 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">est 9:20</span></span>

Mordecai wrote these things - It has been supposed that thus far that
part of the book of Esther, which was written by Mordecai extends: what
follows to the end, was probably added either by Ezra, or the men of the
Great Synagogue; though what is said here may refer only to the letters
sent by Mordecai to the Jews of the provinces. From this to the end of
the chapter is nothing else than a recapitulation of the chief heads of
the preceding history, and an account of the appointment of an annual
feast, called the feast of Purim, in commemoration of their providential
deliverance from the malice of Haman.

[Esther 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">est 9:23</span></span>

The Jews undertook to do as they had begun - They had already kept the
fifteenth day, and some of them in the country the fourteenth also, as a
day of rejoicing: Mordecai wrote to them to bind themselves and their
successors, and all their proselytes, to celebrate this as an annual
feast throughout all their generations; and this they undertook to do.
And it has been observed among them, in all places of their dispersion,
from that day to the present time, without any interruption.

[Esther 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">est 9:26</span></span>

They called these days Purim - That is from pari, the lot; because, as
we have seen, Haman cast lots to find what month, and what day of the
month, would be the most favorable for the accomplishment of his bloody
designs against the Jews. See on [Est
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#007) (note).

And of that which they had seen - The first letter to which this second
refers, must be that sent by Mordecai himself. See [Est
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#020).

[Esther 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">est 9:29</span></span>

Esther - wrote with all authority - Esther and Mordecai had the king's
license so to do: and their own authority was great and extensive.

[Esther 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">est 9:31</span></span>

As they had decreed for themselves and for their seed - There is no
mention of their receiving the approbation of any high priest, nor of
any authority beyond that of Mordecai and Esther; the king could not
join in such a business, as he had nothing to do with the Jewish
religion, that not being the religion of the country.

[Esther 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">est 9:32</span></span>

The decree of Esther confirmed these matters - It was received by the
Jews universally with all respect, and they bound themselves to abide by
it.

The Vulgate gives a strange turn to this verse: Et omnia quae libri
hujus, qui vocatur Esther, historia continentur; "And all things which
are contained in the history of this book, which is called Esther."

The Targum says, And by the word of Esther all these things relative to
Purim were confirmed; and the roll was transcribed in this book. The
Syriac is the same as the Hebrew, and the Septuagint in this place not
very different.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 10](est010)

</div>
