<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Esther Index](est)  
  [Previous](est004)  [Next](est006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#001)

[Esther](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">est 5:0</span></span>

Esther presents herself before the king, and finds favor in his sight,
[Est 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#001), [Est
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#002). He asks what her request is, and
promises to grant it, [Est 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#003). She
invites him and Haman to a banquet, which they accept, [Est
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#004), [Est
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#005). He then desires to know her
request; and she promises to make it known on the morrow, if they will
again come to her banquet, [Est 5:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#006).
Haman, though overjoyed at the manner in which he was received by the
queen, is indignant at the indifference with which he is treated by
Mordecai, [Est 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#009). He goes home, and
complains of this conduct to his friends, and his wife Zeresh, [Est
5:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#010). They counsel him to make a
gallows of fifty cubits high, and to request the king that Mordecai may
be hanged on it, which they take for granted the king will not refuse;
and the gallows is made accordingly, [Est
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#014).

[Esther 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 5:1</span></span>

On the third day - Most probably the third day of the fast which she has
prescribed to Mordecai and the Jews.

[Esther 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">est 5:2</span></span>

She obtained favor in his sight - The Septuagint represents "the king as
being at first greatly enraged when he saw Esther, because she had dared
to appear before him unveiled, and she, perceiving this, was so
terrified that she fainted away; on which the king, touched with
tenderness, sprung from his throne, took her up in his arms, laid the
golden scepter on her neck, and spoke to her in the most endearing
manner." This is more circumstantial than the Hebrew, but is not
contrary to it.

The golden scepter that was in his hand - That the kings of Persia did
wear a golden scepter, we have the following proof in Xenophon: Ὁτι ου
τοδε το χρυσουν σκηπτρον το την βασιλειαν διασωξον εστιν, αλλ' πιστοι
φιλοι σκηπτρον βασιλευσιν αληθεστατον και ασφαλεστατον. See Cyrop., lib.
viii., p. 139, edit. Steph. 1581. It is not, said Cyrus to his son
Cambyses, the Golden Sceptre that saves the kingdom; faithful friends
are the truest and safest scepter of the empire.

[Esther 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">est 5:4</span></span>

Let the king and Haman come this day unto the banquet - It was necessary
to invite Haman to prevent his suspicion, and that he might not take any
hasty step which might have prevented the execution of the great design.

[Esther 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">est 5:6</span></span>

The banquet of wine - At that part of the banquet when the wine was
introduced.

[Esther 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">est 5:8</span></span>

I will do to-morrow - She saw she was gaining on the king's affections;
but she was not yet sufficiently confident; and therefore wished another
interview, that she might ingratiate herself more fully in the king's
favor, and thus secure the success of her design. But Providence
disposed of things thus, to give time for the important event mentioned
in the succeeding chapter.

[Esther 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">est 5:9</span></span>

That he stood not up, nor moved for him - This was certainly carrying
his integrity or inflexibility to the highest pitch. But still we are
left to conjecture that some reverence was required, which Mordecai
could not conscientiously pay.

[Esther 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">est 5:11</span></span>

The multitude of his children - The Asiatic sovereigns delight in the
number of their children; and this is one cause why they take so many
wives and concubines.

[Esther 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">est 5:13</span></span>

Yet all this availeth me nothing - Pride will ever render its possessor
unhappy. He has such a high opinion of his own worth, that he conceives
himself defrauded by every one who does not pay him all the respect and
homage which he conceives to be his due.

The soul was made for God, and nothing but God can fill it and make it
happy. Angels could not be happy in glory, when they had cast off their
allegiance to their Maker. As soon as his heart had departed from God,
Adam would needs go to the forbidden fruit, to satisfy a desire which
was only an indication of his having been unfaithful to his God.
Solomon, in all his glory, possessing every thing heart could wish,
found all to be vanity and vexation of spirit; because his soul had not
God for its portion. Ahab, on the throne of Israel, takes to his bed,
and refuses to eat bread, not merely because he cannot get the vineyard
of Naboth, but because he had not God in his heart, who could alone
satisfy its desires. Haman, on the same ground, though the prime
favourite of the king, is wretched because he cannot have a bow from
that man whom his heart even despised. O, how distressing are the
inquietudes of vanity. And how wretched is the man who has not the God
of Jacob for his help, and in whose heart Christ dwells not by faith!

[Esther 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">est 5:14</span></span>

Let a gallows be made of fifty cubits high - The word עץ ets, which we
translate gallows, signifies simply wood, a tree, or pole; and this was
to be seventy-five feet high, that he might suffer the greater ignominy,
and be a more public spectacle. I believe impaling is here also meant.
See the note, [Est 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#023) (note).

In former times the Jews were accustomed to burn Haman in effigy; and
with him a wooden cross, which they pretended to be in memory of that
which he had erected for the suspension of Mordecai; but which was, in
fact, to deride the Christian religion. The emperors, Justinian and
Theodosius, abolished it by their edicts; and the practice has ceased
from that time, though the principle from which it sprang still exists,
with the same virulence against Christianity and its glorious Author.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 6](est006)

</div>
