<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Esther Index](est)  
  [Previous](est005)  [Next](est007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#001)

[Esther](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">est 6:0</span></span>

That night the king, not being able to sleep, orders the chronicles of
the kingdom to be read to him; and finds there the record concerning the
discovery of the treason of the two eunuchs, made by Mordecai, [Est
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#001), [Est
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#002). He inquires whether Mordecai had
been rewarded, and was answered in the negative, [Est
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#003). At this time Haman arrives, in
order to request the king's permission to hang Mordecai; and being
suddenly asked what should be done to the man whom the king delighted to
honor, supposing that himself must be meant, presented the ceremonial,
[Est 6:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#004). The king orders him to
give Mordecai those honors; which he performs, to his extreme
mortification, [Est 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#010), [Est
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#011). He informs his wife Zeresh of
these transactions, who predicts his downfall, [Est
6:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#012). He is hurried by the eunuchs
to the queen's banquet, [Est 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#014).

[Esther 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 6:1</span></span>

On that night could not the king sleep - The Targum says the king had a
dream, which was as follows: - "And the king saw one in the similitude
of a man who spoke these words to him: Haman desireth to slay thee, and
to make himself king in thy stead. Behold, he will come unto thee early
in the morning, to ask from thee the man who rescued thee from death,
that he may slay him: but say thou unto Haman, What shall be done for
the man whose honor the king studieth? And thou wilt find that he will
ask nothing less from thee than the royal vestments, the regal crown,
and the horse on which the king is wont to ride."

The records of the chronicles - It may be well asked, Why should the
king, in such a perturbed state of mind, wish such a dry detail, as
chronicles afford, to be read to him? But the truth is, as chronicles
were composed among the Persians, he could not have brought before him
any work more instructive, and more entertaining; because they were all
written in verse, and were generally the work of the most eminent poets
in the empire. They are written in this way to the present time; and the
famous epic poem of the finest Persian poet, Ferdusi, the Homer of
India, is nothing else than a collection of chronicles brought down from
the creation to the reign of Mohammed Ghezny, in the beginning of the
tenth century. After thirty years' labor, he finished this poem, which
contained one hundred and twenty thousand lines, and presented it to the
Sultan Mahmoud, who had promised to give him a dinar (eight shillings
and sixpence) for every line. The poem was finished a.d. 984; and was
formed out of compositions of a similar nature made by former poets.
This chronological poem is written in all the harmony, strength, and
elegance of the most beautiful and harmonious language in the universe;
and what adds greatly to its worth is, that it has few Arabic words,
with which the beautiful Persian tongue was loaded, and in my opinion
corrupted, after the conquest of the major part of Asia by the
Mohammedans. The pedants of Hindoostan, whether they speak or write, in
prose or in verse, affect this commixture of Arabic words; which, though
they subjugate them to Persian rules, are producing a ruggedness in a
language, which in Ferdusi, flows deep and strong like a river of oil
over every kind of channel. Such, I suppose, was the chronicle that was
read to Ahasuerus, when his distractions prevented his sleep, and his
troubled mind required that soothing repose which the gentle though
powerful hand of poetry is alone, in such circumstances, capable of
affording. Even our rough English ancestors had their poetic chronicles;
and, among many, the chronicle of Robert of Gloucester is proof in
point. I need not add, that all that is real in Ossian is of the same
complexion.

[Esther 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">est 6:3</span></span>

What honor and dignity hath been done to Mordecai - It is certain he
found nothing in the record; and had any thing been done, that was the
most likely place to find it.

[Esther 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">est 6:4</span></span>

Who is in the court? - This accords with the dream mentioned by the
Targum; and given above.

Now Haman was come - This must have been very early in the morning.
Haman's pride and revenge were both on the tenters to be gratified.

[Esther 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">est 6:6</span></span>

The king said unto him - He did not give him time to make his request;
and put a question to him which, at the first view, promised him all
that his heart could wish.

[Esther 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">est 6:8</span></span>

Let the royal apparel be brought - Pride and folly ever go hand in hand.
What he asked would have been in any ordinary case against his own life:
but he wished to reach the pinnacle of honor: never reflecting that the
higher he rose, the more terrible would be his fall. The royal apparel
was never worn but by the king: even when the king had lain them aside,
it was death to put them on. The Targum has purple robes.

And the horse - and the crown royal - Interpreters are greatly divided
whether what is called here the crown royal be not rather an ornament
worn on the head of the horse, than what may be called the royal crown.
The original may be understood both ways; and our version seems to favor
the former opinion; but I think it more likely that the royal crown is
meant; for why mention the ordinary trappings of the royal steed?

[Esther 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">est 6:9</span></span>

One of the king's most noble princes - Alas, Poor Haman! Never was the
fable of the dog and shadow more literally fulfilled. Thou didst gape at
the shadow, and didst lose the substance.

[Esther 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">est 6:10</span></span>

Make haste, and take the apparel - and do even so to Mordecai - O
mortifying reverse of human fortune! How could Haman bear this? The
Targumist might speak according to nature when he said that "Haman
besought the king to kill him rather than degrade him so." How
astonishing is the conduct of Divine providence in all this business!
From it we plainly see that there is neither counsel nor wisdom against
the Lord; and that he who digs a pit for his neighbor, is sure to fall
into it himself.

[Esther 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">est 6:12</span></span>

Mordecai came again to the king's gate - He resumed his former humble
state; while Haman, ashamed to look up, covered his face, and ran home
to hide himself in his own house. Covering the head and face was a sign
of shame and confusion, as well as of grief, among most people of the
earth.

[Esther 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">est 6:13</span></span>

But shalt surely fall before him - The Septuagint adds, ὁτι ὁ Θεος ὁ ζων
μετ' αυτου, for the living God is with him. But this is a sentiment that
could scarcely be expected to proceed from the mouth of heathens, such
as these were.

[Esther 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">est 6:14</span></span>

Hasted to bring Haman - There was a dreadful banquet before him, of
which he knew nothing: and he could have little appetite to enjoy that
which he knew was prepared at the palace of Esther.

One grand design of this history is, to show that he who lays a snare
for the life of his neighbor, is most likely to fall into it himself:
for, in the course of the Divine providence, men generally meet with
those evils in life which they have been the means of inflicting on
others: and this is exactly agreeable to the saying of our Lord: "With
what measure ye mete it shall be measured to you withal."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 7](est007)

</div>
