<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Exodus Index](exo.md)  
  [Previous](exo031)  [Next](exo033.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001.md)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 32:0</span></span>

The Israelites, finding that Moses delayed his return, desire Aaron to
make them gods to go before them, [Exo
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001.md). Aaron consents, and requires
their ornaments, [Exo 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#002.md). They
deliver them to him, and he makes a molten calf, [Exo
32:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#003.md), [Exo
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#004.md). He builds an altar before it,
[Exo 32:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#005.md); and the people offer
burnt-offerings and peace-offerings, [Exo
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#006.md). The Lord commands Moses to go
down, telling him that the people had corrupted themselves, [Exo
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#007.md), [Exo
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#008.md). The Lord is angry, and threatens
to destroy them, [Exo 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#009.md), [Exo
32:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#010.md). Moses intercedes for them, [Exo
32:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#011.md); and the Lord promises to
spare them, [Exo 32:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#014.md). Moses goes
down with the tables in his hands, [Exo
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#015.md), [Exo
32:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#016.md). Joshua, hearing the noise they
made at their festival, makes some remarks on it, [Exo
32:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#017.md), [Exo
32:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#018.md). Moses, coming to the camp, and
seeing their idolatrous worship, is greatly distressed, throws down and
breaks the two tables, [Exo 32:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#019.md).
Takes the calf, reduces it to powder, strews it upon the water, and
causes them to drink it, [Exo 32:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#020.md).
Moses expostulates with Aaron, [Exo
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#021.md). Aaron vindicates himself, [Exo
32:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#022.md). Moses orders the Levites to
slay the transgressors, [Exo 32:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#025.md).
They do so, and 3,000 fall, [Exo
32:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#028.md), [Exo
32:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#029.md). Moses returns to the Lord on
the mount, and makes supplication for the people, [Exo
32:30-32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#030.md). God threatens and yet
spares, [Exo 32:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#033.md). Commands Moses to
lead the people, and promises him the direction of an angel, [Exo
32:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#034.md). The people are plagued because
of their sin, [Exo 32:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#035.md).

[Exodus 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 32:1</span></span>

When the people saw that Moses delayed - How long this was before the
expiration of the forty days, we cannot tell; but it certainly must have
been some considerable time, as the ornaments must be collected, and the
calf or ox, after having been founded, must require a considerable time
to fashion it with the graving tool; and certainly not more than two or
three persons could work on it at once. This work therefore, must have
required several days.

The people gathered themselves together - They came in a tumultuous and
seditious manner, insisting on having an object of religious worship
made for them, as they intended under its direction to return to Egypt.
See [Act 7:39](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#039.md), [Act
7:40](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#040.md).

As for this Moses, the man that brought us up - This seems to be the
language of great contempt, and by it we may see the truth of the
character given them by Aaron, [Exo
32:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#022.md), they were set on mischief. It
is likely they might have supposed that Moses had perished in the fire,
which they saw had invested the top of the mountain into which he went.

[Exodus 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 32:2</span></span>

Golden ear-rings - Both men and women wore these ornaments, and we may
suppose that these were a part of the spoils which they brought out of
Egypt. How strange, that the very things which were granted them by an
especial influence and providence of God, should be now abused to the
basest idolatrous purposes! But it is frequently the case that the gifts
of God become desecrated by being employed in the service of sin; I will
curse your blessings, saith the Lord, [Mal
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#002.md).

[Exodus 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 32:3</span></span>

And all the people brake off the golden ear-rings - The human being is
naturally fond of dress, though this has been improperly attributed to
the female sex alone, and those are most fond of it who have the
shallowest capacities; but on this occasion the bent of the people to
idolatry was greater than even their love of dress, so that they readily
stripped themselves of their ornaments in order to get a molten god.
They made some compensation for this afterwards; see [Exo
36:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo036.htm#022.md), and See Clarke's note on [Exo
38:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#009.md).

[Exodus 32:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 32:4</span></span>

Fashioned it with a graving tool - There has been much controversy about
the meaning of the word חרט cheret in the text: some make it a mould,
others a garment, cloth, or apron; some a purse or bag, and others a
graver. It is likely that some mould was made on this occasion, that the
gold when fused was cast into it, and that afterwards it was brought
into form and symmetry by the action of the chisel and graver.

These be thy gods, O Israel - The whole of this is a most strange and
unaccountable transaction. Was it possible that the people could have so
soon lost sight of the wonderful manifestations of God upon the mount?
Was it possible that Aaron could have imagined that he could make any
god that could help them? And yet it does not appear that he ever
remonstrated with the people! Possibly he only intended to make them
some symbolical representation of the Divine power and energy, that
might be as evident to them as the pillar of cloud and fire had been,
and to which God might attach an always present energy and influence; or
in requiring them to sacrifice their ornaments, he might have supposed
they would have desisted from urging their request: but all this is mere
conjecture, with very little probability to support it. It must however
be granted that Aaron does not appear to have even designed a worship
that should supersede the worship of The Most High; hence we find him
making proclamation, Tomorrow is a feast to the Lord, (יהוה); and we
find farther that some of the proper rites of the true worship were
observed on this occasion, for they brought burnt-offerings and
peace-offerings, [Exo 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#006.md), [Exo
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#007.md) : hence it is evident he intended
that the true God should be the object of their worship, though he
permitted and even encouraged them to offer this worship through an
idolatrous medium, the molten calf. It has been supposed that this was
an exact resemblance of the famous Egyptian god Apis who was worshipped
under the form of an ox, which worship the Israelites no doubt saw often
practiced in Egypt. Some however think that this worship of Apis was not
then established; but we have already had sufficient proof that
different animals were sacred among the Egyptians, nor have we any
account of any worship in Egypt earlier than that offered to Apis, under
the figure of an Ox.

[Exodus 32:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 32:5</span></span>

To-morrow is a feast to the Lord - In Bengal the officiating Brahmin, or
an appointed person proclaims, "To-morrow, or on - day of - , such a
ceremony will be performed!"

[Exodus 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 32:6</span></span>

The people sat down to eat and to drink - The burnt-offerings were
wholly consumed; the peace-offerings, when the blood bad been poured
out, became the food of the priests, etc. When therefore the strictly
religious part of these ceremonies was finished, the people sat down to
eat of the peace-offerings, and this they did merely as the idolaters,
eating and drinking to excess. And it appears they went much farther,
for it is said they rose up to play, לצחק letsachek, a word of ominous
import, which seems to imply here fornicating and adulterous
intercourse; and in some countries the verb to play is still used
precisely in this sense. In this sense the original is evidently used,
[Gen 39:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#014.md).

[Exodus 32:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 32:7</span></span>

Thy people - have corrupted themselves - They had not only got into the
spirit of idolatry, but they had become abominable in their conduct, so
that God disowns them to be his: Thy people have broken the covenant,
and are no longer entitled to my protection and love.

This is one pretense that the Roman Catholics have for the idolatry in
their image worship. Their high priest, the pope, collects the ornaments
of the people, and makes an image, a crucifix, a madonna, etc. The
people worship it; but the pope says it is only to keep God in
remembrance. But of the whole God says, Thy people have corrupted
themselves; and thus as they continue in their idolatry, they have
forfeited the blessings of the Lord's covenant. They are not God's
people, they are the pope's people, and he is called "our holy father
the pope."

[Exodus 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 32:9</span></span>

A stiff-necked people - Probably an allusion to the stiff-necked ox, the
object of their worship.

[Exodus 32:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 32:10</span></span>

Now therefore let me alone - Moses had already begun to plead with God
in the behalf of this rebellious and ungrateful people; and so powerful
was his intercession that even the Omnipotent represents himself as
incapable of doing any thing in the way of judgment, unless his creature
desisted from praying for mercy! See an instance of the prevalence of
fervent intercession in the case of Abraham, [Gen
18:23-33](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#023.md), from the model of which the
intercession of Moses seems to have been formed.

[Exodus 32:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 32:14</span></span>

And the Lord repented of the evil - This is spoken merely after the
manner of men who, having formed a purpose, permit themselves to be
diverted from it by strong and forcible reasons, and so change their
minds relative to their former intentions.

[Exodus 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 32:15</span></span>

The tables were written on both their sides - If we take this literally,
it was certainly a very unusual thing; for in ancient times the two
sides of the same substance were never written over. However, some
rabbins suppose that by the writing on both sides is meant the letters
were cut through the tables, so that they might be read on both sides,
though on one side they would appear reversed. Supposing this to be
correct, if the letters were the same with those called Hebrew now in
common use, the ס samech, which occurs twice, and the final ם mem which
occurs twenty-three times in the ten commandments, both of these being
close letters, could not be cut through on both sides without falling
out, unless, as some of the Jews have imagined, they were held in by
miracle; but if this ancient character were the same with the Samaritan,
this through cutting might have been quite practicable, as there is not
one close letter in the whole Samaritan alphabet. On this transaction
there are the three following opinions:

1\. We may conceive the tables of stone to have been thin slabs or a
kind of slate, and the writing on the back side to have been a
continuation of that on the front, the first not being sufficient to
contain the whole.

2\. Or the writing on the back side was probably the precepts that
accompanied the ten commandments; the latter were written by the Lord,
the former by Moses; see Clarke's note on [Exo
34:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#001.md). See Clarke's note on [Exo
34:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#027.md).

3\. Or the same words were written on both sides, so that when held up,
two parties might read at the same time.

[Exodus 32:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 32:16</span></span>

The tables were the work of God - Because such a law could proceed from
none but himself; God alone is the fountain and author of Law, of what
is right, just, holy, and good. See the meaning of the word Law, [Exo
12:49](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#049) (note.md).

The writing was the writing of God - For as he is the sole author of law
and justice, so he alone can write them on the heart of man. This is
agreeable to the spirit of the new covenant which God had promised to
make with men in the latter days: I will make a new covenant with the
house of Israel - I will Put My Laws In Their Minds, And Write Them In
Their Hearts, [Jer 31:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033.md); [Heb
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#010.md); [Co2
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#003.md). That the writing of these tables
was the writing of God, see proved at the conclusion of the last
chapter.

[Exodus 32:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 32:17</span></span>

Joshua - said - There is a noise of war in the camp - How natural was
this thought to the mind of a military man! Hearing a confused noise he
supposed that the Israelitish camp had been attacked by some of the
neighboring tribes.

[Exodus 32:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 32:18</span></span>

And he said - That is, Moses returned this answer to the observations of
Joshua.

[Exodus 32:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 32:19</span></span>

He saw the calf, and the dancing - Dancing before the idol takes place
in almost every Hindoo idolatrous feast - Ward.

He cast the tables out of his hands, and brake them - He might have done
this through distress and anguish of spirit, on beholding their
abominable idolatry and dissolute conduct; or he probably did it
emblematically, intimating thereby that, as by this act of his the
tables were broken in pieces, on which the law of God was written; so
they, by their present conduct, had made a breach in the covenant, and
broken the laws of their Maker. But we must not excuse this act; it was
rash and irreverent; God's writing should not have been treated in this
way.

[Exodus 32:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 32:20</span></span>

He took the calf - and burnt - and ground it to powder, etc. - How truly
contemptible must the object of their idolatry appear when they were
obliged to drink their god, reduced to powder and strewed on the water!
"But," says an objector, "how could gold, the most ductile of all
metals, and the most ponderous, be stamped into dust and strewed on
water?" In [Deu 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#021.md), this matter is
fully explained. I took, says Moses, your sin, the calf which ye had
made, and burnt it with fire, that is, melted it down, probably into
ingots, or gross plates, and stamped it, that is, beat into thin
laminae, something like our gold leaf, and ground it very small, even
until it was as small as dust, which might be very easily done by the
action of the hands, when beat into thin plates or leaves, as the
original words אכת eccoth and דק dak imply. And I cast the dust thereof
into the brook, and being thus lighter than the water, it would readily
float, so that they could easily see, in this reduced and useless state,
the idol to which they had been lately offering Divine honors, and from
which they were vainly expecting protection and defense. No mode of
argumentation could have served so forcibly to demonstrate the folly of
their conduct, as this method pursued by Moses.

[Exodus 32:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 32:21</span></span>

What did this people unto thee - It seems if Aaron had been firm, this
evil might have been prevented.

[Exodus 32:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 32:22</span></span>

Thou knowest the people - He excuses himself by the wicked and seditious
spirit of the people, intimating that he was obliged to accede to their
desires.

[Exodus 32:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">exo 32:24</span></span>

I cast it into the fire and there came out this calf - What a silly and
ridiculous subterfuge! He seems to insinuate that he only threw the
metal into the fire, and that the calf came unexpectedly out by mere
accident. The Targum of Jonathan ben Uzziel makes a similar excuse for
him: "And I said unto them, Whosoever hath gold, let him break it off
and give it to me; and I cast it into the fire, and Satan entered into
it, and it came out in the form of this calf!" Just like the popish
legend of the falling of the shrine of our Lady of Loretta out of
heaven! These legends come from the same quarter. Satan can provide more
when necessary for his purpose.

[Exodus 32:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">exo 32:25</span></span>

Moses saw that the people were naked - They were stripped, says the
Targum, of the holy crown that was upon their heads, on which the great
and precious name Jehovah was engraved. But it is more likely that the
word פרע parua implies that they were reduced to the most helpless and
wretched state, being abandoned by God in the midst of their enemies.
This is exactly similar to that expression, [Ch2
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#019.md) : For the Lord brought Judah
low, because of Ahaz king of Israel: for he made Judah Naked, הפריע
hiphria, and transgressed sore against the Lord. Their nakedness,
therefore, though in the first sense it may imply that several of them
were despoiled of their ornaments, yet it may also express their
defenceless and abandoned state, in consequence of their sin. That they
could not literally have all been despoiled of their ornaments, appears
evident from their offerings. See [Exo
36:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo036.htm#021.md), etc.

[Exodus 32:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">exo 32:26</span></span>

Who is on the Lord's side? - That is, Who among you is free from this
transgression? And all the sons of Levi, etc. - It seems they had no
part in this idolatrous business.

[Exodus 32:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">exo 32:27</span></span>

From gate to gate - It is probable that there was an enclosed or
entrenched camp, in which the chief rulers and heads of the people were,
and that this camp had two gates or outlets; and the Levites were
commanded to pass from one to the other, slaying as many of the
transgressors as they could find.

[Exodus 32:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">exo 32:28</span></span>

There fell about three thousand men - These were no doubt the chief
transgressors; having broken the covenant by having other gods besides
Jehovah, they lost the Divine protection, and then the justice of God
laid hold on and slew them. Moses doubtless had positive orders from God
for this act of justice, (see [Exo
32:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#027).md); for though, through his
intercession, the people were spared so as not to be exterminated as a
nation, yet the principal transgressors, those who were set on mischief,
[Exo 32:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#022.md), were to be put to death.

[Exodus 32:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">exo 32:29</span></span>

For Moses had said, Consecrate yourselves - Fill your hands to the Lord.
See the reason of this form of speech in the note on [Exo
29:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#019) (note.md).

[Exodus 32:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">exo 32:31</span></span>

Moses returned unto the Lord - Before he went down from the mountain God
had acquainted him with the general defection of the people, whereupon
he immediately, without knowing the extent of their crime, began to make
intercession for them; and God, having given him a general assurance
that they should not be cut off, hastened him to go down, and bring them
off from their idolatry. Having descended, he finds matters much worse
than he expected, and ordered three thousand of the principal
delinquents to be slain; but knowing that an evil so extensive must be
highly provoking in the sight of the just and holy God, he finds it
highly expedient that an atonement be made for the sin: for although he
had the promise of God that as a nation they should not be exterminated,
yet he had reason to believe that Divine justice must continue to
contend with them, and prevent them from ever entering the promised
land. That he was apprehensive that this would be the case, we may see
plainly from the following verse.

[Exodus 32:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">exo 32:32</span></span>

Forgive their sin - ; and if not, blot me - out of thy book - It is
probable that one part of Moses' work during the forty days of his
residence on the mount with God, was his regulating the muster-roll of
all the tribes and families of Israel, in reference to the parts they
were respectively to act in the different transactions in the
wilderness, promised land, etc.; and this, being done under the
immediate direction of God, is termed God's book which he had written,
(such muster-rolls, or registers, called also genealogies, the Jews have
had from the remotest period of their history); and it is probable that
God had told him, that those who should break the covenant which he had
then made with them should be blotted out of that list, and never enter
into the promised land. All this Moses appears to have particularly in
view, and, without entering into any detail, immediately comes to the
point which he knew was fixed when this list or muster-roll was made,
namely, that those who should break the covenant should be blotted out,
and never have any inheritance in the promised land: therefore he says,
This people have sinned a great sin, and have made them gods of gold;
thus they had broken the covenant, (see the first and second
commandments), and by this had forfeited their right to Canaan. Yet now,
he adds, if thou wilt forgive their sin, that they may yet attain the
promised inheritance - ; and if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy
book which thou hast written - if thou wilt blot out their names from
this register, and never suffer them to enter Canaan, blot me out also;
for I cannot bear the thought of enjoying that blessedness, while my
people and their posterity shall be for ever excluded. And God, in
kindness to Moses, spared him the mortification of going into Canaan
without taking the people with him. They had forfeited their lives, and
were sentenced to die in the wilderness; and Moses' prayer was answered
in mercy to him, while the people suffered under the hand of justice.
But the promise of God did not fail; for, although those who sinned were
blotted out of the book, yet their posterity enjoyed the inheritance.

This seems to be the simple and pure light in which this place should be
viewed; and in this sense St. Paul is to be understood, [Rom
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003.md), where he says: For I could wish
that myself were Accursed from Christ for my brethren, my kinsmen
according to the flesh; who are Israelites, to whom pertaineth the
Adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenants. Moses could not survive the
destruction of his people by the neighboring nations, nor their
exclusion from the promised land; and St. Paul, seeing the Jews about to
be cut off by the Roman sword for their rejection of the Gospel, was
willing to be deprived of every earthly blessing, and even to become a
sacrifice for them, if this might contribute to the preservation and
salvation of the Jewish state. Both those eminent men, engaged in the
same work, influenced by a spirit of unparalleled patriotism, were
willing to forfeit every blessing of a secular kind, even die for the
welfare of the people. But certainly, neither of them could wish to go
to eternal perdition, to save their countrymen from being cut off, the
one by the sword of the Philistines, the other by that of the Romans.
Even the supposition is monstrous.

On this mode of interpretation we may at once see what is implied in the
book of life, and being written in or blotted out of such a book. In the
public registers, all that were born of a particular tribe were entered
in the list of their respective families under that tribe. This was the
book of life; but when any of those died, his name might be considered
as blotted out from this list. Our baptismal registers, which record the
births of all the inhabitants of a particular parish or district, and
which are properly our books of life; and our bills of mortality, which
are properly our books of death, or the lists of those who are thus
blotted out from our baptismal registers or books of life; are very
significant and illustrative remains of the ancient registers, or books
of life and death among the Jews, the Greeks, the Romans, and most
ancient nations. It is worthy of remark, that in China the names of the
persons who have been tried on criminal processes are written in two
distinct books, which are called the book of life and the book of death:
those who have been acquitted, or who have not been capitally convicted,
are written in the former; those who have been found guilty, in the
latter. These two books are presented to the emperor by his ministers,
who, as sovereign, has a right to erase any name from either: to place
the living among the dead, that he may die; or the dead, that is, the
person condemned to death, among the living, that he may be preserved.
Thus he blots out of the book of life or the book of death according to
his sovereign pleasure, on the representation of his ministers, or the
intercession of friends, etc. An ancient and extremely rich picture, in
my own possession, representing this circumstance, painted in China, was
thus interpreted to me by a native Chinese.

[Exodus 32:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">exo 32:33</span></span>

Whosoever hath sinned against me, him will I blot out - As if the Divine
Being had said: "All my conduct is regulated by infinite justice and
righteousness: in no case shall the innocent ever suffer for the guilty.
That no man may transgress through ignorance, I have given you my law,
and thus published my covenant; the people themselves have acknowledged
its justice and equity, and have voluntarily ratified it. He then that
sins against me, (for sin is the transgression of the law, [Jo1
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#004.md), and the law must be published and
known that it may be binding), him will I blot out of my book." And is
it not remarkable that to these conditions of the covenant God strictly
adhered, so that not one soul of these transgressors ever entered into
the promised rest! Here was justice. And yet, though they deserved
death, they were spared! Here was mercy. Thus, as far as justice would
permit, mercy extended; and as far as mercy would permit, justice
proceeded. Behold, O reader, the Goodness and Severity of God! Mercy
saves all that Justice can spare; and Justice destroys all that Mercy
should not save.

[Exodus 32:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">exo 32:34</span></span>

Lead the people unto the place - The word place is not in the text, and
is with great propriety omitted. For Moses never led this people into
that place, they all died in the wilderness except Joshua and Caleb; but
Moses led them towards the place, and thus the particle אל el here
should be understood, unless we suppose that God designed to lead them
to the borders of the land, but not to take them into it.

I will visit their sin - I will not destroy them, but they shall not
enter into the promised land. They shall wander in the wilderness till
the present generation become extinct.

[Exodus 32:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">exo 32:35</span></span>

The Lord plagued the people - Every time they transgressed afterwards
Divine justice seems to have remembered this transgression against them.
The Jews have a metaphorical saying, apparently founded on this text:
"No affliction has ever happened to Israel in which there was not some
particle of the dust of the golden calf."

1\. The attentive reader has seen enough in this chapter to induce him
to exclaim, How soon a clear sky may be overcast! How soon may the
brightest prospects be obscured! Israel had just ratified its covenant
with Jehovah, and had received the most encouraging and unequivocal
pledges of his protection and love. But they sinned, and provoked the
Lord to depart from them, and to destroy the work of his hands. A little
more faith, patience, and perseverance, and they should have been safely
brought into the promised land. For want of a little more dependence
upon God, how often does an excellent beginning come to an unhappy
conclusion! Many who were just on the borders of the promised land, and
about to cross Jordan, have, through an act of unfaithfulness, been
turned back to wander many a dreary year in the wilderness. Reader, be
on thy guard. Trust in Christ, and watch unto prayer.

2\. Many people have been greatly distressed on losing their baptismal
register, and have been reduced in consequence to great political
inconvenience. But still they had their lives, and should a living man
complain? But a man may so sin as to provoke God to cut him off; or,
like a fruitless tree, be cut down, because he encumbers the ground. Or
he may have sinned a sin unto death, [Jo1
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#016.md), [Jo1
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#017.md), that is, a sin which God will
punish with temporal death, while he extends mercy to the soul.

3\. With respect to the blotting out of God's book, on which there has
been so much controversy, Is it not evident that a soul could not be
blotted out of a book in which it had never been written? And is it not
farther evident from [Exo 32:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032.md), [Exo
32:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#033.md), that, although a man be written
in God's book, if he sins he may be blotted out? Let him that readeth
understand; and let him that standeth take heed lest he fall. Reader, be
not high-minded, but fear. See Clarke's note on [Exo
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032.md), and See Clarke's note on [Exo
32:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#033.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 33](exo033.md)

</div>
