<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Exodus Index](exo.md)  
  [Previous](exo026)  [Next](exo028.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#001.md)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 27:0</span></span>

The altar of burnt-offerings, and its dimensions, [Exo
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#001.md); its horns, [Exo
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#002.md); pans, shovels, etc., [Exo
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#003.md); its grate and net work, [Exo
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#004.md), [Exo
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#005.md); its staves, [Exo
27:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#006.md), [Exo
27:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#007.md). Court of the tabernacle, with
its pillars and hangings, [Exo
27:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#009.md). Gate of the court, its
pillars, hangings, length, breadth, and height, [Exo
27:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#016.md). All the vessels used in the
court of the tabernacle to be of brass, [Exo
27:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#019.md). The Israelites to provide pure
olive oil for the light, [Exo 27:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#020.md).
Every thing to be ordered by Aaron and his sons, [Exo
27:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#021.md).

[Exodus 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 27:1</span></span>

Thou shalt make an altar - מזבח mizbeach, from זבח zabach, to slay:
Septuagint, θυσιαστηριον, from θυσιαζω, to sacrifice or from θυω to
kill, etc. See Clarke's note on [Gen
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#020.md).

Four square - As this altar was five cubits long and five broad, and the
cubit is reckoned to be twenty-one inches, hence it must have been eight
feet nine inches square, and about five feet three inches in height, the
amount of three cubits, taken at the same ratio.

[Exodus 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 27:2</span></span>

Thou shalt make the horns of it - The horns might have three uses:

1\. For ornament.

2\. To prevent carcasses, etc., from falling off.

3\. To tie the victim to, previously to its being sacrificed.

So David: Bind the sacrifice with cords to the horns of the altar; [Psa
118:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#027.md). Horns were much used in all
ancient altars among the heathen, and some of them were entirely
constructed of the horns of the beasts that had been offered in
sacrifice; but such altars appear to be erected rather as trophies in
honor of their gods. On the reverses of several medals we find altars
represented with horns at the corners. There is a medal of Antoninus on
the reverse of which is an altar, on which a fire burns, consecrated
Divi Pio, where the horns appear on each of the corners.

There is one of Faustina, on which the altar and its horns are very
distinct, the legend Pietas Augusta. All the following have altars with
horns. One of Valerian, legend Consecratio; one of Claudius Gothicus,
same legend; one of Quintillus, same legend; one of Crispina, with the
legend Diis Genitalibus; and several others. See Numismatica Antiq., a
Musellio, under Consecratio, in the index.

Callimachus, in his Hymn to Apollo, line 60 introduces him constructing
an altar of the horns of the animals slain by Diana:

\- πηξε δε βωμον

Εκ κεραων κ. τ. λ.

Martial has these words: Cornibus ara frequens.

[Exodus 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 27:3</span></span>

Thou shalt make his pans - סירתיו sirothaiv, a sort or large brazen
dishes, which stood under the altar to receive the ashes that fell
through the grating.

His shovels - יעיו yaaiv. Some render this besoms; but as these were
brazen instruments, it is more natural to suppose that some kind of
fire-shovels are intended, or scuttles, which were used to carry off the
ashes that fell through the grating into the large pan or siroth.

His basins - מזרקתיו mizrekothaiv, from זרק zarak, to sprinkle or
disperse; bowls or basins to receive the blood of the sacrifices, in
order that it might be sprinkled on the people before the altar, etc.

His flesh-hooks - מזלגתיו mizlegothaiu. That this word is rightly
translated flesh-hooks is fully evident from [Sa1
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#013.md), where the same word is used in
such a connection as demonstrates its meaning: And the priest's custom
with the people was, that when any man offered sacrifice, the priest's
servant came, while the flesh was in the seething, with a Flesh-Hook
(מזלג mazleg) of three teeth (prongs) in his hand, and he struck it into
the pan, etc.; all that the Flesh-Hook (מזלג mazleg) brought up, the
priest took for himself. It was probably a kind of trident, or fork with
three prongs, and these bent to a right angle at the middle, as the
ideal meaning of the Hebrew seems to imply crookedness or curvature in
general.

His fire-pans - מחתתיו machtothaiu. Bishop Patrick and others suppose
that "this was a larger sort of vessel, wherein, probably, the sacred
fire which came down from heaven ([Lev
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#024).md) was kept burning, whilst they
cleansed the altar and the grate from the coals and the ashes; and while
the altar was carried from one place to another, as it often was in the
wilderness.

[Exodus 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 27:4</span></span>

Thou shalt make for it a grate - Calmet supposes this altar to have been
a sort of box, covered with brass plates, on the top of which was a
grating to supply the fire with air, and permit the ashes to fall
through into the siroth or pan that was placed below. At the four
corners of the grating were four rings and four chains, by which it was
attached to the four horns; and at the sides were rings for the poles of
shittim wood with which it was carried. Even on this there is a great
variety of opinions.

[Exodus 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 27:8</span></span>

Hollow with boards - It seems to have been a kind of frame-work, and to
have had nothing solid in the inside, and only covered with the grating
at the top. This rendered it more light and portable.

[Exodus 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 27:9</span></span>

The court of the tabernacle - The tabernacle stood in an enclosure or
court, open at the top. This court was made with pillars or posts, and
hangings. It was one hundred cubits, or about fifty-eight yards and a
half, in length; the breadth we learn from [Exo
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#012.md), [Exo
27:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#018.md); and five cubits, or nearly
three yards, high, [Exo 27:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#018.md). And as
this was but half the height of the tabernacle, [Exo
26:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#016.md), that sacred building might
easily be seen by the people from without.

[Exodus 27:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 27:16</span></span>

And for the gate of the court - It appears that the hangings of this
gate were of the same materials and workmanship with that of the inner
covering of the tabernacle, and the outer and inner veil. See [Exo
26:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#036.md).

[Exodus 27:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 27:19</span></span>

All the vessels - shall be of brass - It would have been improper to
have used instruments made of the more precious metals about this altar,
as they must have been soon worn out by the severity of the service.

[Exodus 27:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 27:20</span></span>

Pure oil olive beaten - That is, such oil as could easily be expressed
from the olives after they had been bruised in a mortar; the mother
drop, as it is called, which drops out of itself as soon as the olives
are a little broken, and which is much purer than that which is obtained
after the olives are put under the press.

Columella, who is a legitimate evidence in all such matters, says that
the oil which flowed out of the fruit either spontaneously, or with
little application of the force of the press, was of a much finer
flavour than that which was obtained otherwise. Quoniam longe melioris
saporis est, quod minore vi preli, quasi luxurians, defluxerit - Colum.,
lib. xii., c. 50.

To cause the lamp to burn always - They were to be kept burning through
the whole of the night, and some think all the day besides; but there is
a difference of sentiment upon this subject. See the note on [Exo
27:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#021.md).

This oil and continual flame were not only emblematical of the unction
and influences of the Holy Ghost, but also of that pure spirit of
devotion which ever animates the hearts and minds of the genuine
worshippers of the true God. The temple of Vesta, where a fire was kept
perpetually burning, seems to have been formed on the model of the
tabernacle; and from this the followers of Zeratusht, commonly called
Zoroaster, appear to have derived their doctrine of the perpetual fire,
which they still worship as an emblem of the Deity.

[Exodus 27:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 27:21</span></span>

The tabernacle of the congregation - The place where all the assembly of
the people were to worship, where the God of that assembly was pleased
to reside, and to which, as the habitation of their king and protector,
they were ever to turn their faces in all their adorations.

Before the testimony - That is, the ark where the tables of the covenant
were deposited. See [Exo 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#016.md).

Aaron and his sons - These and their descendants being the only
legitimate priests, God having established the priesthood in this
family.

Shall order it from evening to morning - Josephus says the whole of the
seven lamps burned all the night; in the morning four were extinguished,
and three kept burning through the whole day. Others assert that the
whole seven were kept lighted both day and night continually; but it
appears sufficiently evident, from [Sa1
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#003.md), that these lamps were
extinguished in the morning: And ere the lamp of God went out in the
temple of the Lord, where the ark of God was, and Samuel was laid down
to sleep, etc. See also [Exo 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#008.md) :
And when Aaron Lighteth The Lamps At Even. It appears therefore that the
business of the priests was to light the lamps in the evening; and
either to extinguish them in the morning, or permit them to burn out,
having put in the night before as much oil as was necessary to last till
daylight.

A statute for ever - This ordering of the lamps night and morning, and
attendance on the service of the tabernacle, was a statute that was to
be in full force while the tabernacle and temple stood, and should have
its spiritual accomplishment in the Christian Church to the end of time.
Reader, the tabernacle and temple are both destroyed; the Church of
Christ is established in their place. The seven golden candlesticks were
typical of this Church and the glorious light it possesses, [Rev
1:12-20](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#012.md); and Jesus Christ, the
Fountain and Dispenser of this true light, walks in the midst of them.
Reader, hast thou that celestial flame to enlighten and animate thy
heart in all those acts of devotion which thou professest to pay to him
as thy Maker, Redeemer, and Preserver? What is thy profession, and what
thy religious acts and services, without this? A sounding brass, a
tinkling cymbal.

Tertullian asserts that all the ancient heathens borrowed their best
notions from the sacred writings: "Which," says he, "of your poets,
which of your sophists, have not drunk from the fountain of the
prophets? It is from those sacred springs that your philosophers have
refreshed their thirsty spirits; and if they found any thing in the Holy
Scriptures which hit their fancy, or which served their hypothesis, they
took and turned it to a compliance with their own curiosity, not
considering those writings to be sacred and unalterable, nor
understanding their true sense, every one altering them according to his
own fancy." - Apologet.

The reader's attention has already been called to this point several
times in the preceding parts of this work, and the subject will
frequently recur. At the conclusion of [Exo
25:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#031.md) (See Clarke's note at [Exo
25:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#031).md) we had occasion to observe that
the heathens had imitated many things in that Divine worship prescribed
by Moses; but in application to their own corrupt system every thing was
in a certain measure falsified and distorted, yet not so far as to
prevent the grand outlines of primitive truth from being discerned. One
of the most complete imitations of the tabernacle and its whole service
is found in the very ancient temple of Hercules, founded probably by the
Phoenicians, at Gades, now Cadiz, in Spain, so minutely described by
Silius Italicus from actual observation. He observes that though the
temple was at that time very ancient, yet the beams were the same that
had been placed there by the founders, and that they were generally
supposed to be incorruptible; a quality ascribed to the shittim wood,
termed ξυλον ασηπτον, incorruptible wood, by the Septuagint. That women
were not permitted to enter this temple, and that no swine were ever
suffered to come near it. That the priests did not wear party-coloured
vestments, but were always clothed in fine linen, and their bonnets made
of the same. That they offered incense to their god, their clothes being
ungirded; for the same reason doubtless given [Exo
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#026.md), that in going up to the altar
nothing unseemly might appear, and therefore they permitted their long
robes to fall down to their feet. He adds, that by the laws of their
forefathers they bore on their sacerdotal vestments the latus clavus,
which was a round knob or stud of purple with which the robes of the
Roman knights and senators were adorned, which these priests seem to
have copied from the breastplate of judgment made of cunning work,
embroidered with purple, blue, etc. See [Exo
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#015.md). They also ministered
barefooted, their hair was trimmed or cut off, and they observed the
strictest continency, and kept a perpetual fire burning on their altars.
And he farther adds that there was no image or similitude of the gods to
be seen in that sacred place. This is the substance of his description;
but as some of my readers may wish to see the original, I shall here
subjoin it.

Vulgatum (nec cassa fides) ab origine fani Impositas durare trabes,
solasque per aevum Condentum novisse manus: hic credere gaudent
Consedisse Deum, seniumque repellere templis. Tum, queis fas et honos
adyti penetralia nosse, Foemineos prohibent gressus, ac limine curant
Setigeros arcere sues: nec discolor ulli Ante aras cultus: velantur
corpora lino, Et Pelusiaco praefulget stamine vertex. Discinctis mos
thura dare, atque, e lege parenturn Sacrificam Lato vestem distinguere
Clavo. Pes nudus, tousaeque comae, castumque cubile, Irrestincta focis
servant altaria flammae. Sed nulla effigies, simulacrave nota Deorum
Majestate locum, et sacro implevere timore.

Punicor., lib. iii., ver. 17-31.

This is such a remarkable case that I think myself justified in quoting
it at length, as an extraordinary monument, though corrupted, of the
tabernacle and its service. It is probable that the original founders
had consecrated this temple to the true God, under the name of אל EL,
the strong God, or אל גבור El Gibbor, the strong, prevailing, and
victorious God, [Isa 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006.md), out of whom
the Greeks and Romans made their Hercules, or god of strength; and, to
make it agree with this appropriation, the labors of Hercules were
sculptured on the doors of this temple at Gades. In foribus labor
Alcidae Lernaea recisis Anguibus Hydra jacet, etc.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 28](exo028.md)

</div>
