<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo008)  [Next](exo010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 9:0</span></span>

The Lord sends Moses to Pharaoh to inform him that, if he did not let
the Israelites depart, a destructive pestilence should be sent among his
cattle, [Exo 9:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#001); while the cattle
of the Israelites should be preserved, [Exo
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#004). The next day this pestilence,
which was the fifth plague, is sent, and all the cattle of the Egyptians
die, [Exo 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#005), [Exo
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#006). Though Pharaoh finds that not one
of the cattle of the Israelites had died, yet, through hardness of
heart, he refuses to let the people go, [Exo
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#007). Moses and Aaron are commanded to
sprinkle handfuls of ashes from the furnace, that the sixth plague, that
of boils and blains, might come on man and beast, [Exo
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#005), [Exo
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#009); which having done, the plague
takes place, [Exo 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#010). The magicians
cannot stand before this plague, which they can neither imitate nor
remove, [Exo 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#011). Pharaoh's heart is
again hardened, [Exo 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#012). God's awful
message to Pharaoh, with the threat of more severe plagues than before,
[Exo 9:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#013). The seventh plague of
rain, hail, and fire threatened, [Exo
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#018). The Egyptians commanded to house
their cattle that they might not be destroyed, [Exo
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#019). These who feared the word of the
Lord brought home their servants and cattle, and those who did not
regard that word left their cattle and servants in the fields, [Exo
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#020), [Exo
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#021). The storm of hail, thunder, and
lightning takes place, [Exo 9:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#022).
It nearly desolates the whole land of Egypt, [Exo
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#025), while the land of Goshen
escapes, [Exo 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#026). Pharaoh confesses
his sin, and begs an interest in the prayers of Moses and Aaron, [Exo
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#027), [Exo
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#028). Moses promises to intercede for
him, and while he promises that the storm shall cease, he foretells the
continuing obstinacy of both himself and his servants, [Exo
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#029), [Exo
9:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#030). The flax and barley, being in a
state of maturity, are destroyed by the tempest, [Exo
9:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#031); while the wheat and the rye, not
being grown up, are preserved, [Exo
9:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#032). Moses obtains a cessation of the
storm, [Exo 9:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#033). Pharaoh and his
servants, seeing this, harden their hearts, and refuse to let the people
go, [Exo 9:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#034), [Exo
9:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#035).

[Exodus 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 9:1</span></span>

The Lord God of the Hebrews - It is very likely that the term Lord, יויה
Yehovah, is used here to point out particularly his eternal power and
Godhead; and that the term God, אלהי Elohey, is intended to be
understood in the sense of Supporter, Defender, Protector, etc. Thus
saith the self-existent, omnipotent, and eternal Being, the Supporter
and Defender of the Hebrews, "Let my people go, that they may worship
me."

[Exodus 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 9:3</span></span>

The hand of the Lord - The power of God manifested in judgment.

Upon the horses - סוסים susim. This is the first place the horse is
mentioned; a creature for which Egypt and Arabia were always famous. סס
sus is supposed to have the same meaning with שש sas, which signifies to
be active, brisk, or lively, all which are proper appellatives of the
horse, especially in Arabia and Egypt. Because of their activity and
swiftness they were sacrificed and dedicated to the sun, and perhaps it
was principally on this account that God prohibited the use of them
among the Israelites.

A very grievous murrain - The murrain is a very contagious disease among
cattle, the symptoms of which are a hanging down and swelling of the
head, abundance of gum in the eyes, rattling in the throat, difficulty
of breathing, palpitation of the heart, staggering, a hot breath, and a
shining tongue; which symptoms prove that a general inflammation has
taken place. The original word דבר deber is variously translated. The
Septuagint have θανατος, death; the Vulgate has pestis, a plague or
pestilence; the old Saxon version, to die, any fatal disease. Our
English word murrain comes either from the French mourir, to die, or
from the Greek μαραινω maraino, to grow lean, waste away. The term
mortality would be the nearest in sense to the original, as no
particular disorder is specified by the Hebrew word.

[Exodus 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 9:4</span></span>

The Lord shall sever - See Clarke on [Exo
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#022) (note).

[Exodus 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 9:5</span></span>

To-morrow the Lord shall do this - By thus foretelling the evil, he
showed his prescience and power; and from this both the Egyptians and
Hebrews must see that the mortality that ensued was no casualty, but the
effect of a predetermined purpose in the Divine justice.

[Exodus 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 9:6</span></span>

All the cattle of Egypt died - That is, All the cattle that did die
belonged to the Egyptians, but not one died that belonged to the
Israelites, [Exo 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#004), [Exo
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#006). That the whole stock of cattle
belonging to the Egyptians did not die we have the fullest proof,
because there were cattle both to be killed and saved alive in the
ensuing plague, [Exo 9:19-25](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#019). By this
judgment the Egyptians must see the vanity of the whole of their
national worship, when they found the animals which they not only held
sacred but deified, slain without distinction among the common herd, by
a pestilence sent from the hand of Jehovah. One might naturally suppose
that after this the animal worship of the Egyptians could never more
maintain its ground.

[Exodus 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 9:7</span></span>

And Pharaoh sent, etc. - Finding so many of his own cattle and those of
his subjects slain, he sent to see whether the mortality had reached to
the cattle of the Israelites, that he might know whether this were a
judgment inflicted by their God, and probably designing to replace the
lost cattle of the Egyptians with those of the Israelites.

[Exodus 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 9:8</span></span>

Handfuls of ashes of the furnace - As one part of the oppression of the
Israelites consisted In their labor in the brick-kilns, some have
observed a congruity between the crime and the punishment. The furnaces,
in the labor of which they oppressed the Hebrews, now yielded the
instruments of their punishment; for every particle of those ashes,
formed by unjust and oppressive labor, seemed to be a boil or a blain on
the tyrannical king and his cruel and hard-hearted people.

[Exodus 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 9:9</span></span>

Shall be a boil - שחין shechin. This word is generally expounded, an
inflammatory swelling, a burning boil; one of the most poignant
afflictions, not immediately mortal, that can well affect the surface of
the human body. If a single boil on any part of the body throws the
whole system into a fever, what anguish must a multitude of them on the
body at the same time occasion!

Breaking forth with blains - אבעבעת ababuoth, supposed to come from בעה
baah, to swell, bulge out; any inflammatory swelling, node, or pustule,
in any part of the body, but more especially in the more glandular
parts, the neck, arm-pits, groin, etc. The Septuagint translate it thus:
Και εσται ἑλκη φλυκτιδες αναζεουσαι· And it shalt be an ulcer with
burning pustules. It seems to have been a disorder of an uncommon kind,
and hence it is called by way of distinction, the botch of Egypt, [Deu
28:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#027), perhaps never known before in
that or any other country. Orosius says that in the sixth plague "all
the people were blistered, that the blisters burst with tormenting pain,
and that worms issued out of them." Alfred's Oros., lib. i., c. vii.

[Exodus 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 9:11</span></span>

The boil was upon the magicians - They could not produce a similar
malady by throwing ashes in the air; and they could neither remove the
plague from the people, nor from their own tormented flesh. Whether they
perished in this plague we know not, but they are no more mentioned. If
they were not destroyed by this awful judgment, they at least left the
field, and no longer contended with these messengers of God. The triumph
of God's power was now complete, and both the Hebrews and the Egyptians
must see that there was neither might, nor wisdom, nor counsel against
the Lord; and that, as universal nature acknowledged his power, devils
and men must fail before him.

[Exodus 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 9:15</span></span>

For now I will stretch out my hand - In the Hebrew the verbs are in the
past tense, and not in the future, as our translation improperly
expresses them, by which means a contradiction appears in the text: for
neither Pharaoh nor his people were smitten by a pestilence, nor was he
by any kind of mortality cut off from the earth. It is true the
first-born were slain by a destroying angel, and Pharaoh himself was
drowned in the Red Sea; but these judgments do not appear to be referred
to in this place. If the words be translated, as they ought, in the
subjunctive mood, or in the past instead of the future, this seeming
contradiction to facts, as well as all ambiguity, will be avoided: For
if now I Had Stretched Out (שלהתי shalachti, had set forth) my hand, and
had smitten thee (ואך אותך vaach otheca) and thy people with the
pestilence, thou Shouldst Have Been cut off (תכחד ticcached) from the
earth.

[Exodus 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 9:16</span></span>

But truly, on this very account, have I caused thee to subsist -
(העמדחיך heemadticha), that I might cause thee to see my power, (הראתך
את כחי harotheca eth cochi), and that my name might be declared
throughout all the earth, (or, בכל הארץ becol haarets, in all this
land). See Ainsworth and Houbigant.

Thus God gave this impious king to know that it was in consequence of
his especial providence that both he and his people had not been already
destroyed by means of the past plagues; but God had preserved him for
this very purpose, that he might have a farther opportunity of
manifesting that he, Jehovah, was the only true God for the full
conviction both of the Hebrews and Egyptians, that the former might
follow and the latter fear before him. Judicious critics of almost all
creeds have agreed to translate the original as above, a translation
which it not only can bear but requires, and which is in strict
conformity to both the Septuagint and Targum. Neither the Hebrew העמדחיך
heemadticha, I have caused thee to stand; nor the apostle's translation
of it, [Rom 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#017), εξηγειρα σε, I have
raised thee; nor that of the Septuagint, ἑνεκεν τουτου διετηρηθης, on
this account art thou preserved, viz., in the past plagues; can
countenance that most exceptionable meaning put on the words by certain
commentators, viz., "That God ordained or appointed Pharaoh from all
eternity, by certain means, to this end; that he made him to exist in
time; that he raised him to the throne; promoted him to that high honor
and dignity; that he preserved him, and did not cut him off as yet; that
he strengthened and hardened his heart; irritated, provoked, and stirred
him up against his people Israel, and suffered him to go all the lengths
he did go in his obstinacy and rebellion; all which was done to show in
him his power in destroying him in the Red Sea. The sum of which is,
that this man was raised up by God in every sense for God to show his
power in his destruction." So man speaks; thus God hath not spoken. See
Henry on the place.

[Exodus 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 9:17</span></span>

As yet exaltest thou thyself against my people - So it appears that at
this time he might have submitted, and thus prevented his own
destruction.

[Exodus 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 9:18</span></span>

To-morrow about this time - The time of this plague is marked thus
circumstantially to show Pharaoh that Jehovah was Lord of heaven and
earth, and that the water, the fire, the earth, and the air, which were
all objects of Egyptian idolatry, were the creatures of his power; and
subservient to his will; and that, far from being able to help them,
they were now, in the hands of God, instruments of their destruction.

To rain a very grievous hail - To rain hail may appear to some
superficial observers as an unphilosophical mode of expression, but
nothing can be more correct. "Drops of rain falling through a cold
region of the atmosphere are frozen and converted into hail;" and thus
the hail is produced by rain. When it begins to fall it is rain; when it
is falling it is converted into hail; thus it is literally true that it
rains hail. The farther a hail-stone falls the larger it generally is,
because in its descent it meets with innumerable particles of water,
which, becoming attached to it, are also frozen, and thus its bulk is
continually increasing till it reaches the earth. In the case in
question, if natural means were at all used, we may suppose a highly
electrified state of an atmosphere loaded with vapors, which, becoming
condensed and frozen, and having a considerable space to fall through,
were of an unusually large size. Though this was a supernatural storm,
there have been many of a natural kind, that have been exceedingly
dreadful. A storm of hail fell near Liverpool, in Lancashire, in the
year 1795, which greatly damaged the vegetation, broke windows, etc.,
etc. Many of the stones measured five inches in circumference. Dr.
Halley mentions a similar storm of hail in Lancashire, Cheshire, etc.,
in 1697, April 29, that for sixty miles in length and two miles in
breadth did immense damage, by splitting trees, killing fowls and all
small animals, knocking down men and horses, etc., etc. Mezeray, in his
History of France, says "that in Italy, in 1510, there was for some time
a horrible darkness, thicker than that of night, after which the clouds
broke into thunder and lightning, and there fell a shower of hail-stones
which destroyed all the beasts, birds, and even fish of the country. It
was attended with a strong smell of sulphur, and the stones were of a
bluish color, some of them weighing one hundred pounds' weight." The
Almighty says to Job: "Hast thou seen the treasures of the hail, which I
have reserved against the time of trouble, against the day of battle and
war?" [Job 38:22](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#022), [Job
38:23](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#023). While God has such artillery at
his command, how soon may he desolate a country or a world! See the
account of a remarkable hail-storm in [Jos
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#011).

[Exodus 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 9:19</span></span>

Send - now, and gather thy cattle - So in the midst of judgment, God
remembered mercy. The miracle should be wrought that they might know he
was the Lord; but all the lives both of men and beasts might have been
saved, had Pharaoh and his servants taken the warning so mercifully
given them. While some regarded not the word of the Lord, others feared
it, and their cattle and their servants were saved, See [Exo
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#020), [Exo
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#021).

[Exodus 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">exo 9:23</span></span>

The Lord sent thunder - קלת koloth, voices; but loud, repeated peals of
thunder are meant.

And the fire ran along upon the ground - ותהלך אש ארצה vattihalac esh
aretsah, and the fire walked upon the earth. It was not a sudden flash
of lightning, but a devouring fire, walking through every part,
destroying both animals and vegetables; and its progress was
irresistible.

[Exodus 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">exo 9:24</span></span>

Hail, and fire mingled with the hail - It is generally allowed that the
electric fluid is essential to the formation of hail. On this occasion
it was supplied in a supernatural abundance; for streams of fire seem to
have accompanied the descending hail, so that herbs and trees, beasts
and men, were all destroyed by them.

[Exodus 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">exo 9:26</span></span>

Only in the land of Goshen - was there no hail - What a signal proof of
a most particular providence! Surely both the Hebrews and Egyptians
profited by this display of the goodness and severity of God.

[Exodus 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">exo 9:27</span></span>

The Lord is righteous, and I and my people are wicked - The original is
very emphatic: The Lord is The Righteous One, (הצדיק hatstaddik), and I
and my people are The Sinners, (הרשעים hareshaim); i.e., He is alone
righteous, and we alone are transgressors. Who could have imagined that
after such an acknowledgment and confession, Pharaoh should have again
hardened his heart?

[Exodus 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">exo 9:28</span></span>

It is enough - There is no need of any farther plague; I submit to the
authority of Jehovah and will rebel no more.

Mighty thunderings - כלת אלהים koloth Elohim, voices of God; - that is,
superlatively loud thunder. So mountains of God ([Psa
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006)) means exceeding high mountains.
So a prince of God ([Gen 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#006)) means a
mighty prince. See a description of thunder, [Psa
29:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#003) : "The Voice Of The Lord is
upon the waters: the God of glory thundereth; the Lord is upon many
waters. The voice of the Lord is powerful; the voice of the Lord is full
of majesty. The voice of the Lord breaketh the cedars. The voice of the
Lord divideth the flames of fire. The voice of the Lord shaketh the
wilderness," etc. The production of rain by the electric spark is
alluded to in a very beautiful manner, [Jer
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#013) : When he uttereth his voice,
there is a multitude of waters in the heavens. See Clarke's note on [Gen
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#011), and [Gen
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#001) (note).

[Exodus 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">exo 9:29</span></span>

I will spread abroad my hands - That is, I will make supplication to God
that he may remove this plague. This may not be an improper place to
make some observations on the ancient manner of approaching the Divine
Being in prayer. Kneeling down, stretching out the hands, and lifting
them up to heaven, were in frequent use among the Hebrews in their
religious worship. Solomon kneeled down on his knees, and spread forth
his hands to heaven; [Ch2 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#013). So
David, [Psa 143:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#006) : I stretch forth my
hands unto thee. So Ezra: I fell upon my knees, and spread out my hands
unto the Lord my God; [Ezr 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#005). See
also Job [Job 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#013) : If thou prepare
thine heart, and stretch out thy hands towards him. Most nations who
pretended to any kind of worship made use of the same means in
approaching the objects of their adoration, viz., kneeling down and
stretching out their hands; which custom it is very likely they borrowed
from the people of God. Kneeling was ever considered to be the proper
posture of supplication, as it expresses humility, contrition, and
subjection. If the person to whom the supplication was addressed was
within reach, the supplicant caught him by the knees; for as among the
ancients the forehead was consecrated to genius, the ear to memory, and
the right hand to faith, so the knees were consecrated to mercy. Hence
those who entreated favor fell at and caught hold of the knees of the
person whose kindness they supplicated. This mode of supplication is
particularly referred to in the following passages in Homer: -

Των νυν μιν μνησασα παρεζεο, και λαβε γουνων.

Iliad i., ver. 407.

Now therefore, of these things reminding Jove,

Embrace his knees.

Cowper.

To which the following answer is made: -

Και τοτ' επειτα τοι ειμι Διος ποτι χαλκοβατες δω,

Και μιν γουνασομαι, και μιν πεισεσθαι οΐω.

Iliad i., ver. 426.

Then will I to Jove's brazen-floor'd abode, That I may clasp his knees;
and much misdeem Of my endeavor, or my prayer shall speed. Id. See the
issue of thus addressing Jove, Ibid., ver. 500-502, and ver. 511, etc.

In the same manner we find our Lord accosted, [Mat
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#014) : There came to him a certain
man, kneeling down to him γονυπετων αυτον, falling down at his knees.

As to the lifting up or stretching out of the hands, (often joined to
kneeling), of which we have seen already several instances, and of which
we have a very remarkable one in this book, [Exo
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#011), where the lifting up or
stretching out of the hands of Moses was the means of Israel's
prevailing over Amalek; we find many examples of both in ancient
authors. Thus Homer: -

Εσθλον γαρ Δυ χειρας ανασχεμεν, αι κ' ελεησῃ.

Iliad xxiv., ver. 301.

For right it is to spread abroad the hands To Jove for mercy.

Also Virgil: -

Corripio e stratis corpus,

Tendoque supinas ad coelum

cum voce manus, et munera libo

Aeneid iii., ver. 176.

I started from my bed, and raised on high

My hands and voice in rapture to the sky;

And pour libations.

Ptt.

Dixerat: et Genua Amplexus,

genibusque volutans Haerebat.

Ibid., ver. 607.

Then kneel'd the wretch, and suppliant clung around

My knees with tears, and grovell'd on the ground.

Id.

\- media inter numina divum Multa Jovem

Manibus Supplex orasse SUPINIS.

Ibid. iv., ver. 204.

Amidst the statues of the gods he stands,

And spreading forth to Jove his lifted hands.

Id.

Et Duplices cum voce Manus ad sidera

Tendit. Ibid. x., ver. 667.

And lifted both his hands and voice to heaven.

In some cases the person petitioning came forward, and either sat in the
dust or kneeled on the ground, placing his left hand on the knee of him
from whom he expected the favor, while he touched the person's chin with
his right. We have an instance of this also in Homer:

Και ρα παροιθ' αυτοιο καθεζετο, και λαβε γουνων

Σκαιῃ· δεξιτερῃ δ' αρ' ὑπ' ανθερεωνος ἑλουσα.

Iliad i., ver. 500.

Suppliant the goddess stood: one hand she placed

Beneath his chin, and one his knee embraced.

Pope.

When the supplicant could not approach the person to whom he prayed, as
where a deity was the object of the prayer, he washed his hands, made an
offering, and kneeling down, either stretched out both his hands to
heaven, or laid them upon the offering or sacrifice, or upon the altar.
Thus Homer represents the priest of Apollo praying: -

Χερνιψαντο δ' επειτα, και ουλοχυτας ανελοντο.

Τοισιν δε Χρυσης μεγαλ' ευχετο, χειρας ανασχων.

Iliad i., ver. 449.

With water purify their hands, and take

The sacred offering of the salted cake,

While thus, with arms devoutly raised in air,

And solemn voice, the priest directs his prayer.

Pope.

How necessary ablutions of the whole body, and of the hands
particularly, accompanied with offerings and sacrifices were, under the
law, every reader of the Bible knows: see especially [Exo
29:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#001), where Aaron and his sons were
commanded to be washed, previously to their performing the priest's
office; and [Exo 30:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#019), where it is
said: "Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands - that they die not."
See also [Lev 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#015). When the high
priest among the Jews blessed the people, he lifted up his hands, [Lev
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#022). And the Israelites, when they
presented a sacrifice to God, lifted up their hands and placed them on
the head of the victim: "If any man of you bring an offering unto the
Lord - of the cattle of the herd, and of the flock - he shall put his
hand upon the head of the burnt-offering, and it shall be accepted for
him, to make atonement for him;" [Lev
1:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#002). To these circumstances the
apostle alludes, [Ti1 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008) : "I will
therefore that men pray everywhere, lifting up holy hands, without wrath
and doubting." In the apostle's word επαιροντας, lifting up, there is a
manifest reference to stretching out the hands to place them either on
the altar or on the head of the victim. Four things were signified by
this lifting up of the hands. 1. It was the posture of supplication, and
expressed a strong invitation - Come to my help; 2. It expressed the
earnest desire of the person to lay hold on the help he required, by
bringing him who was the object of his prayer to his assistance; 3. It
showed the ardor of the person to receive the blessings he expected; and
4. By this act he designated and consecrated his offering or sacrifice
to his God.

From a great number of evidences and coincidences it is not unreasonable
to conclude that the heathens borrowed all that was pure and rational,
even in their mode of worship, from the ancient people of God; and that
the preceding quotations are proofs of this.

[Exodus 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">exo 9:31</span></span>

The flax and the barley was smitten - The word פשתה pishtah, flax, Mr.
Parkhurst thinks, is derived from the root פשט pashat, to strip, because
the substance which we term flax is properly the bark or rind of the
vegetable, pilled or stripped off the stalks. From time immemorial Egypt
was celebrated for the production and manufacture of flax: hence the
linen and fine linen of Egypt, so often spoken of in ancient authors.

Barley - שערה seorah, from שער saar, to stand on end, to be rough,
bristly, etc.; hence שער sear, the hair of the head, and שעיר sair, a
he-goat, because of its shaggy hair; and hence also barley, because of
the rough and prickly beard with which the ears are covered and
defended.

Dr. Pocock has observed that there is a double seed-time and harvest in
Egypt: Rice, India wheat, and a grain called the corn of Damascus, and
in Italian surgo rosso, are sown and reaped at a very different time
from wheat, barley and flax. The first are sown in March, before the
overflowing of the Nile, and reaped about October; whereas the wheat and
barley are sown in November and December, as soon as the Nile is gone
off, and are reaped before May.

Pliny observes, Hist. Nat., lib. xviii., cap. 10, that in Egypt the
barley is ready for reaping in six months after it is sown, and wheat in
seven. In Aegypto Hordeum sexto a satu mense, Feumenta septimo metuntur.

The flax was boiled - Meaning, I suppose, was grown up into a stalk: the
original is גבעל gibol, podded or was in the pod.

The word well expresses that globous pod on the top of the stalk of flax
which succeeds the flower and contains the seed, very properly expressed
by the Septuagint, το δε λινον σπερματιζον, but the flax was in seed or
was seeding.

[Exodus 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">exo 9:32</span></span>

But the wheat and the rye were not smitten - Wheat, חטה chittah, which
Mr. Parkhurst thinks should be derived from the Chaldee and Samaritan
חטי chati, which signifies tender, delicious, delicate, because of the
superiority of its flavor, etc., to every other kind of grain. But this
term in Scripture appears to mean any kind of bread-corn. Rye, כסמת
cussemeth, from כסם casam, to have long hair; and hence, though the
particular species is not known, the word must mean some bearded grain.
The Septuagint call it ολυρα, the Vulgate for, and Aquila ζεα, which
signify the grain called spelt; and some suppose that rice is meant.

Mr. Harmer, referring to the double harvest in Egypt mentioned by Dr.
Pocock, says that the circumstance of the wheat and the rye being אפילת
aphiloth, dark or hidden, as the margin renders it, (i.e., they were
sown, but not grown up), shows that it was the Indian wheat or surgo
rosso mentioned [Exo 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#031), which, with
the rye, escaped, while the barley and flax were smitten because they
were at or nearly at a state of maturity. See Harmer's Obs., vol. iv.,
p. 11, edit 1808. But what is intended by the words in the Hebrew text
we cannot positively say, as there is a great variety of opinions on
this subject, both among the versions and the commentators. The
Anglo-Saxon translator, probably from not knowing the meaning of the
words, omits the whole verse.

[Exodus 9:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">exo 9:33</span></span>

Spread abroad his hands - Probably with the rod of God in them. See what
has been said on the spreading out of the hands in prayer, [Exo
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#029). See Clarke on [Exo
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#029) (note).

[Exodus 9:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">exo 9:34</span></span>

He sinned yet more, and hardened his heart - These were merely acts of
his own; "for who can deny," says Mr. Psalmanazar, "that what God did on
Pharaoh was much more proper to soften than to harden his heart;
especially when it is observable that it was not till after seeing each
miracle, and after the ceasing of each plague, that his heart is said to
have been hardened? The verbs here used are in the conjugations pihel
and hiphil, and often signify a bare permission, from which it is plain
that the words should have been read, God suffered the heart of Pharaoh
to be hardened." - Universal Hist., vol. i., p. 494. Note D.

[Exodus 9:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">exo 9:35</span></span>

And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened - In consequence of his sinning
yet more, and hardening his own heart against both the judgments and
mercies of God, we need not be surprised that, after God had given him
the means of softening and repentance, and he had in every instance
resisted and abused them, he should at last have been left to the
hardness and darkness of his own obstinate heart, so as to fill up the
measure of his iniquity, and rush headlong to his own destruction.

In the fifth, sixth, and seventh plagues described in this chapter, we
have additional proofs of the justice and mercy of God, as well as of
the stupidity, rebellion, and wickedness of Pharaoh and his courtiers.
As these continued to contradict and resist, it was just that God should
continue to inflict those punishments which their iniquities deserved.
Yet in the midst of judgment he remembers mercy; and therefore Moses and
Aaron are sent to inform the Egyptians that such plagues would come if
they continued obstinate. Here is mercy; the cattle only are destroyed,
and the people saved! Is it not evident from all these messages, and the
repeated expostulations of Moses and Aaron in the name and on the
authority of God, that Pharaoh was bound by no fatal necessity to
continue his obstinacy; that he might have humbled himself before God,
and thus prevented the disasters that fell on the land, and saved
himself and his people from destruction? But he would sin, and therefore
he must be punished.

In the sixth plague Pharaoh had advantages which he had not before. The
magicians, by their successful imitations of the miracles wrought by
Moses, made it doubtful to the Egyptians whether Moses himself was not a
magician acting without any Divine authority; but the plague of the
boils, which they could not imitate, by which they were themselves
afflicted, and which they confessed to be the finger of God, decided the
business.

Pharaoh had no longer any excuse, and must know that he had now to
contend, not with Moses and Aaron, mortals like himself, but with the
living God. How strange, then, that he should continue to resist! Many
affect to be astonished at this, and think it must be attributed only to
a sovereign controlling influence of God, which rendered it impossible
for him to repent or take warning. But the whole conduct of God shows
the improbability of this opinion: and is not the conduct of Pharaoh and
his courtiers copied and reacted by thousands who are never suspected to
be under any such necessitating decree? Every sinner under heaven, who
has the Bible in his hand, is acting the same part. God says to the
swearer and the profane, Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy
God in vain; and yet common swearing and profaneness are most
scandalously common among multitudes who bear the Christian name, and
who presume on the mercy of God to get at last to the kingdom of heaven!
He says also, Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy; thou shalt not
kill; thou shalt not commit adultery; thou shalt not steal; thou shalt
not bear false witness; thou shalt not covet; and sanctions all these
commandments with the most awful penalties: and yet, with all these
things before them, and the professed belief that they came from God,
Sabbath-breakers, men-slayers, adulterers, fornicators, thieves,
dishonest men, false witnesses, liars, slanderers, backbiters, covetous
men, lovers of the world more than lovers of God, are found by hundreds
and thousands! What were the crimes of the poor half-blind Egyptian king
when compared with these! He sinned against a comparatively unknown God;
these sin against the God of their fathers - against the God and Father
of Him whom they call their Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ! They sin with
the Bible in their hand, and a conviction of its Divine authority in
their hearts. They sin against light and knowledge; against the checks
of their consciences, the reproofs of their friends, the admonitions of
the messengers of God; against Moses and Aaron in the law; against the
testimony of all the prophets; against the evangelists, the apostles,
the Maker of heaven and earth, the Judge of all men, and the Savior of
the world! What were Pharaoh's crimes to the crimes of these? On
comparison, his atom of moral turpitude is lost in their world of
iniquity. And yet who supposes these to be under any necessitating
decree to sin on, and go to perdition? Nor are they; nor was Pharaoh. In
all things God has proved both his justice and mercy to be clear in this
point. Pharaoh, through a principle of covetousness, refused to dismiss
the Israelites, whose services he found profitable to the state: these
are absorbed in the love of the world, the love of pleasure, and the
love of gain; nor will they let one lust go, even in the presence of the
thunders of Sinai, or in sight of the agony, bloody sweat, crucifixion,
and death of Jesus Christ! Alas! how many are in the habit of
considering Pharaoh the worst of human beings, inevitably cut off from
the possibility of being saved because of his iniquities, who outdo him
so far in the viciousness of their lives, that Pharaoh, hardening his
heart against ten plagues, appears a saint when compared with those who
are hardening their hearts against ten millions of mercies. Reader, art
thou of this number? Proceed no farther! God's judgments linger not.
Desperate as thy state is, thou mayest return; and thou, even thou, find
mercy through the blood of the Lamb.

See the observations at the conclusion of the next chapter. See Clarke
at [Exo 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#029) (note).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 10](exo010)

</div>
