<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Exodus Index](exo.md)  
  [Previous](exo021)  [Next](exo023.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001.md)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 22:0</span></span>

Laws concerning theft, [Exo 22:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001.md);
concerning trespass, [Exo 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#005.md);
concerning casualties, [Exo 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#006.md). Laws
concerning deposits, or goods left in custody of others, which may have
been lost, stolen, or damaged, [Exo
22:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#007.md). Laws concerning things
borrowed or let out on hire, [Exo
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#014.md), [Exo
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#015.md). Laws concerning seduction, [Exo
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#016.md), [Exo
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#017.md). Laws concerning witchcraft,
[Exo 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#018.md); bestiality, [Exo
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#019.md); idolatry, [Exo
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#020.md). Laws concerning strangers, [Exo
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#021.md); concerning widows, [Exo
22:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#022.md); lending money to the poor,
[Exo 22:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#025.md); concerning pledges, [Exo
22:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#026.md); concerning respect to
magistrates, [Exo 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#028.md); concerning
the first ripe fruits, and the first-born of man and beast, [Exo
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#029.md), [Exo
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#030.md). Directions concerning carcasses
found torn in the field, [Exo 22:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#031.md).

[Exodus 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 22:1</span></span>

If a man shall steal - This chapter consists chiefly of judicial laws,
as the preceding chapter does of political; and in it the same good
sense, and well-marked attention to the welfare of the community and the
moral improvement of each individual, are equally evident.

In our translation of this verse, by rendering different Hebrew words by
the same term in English, we have greatly obscured the sense. I shall
produce the verse with the original words which I think improperly
translated, because one English term is used for two Hebrew words, which
in this place certainly do not mean the same thing. If a man shall steal
an ox (שור shor) or a sheep, (שה seh), and kill it, or sell it; he shall
restore five oxen (בקר bakar) for an ox, (שור shor), and four sheep (צאן
tson) for a sheep (שה seh). I think it must appear evident that the
sacred writer did not intend that these words should be understood as
above. A shor certainly is different from a bakar, and a seh from a
tson. Where the difference in every case lies, wherever these words
occur, it is difficult to say. The shor and the bakar are doubtless
creatures of the beeve kind, and are used in different parts of the
sacred writings to signify the bull, the ox, the heifer, the steer, and
the calf. The seh and the tson are used to signify the ram, the wether,
the ewe, the lamb, the he-goat, the she-goat, and the kid. And the
latter word צאן tson seems frequently to signify the flock, composed of
either of these lesser cattle, or both sorts conjoined.

As שור shor is used, [Job 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#010.md), for a
bull probably it may mean so here. If a man steal a Bull he shall give
five Oxen for him, which we may presume was no more than his real value,
as very few bulls could be kept in a country destitute of horses, where
oxen were so necessary to till the ground. For though some have imagined
that there were no castrated cattle among the Jews, yet this cannot be
admitted on the above reason; for as they had no horses, and bulls would
have been unmanageable and dangerous, they must have had oxen for the
purposes of agriculture. Tson צאן is used for a flock either of sheep or
goats, and seh שה for an individual of either species. For every seh,
four, taken indifferently from the tson or flock must be given; i.e., a
sheep stolen might be recompensed with four out of the flock, whether of
sheep or goats: so that a goat might be compensated with four sheep, or
a sheep with four goats.

[Exodus 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 22:2</span></span>

If a thief be found - If a thief was found breaking into a house in the
night season, he might be killed; but not if the sun had risen, for then
he might be known and taken, and the restitution made which is mentioned
in the succeeding verse. So by the law of England it is a burglary to
break and enter a house by night; and "anciently the day was accounted
to begin only from sunrising, and to end immediately upon sunset: but it
is now generally agreed that if there be daylight enough begun or left,
either by the light of the sun or twilight, whereby the countenance of a
person may reasonably be discerned, it is no burglary; but that this
does not extend to moonlight, for then many midnight burglaries would go
unpunished. And besides, the malignity of the offense does not so
properly arise, as Mr. Justice Blackstone observes, from its being done
in the dark, as at the dead of night when all the creation except beasts
of prey are at rest; when sleep has disarmed the owner, and rendered his
castle defenceless." - East's Pleas of the Crown, vol. ii., p. 509.

[Exodus 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 22:4</span></span>

He shall restore double - In no case of theft was the life of the
offender taken away; the utmost that the law says on this point is,
that, if when found breaking into a house, he should be smitten so as to
die, no blood should be shed for him; [Exo
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#002.md). If he had stolen and sold the
property, then he was to restore four or fivefold, [Exo
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001.md); but if the animal was found
alive in his possession, he was to restore double.

[Exodus 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 22:6</span></span>

If fire break out - Mr. Harmer observes that it is a common custom in
the east to set the dry herbage on fire before the autumnal rains, which
fires, for want of care, often do great damage: and in countries where
great drought prevails, and the herbage is generally parched, great
caution was peculiarly necessary; and a law to guard against such evils,
and to punish inattention and neglect, was highly expedient. See
Harmer's Observat., vol. iii., p. 310, etc.

[Exodus 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 22:7</span></span>

Deliver unto his neighbor - This is called pledging in the law of
bailments; it is a deposit of goods by a debtor to his creditor, to be
kept till the debt be discharged. Whatever goods were thus left in the
hands of another person, that person, according to the Mosaic law,
became responsible for them; if they were stolen, and the thief was
found, he was to pay double; if he could not be found, the oath of the
person who had them in keeping, made before the magistrates, that he
knew nothing of them, was considered a full acquittance. Among the
Romans, if goods were lost which a man had entrusted to his neighbor,
the depositary was obliged to pay their full value. But if a man had
been driven by necessity, as in case of fire, to lodge his goods with
one of his neighbors, and the goods were lost, the depositary was
obliged to pay double their value, because of his unfaithfulness in a
case of such distress, where his dishonesty, connected with the
destruction by the fire, had completed the ruin of the sufferer. To this
case the following law is applicable: Cum quis fidem elegit, nec
depositum redditur, contentus esse debet simplo: cum vero extante
necessitate deponat, crescit perfidia crimen, etc. - Digest., lib. xvi.,
tit. 3, 1. 1.

[Exodus 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 22:8</span></span>

Unto the judges - See Clarke's note on [Exo
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#006.md).

[Exodus 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 22:9</span></span>

Challengeth to be his - It was necessary that such a matter should come
before the judges, because the person in whose possession the goods were
found might have had them by a fair and honest purchase; and, by sifting
the business, the thief might be found out, and if found, be obliged to
pay double to his neighbor.

[Exodus 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 22:11</span></span>

An oath of the Lord be between them - So solemn and awful were all
appeals to God considered in those ancient times, that it was taken for
granted that the man was innocent who could by an oath appeal to the
omniscient God that he had not put his hand to his neighbor's goods.
Since oaths have become multiplied, and since they have been
administered on the most trifling occasions, their solemnity is gone,
and their importance little regarded. Should the oath ever reacquire its
weight and importance, it must be when administered only in cases of
peculiar delicacy and difficulty, and as sparingly as in the days of
Moses.

[Exodus 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 22:13</span></span>

If it be torn in pieces - let him bring it for witness - Rather, Let him
bring עד הטרפה ed hatterephah, a testimony or evidence of the torn
thing, such as the horns, hoofs, etc. This is still a law in some
countries among graziers: if a horse, cow, sheep, or goat, entrusted to
them, be lost, and the keeper asserts it was devoured by dogs, etc., the
law obliges him to produce the horns and hoofs, because on these the
owner's mark is generally found. If these can be produced, the keeper is
acquitted by the law. The ear is often the place marked, but this is not
absolutely required, because a ravenous beast may eat the ear as well as
any other part, but he cannot eat the horns or the hoofs. It seems
however that in after times two of the legs and the ear were required as
evidences to acquit the shepherd of all guilt. See [Amo
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#012.md).

[Exodus 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 22:16</span></span>

If a man entice a maid - This was an exceedingly wise and humane law,
and must have operated powerfully against seduction and fornication;
because the person who might feel inclined to take the advantage of a
young woman knew that he must marry her, and give her a dowry, if her
parents consented; and if they did not consent that their daughter
should wed her seducer, in this case he was obliged to give her the full
dowry which could have been demanded had she been still a virgin.
According to the Targumist here, and to [Deu
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#029.md), the dowry was fifty shekels of
silver, which the seducer was to pay to her father, and he was obliged
to take her to wife; nor had he authority, according to the Jewish
canons, ever to put her away by a bill of divorce. This one
consideration was a powerful curb on disorderly passions, and must tend
greatly to render marriages respectable, and prevent all crimes of this
nature.

[Exodus 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 22:18</span></span>

Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live - If there had been no witches,
such a law as this had never been made. The existence of the law, given
under the direction of the Spirit of God, proves the existence of the
thing. It has been doubted whether מכשפה mecash-shephah, which we
translate witch, really means a person who practiced divination or
sorcery by spiritual or infernal agency. Whether the persons thus
denominated only pretended to have an art which had no existence, or
whether they really possessed the power commonly attributed to them, are
questions which it would be improper to discuss at length in a work of
this kind; but that witches, wizards, those who dealt with familiar
spirits, etc., are represented in the sacred writings as actually
possessing a power to evoke the dead, to perform, supernatural
operations, and to discover hidden or secret things by spells, charms,
incantations, etc., is evident to every unprejudiced reader of the
Bible. Of Manasseh it is said: He caused his children to pass through
the fire in the valley of the son of Hinnom: also he observed times
\[ועונן, veonen, he used divination by clouds\] and used enchantments,
and used witchcraft, \[וכשף vechishsheph\], and dealt with a familiar
spirit, \[ועשה אוב veasah ob, performed a variety of operations by means
of what was afterwards called the πνευμα πυθωνος, the spirit of
Python\], and with wizards, \[ידעוני yiddeoni, the wise or knowing
ones\]; and he wrought much evil in the sight of the Lord; [Ch2
33:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#006.md). It is very likely that the
Hebrew כשף cashaph, and the Arabic cashafa, had originally the same
meaning, to uncover, to remove a veil, to manifest, reveal, make bare or
naked; and mecashefat is used to signify commerce with God. See Wilmet
and Giggeius. The mecashshephah or witch, therefore, was probably a
person who professed to reveal hidden mysteries, by commerce with God,
or the invisible world.

From the severity of this law against witches, etc., we may see in what
light these were viewed by Divine justice. They were seducers of the
people from their allegiance to God, on whose judgment alone they should
depend; and by impiously prying into futurity, assumed an attribute of
God, the foretelling of future events, which implied in itself the
grossest blasphemy, and tended to corrupt the minds of the people, by
leading them away from God and the revelation he had made of himself.
Many of the Israelites had, no doubt, learned these curious arts from
their long residence with the Egyptians; and so much were the Israelites
attached to them, that we find such arts in repute among them, and
various practices of this kind prevailed through the whole of the Jewish
history, notwithstanding the offense was capital, and in all cases
punished with death.

[Exodus 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 22:19</span></span>

Lieth with a beast - If this most abominable crime had not been common,
it never would have been mentioned in a sacred code of laws. It is very
likely that it was an Egyptian practice; and it is certain, from an
account in Sonnini's Travels, that it is practiced in Egypt to the
present day.

[Exodus 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 22:20</span></span>

Utterly destroyed - The word חרם cherem denotes a thing utterly and
finally separated from God and devoted to destruction, without the
possibility of redemption.

[Exodus 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 22:21</span></span>

Thou shalt neither vex a stranger, nor oppress him - This was not only a
very humane law, but it was also the offspring of a sound policy: "Do
not vex a stranger; remember ye were strangers. Do not oppress a
stranger; remember ye were oppressed. Therefore do unto all men as ye
would they should do to you." It was the produce of a sound policy: "Let
strangers be well treated among you, and many will come to take refuge
among you, and thus the strength of your country will be increased. If
refugees of this kind be treated well, they will become proselytes to
your religion, and thus their souls may be saved." In every point of
view, therefore, justice, humanity, sound policy, and religion, say.
Neither vex nor oppress a stranger.

[Exodus 22:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 22:22</span></span>

Ye shall not afflict any widow, or fatherless child - It is remarkable
that offenses against this law are not left to the discretion of the
judges to be punished; God reserves the punishment to himself, and by
this he strongly shows his abhorrence of the crime. It is no common
crime, and shall not be punished in a common way; the wrath of God shall
wax hot against him who in any wise afflicts or wrongs a widow or a
fatherless child: and we may rest assured that he who helps either does
a service highly acceptable in the sight of God.

[Exodus 22:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">exo 22:25</span></span>

Neither shalt thou lay upon him usury - נשך neshech, from nashach, to
bite, cut, or pierce with the teeth; biting usury. So the Latins call it
usura vorax, devouring usury. "The increase of usury is called נשך
neshech, because it resembles the biting of a serpent; for as this is so
small as scarcely to be perceptible at first, but the venom soon spreads
and diffuses itself till it reaches the vitals, so the increase of
usury, which at first is not perceived nor felt, at length grows so much
as by degrees to devour another's substance." - Leigh.

It is evident that what is here said must be understood of accumulated
usury, or what we call compound interest only; and accordingly נשך
neshech is mentioned with and distinguished from תרביה tarbith and מרביה
marbith, interest or simple interest, [Lev
25:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#036.md), [Lev
25:37](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#037.md); [Pro
28:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#008.md); [Eze
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#008.md), [Eze
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#013.md), [Eze
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#017.md), and [Exo
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#012.md) - Parkhurst.

Perhaps usury may be more properly defined unlawful interest, receiving
more for the loan of money than it is really worth, and more than the
law allows. It is a wise regulation in the laws of England, that if a
man be convicted of usury - taking unlawful interest, the bond or
security is rendered void, and he forfeits treble the sum borrowed.
Against such an oppressive practice the wisdom of God saw it essentially
necessary to make a law to prevent a people, who were naturally what our
Lord calls the Pharisees, φιλαργυροι, lovers of money, ([Luk
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#014).md), from oppressing each other;
and who, notwithstanding the law in the text, practice usury in all
places of their dispersion to the present day.

[Exodus 22:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">exo 22:26</span></span>

If thou - take thy neighbor's raiment to pledge - It seems strange that
any pledge should be taken which must be so speedily restored; but it is
very likely that the pledge was restored by night only, and that he who
pledged it brought it back to his creditor next morning. The opinion of
the rabbins is, that whatever a man needed for the support of life, he
had the use of it when absolutely necessary, though it was pledged. Thus
he had the use of his working tools by day, but he brought them to his
creditor in the evening. His hyke, which serves an Arab as a plaid does
a Highlander, (See Clarke's note on [Exo
12:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#034).md), was probably the raiment here
referred to: it is a sort of coarse blanket, about six yards long, and
five or six feet broad, which an Arab always carries with him, and on
which he sleeps at night, it being his only substitute for a bed. As the
fashions in the east scarcely ever change, it is very likely that the
raiment of the Israelites was precisely the same with that of the modern
Arabs, who live in the very same desert in which the Hebrews were when
this law was given. How necessary it was to restore the hyke to a poor
man before the going down of the sun, that he might have something to
repose on, will appear evident from the above considerations. At the
same time, the returning it daily to the creditor was a continual
acknowledgment of the debt, and served instead of a written
acknowledgment or bond; as we may rest assured that writing, if
practiced at all before the giving of the law, was not common: but it is
most likely that it did not exist.

[Exodus 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">exo 22:28</span></span>

Thou shalt not revile the gods - Most commentators believe that the word
gods here means magistrates. The original is אלהים Elohim, and should be
understood of the true God only: Thou shalt not blaspheme or make light
of \[תקלל tekallel\] God, the fountain of justice and power, nor curse
the ruler of thy people, who derives his authority from God. We shall
ever find that he who despises a good civil government, and is
disaffected to that under which he lives, is one who has little fear of
God before his eyes. The spirit of disaffection and sedition is ever
opposed to the religion of the Bible. When those who have been pious get
under the spirit of misrule, they infallibly get shorn of their
spiritual strength, and become like salt that has lost its savor. He who
can indulge himself in speaking evil of the civil ruler, will soon learn
to blaspheme God. The highest authority says, Fear God: honor the king.

[Exodus 22:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">exo 22:29</span></span>

The first of thy ripe fruits - This offering was a public acknowledgment
of the bounty and goodness of God, who had given them their proper seed
time, the first and the latter rain, and the appointed weeks of harvest.

From the practice of the people of God the heathens borrowed a similar
one, founded on the same reason. The following passage from Censorinus,
De Die Natali, is beautiful, and worthy of the deepest attention: -

Illi enim (majores nostri) qui alimenta, patriam, lucem, se denique
ipsos deorum dono habebant, ex omnibus aliquid diis sacrabant, magis
adeo, ut se gratos approbarent, quam quod deos arbitrarentur hoc
indigere. Itaque cum perceperant fruges, antequam vescerentur, Diis
libare instituerunt: et cum agros atque urbes, deorum munera,
possiderent, partem quandam templis sacellisque, ubi eos colerent,
dicavere.

"Our ancestors, who held their food, their country, the light, and all
that they possessed, from the bounty of the gods, consecrated to them a
part of all their property, rather as a token of their gratitude, than
from a conviction that the gods needed any thing. Therefore as soon as
the harvest was got in, before they had tasted of the fruits, they
appointed libations to be made to the gods. And as they held their
fields and cities as gifts from their gods, they consecrated a certain
part for temples and shrines, where they might worship them."

Pliny is express on the same point, who attests that the Romans never
tasted either their new corn or wine, till the priests had offered the
First-Fruits to the gods. Acts ne degustabant quidem, novas fruges aut
vina, antequam sacerdotes Primitias Libassent. Hist. Nat., lib. xviii.,
c. 2.

Horace bears the same testimony, and shows that his countrymen offered,
not only their first-fruits, but the choicest of all their fruits, to
the Lares or household gods; and he shows also the wickedness of those
who sent these as presents to the rich, before the gods had been thus
honored: -

Dulcia poma,

Et quoscumque feret cultus tibi fundus honores,

Ante Larem gustet venerabilior Lare dives.

Sat., lib. ii., s. v., ver. 12.

"What your garden yields,

The choicest honors of your cultured fields,

To him be sacrificed, and let him taste,

Before your gods, the vegetable feast."

Dunkin.

And to the same purpose Tibullus, in one of the most beautiful of his
elegies: -

Et quodcumque mihi pomum novus educat annus,

Libatum agricolae ponitur ante deo.

Flava Ceres, tibi sit nostro de rure corona

Spicea, quae templi pendeat ante fores.

Eleg., lib. i., eleg. i. ver. 13.

"My grateful fruits, the earliest of the year,

Before the rural god shall daily wait.

From Ceres' gifts I'll cull each browner ear,

And hang a wheaten wreath before her gate."

Grainger.

The same subject he touches again in the fifth elegy of the same book,
where he specifies the different offerings made for the produce of the
fields, of the flocks, and of the vine, ver. 27: -

Illa deo sciet agricolae pro vitibus uvam,

Pro segete spicas, pro grege ferre dapem.

"With pious care will load each rural shrine,

For ripen'd crops a golden sheaf assign,

Cates for my fold, rich clusters for my wine.

Id. - See Calmet.

These quotations will naturally recall to our memory the offerings of
Cain and Abel, mentioned [Gen 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#003.md),
[Gen 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#004.md).

The rejoicings at our harvest-home are distorted remains of that
gratitude which our ancestors, with all the primitive inhabitants of the
earth, expressed to God with appropriate signs and ceremonies. Is it not
possible to restore, in some goodly form, a custom so pure, so edifying,
and so becoming? There is a laudable custom, observed by some pious
people, of dedicating a new house to God by prayer, etc., which cannot
be too highly commended.

[Exodus 22:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">exo 22:30</span></span>

Seven days it shall be with his dam - For the mother's health it was
necessary that the young one should suck so long; and prior to this time
the process of nutrition in a young animal can scarcely be considered as
completely formed. Among the Romans lambs were not considered as pure or
clean before the eighth day; nor calves before the thirtieth: Pecoris
faetus die octavo purus est, bovis trigesimo - Plin. Hist. Nat., lib.
viii.

[Exodus 22:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">exo 22:31</span></span>

Neither shall ye eat - flesh - torn of beasts in the field - This has
been supposed to be an ordinance against eating flesh cut off the animal
while alive, and so the Syriac seems to have understood it. If we can
credit Mr. Bruce, this is a frequent custom in Abyssinia; but human
nature revolts from it. The reason of the prohibition against eating the
flesh of animals that had been torn, or as we term it worried in the
field, appears to have been simply this: That the people might not eat
the blood, which in this case must be coagulated in the flesh; and the
blood, being the life of the beast, and emblematical of the blood of the
covenant, was ever to be held sacred, and was prohibited from the days
of Noah. See Clarke's note on [Gen
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#004.md).

In the conclusion of this chapter we see the grand reason of all the
ordinances and laws which it contains. No command was issued merely from
the sovereignty of God. He gave them to the people as restraints on
disorderly passions, and incentives to holiness; and hence he says, Ye
shall be holy men unto me. Mere outward services could neither please
him nor profit them; for from the very beginning of the world the end of
the commandment was love out of a pure heart and good conscience, and
faith unfeigned, [Ti1 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005.md). And without
these accompaniments no set of religious duties, however punctually
performed, could be pleasing in the sight of that God who seeks truth in
the inward parts, and in whose eyes the faith that worketh by love is
alone valuable. A holy heart and a holy, useful life God invariably
requires in all his worshippers. Reader, how standest thou in his sight?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 23](exo023.md)

</div>
