<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo009)  [Next](exo011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 10:0</span></span>

Moses is again sent to Pharaoh, and expostulates with him on his refusal
to let the Hebrews go, [Exo 10:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#001).
The eighth plague, viz., of locusts, is threatened, [Exo
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#004). The extent and oppressive nature
of this plague, [Exo 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#005), [Exo
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#006). Pharaoh's servants counsel him
to dismiss the Hebrews, [Exo 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#007). He
calls for Moses and Aaron, and inquires who they are of the Hebrews who
wish to go, [Exo 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#008). Moses having
answered that the whole people, with their flocks and herds must go and
hold a feast to the Lord, [Exo 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#009),
Pharaoh is enraged, and having granted permission only to the men,
drives Moses and Aaron from his presence, [Exo
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#010), [Exo
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#011). Moses is commanded to stretch
out his hand and bring the locusts, [Exo
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#012). He does so, and an east wind is
sent, which, blowing all that day and night, brings the locusts the next
morning, [Exo 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#013). The devastation
occasioned by these insects, [Exo
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#014), [Exo
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#015). Pharaoh is humbled,
acknowledges his sin, and begs Moses to intercede with Jehovah for him,
[Exo 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#016), [Exo
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#017). Moses does so, and at his
request a strong west wind is sent, which carries all the locusts to the
Red Sea, [Exo 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#018), [Exo
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#019). Pharaoh's heart is again
hardened, [Exo 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#020). Moses is
commanded to bring the ninth plague of extraordinary darkness over all
the land of Egypt, [Exo 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#021). The
nature, duration, and effects of this, [Exo
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#022), [Exo
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#023). Pharaoh, again humbled,
consents to let the people go, provided they leave their cattle behind,
[Exo 10:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#024). Moses insists on having
all their cattle, because of the sacrifices which they must make to the
Lord, [Exo 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#025), [Exo
10:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#026). Pharaoh, again hardened,
refuses, [Exo 10:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#027). Orders Moses from
his presence, and threatens him with death should he ever return, [Exo
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#028). Moses departs with the promise
of returning no more, [Exo 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#029).

[Exodus 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 10:1</span></span>

Hardened his heart - God suffered his natural obstinacy to prevail, that
he might have farther opportunities of showing forth his eternal power
and Godhead.

[Exodus 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 10:2</span></span>

That thou mayest tell in the ears of thy son - That the miracles wrought
at this time might be a record for the instruction of the latest
posterity, that Jehovah alone, the God of the Hebrews, was the sole
Maker, Governor, and Supporter of the heavens and the earth. Thus we
find God so did his marvelous works, that they might be had in
everlasting remembrance. It was not to crush the poor worm, Pharaoh,
that he wrought such mighty wonders, but to convince his enemies, to the
end of the world, that no cunning or power can prevail against him; and
to show his followers that whosoever trusted in him should never be
confounded.

[Exodus 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 10:3</span></span>

How long wilt thou refuse to humble thyself - Had it been impossible for
Pharaoh, in all the preceding plagues, to have humbled himself and
repented can we suppose that God could have addressed him in such
language as the preceding? We may rest assured that there was always a
time in which he might have relented, and that it was because he
hardened his heart at such times that God is said to harden him, i.e.,
to give him up to his own stubborn and obstinate heart; in consequence
of which he refused to let the people go, so that God had a fresh
opportunity to work another miracle, for the very gracious purposes
mentioned in [Exo 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#002). Had Pharaoh
relented before, the same gracious ends would have been accomplished by
other means.

[Exodus 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 10:4</span></span>

To-morrow will I bring the locusts - The word ארבה arbeh, a locust, is
probably from the root רבה rabah, he multiplied, became great, mighty,
etc.; because of the immense swarms of these animals by which different
countries, especially the east, are infested. The locust, in entomology,
belongs to a genus of insects known among naturalists by the term
Grylli; and includes three species, crickets, grasshoppers, and those
commonly called locusts; and as they multiply faster than any other
animal in creation, they are properly entitled to the name ארבה arbeh,
which might be translated the numerous or multiplied insect. See this
circumstance referred to, [Jdg 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#005);
[Jdg 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#012); [Psa
105:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#034); [Jer
46:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#023); [Jer
51:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#014); [Joe
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#006); [Nah
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#015); Judith 2:19, 20; where the most
numerous armies are compared to the arbeh or locust. The locust has a
large open mouth; and in its two jaws it has four incisive teeth, which
traverse each other like scissors, being calculated, from their
mechanism, to grip or cut. Mr. Volney, in his Travels in Syria, gives a
striking account of this most awful scourge of God: -

"Syria partakes together with Egypt and Persia, and almost all the whole
middle part of Asia, in the terrible scourge, I mean those clouds of
locusts of which travelers have spoken; the quantity of which is
incredible to any person who has not himself seen them, the earth being
covered by them for several leagues round. The noise they make in
browsing the plants and trees may be heard at a distance, like an army
plundering in secret. Fire seems to follow their tracks. Wherever their
legions march the verdure disappears from the country, like a curtain
drawn aside; the trees and plants, despoiled of their leaves, make the
hideous appearance of winter instantly succeed to the bright scenes of
spring. When these clouds of locusts take their flight, in order to
surmount some obstacle, or the more rapidly to cross some desert, one
may literally say that the sun is darkened by them."

Baron de Tott gives a similar account: "Clouds of locusts frequently
alight on the plains of the Noguais, (the Tartars), and giving
preference to their fields of millet, ravage them in an instant. Their
approach darkens the horizon, and so enormous is their multitude, it
hides the light of the sun. They alight on the fields, and there form a
bed of six or seven inches thick. To the noise of their flight succeeds
that of their devouring actively, which resembles the rattling of
hail-stones; but its consequences are infinitely more destructive. Fire
itself eats not so fast; nor is there any appearance of vegetation to be
found when they again take their flight, and go elsewhere to produce new
disasters."

Dr. Shaw, who witnessed most formidable swarms of these in Barbary in
the years 1724 and 1725, gives the following account of them: "They were
much larger than our grasshoppers, and had brown-spotted wings, with
legs and bodies of a bright yellow. Their first appearance was towards
the latter end of March. In the middle of April their numerous swarms,
like a succession of clouds, darkened the sun. In the month of May they
retired to the adjacent plains to deposit their eggs: these were no
sooner hatched in June than the young brood first produced, while in
their caterpillar or worm-like state, formed themselves into a compact
body of more than a furlong square, and, marching directly forward,
climbed over trees, walls, and houses, devouring every plant in their
way. Within a day or two another brood was hatched, and advancing in the
same manner, gnawed off the young branches and bark of the trees left by
the former, making a complete desolation. The inhabitants, to stop their
progress, made a variety of pits and trenches all over their fields and
gardens, which they filled with water, or else heaped up therein heath,
stubble, etc., which they set on fire; but to no purpose: for the
trenches were quickly filled up and the fires extinguished, by infinite
swarms succeeding one another; while the front seemed regardless of
danger, and the rear pressed on so close that retreat was altogether
impossible. In a month's time they threw off their worm-like state; and
in a new form, with wings and legs, and additional powers, returned to
their former voracity." - Shaw's Travels, 187, 188, 4th edition.

The descriptions given by these travelers show that God's army,
described by the Prophet Joel, [Joe
2:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001), was innumerable swarms of
locusts, to which the accounts given by Dr. Shaw and others exactly
agree.

[Exodus 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 10:5</span></span>

They shall cover the face of the earth - They sometimes cover the whole
ground to the depth of six or eight inches. See the preceding accounts.

[Exodus 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 10:6</span></span>

They shall fill thy houses - Dr. Shaw mentions this circumstance; "they
entered," says he, "Into our very houses and bed-chambers, like so many
thieves." - Ibid. p. 187.

[Exodus 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 10:7</span></span>

How long shall this man be a snare unto us? - As there is no noun in the
text, the pronoun זה zeh may either refer to the Israelites, to the
plague by which they were then afflicted, or to Moses and Aaron, the
instruments used by the Most High in their chastisement. The Vulgate
translates, Usquequo patiemur hoc scandalum? "How long shall we suffer
this scandal or reproach?"

Let the men go, that they may serve the Lord their God - Much of the
energy of several passages is lost in translating יהוה Yehovah by the
term Lord. The Egyptians had their gods, and they supposed that the
Hebrews had a god like unto their own; that this Jehovah required their
services, and would continue to afflict Egypt till his people were
permitted to worship him in his own way.

Egypt is destroyed? - This last plague had nearly ruined the whole land.

[Exodus 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 10:8</span></span>

Who are they that shall go? - Though the Egyptians, about fourscore
years before, wished to destroy the Hebrews, yet they found them now so
profitable to the state that they were unwilling to part with them.

[Exodus 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 10:9</span></span>

We will go with our young and with our old, etc. - As a feast was to be
celebrated to the honor of Jehovah, all who were partakers of his bounty
and providential kindness must go and perform their part in the
solemnity. The men and the women must make the feast, the children must
witness it, and the cattle must be taken along with them to furnish the
sacrifices necessary on this occasion. This must have appeared
reasonable to the Egyptians, because it was their own custom in their
religious assemblies. Men, women, and children attended them, often to
the amount of several hundred thousand. Herodotus informs us, in
speaking of the six annual feasts celebrated by the Egyptians in honor
of their deities, that they hold their chief one at the city of Bubastis
in honor of Neith or Diana; that they go thither by water in boats-men,
women, and children; that during their voyage some of the women play on
castanets, and some of the men upon flutes, while the rest are employed
in singing and clapping their hands; and that, when they arrive at
Bubastis, they sacrifice a vast number of victims, and drink much wine;
and that at one such festival, the inhabitants assured him, that there
were not assembled fewer than 700,000 men and women, without reckoning
the children - Euterpe, chap. lix., lx. I find that the ancient
Egyptians called Diana Neith; this comes as near as possible to the
Gaile of the Isle of Man. The moon is called yn neith or neath; and also
ke-sollus, from ke, smooth or even, and sollus, light, the Smooth Light;
perhaps to distinguish her from the sun, grian, from gri-tien or
cri-tien, i.e., Trembling Fire; yn neith-easya, as Macpherson has it,
signifies wan complexion. I should rather incline to think it may come
from aise. The Celtic nations thought that the heavenly luminaries were
the residences of spirits which they distinguished by the name of aise,
thus grian-ais signifies the spirit of the sun.

Moses and Aaron, requesting liberty for the Hebrews to go three days'
journey into the wilderness, and with them all their wives, little ones,
and cattle, in order to hold a feast unto Jehovah their God, must have
at least appeared as reasonable to the Egyptians as their going to the
city of Bubastis with their wives, little ones, and cattle, to hold a
feast to Neith or Diana, who was there worshipped. The parallel in these
two cases is too striking to pass unnoticed.

[Exodus 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 10:10</span></span>

Let the Lord be so with you - This is an obscure sentence. Some suppose
that Pharaoh meant it as a curse, as if he had said, "May your God be as
surely with you, as I shall let you go!" For as he purposed not to
permit them to go, so he wished them as much of the Divine help as they
should have of his permission.

Look - for evil is before you - ראו כי רעה נגד פניכם reu ki raah neged
peneychem, See ye that evil is before your faces - if you attempt to go,
ye shall meet with the punishment ye deserve. Probably Pharaoh intended
to insinuate that they had some sinister designs, and that they wished
to go in a body that they might the better accomplish their purpose; but
if they had no such designs they would be contented for the males to go,
and leave their wives and children behind: for he well knew if the men
went and left their families they would infallibly return, but that if
he permitted them to take their families with them, they would
undoubtedly make their escape; therefore he says, [Exo
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#011), Go now ye that are men, and
serve the Lord.

[Exodus 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 10:13</span></span>

The Lord brought an east wind - As locusts abounded in those countries,
and particularly in Ethiopia, and more especially at this time of the
year, God had no need to create new swarms for this purpose; all that
was requisite was to cause such a wind to blow as would bring those
which already existed over the land of Egypt. The miracle in this
business was the bringing the locusts at the appointed time, and causing
the proper wind to blow for that purpose; and then taking them away
after a similar manner.

[Exodus 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 10:14</span></span>

Before them there were no such locusts, etc. - They exceeded all that
went before, or were since, in number, and in the devastations they
produced. Probably both these things are intended in the passage. See
[Exo 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#015).

[Exodus 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 10:15</span></span>

There remained not any green thing - See Clarke's note on [Exo
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#004).

[Exodus 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 10:17</span></span>

Forgive, I pray thee, my sin only this once - What a strange case! And
what a series of softening and hardening, of sinning and repenting! Had
he not now another opportunity of returning to God? But the love of
gain, and the gratification of his own self-will and obstinacy, finally
prevailed.

[Exodus 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 10:19</span></span>

A mighty strong west wind - רוח ים ruach yam, literally the wind of the
sea; the wind that blew from the Mediterranean Sea, which lay north-west
of Egypt, which had the Red Sea on the east. Here again God works by
natural means; he brought the locusts by the east wind, and took them
away by the west or north-west wind, which carried them to the Red Sea
where they were drowned.

The Red Sea - ים סוף yam suph, the weedy sea; so called, as some
suppose, from the great quantity of alga or sea-weed which grows in it
and about its shores. But Mr. Bruce, who has sailed the whole extent of
it, declares that he never saw in it a weed of any kind; and supposes it
has its name suph from the vast quantity of coral which grows in it, as
trees and plants do on land. "One of these," he observes, "from a root
nearly central, threw out ramifications in a nearly circular form
measuring twenty-six feet diameter every way." - Travels, vol. ii., p.
138. In the Septuagint it is called θαλασσα ερυθρα, the Red Sea, from
which version we have borrowed the name; and Mr. Bruce supposes that it
had this name from Edom or Esau, whose territories extended to its
coasts; for it is well known that the word אדם Edom in Hebrew signifies
red or ruddy. The Red Sea, called also the Arabic Gulf, separates Arabia
from Upper Ethiopia and part of Egypt. It is computed to be three
hundred and fifty leagues in length from Suez to the Straits of
Babelmandel, and is about forty leagues in breadth. It is not very
tempestuous, and the winds usually blow from north to south, and from
south to north, six months in the year; and, like the monsoons of India,
invariably determine the seasons of sailing into or out of this sea. It
is divided into two gulfs: that to the east called the Elanitic Gulf,
from the city of Elana to the north end of it; and that to the west
called the Heroopolitan Gulf, from the city of Heroopolis; the former of
which belongs to Arabia, the latter to Egypt. The Heroopolitan Gulf is
called by the Arabians Bahr el Kolzum, the sea of destruction, or of
Clysmae, an ancient town in that quarter; and the Elanitic Gulf Bahr el
Akaba, the sea of Akaba, a town situated on its most inland point.

[Exodus 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 10:21</span></span>

Darkness which may be felt - Probably this was occasioned by a
superabundance of aqueous vapors floating in the atmosphere, which were
so thick as to prevent the rays of the sun from penetrating through
them; an extraordinarily thick mist supernaturally, i.e., miraculously,
brought on. An awful emblem of the darkened state of the Egyptians and
their king.

[Exodus 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">exo 10:23</span></span>

They saw not one another - So deep was the obscurity, and probably such
was its nature, that no artificial light could be procured; as the thick
clammy vapors would prevent lamps, etc., from burning, or if they even
could be ignited, the light through the palpable obscurity, could
diffuse itself to no distance from the burning body. The author of the
book of The Wisdom of Solomon 17:2-19, gives a fearful description of
this plague. He says, "The Egyptians were shut up in their houses, the
prisoners of darkness: and were fettered with the bonds of a long night.
They were scattered under a dark veil of forgetfulness, being horribly
astonished and troubled with strange apparitions; for neither might the
corner that held them keep them from fear; but noises as of waters
falling down sounded about them; and sad visions appeared unto them with
heavy countenances. No power of the fire could give them light - only
there appeared unto them a fire kindled of itself very dreadful; for
being much terrified, they thought the things which they saw to be worse
than the sight they saw not. For though no terrible thing did scare
them, yet being scared with beasts that passed by, and hissing of
serpents, they died for fear: for whether he were husbandman, or
shepherd, or a laborer in the field, he was overtaken; for they were all
bound with one chain of darkness. Whether it were a whistling wind, or a
terrible sound of stones cast down, or a running that could not be seen
of tripping beasts, or a roaring voice of most savage wild beasts, or a
rebounding echo from the hollow mountains, these things made them to
swoon for fear." See [Psa 78:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#049).

To this description nothing need be added except this circumstance, that
the darkness, with its attendant horrors, lasted for three days.

All the children of Israel had light - By thus distinguishing the
Israelites, God showed the Egyptians that the darkness was produced by
his power; that he sent it in judgment against them for their cruelty to
his people; that because they trusted in him they were exempted from
these plagues; that in the displeasure of such a Being his enemies had
every thing to fear, and in his approbation his followers had every
thing to hope.

[Exodus 10:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">exo 10:24</span></span>

Only let your flocks and your herds be stayed - Pharaoh cannot get all
he wishes; and as he sees it impossible to contend with Jehovah, he now
consents to give up the Israelites, their wives and their children,
provided he may keep their flocks and their herds. The cruelty of this
demand is not more evident than its avarice. Had six hundred thousand
men, besides women and children, gone three days' journey into the
wilderness without their cattle, they must have inevitably perished,
being without milk for their little ones, and animal food for their own
sustenance, in a place where little as a substitute could possibly be
found. It is evident from this that Pharaoh intended the total
destruction of the whole Israelitish host.

[Exodus 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">exo 10:26</span></span>

We know not with what we must serve the Lord, etc. - The law was not yet
given; the ordinances concerning the different kinds of sacrifices and
offerings not known. What kind and what number of animals God should
require to be sacrificed, even Moses himself could not as yet tell. He
therefore very properly insists on taking the whole of their herds with
them, and not leaving even one hoof behind.

[Exodus 10:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">exo 10:27</span></span>

The Lord hardened Pharaoh's heart - He had yet another miracle to work
for the complete conviction of the Egyptians and triumph of his people;
and till that was wrought he permitted the natural obstinacy of
Pharaoh's haughty heart to have its full sway, after each resistance of
the gracious influence which was intended to soften and bring him to
repentance.

[Exodus 10:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">exo 10:28</span></span>

See my face no more - Hitherto Pharaoh had left the way open for
negotiation; but now, in wrath against Jehovah, he dismisses his
ambassador, and threatens him with death if he should attempt any more
to come into his presence.

[Exodus 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">exo 10:29</span></span>

I will see thy face again no more - It is very likely that this was the
last interview that Moses had with Pharaoh, for what is related, [Exo
11:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#004), might have been spoken on this
very occasion, as it is very possible that God gave Moses to understand
his purpose to slay the first-born, while before Pharaoh at this time;
so, in all probability, the interview mentioned here was the last which
Moses had with the Egyptian king. It is true that in [Exo
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#031) it is stated that Pharaoh called
for Moses and Aaron by night, and ordered them to leave Egypt, and to
take all their substance with them, which seems to imply that there was
another interview, but the words may imply no more than that Moses and
Aaron received such a message from Pharaoh. If, however, this mode of
interpreting these passages should not seem satisfactory to any, he may
understand the words of Moses thus: I will see thy face - seek thy
favor, no more in behalf of my people, which was literally true; for if
Moses did appear any more before Pharaoh, it was not as a supplicant,
but merely as the ambassador of God, to denounce his judgments by giving
him the final determination of Jehovah relative to the destruction of
the first-born.

1\. To the observations at the conclusion of the preceding chapter, we
may add that at first view it seems exceedingly strange that, after all
the proofs Pharaoh had of the power of God, he should have acted in the
manner related in this and the preceding chapters, alternately sinning
and repenting; but it is really a common case, and multitudes who
condemn the conduct of this miserable Egyptian king, act in a similar
manner. They relent when smarting under God's judgments, but harden
their hearts when these judgments are removed. Of this kind I have
witnessed numerous cases. To such God says by his prophet, Why should ye
be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more. Reader, are not the
vows of God upon thee? Often when afflicted in thyself or family hast
thou not said like Pharaoh, ([Exo
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#017)), Now therefore forgive, I pray
thee, my sin only This Once, and take away from me this death Only? And
yet when thou hadst respite, didst thou not harden thy heart, and with
returning health and strength didst thou not return unto iniquity? And
art thou not still in the broad road of transgression? Be not deceived;
God is not mocked; he warns thee, but he will not be mocked by thee.
What thou sowest, that thou must reap. Think then what a most dreadful
harvest thou mayest expect from the seeds of vice which thou hast
already sown!

2\. Even in the face of God's judgments the spirit of avarice will make
its requisitions. Only let your flocks and your herds be stayed, says
Pharaoh. The love of gain was the ruling principle of this man's soul,
and he chooses desperately to contend with the justice of his Maker,
rather than give up his bosom sin! Reader, is this not thy own case? And
art thou not ready, with Pharaoh, to say to the messenger of God, who
rebukes thee for thy worldly mindedness, etc., Get thee gone from me.
Take heed to thyself, and see my face no more. Esau and Pharaoh have
both got a very bad name, and many persons who are repeating their
crimes are the foremost to cover them with obloquy! When shall we learn
to look at home? to take warning by the miscarriages of others, and thus
shun the pit into which we have seen so many fall? If God were to give
the history of every man who hardens himself from his fear, how many
Pharaoh-like cases should we have on record! But a day is coming in
which the secrets of every heart shall be revealed, and the history of
every man's life laid open to an assembled world.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 11](exo011)

</div>
