<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze046)  [Next](eze048) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 47](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 47:0</span></span>

The vision of the holy waters issuing out of the temple, and their
virtue; an emblem of the power of God's grace under the Gospel, capable
of healing all but the incorrigibly impenitent, represented by the
marshy ground that cannot be healed, [Eze
47:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#001). Also a description of the
several divisions of the Holy Land indiscriminately shared betwixt Jews
and proselytes; to denote that in after times the privileges now enjoyed
by the Jews should be also extended to the Gentiles, [Eze
47:13-23](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#013).

[Ezekiel 47:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 47:1</span></span>

Behold, waters issued out from under the threshold - Ezekiel, after
having made the whole compass of the court of the people, is brought
back by the north gate into the courts of the priests; and, having
reached the gate of the temple, he saw waters which had their spring
under the threshold of that gate, that looked towards the east; and
which passing to the south of the altar of burnt-offerings on the right
of the temple, ran from the west to the east, that they might fall into
the brook Kidron, and thence be carried into the Dead Sea. Literally, no
such waters were ever in the temple; and because there were none,
Solomon had what is called the brazen sea made, which held water for the
use of the temple. It is true that the water which supplied this sea
might have been brought by pipes to the place: but a fountain producing
abundance of water was not there, and could not be there, on the top of
such a hill; and consequently these waters, as well as those spoken of
in [Joe 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#018), and in [Zac
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#008), are to be understood spiritually
or typically; and indeed the whole complexion of the place here shows,
that they are thus to be understood. Taken in this view, I shall proceed
to apply the whole of this vision to the effusion of light and salvation
by the outpouring of the Spirit of God under the Gospel dispensation, by
which the knowledge of the true God was multiplied in the earth; and
have only one previous remark to make, that the farther the waters
flowed from the temple, the deeper they grew.

With respect to the phraseology of this chapter, it may be said that St.
John had it particularly in view while he wrote his celebrated
description of the paradise of God, Revelation 22. The prophet may
therefore be referring to the same thing which the apostle describes,
viz., the grace of the Gospel, and its effects in the world.

[Ezekiel 47:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 47:2</span></span>

There ran out waters - מים מפכים mayim mephaccim, the waters seem to
have been at first in small quantity; for the words imply that they
oozed or dropped out. They were at first so small that they came
guttatim, drop by drop; but they increased so, that they became a river
in which one could swim.

[Ezekiel 47:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 47:3</span></span>

He measured a thousand cubits - the waters were to the Ankles; a
thousand more, - the waters were to the Knees; a thousand more, - they
became a River that could not be forded. The waters were risen, and they
were waters to Swim in.

I. This may be applied to the gradual discoveries of the plan of
salvation, -

1\. In the patriarchal ages.

2\. In the giving of the law.

3\. In the ministry of John the Baptist. And,

4\. In the full manifestation of Christ by the communication of the Holy
Ghost.

II\. This vision may be applied also to the growth of a believer in the
grace and knowledge of God. There is -

1\. The seed of the kingdom.

2\. The blade from that seed.

3\. The ear out of that blade. And,

4\. The full corn in that ear.

III\. It may be applied to the discoveries a penitent believer receives
of the mercy of God in his salvation. He is -

1\. A little child, born of God, born from above, and begins to taste
the bread of life, and live on the heavenly food.

2\. He grows up and increases in stature and strength, and becomes a
young man.

3\. He becomes matured in the Divine life, and has his spiritual senses
exercised so as to become a father in Christ. In other words, the grace
of God appears to come drop by drop; it is given as it can be used; it
is a seed of light, and multiplies itself. The penitent at first can
scarcely believe the infinite goodness of his Maker; he however ventures
to follow on with the conducting angel, the minister of the Gospel, in
his descriptions of the plenitude of that salvation, provided in that
living Temple in which alone the well-spring of life is to be found.

4\. In thus following on to know the Lord he finds a continual increase
of light and life, till at last he is carried by the streams of grace to
the ocean of eternal mercy; then

"Plunged in the Godhead's deepest sea, And lost in his immensity."

IV\. These waters may be considered as a type of the progress which
Christianity shall make in the world.

1\. There were only a few poor fishermen.

2\. Afterwards many Jews.

3\. Then the Gentiles of Asia Minor and Greece.

4\. The continent and isles of Europe. And,

5\. Now spreading through Africa, Asia, and America, at present these
waters are no longer a river, but an immense sea; and the Gospel fishers
are daily bringing multitudes of souls to Christ.

[Ezekiel 47:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 47:9</span></span>

Every thing - whithersoever the rivers shall come, shall live - Life and
salvation shall continually accompany the preaching of the Gospel; the
death of sin being removed, the life of righteousness shall be brought
in.

There shall be a very great multitude of fish - On the above plan this
must refer to genuine converts to the Christian faith; true believers,
who have got life and salvation by the streams of God's grace. The
apostles were fishers of men; converts were the fish caught. See below.
As the waters flow into the Dead Sea, where no fish, it is said, can
live, its waters must be healed, that is, made capable of preserving
life; and so its nature be thus far most surprisingly altered.

[Ezekiel 47:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 47:10</span></span>

The fishers shall stand upon it - On the above plan of interpretation
these must mean -

1\. The apostles of our Lord Jesus.

2\. The preachers of the everlasting Gospel. See [Mat
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#019).

From En-gedi - At the southern extremity of the Dead Sea.

Unto En-eglaim - At the northern extremity of the same.

Their fish shall be according to their kinds - Every kind of fish, and
the fish all excellent of their kinds. All nations, and kindreds, and
people shall be called by the Gospel; it shall not be an excluding
system like that of Judaism, for its Author tasted death for every man.

[Ezekiel 47:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 47:11</span></span>

The miry places - "Point out," says Calmet, "the schismatics and
heretics who do not live by the Spirit of Jesus Christ, but separate
from his Church; and the evil Christians who dishonor that Church, of
which they are corrupt members." A description applicable to the Roman
Catholic Church, that is both schismatic and heretic from the Church of
Jesus Christ, which is built on the foundation of the prophets and
apostles, Jesus himself being the chief corner stone; for the Church of
Rome, leaving this foundation, is now built on the foundation of
councils and traditions, and lying miracles; the popes in their
succession being its only corner stones.

[Ezekiel 47:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 47:12</span></span>

Shall grow all trees for meat, whose leaf shall not fade - A description
that suits the righteous, who are still producing -

1\. The fruits of faith.

2\. The fruits of the Spirit.

3\. The fruits of love to God, obedience to his holy will, and love to
all men. Benevolence, mercy, charity, kindness, etc.

The leaf thereof for medicine - See [Rev
22:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#001). Even the leaves, the holy
profession of the righteous, is a spiritual medicine. Righteousness is
thus encouraged in the world. The profession points out the salvation,
as it shows the nature and sufficiency of that salvation; for a just
creed contains all the articles of the Christian faith.

[Ezekiel 47:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 47:13</span></span>

Joseph shall have two portions - That is, In Ephraim and Manasseh, his
two sons, who each had a separate inheritance.

[Ezekiel 47:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 47:15</span></span>

The way of Hethlon, as men go to Zedad - Probably Hethlon is the same as
Cuthlon, a city of Syria, between Antioch and Laodicea, according to
Antoninus. Some of these places are not known; but see the same kind of
division, [Num 34:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#007).

[Ezekiel 47:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 47:16</span></span>

Hamath - Emesa or Amesa, in Syria. - Calmet.

Berothah - Berytus, now Baruth or Beeroth, which David took from
Hadarezer, king of Syria, [Sa2 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#008);
but these things are very uncertain.

Sibraim - Sabarim or Sepharvaim, according to the Syriac, between Hamath
and Damascus.

Hazar-hatticon - The middle Hazar; or middle village, as the margin.

Hauran - The city Aurana, and the district Auranitis, are in the
north-east limit of the Holy Land.

[Ezekiel 47:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 47:17</span></span>

The border from the sea - The north border eastward is ascertained [Eze
47:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#015), [Eze
47:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#016); here it is shown how far it
extends itself northward.

Hazar-enan - The village of Enan, [Num
34:9](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#009), placed to the north of Caesarea
Philippi. Ziphron, see [Num 34:9](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#009),
called Zaphion by the Syriac.

[Ezekiel 47:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eze 47:18</span></span>

The east sea - The same as the Dead Sea.

[Ezekiel 47:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eze 47:19</span></span>

Tamar - Called Hazazon Tamar, or Engedi, [Ch2
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#002).

The river - Besor, which runs into the sea near Gaza.

[Ezekiel 47:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eze 47:20</span></span>

The great sea - The Mediterranean.

From the border - The southern border, mentioned [Eze
47:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#019).

[Ezekiel 47:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 47:22</span></span>

And to the strangers that sojourn - In former divisions of the land, no
place was given to strangers; but in this division, (which seems to have
no other reference than to the Gospel, for literally such a division
never took place), the strangers are to have an inheritance; intimating
the calling of the Gentiles into the Church of Christ, to an inheritance
that is incorruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth not away. Glory be to
God for his unspeakable gift! Amen. Amen.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 48](eze048)

</div>
