<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze.md)  
  [Previous](eze031)  [Next](eze033.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 32](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#001.md)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 32:0</span></span>

The prophet goes on to predict the fall of the king of Egypt, under the
figure of an animal of prey, such as a lion or crocodile, caught, slain,
and his carcass left a prey to the fowls and wild beasts, [Eze
32:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#001.md). The figure is then changed;
and the greatness of his fall (described by the darkening of the sun,
moon, and stars) strikes terror into all the surrounding nations, [Eze
32:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#007.md). The prophet adds, that the
overthrow of the then reigning Egyptian dynasty was to be effected by
the instrumentality of the king of Babylon, who should leave Egypt so
desolate, that its waters, (alluding to the metaphor used in the second
verse), should run as pure and smooth as oil, without the foot of man or
the hoof of a beast to disturb them, [Eze
32:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#011.md). A beautiful, nervous, and
concise description of a land ruined and left utterly desolate. In the
remaining part of the chapter the same event is pourtrayed by one of the
boldest figures ever attempted in any composition, and which at the.
same time is executed with astonishing perspicuity and force. God is
introduced ordering a place in the lower regions for the king of Egypt
and his host, [Eze 32:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#017.md), [Eze
32:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#018.md). The prophet delivers his
message, pronounces their fate, and commands those who buried the slain
to drag him and his multitudes to the subterraneous mansions, [Eze
32:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#019.md), [Eze
32:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#020.md). At the tumult and commotion
which this mighty work occasions, the infernal shades are represented as
roused from their couches to learn the cause. They see and congratulate
the king of Egypt, on his arrival among them, [Eze
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#021.md). Pharaoh being now introduced
into this immense subterraneous cavern, (see the fourteenth chapter of
Isaiah, where a similar imagery is employed), the prophet leads him all
around the sides of the pit; shows him the gloomy mansions of former
tyrants, tells their names as he goes along; beautifully contrasts their
former pomp and destructive ambition, when they were a terror to the
surrounding states, with their present most abject and helpless
condition; declares that all these oppressors of mankind have not only
been cut off out of the land of the living, but have gone down into the
grave uncircumcised, that is, they have died in their sins, and
therefore shall have no resurrection to eternal life; and concludes with
showing Pharaoh the place destined for him in the midst of the
uncircumcised, and of them that have been slain by the sword, [Eze
32:22-32](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#022.md). This prophetic ode may be
considered as a finished model in that species of writing which is
appropriated to the exciting of terror. The imagery throughout is
sublime and terrible; and no reader of sensibility and taste can
accompany the prophet in this funeral procession, and visit the mansions
of Hades, without being impressed with a degree of awe nearly
approaching to horror.

[Ezekiel 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 32:1</span></span>

In the twelfth year, in the twelfth month, in the first day of the month
- On Wednesday, March 22, the twelfth year of the captivity of Jeconiah,
A.M. 3417.

Instead of the twelfth year, five of Kennicott's MSS., and eight of De
Rossi's, read בעשתי עשרה in the eleventh year. This reading is supported
by the Syriac; and is confirmed by an excellent MS. of my own, about
four hundred years old.

[Ezekiel 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 32:2</span></span>

Thou art like a young lion - and thou art as a whale in the seas - Thou
mayest be likened to two of the fiercest animals in the creation; to a
lion, the fiercest on the land; to a crocodile, תנים tannim, (see [Eze
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#003).md), the fiercest in the waters. It
may, however, point out the hippopotamus, as there seems to be a
reference to his mode of feeding. He walks deliberately into the water
over head, and pursues his way in the same manner; still keeping on his
feet, and feeding on the plants, etc., that grow at the bottom. Thus he
fouls the water with his feet.

[Ezekiel 32:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 32:5</span></span>

And fill the valleys with thy height - Some translate, with the worms,
which should proceed from the putrefaction of his flesh.

[Ezekiel 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 32:6</span></span>

The land wherein thou swimmest - Egypt; so called, because intersected
with canals, and overflowed annually by the Nile.

[Ezekiel 32:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 32:7</span></span>

I will cover the heaven - Destroy the empire.

Make the stars thereof dark - Overwhelm all the dependent states.

I will cover the sun - The king himself.

And the moon shall not give her light - The queen may be meant, or some
state less than the kingdom.

[Ezekiel 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 32:8</span></span>

And set darkness upon thy land - As I did when a former king refused to
let my people go to the wilderness to worship me. I will involve thee,
and thy house, and thy people, and the whole land, in desolation and wo.

[Ezekiel 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 32:9</span></span>

I will also vex the hearts - Even the remote nations, who had no
connection with thee, shall be amazed at the judgments which have fallen
upon thee.

[Ezekiel 32:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 32:14</span></span>

Cause their rivers to run like oil - Bring the whole state into
quietness, there being no longer a political hippopotamus to foul the
waters - to disturb the peace of the country.

[Ezekiel 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 32:15</span></span>

Shall be destitute of that whereof it was full - Of corn, and all other
necessaries of life.

[Ezekiel 32:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 32:17</span></span>

In the twelfth year - Two of Kennicott's MSS., one of De Rossi's, and
one of my own, (that mentioned [Eze
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#001).md), have, in the Eleventh year; and
so has the Syriac, as before. This prophecy concerns the people of
Egypt.

[Ezekiel 32:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eze 32:18</span></span>

Cast them down - Show them that they shall be cast down. Proclaim to
them a casting down prophecy.

[Ezekiel 32:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eze 32:19</span></span>

Whom dost thou pass in beauty? - How little does it signify, whether a
mummy be well embalmed, wrapped round with rich stuff, and beautifully
painted on the outside, or not. Go down into the tombs, examine the
niches, and see whether one dead carcass be preferable to another.

[Ezekiel 32:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eze 32:21</span></span>

Out of the midst of hell - שאול sheol, the catacombs, the place of
burial. There is something here similar to [Isa
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#009.md), where the descent of the king of
Babylon to the state of the dead is described.

[Ezekiel 32:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 32:22</span></span>

Asshur is there - The mightiest conquerors of the earth have gone down
to the grave before thee; there they and their soldiers lie together,
all slain by the sword.

[Ezekiel 32:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eze 32:23</span></span>

Whose graves are set in the sides of the pit - Alluding to the niches in
the sides of the subterranean caves or burying-places, where the bodies
are laid. These are numerous in Egypt.

[Ezekiel 32:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">eze 32:24</span></span>

There is Elam - The Elamites, not far from the Assyrians; others think
that Persia is meant. It was invaded by the joint forces of Cyaxares and
Nebuchadnezzar.

[Ezekiel 32:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">eze 32:26</span></span>

There is Meshech, Tubal - See on [Eze
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#013) (note.md).

[Ezekiel 32:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">eze 32:27</span></span>

Gone down to hell with their weapons of war - Are buried in their armor
and with their weapons lying by their sides. It was a very ancient
practice, in different nations, to bury a warrior's weapons in the same
grave with himself.

[Ezekiel 32:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">eze 32:29</span></span>

There is Edom - All the glory and pomp of the Idumean kings, who also
helped to oppress the Israelites, are gone down into the grave. Their
kings, princes, and all their mighty men lie mingled with the
uncircumcised, not distinguished from the common dead:

"Where they an equal honor share,

Who buried or unburied are.

Where Agamemnon knows no more

Than Irus, he condemned before.

Where fair Achilles and Thersites lie,

Equally naked, poor, and dry."

[Ezekiel 32:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">eze 32:30</span></span>

There be the princes of the north - The kings of Media and Assyria, and
all the Zidonians - the kings of Tyre, Sodom, and Damascus. See Calmet.

[Ezekiel 32:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">eze 32:31</span></span>

Pharaoh shall see them - Pharaoh also, who said he was a god, shall be
found among the vulgar dead.

And shalt be comforted - Shall console himself, on finding that all
other proud boasters are in the same circumstances with himself. Here is
a reference to a consciousness after death.

[Ezekiel 32:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">eze 32:32</span></span>

I have caused my terror in the land of the living - I have spread dismay
through Judea, the land of the living God, where the living oracles were
delivered, and where the upright live by faith. When Pharaoh-necho came
against Josiah, defeated, and slew him at Megiddo, fear and terror were
spread through all the land of Judea; and the allusion here is probably
to that circumstance. But even he is now laid with the uncircumcised,
and is no more to be distinguished from the common dead.

Much of the phraseology of this chapter may be illustrated by comparing
it with Isaiah 14 (note), where see the notes, which the intelligent
reader will do well to consult.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 33](eze033.md)

</div>
