<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze038)  [Next](eze040) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 39](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 39:0</span></span>

The prophet goes on to denounce the Divine judgments against Gog and his
army, [Eze 39:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#001); and describes their
dreadful slaughter, [Eze 39:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#008), and
burial, [Eze 39:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#011), in terms so
very lofty and comprehensive, as must certainly denote some very
extraordinary interposition of Providence in behalf of the Jews. And to
amplify the matter still more, the prophet, with peculiar art and
propriety, delays the summoning of all the birds and beasts of prey in
nature to feast on the slain, (in allusion to the custom of feasting on
the remainder of sacrifices), till after the greater multitudes are
buried; to intimate that even the remainder, and as it were the
stragglers of such mighty hosts, would be more than sufficient to
satisfy their utmost rapacity, [Eze
39:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#017). The remaining verses contain
a prediction of the great blessedness of the people of God in Gospel
times, and of the stability of the kingdom of Christ, [Eze
39:21-29](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#021). It will be proper to remark
that the great northern expedition against the natural Israel, described
in this and the preceding chapter, is, from its striking resemblance in
the main particulars, put by the writer of the Apocalypse, ([Eze
20:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#007)), for a much more formidable
armament of a multitude of nations in the four quarters of the earth
against the pure Christian Church, the Mystical Israel; an event still
extremely remote, and which it is thought shall immediately precede the
destruction of the world by fire, and the general judgment.

[Ezekiel 39:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 39:2</span></span>

And leave but the sixth part of thee - The margin has, strike thee with
six plagues; or, draw thee back with a hook of six teeth.

[Ezekiel 39:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 39:3</span></span>

I will smite thy bow out of thy left hand - The Persians whom Antiochus
had in his army, [Eze 38:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#005), were
famous as archers, and they may be intended here. The bow is held by the
left hand; the arrow is pulled and discharged by the right.

[Ezekiel 39:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 39:6</span></span>

I will send a fire on Magog - On Syria. I will destroy the Syrian
troops.

And among them that dwell carelessly in the isles - The auxiliary troops
that came to Antiochus from the borders of the Euxine Sea. - Martin.

[Ezekiel 39:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 39:7</span></span>

In the midst of my people Israel - This defeat of Gog is to be in
Israel: and it was there according to this prophecy, that the immense
army of Antiochus was so completely defeated.

Ands I will not let them pollute my holy name any more - See on 1
Maccabees 1:11, etc., how Antiochus had profaned the temple, insulted
Jehovah and his worship, etc. God permitted that as a scourge to his
disobedient people; but now the scourger shall be scourged, and he shall
pollute the sanctuary no more.

[Ezekiel 39:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 39:9</span></span>

And shall set on fire - the weapons - The Israelites shall make bonfires
and fuel of the weapons, tents, etc., which the defeated Syrians shall
leave behind them, as expressive of the joy which they shall feel for
the destruction of their enemies; and to keep up, in their culinary
consumption, the memory of this great event.

They shall burn them with fire seven years - These may be figurative
expressions, after the manner of the Asiatics, whose language abounds
with such descriptions. They occur every where in the prophets. As to
the number seven it is only a certain for an indeterminate number. But
as the slaughter was great, and the bows, arrows, quivers, shields,
bucklers, handstaves, and spears were in vast multitudes, it must have
taken a long time to gather them up in the different parts of the fields
of battle, and the roads in which the Syrians had retreated, throwing
away their arms as they proceeded; so there might have been a long time
employed in collecting and burning them. And as all seem to have been
doomed to the fire, there might have been some found at different
intervals and burned, during the seven years here mentioned. Mariana, in
his History of Spain, lib. xi., c. 24, says, that after the Spaniards
had given that signal overthrow to the Saracens, a.d. 1212 they found
such a vast quantity of lances, javelins, and such like, that they
served them for four years for fuel. And probably these instruments
obtained by the Israelites were used in general for culinary firewood,
and might literally have served them for seven years; so that during
that time they should take no wood out of the fields, nor out of the
forests for the purpose of fuel, [Eze
39:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#010).

[Ezekiel 39:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 39:11</span></span>

The valley of the passengers on the east of the sea - That is, of
Gennesareth, according to the Targum. The valley near this lake or sea
is called the Valley of the Passengers, because it was a great road by
which the merchants and traders from Syria and other eastern countries
went into Egypt; see [Gen 37:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#017), [Gen
37:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#025). See Calmet here.

There shall they bury Gog and all his multitude - Some read, "There
shall they bury Gog, that is, all his multitude." Not Gog, or Antiochus
himself, for he was not in this battle; but his generals, captains, and
soldiers, by whom he was represented. As to Hamon-gog, we know no valley
of this name but here. But we may understand the words thus: the place
where this great slaughter was, and where the multitudes of the slain
were buried, might be better called Hamon-gog, the valley of the
multitude of God, than the valley of passengers; for so great was the
carnage there, that the way of the passengers shall be stopped by it.
See the text.

[Ezekiel 39:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 39:12</span></span>

And seven months - It shall require a long time to bury the dead. This
is another figurative expression; which, however, may admit of a good
deal of literal meaning. Many of the Syrian soldiers had secreted
themselves in different places during the pursuit after the battle,
where they died of their wounds, of hunger, and of fatigue; so that they
were not all found and buried till seven months after the defeat of the
Syrian army. This slow process of burying is distinctly related in the
three following verses, and extended even to a bone, [Eze
39:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#015); which, when it was found by a
passenger, the place was marked, that the buriers might see and inter
it. Seven months was little time enough for all this work; and in that
country putrescency does not easily take place: the scorching winds
serving to desiccate the flesh, and preserve it from decomposition.

[Ezekiel 39:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 39:17</span></span>

Gather yourselves - to my sacrifice - This is an allusion to a custom
common in the east: when a sacrifice is made, the friends and neighbors
of the party sacrificing are invited to come and feast on the sacrifice.

[Ezekiel 39:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eze 39:18</span></span>

Ye shall - drink the blood of the princes of the earth - I need not
mention the custom of the Scandinavians: they were accustomed to drink
the blood of their enemies out of the skulls of the dead. But this is
spoken of fowls and beasts here - rams, lambs, and goats. The feast
shall be as grateful and as plenteous to the fowls and beasts, as one
made of the above animals, the fattest and best of their kind, (because
fed in the fertile fields of Bashan), would be to the guests of him who
makes a sacrifice.

[Ezekiel 39:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eze 39:19</span></span>

And ye shall eat fat - and drink blood - Who shall eat and drink, etc.?
Not the Jews: though Voltaire says they ate human flesh, and are invited
here by the prophet to eat the flesh and drink the blood of their
enemies; which is a most unprincipled falsehood. It is the fowls and the
beasts that God invites, [Eze 39:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#017) :
"Speak to every feathered fowl, and to every beast of the field,
assemble yourselves - that ye may eat flesh and drink blood;" nor are
the persons altered in all these [Eze
39:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#017) : so the assertion of
Voltaire is either through brutish ignorance or Satanic malice.

[Ezekiel 39:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">eze 39:25</span></span>

Now will I bring again the captivity of Jacob - Both they and the
heathen shall know that it was for their iniquity that I gave them into
the hands of their enemies: and now I will redeem them from those hands
in such a way as to prove that I am a merciful God, as well as a just
God.

[Ezekiel 39:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">eze 39:26</span></span>

After that they have borne their shame - After they shall have borne the
punishment due to a line of conduct which is their shame and reproach,
viz. idolatry.

[Ezekiel 39:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">eze 39:27</span></span>

When I have - gathered them - Antiochus had before captured many of the
Jews, and sold them for slaves; see [Dan
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#033).

[Ezekiel 39:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">eze 39:28</span></span>

And have left none of then any more there - All that chose had liberty
to return; but many remained behind. This promise may therefore refer to
a greater restoration, when not a Jew shall be left behind. This, the
next verse intimates, will be in the Gospel dispensation.

[Ezekiel 39:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">eze 39:29</span></span>

For I have poured out my Spirit - That is, I will pour out my Spirit;
see the notes on [Eze 36:25-29](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#025) (note),
where this subject is largely considered. This Spirit is to enlighten,
quicken, purify, and cleanse their hearts; so that, being completely
changed, they shall become God's people, and be a praise in the earth.
Now, they are a proverb of reproach; then, they shall be eminently
distinguished.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 40](eze040)

</div>
