<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze042)  [Next](eze044) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 43](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 43:0</span></span>

The glory of the Lord is represented as returning to the temple, [Eze
43:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#001); where God promises to fix his
residence, if the people repent and forsake those sins which caused him
to depart from them, [Eze 43:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#007).
Then the measures of the altar, and the ordinances relating to it, are
set down, [Eze 43:13-27](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#013).

[Ezekiel 43:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 43:2</span></span>

The glory of the God of Israel came from the way of the east - This was
the chariot of cherubim, wheels, etc., which he saw at the river Chebar.
And this glory, coming from the east, is going to enter into the eastern
gate of the temple, and thence to shine out upon the whole earth. Is
there not a mystery here? All knowledge, all religion, and all arts and
sciences, have traveled, according to the course of the sun, From East
To West! From that quarter the Divine glory at first came; and thence
the rays of Divine light continue to diffuse themselves over the face of
the earth. From thence came the Bible, and through that the new
covenant. From thence came the prophets, the apostles, and the first
missionaries, that brought the knowledge of God to Europe, to the isles
of the sea, and to the west first, and afterwards to these northern
regions.

[Ezekiel 43:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 43:5</span></span>

The spirit took me up - And, to follow this thought for a moment, how
many men has this heavenly Spirit taken up; filled them with his own
influence, and sent them to every country, and nation, and tongue, and
people, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God, and to preach among
the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ! What spiritual temples
have been raised, beautified, and filled with the glory of God! And this
light is shining and burning more and more unto the perfect day, when
the whole earth shall be filled with the glory of God!

[Ezekiel 43:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 43:7</span></span>

Son of man, the place of my throne - The throne refers to his majesty;
the soles of his feet, to his condescension in dwelling among men.

Where I will dwell in the midst of the children of Israel - The
tabernacle and temple were types of the incarnation of Jesus Christ:
"Destroy This Temple, and after three days I will raise it up; - but
this he spake of the temple of his body;" [Joh
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019), [Joh
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#021). And in That Temple "dwelt all
the fullness of the Godhead bodily." Into this immaculate humanity did
the glory of the Supreme God enter; and thus, "God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself." And this Jesus is Immanuel, God
with Us. In him we find united the ineffable majesty of God, with the
abjectness of man. He humbled himself in human nature, not only to bear
the form of a servant, but to suffer death upon the cross as a
malefactor slave! But by these means he has purchased eternal redemption
for us; and the spiritual Israel, who find redemption in his blood,
shall be raised up wherever his holy name shall be proclaimed; and shall
not, like the old apostate Israel, defile that great name by idolatry or
a life of wickedness, but they shall show forth the virtues of Him who
has called them from darkness into his marvellous light.

[Ezekiel 43:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 43:8</span></span>

In their setting of their threshold - They had even gone so far as to
set up their idol altars by those of Jehovah; so that their abominable
idols were found in the very house of God! therefore, "he consumed them
in his anger."

[Ezekiel 43:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 43:9</span></span>

Now let them put away their whoredom - Their idolatry.

And the carcasses of their kings - It appears that God was displeased
with their bringing their kings so near his temple. David was buried in
the city of David, which was on Mount Zion, near to the temple; and so
were almost all the kings of Judah; but God requires that the place of
his temple and its vicinity shall be kept unpolluted; and when they put
away all kinds of defilement, then will he dwell among them.

[Ezekiel 43:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 43:10</span></span>

Show the house to the house of Israel - Show them this holy house where
the holy God dwells, that they may be ashamed of their iniquities. Their
name, their profession, their temple, their religious services, all
bound them to a holy life; all within them, all without them, should
have been holiness unto the Lord. But alas! they have been bound by no
ties, and they have sinned against all their obligations; nevertheless,
let them measure the pattern, let them see the rule by which they should
have walked, and let them measure themselves by this standard, and walk
accordingly.

[Ezekiel 43:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 43:11</span></span>

And if they be ashamed - If, in a spirit of true repentance, they
acknowledge their past transgressions, and purpose in his help never
more to offend their God, then teach them every thing that concerns my
worship, and their profiting by it.

[Ezekiel 43:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 43:12</span></span>

This is the law of the house - From the top of the mountain on which it
stands, to the bottom, all round about, all shall be holy; no buildings
shall be erected in any part, nor place nor spot be appropriated to a
common use; all shall be considered as being most holy.

[Ezekiel 43:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 43:13</span></span>

The cubit is a cubit and a hand breadth - It is the same cubit by which
all the previous admeasurements were made, and was a hand breadth or
four inches longer than the Babylonian cubit.

[Ezekiel 43:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 43:15</span></span>

So the altar - ההראל haharel, "the mount of God."

And from the altar - ומהאראיל umihaariel, "and from the lion of God."
Perhaps the first was a name given to the altar when elevated to the
honor of God, and on which the victims were offered to him, and the
second, the lion of God, may mean the hearth, which might have been thus
called, because it devoured and consumed the burnt-offerings, as a lion
does his prey. See on [Isa 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#001)
(note).

[Ezekiel 43:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 43:17</span></span>

And the settle - The ledge on which the priests walked round the altar,
see [Eze 43:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#014). By these settles or
ledges the altar was narrowed towards the top. "The ascent shall look
toward the east;" this ascent was an inclined plane. But these settles,
or more properly ledges, as Bp. Newcome translates, may be thus
computed. The altar itself was ten feet high and twenty broad; the same
as that of Solomon, [Ch2 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#001).

Height Cubits For the base, [Eze
43:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#013), is in height 1 From the surface
of the base to the first ledge, [Eze
43:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#014) 1 From the lower ledge to the
upper, [Eze 43:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#014) 4 From the upper
ledge to the ariel or hearth, [Eze
43:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#015) 4 In all 10 Breadth Cubits And
as to the breadth, the upper ledge, [Eze
43:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#017), was 14 Add a cubit on each side
for the higher ledge, [Eze 43:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#014),
latter part 2 Add a cubit on each side for the lower ledge, [Eze
43:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#014), former part 2 Add a cubit on
each side for the base, [Eze 43:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#013) 2
In all 20

The altar of burnt-offerings, described [Exo
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#001); [Exo
38:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#001), was smaller than this, because
it was to be removed from place to place with the tabernacle. This was
designed for a permanent temple. See Bp. Newcome on this chapter.

[Ezekiel 43:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eze 43:19</span></span>

The priests - that be of the seed of Zadok - It was this Zadok that was
put in the place of Abiathar, by Solomon, [Kg1
2:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#035), in whose family the priesthood
had continued ever since.

[Ezekiel 43:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">eze 43:25</span></span>

Seven days shalt thou prepare - These are, in general, ordinances of the
Law; and may be seen by consulting the parallel passages. All these
directions are given that they might follow them, when they should be
put in possession of their own land. For in several cases the prophet
enters into particulars, as if he had supposed that the book of the law
had perished.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 44](eze044)

</div>
