<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze032)  [Next](eze034) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 33](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 33:0</span></span>

The prophet, after having addressed several other nations, returns now
to his own; previously to which he is told, as on a former occasion, the
duty of a watchman, the salvation or ruin of whose soul depends on the
manner in which he discharges it. An awful passage indeed; full of
important instruction both to such as speak, and to such as hear, the
word of God, [Eze 33:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#001). The prophet
is then directed what answer to make to the cavils of infidelity and
impiety; and to vindicate the equity of the Divine government by
declaring the general terms of acceptance with God to be (as told
before, chap. 18) without respect of persons; so that the ruin of the
finally impenitent must be entirely owing to themselves, [Eze
33:10-20](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#010). The prophet receives the
news of the destruction of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans, about a year and
four months after it happened, according to the opinion of some, who
have been led to this conjecture by the date given to this prophecy in
the twenty-first verse, as it stands in our common Version: but some of
the manuscripts of this prophet consulted by Dr. Kennicott have in this
place the Eleventh year, which is probably the genuine reading. To check
the vain confidence of those who expected to hold out by possessing
themselves of its other fastnesses, the utter desolation of all Judea is
foretold, [Eze 33:21-29](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#021). Ezekiel is
informed that among those that attended his instructions were a great
number of hypocrites, against whom he delivers a most awful message.
When the Lord is destroying these hypocrites, then shall they know that
there hath been a prophet among them, [Eze
33:30-33](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#030).

[Ezekiel 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 33:2</span></span>

Son of man - if the people of the land take a man - The first ten verses
of this chapter are the same with [Eze
3:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#017); and to what is said there on
this most important and awful subject I must refer the reader. Here the
People choose the watchman; there, the Lord appoints him. When God
chooses, the people should approve.

[Ezekiel 33:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 33:10</span></span>

If our transgressions and our sins be upon us - They are upon us, as a
grievous burden, too weighty for us to bear: how then can we live under
such a load?

We pine away in them - In such circumstances how consoling is that word:
"Come unto me, all ye who are heavy laden, and I will give you rest!"

[Ezekiel 33:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 33:11</span></span>

As I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the
wicked - From this to the twentieth verse inclusive is nearly the same
with Ezekiel 18, on which I wish the reader to consult the notes.

[Ezekiel 33:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 33:13</span></span>

If he trust to his own righteousness, and commit iniquity - If he trust
in his acting according to the statutes and ordinances of religion, and
according to the laws relative to rights and wrongs among men, and in
other respects commit iniquity, he shall die for it.

[Ezekiel 33:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eze 33:19</span></span>

He shall live thereby - "The wages of sin is death;" the "gift of God is
eternal life." It is a miserable trade by which a man cannot live; such
a trade is sin.

[Ezekiel 33:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eze 33:21</span></span>

In the twelfth year of our captivity, in the tenth month, in the fifth
day of the month - Instead of the twelfth year, the eleventh is the
reading of seven of Kennicott's MSS., one of De Rossi's, and the Syriac.
My own, mentioned in the preceding chapter, reads with the present text.
This was on Wednesday, Jan. 25, A.M. 3416 or 3417.

One that had escaped out of Jerusalem - After it had been taken by the
Chaldeans.

Came unto me, saying, The City Is Smitten - This very message God had
promised to the prophet, [Eze 24:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#026).

[Ezekiel 33:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 33:22</span></span>

My mouth was opened - They had now the fullest evidence that I had
spoken from the Lord. I therefore spoke freely and fully what Good
delivered to me, [Eze 24:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#027).

[Ezekiel 33:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">eze 33:24</span></span>

Abraham was one - If he was called to inherit the land when he was
alone, and had the whole to himself, why may we not expect to be
established here, who are his posterity, and are many? They wished to
remain in the land and be happy after the Chaldeans had carried the rest
away captives.

[Ezekiel 33:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">eze 33:25</span></span>

Ye eat with the blood - Abraham was righteous, ye are unrighteous.
Eating of blood, in any way dressed, or of flesh from which the blood
had not been extracted, was and is in the sight of God abominable. All
such practices he has absolutely and for ever forbidden. Let the vile
blood-eaters hear and tremble. See the note on [Act
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#020), and the passages in the margin.

[Ezekiel 33:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">eze 33:26</span></span>

Ye stand upon your sword - Ye live by plunder, rapine, and murder. Ye
are every way impure; and shall ye possess the land? No.

[Ezekiel 33:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">eze 33:27</span></span>

They that are in the wastes - He seems to speak of those Jews who had
fled to rocks, caves, and fortresses, in the mountains; whose death he
predicts, partly by the sword, partly by wild beasts, and partly by
famine.

[Ezekiel 33:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">eze 33:30</span></span>

The people still are talking against thee - בך bach should be rather
translated, "concerning thee," than "against thee;" for the following
verses show that the prophet was much respected. The Vulgate translates,
de te; the Septuagint, περι σου, "concerning thee," both right.

Talking by the walls and in the doors of the houses is not a custom
peculiar to the Copts, mentioned by Bp. Pococke, it is a practice among
idle people, and among those who are resting from their work, in every
country, when the weather permits. Gossiping in the inside of the house
is not less frequent, and much more blamable.

[Ezekiel 33:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">eze 33:31</span></span>

As the people cometh - As they are accustomed to come on public days,
Sabbaths, etc.

With their mouth they show much love - They respected the prophet, but
would not bend themselves to follow his precepts. They loved earthly
things, and did not relish those of heaven.

[Ezekiel 33:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">eze 33:32</span></span>

As a very lovely song - They admired the fine voice and correct delivery
of the prophet; this was their religion, and this is the whole of the
religion of thousands to the present day; for never were itching ears so
multiplied as now.

[Ezekiel 33:33](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">eze 33:33</span></span>

When this cometh to pass - then shall they know that a prophet hath been
among them - What I have predicted, (and it is even now at the doors),
then they will be convinced that there was a prophet among them, by
whose ministry they did not profit as they ought.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 34](eze034)

</div>
