<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze.md)  
  [Previous](eze020)  [Next](eze022.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#001.md)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 21:0</span></span>

The prophet goes on to denounce the fate of Jerusalem and Judea; using
signs of vehement grief, to denote the greatness of the calamity, [Eze
21:2-7](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#002.md). He then changes the emblem to
that of a sharp and bright sword, still denoting the same sad event,
[Eze 21:8-17](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#008.md); and, becoming yet more
explicit, he represents the king of Babylon, who was to be employed by
God in this work, as setting out to take vengeance on both the Jews and
the Ammonites, for joining with Egypt in a confederacy against him. He
is described as standing at the parting of the roads leading to the
respective capitals of the Jews and Ammonites; and doubting which to
attack first, he commits the decision of the matter to his arts of
divination, performed by mingling arrows inscribed with the names of the
different nations or cities, and then marching against that whose name
was written on the arrow first drawn from the quiver. In this case the
name Jerusalem comes forward; and therefore he proceeds against it, [Eze
21:18-24](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#018.md). History itself could
scarcely be more explicit than this prophecy. The profane prince
Zedekiah as then declared to be given up by God, and his kingdom devoted
to utter destruction, for that breach of oath of which the prophet
foretells he should be guilty, [Eze
21:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#025.md). The remaining verses form a
distinct prophecy relating to the destruction of the Ammonites, which
was fulfilled about five years after the destruction of Jerusalem, [Eze
21:28-32](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#028.md).

[Ezekiel 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 21:2</span></span>

Set thy face toward Jerusalem - This is a continuation of the preceding
prophecy; and in this chapter the prophet sets before them, in the
plainest language, what the foregoing metaphors meant, so that they
could not complain of his parables.

[Ezekiel 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 21:3</span></span>

Behold, I am against thee - Dismal news! When God is against us, who can
be for us?

And will draw forth my sword - War.

And will cut off from thee - The land of Judea.

The righteous and the wicked - All shall be removed from thee. Some
shall be cut off - removed by the sword; shall be slain in battle, or by
the pestilence; and some shall be cut off - die by the famine; and some
shall be cut off - removed from the land by captivity. Now, among the
two latter classes there might be many righteous as well as wicked. And
when all the provisions were consumed, so that there was no more bread
in the city, during the siege by Nebuchadnezzar, the righteous must have
suffered as well as the wicked; for they could not be preserved alive,
but by miracle, when there was no bread; nor was their perishing for
want any loss to them, because the Lord would take them straight to his
glory. And however men in general are unwilling to die, yet there is no
instance, nor can there be, of any man's complaint that he got to heaven
too soon. Again, if God had permitted none to be carried off captive but
the wicked, the case of these would be utterly hopeless, as there would
be none to set a good example, to preach repentance, to reprove sin, or
to show God's willingness to forgive sinners. But God, in his mercy,
permitted many of the righteous to be carried off also, that the wicked
might not be totally abandoned, or put beyond the reach of being saved.
Hence, both Ezekiel and Daniel, and indeed several others, prophets and
righteous men, were thus cut off from the land, and carried into
captivity. And how much was God's glory and the good of men promoted by
this! What a seed of salvation was sown, even in the heathen countries,
by thus cutting off the righteous with the wicked! To this we owe, under
God, many of the Psalms, the whole of the Book of Ezekiel, all the
prophecies of Daniel, the bright example of Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abed-nego, the decrees passed in favor of the religion of the true God
by Nebuchadnezzar, Cyrus, Darius, etc. And to this dispensation of God's
merciful providence we owe the Books and example of Ezra and Nehemiah.
Where then is the injustice, so loudly declaimed against, of God's thus
cutting off from the land of Judea the righteous with the wicked? The
righteous were not cut off for the crimes of the wicked, (see chap. 18),
nor were these crimes visited upon them, yet several of them shared in
the common calamity, but none perished. Those that were removed by a
violent death, (and I believe we shall find few such), got a speedier
entrance into eternal glory.

[Ezekiel 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 21:4</span></span>

From the south to the north - The whole land shall be ravaged from one
end to the other.

[Ezekiel 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 21:5</span></span>

It shall not return any more - That is, till all the work that I have
designed for it is done. Nor did it; for Nebuchadnezzar never rested
till he had subdued all the lands from the south to the north, from the
Euphrates to the Nile.

[Ezekiel 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 21:6</span></span>

Sigh - with the breaking of thy loins - Let thy mourning for this sore
calamity be like that of a woman in the pains of travail.

[Ezekiel 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 21:7</span></span>

Wherefore sighest thou? - The prophet was a sign unto them.

His sighing and mourning showed them how they should act.

All knees shall be weak as water - See the note on [Eze
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#017.md).

[Ezekiel 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 21:10</span></span>

It contemneth the rod of my son - "It," the sword of Nebuchadnezzar,
"contemneth the rod," despises the power and influence of my son -
Israel, the Jewish people: "Out of Egypt have I called My Son."

As every tree - As all the stocks, kindreds, and nations, over which I
have already given him commission. Can the rod of Israel be spared, when
the trees of Assyria, Egypt, etc., have been cut down?

[Ezekiel 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 21:11</span></span>

This sword is sharpened - It is prepared for the slaughter, it is
furbished; from the French, foubir, to polish, brighten. He shall have
splendid victories every where. Some complain of corruption in the
original in this place; but I think without sufficient reason.

[Ezekiel 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 21:12</span></span>

Smite - upon thy thigh - See on [Jer
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#019) (note.md). So Homer, Il. 15 ver.
113: -

Ὡς εφατ'· αυταρ Αρης θαλερω πεπληγετο μηρω

Χερσι καταπρηνεσσ,ολοφυρομενος δε προσηυδα.

"She spake; and, with expanded arms his thighs

Smiting, thus sorrowful the god exclaimed."

Cowper.

[Ezekiel 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 21:13</span></span>

Because it is a trial - This will be a trial of strength and skill
between the Chaldeans and the Jews; and a trial of faith and patience to
the righteous.

And what if the sword, (Nebuchadnezzar), contemn even the rod? -
Overthrow Zedekiah? It will do so; for the regal government of Judea
shall be no more. Or, it is tried; that it the sword. Nebuchadnezzar has
already shown himself strong and skillful.

[Ezekiel 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 21:14</span></span>

Let the sword be doubled the third time - The sword has been doubled,
and it shall come the third time. Nebuchadnezzar came against Judea
Thrice.

1\. Against Jehoiakim.

2\. Against Jeconiah.

3\. Against Zedekiah.

The sword had already been doubled; it is to come now the third time,
i.e., against Zedekiah.

The sword of the slain - חרב חללים chereb chalalim, "the sword of the
soldiers," of the Chaldeans. So in the next clause, היא חרב חלל הגדול hi
chereb chalal haggadol, "it is the sword of that great soldier," that
eminent king and conqueror. This is the meaning of the word חלל chalal,
that is so ill rendered in almost every place of its occurrence, in our
Version. See Dr. Kennicott.

[Ezekiel 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 21:15</span></span>

Wrapped up - It is not a blunt sword, it is carefully sharpened and
preserved for the slaughter.

[Ezekiel 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 21:16</span></span>

Go thee one way or other - Thou shalt prosper, O sword, whithersoever
thou turnest; against Ammon, or Judea, or Egypt.

[Ezekiel 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eze 21:19</span></span>

Appoint thee two ways - Set off from Babylon, and lay down two ways,
either of which thou mayest take; that to the right, which leads to
Jerusalem; or that to the left which leads to Rabbath of the Ammonites,
[Eze 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#020.md). But why against the
Ammonites? Because both they and the Moabites were united with Zedekiah
against the Chaldeans, (see [Jer
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#003).md), though they afterwards fought
against Judea, [Eze 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#006.md).

[Ezekiel 21:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eze 21:21</span></span>

For the king of Babylon stood at the parting of the way - He was in
doubt which way he should first take; whether to humble the Ammonites by
taking their metropolis, Riblath, or go at once against Jerusalem. In
this case of uncertainty, he made use of divination. And this was of
three kinds: 1. By arrows. 2. By images or talismans. 3. By inspecting
the entrails of a sacrifice offered on the occasion.

1\. He made bright his arrows. This might be after the manner in which
the divination is still practiced among the Arabs. These arrows were
without head or wing. They took three. On one they wrote, Command me,
Lord. On the second, Forbid me, Lord. The third was blank. These were
put in a bag, and the querist put in his hand and took one out. If it
was Command me, he set about the business immediately; if it was Forbid
me, he rested for a whole year; if it was the blank one, he drew again.
On all occasions the Arabs consulted futurity by such arrows. See
D'Herbelot, under the word Acdah.

2\. As to the images, the Hebrew calls them תרפים teraphim. See the note
on [Gen 31:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#019) (note.md).

3\. And as to the liver, I believe it was only inspected to see whether
the animal offered in sacrifice were sound and healthy, of which the
state of the liver is the most especial indication. When the liver is
sound, the animal is healthy; and it would have been a bad omen to any
who offered sacrifice, to find that the animal they had offered to their
gods was diseased; as, in that case, they would have taken for granted
that the sacrifice was not accepted.

[Ezekiel 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 21:22</span></span>

At his right hand was the divination for Jerusalem - He had probably
written on two arrows; one, Jerusalem; the other, Riblath; the third,
left blank. He drew, and that on which Jerusalem was written came to his
hand; in consequence of which he marched immediately against that city.
It was ripe for destruction; and had he marched before or after, it
would have fallen; but he never considered himself as sure of the
conquest till now.

[Ezekiel 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eze 21:23</span></span>

To them that have sworn oaths - To Zedekiah and his ministers, who had
bound themselves by the oath of the Lord to be faithful to the
Chaldeans, and to pay them the promised tribute. The oaths may refer,
farther, to the alliances formed with the Egyptians, Ammonites, and
others. They will not believe that Nebuchadnezzar shall succeed against
them, while they expect the powerful assistance of the Egyptians.

[Ezekiel 21:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">eze 21:25</span></span>

And thou profane wicked prince of Israel - Zedekiah, called here
profane, because he had broken his oath; and wicked, because of his
opposition to God and his prophet.

Whose day is come - Who in a short time shalt be delivered into the
hands of thy enemies.

[Ezekiel 21:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">eze 21:26</span></span>

Exalt him that is low - Give Gedaliah the government of Judea.

Abase him that is high - Depose Zedekiah - remove his diadem, and take
off his crown.

[Ezekiel 21:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">eze 21:27</span></span>

I will overturn - I will utterly destroy the Jewish government.
Perverted will I make it. Heb. perverted, perverted, perverted I will
make it.

Until he come whose - is - משפט mishpat, the judgment; i.e., till the
coming of the son of David, the Lord Jesus; who, in a mystic and
spiritual sense, shall have the throne of Israel, and whose right it is.
See the famous prophecy, [Gen 49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010.md),
and [Luk 1:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#032.md). The עוה avah, which we
translate overturn, is thrice repeated here; to point out, say the
rabbins, the three conquests of Jerusalem, in which Jehoiakim, Jeconiah,
and Zedekiah were overthrown.

[Ezekiel 21:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">eze 21:28</span></span>

Concerning the Ammonites - They had reproached and insulted Judea in its
low estate, see Ezekiel 25. This prophecy against them was fulfilled
about five years after the taking of Jerusalem. See Joseph. Ant. lib. 10
c. 11; and Jeremiah 27, 48, 49; Ezekiel 25.

[Ezekiel 21:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">eze 21:30</span></span>

I will judge thee - This seems to refer to Nebuchadnezzar, who, after
his return from Jerusalem, became insane, and lived like a beast for
seven years; but was afterwards restored, and acknowledged the Lord.

[Ezekiel 21:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">eze 21:32</span></span>

Thou shalt be no more remembered - The empire of the Chaldeans was
destroyed, and the power transferred to the Persians; the Persian empire
was destroyed, and given to the Greeks; the Grecian empire was
destroyed, and given to the Mohammedans; and the destruction of the
Mohammedans is at no great distance.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 22](eze022.md)

</div>
