<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze036)  [Next](eze038) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 37](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 37:0</span></span>

This chapter treats of the same subject with the preceding, in a
beautiful and significant vision. Under the emblem of the open valley
being thickly strewed with very dry bones is represented the hopeless
state of the Jews when dispersed throughout the provinces of the
Chaldean empire. But God, contrary to every human probability, restores
these bones to life, thereby prefiguring the restoration of that people
from the Babylonish captivity, and their resettlement in the land of
their forefathers, [Eze 37:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#001). The
prophet then makes an easy and elegant transition to the blessedness of
the people of God under the Gospel dispensation, in the plenitude of its
manifestation, when the genuine converts to Christianity, the spiritual
Israel, shall be no longer under the domination of heathen and
anti-christian rulers, but shall be collected together into one visible
kingdom, and constitute but one flock under one Shepherd, [Eze
37:15-28](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#015). The vision of the dry bones
reviving is considered by some as having a remote view to the general
resurrection.

[Ezekiel 37:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 37:1</span></span>

The hand of the Lord was upon me - The prophetic influence was
communicated.

And carried me out in the spirit - Or, And the Lord brought me out in
the spirit; that is, a spiritual vision, in which all these things were
doubtless transacted.

The valley which was full of bones - This vision of the dry bones was
designed, first, as an emblem of the then wretched state of the Jews;
secondly, of the general resurrection of the body.

[Ezekiel 37:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 37:3</span></span>

Can these bones live? - Is it possible that the persons whose bones
these are can return to life?

[Ezekiel 37:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 37:4</span></span>

Prophesy upon these bones - Declare to your miserable countrymen the
gracious designs of the Lord; show them that their state, however
deplorable, is not hopeless.

[Ezekiel 37:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 37:5</span></span>

Behold, I will cause breath - רוח ruach signifies both soul, breath, and
wind; and sometimes the Spirit of God. Soul is its proper meaning in
this vision, where it refers to the bones: "I will cause the Soul to
enter into you."

[Ezekiel 37:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 37:6</span></span>

I will lay sinews upon you - Observe the progress:

1\. Here are the bones.

2\. The ligaments, called here sinews, are to be added in order to unite
the bones, that the skeleton might be complete.

3\. The flesh (the whole muscular system, the subjacent and superjacent
muscles, including the arterial and venous system) clothes this
skeleton.

4\. The skin (the dermis and epidermis, or cutis and cuticle) envelopes
the whole of these muscles or flesh; and now these bodies are in the
state that the body of Adam was before it received the animal and
intellectual principle from God.

5\. There was no breath in them - they had not yet received their souls.

6\. The wind, רוח ruach, the soul, came into them. They were endued with
animal and intellectual life; and they arose and evidenced a complete
restoration to life, and began to perform its functions, [Eze
37:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#010).

[Ezekiel 37:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 37:9</span></span>

Prophesy unto the wind - רוח ruach. Address thyself to the soul, and
command it to enter into these well-organized bodies, that they may
live.

Come from the four winds - Souls, come frown all parts where ye are
scattered; and reanimate these bodies from; which ye have been so long
separated. The four winds signify all parts - in every direction.
Literally it is, "Souls, come from the four souls;" "Breath, come from
the four breaths;" or, "Wind, come from the four winds." But here רוח
ruach has both of its most general meanings, wind or breath, and soul.

[Ezekiel 37:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 37:11</span></span>

These bones are the whole house of Israel - That is, their state is
represented by these bones; and their restoration to their own land is
represented by the revivification of these bones.

[Ezekiel 37:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 37:12</span></span>

I will open your graves - Here is a pointed allusion to the general
resurrection; a doctrine properly credited and understood by the Jews,
and to which our Lord refers, [Joh
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#025), [Joh
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#028), [Joh
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#029) : "The hour is coming when they
that are in their graves shall hear his voice, and come forth."

And cause you to come up out of your graves - I am determined that ye
shall be restored; so that were ye even in your graves, as mankind at
the general resurrection, yet my all-powerful voice shall call you
forth.

[Ezekiel 37:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 37:13</span></span>

When I have opened your graves - When I shall have done for you what was
beyond your hope, and deemed impossible, then shall ye know that I am
Jehovah.

[Ezekiel 37:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 37:14</span></span>

And shall put my Spirit - רוחי ruchi. Here רוח ruach is taken for the
Holy Ghost. They were living souls, animal and intellectual beings, when
they had received their souls, as mentioned above: but they could only
become spiritual, holy, and obedient creatures by the Spirit of God
actuating their spirits. See the notes on [Eze
36:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#025) (note).

Three degrees or processes have been remarked in this mystic vision.

When the prophet was commanded to prophesy - to foretell, on the
authority of God, that there should be a restoration to their own land:
-

1\. There was a noise, which was followed by a general shaking, during
which the bones became arranged and united.

2\. The flesh and skin came upon them, so that the dry bones were no
longer seen.

3\. The spirit or soul came into them, and they stood up perfectly
vivified.

Perhaps these might be illustrated by three periods of time, which
marked the regeneration of the Jewish polity.

1\. The publication of the edict of Cyrus in behalf of the Jews, which
caused a general shaking or stir among the people, so that the several
families began to approach each other. and prepare for their return to
Judea, [Ezr 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#002), [Ezr
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#003). But though partially restored,
they were obliged to discontinue the rebuilding of their temple.

2\. The edict published by Darius in the second year of his reign, [Ezr
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#023), [Ezr
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#024), which removed the impediments
thrown in the way of the Jews. [Ezr
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#006), [Ezr
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#007), etc.

3\. The mission of Nehemiah, with orders from Artaxerxes to complete the
building of the temple and the city, [Neh
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#007), etc. Then the Jews became a great
army, and found themselves in sufficient force to defend themselves and
city against all their enemies.

As to the spiritual uses of this curious vision, I must leave them to
preachers. I have given the literal meaning, and what the different
parts refer to; and if they found their observations on these, they may
profit their hearers.

[Ezekiel 37:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 37:16</span></span>

Son of man, take thee one stick - The two sticks mentioned in this
symbolical transaction represented, as the text declares the two
kingdoms of Israel and Judah, which were formed in the days of Rehoboam,
and continued distinct till the time of the captivity. The kingdom of
Judah was composed of the tribes of Judah and Benjamin, with the
Levites; all the rest went off in the schism with Jeroboam, and formed
the kingdom of Israel. Though some out of those tribes did rejoin
themselves to Judah, yet no whole tribe ever returned to that kingdom.
Common sufferings in their captivity became the means of reviving a
kinder feeling; and to encourage this, God promises that he will reunite
them, and restore them to their own land; and that there shall no more
be any divisions or feuds among them. To represent this in such a way as
would make it a subject of thought, reflection, and inquiry, the prophet
is ordered to take the two sticks mentioned above, to write on them the
distinguishing names of the divided kingdoms, and then by a notch,
dovetail, glue, or some such method, to unite them both before the
people. He did so, and on their inquiry, showed them the full meaning of
this symbolical action.

[Ezekiel 37:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eze 37:19</span></span>

The stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim - Jeroboam, the
first king of the ten tribes, was an Ephraimite. Joseph represents the
ten tribes in general; they were in the hand of Ephraim, that is, under
the government of Jeroboam.

[Ezekiel 37:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 37:22</span></span>

I will make them one nation - There was no distinction after the return
from Babylon.

And one king shall be king to them all - Politically speaking they never
had a king from that day to this; and the grand junction and government
spoken of here must refer to another time - to that in which they shall
be brought into the Christian Church with the fullness of the Gentiles;
when Jesus, the King of kings and Lord of lords, shall rule over all.

[Ezekiel 37:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">eze 37:24</span></span>

And David my servant shall be King - That this refers to Jesus Christ,
see proved, [Eze 34:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#023) (note).

[Ezekiel 37:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">eze 37:25</span></span>

The land that I have given unto Jacob my servant - Jacob means here the
twelve tribes; and the land given to them was the whole land of
Palestine; consequently, the promise states that, when they return, they
are to possess the whole of the Promised Land.

[Ezekiel 37:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">eze 37:26</span></span>

Covenant of peace - See this explained [Eze
34:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#025) (note).

[Ezekiel 37:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">eze 37:27</span></span>

By tabernacle - Jesus Christ, the true tabernacle, in whom dwelt all the
fullness of the Godhead bodily.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 38](eze038)

</div>
