<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze043)  [Next](eze045) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 44](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 44:0</span></span>

This chapter gives an account of the glory of God having returned to the
temple, [Eze 44:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#014). The Jews reproved
for suffering idolatrous priests to pollute it with their ministrations,
[Eze 44:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#005). Ordinances respecting the
conduct of the priests, and the maintenance due to them, vv. 9-31.

[Ezekiel 44:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 44:1</span></span>

The outward sanctuary - In opposition to the temple itself, which was
the inner sanctuary.

[Ezekiel 44:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 44:2</span></span>

This gate shall be shut - It was not to be opened on ordinary occasions,
nor at all on the week days: but only on the Sabbaths and the new moons.
See the account of the gates (4) in the explanation of the plan.

This verse has been adduced by the Roman Catholics to prove the
perpetual virginity of the mother of our Lord; and it may be allowed to
be as much to the purpose as any other that has been brought to prove
this very precarious point, on which no stress should ever be laid by
any man. Mary was a virgin when she brought forth Jesus.

[Ezekiel 44:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 44:5</span></span>

Mark well, and behold - Take notice of every thing; register all so
fully that thou shalt be able to give the most minute information to the
children of Israel.

[Ezekiel 44:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 44:7</span></span>

The fat and the blood - These never went into common use; they were
wholly offered to God. The blood was poured out; the fat consumed.

Because of all your abominations - Several MSS. of Kennicott's and De
Rossi's read their abominations, referring to the strangers mentioned
before.

[Ezekiel 44:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 44:10</span></span>

And the Levites that are gone away far from me - This refers to the
schism of Jeroboam, who, when he set up a new worship, got as many of
the priests and Levites to join him in his idolatry as he could. These,
on the return from the captivity, should not be permitted to perform the
functions of priests in the new temple; but they might be continued as
keepers of all the charge of the house - be treasurers, guards of the
temple, porters, etc.; see [Eze
44:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#011). The whole of these passages
refer to the period of time when the second temple was built.

[Ezekiel 44:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 44:16</span></span>

Come near to my table - To place the shew-bread there, and to burn
incense on the golden altar in the holy of holies.

[Ezekiel 44:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 44:17</span></span>

No wool shall come upon them - The reason is plain; wool is more apt
than linen to contract dirt and breed insects; linen breeds none;
besides, this is a vegetable, and the other an animal substance. It was
an ancient maxim, that whatever was taken from a dead body was impure in
matters of religion, and should not be permitted to enter into the
temple. The Egyptian priests always wore linen on their bodies, and
shoes of matting or rushes on their feet. The Mohammedans never write
the Koran upon vellum or skin of any kind, as they would consider that
as a defilement.

[Ezekiel 44:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eze 44:20</span></span>

Neither shall they shave their heads - The priests of Isis shaved their
heads close to the skin; the priests of Budhoo do so still, their
ordinances oblige them to shave their heads every tenth day. To let the
hair grow long would have been improper; therefore the Lord commands
them to poll - cut the hair short, but not to shave.

[Ezekiel 44:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 44:22</span></span>

Neither shall they take for their wives a widow - This was prohibited to
the high priest only, by Moses, [Lev
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#013), [Lev
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#014).

[Ezekiel 44:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">eze 44:25</span></span>

And they shall come at no dead person to defile themselves - Touching
the dead defiles a Hindoo now, as it formerly did a Jew; and they must
bathe to become clean again.

[Ezekiel 44:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">eze 44:28</span></span>

I am their inheritance - Those who affect to form their ecclesiastical
matters on the model of the Jewish Church have with one consent left
this out of the question. They will not live on the free-will offerings
of the people; but must have vast revenues, and these secured to them by
law. That every minister of God should be supported by the altar I
grant; but I think, instead of that method of paying the parochial
clergy which I see is so much objected to, and breeds so much dissension
between the pastors and their flocks, it would be better, on these
accounts, to assign them a portion of land adequate to their supply, or
let the state maintain them as it does its other officers. In Israel God
was their inheritance and their possession; but they had the breast and
shoulder of all sin-offerings and trespass-offerings, and all dedicated
things were theirs; and they had a portion of all the dough that was
prepared for bread. These were considered as the Lord's property, and
these he gave to them; and this is always implied in the Lord's being
their inheritance and their possession. They had a plentiful support.

Hitherto tithes have been thought the best mode of paying the clergy,
and providing for the poor of each parish; but these matters have
undergone such alterations since the time of their institution, that
some emendation of the system is at present absolutely necessary.

There should be a public acknowledgment of God in every nation, and this
should be provided for by the state in a way the least burdensome to the
people, that all may rejoice in the benefit. Happy the nations that have
a Bible so correct, and a Liturgy so pure, as those in the British
empire! In such cases, a religion established by the state is an
unutterable blessing to the nation; only keep it to the Bible, and to
the Liturgy, and all, under God, will be well; but when the sermon is
against these, all is bad.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 45](eze045)

</div>
