<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze004)  [Next](eze006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 5:0</span></span>

In this chapter the prophet shows, under the type of hair, the judgments
which God was about to execute on the inhabitants of Jerusalem by
famine, sword, and dispersion, [Eze
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#014). The type or allegory is then
dropped, and God is introduced declaring in plain terms the vengeance
that was coming on the whole nation which had proved so unworthy of
those mercies with which they had hitherto been distinguished, [Eze
5:5-17](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#005).

[Ezekiel 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 5:1</span></span>

Take thee a sharp knife - Among the Israelites, and indeed among most
ancient nations, there were very few edge-tools. The sword was the
chief; and this was used as a knife, a razor, etc., according to its
different length and sharpness. It is likely that only one kind of
instrument is here intended; a knife or short sword, to be employed as a
razor.

Here is a new emblem produced, in order to mark out the coming evils.

1\. The prophet represents the Jewish nation.

2\. His hair, the people.

3\. The razor, the Chaldeans.

4\. The cutting the beard and hair, the calamities, sorrows, and
disgrace coming upon the people. Cutting off the hair was a sign of
mourning; see on [Jer 45:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer045.htm#005) (note);
[Jer 48:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#037) (note); and also a sign of
great disgrace; see [Sa2 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#004).

5\. He is ordered to divide the hair, [Sa2
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#002), into three equal parts, to
intimate the different degrees and kinds of punishment which should fall
upon the people.

6\. The balances, [Sa2 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#001), were to
represent the Divine justice, and the exactness with which God's
judgments should be distributed among the offenders.

7\. This hair, divided into three parts, is to be disposed of thus:

1\. A third part is to be burnt in the midst of the city, to show that
so many should perish by famine and pestilence during the siege.

2\. Another third part he was to cut in small portions about the city,
(that figure which he had pourtrayed upon the brick), to signify those
who should perish in different sorties, and in defending the walls.

3\. And the remaining third part he was to scatter in the wind, to point
out those who should be driven into captivity. And,

4\. The sword following them was intended to show that their lives
should be at the will of their captors, and that many of them should
perish by the sword in their dispersions.

5\. The few hairs which he was to take in his skirts, [Sa2
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#003), was intended to represent those
few Jews that should be left in the land under Gedaliah, after the
taking of the city.

6\. The throwing a part of these last into the fire, [Sa2
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#004), was intended to show the
miseries that these suffered in Judea, in Egypt, and finally in their
being also carried away into Babylon on the conquest of Egypt by
Nebuchadnezzar. See these transactions particularly pointed out in the
notes on Jeremiah, chapters 40, 41, 42. Some think that this prophecy
may refer to the persecution of the Jews by Antiochus Epiphanes.

[Ezekiel 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 5:5</span></span>

This is Jerusalem: I have set it in the midst of the nations - I have
made this city the most eminent and the most illustrious in the world.
Some think that these words refer to its geographical situation, as
being equally in the center of the habitable world. But any point on a
globe is its center, no matter where laid down; and it would not be
difficult to show that even this literal sense is tolerably correct. But
the point which is the center of the greatest portion of land that can
be exhibited on one hemisphere is the capital of the British empire. See
my Sermon on the universal spread of the Gospel.

[Ezekiel 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 5:6</span></span>

She hath changed my judgments - God shows the reason why he deals with
Jerusalem in greater severity than with the surrounding nations; because
she was more wicked than they. Bad and idolatrous as they were, they had
a greater degree of morality among them than the Jews had. Having fallen
from the true God, they became more abominable than others in proportion
to the height, eminence, and glory from which they had fallen. This is
the common case of backsliders; they frequently, in their fall, become
tenfold more the children of wrath than they were before.

[Ezekiel 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 5:9</span></span>

I will do in thee that which I have not done - The destruction of
Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar was one of the greatest calamities that ever
fell on any nation or place before; and that by the Romans under Titus
exceeded all that has taken place since. These two sackages of that city
have no parallel in the history of mankind.

[Ezekiel 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 5:10</span></span>

The fathers shall eat the sons - Though we have not this fact so
particularly stated in history, yet we cannot doubt of it, considering
the extremities to which they were reduced during the siege. The same is
referred to by Jeremiah, [Lam 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#010).
Even the women, who were remarkable for kindness and humanity, boiled
their own children, and ate them during the siege.

Will I scatter into all the winds - Disperse you, by captivity, among
all the nations of the earth.

[Ezekiel 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 5:12</span></span>

A third part of thee - See the note on [Eze
5:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#001) (note).

[Ezekiel 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 5:13</span></span>

I will cause my fury to rest - My displeasure, and the evidences of it,
shall not be transient; they shall be permanent upon you, and among you.
And is not this dreadfully true to the present day?

[Ezekiel 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 5:16</span></span>

The evil arrows of famine - Famine and pestilence are represented as
poisoned arrows, inflicting death wherever they wound. The ancients
represented them in the same way.

[Ezekiel 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 5:17</span></span>

So will I send upon you famine and evil beasts, and they shall bereave
thee - Wild beasts always multiply in depopulated countries. In England,
wolves abounded when the country was thinly peopled, it is now full of
inhabitants, and there is not one wolf in the land. Nebuchadnezzar and
his Chaldeans may be called here evil beasts. He is often compared to a
lion, [Jer 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#007); [Dan
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#014); on account of the ravages made
by him and his Chaldean armies.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 6](eze006)

</div>
