<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze008)  [Next](eze010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 9:0</span></span>

The vision in this chapter seems intended to denote the general
destruction of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, excepting a few pious
individuals that were distressed at the abominations that were committed
in the land; who, in order to be delivered from the general calamity,
were Marked, in allusion, perhaps, to the custom of eastern princes, who
marked their servants in the forehead, or rather to the custom very
frequent among the Pagan worshippers, of indelibly imprinting on
different parts of their body the marks of their idols. To indicate,
likewise, that God was soon to forsake the temple, the shechinah, or
glorious symbol of his presence, is seen to remove from the inner
sanctuary to the threshold or door of the temple, [Eze
9:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#001). The prophet intercedes for his
people; but God, on account of the greatness of their sins, will not be
entreated, [Eze 9:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#008).

[Ezekiel 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 9:1</span></span>

Cause them that have charge over the city - By those six men with
destroying weapons the Chaldeans are represented, who had received
commission to destroy the city; and when the north is mentioned in such
cases, Chaldea and the Chaldean armies are generally intended. There
appears to have been six men with a sort of slaughter-bills, and one man
with an inkhorn. These may represent the seven counsellors of the
eastern monarchs, who always saw the king's face, and knew all the
secrets of the government. One of them was that minister who had the
office of reporting concerning criminals, who carried the book of death
and the book of life into the presence of the king, where the names were
entered of criminals who were destined to suffer, and of those who were
either considered as innocent or recommended to mercy; those of the
former in the book of death, those of the latter in the book of life.
This person with the inkhorn might be termed, in our phrase, the
recorder.

[Ezekiel 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 9:2</span></span>

Stood beside the brazen altar - To signify that the people against whom
they had their commission were, for their crimes, to be sacrificed to
the demands of Divine justice.

[Ezekiel 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 9:3</span></span>

And he called to the man - The person here who called was that who sat
on the chariot of the Divine glory. See [Eze
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#026).

[Ezekiel 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 9:4</span></span>

Set a mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh - This is in allusion
to the ancient every-where-used custom of setting marks on servants and
slaves, to distinguish them from others. It was also common for the
worshippers of particular idols to have their idol's mark upon their
foreheads, arms, etc. These are called sectarian marks to the present
day among the Hindoos and others in India. Hence by this mark we can
easily know who is a follower of Vishnoo, who of Siva, who of Bramah,
etc. The original words, והתוית תו vehithvitha tau, have been translated
by the Vulgate, et signa thau, "and mark thou tau on the foreheads,"
etc. St. Jerome and many others have thought that the letter tau was
that which was ordered to be placed on the foreheads of those mourners;
and Jerome says, that this Hebrew letter ת tau was formerly written like
a cross. So then the people were to be signed with the sign of the
cross! It is certain that on the ancient Samaritan coins, which are yet
extant, the letter ת tau is in the form +, which is what we term St.
Andrew's cross. The sense derived from this by many commentators is,
that God, having ordered those penitents to be marked with this figure,
which is the sign of the cross, intimated that there is no redemption
nor saving of life but by the cross of Christ, and that this will avail
none but the real penitent. All this is true in itself, but it is not
true in respect to this place. The Hebrew words signify literally, thou
shalt make a mark, or sign a sign, but give no intimation what that mark
or sign was. It was intended here to be what the sprinkling of the blood
of the paschal lamb on the lintels and door-posts of the Israelites was,
namely, a notice to the destroying angel what house he should spare. As
the whole of this matter only passed in vision we are bound to neither
letter, nor any other kind of figure. The symbolical action teaches us
that God, in general judgments, will make a distinction between the
innocent and the guilty, between the penitent and the hardened sinner.

[Ezekiel 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 9:6</span></span>

Begin at my sanctuary - Let those who have sinned against most mercy,
and most privileges, be the first victims of justice. Those who know
their Lord's will, and do it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. The
unfaithful members of Christ's church will be first visited and most
punished. But let not those who belong to the synagogue of Satan exult
in this, for if judgment begin at the house of God what will the end be
of them who obey not the Gospel! However, the truly penitent of all
descriptions in such cases shall be safe. The command of God is, "Set a
mark on all them that sigh and cry;" and his command to the destroyers
is, "Come not near any man on whom is the mark."

[Ezekiel 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 9:7</span></span>

Defile the house - A dreadful sentence, Let it be polluted, I will no
more dwell in it; I now utterly forsake it.

[Ezekiel 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 9:8</span></span>

Wilt thou destroy all the residue of Israel, On thy pouring out of thy
fury upon Jerusalem? - These destroyers had slain the seventy elders,
the twenty-five adorers of the sun, and the women that mourned for
Tammuz; and on seeing this slaughter the prophet fell on his face, and
began to make intercession.

[Ezekiel 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 9:9</span></span>

For they say, The Lords hath forsaken the earth - את הארץ eth haarets,
"this land." He has no more place in Israel; he has quite abandoned it;
he neither sees nor cares, and he can be no longer the object of worship
to any man in Israel. This seems to be the meaning; and God highly
resents it, because it was bringing him on a level with idols and
provincial deities, who had, according to supposition, regency only in
some one place.

[Ezekiel 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 9:10</span></span>

Mine eye shall not spare - They say, the Lord seeth not: this is false;
I have seen all their iniquities, and do see all their abominations; and
I will bring deserved judgment upon them, and then that eye which now
sees will neither pity nor spare.

[Ezekiel 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 9:11</span></span>

I have done as thou hast commanded me - Angels and men must all give
account of their conduct to God; for although he is every where, and his
eye sees all things, yet they must personally account for all that they
have done. I have done as thou hast commanded me. The penitents are all
signed; the penitents are all safe. This is good news for them that
mourn.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 10](eze010)

</div>
