<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze019)  [Next](eze021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 20:0</span></span>

A deputation of the elders of Israel, as usual, in their distress, came
to request Ezekiel to ask counsel of God, [Eze
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#001). In reply to this, God commands
the prophet to put them in mind of their rebellion and idolatry: In
Egypt, [Eze 20:2-9](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#002), in the wilderness,
vv. 10-27, and in Canaan, [Eze
20:28-32](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#028). Notwithstanding which the
Lord most graciously promises to restore them to their own land, after
they should be purged from their dross, [Eze
20:33-44](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#033). The five last verses of this
chapter ought to begin the next, as they are connected with the subject
of that chapter, being a prophecy against Jerusalem, which lay to the
south of Chaldea, where the prophet then was, and which here and
elsewhere is represented under the emblem of a forest doomed to be
destroyed by fire, [Eze 20:45-49](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#045).

[Ezekiel 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 20:1</span></span>

In the seventh year - Of the captivity of Jeconiah, (see [Eze
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#001)), and the seventh of the reign of
Zedekiah.

The fifth month, the tenth day - That is, according to Abp. Usher,
Monday, August 27, A.M. 3411.

Certain of the elders of Israel - What these came to inquire about is
not known. They were doubtless hypocrites and deceivers, from the manner
in which God commands the prophet to treat them. It seems to have been
such a deputation of elders as those mentioned [Eze
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#001); [Eze
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#001).

[Ezekiel 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 20:3</span></span>

I will not be inquired of by you - I will not hear you. I will have
nothing to do with you.

[Ezekiel 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 20:4</span></span>

Wilt thou judge them - If thou wilt enter into any discussion with them,
show them the abomination of their fathers. The whole chapter is a
consecutive history of the unfaithfulness ingratitude, rebellion, and
idolatry of the Jews, from the earliest times to that day; and
vindicates the sentence which God had pronounced against them, and which
he was about to execute more fully in delivering them and the city into
the hands of the Chaldeans.

[Ezekiel 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 20:5</span></span>

I chose Israel - They did not choose me for their God, till I had chosen
them to be my people.

I lifted up mine hand - I bound myself in a covenant to them to continue
to be their God, if they should be faithful, and continue to be my
people. Among the Jews the juror lifted up his right hand to heaven;
which explains [Psa 144:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#008) : "Their
right hand is a right hand of falsehood." This is a form used in
England, Scotland, and Ireland.

[Ezekiel 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 20:6</span></span>

To bring them forth of the land of Egypt - When they had been long in a
very disgraceful and oppressive bondage.

A land that I had espied for them - God represents himself as having
gone over different countries in order to find a comfortable residence
for these people, whom he considered as his children.

Flowing with milk and honey - These were the characteristics of a happy
and fruitful country, producing without intense labor all the
necessaries and comforts of life. Of the happiest state and happiest
place, a fine poet gives the following description: -

Ver erat aeternum, placidique tepentibus auris

Mulcebant Zephyri natos sine semine flores.

Mox etiam fruges tellus inarata ferebat:

Nec renovatus ager gravidis canebat aristis.

Flumina jam lactis, jam flumina nectaris ibant:

Flavaque de viridi stillabant ilice mella.

Ovid's Metam. lib. i., 107.

On flowers unsown soft Zephyr spreads his wing,

And time itself was one eternal spring;

Ensuing years the yellow harvest crowned,

The bearded blade sprang from the untilled ground,

And laden unrenewed the fields were found.

Floods were with milk, and floods with nectar filled,

And honey from the sweating oaks distilled.

In the flourishing state of Judea every mountain was cultivated as well
as the valleys. Among the very rocks the vines grew luxuriantly.

[Ezekiel 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 20:7</span></span>

Cast ye away - the abominations - Put away all your idols; those
incentives to idolatry that ye have looked on with delight.

[Ezekiel 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 20:8</span></span>

They did not - cast away - They continued attached to the idolatry of
Egypt; so that, had I consulted my justice only, I should have consumed
them even in Egypt itself. This is a circumstance that Moses has not
mentioned, namely, their provoking God by their idolatry, after he had
sent Moses and Aaron to them in Egypt.

[Ezekiel 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 20:9</span></span>

But I wrought for my name's sake - I bare with them and did not punish
them, lest the heathen, who had known my promises made to them, might
suppose that I had either broken them through some caprice, or was not
able to fulfill them.

[Ezekiel 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 20:10</span></span>

I caused them to go forth - Though greatly oppressed and degraded, they
were not willing to leave their house of bondage. I was obliged to force
them away.

[Ezekiel 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 20:11</span></span>

I gave them my statutes - I showed them what they should do in order to
be safe, comfortable, wise, and happy; and what they should avoid in
order to be uninjured in body, mind, and possessions. Had they attended
to these things, they should have lived by them. They would have been
holy, healthy, and happy.

[Ezekiel 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 20:12</span></span>

I gave them my Sabbaths - The religious observance of the Sabbath was
the first statute or command of God to men. This institution was a sign
between God and them, to keep them in remembrance of the creation of the
world, of the rest that he designed them in Canaan, and of the eternal
inheritance among the saints in light. Of these things the Sabbath was a
type and pledge.

[Ezekiel 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 20:13</span></span>

But the house of Israel rebelled - They acted in the wilderness just as
they had done in Egypt; and he spared them there for the same reason.
See [Eze 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#009).

[Ezekiel 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 20:15</span></span>

I lifted up my hand - Their provocations in the wilderness were so
great, that I vowed never to bring them into the promised land. I did
not consume them, but I disinherited them. See the note on [Eze
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#005) (note).

[Ezekiel 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eze 20:18</span></span>

But I said unto their children - These I chose in their fathers' stead;
and to them I purposed to give the inheritance which their fathers by
disobedience lost.

[Ezekiel 20:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 20:22</span></span>

I withdrew mine hand - I had just lifted it up to crush them as in a
moment; for they also were idolatrous, and walked in the steps of their
fathers.

[Ezekiel 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">eze 20:25</span></span>

I gave them also statutes that were not good - What a foolish noise has
been made about this verse by critics, believers and infidels! How is it
that God can be said "to give a people statutes that were not good, and
judgments whereby they could not live?" I answer, in their sense of the
words, God never gave any such, at any time, to any people. Let any man
produce an example of this kind if he can; or show even the fragment of
such a law, sanctioned by the Most High! The simple meaning of this
place and all such places is, that when they had rebelled against the
Lord, despised his statutes, and polluted his Sabbaths - in effect cast
him off, and given themselves wholly to their idols, then he abandoned
them, and they abandoned themselves to the customs and ordinances of the
heathen. That this is the meaning of the words, requires no proof to
them who are the least acquainted with the genius and idioms of the
Hebrew language, in which God is a thousand times said to do, what in
the course of his providence or justice he only permits to be done.

[Ezekiel 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">eze 20:26</span></span>

I polluted them in their own gifts - I permitted them to pollute
themselves by the offerings which they made to their idols. Causing
their children to pass through the fire was one of those pollutions;
but, did God ever give them a statute or judgment of this kind? No. He
ever inveighs against such things, and they incur his heaviest
displeasure and curse. See on [Eze
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#031) (note).

[Ezekiel 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">eze 20:29</span></span>

What is the high place - מה הבמה mah habbamah, "what is the high place?"
What is it good for? Its being a high place shows it to be a place of
idolatry. I called it במה bamah, to mark it with infamy; but ye continue
to frequent it, even while it is called במה bamah, to the present day!

[Ezekiel 20:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">eze 20:31</span></span>

Ye pollute yourselves - This shows the sense in which God says, [Eze
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#026), "I polluted them in their own
gifts." They chose to pollute themselves, and I permitted them to do so.
See on [Eze 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#025) (note), [Eze
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#026) (note).

[Ezekiel 20:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">eze 20:32</span></span>

And that which cometh into your mind - Ye wish to be naturalized among
idolaters, and make a part of such nations. But this shall not be at
all; you shall be preserved as a distinct people. Ye shall not be
permitted to mingle yourselves with the people of those countries: even
they, idolaters as they are, will despise and reject you. Besides, I
will change your place, restore your captivity; yet not in mercy, but in
fury poured out; and reserve you for sorer evils, [Eze
20:34](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#034).

[Ezekiel 20:35](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">eze 20:35</span></span>

I will bring you into the wilderness of the people - I will bring you
out of your captivity, and bring you into your own land which you will
find to be a wilderness, the consequence of your crimes.

There will I plead with you - There I will be your king, and rule you
with a sovereign rule; and the dispensations of my justice and mercy
shall either end you or mend you.

[Ezekiel 20:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">eze 20:37</span></span>

I will cause you to pass under the rod - This alludes to the custom of
tithing the sheep. I take it from the rabbins. The sheep were all
penned; and the shepherd stood at the door of the fold, where only one
sheep could come out at once. He had in his hand a rod dipped in
vermillion; and as they came out, he counted one, two, three, four,
five, six, seven, eight, nine; and as the tenth came out, he marked it
with the rod, and said, "This is the tenth;" and that was set apart for
the Lord.

I wilt bring you into the bond of the covenant - You shall be placed
under the same obligations as before, and acknowledge your selves bound;
ye shall feel your obligation, and live according to its nature.

[Ezekiel 20:38](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">eze 20:38</span></span>

I will purge out from among you the rebels - The incorrigibly wicked I
will destroy; those who will not receive him whom I have appointed for
this purpose as the Savior of Israel. And I will gather you who believe
out of all the countries where you sojourn, and bring you into your own
land; but those of you who will not believe - will not receive the Son
of David to reign over you, shall never enter into the land of Israel,
but die in your dispersions. This is what the contradicting and
blaspheming Jews of the present day have to expect. And thus, both of
you shall know that he is Jehovah, fulfilling his threatenings against
the one, and his promises to the other.

[Ezekiel 20:39](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">eze 20:39</span></span>

Go ye, serve ye every one his idols - Thus, God gave them statutes that
were not good, and judgments whereby they could not live, by thus
permitting them to take their own way, serve their gods, and follow the
maxims and rites of that abominable worship.

[Ezekiel 20:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">eze 20:40</span></span>

For in mine holy mountain - The days shall come in which all true
Israelites shall receive Him whom I have sent to be the true sacrifice
for the life of the world; and shall bring to Jerusalem - the pure
Christian Church, their offerings, which I will there accept, for they
will give me thanks for my unspeakable gift.

[Ezekiel 20:42](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">eze 20:42</span></span>

And ye shall know - Shall acknowledge that I am Jehovah.

[Ezekiel 20:43](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">eze 20:43</span></span>

And there shall ye remember your ways - Ye shall be ashamed of your past
conduct, and of your long opposition to the Gospel of your salvation.

These promises may, in a certain limited sense, be applied to the
restoration from the Babylonish captivity; but they must have their
proper fulfillment when the Jews shall accept Jesus as their Savior, and
in consequence be brought back from all their dispersions to their own
land.

[Ezekiel 20:46](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">eze 20:46</span></span>

Set thy face toward the south - Towards Judea, which lay south from
Babylon, or Mesopotamia, where the prophet then dwelt.

The forest of the south field - The city of Jerusalem, as full of
inhabitants as the forest is of trees.

[Ezekiel 20:47](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">eze 20:47</span></span>

I will kindle a fire - I will send war, "and it shall devour every green
tree," the most eminent and substantial of the inhabitants; and every
dry tree, the lowest and meanest also.

The flaming flame shall not be quenched - The fierce ravages of
Nebuchadnezzar and the Chaldeans shall not be stopped till the whole
land is ruined.

All faces from the south to the north shalt be burned - From the one end
of the land to the other there shall be nothing but fear, dismay,
terror, and confusion, occasioned by the wide-wasting violence of the
Chaldeans. Judea lay in length from north to south.

[Ezekiel 20:48](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">eze 20:48</span></span>

All flesh - All the people shall see that this war is a judgment of the
Lord.

It shall not be quenched - Till the whole land shall be utterly ruined.

[Ezekiel 20:49](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">eze 20:49</span></span>

Ah Lord God - O my God, consider my situation; who will believe what I
shall say? They put the evil day far from them.

Doth he not speak parables? - הלא ממשל משלים הוא halo memashshel
meshalim hu, "Is not he a maker of parables?" Is it not his custom to
deal in enigmas? His figures are not to be understood; we should not
trouble ourselves with them. We are not obliged to fathom his meaning;
and perhaps after all it does not refer to us, or will not be
accomplished in our time, if it even respect the land. Thus they turned
aside what might have done them good, and rejected the counsel of God
against themselves.

By dividing the word with our neighbor we often lose the benefit both of
threatenings and promises. They voluntarily shut their own eyes; and
then God, in judgment, sealed them up in darkness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 21](eze021)

</div>
