<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze027)  [Next](eze029) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 28:0</span></span>

The first part of this chapter relates to a King of Tyre, probably the
same who is called in the Phoenician annals Ithobalus. He seems to have
been a vain man, who affected Divine honors. The prophet treats his
foolish pretensions with severe irony, and predicts his doom, [Eze
28:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#001). He then takes up a funeral
dirge and lamentation over him, in which his former pomp and splendor
are finely contrasted with his fall, in terms that seem frequently to
allude to the fall of Lucifer from heaven, (Isaiah 14), [Eze
28:11-19](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#011). The overthrow of Sidon, the
mother city of Tyre, is next announced, [Eze
28:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#020); and the chapter concludes
with a promise to the Jews of deliverance from all their enemies, and
particularly of their restoration from the Babylonish captivity, [Eze
28:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#024).

[Ezekiel 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 28:2</span></span>

Say unto the prince of Tyrus - But who was this prince of Tyrus? Some
think Hiram; some, Sin; some, the devil; others, Ithobaal, with whom the
chronology and circumstances best agree. Origen thought the guardian
angel of the city was intended.

I am a god - That is, I am absolute, independent, and accountable to
none. He was a man of great pride and arrogance.

[Ezekiel 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 28:3</span></span>

Thou art wiser than Daniel - Daniel was at this time living, and was
reputable for his great wisdom. This is said ironically. See [Eze
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#014); [Eze
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#001).

[Ezekiel 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 28:5</span></span>

By thy great wisdom - He attributed every thing to himself; he did not
acknowledge a Divine providence. As he got all by himself, so he
believed he could keep all by himself, and had no need of any foreign
help.

[Ezekiel 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 28:7</span></span>

I will bring strangers upon thee - The Chaldeans.

[Ezekiel 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 28:9</span></span>

Wilt thou yet say before him that slayeth thee - Wilt thou continue thy
pride and arrogance when the sword is sheathed in thee, and still
imagine that thou art self-sufficient and independent?

[Ezekiel 28:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 28:10</span></span>

The deaths of the uncircumcised - Two deaths, temporal and eternal.
Ithobaal was taken and killed by Nebuchadnezzar.

[Ezekiel 28:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 28:12</span></span>

Thou sealest up - This has been translated, "Thou drawest thy own
likeness." "Thou formest a portrait of thyself; and hast represented
thyself the perfection of wisdom and beauty." I believe this to be the
meaning of the place.

[Ezekiel 28:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 28:13</span></span>

Thou hast been in Eden - This also is a strong irony. Thou art like
Adam, when in his innocence and excellence he was in the garden of Eden!

Every precious stone was thy covering - For a description of these
stones see the note on [Exo 28:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#017).

[Ezekiel 28:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 28:14</span></span>

Thou art the anointed cherub that covereth - The irony is continued; and
here he is likened to the Cherub that guarded the gates of Paradise, and
kept the way of the tree of life; or to one of the cherubs whose wings,
spread out, covered the mercy-seat.

Thou mast upon the holy mountain of God - The irony is still continued;
and now he is compared to Hoses, and afterwards to one of the chief
angels, who has walked up and down among the stones of fire; that is,
thy floors have been paved with precious stones, that shone and sparkled
like fire.

Lucan, describing the splendor of the apartments of Cleopatra, queen of
Egypt, speaks in nearly a similar language: -

Nec summis crustata domus, sectisque nitebat

Marmoribus, stabatque sibi non segnis achates,

Purpureusque lapis, totusque effusus in aula

Calcabatur onyx;

Pharsal. lib. x.

Rich as some fane by slavish zealots reared,

For the proud banquet stood the hall prepared:

Thick golden plates the latent beams infold,

And the high roof was fretted o'er with gold.

Of solid marble all the walls were made,

And onyx e'en the meaner floor inlaid;

While porphyry and agate round the court

In massy columns rose, a proud support.

Of solid ebony each post was wrought,

From swarthy Meroe profusely brought.

With ivory was the entrance crusted o'er,

And polished tortoise hid each shining door;

While on the cloudy spots enchased was seen

The trusty emerald's never-fading green.

Within the royal beds and couches shone,

Beamy and bright with many a costly stone,

The glowing purple rich.

Rowe.

[Ezekiel 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 28:15</span></span>

Thou wast perfect in thy ways - The irony seems still to be kept up.
Thou hast been like the angels, like Moses, like the cherubs, like Adam,
like God, till thy iniquity was found out.

[Ezekiel 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 28:16</span></span>

I will cast thee as profane - Thou shalt be cast down from thine
eminence.

From the midst of the stones of fire - Some, supposing that stones of
fire means the stars, have thought that the whole refers to the fall of
Satan.

[Ezekiel 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eze 28:18</span></span>

Thou hast defiled thy sanctuaries - Irony continued. As God, as the
angels, as the cherubim, thou must have had thy sanctuaries; but thou
hast defiled them: and as Adam, thou hast polluted thy Eden, and hast
been expelled from Paradise.

[Ezekiel 28:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eze 28:19</span></span>

Thou shalt be a terror - Instead of being an object of adoration thou
shalt be a subject of horror, and at last be destroyed with thy city, so
that nothing but thy name shall remain. It was entirely burnt by
Alexander the Great, as it had been before by Nebuchadnezzar.

[Ezekiel 28:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 28:22</span></span>

I am against thee, O Zidon - Sidon for a long time had possessed the
empire of the sea and of all Phoenicia, and Tyre was one of its
colonies; but in process of time, the daughter became greater than the
mother. It seems to have been an independent place at the time in which
Tyre was taken; but it is likely that it was taken by the Chaldeans soon
after the former.

[Ezekiel 28:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eze 28:23</span></span>

And the wounded - חלל chalal, the soldiery. All its supports shall be
taken away, and its defenders destroyed.

[Ezekiel 28:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">eze 28:24</span></span>

There shall be no more a pricking brier - Nothing to excite Israel to
idolatry when restored from their captivity. Perhaps there is an
allusion to Jezebel, daughter of Ethbaal, king of Sidon, and wife to
Ahab, king of Israel, who was the greatest curse to Israel, and the
universal restorer of idolatry in the land, see [Kg1
16:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#031). Sidon being destroyed, there
would come no encourager of idolatry from that quarter.

[Ezekiel 28:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">eze 28:25</span></span>

When I shall have gathered the house of Israel - In their long
captivity, God had been preparing the land for them so as to make it a
safe dwelling; and hence he executed judgments on all the heathen
nations round about by means of the Chaldeans. Thus Tyre and Sidon were
destroyed, as were the Ammonites and others who had been the inveterate
enemies of the Jews. Judgment first began at his own house, then
proceeded to the heathen nations; and when they were brought down, then
he visited and redeemed his people. Thus God's ways are proved to be all
equal; partialities and caprices belong not to him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 29](eze029)

</div>
