<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze005)  [Next](eze007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 6:0</span></span>

In this chapter, which forms a distinct section, the prophet denounces
the judgments of God against the Jews for their idolatry, [Eze
6:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#001); but tells them that a remnant
shall be saved, and brought to a sense of their sins by their severe
afflictions, [Eze 6:8-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#008).

[Ezekiel 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 6:2</span></span>

Set thy face toward the mountains of Israel - This is a new prophecy,
and was most probably given after the four hundred and thirty days of
his lying on his left and right side were accomplished. By Israel here,
Judea is simply meant; not the ten tribes, who had long before been
carried into captivity. Ezekiel uses this term in reference to the Jews
only.

The mountains may be addressed here particularly, because it was on them
the chief scenes of idolatry were exhibited.

[Ezekiel 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 6:4</span></span>

Your images shall be broken - Literally, your sun images;
representations of the sun, which they worshipped. See the margin.

[Ezekiel 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 6:5</span></span>

Will scatter your bones round about your altars - This was literally
fulfilled by the Chaldeans. According to Baruch, 2:24, 25, they opened
the sepulchres of the principal people, and threw the bones about on
every side.

[Ezekiel 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 6:9</span></span>

They that escape of you shall remember me - Those that escape the sword,
the pestilence, and the famine, and shall be led into captivity, shall
plainly see that it is God who has done this, and shall humble
themselves on account of their abominations, leave their idolatry, and
worship me alone. And this they have done from the Babylonish captivity
to the present day.

[Ezekiel 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 6:11</span></span>

Smite with thine hand, and stamp with thy foot - Show the utmost marks
of thy astonishment and indignation, and dread of the evils that are
coming upon them. Some have contended for the propriety of clapping and
stamping in public worship from these words! It is scarcely a breach of
charity to think that such persons are themselves incapable either of
attending on or conducting the worship of God. To be consistent, they
should copy the prophet in his other typical actions as well as these;
and then we shall hear of their lying on their left side for three
hundred and ninety days, and on their right side for forty days; shaving
their heads, burning their hair, baking their bread with dung, etc. Now
all these things, because they were typical and commanded, were proper
in the prophet: in such persons as the above they would be evidences of
insanity. Such extravagant acts are no part of God's worship.

[Ezekiel 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 6:14</span></span>

And make the land - more desolate than the wilderness toward Diblath -
Diblath or Diblathayim is situated in the land of Moab. It is mentioned
[Num 33:46](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#046), Almon-Diblathaim; and in
[Jer 48:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#022), Beth-Diblathaim. It was a
part of that horrible wilderness mentioned by Moses, [Deu
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#015), "wherein were fiery serpents,
and scorpions, and drought." The precise reason why it is mentioned here
is not very evident. Some think it is the same as Riblah, where
Nebuchadnezzar slew the princes of Israel, and put out Zedekiah's eyes;
the principal difference lying between the ד daleth and the ר resh,
which in MSS. is often scarcely discernible; and hence vast multitudes
of various readings. Five, probably six, of Kennicott's MSS. have רבלתה
riblathah, as likewise two of my oldest MSS.; though in the margin of
one a later hand directs the word to be read בדלת bedaleth, with daleth.
But all the Versions read the word with a D. This may appear a matter of
little importance, but we should take pains to recover even one lost
letter of the word of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 7](eze007)

</div>
