<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze001)  [Next](eze003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 2:0</span></span>

The prophet, having been overwhelmed with the glorious vision in the
preceding chapter, is here strengthened and comforted, [Eze
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#001), [Eze
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#002); and then commissioned to declare
to the rebellious house of Israel the terrible judgments that would very
shortly come upon the whole land, if they repented not; with a gracious
assurance to Ezekiel that God would be constantly with him while
executing the duties of his office, [Eze
2:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#003). The prophet is also commanded
to be fearless, resolute, and faithful in the discharge of it, [Eze
2:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#006), as he must be the messenger of
very unpleasing tidings, which well expose him to great persecution,
[Eze 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#009), [Eze
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#010).

[Ezekiel 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 2:1</span></span>

And he said unto me - In the last verse of the preceding chapter we find
that the prophet was so penetrated with awe at the sight of the glory of
God in the mystical chariot, that "he fell upon his face;" and, while he
was in this posture of adoration, he heard the voice mentioned here. It
is evident, therefore, that the present division of these chapters is
wrong. Either the first should end with the words, "This was the
appearance of the likeness of the glory of the Lord," [Eze
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#028); or the first verse of this
chapter should be added to the preceding, and this begin with the second
verse.

[Ezekiel 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 2:2</span></span>

And the spirit entered into me - This spirit was different to that
mentioned above, by which the wheels, etc., were moved. The spirit of
prophecy is here intended; whose office was not merely to enable him to
foresee and foretell future events, but to purify and refine his heart,
and qualify him to be a successful preacher of the word of life.

He who is sent by the God of all grace to convert sinners must be
influenced by the Holy Ghost; otherwise he can neither be saved himself,
nor become the instrument of salvation to others.

And set me upon my feet - That he might stand as a servant before his
master, to receive his orders.

[Ezekiel 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 2:3</span></span>

Son of man - This appellative, so often mentioned in this book, seems to
have been given first to this prophet; afterwards to Daniel; and after
that to the Man Christ Jesus. Perhaps it was given to the two former to
remind them of their frailty, and that they should not be exalted in
their own minds by the extraordinary revelations granted to them; and
that they should feel themselves of the same nature with those to whom
they were sent; and, from the common principle of humanity, deeply
interest themselves in the welfare of their unhappy countrymen. To the
latter it might have been appropriated merely to show that though all
his actions demonstrated him to be God, yet that he was also really Man;
and that in the man Christ Jesus dwelt all the fullness of the Godhead
bodily. When the acts of Christ are considered, it is more easy to
believe his eternal Godhead, than to be convinced that the person we
hear speaking, and see working, is also a man like unto ourselves.

I send thee to the children of Israel - To those who were now in
captivity, in Chaldea particularly; and to the Jews in general, both far
and near.

[Ezekiel 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 2:4</span></span>

Thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord - Let them know that what
thou hast to declare is the message of the Lord, that they may receive
it with reverence.

Every preacher of God's word should take heed that it is God's message
he delivers to the people. Let him not suppose, because it is according
to his own creed or confession of faith, that therefore it is God's
word. False doctrines and fallacies without end are foisted on the world
in this way. Bring the creed first to the Word of God, and scrupulously
try whether it be right; and when this is done, leave it where you
please; take the Bible, and warn them from God's word recorded there.

[Ezekiel 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 2:5</span></span>

Yet shall know that there hath been a prophet among them - By this they
shall be assured of two things:

1\. That God in his mercy had given them due warning.

2\. That themselves were inexcusable, for not taking it.

[Ezekiel 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 2:6</span></span>

Be not afraid of them - They will maltreat thee for thy message; but let
not the apprehension of this induce thee to suppress it. Though they be
rebels, fear them not; I will sustain and preserve thee.

[Ezekiel 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 2:7</span></span>

Whether they will hear - Whether they receive the message, or persecute
thee for it, declare it to them, that they may be without excuse.

[Ezekiel 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 2:8</span></span>

Open thy mouth and eat that I give thee - Take my word as thou wouldst
take thy proper food; receive it into thy heart; ponder it there, that
it may be the means of strengthening and preserving thy soul, as proper
nourishment will strengthen the body, and preserve from death. And the
people to whom such messages of God may come should so hear it read,
mark, learn, and inwardly digest it, that it may become efficient
nourishment to their souls.

[Ezekiel 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 2:9</span></span>

A hand was sent - Here the hand signifies not only the instrument of
conveyance, but an emblem of the Divine power, which the hand of God
always signifies.

A roll of a book - מגלת שפר megillath sepher. All ancient books were
written so as to be rolled up; hence volumen, a volume, from volvo, I
roll.

[Ezekiel 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 2:10</span></span>

It was written within and without - Contrary to the state of rolls in
general, which are written on the inside only. The Hebrew rolls are
generally written in this way. There are several of such Hebrew rolls
before me, all written on the inside only, consisting of skins of
vellum, or parchment, or basil, a sort of half-tanned sheep or goat
skin, sewed together, extending to several yards in length. Other
Asiatic books were written in the same way. A Sanscrit roll of sixty
feet in length, also before me, is written all on the inside; and a
Koran, written in exceedingly small characters, about two inches broad
and twelve feet long, and weighing but about half an ounce. But the roll
presented to the prophet was written on both sides, because the prophecy
was long, and to the same effect; that they might see the mind of God
wherever they looked.

There was written therein lamentations, and mourning, and wo - What an
awful assemblage! קינים והגה והי kinim, vahegeh, vehi, lamentations, and
a groan, and alas! Lamentations on all hands; a groan from the dying;
and alas, or Wo is me! from the survivors. It was the letter that
killeth, and is the ministration of death. What a mercy to have that
which is emphatically called Το Ευαγγελιον, The glad tidings, the good
news! Christ Jesus is come into the world to save sinners; and he wills
that all men should be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth.
Here are rejoicings, thanksgivings, and exultation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 3](eze003)

</div>
