<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezra Index](ezr)  
  [Previous](ezr006)  [Next](ezr008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#001)

[Ezra](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ezr 7:0</span></span>

In the seventh year of Artaxerxes, king of Persia, Ezra goes up to
Jerusalem; and with him certain of the priests, Levites, porters, and
Nethinim: his character, [Ezr 7:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#001).
The letter and decree of Artaxerxes in behalf of the Jews, vv. 11-26.
Ezra's thanksgiving to God for these mercies, [Ezr
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#027), [Ezr
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#028).

[Ezra 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ezr 7:1</span></span>

In the reign of Artaxerxes - This was Artaxerxes Longimanus, the seventh
of whose reign chronologers place A.M. 3547, sixty-eight years after
Cyrus had sent back Zerubbabel. - Calmet. See the introduction.

Son of Seraiah - Either this could not have been Seraiah the high
priest, who had been put to death by Nebuchadnezzar one hundred and
twenty-one years before this time, or the term son here must signify
only his descendants, or one of his descendants. Were it otherwise, Ezra
must now be at least one hundred and twenty-two years of age, supposing
him to have been born in the year of his father's death; if, indeed
Seraiah the high priest was his father; but this is evidently
impossible. In this place there are only sixteen generations reckoned
between Ezra and Aaron, but in [Ch1
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#003), [Ch1
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#004), etc., there are not less than
twenty-two. We must therefore supply the deficient generations from the
above place, between Amariah son of Meraioth, [Ch1
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#007), and Azariah the son of Johanan,
[Ch1 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#010). There are other
discrepancies relative to genealogies in these historical books which it
would be useless to investigate. On these differences much has been
already said in different parts of this comment.

[Ezra 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ezr 7:6</span></span>

A ready scribe - סופר מחיר sopher machir does not merely signify a
speedy writer or an excellent penman, but one who was eminently skillful
in expounding the law. In this sense the word γραμματευς, scribe, is
repeatedly used in the New Testament, and we find that both in the Old
and New Testament it had the same signification. The Syriac gives the
sense of the word by translating sophro chocimo, a wise scribe, or
expounder.

[Ezra 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ezr 7:8</span></span>

He came to Jerusalem in the fifth month - From the following verse we
learn that Ezra and his company set off from Babylon on the first day of
the first month, and thus we find they were upwards of four months on
their journey. They could not travel fast, as they were a great company,
composed in part of the aged and infirm, besides multitudes of women and
children. They appear also to have taken a circuitous route. See on [Ezr
8:24-32](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#024) (note).

[Ezra 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ezr 7:10</span></span>

Ezra had prepared his heart - Here is a fine character of a minister of
God: He prepares, הכין hechin, he fixes, purposes, and determines, לבבו
lebabo, with his heart - with all his powers and affections, to seek the
law of God, and to do it himself, that he may be properly qualified to
teach its statutes and judgments to Israel.

[Ezra 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ezr 7:12</span></span>

Artaxerxes, king of kings - This letter, from the beginning of this
verse to the end of [Ezr 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#026), is in
the Aramitic or Chaldee language.

This title of the king would, in Persian, run thus: Ardsheer shahinshah,
or padshah, "Ardsheer, king of kings;" "great or supreme king, or
emperor."

[Ezra 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ezr 7:13</span></span>

Their own free-will - None shall be forced either to go or to stay. He
who loves his God will avail himself of this favorable opportunity.

[Ezra 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ezr 7:14</span></span>

His seven counsellors - It is very likely that the privy counsel of the
king consisted of seven persons simply. The names of these seven
counsellors or chamberlains may be found in the book of Esther, [Est
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#010).

[Ezra 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ezr 7:16</span></span>

And all the silver and gold - The king and his counsellors had already
made a present to the house of the God of Israel; and Ezra is now
empowered to receive any contribution which any of the inhabitants of
the province of Babylon may think proper to give.

[Ezra 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ezr 7:18</span></span>

After the will of your God - He gave them the fullest liberty to order
every thing according to their own institutions, binding them to no form
or mode of worship.

[Ezra 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">ezr 7:22</span></span>

A hundred talents of silver - The talent of silver was 450.

A hundred measures of wheat - A hundred cors; each cor was a little more
than seventy-five gallons, one quart, and a pint, wine measure.

A hundred baths of wine - Each bath was seven gallons and five pints.

[Ezra 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">ezr 7:23</span></span>

Why should there be wrath - As he believed he was appointed by the
Almighty to do this work, he therefore wished to do it heartily, knowing
that if he did not, God would be displeased, and that the kingdom would
be cut off from him or his posterity.

[Ezra 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">ezr 7:24</span></span>

It shall not be lawful to impose toll - As these persons had no private
revenues, it would have been unreasonable to have laid them under
taxation.

[Ezra 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">ezr 7:26</span></span>

Whether it be unto death - These include almost every species of
punishment which should be inflicted on culprits in any civilized state.

With this verse the Chaldee part of this chapter ends.

[Ezra 7:28](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">ezr 7:28</span></span>

And I was strengthened - In what the king decreed he saw the hand of
God; he therefore gave him the praise, and took courage. There is a most
amiable spirit of piety in these reflections. Ezra simply states the
case; shows what the king had determined, and tells what he said; and
then points out the grand agent in the whole business - it was the Lord
God of his fathers. Thus God had put it into the king's heart to
beautify the house of Jehovah; and, as that house was built for the
salvation of the souls of men, he gives God praise for putting it into
the king's heart to repair it: he who loves God and man will rejoice in
the establishment of the Divine worship, because this is the readiest
way to promote the best interests of man.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 8](ezr008)

</div>
