<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezra Index](ezr)  
  [Previous](ezr003)  [Next](ezr005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#001)

[Ezra](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ezr 4:0</span></span>

The Samaritans endeavor to prevent the rebuilding of the temple, [Ezr
4:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#001). They send letters to
Artaxerxes, against the Jews, [Ezr
4:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#006). A copy of the letter, [Ezr
4:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#010). He commands the Jews to cease
from building the temple, which they do; nor was any thing farther done
in the work till the second year of Darius, [Ezr
4:17-24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#017).

[Ezra 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ezr 4:1</span></span>

Now when the adversaries - These were the Samaritans, and the different
nations with which the kings of Assyria had peopled Israel, when they
had carried the original inhabitants away into captivity, see [Ezr
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#009), [Ezr
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#010).

[Ezra 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ezr 4:2</span></span>

Let us build with you - We acknowledge the same God, are solicitous for
his glory, and will gladly assist you in this work. But that they came
with no friendly intention, the context proves.

[Ezra 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ezr 4:3</span></span>

Ye have nothing to do with us - We cannot acknowledge you as worshippers
of the true God, and cannot participate with you in anything that
relates to his worship.

[Ezra 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ezr 4:4</span></span>

Weakened the hands - Discouraged and opposed them by every possible
means.

[Ezra 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ezr 4:5</span></span>

Hired counsellors - They found means to corrupt some of the principal
officers of the Persian court, so that the orders of Cyrus were not
executed; or at least so slowly as to make them nearly ineffectual.

Until the reign of Darius - This was probably Darius the son of
Hystaspes.

[Ezra 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ezr 4:6</span></span>

In the reign of Ahasuerus - This is the person who is called Cambyses by
the Greeks. He reigned seven years and five months; and during the whole
of that time the building of the temple was interrupted.

[Ezra 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ezr 4:7</span></span>

In the days of Artaxerxes - After the death of Cambyses, one of the Magi
named Oropaestus by Trogus Pompeius, Smerdis by Herodotus, Mardus by
Aeschylus, and Sphendatates by Ctesias, usurped the empire, feigning
himself to be Smerdis, the brother of Cambyses, who had been put to
death. This is the person named Artaxerxes in the text: or, following
the Hebrew, Artachshasta. It is generally believed, that from the time
of Cyrus the great, Xerxes and Artaxerxes were names assumed by the
Persian sovereigns, whatever their names had been before.

Written in the Syrian tongue - That is, the Syrian or Chaldean character
was used; not the Hebrew.

Interpreted, in the Syrian tongue - That is, the language, as well as
the character, was the Syriac or Chaldaic.

[Ezra 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ezr 4:8</span></span>

Rehum the chancellor - With this verse the Chaldee part of the chapter
begins; and the same language continues to the end of [Ezr
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#018).

These men wrote to Darius in their own language; and the king in the
same dialect returns an answer, chap. 5. This circumstance adds
authenticity to what is written: so scrupulous was the inspired penman,
that he not only gave the words which each spoke and wrote, but he gave
them also in the very language in which they were conceived and in the
character peculiar to that language.

[Ezra 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ezr 4:10</span></span>

The great and noble Asnapper - Whether this was Shalmaneser, or
Esar-haddon, or some other person, learned men and chronologists are not
agreed. The Syriac terms him Asphid; but of this person we know no more
than we do of Asnapper. He might have been the military officer who was
appointed to escort this people to Judea.

[Ezra 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ezr 4:11</span></span>

And at such a time - The word וכענת ucheeneth has greatly perplexed all
commentators and critics. The versions give us no light; and the Vulgate
translates it et dicunt salutem, "and they wish prosperity." Some
translate it and so forth; and our translators supposed that it referred
to the date, which however is not specified, and might have been as
easily entered as the words and at such a time.

In our first translation of the Bible, that by Coverdale, in 1535, the
passage stands thus: "And other on this syde the water, and in Canaan."

In that by Becke, 1549, it is thus: "And other on this syde the water,
and in Ceneeth:" and in the margin he enters "or peace," "or health." In
Cardmarden's Bible, printed at Rouen, 1566, it stands thus: "And other
that are nowe on thys syde the water." In that printed by Barker, 1615,
we find the text thus: "And Other that are beyond the river, and
Cheeneth;" on which is the following marginal note: "To wit, Euphrates:
and he meaneth in respect of Babel, that they dwelt beyond it." And the
note on Cheeneth is, "Which were a certain people that envied the Jews."
All this is merely guessing, in the midst of obscurity; most of these
having considered the original word כענת Ceeneth as the name of a
people; and in this they follow the Syriac, which uses the word Acaneth.

Calmet thinks we should read ובעת ubaeth, "and at this time;" as if they
had said, "We wish thee to enjoy the same health and prosperity at all
future times, which thou dost at present." This is not remote from the
meaning of the Chaldee original.

[Ezra 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ezr 4:13</span></span>

Toll, tribute, and custom - The first term is supposed to imply the
capitation tax; the second, an excise on commodities and merchandise;
the third, a sort of land tax. Others suppose the first means a property
tax; the second, a poll tax; and the third, what was paid on imports and
exports. In a word, if you permit these people to rebuild and fortify
their city, they will soon set you at naught, and pay you no kind of
tribute.

[Ezra 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ezr 4:14</span></span>

Now because we have maintenance from the king's palace - More literally:
Now because at all times we are salted with the salt of the palace;
i.e., We live on the king's bounty, and must be faithful to our
benefactor. Salt was used as the emblem of an incorruptible covenant;
and those who ate bread and salt together were considered as having
entered into a very solemn covenant. These hypocrites intimated that
they felt their conscience bound by the league between them and the
king; and therefore could not conscientiously see any thing going on
that was likely to turn to the king's damage. They were probably also
persons in the pay of the Persian king.

[Ezra 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ezr 4:15</span></span>

The book of the records of thy fathers - That is, the records of the
Chaldeans, to whom the Persians succeeded.

[Ezra 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ezr 4:17</span></span>

Peace, and at such a time - The word וכעת ucheeth is like that which we
have already considered on [Ezr 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#010),
and probably has the same meaning.

[Ezra 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ezr 4:19</span></span>

Hath made insurrection against kings - How true is the proverb, "It is
an easy thing to find a staff to beat a dog!" The struggles of the
Israelites to preserve or regain their independency, which they had from
God, are termed insurrection, rebellion, and sedition: because at last
they fell under the power of their oppressors. Had they been successful
in these struggles, such offensive words had never been used. In 1688
the people of England struggled to throw off an oppressive government,
that was changing the times and the seasons, and overthrowing the
religion of the country, and setting up in its place the spurious
off-spring of popery and arbitrary government. They were successful; and
it is called the Revolution: had they failed it would have been called
rebellion; and the parties principally concerned would have been put to
death.

[Ezra 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ezr 4:20</span></span>

Beyond the river - That is, the Euphrates. Both David and Solomon
carried their conquests beyond this river. See [Sa2
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#003), etc., and [Kg1
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#021), where it is said, Solomon
reigned over all kingdoms from the river (Euphrates) unto the land of
the Philistines; and unto the borders of Egypt.

[Ezra 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ezr 4:21</span></span>

Until another commandment shall be given from me - The rebuilding was
only provisionally suspended. The decree was, Let it cease for the
present; nor let it proceed at any time without an order express from
me.

[Ezra 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">ezr 4:23</span></span>

Made them to cease by force and power - Commanded them on pain of the
king's displeasure not to proceed, obliging all to remit their labors,
and probably bringing an armed force to prevent them from going forward.

[Ezra 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">ezr 4:24</span></span>

So it ceased unto the second year of - Darius - They had begun in the
first year of Cyrus, b.c. 536, to go up to Jerusalem, and they were
obliged to desist from the building b.c. 522; and thus they continued
till the second year of Darius, b.c. 519. See the chronology in [Hag
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001) (note) and [Zac
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001) (note) and the following chapter,
Ezra 5 (note).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 5](ezr005)

</div>
