<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezra Index](ezr)  
  [Previous](ezr007)  [Next](ezr009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#001)

[Ezra](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ezr 8:0</span></span>

The genealogy of the chief persons who went with Ezra from Babylon, [Ezr
8:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#001). He gathers them together at
Ahava; and finding among them no Levites, he sends confidential persons
to the river of Ahava, who return with many Levites and Nethinim, [Ezr
8:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#015). He proclaims a fast at Ahava
for Divine protection on their journey, [Ezr
8:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#021). He delivers to the care of
the priests etc., the silver, gold, and sacred vessels, that they might
carry them to Jerusalem, and deliver them to the high priest, [Ezr
8:24-30](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#024). They depart from Ahava, and
come to Jerusalem, [Ezr 8:31](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#031), [Ezr
8:32](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#032). The vessels are weighed and the
weight registered, [Ezr 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#033), [Ezr
8:34](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#034). They offer burnt-offerings to
God, [Ezr 8:35](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#035); deliver the king's
commissions to his lieutenants, by whom they are furthered in their
work, [Ezr 8:36](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#036).

[Ezra 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ezr 8:2</span></span>

Gershom - One of the descendants of Phinehas, son of Eliazar.

[Ezra 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ezr 8:3</span></span>

Of the sons of Shechaniah - There were three of this name; the second is
mentioned [Ezr 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#006), and the third [Ezr
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#002). They were all different persons,
as may be seen from their fathers' houses.

[Ezra 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ezr 8:15</span></span>

The river that runneth to Ahava - Ahava was a river itself, which is
supposed to be the same that is called Diava or Adiava, in the province
of Adiabene; and perhaps the place whence the people of Ava came who
were brought by the king of Assyria to Palestine, [Kg2
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#024).

None of the sons of Levi - None that were simply Levites. He found
priests, and they were sons of Levi; but no Levites that were not
priests.

[Ezra 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ezr 8:17</span></span>

At the place Casiphia - The most judicious commentators are agreed that
by Casiphia, the Caspian mountains, between Media and Hyrcania, are
intended; where, probably, the Nethinim were employed in working silver
mines: כסף keseph, from which the word comes, signifies silver.

[Ezra 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">ezr 8:22</span></span>

I was ashamed to require - a band - He had represented God, the object
of his worship, as supremely powerful, and as having the strongest
affection for his true followers: he could not, therefore, consistently
with his declarations, ask a band of soldiers from the king to protect
them on the way, when they were going expressly to rebuild the temple of
Jehovah, and restore his worship. He therefore found it necessary to
seek the Lord by fasting and prayer, that they might have from Him those
succours without which they might become a prey to their enemies; and
then the religion which they professed would be considered by the
heathen as false and vain. Thus we see that this good man had more
anxiety for the glory of God than for his own personal safety.

[Ezra 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">ezr 8:26</span></span>

Silver vessels a hundred talents - That is, The weight of all the silver
vessels amounted to one hundred talents; not that there were one hundred
vessels of silver, each a talent in weight.

Reckoning in round sums, 650 talents of silver at 450 the talent, amount
to 292,500 sterling. Silver vessels, 100 talents, amount to 45,000;
gold, 100 talents, at 7,000 per talent, amount to 700,000 independently
of the 20 basons of gold, amounting to 1000 drachms. Now the golden
drachm or daric was worth about 1. 2s., therefore these basons were
worth 1100; the whole amounting to 1,038, 600 sterling. But these
different weights and coins are variously computed; some making the
silver talent only 353 11s. 10 1/2 d., and the talent of gold 5057 15s.
1 1/2 d., calculations which I have elsewhere introduced.

Two vessels of fine copper, precious as gold - What these were we cannot
tell. The Syriac translates nechoso corinthio toba, to be vessels of the
best Corinthian brass; so called from the brass found after the burning
of Corinth by Lucius Mummius, which was brass, copper, gold, and silver,
all melted together, as is generally supposed. But it was probably some
factitious metal made there, that took the polish and assumed the
brightness of gold, and because of its hardness was more durable. There
is still a certain factitious metal of this kind, made among the
Asiatics. I have seen this metal often made; it is as bright and fine as
gold, takes a most exquisite polish, and will scarcely tarnish. I have
kept this exposed to every variation of the air, even among old iron,
brass, copper, etc., for twenty years together, without being scarcely
at all oxidized. It requires much art in the making, but the constituent
materials are of small value. Vessels of this metal, because of their
lustre and durability for ornamental and domestic uses, are in many
respects more valuable than gold itself. The only difficulty is to get
at first the true color, which depends on the degree of heat, and the
time employed in fusion; but there are, however, proper rules to
ascertain them. This metal is widely different from the or molu of
France and England, is less expensive, and much more valuable.

[Ezra 8:35](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">ezr 8:35</span></span>

Twelve bullocks for all Israel - Though of tribes there were only Judah
and Benjamin, yet they offered a bullock for every tribe, as if present.
There can be little doubt that there were individuals there from all the
twelve tribes, possibly some families of each; but no complete tribe but
those mentioned above.

[Ezra 8:36](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">ezr 8:36</span></span>

The king's lieutenants - אחשדרפני achashdarpeney: this is generally
understood to mean lieutenant or deputy, and is probably of Persian
origin, though here greatly corrupted. The Vulgate renders it regis
satrapis, to the satraps of the king, which is the Persian satrab. A
viceroy in Persian is soubah-dar; viceroys, soubahdaran. Darafreen
signifies a person in whom one has confidence; and achi is an epithet of
a vizir. These two words conjoined will make nearly that of the text.
But I do not give any of these etymologies with confidence. Other words
might be proposed as candidates, but where there is so little certainty,
conjecture is useless. Were it necessary a dissertation might be written
on the Persian words, and Persian forms of speech, in this and the two
following books; but probably after my toil few of my readers would
thank me for my pains.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 9](ezr009)

</div>
