<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Galatians Index](gal)  
  [Previous](gal003)  [Next](gal005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Galatians Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#001)

[Galatians](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gal 4:0</span></span>

The apostle shows that, as an heir in nonage is under tutors and
guardians, so were the Galatians while under the law; and, as the heir
when he comes of age is no longer under guardians, so they, when the
Gospel came, arrived at full maturity, and were redeemed from the law,
[Gal 4:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#001). He shows, farther, that
when the fullness of the time came God sent forth his Son, that we might
obtain the adoption of sons, and have the strongest evidence of that
adoption, [Gal 4:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004). Those who are
children of God are heirs of heaven, [Gal
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#007). He compares their former and
latter state, and shows the reason he had to fear that his labor on
their behalf was in vain, [Gal 4:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#008).
He mentions his trials among them, and their kindness to him, [Gal
4:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#012). Shows his tender affection
for them, and exhorts them to return to the Gospel, [Gal
4:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#017). Shows the excellence of the
Gospel beyond that of the law, by the allegory of Mount Sinai and
Jerusalem, [Gal 4:21-27](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#021). Shows also
that the believing Gentiles are children of the promise, as Isaac was;
and have been elected in the place of the Jews, who have been cast out
according to the Scriptures, [Gal
4:28-31](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#028).

[Galatians 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gal 4:1</span></span>

The heir, as long as He is a child - Though he be appointed by his
father's will heir of all his possessions yet till he arrive at the
legal age he is master of nothing, and does not differ from one of the
common domestics.

[Galatians 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gal 4:2</span></span>

But is under tutors - Επιτροπους· Guardians and governors; οικονομους·
those who have the charge of the family. These words are nearly similar;
but we may consider the first as executor, the last as the person who
superintends the concerns of the family and estate till the heir become
of age; such as we call trustee.

Until the time appointed of the father - The time mentioned in the
father's will or testament.

[Galatians 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gal 4:3</span></span>

Even so we - The whole Jewish people were in a state of nonage while
under the law.

The elements of the world - A mere Jewish phrase, יסודי עולם הזה yesodey
olam hazzeh, "the principles of this world;" that is, the rudiments or
principles of the Jewish religion. The apostle intimates that the law
was not the science of salvation, it was only the elements or alphabet
of it; and in the Gospel this alphabet is composed into a most glorious
system of Divine knowledge: but as the alphabet is nothing of itself,
unless compounded into syllables, words, sentences, and discourses; so
the law, taken by itself, gives no salvation; it contains indeed the
outlines of the Gospel, but it is the Gospel alone that fills up these
outlines.

[Galatians 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gal 4:4</span></span>

When the fullness of the time was come - The time which God in his
infinite wisdom counted best; in which all his counsels were filled up;
and the time which his Spirit, by the prophets, had specified; and the
time to which he intended the Mosaic institutions should extend, and
beyond which they should be of no avail.

God sent forth his Son - Him who came immediately from God himself, made
of a woman, according to the promise, [Gen
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015); produced by the power of God in
the womb of the Virgin Mary without any intervention of man; hence he
was called the Son of God. See Luke, [Luk
1:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#035), and the note there.

Made under the law - In subjection to it, that in him all its designs
might be fulfilled, and by his death the whole might be abolished; the
law dying when the Son of God expired upon the cross.

[Galatians 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gal 4:5</span></span>

To redeem them - Εξαγορασῃ· To pay down a price for them, and thus buy
them off from the necessity of observing circumcision, offering brute
sacrifices, performing different ablutions, etc., etc.

That we might receive the adoption of sons - Which adoption we could not
obtain by the law; for it is the Gospel only that puts us among the
children, and gives us a place in the heavenly family. On the nature of
adoption see the notes on [Rom 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015).

[Galatians 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gal 4:6</span></span>

And because ye are sons - By faith in Christ Jesus, being redeemed both
from the bondage and curse of the law; God - the Father, called
generally the first person of the glorious Trinity, hath sent forth the
Spirit - the Holy Ghost, the second person of that Trinity, of his Son -
Jesus Christ, the third person of the Trinity - crying, Abba, Father!
from the fullest and most satisfactory evidence that God, the Father,
Son, and Spirit, had become their portion. For the explanation of the
phrase, and why the Greek and Syriac terms are joined together here, see
the notes on [Mar 14:36](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#036), and on [Rom
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015) (note).

[Galatians 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gal 4:7</span></span>

Thou art no more a servant - Thou who hast believed in Christ art no
longer a slave, either under the dominion of sin or under obligation to
the Mosaic ritual; but a son of God, adopted into the heavenly family.

And if a son, then an heir - Having a right to the inheritance, because
one of the family, for none can inherit but the children; but this
heirship is the most extraordinary of all: it is not an heirship of any
tangible possession, either in heaven or earth; it is not to possess a
part or even the whole of either, it is to possess Him who made all
things; not God's works, but God himself: heirs of God through Christ.

[Galatians 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gal 4:8</span></span>

When ye knew not God - Though it is evident, from the complexion of the
whole of this epistle, that the great body of the Christians in the
Churches of Galatia were converts from among the Jews or proselytes to
Judaism; yet from this verse it appears that there were some who had
been converted from heathenism; unless we suppose that the apostle here
particularly addresses those who had been proselytes to Judaism and
thence converted to Christianity; which appears to be most likely from
the following verses.

[Galatians 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gal 4:9</span></span>

Now, after that ye have known God - After having been brought to the
knowledge of God as your Savior.

Or rather are known of God - Are approved of him, having received the
adoption of sons.

To the weak and beggarly elements - After receiving all this, will ye
turn again to the ineffectual rites and ceremonies of the Mosaic law -
rites too weak to counteract your sinful habits, and too poor to
purchase pardon and eternal life for you? If the Galatians were turning
again to them, it is evident that they had been once addicted to them.
And this they might have been, allowing that they had become converts
from heathenism to Judaism, and from Judaism to Christianity. This makes
the sense consistent between the 8th and 9th verses.

[Galatians 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gal 4:10</span></span>

Ye observe days - Ye superstitiously regard the Sabbaths and particular
days of your own appointment;

And months - New moons; times - festivals, such as those of tabernacles,
dedication, passover, etc.

Years - Annual atonements, sabbatical years, and jubilees.

[Galatians 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gal 4:11</span></span>

I am afraid of you - I begin now to be seriously alarmed for you, and
think you are so thoroughly perverted from the Gospel of Christ, that
all my pains and labor in your conversion have been thrown away.

[Galatians 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gal 4:12</span></span>

Be as I am - Thoroughly addicted to the Christian faith and worship,
from the deepest conviction of its truth.

For I am as ye are - I was formerly a Jew, and as zealously addicted to
the rites and ceremonies of Judaism as ye are, but I am saved from that
mean and unprofitable dependence: "Be therefore as I am now; who was
once as you now are." Others think the sense to be this: "Be as
affectionate to me as I am to you; for ye were once as loving to me as I
am now to you."

Ye have not injured me at all - I do not thus earnestly entreat you to
return to your Christian profession because your perversion has been any
loss to me, nor because your conversion can be to me any gain: ye have
not injured me at all, ye only injure yourselves; and I entreat you,
through the intense love I bear to you, as my once beloved brethren in
Christ Jesus, to return to him from whom ye have revolted.

[Galatians 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gal 4:13</span></span>

Ye know how through infirmity - The apostle seems to say that he was
much afflicted in body when he first preached the Gospel to them. And is
this any strange thing, that a minister, so laborious as St. Paul was,
should be sometimes overdone and overcome by the severity of his labors?
Surely not. This might have been only an occasional affliction, while
laboring in that part of Asia Minor; and not a continual and incurable
infirmity, as some have too hastily conjectured.

[Galatians 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gal 4:14</span></span>

And my temptation which was in my flesh - On this verse there are a
great many various readings, as there are various opinions.

Instead of μου, My temptation, ABC\*D\*FG, some others, with the Coptic,
Vulgate, Itala, and several of the primitive fathers, have ὑμων, Your
temptation.

The word πειρασμον, which we translate temptation, signifies trial of
any kind. The verse therefore may be read, "Ye despised not the trial
which was in my flesh;" or, "Ye despised not your trial, which was in my
flesh:" i.e. what my flesh suffered on your account, the afflictions I
passed through in consequence of my severe labors on your account. You
did not consider me less an apostle of God on account of my sinking for
a time under the weight of my work. Had they been disaffected towards
him at that time, they would have used this to the prejudice of his
apostolic mission. "What! do you pretend to be an extraordinary
messenger from God, and yet are suffered to fall into sickness under the
severity of your labor? If God sent you, would he not sustain you?" This
would have been quite natural, had they not been well affected toward
him. But, on the contrary, notwithstanding these afflictions, they
received him as an angel of God - as a messenger from heaven, and as
Jesus Christ himself. This appears to me to be the simple meaning of the
apostle, and that he neither alludes to a bodily nor mental infirmity,
which generally or periodically afflicted him, as some have imagined.
Nor does he appear at all to speak of the same case as that mentioned
[Co2 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007), where I wish the reader to
consult the notes. That St. Paul had frequent and severe afflictions, in
consequence of his constant and severe exertions in the Gospel ministry,
we may readily believe, and of this his own words bear sufficient
testimony.

See his affecting account, [Co2
11:23-29](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#023), and the notes there.

[Galatians 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gal 4:15</span></span>

Where is then the blessedness ye spake of? - Ye spake of should be in
italics, there being no corresponding word in the Greek text. Perhaps
there is not a sentence in the New Testament more variously translated
than this. I shall give the original: τις ουν ην ὁ μακαρισμος ὑμων· What
was then your blessedness! Or, How great was your happiness at that
time! Or, What blessings did ye then pour on me! It is worthy of remark,
that, instead of τις, what, ABCFG, several others, the older Syriac, the
later Syriac in the margin, the Armenian, Vulgate, one copy of the
Itala, and some of the fathers, have που, where; and ην, was, is omitted
by ACD, several others, also the Vulgate, Itala, and the Latin fathers.
According to these authorities the text should be read thus: Where then
is your blessedness? Having renounced the Gospel, you have lost your
happiness. What have your false teachers given you to compensate the
loss of communion with God, or that Spirit of adoption, that Spirit of
Christ, by which you cried Abba, Father! If, however, we understand the
words as implying the benedictions they then heaped on the apostle, the
sense will be sufficiently natural, and agree well with the concluding
part of the verse; for I bear you record, that, if possible, ye would
have plucked out your own eyes, and have given them to me. You had then
the strongest affection for me; you loved God, and you loved me for
God's sake, and were ready to give me the most unequivocal proof of your
love.

Dearer than one's eyes, or to profess to give one's eyes for the sake of
a person, appears to have been a proverbial expression, intimating the
highest tokens of the strongest affection. We find a similar form of
speech in Terence, Adelphi, act iv., scene 5, ver. 67.

\- Di me pater Omnes oderint, ni magis te

quam oculos nunc ego amo meos.

"O father, may all the gods hate me,

if I do not love you now more than my own eyes."

[Galatians 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gal 4:16</span></span>

Am I therefore become your enemy - How is it that you are so much
altered towards me, that you now treat me as an enemy, who formerly
loved me with the most fervent affection? Is it because I tell you the
truth; that very truth for which you at first so ardently loved me?

[Galatians 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gal 4:17</span></span>

They zealously affect you, but not well - It is difficult for common
readers to understand the meaning of these words: perhaps it would be
better to translate Ζηλουσιν ὑμας ου καλως, these false teachers
endeavor to conciliate your esteem, but not in honest or true
principles; they work themselves into your good graces; they wish you to
place all your affection upon themselves.

They would exclude you - They wish to shut you out from the affection of
your apostle, that you might affect them, ἱνα αυτους ζηλουτε, that you
might love them alone, hear them alone, abide by their directions only,
and totally abandon him who called you into the grace of the Gospel of
Christ. Some MSS. read ἡμας, us, instead of ὑμας, you; they wish to shut
us entirely out from among you, that you may receive and believe them
alone. The sense is nearly the same but the former appears to be the
more authentic reading.

[Galatians 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gal 4:18</span></span>

It is good to be zealously affected - It is well to have a determined
mind and an ardent heart in reference to things which are laudable and
good.

Not only when I am present - You were thus attached to me when I was
among you, but now ye have lost both your reverence and affection for
me. Your false teachers pretended great concern for you, that you might
put all your confidence in them; they have gained their end; they have
estranged you from me, and got you to renounce the Gospel, and have
brought you again into your former bondage.

[Galatians 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gal 4:19</span></span>

My little children - Τεκνια μου· My beloved children. As their
conversion to God had been the fruit of much labor, prayers, and tears,
so he felt them as his children, and peculiarly dear to him, because he
had been the means of bringing them to the knowledge of the truth;
therefore he represents himself as suffering the same anxiety and
distress which he endured at first when he preached the Gospel to them,
when their conversion to Christianity was a matter of great doubt and
uncertainty. The metaphor which he uses needs no explanation.

Until Christ be formed in you - Till you once more receive the Spirit
and unction of Christ in your hearts, from which you are fallen, by your
rejection of the spirit of the Gospel.

[Galatians 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gal 4:20</span></span>

I desire to be present with you - I wish to accommodate my doctrine to
your state; I know not whether you need stronger reprehension, or to be
dealt with more leniently.

I stand in doubt of you - I have doubts concerning your state; the
progress of error and conviction among you, which I cannot fully know
without being among you, This appears to be the apostle's meaning, and
tends much to soften and render palatable the severity of his reproofs.

[Galatians 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gal 4:21</span></span>

Ye that desire to be under the law - Ye who desire to incorporate the
Mosaic institutions with Christianity, and thus bring yourselves into
bondage to circumcision, and a great variety of oppressive rites.

Do ye not hear the law? - Do ye not understand what is written in the
Pentateuch relative to Abraham and his children. It is evident that the
word law is used in two senses in this verse. It first means the Mosaic
institutions; secondly, the Pentateuch, where the history is recorded to
which the apostle refers.

[Galatians 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gal 4:22</span></span>

For it is written - Viz. in [Gen
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#015); [Gen
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#001), etc., that Abraham had two sons,
Ishmael and Isaac; the one; Ishmael, by a bond maid, Hagar; the other,
Isaac, by a free woman, Sarah.

[Galatians 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gal 4:23</span></span>

Was born after the flesh - Ishmael was born according to the course of
nature, his parents being both of a proper age, so that there was
nothing uncommon or supernatural in his birth: this is the proper
meaning of the apostle's κατα σαρκα, after or according to the flesh,
and answers to the Hebrew phrase, על דרך בשר al derec basar, according
to the manner of the flesh, i.e. naturally, according to the common
process of nature.

By promise - Both Abraham and Sarah had passed that age in which the
procreation of children was possible on natural principles. The birth,
therefore, of Isaac was supernatural; it was the effect of an especial
promise of God; and it was only on the ground of that promise that it
was either credible or possible.

[Galatians 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gal 4:24</span></span>

Which things are an allegory - They are to be understood spiritually;
more being intended in the account than meets the eye.

Allegory, from αλλος, another, and αγορεω, or αγορευω, to speak,
signifies a thing that is a representative of another, where the literal
sense is the representative of a spiritual meaning; or, as the glossary
expresses it, ἑτερως κατα μεταφρασιν νοουμενα, και ου κατα την
αναγνωσιν· "where the thing is to be understood differently in the
interpretation than it appears in the reading."

Allegories are frequent in all countries, and are used by all writers.
In the life of Homer, the author, speaking of the marriage of Jupiter
and Juno, related by that poet, says: δοκει ταυτα αλληγορεισθαι, ὁτι Ἡρα
μεν νοειται ὁ αηρ-Ζευς δε, ὁ αιθηρ· "It appears that these things are to
be understood allegorically; for Juno means the air, Jupiter the ether."
Plutarch, in his treatise De Iside et Osir., says: ὡσπερ Ἑλληνες Κρονον
αλληγορουσι τον χρονον· "As the Greeks allegorize Cronos (Saturn) into
Chronos (Time.)" It is well known how fond the Jews were of
allegorizing. Every thing in the law was with them an allegory. Their
Talmud is full of these; and one of their most sober and best educated
writers, Philo, abounds with them. Speaking (De Migrat. Abrah., page
420) of the five daughters of Zelophehad, he says: ἁς αλληγορουντες
αισθησεις ειναι φαμεν· "which, allegorizing, we assert to be the five
senses!"

It is very likely, therefore, that the allegory produced here, St. Paul
had borrowed from the Jewish writings; and he brings it in to convict
the Judaizing Galatians on their own principles; and neither he nor we
have any thing farther to do with this allegory than as it applies to
the subject for which it is quoted; nor does it give any license to
those men of vain and superficial minds who endeavor to find out
allegories in every portion of the sacred writings, and, by what they
term spiritualizing, which is more properly carnalizing, have brought
the testimonies of God into disgrace. May the spirit of silence be
poured out upon all such corrupters of the word of God!

For these are the two covenants - These signify two different systems of
religion; the one by Moses, the other by the Messiah.

The one from the Mount Sinai - On which the law was published; which was
typified by Hagar, Abraham's bond maid.

Which gendereth to bondage - For as the bond maid or slave could only
gender - bring forth her children, in a state of slavery, and subject
also to become slaves, so all that are born and live under those Mosaic
institutions are born and live in a state of bondage - a bondage to
various rites and ceremonies; under the obligation to keep the whole
law, yet, from its severity and their frailness, obliged to live in the
habitual breach of it, and in consequence exposed to the curse which it
pronounces.

[Galatians 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gal 4:25</span></span>

For this Agar is Mount Sinai in Arabia - Το γαρ Αγαρ Σινα ορος εστιν εν
τη Αραβια. This is the common reading; but it is read differently in
some of the most respectable MSS., versions, and fathers; thus: το γαρ
Σινα ορος εστιν εν τῃ Αραβια, for this Sinai is a mountain of Arabia;
the word Αγαρ, Agar, being omitted. This reading is supported by CFG,
some others, the Ethiopic, Armenian, Vulgate, and one copy of the Itala;
by Epiphanius, Damascenus, Ambrosiaster, Jerome, Augustine, Hilary,
Sedulius, and Bede; and the word is sometimes, though not always,
omitted by Cyril and Origen, which proves that in their time there were
doubts concerning the common reading.

Of the word Agar in this verse, which renders the passage very obscure
and difficult, Professor White says, forsitan delendum, "probably it
should be expunged." Griesbach has left it in the text with a note of
doubtfulness.

Answereth to Jerusalem - Hagar, the bond maid, bringing forth children
in a state of slavery, answereth to Jerusalem that now is, συστοιχει,
points out, or, bears a similitude to, Jerusalem in her present state of
subjection; which, with her children - her citizens, is not only in
bondage to the Romans, but in a worse bondage to the law, to its
oppressive ordinances, and to the heavy curse which it has pronounced
against all those who do not keep them.

[Galatians 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gal 4:26</span></span>

But Jerusalem which is above - The apostle still follows the Jewish
allegory, showing not only how the story of Hagar and Sarah, Ishmael and
Isaac, was allegorized, but pointing out also that even Jerusalem was
the subject of allegory; for it was a maxim among the rabbins, that
"whatsoever was in the earth, the same was also found in heaven for
there is no matter, howsoever small, in this world, that has not
something similar to it in the spiritual world." On this maxim, the Jews
imagine that every earthly thing has its representative in heaven; and
especially whatever concerns Jerusalem, the law, and its ordinances.
Rab. Kimchi, speaking of Melchizedec, king of Salem, says: זו ירושלם של
מעלה zu Yerushalem shel malah, "This is the Jerusalem that is from
above." This phrase frequently occurs among these writers, as may be
seen in Schoettgen, who has written an express dissertation upon the
subject. Hor. Hebr., vol. i. page 1205.

Is free, which is the mother of us all - There is a spiritual Jerusalem,
of which this is the type; and this Jerusalem, in which the souls of all
the righteous are, is free from all bondage and sin: or by this,
probably, the kingdom of the Messiah was intended; and this certainly
answers best to the apostle's meaning, as the subsequent verse shows.
There is an earthly Jerusalem, but this earthly Jerusalem typifies a
heavenly Jerusalem: the former, with all her citizens, is in bondage;
the latter is a free city, and all her inhabitants are free also. And
this Jerusalem is our mother; it signifies the Church of Christ, the
metropolis of Christianity, or rather the state of liberty into which
all true believers are brought. The word παντων, of all, is omitted by
almost every MS. and version of antiquity and importance, and by the
most eminent of the fathers who quote this place; it is undoubtedly
spurious, and the text should be read thus: But Jerusalem, which is
above, is free, which is our mother.

[Galatians 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gal 4:27</span></span>

Rejoice, thou barren that bearest not - This quotation is taken from
[Isa 54:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#001), and is certainly a promise
which relates to the conversion of the Gentiles, as the following clause
proves; for the desolate - the Gentile world, hath many more children -
is a much larger and more numerous Church, than she - Jerusalem, the
Jewish state, which hath a husband - has been so long in covenant with
God, living under his continual protection, and in possession of a great
variety of spiritual advantages; and especially those offered to her by
the Gospel, which she has rejected, and which the Gentiles have
accepted.

[Galatians 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">gal 4:28</span></span>

Now we - Who believe in the Lord Jesus, are the children of promise -
are the spiritual offspring of the Messiah, the seed of Abraham, in whom
the promise stated that all the nations of the earth should be blessed.

[Galatians 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">gal 4:29</span></span>

But as then he - Ishmael, who was born after the flesh - whose birth had
nothing supernatural in it, but was according to the ordinary course of
nature,

Persecuted him - Isaac, who was born after the Spirit - who had a
supernatural birth, according to the promise, and through the efficacy,
of the Holy Spirit, giving effect to that promise - Sarah shall have a
son, [Gen 17:16-21](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#016); [Gen
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#001), etc.

Persecuted him; the persecution here referred to is that mentioned [Gen
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#009). It consisted in mocking his
brother Isaac.

Even so it is now - So the Jews, in every place, persecute the
Christians; and show thereby that they are rather of the posterity of
Hagar than of Sarah.

[Galatians 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">gal 4:30</span></span>

What saith the Scripture? - (In [Gen
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#010)): Cast out the bond woman and
her son: and what does this imply in the present case? Why, that the
present Jerusalem and her children shall be cast out of the favor of
God, and shall not be heirs with the son of the free woman - shall not
inherit the blessings promised to Abraham, because they believe not in
the promised seed.

[Galatians 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">gal 4:31</span></span>

So then - We - Jews and Gentiles, who believe on the Lord Jesus, are not
children of the bond woman - are not in subjection to the Jewish law,
but of the free; and, consequently, are delivered from all its bondage,
obligation, and curse.

Thus the apostle, from their own Scripture, explained by their own
allegory, proves that it is only by Jesus Christ that they can have
redemption; and because they have not believed in him, therefore they
continue to be in bondage; and that shortly God will deliver them up
into a long and grievous captivity: for we may naturally suppose that
the apostle has reference to what had been so often foretold by the
prophets, and confirmed by Jesus Christ himself; and this was the
strongest argument he could use, to show the Galatians their folly and
their danger in submitting again to the bondage from which they had
escaped, and exposing themselves to the most dreadful calamities of an
earthly kind, as well as to the final ruin of their souls. They desired
to be under the law; then they must take all the consequences; and these
the apostle sets fairly before them.

1\. We sometimes pity the Jews, who continue to reject the Gospel. Many
who do so have no pity for themselves; for is not the state of a Jew,
who systematically rejects Christ, because he does not believe him to be
the promised Messiah, infinitely better than his, who, believing every
thing that the Scripture teaches concerning Christ, lives under the
power and guilt of sin? If the Jews be in a state of nonage, because
they believe not the doctrines of Christianity, he is in a worse state
than that of infancy who is not born again by the power of the Holy
Ghost. Reader, whosoever thou art, lay this to heart.

2\. The 4th, 5th, 6th, and 7th verses of this chapter ([Gal
4:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)) contain the sum and marrow of
Christian divinity.

(1.) The determination of God to redeem the world by the incarnation of
his Son.

(2.) The manifestation of this Son in the fullness of time.

(3.) The circumstances in which this Son appeared: sent forth; made of a
woman; made under the law; to be a sufferer; and to die as a sacrifice.

(4.) The redemption of the world, by the death of Christ: he came to
redeem them that were under the law, who were condemned and cursed by
it.

(5.) By the redemption price he purchases sonship or adoption for
mankind.

(6.) He, God the Father, sends the Spirit, God the Holy Ghost, of God
the Son, into the hearts of believers, by which they, through the full
confidence of their adoption, call him their Father.

(7.) Being made children, they become heirs, and God is their portion
throughout eternity. Thus, in a few words, the whole doctrine of grace
is contained, and an astonishing display made of the unutterable mercy
of God. See the notes on [Gal 4:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)
(note).

3\. While the Jews were rejecting the easy yoke of Christ, they were
painfully observing days, and months, and times and years. Superstition
has far more labor to perform than true religion has; and at last
profits nothing! Most men, either from false views of religion, or
through the power and prevalency of their own evil passions and habits,
have ten thousand times more trouble to get to hell, than the followers
of God have to get to heaven.

4\. Even in the perverted Galatians the apostle finds some good; and he
mentions with great feeling those amiable qualities which they once
possessed. The only way to encourage men to seek farther good is to show
them what they have got, and to make this a reason why they should seek
more. He who wishes to do good to men, and is constantly dwelling on
their bad qualities and graceless state, either irritates or drives them
to despair. There is, perhaps, no sinner on this side perdition who has
not something good in him. Mention the good - it is God's work; and show
what a pity it is that he should not have more, and how ready God is to
supply all his wants through Christ Jesus. This plan should especially
be used in addressing Christian societies, and particularly those which
are in a declining state.

5\. The Galatians were once the firm friends of the apostle, and loved
him so well that they would have even plucked out their eyes for him;
and yet these very people cast him off, and counted and treated him as
an enemy! O sad fickleness of human nature! O uncertainty of human
friendships! An undesigned word, or look, or action, becomes the reason
to a fickle heart why it should divest itself of the spirit of
friendship; and he who was as dear to them as their own souls, is
neglected and forgotten! Blessed God! hast thou not said that there is a
friend that sticketh closer than a brother? Where is he? Can such a one
be trusted long on this unkindly earth? He is fit for the society of
angels and the spirits of just men made perfect; and thou takest him in
mercy lest he should lose his friendly heart, or lest his own heart
should be broken in losing that of his friend. Hasten, Lord, a more
perfect state, where the spirit of thy own love in thy followers shall
expand, without control or hinderance, throughout eternity! Amen.

6\. On allegorizing, in explaining the word of God, something has
already been said, under [Gal 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#024);
but on the subject of allegory in general much might be said. The very
learned and accurate critic, Dr. Lowth, in his work, De Sacra Poesi
Hebraeorum, has entered at large into the subject of allegory, as
existing in the sacred writings, in which he has discovered three
species of this rhetorical figure.

1\. That which rhetoricians term a continued metaphor. See Solomon's
portraiture of old age, [Ecc 12:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#002).

2\. A second kind of allegory is that which, in a more proper and
restricted sense, may be called parable. See Matthew 13, and the note on
[Mat 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#003) (note), etc.

3\. The third species of allegory is that in which a double meaning is
couched under the same words. These are called mystical allegories, and
the two meanings are termed the literal and mystical senses.

For examples of all these kinds I must refer to the learned prelate
above named.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians Chapter 5](gal005)

</div>
