<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Galatians Index](gal)  
  [Previous](gal000)  [Next](gal002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Galatians Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001)

St. Paul shows that he was especially called of God to be an apostle,
[Gal 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001). Directs his epistle to the
Churches through the regions of Galatia, [Gal
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#002). Commends them to the grace of
Christ, who gave himself for their sins, [Gal
1:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#003). Marvels that they had so soon
turned away from the grace of the Gospel of Christ, to what falsely
pretended to be another gospel, [Gal
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#006), [Gal
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#007). Pronounces him accursed who shall
preach any other doctrine than that which he had delivered to them, [Gal
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008), [Gal
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#009). Shows his own uprightness, and
that he received his doctrine from God, [Gal
1:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#010). Gives an account of his
conversion and call to the apostleship, [Gal
1:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#013). How three years after his
conversion he went up to Jerusalem, and afterwards went through the
regions of Syria and Cilicia, preaching the faith of Christ to the great
joy of the Christian Churches in Judea, [Gal
1:18-24](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#018).

[Galatians 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gal 1:1</span></span>

Paul, an apostle, not of men - Not commissioned by any assembly or
council of the apostles.

Neither by man - Nor by any one of the apostles; neither by James, who
seems to have been president of the apostolic council at Jerusalem; nor
by Peter, to whom, in a particular manner, the keys of the kingdom were
intrusted.

But by Jesus Christ - Having his mission immediately from Christ
himself, and God the Father who raised him from the dead, see [Act
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#014), [Act
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#015), and commanded him to go both to
the Jews and to the Gentiles, to open their eyes, to turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they might
obtain remission of sins, and an inheritance among them that are
sanctified. See [Act 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#001), etc., and
the notes there.

[Galatians 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gal 1:2</span></span>

And all the brethren which are with me - It is very likely that this
refers to those who were his assistants in preaching the Gospel, and not
to any private members of the Church.

Churches of Galatia - Galatia was a region or province of Asia Minor;
there was neither city nor town of this name. See the preface. But as,
in this province, St. Paul had planted several Churches, he directs the
epistle to the whole of them; for it seems they were all pretty nearly
in the same state, and needed the same instructions.

[Galatians 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gal 1:3</span></span>

Grace be to you, etc. - See on [Rom
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007) (note).

[Galatians 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gal 1:4</span></span>

Who gave himself for our sins - Who became a sin-offering to God in
behalf of mankind, that they might be saved from their sins.

Deliver us from this present evil world - These words cannot mean
created nature, or the earth and its productions, nor even wicked men.
The former we shall need while we live, the latter we cannot avoid;
indeed they are those who, when converted, form the Church of God; and,
by the successive conversion of sinners is the Church of Christ
maintained; and the followers of God must live and labor among them, in
order to their conversion. The apostle, therefore, must mean the Jews,
and their system of carnal ordinances; statutes which were not good, and
judgments by which they could not live; [Eze
20:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#025); and the whole of their
ecclesiastical economy, which was a burden neither they nor their
fathers were able to bear, [Act 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#010).
Schoettgen contends that the word πονηρος, which we translate evil,
should be translated laborious or oppressive, as it comes from πονος,
labor, trouble, etc. The apostle takes occasion, in the very
commencement of the epistle, to inform the Galatians that it was
according to the will and counsel of God that circumcision should cease,
and all the other ritual parts of the Mosaic economy; and that it was
for this express purpose that Jesus Christ gave himself a sacrifice for
our sins, because the law could not make the comers thereunto perfect.
It had pointed out the sinfulness of sin, in its various ordinances,
washings, etc.; and it had showed forth the guilt of sin in its numerous
sacrifices; but the common sense, even of its own votaries, told them
that it was impossible that the blood of bulls and goats should take
away sin. A higher atonement was necessary; and when God provided that,
all its shadows and representations necessarily ceased. See the note on
[Gal 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#003).

[Galatians 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gal 1:5</span></span>

To whom be glory for ever - Let him have the glory to whom alone it is
due, for having delivered us from the present evil world, and from all
bondage to Mosaic rites and ceremonies.

[Galatians 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gal 1:6</span></span>

I marvel that ye are so soon removed - It was a matter of wonder to the
apostle that a people, so soundly converted to God, should have so soon
made shipwreck of their faith. But mutability itself has not a more apt
subject to work upon than the human heart; the alternate workings of
different passions are continually either changing the character, or
giving it a different colouring. Reason, not passion, the word of God,
not the sayings of men, should alone be consulted in the concerns of our
salvation.

From him that called you - The apostle seems here to mean himself. He
called them into the grace of Christ; and they not only abandoned that
grace, but their hearts became greatly estranged from him; so that,
though at first they would have plucked out their eyes for him, they at
last counted him their enemy, [Gal
4:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#014).

Another gospel - It is certain that in the very earliest ages of the
Christian Church there were several spurious gospels in circulation, and
it was the multitude of these false or inaccurate relations that induced
St. Luke to write his own. See [Luk
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001). We have the names of more than
seventy of these spurious narratives still on record, and in ancient
writers many fragments of them remain; these have been collected and
published by Fabricius, in his account of the apocryphal books of the
New Testament, 3 vols. 8vo. In some of these gospels, the necessity of
circumcision, and subjection to the Mosaic law in unity with the Gospel,
were strongly inculcated. And to one of these the apostle seems to
refer.

[Galatians 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gal 1:7</span></span>

Which is not another - It is called a gospel, but it differs most
essentially from the authentic narratives published by the evangelists.
It is not gospel, i.e. good tidings, for it loads you again with the
burdens from which the genuine Gospel has disencumbered you. Instead of
giving you peace, it troubles you; instead of being a useful supplement
to the Gospel of Christ, it perverts that Gospel. You have gained
nothing but loss and damage by the change.

[Galatians 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gal 1:8</span></span>

But though we, or an angel - That Gospel which I have already preached
to you is the only true Gospel; were I to preach any other, I should
incur the curse of God. If your false teachers pretend, as many in early
times did, that they received their accounts by the ministry of an
angel, let them be accursed; separate them from your company, and have
no religious communion with them. Leave them to that God who will show
his displeasure against all who corrupt, all who add to, and all who
take from the word of his revelation.

Let all those who, from the fickleness of their own minds, are ready to
favor the reveries of every pretended prophet and prophetess who starts
up, consider the awful words of the apostle. As, in the law, the
receiver of stolen goods is as bad as the thief; so the encouragers of
such pretended revelations are as bad, in the sight of God, as those
impostors themselves. What says the word of God to them? Let them be
accursed. Reader, lay these things to heart.

[Galatians 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gal 1:9</span></span>

Let him be accursed - Perhaps this is not designed as an imprecation,
but a simple direction; for the word here may be understood as implying
that such a person should, have no countenance in his bad work, but let
him, as Theodoret expresses it, Αλλοτριος εστω του κοινου σωματος της
εκκλησιας, be separated from the communion of the Church. This, however,
would also imply that unless the person repented, the Divine judgments
would soon follow.

[Galatians 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gal 1:10</span></span>

Do I now persuade men, or God? - The words πειθειν τον Θεον may be
rendered to court or solicit the favor of God as the after clause
sufficiently proves. This acceptation of πειθειν is very common in Greek
authors. While the apostle was a persecutor of the Christians, he was
the servant of men, and pleased men. When he embraced the Christian
doctrine, he became the servant of God, and pleased Him. He therefore
intimates that he was a widely different person now from what he had
been while a Jew.

[Galatians 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gal 1:11</span></span>

But I certify you, brethren, etc. - I wish you fully to comprehend that
the Gospel which I preached to you is not after man; there is not a
spark of human invention in it, nor the slightest touch of human
cunning.

[Galatians 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gal 1:12</span></span>

I neither received it of man - By means of any apostle, as was remarked
[Gal 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001). No man taught me what I have
preached to you.

But by the revelation of Jesus Christ - Being commissioned by himself
alone; receiving the knowledge of it from Christ crucified.

[Galatians 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gal 1:13</span></span>

Ye have heard of my conversation - Την εμην αναστροφην· My manner of
life; the mode in which I conducted myself.

Beyond measure I persecuted the Church - For proofs of this the reader
is referred to [Act 9:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#001) (note); [Act
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#004) (note), and the notes there. The
apostle tells them that they had heard this, because, being Jews, they
were acquainted with what had taken place in Judea, relative to these
important transactions.

[Galatians 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gal 1:14</span></span>

And profited in the Jews' religion - The apostle does not mean that he
became more exemplary in the love and practice of the pure law of God
than any of his countrymen, but that he was more profoundly skilled in
the traditions of the fathers than most of his fellow students were, or,
as the word συνηλικιωτας may mean his contemporaries.

[Galatians 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gal 1:15</span></span>

Who separated me from my mother's womb - Him whom I acknowledge as the
God of nature and the God of grace; who preserved me by his providence
when I was a helpless infant, and saved me by his grace when I was an
adult persecutor. For some useful remarks on these passages see the
introduction, sec. 2.

[Galatians 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gal 1:16</span></span>

To reveal his Son in me - To make me know Jesus Christ, and the power of
his resurrection.

That I might preach him among the heathen - For it was to the Gentiles,
and the dispersed Jews among the Gentiles, that St. Paul was especially
sent. Peter was sent more particularly to the Jews in the land of Judea;
Paul to those in the different Greek provinces.

I conferred not with flesh and blood - I did not take counsel with men;
σαρξ και αἱμα, which is a literal translation of the Hebrew בשר ודם
basar vedam, flesh and blood, is a periphrasis for man, any man, a human
being, or beings of any kind. Many suppose that the apostle means he did
not dally, or take counsel, with the erroneous suggestions and unrenewed
propensities of his own heart, or those of others; but no such thing is
intended by the text. St. Paul was satisfied that his call was of God;
he had therefore no occasion to consult man.

[Galatians 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gal 1:17</span></span>

Neither went I up to Jerusalem - The aim of the apostle is to show that
he had his call so immediately and pointedly from God himself, that he
had no need of the concurrence even of the apostles, being appointed by
the same authority, and fitted to the work by the same grace and Spirit,
as they were.

But I went into Arabia - That part of Arabia which was contiguous to
Damascus, over which Aretas was then king. Of this journey into Arabia
we have no other account. As St. Luke was not then with him, it is not
inserted in the Acts of the Apostles. See introduction to this epistle.
Jerusalem was the stated residence of the apostles; and, when all the
other believers were scattered throughout the regions of Judea and
Samaria, we find the apostles still remaining, unmolested, at Jerusalem!
[Act 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#001).

[Galatians 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gal 1:18</span></span>

After three years I went up to Jerusalem to see Peter - These three
years may be reckoned either from the departure of Paul from Jerusalem,
or from his return from Arabia to Damascus.

To see Peter - Ιστορησαι Πετρον, to become personally acquainted with
Peter; for this is the proper import of the verb ἱστορειν, from which we
have the word ἱστορια, history, which signifies a relation of things
from personal knowledge and actual acquaintance. How far this is, now,
from the sense in which we must take the word, ninety-nine of every
hundred of our histories sufficiently show. They are any thing but true
relations of facts and persons.

And abode with him fifteen days - It was not, therefore, to get
religious knowledge from him that he paid him this visit. He knew as
much of the Jewish religion as Peter did, if not more; and as to the
Gospel, he received that from the same source, and had preached it three
years before this.

[Galatians 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gal 1:19</span></span>

James the Lord's brother - Dr. Paley observes: There were at Jerusalem
two apostles, or at least two eminent members of the Church, of the name
of James. This is distinctly inferred from the Acts of the Apostles,
[Act 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#002), where the historian relates
the death of James, the brother of John; and yet, in [Act
15:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#013), and in [Act
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#018), he records a speech delivered
by James in the assembly of the apostles and elders. In this place
James, the Lord 's brother, is mentioned thus to distinguish him from
James the brother of John. Some think there were three of this name: -

1\. James, our Lord's brother, or cousin, as some will have it;

2\. James, the son of Alphaeus; and

3\. James, the son of Zebedee. But the two former names belong to the
same person.

[Galatians 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gal 1:20</span></span>

Before God I lie not - This he speaks in reference to having seen only
Peter and James at Jerusalem; and consequently to prove that he had not
learned the Gospel from the assembly of the apostles at Jerusalem, nor
consequently received his commission from them.

[Galatians 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gal 1:21</span></span>

Afterwards I came into the regions of Syria, etc. - The course of the
apostle's travels, after his conversion, was this: He went from Damascus
to Jerusalem, and from Jerusalem into Syria and Cilicia. "At Damascus
the disciples took him by night, and let him down by the wall in a
basket; and when Saul was come to Jerusalem, he assayed to join himself
to the disciples;" [Act 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#025), [Act
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#026). Afterwards, when the brethren
knew the conspiracy formed against him at Jerusalem, they brought him
down to Caesarea, and sent him forth to Tarsus, a city of Cilicia, [Act
9:30](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#030). This account in the Acts agrees
with that in this epistle.

[Galatians 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gal 1:22</span></span>

And was unknown by face - I was not personally acquainted with any of
the Churches of Judea; I was converted in another place, and had not
preached the Gospel in any Christian congregation in that country; I
knew only those at Jerusalem.

[Galatians 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gal 1:23</span></span>

They had heard only - As a persecutor of the Church of Christ, I was
well known; and as a convert to Christ I was not less so. The fame of
both was great, even where I was personally unknown.

[Galatians 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gal 1:24</span></span>

They glorified God in me - Hearing now that I preached that faith which
before I had persecuted and endeavored to destroy, they glorified God
for the grace which had wrought my conversion. I owe nothing to them; I
owe all to God; and they themselves acknowledge this. I received all
from God, and God has all the glory.

1\. It appeared of great importance to St. Paul to defend and vindicate
his Divine mission. As he had none from man, it was the more necessary
that he should be able to show plainly that he had one from God. Paul
was not brought into the Christian ministry by any rite ever used in the
Christian Church. Neither bishop nor presbyter ever laid hands on him;
and he is more anxious to prove this, because his chief honor arose from
being sent immediately by God himself: his conversion and the purity of
his doctrine showed whence he came. Many since his time, and in the
present day, are far more anxious to show that they are legitimately
appointed by Man than by God; and are fond of displaying their human
credentials. These are easily shown; those that come from God are out of
their reach. How idle and vain is a boasted succession from the
apostles, while ignorance, intolerance, pride, and vain-glory prove that
those very persons have no commission from heaven! Endless cases may
occur where man sends and yet God will not sanction. And that man has no
right to preach, nor administer the sacraments of the Church of Christ,
whom God has not sent; though the whole assembly of apostles had laid
their hands on him. God never sent, and never will send, to convert
others, a man who is not converted himself. He will never send him to
teach meekness, gentleness, and long suffering, who is proud,
overbearing, intolerant, and impatient. He, in whom the Spirit of Christ
does not dwell, never had a commission to preach the Gospel; he may
boast of his human authority, but God will laugh him to scorn. On the
other hand, let none run before he is sent; and when he has got the
authority of God, let him be careful to take that of the Church with him
also.

2\. The apostle was particularly anxious that the Gospel should not be
corrupted, that the Church might not be perverted. Whatever corrupts the
Gospel, subverts the Church. The Church is a spiritual building, and
stands on a spiritual foundation. Its members are compared to stones in
a building, but they are living stones - each instinct with the spirit
of a Divine life; Jesus is not only the foundation and the head-stone,
but the spirit that quickens and animates all. A Church, where the
members are not alive to God, and where the minister is not filled with
the meekness and gentleness of Jesus, differs as much from a genuine
Church as a corpse does from an active human being. False teachers in
Galatia corrupted the Church, by introducing those Jewish ceremonies
which God had abolished; and the doctrine of justification by the use of
those ceremonies which God had shown by the death of his Son to be of
none effect. "If those," says Quesnel, "are justly said to pervert the
Gospel of Christ, who were for joining with it human ceremonies which
God himself instituted, what do those do, who would fondly reconcile and
blend it with the pomps of the devil? The purity of the Gospel cannot
admit of any mixture. Those who do not love it, are so far from building
up that they trouble and overturn all. There is no ground of trust and
confidence for such workmen."

3\. If he be a dangerous man in the Church who introduces Jewish or
human ceremonies which God has not appointed, how much more is he to be
dreaded who introduces any false doctrine, or who labors to undermine or
lessen the influence of that which is true? And even he who does not
faithfully and earnestly preach and inculcate the true doctrine is not a
true pastor. It is not sufficient that a man preach no error; he must
preach the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.

4\. How is it that we have so many Churches like those in Galatia? Is it
not because, on one hand, we disturb the simplicity of the Christian
worship by Jewish, heathenish, or improper rites and ceremonies; and on
the other, corrupt the purity of its doctrines by the inventions of men?
How does the apostle speak of such corrupters? Let them be accursed. How
awful is this! Let every man who officiates as a Christian minister look
well to this. His own soul is at stake; and, if any of the flock perish
through his ignorance or neglect, their blood will God require at the
watchman's hand.

5\. St. Paul well knew that, if he endeavored to please man, he could
not be the servant of Christ. Can any minor minister hope to succeed,
where even an apostle, had he followed that line, could not? The
interests of Christ and those of the world are so opposite, that it is
impossible to reconcile them; and he who attempts it shows thereby that
he knows neither Christ nor the world, though so deeply immersed in the
spirit of the latter.

6\. God generally confounds the expectations of men-pleasing ministers;
they never ultimately succeed even with men. God abhors them, and those
whom they have flattered find them to be dishonest, and cease to trust
them. He who is unfaithful to his God should not be trusted by man.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians Chapter 2](gal002)

</div>
