<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Galatians Index](gal.md)  
  [Previous](gal005)  [Next](eph000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Galatians Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001.md)

[Galatians](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gal 6:0</span></span>

The apostle teaches them to be tender and affectionate towards any who,
through surprise and the violence of temptation, had fallen into sin;
and to bear each other's burdens, [Gal
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001.md), [Gal
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#002.md). To think humbly of themselves,
and to conclude concerning their own character rather from the evidence
of their works than from any thing else, [Gal
6:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#003.md). To minister to the support of
those who instruct them in righteousness, [Gal
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#006.md). He warns them against
self-deception, because whatever a man soweth that he shall reap, [Gal
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#007.md), [Gal
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#008.md). Exhorts them not to be weary in
well doing, and to embrace every opportunity to do good, [Gal
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#009.md), [Gal
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#010.md). Intimates that his love to them
led him to write this whole epistle with his own hand, [Gal
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#011.md). Points out the object that those
had in view who wished them to be circumcised, [Gal
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#012.md), [Gal
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#013.md). He exults in the cross of
Christ, and asserts that a new creation of the soul is essential to its
salvation; and wishes peace to them who act on this plan, [Gal
6:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014.md). States that he bears in his
body the marks of the Lord Jesus, [Gal
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#017.md). And concludes with his
apostolical benediction, [Gal 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#018.md).

[Galatians 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gal 6:1</span></span>

Brethren, if a man be overtaken - Εαν προληφθη· If he be surprised,
seized on without warning, suddenly invaded, taken before he is aware:
all these meanings the word has in connections similar to this. Strabo,
lib. xvi., page 1120, applies it to the rhinoceros, in its contests with
the elephant: he suddenly rips up the belly of the elephant, αν μη
προληφθη τῃ προβοσκιδι, that he may not be surprised with his trunk.
For, should the elephant seize him with his trunk first, all resistance
would be afterwards in vain; therefore he endeavors to rip up the
elephant's belly with the horn which is on his nose, in order to prevent
this. It is used also by Arrian, in Peripl. Mar. Eryth., page 164, and
page 168, to signify a vessel being suddenly agitated and whirled by the
waves, and then dashed on the rocks. See Kypke.

Ye which are spiritual - Ye who still retain the grace of the Gospel,
and have wisdom and experience in Divine things;

Restore such a one - Καταρτιζετε τον τοιουτον· Bring the man back into
his place. It is a metaphor taken from a dislocated limb, brought back
by the hand of a skillful and tender surgeon into its place.

In the spirit of meekness - Use no severity nor haughty carriage towards
him; as the man was suddenly overtaken, he is already deeply humbled and
distressed, and needs much encouragement and lenient usage. There is a
great difference between a man who being suddenly assailed falls into
sin, and the man who transgressed in consequence of having Walked in the
counsel of the Ungodly, or Stood in the way of Sinners.

Considering thyself - Σκοπων σεαυτον· Looking to thyself; as he fell
through a moment of unwatchfulness, look about, that thou be not
surprised; As he fell, so mayest thou: thou art now warned at his
expense; therefore keep a good look out.

Lest thou also be tempted - And having had this warning, thou wilt have
less to plead in extenuation of thy offense. It is no wonder if a harsh
and cruel censurer of a weak, backsliding brother, should be taught
moderation and mercy by an awful proof of his own frailty. Such a one
may justly dread the most violent attacks from the arch enemy; he will
disgrace him if he can, and if he can overtake him he will have no small
triumph. Consider the possibility of such a case, and show the mercy and
feeling which thou wouldst then wish to receive from another. From the
consideration of what we are, what we have been, or what we may be, we
should learn to be compassionate. The poet Mantuanus has set this in a
fine light in his Eclogue, De honesto Amore: -

Id commune malum; semel insanivimus omnes:

Aut sumus, aut fuimus, aut possemus omne quod hic est.

"This is a common evil; at one time or other we have all done wrong.

Either we are, or have been, or may be, as bad as he whom we condemn."

[Galatians 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gal 6:2</span></span>

Bear ye one another's burdens - Have sympathy; feel for each other; and
consider the case of a distressed brother as your own.

And so fulfill the law of Christ - That law or commandment, Ye shall
love one another; or that, Do unto all men as ye would they should do
unto you. We should be as indulgent to the infirmities of others, as we
can be consistently with truth and righteousness: our brother's
infirmity may be his burden; and if we do not choose to help him to bear
it, let us not reproach him because he is obliged to carry the load.

[Galatians 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gal 6:3</span></span>

If a man think himself to be something - i.e. To be a proper Christian
man; when he is nothing; being destitute of that charity which beareth,
hopeth, and endureth all things. See [Co1
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001.md), etc. Those who suppose
themselves to excel all others in piety, understanding, etc., while they
are harsh, censorious, and overbearing, prove that they have not the
charity that thinketh no evil; and in the sight of God are only as
sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal. There are no people more
censorious or uncharitable than those among some religious people who
pretend to more light and a deeper communion with God. They are
generally carried away with a sort of sublime, high sounding
phraseology, which seems to argue a wonderfully deep acquaintance with
Divine things; stripped of this, many of them are like Samson without
his hair.

[Galatians 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gal 6:4</span></span>

Prove his own work - Let him examine himself and his conduct by the
words and example of Christ; and if he find that they bear this
touchstone, then he shall have rejoicing in himself alone, feeling that
he resembles his Lord and Master, and not in another - not derive his
consolation from comparing himself with another who may be weaker, or
less instructed than himself. The only rule for a Christian is the word
of Christ; the only pattern for his imitation is the example of Christ.
He should not compare himself with others; they are not his standard.
Christ hath left us an example that we should follow his steps.

[Galatians 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gal 6:5</span></span>

Every man shall bear his own burden - All must answer for themselves,
not for their neighbors. And every man must expect to be dealt with by
the Divine Judge, as his character and conduct have been. The greater
offenses of another will not excuse thy smaller crimes. Every man must
give account of himself to God.

[Galatians 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gal 6:6</span></span>

Let him that is taught in the word - He who receives instructions in
Christianity by the public preaching of the word;

Communicate unto him that teacheth - Contribute to the support of the
man who has dedicated himself to the work of the ministry, and who gives
up his time and his life to preach the Gospel. It appears that some of
the believers in Galatia could receive the Christian ministry without
contributing to its support. This is both ungrateful and base. We do not
expect that a common schoolmaster will give up his time to teach our
children their alphabet without being paid for it; and can we suppose
that it is just for any person to sit under the preaching of the Gospel
in order to grow wise unto salvation by it, and not contribute to the
support of the spiritual teacher? It is unjust.

[Galatians 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gal 6:7</span></span>

Be not deceived - Neither deceive yourselves, nor permit yourselves to
be deceived by others. He seems to refer to the Judaizing teachers.

God is not mocked - Ye cannot deceive him, and he will not permit you to
mock him with pretended instead of real services.

Whatsoever a man soweth - Whatsoever kind of grain a man sows in his
field, of that shall he reap; for no other species of grain can proceed
from that which is sown. Darnel will not produce wheat, nor wheat,
darnel.

[Galatians 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gal 6:8</span></span>

He that soweth to his flesh - In like manner, he that sows to the flesh
- who indulges his sensual and animal appetites, shall have corruption
as the crop: you cannot expect to lead a bad life and go to heaven at
last. According as your present life is, so will be your eternal life
whether your sowing be to the flesh or to the Spirit, so will your
eternal reaping be. To sow, here, means transacting the concerns of a
man's natural life. To reap, signifies his enjoyment or punishment in
another world. Probably by flesh and Spirit the apostle means Judaism
and Christianity. Circumcision of the flesh was the principal rite of
the former; circumcision in the heart, by the Spirit, the chief rite of
the latter; hence the one may have been called flesh, the other, Spirit.
He who rejects the Gospel, and trusts only in the rites and ceremonies
of the law for salvation, will reap endless disappointment and misery.
He who trusts in Christ, and receives the gifts and graces of the Holy
Spirit, shall reap life everlasting.

[Galatians 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gal 6:9</span></span>

Let us not be weary - Well-doing is easier in itself than ill-doing; and
the danger of growing weary in the former arises only from the
opposition to good in our own nature, or the outward hinderances we may
meet with from a gainsaying and persecuting world.

In due season we shall reap - As the husbandman, in ploughing, sowing,
and variously laboring in his fields, is supported by the hope of a
plentiful harvest, which he cannot expect before the right and appointed
time; so every follower of God may be persuaded that he shall not be
permitted to pray, weep, deny himself, and live in a conformity to his
Maker's will, without reaping the fruit of it in eternal glory. And
although no man obtains glory because he has prayed, etc., yet none can
expect glory who do not seek it in this way. This is sowing to the
Spirit; and the Spirit and the grace are furnished by Christ Jesus, and
by him the kingdom of heaven is opened to all believers; but only those
who believe, love, and obey, shall enter into it.

[Galatians 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gal 6:10</span></span>

As we have - opportunity - While it is the time of sowing let us sow the
good seed; and let our love be, as the love of Christ is, free,
manifested to all. Let us help all who need help according to the
uttermost of our power; but let the first objects of our regards be
those who are of the household of faith - the members of the Church of
Christ, who form one family, of which Jesus Christ is the head. Those
have the first claims on our attention, but all others have their claims
also, and therefore we should do good unto all.

[Galatians 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gal 6:11</span></span>

Ye see how large a letter - There is a strange diversity of opinions
concerning the apostle's meaning in this place. Some think he refers to
the length of the epistle, others to the largeness of the letters in
which this epistle is written, others to the inadequacy of the apostle's
writing. It appears plain that most of his epistles were written by an
amanuensis, and simply subscribed by himself; but the whole of the
Epistle to the Galatians was written by his own hand. To say that the
apostle was unskilled in Greek, and especially in the Greek characters,
is in my opinion absurd. He was born in Tarsus, a city which, according
to Strabo, rivaled both Athens and Alexandria in philosophy, and in arts
and sciences; and therefore he could not be ignorant of a tongue which
must have been the very means of conveying all this instruction. As to
writing it, there was in his time nothing difficult, because the uncial
character was that which was alone in use in those days, and this
character is as easily made as the capitals in the Roman alphabet, which
have been taken from it. I conclude, therefore, that what the apostle
says must be understood of the length of the epistle, in all probability
the largest he had ever written with his own hand; though several, much
larger, have been dictated by him, but they were written by his scribe
or amanuensis.

[Galatians 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gal 6:12</span></span>

A fair show in the flesh - The Jewish religion was general in the region
of Galatia, and it was respectable, as it appears that the principal
inhabitants were either Jews or proselytes. As it was then professed and
practiced among the Jews, this religion had nothing very grievous to the
old man; an unrenewed nature might go through all its observances with
little pain or cross-bearing. On the other hand, Christianity could not
be very popular; it was too strict. A Jew made a fair show there,
according to his carnal system, and it was a temptation to a weak
Christian to swerve into Judaism, that he might be exempted from
persecution, and be creditable among his countrymen. This is what the
apostle intimates: "They constrain you to be circumcised, lest they
should suffer persecution for the cross of Christ."

[Galatians 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gal 6:13</span></span>

Neither they themselves who are circumcised - They receive circumcision
and profess Judaism, not from a desire to be conformed to the will of
God; but Judaism was popular, and the more converts the false teachers
could make; the more occasion of glorying they had, and they wished to
get those Christian converts, who had been before proselytes of the
gate, to receive circumcision, that they might glory in their flesh.
Behold my converts! Thus they gloried, or boasted, not that the people
were converted to God, hut that they were circumcised.

[Galatians 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gal 6:14</span></span>

But God forbid that I should glory - Whatever others may do, or whatever
they may exult or glory in, God forbid that I should exult, except in
the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ; in the grand doctrine, that
justification and salvation are only through Christ crucified, he having
made an atonement for the sin of the world by his passion and death. And
I glory, also, in the disgrace and persecution which I experience
through my attachment to this crucified Christ.

By whom the world is crucified unto me - Jewish rites and Gentile
vanities are equally insipid to me; I know them to be empty and
worthless. If Jews and Gentiles despise me, I despise that in which they
trust; through Jesus, all are crucified to me - their objects of
dependence are as vile and execrable to me, as I am to them, in whose
sight these things are of great account.

[Galatians 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gal 6:15</span></span>

In Christ Jesus - Under the dispensation of the Gospel, of which he is
head and supreme, neither circumcision - nothing that the Jew can boast
of, nothing that the Gentile can call excellent, availeth any thing -
can in the least contribute to the salvation of the soul.

But a new creature - Αλλα καινη κτισις· But a new creation; not a new
creature merely, (for this might be restrained to any new power or
faculty), but a total renewal of the whole man, of all the powers and
passions of the soul; and as creation could not be effected but by the
power of the Almighty, so this change cannot be effected but by the same
energy; no circumcision can do this; only the power that made the man at
first can new make him. See the note on [Co1
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#019.md), and on [Co2
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017) (note.md).

[Galatians 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gal 6:16</span></span>

As many as walk according to this rule - Τῳ κανονι τουτῳ· This canon;
viz. what is laid down in the preceding verses, that redemption is
through the sacrifice of Christ; that circumcision and uncircumcision
are equally unavailable; and that none can be saved without being
created anew. This is the grand canon or rule in Christianity.

Peace be on them - Those who act from this conviction will have the
peace and mercy of God; for it is in this way that mercy is communicated
and peace obtained.

The Israel of God - The true Christians, called here the Israel of God,
to distinguish them from Israel according to the flesh. See the notes on
[Rom 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#029.md); [Rom
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#012) (note.md).

[Galatians 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gal 6:17</span></span>

From henceforth let no man trouble me - Put an end to your contentions
among yourselves; return to the pure doctrine of the Gospel; abandon
those who are leading you astray; separate from the Church those who
corrupt and disturb it; and let me be grieved no longer with your
defections from the truth.

I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus - The στιγματα, stigmata,
of which the apostle speaks here, may be understood as implying the
scars of the wounds which he had received in the work of the ministry;
and that he had such scars, we may well conceive, when we know that he
had been scourged, stoned, and maltreated in a variety of ways. The
writer could show such scars himself, received in the same way. Or, the
apostle may allude to the stigmata or marks with which servants and
slaves were often impressed, in order to ascertain whose property they
were. A Burman servant often has indelible marks on his thighs and
elsewhere, which ascertain to whose service he belongs. "Do not trouble
me; I bear the marks of my Lord and Master, Jesus; I am his, and will
remain so. You glory in your mark of circumcision; I glory in the marks
which I bear in my body for the testimony of the Lord; I am an open,
professed Christian, and have given full proof of my attachment to the
cause of Christianity."

The first sense appears to be the best: "I have suffered already
sufficiently; I am suffering still; do not add any more to my
afflictions."

[Galatians 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gal 6:18</span></span>

The grace - Favor, benevolence, and continual influence of the Lord
Jesus, be with your spirit - may it live in your heart, enlighten and
change your souls, and be conspicuous in your life!

Amen - So let it be; and the prayer which I offer up for you on earth,
may it be registered in heaven!

Unto the Galatians, written from Rome - This, or the major part of it,
is wanting in the best and most ancient MSS. Written from Rome is
wanting in ACDEFG, and others. Claudius Antissiodor, has εγραφη απ'
Εφεσου· Written from Ephesus. Some add, by the hands of Paul, others, by
Titus. The Syriac has, The end of the Epistle to the Galatians, which
was written from the city of Rome. The Aethiopic, To the Galatians. The
Coptic, Written from Rome. The Vulgate, nothing. The Arabic, Written
from the city of Rome by Titus and Luke.

Little respect is to be paid to these subscriptions. The epistle was
written by Paul himself, not Titus, Luke nor Tychicus; and there is no
evidence that it was written from Rome, but rather from Corinth or
Ephesus. See the preface.

The great similarity between the Epistle to the Romans and that to the
Galatians has been remarked by many; and indeed it is so obvious, that
the same mode of interpretation may be safely pursued in the elucidation
of both; as not only the great subject, but the phraseology, in many
respects, is the same. The design of the apostle is to show that God has
called the Gentiles to equal privileges with the Jews, pulling down the
partition wall that had separated them and the Gentiles, calling all to
believe in Christ Jesus, and forming out of the believers of both people
one holy and pure Church, of which, equally, himself was the head; none
of either people having any preference to another, except what he might
derive from his personal sanctity and superior usefulness. The calling
of the Gentiles to this state of salvation was the mystery which had
been hidden from all ages, and concerning which the apostle has entered
into such a laborious discussion in the Epistle to the Romans;
justifying the reprobation as well as the election of the Jews, and
vindicating both the justice and mercy of God in the election of the
Gentiles. The same subjects are referred to in this epistle, but not in
that detail of argumentation as in the former. In both, the national
privileges of the Jews are a frequent subject of consideration; and, as
these national privileges were intended to point out spiritual
advantages, the terms which express them are used frequently in both
these senses with no change; and it requires an attentive mind, and a
proper knowledge of the analogy of faith, to discern when and where they
are to be restricted exclusively to one or the other meaning, as well as
where the one is intended to shadow forth the other; and where it is
used as expressing what they ought to be, according to the spirit and
tenor of their original calling.

Multitudes of interpreters of different sects and parties have strangely
mistaken both epistles, by not attending to these most necessary, and to
the unprejudiced, most obvious, distinctions and principles. Expressions
which point out national privileges have been used by them to point out
those which were spiritual; and merely temporal advantages or
disadvantages have been used in the sense of eternal blessings or
miseries. Hence, what has been spoken of the Jews in their national
capacity has been applied to the Church of God in respect to its future
destiny; and thus, out of the temporal election and reprobation of the
Jews, the doctrine of the irrespective and eternal election of a small
part of mankind, and the unconditional and eternal reprobation of the
far greater part of the human race, has been formed. The contentions
produced by these misapprehensions among Christians have been
uncharitable and destructive. In snatching at the shadow of religion in
a great variety of metaphors and figures, the substance of Christianity
has been lost: and the man who endeavors to draw the contending parties
to a consistent and rational interpretation of those expressions, by
showing the grand nature and design of these epistles, becomes a prey to
the zealots of both parties! Where is truth in the mean time? It is
fallen in the streets, and equity is gone backwards; for the most
sinister designs and most heterodox opinions have been attributed to
those who, regarding the words of God only, have refused to swim with
either torrent; and, without even consulting their own peculiar creed,
have sought to find out the meaning of the inspired writers, and with
simplicity of heart, and purity of conscience, to lay that meaning
before mankind.

The Israelites were denominated a peculiar treasure unto God, above all
people; a kingdom of priests, and a holy nation, [Exo
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#005.md), [Exo
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006.md). A holy people whom he had chosen
to be a special people unto himself, above all the people who were upon
the face of the earth, [Deu 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#006.md). This
was their calling, this was their profession, and this was their
denomination; but how far they fell practically short of this character
their history most painfully proves. Yet still they were called a holy
people, because called to holiness, ([Lev
11:44](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#044.md); [Lev
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#002.md); [Lev
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#007).md), and separated from the impure
and degrading idolatries of the neighboring nations.

Under the New Testament, all those who believe in Christ Jesus are
called to holiness - to have their fruit unto holiness, that their end
may be eternal life; and hence they are called saints or holy persons.
And the same epithets are applied to them as to the Israelites of old;
they are lively stones, built up a spiritual house, a holy priesthood,
to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Christ; they
are also called a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, a holy nation,
a peculiar people, that should show forth the praises of him who had
called them from darkness into his marvelous light, [Pe1
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005.md), [Pe1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009.md). All this they were called to, all
this was their profession, and to have all these excellences was their
indisputable privilege.

As they professed to be what God had called them to be, they are often
denominated by their profession; and this denomination is given
frequently to those who, in experience and practice, fall far short of
the blessings and privileges of the Gospel. The Church of Corinth, which
was in many respects the most imperfect, as well as the most impure, of
all the apostolic Churches, is nevertheless denominated the Church of
God, sanctified in Christ Jesus, and called to be saints, [Co1
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#002.md). That there were many saints in
the Corinthian Church, and many sanctified in Christ Jesus both in it
and in the Churches of Galatia, the slightest perusal of the epistles to
those Churches will prove: but that there were many, and in the Galatian
Churches the majority, of a different character, none can doubt; yet
they are all indiscriminately called the Churches of God, saints, etc.
And, even in those early times, saint appears to have been as general an
appellative for a person professing faith in Christ Jesus, as the term
Christian is at the present day, which is given to all who profess the
Christian religion; and yet these terms, taken in their strict and
proper sense, signify, a holy person, and one who has the Spirit and
mind of Christ.

In my notes on the Epistle to the Romans I have entered at large into a
discussion of the subjects to which I have referred in these
observations; and, to set the subject in a clear point of view, I have
made a copious extract from Dr. Taylor's Key to that epistle; and I have
stated, that a consistent exposition of that epistle cannot be given but
upon that plan. I am still of the same opinion. It is by attending to
the above distinctions, which are most obvious to all unprejudiced
persons, that we plainly see that the doctrines of eternal,
unconditional reprobation and election, and the impossibility of falling
finally from the grace of God, have no foundation in the Epistle to the
Romans. Dr. Taylor has shown that the phrases and expressions on which
these doctrines are founded refer to national privileges, and those
exclusive advantages which the Jews, as God's peculiar people, enjoyed
during the time in which that peculiarity was designed to last; and that
it is doing violence to the sense in which those expressions are
generally used, to apply them to the support of such doctrines. In
reference to this, I have quoted Dr. Taylor; and those illustrations of
his which I have adopted, I have adopted on this ground, taking care
never to pledge myself to any peculiar or heterodox opinions, by
whomsoever held; and, where I thought an expression might be
misunderstood, I took care to guard it by a note or observation.

Now I say that it is in this sense I understand the quotations I have
made, and in this sense alone these quotations ought to be understood;
and my whole work sufficiently shows that neither Dr. Taylor's nor any
person's peculiar theological system makes any part of mine; that, on
the doctrine of the fall of man or original sin, the doctrine of the
eternal deity of Jesus Christ, the doctrine of justification by faith in
the atoning blood, and the doctrine of the inspiration and regenerating
influence of the Holy Ghost, I stand on the pure orthodox creed,
diametrically opposite to that of the Arians and Socinians. Yet this
most distinguishing difference cannot blind me against the excellences I
find in any of their works, nor can I meanly borrow from Dr. Taylor, or
any other author, without acknowledging my obligation; nor could I
suppress a name, however obnoxious that might be, as associated with any
heterodox system, when I could mention it with deference and respect.
Let this be my apology for quoting Dr. Taylor, and for the frequent use
I have made of his industry and learning in my exposition of the Epistle
to the Romans. If I have quoted, to illustrate the sacred writings,
passages almost innumerable from Greek and Roman heathens; from Jewish
Talmudists and rabbinical expositors; from the Koran; from Mohammedan
writers, both Arabic and Persian; and from Brahminical polytheists; and
these illustrations have been well received by the Christian public;
surely I may have liberty to use, in the same way, the works of a very
learned man, and a most conscientious believer in the books of Divine
revelation, however erroneous he may appear to be in certain doctrines
which I myself deem of vital importance to the creed of an experimental
Christian. Let it not be said that, by thus largely quoting from his
work, I tacitly recommend an Arian creed, or any part of that system of
theology peculiar to him and his party; I no more do so than the Indian
matron who, while she gives the nourishing farina of the cassava to her
household, recommends them to drink the poisonous juice which she has
previously expressed from it.

After this declaration, it will be as disingenuous as unchristian for
either friends or foes to attribute to me opinions which I never held,
or an indifference to those doctrines which (I speak as a fool) stand in
no work of the kind, in any language, so fully explained, fortified, and
demonstrated, as they do in that before the reader. On such a mode of
judgment and condemnation as that to which some resort in matters of
this kind, I might have long ago been reputed a Pagan or a Mohammedan,
because I have quoted heathen writers and the Koran. And, by the same
mode of argumentation, St. Paul might be convicted of having abandoned
his Jewish creed and Christian faith, because he had quoted the heathen
poets Aratus and Cleanthes. The man is entitled to my pity who refuses
to take advantage of useful discoveries in the philosophical researches
of Dr. Priestley, because Dr. Priestley, as a theologian, was not sound
in the faith.

I have made that use of Dr. Taylor which I have done of others; and have
reason to thank God that his Key, passing through several wards of a
lock which appeared to me inextricable, has enabled me to bring forth
and exhibit, in a fair and luminous point of view, objects and meanings
in the Epistle to the Romans which, without this assistance, I had
perhaps been unable to discover.

I may add, farther, that I have made that use of Dr. Taylor which
himself has recommended to his readers: some of his censors will perhaps
scarcely believe that the four following articles constitute the charge
with which this learned man commences his theological lectures: -

I. "I do solemnly charge you, in the name of the God of truth, and of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the way, the truth, and the life, and
before whose judgment seat you must in no long time appear, that, in all
your studies and inquiries of a religious nature, present or future, you
do constantly, carefully, impartially, and conscientiously attend to
evidence, as it lies in the Holy Scriptures, or in the nature of things
and the dictates of reason, cautiously guarding against the sallies of
imagination, and the fallacy of ill-grounded conjecture.

II\. "That you admit, embrace, or assent to no principle or sentiment,
by me taught or advanced, but only so far as it shall appear to you to
be justified by proper evidence from revelation, or the reason of
things.

III\. "That if at any time hereafter any principle or sentiment by me
taught or advanced, or by you admitted or embraced, shall, upon
impartial and faithful examination, appear to you to be dubious or
false, you either suspect or totally reject such principle or sentiment.

IV\. "That you keep your mind always open to evidence; that you labor to
banish from your breast all prejudice, prepossession, and party zeal;
that you study to live in peace and love with all your fellow
Christians; and that you steadily assert for yourself, and freely allow
to others, the unalienable rights of judgment and conscience." -
Taylor's Scheme of Scripture Divinity, preface, page vi.

Thus I have done with Dr. Taylor's works; and thus I desire every
intelligent reader to do with my own.

When I was a child I had for a lesson the following words: Despise not
advice, even from the meanest; the cackling of geese once preserved the
Roman state. And since I became a man, I have learned wisdom from that
saying: Blessed are ye who sow beside All Waters; that send forth
thither the feet of the Ox and the Ass. May He, who is the way, the
truth, and the life, lead the reader into all truth, and bring him to
life everlasting! Amen.

Finished the correction for a new edition, Dec. 14th, 1831. - A. C.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians Introduction](eph000.md)

</div>
