<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Galatians Index](gal)  
  [Previous](gal004)  [Next](gal006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Galatians Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#001)

[Galatians](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gal 5:0</span></span>

The apostle exhorts the Galatians to stand fast in the liberty of the
Gospel, and not by receiving circumcision bring themselves into a yoke
of bondage, [Gal 5:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#001). Shows the
superior excellence of Christianity, [Gal
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#005), [Gal
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#006). Mentions their former steadiness,
and warns them against the bad doctrine which was then preached among
them, [Gal 5:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#007). Expresses his
confidence that they will yet return; and shows that he who perverted
them shall bear his own punishment, [Gal
5:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#010). States that they are called
to liberty, and that love is the fulfilling of the law, [Gal
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#013), [Gal
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#014). Warns them against dissensions,
and enumerates the fruits of the flesh, which exclude those who bear
them from the kingdom of God, [Gal
5:15-21](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#015). Enumerates also the fruits of
the Spirit, which characterize the disciples of Christ, [Gal
5:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022). Exhorts them to live in the
Spirit, and not provoke each other, [Gal
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#025), [Gal
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#026).

[Galatians 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gal 5:17</span></span>

For the flesh lusteth against the Spirit - God still continues to strive
with you, notwithstanding your apostasy, showing you whence you have
fallen, and exciting you to return to him; but your own obstinacy
renders all ineffectual; and through the influence of these different
principles, you are kept in a state of self-opposition and
self-distraction, so that you cannot do the things that ye would. You
are convinced of what is right, and ye wish to do it; but, having
abandoned the Gospel and the grace of Christ, the law and its ordinances
which ye have chosen in their place afford you no power to conquer your
evil propensities. It was on this ground that the apostle exhorted them,
[Gal 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#016), to walk in the Spirit, that
they might not fulfill the lust of the flesh; as without the grace of
God they could do nothing. Who can suppose that he speaks this of adult
Christians?

[Galatians 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gal 5:18</span></span>

But, if ye be led of the Spirit - If ye receive again the Gospel and the
grace of Christ, and permit yourselves to be influenced by the Holy
Spirit whom you are now grieving, ye are not under the law - ye will not
feel those evil propensities which now disgrace and torment you; but
they must prevail while you are not under the influence of the grace and
Spirit of Christ.

[Galatians 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gal 5:19</span></span>

Now the works of the flesh are manifest - By flesh we are to understand
the evil and fallen state of the soul, no longer under the guidance of
God's Spirit and right reason, but under the animal passions; and they
are even rendered more irregular and turbulent by the influence of sin;
so that man is in a worse state than the brute: and so all-commanding is
this evil nature that it leads men into all kinds of crimes; and among
them the following, which are manifest - known to all, and most
prevalent; and, though these are most solemnly forbidden by your law,
the observance of its ordinances gives no power to overcome them, and
provides no pardon for the guilt and condemnation produced by them.

Adultery - Μοιχεια· Illicit connection with a married person. This word
is wanting in this place in the best MSS., versions, and fathers; the
next term often comprehending both.

Fornication - Πορνεια· Illicit connection between single or unmarried
persons; yet often signifying adultery also.

Uncleanness - Ακαθαπσια· Whatever is opposite to purity; probably
meaning here, as in [Rom 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#024); [Co2
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#021), unnatural practices; sodomy,
bestiality.

Lasciviousness - Ασελγεια· Whatever is contrary to chastity; all
lewdness.

[Galatians 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gal 5:20</span></span>

Idolatry - Worshipping of idols; frequenting idol festivals; all the
rites of Bacchus, Venus, Priapus, etc., which were common among the
Gentiles.

Witchcraft - Φαρμακεια, from φαρμακον a drug or poison; because in all
spells and enchantments, whether true or false, drugs were employed. As
a drug, φαρμακον, might either be the means of removing an evil, or
inflicting one, etymologists have derived it from φερον ακος, bringing
ease, or φερον αχος, bringing pain. So spells and incantations were used
sometimes for the restoration of the health; at others, for the
destruction of an enemy. Sometimes, these φαρμακα were used to procure
love; at other times, to produce hatred.

Hatred - Εχθραι· Aversions and antipathies, when opposed to brotherly
love and kindness.

Variance - Ερεις· Contentions, where the principle of hatred proceeds to
open acts; hence contests, altercations, lawsuits, and disputes in
general.

Emulations - Ζηλοι· Envies or emulations; that is strife to excel at the
expense of another; lowering others to set up one's self; unholy zeal,
fervently adopting a bad cause, or supporting a good one by cruel means.
Inquisitions, pretending to support true religion by torturing and
burning alive those who both profess and practice it.

Wrath - Θυμοι· Turbulent passions, disturbing the harmony of the mind,
and producing domestic and civil broils and disquietudes.

Strife - Επιθειαι· Disputations, janglings, logomachics, or strife about
words.

Seditions - Διχοστασιαι· Divisions into separate factions; parties,
whether in the Church or state.

Heresies - Αἱρεσεις· Factions; parties in the Church separating from
communion with each other, and setting up altar against altar. The word,
which is harmless in itself, is here used in a bad sense. In stead of
αἱρεσεις the Slavonic has σκανδαλα, scandals, offenses or
stumbling-blocks.

[Galatians 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gal 5:21</span></span>

Envyings - Φθονοι· "Pain felt, and malignity conceived, at the sight of
excellence or happiness." A passion the most base and the least curable
of all that disgrace or degrade the fallen soul. See on [Rom
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#013) (note)

Murders - Φονοι· Similarity of sound to the preceding seems to have
suggested the word in this association; it is wanting in several MSS.
Murder signifies the destruction of human life; and as he who hates his
brother in his heart is ready to take away his life, so he is called a
murderer. After all the casuistry of man, it does not appear that the
right of taking away a human life on any pretense, except for the crime
of murder belongs to any but the Maker and Judge of all men.

Drunkenness - Μεθαι· Taking more wine or any kind of inebriating liquor
than is necessary for health; whatever unfits for public, domestic, or
spiritual duties; even the cares of the world, when they intoxicate the
mind. See on [Rom 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#013) (note).

Revellings - Κωμοι· Lascivious feastings, with obscene songs, music,
etc. See on [Rom 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#013) (note).

And such like - Και τα ὁμοια τουτοις· All that proceeds from the evil
passions of a fallen spirit, besides those above specified; and all that
the law of God specifies and condemns.

Of the which I tell you before - When I first preached the Gospel to
you.

As I have also told you in time past - When I paid my second visit to
you; for the apostle did visit them twice. See [Act
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#006); [Act
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#023); and see preface.

Shall not inherit - They are not children of God, and therefore cannot
inherit the kingdom which belongs only to the children of the Divine
family.

[Galatians 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gal 5:22</span></span>

But the fruit of the Spirit - Both flesh - the sinful dispositions of
the human heart and spirit - the changed or purified state of the soul,
by the grace and Spirit of God, are represented by the apostle as trees,
one yielding good the other bad fruit; the productions of each being
according to the nature of the tree, as the tree is according to the
nature of the seed from which it sprung. The bad seed produced a bad
tree, yielding all manner of bad fruit; the good seed produced a good
tree, bringing forth fruits of the most excellent kind. The tree of the
flesh, with all its bad fruits, we have already seen; the tree of the
Spirit, with its good fruits, we shall now see.

Love - Αγαπη· An intense desire to please God, and to do good to
mankind; the very soul and spirit of all true religion; the fulfilling
of the law, and what gives energy to faith itself. See [Gal
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#006).

Joy - Χαρα· The exultation that arises from a sense of God's mercy
communicated to the soul in the pardon of its iniquities, and the
prospect of that eternal glory of which it has the foretaste in the
pardon of sin. See [Rom 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#002).

Peace - Ειρηνη· The calm, quiet, and order, which take place in the
justified soul, instead of the doubts, fears, alarms, and dreadful
forebodings, which every true penitent less or more feels, and must feel
till the assurance of pardon brings peace and satisfaction to the mind.
Peace is the first sensible fruit of the pardon of sin. See [Rom
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001), and the notes there.

Long-suffering - Μακροθυμια· Long-mindedness, bearing with the frailties
and provocations of others, from the consideration that God has borne
long with ours; and that, if he had not, we should have been speedily
consumed: bearing up also through all the troubles and difficulties of
life without murmuring or repining; submitting cheerfully to every
dispensation of God's providence, and thus deriving benefit from every
occurrence.

Gentleness - Χρηστοτης· Benignity, affability; a very rare grace, often
wanting in many who have a considerable share of Christian excellence. A
good education and polished manners, when brought under the influence of
the grace of God, will bring out this grace with great effect.

Goodness - Αγαθωσυνη· The perpetual desire and sincere study, not only
to abstain from every appearance of evil, but to do good to the bodies
and souls of men to the utmost of our ability. But all this must spring
from a good heart - a heart purified by the Spirit of God; and then, the
tree being made good, the fruit must be good also.

Faith - Πιστις, here used for fidelity - punctuality in performing
promises, conscientious carefulness in preserving what is committed to
our trust, in restoring it to its proper owner, in transacting the
business confided to us, neither betraying the secret of our friend, nor
disappointing the confidence of our employer.

[Galatians 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gal 5:23</span></span>

Meekness - Πραοτης· Mildness, indulgence toward the weak and erring,
patient suffering of injuries without feeling a spirit of revenge, an
even balance of all tempers and passions, the entire opposite to anger.

Temperance - Εγκρατεια· Continence, self-government, or moderation,
principally with regard to sensual or animal appetites. Moderation in
eating, drinking, sleeping, etc.

Several very respectable MSS., as D\*EFG, with the Vulgate, most copies
of the Itala and several of the fathers, add ἁγνεια, chastity. This we
are sure cannot be separated from the genuine Christian character,
though it may be included in the word εγκρατεια, continence or
moderation, immediately preceding.

Against such there is no law - Those, whose lives are adorned by the
above virtues, cannot be condemned by any law, for the whole purpose and
design of the moral law of God is fulfilled in those who have the Spirit
of God, producing in their hearts and lives the preceding fruits.

[Galatians 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gal 5:24</span></span>

And they that are Christ's - All genuine Christians have crucified the
flesh - are so far from obeying its dictates and acting under its
influence, that they have crucified their sensual appetites; they have
nailed them to the cross of Christ, where they have expired with him;
hence, says St. Paul, [Rom 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006), our
old man - the flesh, with its affections and lusts, is crucified with
him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should
not serve sin. By which we see that God has fully designed to save all
who believe in Christ from all sin, whether outward or inward, with all
the affections, παθημασι, irregular passions, and lusts, επιθυμιαις,
disorderly wishes and desires. All that a man may feel contrary to love
and purity; and all that he may desire contrary to moderation and that
self-denial peculiar to the Christian character.

[Galatians 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gal 5:25</span></span>

If we live in the Spirit - If we profess to believe a spiritual
religion, let us walk in the Spirit - let us show in our lives and
conversation that the Spirit of God dwells in us.

[Galatians 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gal 5:26</span></span>

Let us not be desirous of vain glory - Κενοδοξοι· Let us not be vain
glorious - boasting of our attainments; vaunting ourselves to be
superior to others; or seeking honor from those things which do not
possess moral good; in birth, riches, eloquence, etc., etc.

Provoking one another - What this may refer to we cannot tell; whether
to the Judaizing teachers, endeavoring to set themselves up beyond the
apostle, and their attempts to lessen him in the people's eyes, that
they might secure to themselves the public confidence, and thus destroy
St. Paul's influence in the Galatian Churches; or whether to some other
matter in the internal economy of the Church, we know not. But the
exhortation is necessary for every Christian, and for every Christian
Church. He who professes to seek the honor that comes from God, should
not be desirous of vain glory. He who desires to keep the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace, should not provoke another. He who knows
that he never deserved any gift or blessing from God should not envy
another those blessings which the Divine goodness may have thought
proper to bestow upon him. May not God do what he will with his own? If
Christians in general would be content with the honor that comes from
God, if they would take heed to give no provocations to their fellow
Christians, if they would cease from envying those on whom either God or
man bestows honors or advantages, we should soon have a happier and more
perfect state of the Christian Church than we now see. Christianity
requires us to esteem each other better than ourselves, or in honor to
prefer one another. Had not such a disposition been necessary to the
Christian character, and to the peace and perfection of the Church of
Christ, it would not have been so strongly recommended. But who lays
this to heart, or even thinks that this is indispensably necessary to
his salvation? Where this disposition lives not, there are both the seed
and fruit of the flesh. Evil tempers are the bane of religion and
totally contrary to Christianity.

[Galatians 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gal 5:1</span></span>

Stand fast therefore in the liberty - This is intimately connected with
the preceding chapter: the apostle having said, just before, So then,
brethren, we are not children of the bond woman, but of the free,
immediately adds, Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ
hath made us free. Hold fast your Christian profession; it brings
spiritual liberty: on the contrary, Judaism brings spiritual bondage.
Among the Jews, the Messiah's reign was to be a reign of liberty, and
hence the Targum, on [Lam 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#022), says:
"Liberty shall be publicly proclaimed to thy people of the house of
Israel, על יד משיחא al yad Mashicha, by the hand of the Messiah, such as
was granted to them by Moses and Aaron at the time of the passover."

The liberty mentioned by the apostle is freedom from Jewish rites and
ceremonies, called properly here the yoke of bondage; and also liberty
from the power and guilt of sin, which nothing but the grace of Christ
can take away.

[Galatians 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gal 5:2</span></span>

If ye be circumcised - By circumcision you take on you the whole
obligation of the Jewish law, and consequently profess to seek salvation
by means of its observances; and therefore Christ can profit you
nothing; for, by seeking justification by the works of the law, you
renounce justification by faith in Christ.

[Galatians 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gal 5:3</span></span>

He is a debtor to do the whole law - Lays himself, by receiving
circumcision, under the obligation to fulfill all its precepts,
ordinances, etc.

[Galatians 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gal 5:4</span></span>

Christ is become of no effect unto you - It is vain for you to attempt
to unite the two systems. You must have the law and no Christ, or Christ
and no law, for your justification.

Ye are fallen from grace - From the Gospel. They had been brought into
the grace of the Gospel; and now, by readopting the Mosaic ordinances,
they had apostatized from the Gospel as a system of religion, and had
lost the grace communicated to their souls, by which they were preserved
in a state of salvation. The peace and love of God, received by Jesus
Christ, could not remain in the hearts of those who had rejected Christ.
They had, therefore, in every sense of the word, fallen from grace; and
whether some of them ever rose again is more than we can tell.

[Galatians 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gal 5:5</span></span>

For we, Christians, through the Spirit - Through the operation of the
Holy Ghost, under this spiritual dispensation of the Gospel, wait for
the hope of righteousness - expect that which is the object of our hope,
on our being justified by faith in Christ. Righteousness, δικαιοσυνη,
may here, as in many other places of St. Paul's epistles, mean
justification, and the hope of justification, or the hope excited and
inspired by it, is the possession of eternal glory; for, says the
apostle, [Rom 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001), [Rom
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#002), Being justified by faith, we have
peace with God - and rejoice in Hope of the Glory of God. But, as this
glory is necessarily future, it is to be waited for; but this waiting,
in a thorough Christian, is not only a blessed expectation, but also a
continual anticipation of it; and therefore the apostle says,
απεκδεχομεθα, we receive out if it, from απο, from εκ, out of, and
δεχομαι, I receive. This is no fanciful derivation; it exists in the
experience of every genuine Christian; he is continually anticipating or
receiving foretastes of that glory, the fullness of which he expects
after death. Thus they are receiving the end of their faith, the
salvation of their souls. [Pe1 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#009).

That they could not have the Holy Spirit without faith, was a doctrine
also of the Jews; hence it is said, Mechilta, fol. 52: "That faith was
of great consequence with which the Israelites believed in Him who, with
one word, created the universe; and because the Israelites believed in
God, the Holy Spirit dwelt in them; so that, being filled with God, they
sang praises to him." Cicero, De Nat. Deor., lib. ii., has said: Nemo
vir magnus sine aliquo afflatu divino unquam fuit: "There never was a
great man who had not some measure of the Divine influence." However
true this may be with respect to the great men of the Roman orator, we
may safely assert there never was a true Christian who had not the
inspiration of God's Holy Spirit.

[Galatians 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gal 5:6</span></span>

For in Jesus Christ - By the dispensation of the Gospel all legal
observances, as essential to salvation, are done away; and
uncircumcision, or the Gentile state, contributes as much to salvation
as circumcision or the Jewish state; they are both equally ineffectual;
and nothing now avails in the sight of God but that faith δι' αγαπης
ενεργουμενη, which is made active, or energetic, by love. God
acknowledges no faith, as of the operation of his Spirit, that is not
active or obedient; but the principle of all obedience to God, and
beneficence to man, is love; therefore faith cannot work unless it be
associated with love. Love to God produces obedience to his will: love
to man worketh no ill; but, on the contrary, every act of kindness.
Faith which does not work by love is either circumcision or
uncircumcision, or whatever its possessor may please to call it; it is,
however, nothing that will stand him in stead when God comes to take
away his soul. It availeth nothing. This humble, holy, operative,
obedient Love, is the grand touchstone of all human creeds and
confessions of faith. Faith without this has neither soul nor operation;
in the language of the Apostle James, it is dead, and can perform no
function of the spiritual life, no more than a dead man can perform the
duties of animal or civil life.

[Galatians 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gal 5:7</span></span>

Ye did run well - Ye once had the faith that worked by love - ye were
genuine, active, useful Christians.

Who doth hinder - Who prevented you from continuing to obey the truth?
Ye could only be turned aside by your own consent. St. Paul here, as in
[Co1 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#024) (note), compares
Christianity to a race. See the notes on the above text.

[Galatians 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gal 5:8</span></span>

This persuasion - Of the necessity of your being circumcised and obeying
the law of Moses, is not of him that calleth you. I never preached such
a doctrine to you; I called you out of bondage to liberty, from a
galling yoke to a cheerful service. Some translate πεισμονη, obedience
or subjection. This subjection of yours to the Mosaic law is opposed to
the will of God, and never was preached by me.

[Galatians 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gal 5:9</span></span>

A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump - A proverbial expression, see
[Co1 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#006), very aptly applied to those
who receive the smallest tincture of false doctrine, relative to the
things essential to salvation, which soon influences the whole conduct,
so that the man becomes totally perverted. They might have argued, "It
is a small thing, and should not be made a subject of serious
controversy, whether we be circumcised or not." Granted, that in itself
it is a small matter; but, as every man who is circumcised is a debtor
to do the whole law, [Gal 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#003), then
your circumcision leads necessarily to your total perversion; as the
little portion of leaven, mixed with the batch, soon leavens the whole
lump.

[Galatians 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gal 5:10</span></span>

I have confidence in you - I now feel a persuasion from the Lord that I
shall not be permitted to expostulate with you in vain; that ye will be
none otherwise minded - that ye will be aware of the danger to which ye
are exposed, that ye will retreat in time, and recover the grace which
ye have lost.

But he that troubleth you - The false teacher, who sowed doubtful
disputations among you, and thus has troubled the repose of the whole
Church, shall bear his judgment - shall meet with the punishment he
deserves, for having sown his tares among God's wheat.

[Galatians 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gal 5:11</span></span>

If I yet preach circumcision - it is very likely that some of the false
apostles, hearing of Paul's having circumcised Timothy, [Act
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#003), which must have been done about
this time, reported him as being an advocate for circumcision, and by
this means endeavored to sanction their own doctrine. To this the
apostle replies: Were it so, that I am a friend to this measure, is it
likely that I should suffer persecution from the Jews? But I am every
where persecuted by them, and I am persecuted because I am known to be
an enemy to circumcision; were I a friend to this doctrine, the offense
of the cross - preaching salvation only through the sacrifice of Christ,
would soon cease; because, to be consistent with myself, if I preached
the necessity of circumcision I must soon cease to preach Christ
crucified, and then the Jews would be no longer my enemies.

[Galatians 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gal 5:12</span></span>

I would they were even cut off which trouble you - This saying has
puzzled many, and different interpretations of the place have been
proposed by learned men.

At first sight it seems as if the apostle was praying for the
destruction of the false teachers who had perverted the Churches of
Galatia. Mr. Wakefield thought οφελον αποκοψονται might be translated, I
wish that they were made to weep; and in his translation of the New
Testament the passage stands thus: "I wish that they who are unsettling
you may lament it." I believe the apostle never meant any such thing. As
the persons who were breeding all this confusion in the Churches of
Galatia were members of that Church, the apostle appears to me to be
simply expressing his desire that they might be cut off or
excommunicated from the Church. Kypke has given an abundance of examples
where the word is used to signify amputating; cutting off from society,
office, etc.; excluding. In opposition to the notion of excommunication,
it might be asked: "Why should the apostle wish these to be
excommunicated when it was his own office to do it?" To this it may be
answered: The apostle's authority was greatly weakened among that people
by the influence of the false teachers, so that in all probability he
could exercise no ecclesiastical function; he could therefore only
express his wish. And the whole passage is so parallel to that, [Co1
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#006), [Co1
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007), that I think there can be no
reasonable doubt of the apostle's meaning: Let those who are unsettling
the Church of Christ in your district be excommunicated; this is my
wish, that they should no longer have any place among you."

[Galatians 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gal 5:13</span></span>

Ye have been called unto liberty - A total freedom from all the
burthensome rites and ceremonies of the Mosaic law. Only use not that
liberty for an occasion to the flesh. By flesh, here, we may understand
all the unrenewed desires and propensities of the mind; whatsoever is
not under the influence and guidance of the Holy Spirit of God. Your
liberty is from that which would oppress the spirit; not from that which
would lay restraints on the flesh. The Gospel proclaims liberty from the
ceremonial law: but binds you still faster under the moral law. To be
freed from the ceremonial law is the Gospel liberty; to pretend freedom
from the moral law is Antinomianism.

By love serve one another - Having that faith which worketh by love,
serve each other to the uttermost of your power: δουλευετε, serve each
other, when necessary, as slaves serve their masters. Several excellent
MSS. and versions, instead of δια της αγαπης, by love, have τῃ αγαπῃ του
Πνευματος, in the love of the Spirit serve one another.

[Galatians 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gal 5:14</span></span>

For all the law - Which respects our duty to our fellows, is fulfilled -
is comprehended, in one word: Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.
See the notes on [Mat 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#019), and [Rom
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#009) (note).

[Galatians 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gal 5:15</span></span>

If ye bite and devour one another - These Churches seem to have been in
a state of great distraction; there were continual altercations among
them. They had fallen from the grace of the Gospel; and, as Christ no
longer dwelt in their hearts by faith, pride, anger, ill-will, and all
unkind and uncharitable tempers, took possession of their souls, and
they were in consequence alternately destroying each other. Nothing is
so destructive to the peace of man, and to the peace of the soul, as
religious disputes; where they prevail, religion in general has little
place.

[Galatians 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gal 5:16</span></span>

Walk in the Spirit - Get back that Spirit of God which you have grieved
and lost; take up that spiritual religion which you have abandoned.

Ye shall not fulfill the lust of the flesh - If the Spirit of God dwell
in and rule your heart, the whole carnal mind will be destroyed; and
then, not only carnal ordinances will be abandoned, but also the works
and propensities of the flesh.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians Chapter 6](gal006)

</div>
