<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen002)  [Next](gen004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 3:0</span></span>

Satan, by means of a creature here called the serpent, deceives Eve,
[Gen 3:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#001). Both she and Adam
transgress the Divine command, and fall into sin and misery, [Gen
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#006), [Gen
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#007). They are summoned before God, and
judged, [Gen 3:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#008). The creature
called the serpent is degraded and punished, [Gen
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#014). The promise of redemption by the
incarnation of Christ, [Gen 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015). Eve
sentenced, [Gen 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#016). Adam sentenced,
[Gen 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#017). The ground cursed, and
death threatened, [Gen 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#018), [Gen
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019). Why the woman was called Eve,
[Gen 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#020). Adam and Eve clothed with
skins, [Gen 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#021). The wretched state
of our first parents after their fall, and their expulsion from the
garden of Paradise, [Gen 3:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#022).

[Genesis 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 3:1</span></span>

Now the serpent was more subtle - We have here one of the most difficult
as well as the most important narratives in the whole book of God. The
last chapter ended with a short but striking account of the perfection
and felicity of the first human beings, and this opens with an account
of their transgression, degradation, and ruin. That man is in a fallen
state, the history of the world, with that of the life and miseries of
every human being, establishes beyond successful contradiction. But how,
and by what agency, was this brought about? Here is a great mystery, and
I may appeal to all persons who have read the various comments that have
been written on the Mosaic account, whether they have ever yet been
satisfied on this part of the subject, though convinced of the fact
itself. Who was the serpent? of what kind? In what way did he seduce the
first happy pair? These are questions which remain yet to be answered.
The whole account is either a simple narrative of facts, or it is an
allegory. If it be a historical relation, its literal meaning should be
sought out; if it be an allegory, no attempt should be made to explain
it, as it would require a direct revelation to ascertain the sense in
which it should be understood, for fanciful illustrations are endless.
Believing it to be a simple relation of facts capable of a satisfactory
explanation, I shall take it up on this ground; and, by a careful
examination of the original text, endeavor to fix the meaning, and show
the propriety and consistency of the Mosaic account of the fall of man.
The chief difficulty in the account is found in the question, Who was
the agent employed in the seduction of our first parents?

The word in the text which we, following the Septuagint, translate
serpent, is נחש nachash; and, according to Buxtorf and others, has three
meanings in Scripture.

1\. It signifies to view or observe attentively, to divine or use
enchantments, because in them the augurs viewed attentively the flight
of birds, the entrails of beasts, the course of the clouds, etc.; and
under this head it signifies to acquire knowledge by experience.

2\. It signifies brass, brazen, and is translated in our Bible, not only
brass, but chains, fetters, fetters of brass, and in several places
steel; see [Sa2 22:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#035); [Job
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#024); [Psa
18:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#034); and in one place, at least
filthiness or fornication, [Eze 16:36](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#036).

3\. It signifies a serpent, but of what kind is not determined. In [Job
26:13](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#013), it seems to mean the whale or
hippopotamus: By his spirit he hath garnished the heavens, his hand hath
formed the crooked serpent, נחש ברח nachash bariach: as ברח barach
signifies to pass on or pass through, and בריח beriach is used for a bar
of a gate or door that passed through rings, etc., the idea of
straightness rather than crookedness should be attached to it here; and
it is likely that the hippopotamus or sea-horse is intended by it.

In [Ecc 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#011), the creature called
nachash, of whatever sort, is compared to the babbler: Surely the
serpent (נחש nachash) will bite without enchantment; and a babbler is no
better.

In [Isa 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#001), the crocodile or
alligator seems particularly meant by the original: In that day the Lord
- shall punish leviathan the piercing serpent, etc. And in [Isa
65:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#025), the same creature is meant as
in [Gen 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#001), for in the words, And
dust shall be the serpent's meat, there is an evident allusion to the
text of Moses. In [Amo 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#003), the
crocodile is evidently intended: Though they be hid in the bottom of the
sea, thence will I command the serpent, (הנחש hannachash) and he shall
bite them. No person can suppose that any of the snake or serpent kind
can be intended here; and we see from the various acceptations of the
word, and the different senses which it bears in various places in the
sacred writings, that it appears to be a sort of general term confined
to no one sense. Hence it will be necessary to examine the root
accurately, to see if its ideal meaning will enable us to ascertain the
animal intended in the text. We have already seen that נחש nachash
signifies to view attentively, to acquire knowledge or experience by
attentive observation; so נחשתי nichashti, [Gen
30:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#027) : I have learned by experience;
and this seems to be its most general meaning in the Bible. The original
word is by the Septuagint translated οφις, a serpent, not because this
was its fixed determinate meaning in the sacred writings, but because it
was the best that occurred to the translators: and they do not seem to
have given themselves much trouble to understand the meaning of the
original, for they have rendered the word as variously as our
translators have done, or rather our translators have followed them, as
they give nearly the same significations found in the Septuagint: hence
we find that οφις is as frequently used by them as serpent, its supposed
literal meaning, is used in our version. And the New Testament writers,
who seldom quote the Old Testament but from the Septuagint translation,
and often do not change even a word in their quotations, copy this
version in the use of this word. From the Septuagint therefore we can
expect no light, nor indeed from any other of the ancient versions,
which are all subsequent to the Septuagint, and some of them actually
made from it. In all this uncertainty it is natural for a serious
inquirer after truth to look everywhere for information. And in such an
inquiry the Arabic may be expected to afford some help, from its great
similarity to the Hebrew. A root in this language, very nearly similar
to that in the text, seems to cast considerable light on the subject.
Chanas or khanasa signifies he departed, drew off, lay hid, seduced,
slunk away; from this root come akhnas, khanasa, and khanoos, which all
signify an ape, or satyrus, or any creature of the simia or ape genus.
It is very remarkable also that from the same root comes khanas, the
Devil, which appellative he bears from that meaning of khanasa, he drew
off, seduced, etc., because he draws men off from righteousness, seduces
them from their obedience to God, etc., etc. See Golius, sub voce. Is it
not strange that the devil and the ape should have the same name,
derived from the same root, and that root so very similar to the word in
the text? But let us return and consider what is said of the creature in
question. Now the nachash was more subtle, ערום arum, more wise,
cunning, or prudent, than any beast of the field which the Lord God had
made. In this account we find,

1\. That whatever this nachash was, he stood at the head of all inferior
animals for wisdom and understanding.

2\. That he walked erect, for this is necessarily implied in his
punishment - on thy belly (i.e., on all fours) shalt thou go.

3\. That he was endued with the gift of speech, for a conversation is
here related between him and the woman.

4\. That he was also endued with the gift of reason, for we find him
reasoning and disputing with Eve.

5\. That these things were common to this creature, the woman no doubt
having often seen him walk erect, talk, and reason, and therefore she
testifies no kind of surprise when he accosts her in the language
related in the text; and indeed from the manner in which this is
introduced it appears to be only a part of a conversation that had
passed between them on the occasion: Yea, hath God said, etc.

Had this creature never been known to speak before his addressing the
woman at this time and on this subject, it could not have failed to
excite her surprise, and to have filled her with caution, though from
the purity and innocence of her nature she might have been incapable of
being affected with fear. Now I apprehend that none of these things can
be spoken of a serpent of any species.

1\. None of them ever did or ever can walk erect. The tales we have had
of two-footed and four-footed serpents are justly exploded by every
judicious naturalist, and are utterly unworthy of credit. The very name
serpent comes from serpo, to creep, and therefore to such it could be
neither curse nor punishment to go on their bellies, i.e., to creep on,
as they had done from their creation, and must do while their race
endures.

2\. They have no organs for speech, or any kind of articulate sound;
they can only hiss. It is true that an ass by miraculous influence may
speak; but it is not to be supposed that there was any miraculous
interference here. God did not qualify this creature with speech for the
occasion, and it is not intimated that there was any other agent that
did it; on the contrary, the text intimates that speech and reason were
natural to the nachash: and is it not in reference to this the inspired
penman says, The nachash was more subtle or intelligent than all the
beasts of the field that the Lord God had made? Nor can I find that the
serpentine genus are remarkable for intelligence. It is true the wisdom
of the serpent has passed into a proverb, but I cannot see on what it is
founded, except in reference to the passage in question, where the
nachash, which we translate serpent, following the Septuagint, shows so
much intelligence and cunning: and it is very probable that our Lord
alludes to this very place when he exhorts his disciples to be wise -
prudent or intelligent, as serpents, φρονιμοι ὡς οἱ οφεις· and it is
worthy of remark that he uses the same term employed by the Septuagint
in the text in question: Οφις ην φρονιμωτατος, the serpent was more
prudent or intelligent than all the beasts, etc.

All these things considered, we are obliged to seek for some other word
to designate the nachash in the text, than the word serpent, which on
every view of the subject appears to me inefficient and inapplicable. We
have seen above that khanas, akhnas, and khanoos, signify a creature of
the ape or satyrus kind. We have seen that the meaning of the root is,
he lay hid, seduced, slunk away, etc.; and that khanas means the devil,
as the inspirer of evil, and seducer from God and truth. See Golius and
Wilmet. It therefore appears to me that a creature of the ape or ouran
outang kind is here intended; and that Satan made use of this creature
as the most proper instrument for the accomplishment of his murderous
purposes against the life and soul of man. Under this creature he lay
hid, and by this creature he seduced our first parents, and drew off or
slunk away from every eye but the eye of God. Such a creature answers to
every part of the description in the text: it is evident from the
structure of its limbs and their muscles that it might have been
originally designed to walk erect, and that nothing less than a
sovereign controlling power could induce them to put down hands in every
respect formed like those of man, and walk like those creatures whose
claw-armed paws prove them to have been designed to walk on all fours.
Dr. Tyson has observed in his anatomy of an ouran outang, that the
seminal vessels passed between the two coats of the peritoneum to the
scrotum, as in man; hence he argues that this creature was designed to
walk erect, as it is otherwise in all quadrupeds. Philos. Trans., vol.
xxi., p. 340. The subtlety, cunning, endlessly varied pranks and tricks
of these creatures, show them, even now, to be more subtle and more
intelligent than any other creature, man alone excepted. Being obliged
now to walk on all fours, and gather their food from the ground, they
are literally obliged to eat the dust; and though exceedingly cunning,
and careful in a variety of instances to separate that part which is
wholesome and proper for food from that which is not so, in the article
of cleanliness they are lost to all sense of propriety; and though they
have every means in their power of cleansing the aliments they gather
off the ground, and from among the dust, yet they never in their savage
state make use of any, except a slight rub against their side, or with
one of their hands, more to see what the article is than to cleanse it.
Add to this, their utter aversion to walk upright; it requires the
utmost discipline to bring them to it, and scarcely anything irritates
them more than to be obliged to do it. Long observation on some of these
animals enables me to state these facts.

Should any person who may read this note object against my conclusions,
because apparently derived from an Arabic word which is not exactly
similar to the Hebrew, though to those who understand both languages the
similarity will be striking; yet, as I do not insist on the identity of
the terms, though important consequences have been derived from less
likely etymologies, he is welcome to throw the whole of this out of the
account. He may then take up the Hebrew root only, which signifies to
gaze, to view attentively, pry into, inquire narrowly, etc., and
consider the passage that appears to compare the nachash to the babbler.
[Ecc 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#011), and he will soon find, if
he have any acquaintance with creatures of this genus, that for earnest,
attentive watching, looking, etc., and for chattering or babbling, they
have no fellows in the animal world. Indeed, the ability and propensity
to chatter is all they have left, according to the above hypothesis, of
their original gift of speech, of which I suppose them to have been
deprived at the fall as a part of their punishment.

I have spent the longer time on this subject,

1\. Because it is exceedingly obscure;

2\. Because no interpretation hitherto given of it has afforded me the
smallest satisfaction;

3\. Because I think the above mode of accounting for every part of the
whole transaction is consistent and satisfactory, and in my opinion
removes many embarrassments, and solves the chief difficulties.

I think it can be no solid objection to the above mode of solution that
Satan, in different parts of the New Testament, is called the serpent,
the serpent that deceived Eve by his subtlety, the old serpent, etc.,
for we have already seen that the New Testament writers have borrowed
the word from the Septuagint, and the Septuagint themselves use it in a
vast variety and latitude of meaning; and surely the ouran outang is as
likely to be the animal in question as נחש nachash and οφις ophis are
likely to mean at once a snake, a crocodile, a hippopotamus,
fornication, a chain, a pair of fetters, a piece of brass, a piece of
steel, and a conjurer; for we have seen above that all these are
acceptations of the original word. Besides, the New Testament writers
seem to lose sight of the animal or instrument used on the occasion, and
speak only of Satan himself as the cause of the transgression, and the
instrument of all evil. If, however, any person should choose to differ
from the opinion stated above, he is at perfect liberty so to do; I make
it no article of faith, nor of Christian communion; I crave the same
liberty to judge for myself that I give to others, to which every man
has an indisputable right; and I hope no man will call me a heretic for
departing in this respect from the common opinion, which appears to me
to be so embarrassed as to be altogether unintelligible. See farther on
[Gen 3:7-14](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#007), etc.

Yea, hath God said - This seems to be the continuation of a discourse of
which the preceding part is not given, and a proof that the creature in
question was endued with the gift of reason and speech, for no surprise
is testified on the part of Eve.

[Genesis 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 3:3</span></span>

Neither shall ye touch it - Did not the woman add this to what God had
before spoken? Some of the Jewish writers, who are only serious on
comparative trifles, state that as soon as the woman had asserted this,
the serpent pushed her against the tree and said, "See, thou hast
touched it, and art still alive; thou mayest therefore safely eat of the
fruit, for surely thou shalt not die."

[Genesis 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 3:4</span></span>

Ye shall not surely die - Here the father of lies at once appears; and
appears too in flatly contradicting the assertion of God. The tempter,
through the nachash, insinuates the impossibility of her dying, as if he
had said, God has created thee immortal, thy death therefore is
impossible; and God knows this, for as thou livest by the tree of life,
so shalt thou get increase of wisdom by the tree of knowledge.

[Genesis 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 3:5</span></span>

Your eyes shall be opened - Your understanding shall be greatly
enlightened and improved; and ye shall be as gods, כאלהים kelohim, like
God, so the word should be translated; for what idea could our first
parents have of gods before idolatry could have had any being, because
sin had not yet entered into the world? The Syriac has the word in the
singular number, and is the only one of all the versions which has hit
on the true meaning. As the original word is the same which is used to
point out the Supreme Being, [Gen 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001),
so it has here the same signification, and the object of the tempter
appears to have been this: to persuade our first parents that they
should, by eating of this fruit, become wise and powerful as God, (for
knowledge is power), and be able to exist for ever, independently of
him.

[Genesis 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 3:6</span></span>

The tree was good for food -

1\. The fruit appeared to be wholesome and nutritive. And that it was
pleasant to the eyes.

2\. The beauty of the fruit tended to whet and increase appetite. And a
tree to be desired to make one wise, which was,

3\. An additional motive to please the palate.

From these three sources all natural and moral evil sprang: they are
exactly what the apostle calls the desire of the flesh; the tree was
good for food: the desire of the eye; it was pleasant to the sight: and
the pride of life; it was a tree to be desired to make one wise. God had
undoubtedly created our first parents not only very wise and
intelligent, but also with a great capacity and suitable propensity to
increase in knowledge. Those who think that Adam was created so perfect
as to preclude the possibility of his increase in knowledge, have taken
a very false view of the subject. We shall certainly be convinced that
our first parents were in a state of sufficient perfection when we
consider,

1\. That they were endued with a vast capacity to obtain knowledge.

2\. That all the means of information were within their reach.

3\. That there was no hindrance to the most direct conception of
occurring truth.

4\. That all the objects of knowledge, whether natural or moral, were
ever at hand.

5\. That they had the strongest propensity to know; and,

6\. The greatest pleasure in knowing.

To have God and nature continually open to the view of the soul; and to
have a soul capable of viewing both, and fathoming endlessly their
unbounded glories and excellences, without hindrance or difficulty; what
a state of perfection! what a consummation of bliss! This was
undoubtedly the state and condition of our first parents; even the
present ruins of the state are incontestable evidences of its primitive
excellence. We see at once how transgression came; it was natural for
them to desire to be increasingly wise. God had implanted this desire in
their minds; but he showed them that this desire should be gratified in
a certain way; that prudence and judgment should always regulate it;
that they should carefully examine what God had opened to their view;
and should not pry into what he chose to conceal. He alone who knows all
things knows how much knowledge the soul needs to its perfection and
increasing happiness, in what subjects this may be legitimately sought,
and where the mind may make excursions and discoveries to its prejudice
and ruin. There are doubtless many subjects which angels are capable of
knowing, and which God chooses to conceal even from them, because that
knowledge would tend neither to their perfection nor happiness. Of every
attainment and object of pursuit it may be said, in the words of an
ancient poet, who conceived correctly on the subject, and expressed his
thoughts with perspicuity and energy: -

Est modus in rebus: sunt certi denique fines,

Quos ulta citraque nequit consistere rectum.

Hor. Sat., lib. i., Sat. 1., ver. 106.

"There is a rule for all things; there are in fine fixed and stated
limits, on either side of which righteousness cannot be found." On the
line of duty alone we must walk.

Such limits God certainly assigned from the beginning: Thou shalt come
up to this; thou shalt not pass it. And as he assigned the limits, so he
assigned the means. It is lawful for thee to acquire knowledge in this
way; it is unlawful to seek it in that. And had he not a right to do so?
And would his creation have been perfect without it?

[Genesis 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 3:7</span></span>

The eyes of them both were opened - They now had a sufficient discovery
of their sin and folly in disobeying the command of God; they could
discern between good and evil; and what was the consequence? Confusion
and shame were engendered, because innocence was lost and guilt
contracted.

Let us review the whole of this melancholy business, the fall and its
effects.

1\. From the New Testament we learn that Satan associated himself with
the creature which we term the serpent, and the original the nachash, in
order to seduce and ruin mankind; [Co2
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#003) [Rev
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#009) [Rev
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#002).

2\. That this creature was the most suitable to his purpose, as being
the most subtle, the most intelligent and cunning of all beasts of the
field, endued with the gift of speech and reason, and consequently one
in which he could best conceal himself.

3\. As he knew that while they depended on God they could not be ruined,
he therefore endeavored to seduce them from this dependence.

4\. He does this by working on that propensity of the mind to desire an
increase of knowledge, with which God, for the most gracious purposes,
had endued it.

5\. In order to succeed, he insinuates that God, through motives of
envy, had given the prohibition - God doth know that in the day ye eat
of it, ye shall be like himself, etc.

6\. As their present state of blessedness must be inexpressibly dear to
them, he endeavors to persuade them that they could not fall from this
state: Ye shall not surely die - ye shall not only retain your present
blessedness, but it shall be greatly increased; a temptation by which he
has ever since fatally succeeded in the ruin of multitudes of souls,
whom he persuaded that being once right they could never finally go
wrong.

7\. As he kept the unlawfulness of the means proposed out of sight,
persuaded them that they could not fall from their steadfastness,
assured them that they should resemble God himself, and consequently be
self-sufficient, and totally independent of him; they listened, and
fixing their eye only on the promised good, neglecting the positive
command, and determining to become wise and independent at all events,
they took of the fruit and did eat.

Let us now examine the effects.

1\. Their eyes were opened, and they saw they were naked. They saw what
they never saw before, that they were stripped of their excellence; that
they had lost their innocence; and that they had fallen into a state of
indigence and danger.

2\. Though their eyes were opened to see their nakedness, yet their mind
was clouded, and their judgment confused. They seem to have lost all
just notions of honor and dishonor, of what was shameful and what was
praise-worthy. It was dishonorable and shameful to break the commandment
of God; but it was neither to go naked, when clothing was not necessary.

3\. They seem in a moment, not only to have lost sound judgment, but
also reflection: a short time before Adam was so wise that he could name
all the creatures brought before him, according to their respective
natures and qualities; now he does not know the first principle
concerning the Divine nature, that it knows all things, and that it is
omnipresent, therefore he endeavors to hide himself among the trees from
the eye of the all-seeing God! How astonishing is this! When the
creatures were brought to him he could name them, because he could
discern their respective natures and properties; when Eve was brought to
him he could immediately tell what she was, who she was, and for what
end made, though he was in a deep sleep when God formed her; and this
seems to be particularly noted, merely to show the depth of his wisdom,
and the perfection of his discernment. But alas! how are the mighty
fallen! Compare his present with his past state, his state before the
transgression with his state after it; and say, is this the same
creature? the creature of whom God said, as he said of all his works, He
is very good - just what he should be, a living image of the living God;
but now lower than the beasts of the field?

4\. This account could never have been credited had not the indisputable
proofs and evidences of it been continued by uninterrupted succession to
the present time. All the descendants of this first guilty pair resemble
their degenerate ancestors, and copy their conduct. The original mode of
transgression is still continued, and the original sin in consequence.
Here are the proofs. 1. Every human being is endeavoring to obtain
knowledge by unlawful means, even while the lawful means and every
available help are at hand. 2. They are endeavoring to be independent,
and to live without God in the world; hence prayer, the language of
dependence on God's providence and grace, is neglected, I might say
detested, by the great majority of men. Had I no other proof than this
that man is a fallen creature, my soul would bow to this evidence. 3.
Being destitute of the true knowledge of God they seek privacy for their
crimes, not considering that the eye of God is upon them, being only
solicitous to hide them from the eye of man. These are all proofs in
point; but we shall soon meet with additional ones. See on [Gen
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#010) (note), [Gen
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#012) (note).

[Genesis 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 3:8</span></span>

The voice of the Lord - The voice is properly used here, for as God is
an infinite Spirit, and cannot be confined to any form, so he can have
no personal appearance. It is very likely that God used to converse with
them in the garden, and that the usual time was the decline of the day,
לרוח היום leruach haiyom, in the evening breeze; and probably this was
the time that our first parents employed in the more solemn acts of
their religious worship, at which God was ever present. The time for
this solemn worship is again come, and God is in his place; but Adam and
Eve have sinned, and therefore, instead of being found in the place of
worship, are hidden among the trees! Reader, how often has this been thy
case!

[Genesis 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 3:10</span></span>

I was afraid, because I was naked - See the immediate consequences of
sin. 1. Shame, because of the ingratitude marked in the rebellion, and
because that in aiming to be like God they were now sunk into a state of
the greatest wretchedness. 2. Fear, because they saw they had been
deceived by Satan, and were exposed to that death and punishment from
which he had promised them an exemption. How worthy is it of remark that
this cause continues to produce the very same effects! Shame and fear
were the first fruits of sin, and fruits which it has invariably
produced, from the first transgression to the present time.

[Genesis 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 3:12</span></span>

And the man said, etc. - We have here some farther proofs of the fallen
state of man, and that the consequences of that state extend to his
remotest posterity. 1. On the question, Hast thou eaten of the tree?
Adam is obliged to acknowledge his transgression; but he does this in
such a way as to shift off the blame from himself, and lay it upon God
and upon the woman! This woman whom Thou didst give to be with me, עמדי
immadi, to be my companion, (for so the word is repeatedly used), she
gave me, and I did eat. I have no farther blame in this transgression; I
did not pluck the fruit; she took it and gave it to me. 2. When the
woman is questioned she lays the blame upon God and the serpent,
(nachash). The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. Thou didst make him
much wiser than thou didst make me, and therefore my simplicity and
ignorance were overcome by his superior wisdom and subtlety; I can have
no fault here, the fault is his, and his who made him so wise and me so
ignorant. Thus we find that, while the eyes of their body were opened to
see their degraded state, the eyes of their understanding were closed,
so that they could not see the sinfulness of sin; and at the same time
their hearts were hardened through its deceitfulness. In this also their
posterity copy their example. How few ingenuously confess their own sin!
They see not their guilt. They are continually making excuses for their
crimes; the strength and subtlety of the tempter, the natural weakness
of their own minds, the unfavorable circumstances in which they were
placed, etc., etc., are all pleaded as excuses for their sins, and thus
the possibility of repentance is precluded; for till a man take his sin
to himself, till he acknowledge that he alone is guilty, he cannot be
humbled, and consequently cannot be saved. Reader, till thou accuse
thyself, and thyself only, and feel that thou alone art responsible for
all thy iniquities, there is no hope of thy salvation.

[Genesis 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 3:14</span></span>

And the Lord God said unto the serpent - The tempter is not asked why he
deceived the woman; he cannot roll the blame on any other; self-tempted
he fell, and it is natural for him, such is his enmity, to deceive and
destroy all he can. His fault admits of no excuse, and therefore God
begins to pronounce sentence on him first. And here we must consider a
twofold sentence, one on Satan and the other on the agent he employed.
The nachash, whom I suppose to have been at the head of all the inferior
animals, and in a sort of society and intimacy with man, is to be
greatly degraded, entirely banished from human society, and deprived of
the gift of speech. Cursed art thou above all cattle, and above every
beast of the field - thou shalt be considered the most contemptible of
animals; upon thy belly shalt thou go - thou shalt no longer walk erect,
but mark the ground equally with thy hands and feet; and dust shalt thou
eat - though formerly possessed of the faculty to distinguish, choose,
and cleanse thy food, thou shalt feed henceforth like the most stupid
and abject quadruped, all the days of thy life - through all the
innumerable generations of thy species. God saw meet to manifest his
displeasure against the agent employed in this melancholy business; and
perhaps this is founded on the part which the intelligent and subtle
nachash took in the seduction of our first parents. We see that he was
capable of it, and have some reason to believe that he became a willing
instrument.

[Genesis 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 3:15</span></span>

I will put enmity between thee and the woman - This has been generally
supposed to apply to a certain enmity subsisting between men and
serpents; but this is rather a fancy than a reality. It is yet to be
discovered that the serpentine race have any peculiar enmity against
mankind, nor is there any proof that men hate serpents more than they do
other noxious animals. Men have much more enmity to the common rat and
magpie than they have to all the serpents in the land, because the
former destroy the grain, etc., and serpents in general, far from
seeking to do men mischief, flee his approach, and generally avoid his
dwelling. If, however, we take the word nachash to mean any of the simia
or ape species, we find a more consistent meaning, as there is scarcely
an animal in the universe so detested by most women as these are; and
indeed men look on them as continual caricatures of themselves. But we
are not to look for merely literal meanings here: it is evident that
Satan, who actuated this creature, is alone intended in this part of the
prophetic declaration. God in his endless mercy has put enmity between
men and him; so that, though all mankind love his service, yet all
invariably hate himself. Were it otherwise, who could be saved? A great
point gained towards the conversion of a sinner is to convince him that
it is Satan he has been serving, that it is to him he has been giving up
his soul, body, goods, etc.; he starts with horror when this conviction
fastens on his mind, and shudders at the thought of being in league with
the old murderer. But there is a deeper meaning in the text than even
this, especially in these words, it shall bruise thy head, or rather,
הוא hu, He; who? the seed of the woman; the person is to come by the
woman, and by her alone, without the concurrence of man. Therefore the
address is not to Adam and Eve, but to Eve alone; and it was in
consequence of this purpose of God that Jesus Christ was born of a
virgin; this, and this alone, is what is implied in the promise of the
seed of the woman bruising the head of the serpent. Jesus Christ died to
put away sin by the sacrifice of himself, and to destroy him who had the
power of death, that is, the devil. Thus he bruises his head - destroys
his power and lordship over mankind, turning them from the power of
Satan unto God; [Act 26:18](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#018). And Satan
bruises his heel - God so ordered it, that the salvation of man could
only be brought about by the death of Christ; and even the spiritual
seed of our blessed Lord have the heel often bruised, as they suffer
persecution, temptation, etc., which may be all that is intended by this
part of the prophecy.

[Genesis 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 3:16</span></span>

Unto the woman he said - She being second in the transgression is
brought up the second to receive her condemnation, and to hear her
punishment: I will greatly multiply, or multiplying I will multiply;
i.e., I will multiply thy sorrows, and multiply those sorrows by other
sorrows, and this during conception and pregnancy, and particularly so
in parturition or child-bearing. And this curse has fallen in a heavier
degree on the woman than on any other female. Nothing is better attested
than this, and yet there is certainly no natural reason why it should be
so; it is a part of her punishment, and a part from which even God's
mercy will not exempt her. It is added farther, Thy desire shall be to
thy husband - thou shalt not be able to shun the great pain and peril of
child-bearing, for thy desire, thy appetite, shall be to thy husband;
and he shall rule over thee, though at their creation both were formed
with equal rights, and the woman had probably as much right to rule as
the man; but subjection to the will of her husband is one part of her
curse; and so very capricious is this will often, that a sorer
punishment no human being can well have, to be at all in a state of
liberty, and under the protection of wise and equal laws.

[Genesis 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 3:17</span></span>

Unto Adam he said - The man being the last in the transgression is
brought up last to receive his sentence: Because thou hast hearkened
unto the voice of thy wife - "thou wast not deceived, she only gave and
counseled thee to eat; this thou shouldst have resisted;" and that he
did not is the reason of his condemnation. Cursed is the ground for thy
sake - from henceforth its fertility shall be greatly impaired; in
sorrow shalt thou eat of it - be in continual perplexity concerning the
seed time and the harvest, the cold and the heat, the wet and the dry.
How often are all the fruits of man's toll destroyed by blasting, by
mildew, by insects, wet weather, land floods, etc.! Anxiety and
carefulness are the laboring man's portion.

[Genesis 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 3:18</span></span>

Thorns also and thistles, etc. - Instead of producing nourishing grain
and useful vegetables, noxious weeds shall be peculiarly prolific,
injure the ground, choke the good seed, and mock the hopes of the
husbandman; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field - thou shalt no
longer have the privilege of this garden of delights, but must go to the
common champaign country, and feed on such herbs as thou canst find,
till by labor and industry thou hast raised others more suitable to thee
and more comfortable.

In the curse pronounced on the ground there is much more implied than
generally appears. The amazing fertility of some of the most common
thistles and thorns renders them the most proper instruments for the
fulfillment of this sentence against man. Thistles multiply enormously;
a species called the Carolina sylvestris bears ordinarily from 20 to 40
heads, each containing from 100 to 150 seeds.

Another species, called the Acanthum vulgare, produces above 100 heads,
each containing from 3 to 400 seeds. Suppose we say that these thistles
produce at a medium only 80 beads, and that each contains only 300
seeds; the first crop from these would amount to 24,000. Let these be
sown, and their crop will amount to 576 millions. Sow these, and their
produce will be 13,824,000,000,000, or thirteen billions, eight hundred
and twenty-four thousand millions; and a single crop from these, which
is only the third year's growth, would amount to
331,776,000,000,000,000, or three hundred and thirty-one thousand seven
hundred and seventy-six billions; and the fourth year's growth will
amount to 7,962,624,000,000,000,000,000, or seven thousand nine hundred
and sixty-two trillions, six hundred and twenty-four thousand billions.
A progeny more than sufficient to stock not only the surface of the
whole world, but of all the planets of the solar system, so that no
other plant or vegetable could possibly grow, allowing but the space of
one square foot for each plant.

The Carduus vulgatissimus viarum, or common hedge thistle, besides the
almost infinite swarms of winged seeds it sends forth, spreads its roots
around many yards, and throws up suckers everywhere, which not only
produce seeds in their turn, but extend their roots, propagate like the
parent plant, and stifle and destroy all vegetation but their own.

As to Thorns, the bramble, which occurs so commonly, and is so
mischievous, is a sufficient proof how well the means are calculated to
secure the end. The genista, or spinosa vulgaris, called by some furze,
by others whins, is allowed to be one of the most mischievous shrubs on
the face of the earth. Scarcely any thing can grow near it, and it is so
thick set with prickles that it is almost impossible to touch it without
being wounded. It is very prolific; almost half the year it is covered
with flowers which produce pods filled with seeds. Besides it shoots out
roots far and wide, from which suckers and young plants are continually
springing up, which produce others in their turn. Where it is permitted
to grow it soon overspreads whole tracts of ground, and it is extremely
difficult to clear the ground of its roots where once it has got proper
footing. Such provision has the just God made to fulfill the curse which
he has pronounced on the earth, because of the crimes of its
inhabitants. See Hale's Vegetable Statics.

[Genesis 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 3:19</span></span>

In the sweat of thy face - Though the whole body may be thrown into a
profuse sweat, if hard labor be long continued, yet the face or forehead
is the first part whence this sweat begins to issue; this is occasioned
by the blood being strongly propelled to the brain, partly through
stooping, but principally by the strong action of the muscles; in
consequence of this the blood vessels about the head become turgid
through the great flux of blood, the fibres are relaxed, the pores
enlarged, and the sweat or serum poured out. Thus then the very
commencement of every man's labor may put him in mind of his sin and its
consequences.

Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return - God had said that in
the day they ate of the forbidden fruit, dying they should die - they
should then become mortal, and continue under the influence of a great
variety of unfriendly agencies in the atmosphere and in themselves, from
heats, colds, drought, and damps in the one, and morbid increased and
decreased action in the solids and fluids of the other, till the spirit,
finding its earthly house no longer tenable, should return to God who
gave it; and the body, being decomposed, should be reduced to its
primitive dust. It is evident from this that man would have been
immortal had he never transgressed, and that this state of continual
life and health depended on his obedience to his Maker. The tree of
life, as we have already seen, was intended to be the means of continual
preservation. For as no being but God can exist independently of any
supporting agency, so man could not have continued to live without a
particular supporting agent; and this supporting agent under God appears
to have been the tree of life.

Ολιγη δε κεισομεσθα

Κονις, οστεων λυθεντων.

Anac. Od. 4., v. 9.

"We shall lie down as a small portion of dust, our bones being
dissolved."

[Genesis 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 3:20</span></span>

And Adam called his wife's name Eve; because she was the mother of all
living - A man who does not understand the original cannot possibly
comprehend the reason of what is said here. What has the word Eve to do
with being the mother of all living? Our translators often follow the
Septuagint; it is a pity they had not done so here, as the Septuagint
translation is literal and correct: Και εκαλεσεν Αδαμ το ονομα της
γυναικος αυτου Ζωη, ὁτι μητηρ παντων των ζωντων· "And Adam called his
wife's name Life, because she was the mother of all the living." This is
a proper and faithful representation of the Hebrew text, for the חוה
Chavvah of the original, which we have corrupted into Eve, a word
destitute of all meaning, answers exactly to the Ζωη of the Septuagint,
both signifying life; as does also the Hebrew חי chai to the Greek
ζωντων, both of which signify the living.

It is probable that God designed by this name to teach our first parents
these two important truths:

1\. That though they had merited immediate death, yet they should be
respited, and the accomplishment of the sentence be long delayed; they
should be spared to propagate a numerous progeny on the earth.

2\. That though much misery would be entailed on his posterity, and
death should have a long and universal empire, yet One should in the
fullness of time spring from the woman, who should destroy death, and
bring life and immortality to light, [Ti2
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#010). Therefore Adam called his wife's
name Life, because she was to be the mother of all human beings, and
because she was to be the mother of Him who was to give life to a world
dead in trespasses, and dead in sins, [Eph
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#001), etc.

[Genesis 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 3:21</span></span>

God made coats of skins - It is very likely that the skins out of which
their clothing was made were taken off animals whose blood had been
poured out as a sin-offering to God; for as we find Cain and Abel
offering sacrifices to God, we may fairly presume that God had given
them instructions on this head; nor is it likely that the notion of a
sacrifice could have ever occurred to the mind of man without an express
revelation from God. Hence we may safely infer, 1. That as Adam and Eve
needed this clothing as soon as they fell, and death had not as yet made
any ravages in the animal world, it is most likely that the skins were
taken off victims offered under the direction of God himself, and in
faith of Him who, in the fullness of time, was to make an atonement by
his death. And it seems reasonable also that this matter should be
brought about in such a way that Satan and death should have no triumph,
when the very first death that took place in the world was an emblem and
type of that death which should conquer Satan, destroy his empire,
reconcile God to man, convert man to God, sanctify human nature, and
prepare it for heaven.

[Genesis 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 3:22</span></span>

Behold, the man is become as one of us - On all hands this text is
allowed to be difficult, and the difficulty is increased by our
translation, which is opposed to the original Hebrew and the most
authentic versions. The Hebrew has היה hayah, which is the third person
preterite tense, and signifies was, not is. The Samaritan text, the
Samaritan version, the Syriac, and the Septuagint, have the same tense.
These lead us to a very different sense, and indicate that there is an
ellipsis of some words which must be supplied in order to make the sense
complete. A very learned man has ventured the following paraphrase,
which should not be lightly regarded: "And the Lord God said, The man
who was like one of us in purity and wisdom, is now fallen and robbed of
his excellence; he has added לדעת ladaath, to the knowledge of the good,
by his transgression the knowledge of the evil; and now, lest he put
forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat and live for
ever in this miserable state, I will remove him, and guard the place
lest he should re-enter. Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the
garden of Eden," etc. This seems to be the most natural sense of the
place. Some suppose that his removal from the tree of life was in mercy,
to prevent a second temptation. He before imagined that he could gain an
increase of wisdom by eating of the tree of knowledge, and Satan would
be disposed to tempt him to endeavor to elude the sentence of death, by
eating of the tree of life. Others imagine that the words are spoken
ironically, and that the Most High intended by a cutting taunt, to
upbraid the poor culprit for his offense, because he broke the Divine
command in the expectation of being like God to know good from evil; and
now that he had lost all the good that God had designed for him, and got
nothing but evil in its place, therefore God taunts him for the total
miscarriage of his project. But God is ever consistent with himself; and
surely his infinite pity prohibited the use of either sarcasm or irony,
in speaking of so dreadful a catastrophe, that was in the end to
occasion the agony and bloody sweat, the cross and passion, the death
and burial, of Him in whom dwelt all the fullness of the Godhead bodily,
[Col 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009).

In [Gen 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026), [Gen
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027), we have seen man in the
perfection of his nature, the dignity of his office, and the plenitude
of his happiness. Here we find the same creature, but stripped of his
glories and happiness, so that the word man no longer conveys the same
ideas it did before. Man and intellectual excellence were before so
intimately connected as to appear inseparable; man and misery are now
equally so. In our nervous mother tongue, the Anglo-Saxon, we have found
the word God signifying, not only the Supreme Being, but also good or
goodness; and it is worthy of especial note that the word man, in the
same language, is used to express, not only the human being so called,
both male and female, but also mischief, wickedness, fraud, deceit, and
villany. Thus a simple monosyllable, still in use among us in its first
sense, conveyed at once to the minds of our ancestors the two following
particulars:

1\. The human being in his excellence, capable of knowing, loving, and
glorifying his Maker.

2\. The human being in his fallen state, capable of and committing all
kinds of wickedness. "Obiter hic notandum," says old Mr. Somner in his
Saxon Dictionary, "venit, Saxonibus et Deum significasse et Bonum: uti
et hominem et nequitiam. Here it is to be noted, that among the Saxons
the term God signified both the Divine Being and goodness, as the word
man signified both the human being and wickedness." This is an
additional proof that our Saxon ancestors both thought and spoke at the
same time, which, strange as it may appear, is not a common case: their
words in general are not arbitrary signs; but as far as sounds can
convey the ideal meaning of things, their words do it; and they are so
formed and used as necessarily to bring to view the nature and proper
ties of those things of which they are the signs. In this sense the
Anglo-Saxon is inferior only to the Hebrew.

[Genesis 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 3:24</span></span>

So he drove out the man - Three things are noted here:

1\. God's displeasure against sinful man, evidenced by his expelling him
from this place of blessedness;

2\. Man's unfitness for the place, of which he had rendered himself
unworthy by his ingratitude and transgression; and,

3\. His reluctance to leave this place of happiness. He was, as we may
naturally conclude, unwilling to depart, and God drove him out.

He placed at the east - מכדם mikkedem, or before the garden of Eden,
before what may be conceived its gate or entrance; Cherubims, הכרבים
hakkerubim, The cherubim. Hebrew plurals in the masculine end in general
in im: to add an s to this when we introduce such words into English, is
very improper; therefore the word should be written cherubim, not
cherubims. But what were these? They are utterly unknown. Conjectures
and guesses relative to their nature and properties are endless. Several
think them to have been emblematical representations of the sacred
Trinity, and bring reasons and scriptures in support of their opinion;
but as I am not satisfied that this opinion is correct, I will not
trouble the reader with it. From the description in [Exo
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#001), [Exo
26:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#031); [Kg1
6:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#029), [Kg1
6:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#032); [Ch2
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#014), it appears that the cherubs were
sometimes represented with two faces, namely, those of a lion and of a
man; but from [Eze 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#005), etc.; [Eze
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#020), [Eze
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#021), we find that they had four
faces and four wings; the faces were those of a man, a lion, an ox, and
an eagle; but it seems there was but one body to these heads. The
two-faced cherubs were such as were represented on the curtains and veil
of the tabernacle, and on the wall, doors, and veil of the temple; those
with four faces appeared only in the holy of holies. The word כרב or
כרוב kerub never appears as a verb in the Hebrew Bible, and therefore is
justly supposed to be a word compounded of כ ke a particle of
resemblance, like to, like as, and רב rab, he was great, powerful, etc.
Hence it is very likely that the cherubs, to whatever order of beings
they belonged, were emblems of the All-Mighty, and were those creatures
by whom he produced the great effects of his power. The word רב rab is a
character of the Most High, [Pro 26:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#010)
: The great God who formed all; and again in [Psa
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002), where he is called the Great
King, מלך רב melech rab. But though this is rarely applied as a
character of the Supreme Being in the Hebrew Bible, yet it is a common
appellative of the Deity in the Arabic language. rab, and rab'ulalameen
Lord of both worlds, or, Lord of the universe, are expressions
repeatedly used to point out the almighty energy and supremacy of God.
On this ground, I suppose, the cherubim were emblematical
representations of the eternal power and Godhead of the Almighty. These
angelic beings were for a time employed in guarding the entrance to
Paradise, and keeping the way of or road to the tree of life. This, I
say, for a time; for it is very probable that God soon removed the tree
of life, and abolished the garden, so that its situation could never
after be positively ascertained.

By the flaming sword turning every way, or flame folding back upon
itself, we may understand the formidable appearances which these
cherubim assumed, in order to render the passage to the tree of life
inaccessible.

Thus terminates this most awful tragedy; a tragedy in which all the
actors are slain, in which the most awful murders are committed, and the
whole universe ruined! The serpent, so called, is degraded; the woman
cursed with pains, miseries, and a subjection to the will of her
husband, which was never originally designed; the man, the lord of this
lower world, doomed to incessant labor and toil; and the earth itself
cursed with comparative barrenness! To complete all, the garden of
pleasure is interdicted, and this man, who was made after the image of
God, and who would be like him, shamefully expelled from a place where
pure spirits alone could dwell. Yet in the midst of wrath God remembers
mercy, and a promise of redemption from this degraded and cursed state
is made to them through Him who, in the fullness of time, is to be made
flesh, and who, by dying for the sin of the world, shall destroy the
power of Satan, and deliver all who trust in the merit of his sacrifice
from the power, guilt, and nature of sin, and thus prepare them for the
celestial Paradise at the right hand of God. Reader, hast thou repented
of thy sin? for often hast thou sinned after the similitude of thy
ancestor's transgression. Hast thou sought and found redemption in the
blood of the Lamb? Art thou saved from a disposition which led thy first
parents to transgress? Art thou living a life of dependence on thy
Creator, and of faith and loving obedience to him who died for thee?
Wilt thou live under the curse, and die eternally? God forbid! Return to
him with all thy soul, and receive this exhortation as a call from his
mercy.

To what has already been said on the awful contents of this chapter, I
can add little that can either set it in a clearer light, or make its
solemn subject more impressive. We see here that by the subtlety and
envy of the devil sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and we
find that death reigned, not only from Adam to Moses, but from Moses to
the present day. Flow abominable must sin be in the sight of God, when
it has not only defaced his own image from the soul of man, but has also
become a source of natural and moral evil throughout every part of the
globe! Disruption and violence appear in every part of nature; vice,
profligacy, and misery, through all the tribes of men and orders of
society. It is true that where sin hath abounded, there grace doth much
more abound; but men shut their eyes against the light, and harden their
hearts against the truth. Sin, which becomes propagated into the world
by natural generation, growing with the growth and strengthening with
the strength of man, would be as endless in its duration, as unlimited
in its influence, did not God check and restrain it by his grace, and
cut off its extending influence in the incorrigibly wicked by means of
death. How wonderful is the economy of God! That which entered into the
world as one of the prime fruits and effects of sin, is now an
instrument in his hands to prevent the extension of its contagion.

If men, now so greatly multiplied on the earth, and fertile in
mischievous inventions, were permitted to live nearly a thousand years,
as in the ancient world, to mature and perfect their infectious and
destructive counsels, what a sum of iniquity and ruin would the face of
the earth present! Even while they are laying plans to extend the empire
of death, God, by the very means of death itself, prevents the
completion of their pernicious and diabolic designs. Thus what man, by
his wilful obstinacy does not permit grace to correct and restrain, God,
by his sovereign power, brings in death to control. It is on this ground
that wicked and blood-thirsty men live not out half their days; and what
a mercy to the world that it is so! They who will not submit to the
scepter of mercy shall be broken in pieces by the rod of iron. Reader,
provoke not the Lord to displeasure; thou art not stronger than he.
Grieve not his Spirit, provoke him not to destroy thee; why shouldst
thou die before thy time? Thou hast sinned much, and needest every
moment of thy short life to make thy calling and election sure. Shouldst
thou provoke God, by thy perseverance in iniquity, to cut thee off by
death before this great work is done, better for thee thou hadst never
been born!

How vain are all attempts to attain immortality here! For some thousands
of years men have been laboring to find out means to prevent death; and
some have even boasted that they had found out a medicine capable of
preserving life for ever, by resisting all the attacks of disease, and
incessantly repairing all the wastes of the human machine. That is, the
alchymistic philosophers would have the world to believe that they had
found out a private passage to the tree of immortality; but their own
deaths, in the common order of nature, as well as the deaths of the
millions which make no such pretensions, are not only a sufficient
confutation of their baseless systems, but also a continual proof that
the cherubim, with their flaming swords, are turning every way to keep
the passage of the tree of life. Life and immortality are, however,
brought to light by the Gospel; and he only who keepeth the sayings of
the Son of God shall live for ever. Though the body is dead - consigned
to death, because of sin, yet the spirit is life because of
righteousness; and on those who are influenced by this Spirit of
righteousness, the second death shall have no power!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 4](gen004)

</div>
