<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen019)  [Next](gen021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 20:0</span></span>

Abraham leaves Mamre, and, after having sojourned at Kadesh and Shur,
settles in Gerar, [Gen 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#001). Abimelech
takes Sarah, Abraham having acknowledged her only as his sister, [Gen
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#002). Abimelech is warned by God in a
dream to restore Sarah, [Gen 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#003). He
asserts his innocence, [Gen 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#004), [Gen
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#005). He is farther warned, [Gen
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#006), [Gen
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#007). Expostulates with Abraham, [Gen
20:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#008). Abraham vindicates his
conduct, [Gen 20:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#011). Abimelech
restores Sarah, makes Abraham a present of sheep, oxen, and male and
female slaves, [Gen 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#014); offers him
a residence in any part of the land, [Gen
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#015); and reproves Sarah, [Gen
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#016). At the intercession of Abraham,
the curse of barrenness is removed from Abimelech and his household,
[Gen 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#017), [Gen
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#018).

[Genesis 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 20:1</span></span>

And Abraham journeyed - It is very likely that this holy man was so
deeply affected with the melancholy prospect of the ruined cities, and
not knowing what was become of his nephew Lot and his family, that he
could no longer bear to dwell within sight of the place. Having,
therefore, struck his tents, and sojourned for a short time at Kadesh
and Shur, he fixed his habitation in Gerar, which was a city of Arabia
Petraea, under a king of the Philistines called Abimelech, my father
king, who appears to have been not only the father of his people, but
also a righteous man.

[Genesis 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 20:2</span></span>

She is my sister - See the parallel account, Genesis 12 (note), and the
notes there. Sarah was now about ninety years of age, and probably
pregnant with Isaac. Her beauty, therefore, must have been considerably
impaired since the time she was taken in a similar manner by Pharaoh,
king of Egypt; but she was probably now chosen by Abimelech more on the
account of forming an alliance with Abraham, who was very rich, than on
account of any personal accomplishments. A petty king, such as
Abimelech, would naturally be glad to form an alliance with such a
powerful chief as Abraham was: we cannot but recollect his late defeat
of the four confederate Canaanitish kings. See note on [Gen
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#014), etc. This circumstance was
sufficient to establish his credit, and cause his friendship to be
courted; and what more effectual means could Abimelech use in reference
to this than the taking of Sarah, who he understood was Abraham's
sister, to be his concubine or second wife, which in those times had no
kind of disgrace attached to it?

[Genesis 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 20:3</span></span>

But God came to Abimelech - Thus we find that persons who were not of
the family of Abraham had the knowledge of the true God. Indeed, all the
Gerarites are termed גוי צדיק goi tsaddik, a righteous nation, [Gen
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#004).

[Genesis 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 20:5</span></span>

In the integrity of my heart, etc. - Had Abimelech any other than
honorable views in taking Sarah, he could not have justified himself
thus to his Maker; and that these views were of the most honorable kind,
God himself, to whom the appeal was made, asserts in the most direct
manner, Yea, I know that thou didst this in the integrity of thy heart.

[Genesis 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 20:7</span></span>

He is a prophet, and he shall pray for thee - The word prophet, which we
have from the Greek προφητες, and which is compounded of προ, before,
and φημι, I speak, means, in its general acceptation, one who speaks of
things before they happen, i.e., one who foretells future events. But
that this was not the original notion of the word, its use in this place
sufficiently proves. Abraham certainly was not a prophet in the present
general acceptation of the term, and for the Hebrew נביא nabi, we must
seek some other meaning. I have, in a discourse entitled "The Christian
Prophet and his Work," proved that the proper ideal meaning of the
original word is to pray, entreat, make supplication, etc., and this
meaning of it I have justified at large both from its application in
this place, and from its pointed use in the case of Saul, mentioned 1
Samuel 10, and from the case of the priests of Baal, 1 Kings 18, where
prophesying most undoubtedly means making prayer and supplication. As
those who were in habits of intimacy with God by prayer and faith were
found the most proper persons to communicate his mind to man, both with
respect to the present and the future, hence, נביא nabi, the
intercessor, became in process of time the public instructor or
preacher, and also the predictor of future events, because to such
faithful praying men God revealed the secret of his will. Hence St.
Paul, [Co1 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#003), seems to restrain the
word wholly to the interpreting the mind of God to the people, and their
instruction in Divine things, for, says he, he that prophesieth speaketh
unto men to edification and exhortation and comfort. See the discourse
on this text referred to above. The title was also given to men eminent
for eloquence and for literary abilities; hence Aaron, because he was
the spokesman of Moses to the Egyptian king, was termed נביא nabi,
prophet; [Exo 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#016); [Exo
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001). And Epimenides, a heathen poet,
is expressly styled προφητης, a prophet, by St. Paul, [Tit
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#012), just as poets in general were
termed vates among the Romans, which properly signifies the persons who
professed to interpret the will of the gods to their votaries, after
prayers and sacrifices duly performed. In Arabic the word naba has
nearly the same meaning as in Hebrew, but in the first conjugation it
has a meaning which may cast light upon the subject in general. It
signifies to itinerate, move from one place or country to another,
compelled thereto either by persecution or the command of God; exivit de
una regione in aliam - migrans de loco in locum - Golius. Hence Mohammed
was called an nabi, because of his sudden removal from Mecca to Medina,
when, pretending to a Divine commission, his townsmen sought to take
away his life: e Mecca exiens Medinam, unde Muhammed suis Nabi Allah
dictus fuit - Golius. If this meaning belonged originally to the Hebrew
word, it will apply with great force to the case of Abraham, whose
migratory, itinerant kind of life, generally under the immediate
direction of God, might have given him the title nabi. However this may
be, the term was a title of the highest respectability and honor, both
among the He brews and Arabs, and continues so to this day. And from the
Hebrews the word, in all the importance and dignity of its meaning, was
introduced among the heathens in the προφητης and vates of the Greeks
and Romans. See note on the word seer, [Gen
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001) (note).

[Genesis 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 20:8</span></span>

Abimelech rose early, etc. - God came to Abimelech in a dream by night,
and we find as the day broke he arose, assembled his servants, (what we
would call his courtiers), and communicated to them what he had received
from God. They were all struck with astonishment, and discerned the hand
of God in this business. Abraham is then called, and in a most
respectful and pious manner the king expostulates with him for bringing
him and his people under the Divine displeasure, by withholding from him
the information that Sarah was his wife; when, by taking her, he sought
only an honorable alliance with his family.

[Genesis 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 20:11</span></span>

And Abraham said - The best excuse he could make for his conduct, which
in this instance is far from defensible.

[Genesis 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 20:12</span></span>

She is my sister - I have not told a lie; I have suppressed only a part
of the truth. In this place it may be proper to ask, What is a lie? It
is any action done or word spoken, whether true or false in itself,
which the doer or speaker wishes the observer or hearer to take in a
contrary sense to that which he knows to be true. It is, in a word, any
action done or speech delivered with the intention to deceive, though
both may be absolutely true and right in themselves. See note on [Gen
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#013).

The daughter of my father, but not - of my mother - Ebn Batrick, in his
annals, among other ancient traditions has preserved the following:
"Terah first married Yona, by whom he had Abraham; afterwards he married
Tehevita, by whom he had Sarah." Thus she was the sister of Abraham,
being the daughter of the same father by a different mother.

[Genesis 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 20:13</span></span>

When God caused me to wander - Here the word אלהים Elohim is used with a
plural verb, (התעו hithu, caused me to wander), which is not very usual
in the Hebrew language, as this plural noun is generally joined with
verbs in the singular number. Because there is a departure from the
general mode in this instance, some have contended that the word Elohim
signifies princes in this place, and suppose it to refer to those in
Chaldea, who expelled Abraham because he would not worship the fire; but
the best critics, and with them the Jews, allow that Elohim here
signifies the true God. Abraham probably refers to his first call.

[Genesis 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 20:16</span></span>

And unto Sarah he said - But what did he say? Here there is scarcely any
agreement among interpreters; the Hebrew is exceedingly obscure, and
every interpreter takes it in his own sense.

A thousand pieces of silver - Shekels are very probably meant here, and
so the Targum understands it. The Septuagint has χιλια διδραχμα, a
thousand didrachma, no doubt meaning shekels; for in [Gen
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#015), [Gen
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#016), this translation uses διδραχμα
for the Hebrew שקל shekel. As shakal signifies literally to weigh, and
the shekel was a coin of such a weight, Mr. Ainsworth and others think
this to be the origin of our word scale, the instrument to weigh with.

The shekel of the sanctuary weighed twenty gerahs, [Exo
30:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#013). And according to the Jews, the
gerah weighed sixteen grains of barley. R. Maimon observes, that after
the captivity the shekel was increased to three hundred and eighty-four
grains or barley-corns. On the subject of ancient weights and measures,
very little that is satisfactory is known.

Behold, he is to thee a covering of the eyes - It - the one thousand
shekels, (not he - Abraham), is to thee for a covering - to procure thee
a veil to conceal thy beauty (unto all that are with thee, and with all
other) from all thy own kindred and acquaintance, and from all
strangers, that none, seeing thou art another mans wife; may covet thee
on account of thy comeliness.

Thus she was reproved - The original is ונכחת venochachath, but the word
is probably the second person preterite, used for the imperative mood,
from the root נכח nachach, to make straight, direct, right; or to speak
rightly, correctly; and may, in connection with the rest of the text, be
thus paraphrased: Behold, I have given thy Brother (Abraham, gently
alluding to the equivocation, [Gen
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#002), [Gen
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#005)) a thousand shekels of silver;
behold, It is (that is, the silver is, or may be, or let it be) to thee
a covering of the eyes (to procure a veil; see above) with regard to all
those who are with thee; and to all (or and in all) speak thou the
truth. Correctly translated by the Septuagint, και παντα αληθευσον, and
in all things speak the truth - not only tell a part of the truth, but
tell the whole; say not merely he is my brother, but say also, he is my
husband too. Thus in All things speak the truth. I believe the above to
be the sense of this difficult passage, and shall not puzzle my readers
with criticisms. See Kennicott.

[Genesis 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 20:17</span></span>

So Abraham prayed - This was the prime office of the נביא nabi; see [Gen
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#007).

[Genesis 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 20:18</span></span>

For the Lord had fast closed up all the wombs - Probably by means of
some disease with which he had smitten them, hence it is said they were
healed at Abraham's intercession; and this seems necessarily to imply
that they had been afflicted by some disease that rendered it impossible
for them to have children till it was removed. And possibly this
disease, as Dr. Dodd conjectures, had afflicted Abimelech, and by this
he was withheld, [Gen 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#006), from
defiling Abraham's bed.

1\. On the prevarication of Abraham and Sarah, see the notes and
concluding observations on Genesis 12 (note); (See note [Gen
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#020)) and while we pity this
weakness, let us take it as a warning.

2\. The cause why the patriarch did not acknowledge Sarah as his wife,
was a fear lest he should lose his life on her account, for he said,
Surely the fear, i.e., the true worship, of the true God is not in this
place. Such is the natural bigotry and narrowness of the human heart,
that we can scarcely allow that any besides ourselves possess the true
religion. To indulge a disposition of this kind is highly blamable. The
true religion is neither confined to one spot nor to one people; it is
spread in various forms over the whole earth. He who fills immensity has
left a record of himself in every nation and among every people under
heaven. Beware of the spirit of intolerance! for bigotry produces
uncharitableness; and uncharitableness, harsh judging; and in such a
spirit a man may think he does God service when he tortures, or makes a
burnt-offering of the person whom his narrow mind and hard heart have
dishonored with the name of heretic. Such a spirit is not confined to
any one community, though it has predominated in some more than in
others. But these things are highly displeasing in the sight of God. He,
as the Father of the spirits of all flesh, loves every branch of his
vastly extended family; and as far as we love one another, no matter of
what sect of party, so far we resemble Him. Had Abraham possessed more
charity for man and confidence in God at this time, he had not fallen
into that snare from which he barely escaped. A hasty judgment is
generally both erroneous and harsh; and those who are the most apt to
form it are generally the most difficult to be convinced of the truth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 21](gen021)

</div>
