<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen000)  [Next](gen002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001.md)

First day's work - Creation of the heavens and the earth, [Gen
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001.md), [Gen
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002.md). Of the light and its separation
from the darkness, [Gen 1:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#003.md). Second
day's work - The creation of the firmament, and the separation of the
waters above the firmament from those below it, [Gen
1:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#006.md). Third day's work - The waters
are separated from the earth and formed into seas, etc., [Gen
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#009.md), [Gen
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#010.md). The earth rendered fruitful, and
clothed with trees, herbs, grass, etc., [Gen
1:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#011.md). Fourth day's work - Creation
of the celestial luminaries intended for the measurement of time, the
distinction of periods, seasons, etc., [Gen
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#014.md); and to illuminate the earth,
[Gen 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#015.md). Distinct account of the
formation of the sun, moon, and stars, [Gen
1:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#016.md). Fifth day's work - The
creation of fish, fowls, and reptiles in general, [Gen
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#020.md). Of great aquatic animals, [Gen
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#021.md). They are blessed so as to make
them very prolific, [Gen 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#022.md), [Gen
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#023.md). Sixth day's work - Wild and tame
cattle created, and all kinds of animals which derive their nourishment
from the earth, [Gen 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#024.md), [Gen
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#025.md). The creation of man in the image
and likeness of God, with the dominion given him over the earth and all
inferior animals, [Gen 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026.md). Man or
Adam, a general name for human beings, including both male and female,
[Gen 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027.md). Their peculiar blessing,
[Gen 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#028.md). Vegetables appointed as the
food of man and all other animals, [Gen
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#029.md), [Gen
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#030.md). The judgment which God passed on
his works at the conclusion of his creative acts, [Gen
1:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#031.md).

[Genesis 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 1:1</span></span>

God in the beginning created the heavens and the earth - בראשית ברא
אלהים את השמים ואת הארץ Bereshith bara Elohim eth hashshamayim veeth
haarets; God in the beginning created the heavens and the earth.

Many attempts have been made to define the term God: as to the word
itself, it is pure Anglo-Saxon, and among our ancestors signified, not
only the Divine Being, now commonly designated by the word, but also
good; as in their apprehensions it appeared that God and good were
correlative terms; and when they thought or spoke of him, they were
doubtless led from the word itself to consider him as The Good Being, a
fountain of infinite benevolence and beneficence towards his creatures.

A general definition of this great First Cause, as far as human words
dare attempt one, may be thus given: The eternal, independent, and
self-existent Being: the Being whose purposes and actions spring from
himself, without foreign motive or influence: he who is absolute in
dominion; the most pure, the most simple, and most spiritual of all
essences; infinitely benevolent, beneficent, true, and holy: the cause
of all being, the upholder of all things; infinitely happy, because
infinitely perfect; and eternally self-sufficient, needing nothing that
he has made: illimitable in his immensity, inconceivable in his mode of
existence, and indescribable in his essence; known fully only to
himself, because an infinite mind can be fully apprehended only by
itself. In a word, a Being who, from his infinite wisdom, cannot err or
be deceived; and who, from his infinite goodness, can do nothing but
what is eternally just, right, and kind. Reader, such is the God of the
Bible; but how widely different from the God of most human creeds and
apprehensions!

The original word אלהים Elohim, God, is certainly the plural form of אל
El, or אלה Eloah, and has long been supposed, by the most eminently
learned and pious men, to imply a plurality of Persons in the Divine
nature. As this plurality appears in so many parts of the sacred
writings to be confined to three Persons, hence the doctrine of the
Trinity, which has formed a part of the creed of all those who have been
deemed sound in the faith, from the earliest ages of Christianity. Nor
are the Christians singular in receiving this doctrine, and in deriving
it from the first words of Divine revelation. An eminent Jewish rabbi,
Simeon ben Joachi, in his comment on the sixth section of Leviticus, has
these remarkable words: "Come and see the mystery of the word Elohim;
there are three degrees, and each degree by itself alone, and yet
notwithstanding they are all one, and joined together in one, and are
not divided from each other." See Ainsworth. He must be strangely
prejudiced indeed who cannot see that the doctrine of a Trinity, and of
a Trinity in unity, is expressed in the above words. The verb ברא bara,
he created, being joined in the singular number with this plural noun,
has been considered as pointing out, and not obscurely, the unity of the
Divine Persons in this work of creation. In the ever-blessed Trinity,
from the infinite and indivisible unity of the persons, there can be but
one will, one purpose, and one infinite and uncontrollable energy.

"Let those who have any doubt whether אלהים Elohim, when meaning the
true God, Jehovah, be plural or not, consult the following passages,
where they will find it joined with adjectives, verbs, and pronouns
plural.

"[Gen 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026.md) [Gen
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#022.md) [Gen
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#007.md) [Gen
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#013.md) [Gen
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#007.md), [Gen
31:53](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#053.md) [Gen
35:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#007.md). "[Deu
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#007.md) [Deu
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#023.md); [Jos
24:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#019.md) [Sa1
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#008.md); [Sa2
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#023.md); "[Psa
58:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#006.md); [Isa
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#008.md); [Jer
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#010.md), [Jer
23:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#036.md). "See also [Pro
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#010.md), [Pro
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#003.md); [Psa
149:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#002.md); [Ecc
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#007.md), [Ecc
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#001.md); [Job
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#001.md); [Isa
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#003.md), [Isa
54:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#005.md), [Isa
62:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#005.md); [Hos
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#012.md), or [Hos
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#001.md); [Mal
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#006.md); [Dan
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#018.md), [Dan
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#020.md), and [Dan
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#018.md), [Dan
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#022.md)." - Parkhurst.

As the word Elohim is the term by which the Divine Being is most
generally expressed in the Old Testament, it may be necessary to
consider it here more at large. It is a maxim that admits of no
controversy, that every noun in the Hebrew language is derived from a
verb, which is usually termed the radix or root, from which, not only
the noun, but all the different flections of the verb, spring. This
radix is the third person singular of the preterite or past tense. The
ideal meaning of this root expresses some essential property of the
thing which it designates, or of which it is an appellative. The root in
Hebrew, and in its sister language, the Arabic, generally consists of
three letters, and every word must be traced to its root in order to
ascertain its genuine meaning, for there alone is this meaning to be
found. In Hebrew and Arabic this is essentially necessary, and no man
can safely criticise on any word in either of these languages who does
not carefully attend to this point.

I mention the Arabic with the Hebrew for two reasons.

1\. Because the two languages evidently spring from the same source, and
have very nearly the same mode of construction.

2\. Because the deficient roots in the Hebrew Bible are to be sought for
in the Arabic language. The reason of this must be obvious, when it is
considered that the whole of the Hebrew language is lost except what is
in the Bible, and even a part of this book is written in Chaldee.

Now, as the English Bible does not contain the whole of the English
language, so the Hebrew Bible does not contain the whole of the Hebrew.
If a man meet with an English word which he cannot find in an ample
concordance or dictionary to the Bible, he must of course seek for that
word in a general English dictionary. In like manner, if a particular
form of a Hebrew word occur that cannot be traced to a root in the
Hebrew Bible, because the word does not occur in the third person
singular of the past tense in the Bible, it is expedient, it is
perfectly lawful, and often indispensably necessary, to seek the
deficient root in the Arabic. For as the Arabic is still a living
language, and perhaps the most copious in the universe, it may well be
expected to furnish those terms which are deficient in the Hebrew Bible.
And the reasonableness of this is founded on another maxim, viz., that
either the Arabic was derived from the Hebrew, or the Hebrew from the
Arabic. I shall not enter into this controversy; there are great names
on both sides, and the decision of the question in either way will have
the same effect on my argument. For if the Arabic were derived from the
Hebrew, it must have been when the Hebrew was a living and complete
language, because such is the Arabic now; and therefore all its
essential roots we may reasonably expect to find there: but if, as Sir
William Jones supposed, the Hebrew were derived from the Arabic, the
same expectation is justified, the deficient roots in Hebrew may be
sought for in the mother tongue. If, for example, we meet with a term in
our ancient English language the meaning of which we find difficult to
ascertain, common sense teaches us that we should seek for it in the
Anglo-Saxon, from which our language springs; and, if necessary, go up
to the Teutonic, from which the Anglo-Saxon was derived. No person
disputes the legitimacy of this measure, and we find it in constant
practice. I make these observations at the very threshold of my work,
because the necessity of acting on this principle (seeking deficient
Hebrew roots in the Arabic) may often occur, and I wish to speak once
for all on the subject.

The first sentence in the Scripture shows the propriety of having
recourse to this principle. We have seen that the word אלהים Elohim is
plural; we have traced our term God to its source, and have seen its
signification; and also a general definition of the thing or being
included under this term, has been tremblingly attempted. We should now
trace the original to its root, but this root does not appear in the
Hebrew Bible. Were the Hebrew a complete language, a pious reason might
be given for this omission, viz., "As God is without beginning and
without cause, as his being is infinite and underived, the Hebrew
language consults strict propriety in giving no root whence his name can
be deduced." Mr. Parkhurst, to whose pious and learned labors in Hebrew
literature most Biblical students are indebted, thinks he has found the
root in אלה alah, he swore, bound himself by oath; and hence he calls
the ever-blessed Trinity אלהים Elohim, as being bound by a conditional
oath to redeem man, etc., etc. Most pious minds will revolt from such a
definition, and will be glad with me to find both the noun and the root
preserved in Arabic. Allah is the common name for God in the Arabic
tongue, and often the emphatic is used. Now both these words are derived
from the root alaha, he worshipped, adored, was struck with
astonishment, fear, or terror; and hence, he adored with sacred horror
and veneration, cum sacro horrore ac veneratione coluit, adoravit -
Wilmet. Hence ilahon, fear, veneration, and also the object of religious
fear, the Deity, the supreme God, the tremendous Being. This is not a
new idea; God was considered in the same light among the ancient
Hebrews; and hence Jacob swears by the fear of his father Isaac, [Gen
31:53](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#053.md). To complete the definition,
Golius renders alaha, juvit, liberavit, et tutatus fuit, "he succoured,
liberated, kept in safety, or defended." Thus from the ideal meaning of
this most expressive root, we acquire the most correct notion of the
Divine nature; for we learn that God is the sole object of adoration;
that the perfections of his nature are such as must astonish all those
who piously contemplate them, and fill with horror all who would dare to
give his glory to another, or break his commandments; that consequently
he should be worshipped with reverence and religious fear; and that
every sincere worshipper may expect from him help in all his weaknesses,
trials, difficulties, temptations, etc.,; freedom from the power, guilt,
nature, and consequences of sin; and to be supported, defended, and
saved to the uttermost, and to the end.

Here then is one proof, among multitudes which shall be adduced in the
course of this work, of the importance, utility, and necessity of
tracing up these sacred words to their sources; and a proof also, that
subjects which are supposed to be out of the reach of the common people
may, with a little difficulty, be brought on a level with the most
ordinary capacity.

In the beginning - Before the creative acts mentioned in this chapter
all was Eternity. Time signifies duration measured by the revolutions of
the heavenly bodies: but prior to the creation of these bodies there
could be no measurement of duration, and consequently no time; therefore
in the beginning must necessarily mean the commencement of time which
followed, or rather was produced by, God's creative acts, as an effect
follows or is produced by a cause.

Created - Caused existence where previously to this moment there was no
being. The rabbins, who are legitimate judges in a case of verbal
criticism on their own language, are unanimous in asserting that the
word ברא bara expresses the commencement of the existence of a thing, or
egression from nonentity to entity. It does not in its primary meaning
denote the preserving or new forming things that had previously existed,
as some imagine, but creation in the proper sense of the term, though it
has some other acceptations in other places. The supposition that God
formed all things out of a pre-existing, eternal nature, is certainly
absurd, for if there had been an eternal nature besides an eternal God,
there must have been two self-existing, independent, and eternal beings,
which is a most palpable contradiction.

את השמים eth hashshamayim. The word את eth, which is generally
considered as a particle, simply denoting that the word following is in
the accusative or oblique case, is often understood by the rabbins in a
much more extensive sense. "The particle את," says Aben Ezra, "signifies
the substance of the thing." The like definition is given by Kimchi in
his Book of Roots. "This particle," says Mr. Ainsworth, "having the
first and last letters of the Hebrew alphabet in it, is supposed to
comprise the sum and substance of all things." "The particle את eth
(says Buxtorf, Talmudic Lexicon, sub voce) with the cabalists is often
mystically put for the beginning and the end, as α alpha and ω omega are
in the Apocalypse." On this ground these words should be translated,
"God in the beginning created the substance of the heavens and the
substance of the earth," i.e. the prima materia, or first elements, out
of which the heavens and the earth were successively formed. The Syriac
translator understood the word in this sense, and to express this
meaning has used the word yoth, which has this signification, and is
very properly translated in Walton's Polyglot, Esse, caeli et Esse
terrae, "the being or substance of the heaven, and the being or
substance of the earth." St. Ephraim Syrus, in his comment on this
place, uses the same Syriac word, and appears to understand it precisely
in the same way. Though the Hebrew words are certainly no more than the
notation of a case in most places, yet understood here in the sense
above, they argue a wonderful philosophic accuracy in the statement of
Moses, which brings before us, not a finished heaven and earth, as every
other translation appears to do, though afterwards the process of their
formation is given in detail, but merely the materials out of which God
built the whole system in the six following days.

The heaven and the earth - As the word שמים shamayim is plural, we may
rest assured that it means more than the atmosphere, to express which
some have endeavored to restrict its meaning. Nor does it appear that
the atmosphere is particularly intended here, as this is spoken of, [Gen
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#006.md), under the term firmament. The
word heavens must therefore comprehend the whole solar system, as it is
very likely the whole of this was created in these six days; for unless
the earth had been the center of a system, the reverse of which is
sufficiently demonstrated, it would be unphilosophic to suppose it was
created independently of the other parts of the system, as on this
supposition we must have recourse to the almighty power of God to
suspend the influence of the earth's gravitating power till the fourth
day, when the sun was placed in the center, round which the earth began
then to revolve. But as the design of the inspired penman was to relate
what especially belonged to our world and its inhabitants, therefore he
passes by the rest of the planetary system, leaving it simply included
in the plural word heavens. In the word earth every thing relative to
the terraqueaerial globe is included, that is, all that belongs to the
solid and fluid parts of our world with its surrounding atmosphere. As
therefore I suppose the whole solar system was created at this time, I
think it perfectly in place to give here a general view of all the
planets, with every thing curious and important hitherto known relative
to their revolutions and principal affections.

Observations On The Preceding Tables

(Editor's Note: These tables were omitted due to outdated information)

In Table I. the quantity or the periodic and sidereal revolutions of the
planets is expressed in common years, each containing 365 days; as,
e.g., the tropical revolution of Jupiter is, by the table, 11 years, 315
days, 14 hours, 39 minutes, 2 seconds; i.e., the exact number of days is
equal to 11 years multiplied by 365, and the extra 315 days added to the
product, which make In all 4330 days. The sidereal and periodic times
are also set down to the nearest second of time, from numbers used in
the construction of the tables in the third edition of M. de la Lande's
Astronomy. The columns containing the mean distance of the planets from
the sun in English miles, and their greatest and least distance from the
earth, are such as result from the best observations of the two last
transits of Venus, which gave the solar parallax to be equal to 8
three-fifth seconds of a degree; and consequently the earth's diameter,
as seen from the sun, must be the double of 8 three-fifth seconds, or 17
one-fifth seconds. From this last quantity, compared with the apparent
diameters of the planets, as seen at a distance equal to that of the
earth at her main distance from the sun, the diameters of the planets in
English miles, as contained in the seventh column, have been carefully
computed. In the column entitled "Proportion of bulk, the earth being
1," the whole numbers express the number of times the other planet
contains more cubic miles, etc., than the earth; and if the number of
cubic miles in the earth be given, the number of cubic miles in any
planet may be readily found by multiplying the cubic miles contained in
the earth by the number in the column, and the product will be the
quantity required.

This is a small but accurate sketch of the vast solar system; to
describe it fully, even in all its known revolutions and connections, in
all its astonishing energy and influence, in its wonderful plan,
structure, operations, and results, would require more volumes than can
be devoted to the commentary itself.

As so little can be said here on a subject so vast, it may appear to
some improper to introduce it at all; but to any observation of this
kind I must be permitted to reply, that I should deem it unpardonable
not to give a general view of the solar system in the very place where
its creation is first introduced. If these works be stupendous and
magnificent, what must He be who formed, guides, and supports them all
by the word of his power! Reader, stand in awe of this God, and sin not.
Make him thy friend through the Son of his love; and, when these heavens
and this earth are no more, thy soul shall exist in consummate and
unutterable felicity.

See the remarks on the sun, moon, and stars, after [Gen
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#016.md). See Clarke's note on [Gen
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#016.md).

[Genesis 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 1:2</span></span>

The earth was without form and void - The original term תהו tohu and בהו
bohu, which we translate without form and void, are of uncertain
etymology; but in this place, and wherever else they are used, they
convey the idea of confusion and disorder. From these terms it is
probable that the ancient Syrians and Egyptians borrowed their gods,
Theuth and Bau, and the Greeks their Chaos. God seems at first to have
created the elementary principles of all things; and this formed the
grand mass of matter, which in this state must be without arrangement,
or any distinction of parts: a vast collection of indescribably confused
materials, of nameless entities strangely mixed; and wonderfully well
expressed by an ancient heathen poet: -

Ante mare et terras, et, quod tegit omnia, caelum,

Unus erat toto naturae vultus in orbe, Quem dixere

Chaos; rudis indigestaque moles,

Nec quicquam nisi pondus iners; congestaque eodem

Non bene junctarum discordia semina rerum.

Ovid.

Before the seas and this terrestrial ball,

And heaven's high canopy that covers all,

One was the face of nature, if a face;

Rather, a rude and indigested mass;

A lifeless lump, unfashion'd and unframed,

Of jarring seeds, and justly Chaos named.

Dryden.

The most ancient of the Greeks have spoken nearly in the same way of
this crude, indigested state of the primitive chaotic mass.

When this congeries of elementary principles was brought together, God
was pleased to spend six days in assimilating, assorting, and arranging
the materials, out of which he built up, not only the earth, but the
whole of the solar system.

The spirit of God - This has been variously and strangely understood.
Some think a violent wind is meant, because רוח, ruach often signifies
wind, as well as spirit, as πνευμα, does in Greek; and the term God is
connected with it merely, as they think, to express the superlative
degree. Others understand by it an elementary fire. Others, the sun,
penetrating and drying up the earth with his rays. Others, the angels,
who were supposed to have been employed as agents in creation. Others, a
certain occult principle, termed the anima mundi or soul of the world.
Others, a magnetic attraction, by which all things were caused to
gravitate to a common center. But it is sufficiently evident from the
use of the word in other places, that the Holy Spirit of God is
intended; which our blessed Lord represents under the notion of wind,
[Joh 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#008.md); and which, as a mighty
rushing wind on the day of Pentecost, filled the house where the
disciples were sitting, [Act 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#002.md),
which was immediately followed by their speaking with other tongues,
because they were filled with the Holy Ghost, [Act
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#004.md). These scriptures sufficiently
ascertain the sense in which the word is used by Moses.

Moved - מרחפת merachepheth, was brooding over; for the word expresses
that tremulous motion made by the hen while either hatching her eggs or
fostering her young. It here probably signifies the communicating a
vital or prolific principle to the waters. As the idea of incubation, or
hatching an egg, is implied in the original word, hence probably the
notion, which prevailed among the ancients, that the world was generated
from an egg.

[Genesis 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 1:3</span></span>

And God said, Let there be light - הי אור ויהי אור Yehi or, vaihi or.
Nothing can be conceived more dignified than this form of expression. It
argues at once uncontrollable authority, and omnific power; and in human
language it is scarcely possible to conceive that God can speak more
like himself. This passage, in the Greek translation of the Septuagint,
fell in the way of Dionysius Longinus, one of the most judicious Greek
critics that ever lived, and who is highly celebrated over the civilized
world for a treatise he wrote, entitled Περι Ὑψους, Concerning the
Sublime, both in prose and poetry; of this passage, though a heathen, he
speaks in the following terms: - Ταυτῃ και ὁ των Ιουδαιων θεσμοθετης(ουχ
ὁ τυχων ανηρ,) επειδη την του θειου δυναμιν κατα την αξιαν εχωρησε,
καξεφηνεν· ευθυς εν τῃ εισβολη γραψας των νομων, ΕΙΠΕΝ Ὁ ΘΕΟΣ, φησι, τι;
ΓΕΝΕΣΘΩ ΦΩΣ· και εγενετο. ΓΕΝΕΣΘΩ ΓΗ· και εγενετο."So likewise the
Jewish lawgiver (who was no ordinary man) having conceived a just idea
of the Divine power, he expressed it in a dignified manner; for at the
beginning of his laws he thus speaks: God Said - What? Let There Be
Light! and there was light. Let There Be Earth! and there was earth." -
Longinus, sect. ix. edit. Pearce.

Many have asked, "How could light be produced on the first day, and the
sun, the fountain of it, not created till the fourth day?" With the
various and often unphilosophical answers which have been given to this
question I will not meddle, but shall observe that the original word אור
signifies not only light but fire, see [Isa
31:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#009.md) [Eze
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#002.md). It is used for the Sun, [Job
31:26](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#026.md). And for the electric fluid or
Lightning, [Job 37:3](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#003.md). And it is worthy
of remark that It is used in [Isa
44:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#016.md), for the heat, derived from אש
esh, the fire. He burneth part thereof in the fire (במו אש bemo esh):
yea, he warmeth himself, and saith, Aha! I have seen the fire, ראיתי אור
raithi ur, which a modern philosopher who understood the language would
not scruple to translate, I have received caloric, or an additional
portion of the matter of heat. I therefore conclude, that as God has
diffused the matter of caloric or latent heat through every part of
nature, without which there could be neither vegetation nor animal life,
that it is caloric or latent heat which is principally intended by the
original word.

That there is latent light, which is probably the same with latent heat,
may be easily demonstrated: take two pieces of smooth rock crystal,
agate, cornelian or flint, and rub them together briskly in the dark,
and the latent light or matter of caloric will be immediately produced
and become visible. The light or caloric thus disengaged does not
operate in the same powerful manner as the heat or fire which is
produced by striking with flint and steel, or that produced by electric
friction. The existence of this caloric-latent or primitive light, may
be ascertained in various other bodies; it can be produced by the flint
and steel, by rubbing two hard sticks together, by hammering cold iron,
which in a short time becomes red hot, and by the strong and sudden
compression of atmospheric air in a tube. Friction in general produces
both fire and light. God therefore created this universal agent on the
first day, because without It no operation of nature could be carried on
or perfected.

Light is one of the most astonishing productions of the creative skill
and power of God. It is the grand medium by which all his other works
are discovered, examined, and understood, so far as they can be known.
Its immense diffusion and extreme velocity are alone sufficient to
demonstrate the being and wisdom of God. Light has been proved by many
experiments to travel at the astonishing rate of 194,188 miles in one
second of time! and comes from the sun to the earth in eight minutes 11
43/50 seconds, a distance of 95,513,794 English miles.

[Genesis 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 1:4</span></span>

God divided the light from the darkness - This does not imply that light
and darkness are two distinct substances, seeing darkness is only the
privation of light; but the words simply refer us by anticipation to the
rotation of the earth round its own axis once in twenty-three hours,
fifty-six minutes, and four seconds, which is the cause of the
distinction between day and night, by bringing the different parts of
the surface of the earth successively into and from under the solar
rays; and it was probably at this moment that God gave this rotation to
the earth, to produce this merciful provision of day and night. For the
manner in which light is supposed to be produced, see [Gen
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#016.md), under the word sun.

[Genesis 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 1:6</span></span>

And God said, Let there be a firmament - Our translators, by following
the firmamentum of the Vulgate, which is a translation of the στερεωμα
of the Septuagint, have deprived this passage of all sense and meaning.
The Hebrew word רקיע rakia, from רקע raka, to spread out as the curtains
of a tent or pavilion, simply signifies an expanse or space, and
consequently that circumambient space or expansion separating the
clouds, which are in the higher regions of it, from the seas, etc.,
which are below it. This we call the atmosphere, the orb of atoms or
inconceivably small particles; but the word appears to have been used by
Moses in a more extensive sense, and to include the whole of the
planetary vortex, or the space which is occupied by the whole solar
system.

[Genesis 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 1:10</span></span>

And God called the dry land Earth; and the gathering together of the
waters called he Seas - These two constitute what is called the
terraqueous globe, in which the earth and the water exist in a most
judicious proportion to each other. Dr. Long took the papers which cover
the surface of a seventeen inch terrestrial globe, and having carefully
separated the land from the sea, be weighed the two collections of
papers accurately, and found that the sea papers weighed three hundred
and forty-nine grains, and the land papers only one hundred and
twenty-four; by which experiment it appears that nearly three-fourths of
the surface of our globe, from the Arctic to the Antarctic polar
circles, are covered with water. The doctor did not weigh the parts
within the polar circles, because there is no certain measurement of the
proportion of land and water which they contain. This proportion of
three-fourths water may be considered as too great, if not useless; but
Mr. Ray, by most accurate experiments made on evaporation, has proved
that it requires so much aqueous surface to yield a sufficiency of
vapors for the purpose of cooling the atmosphere, and watering the
earth. See Ray's Physico-theological Discourses.

An eminent chemist and philosopher, Dr. Priestley, has very properly
observed that it seems plain that Moses considered the whole terraqueous
globe as being created in a fluid state, the earthy and other particles
of matter being mingled with the water. The present form of the earth
demonstrates the truth of the Mosaic account; for it is well known that
if a soft or elastic globular body be rapidly whirled round on its axis,
the parts at the poles will be flattened, and the parts on the equator,
midway between the north and south poles, will be raised up. This is
precisely the shape of our earth; it has the figure of an oblate
spheroid, a figure pretty much resembling the shape of an orange. It has
been demonstrated by admeasurement that the earth is flatted at the
poles and raised at the equator. This was first conjectured by Sir Isaac
Newton, and afterwards confirmed by M. Cassini and others, who measured
several degrees of latitude at the equator and near the north pole, and
found that the difference perfectly justified Sir Isaac Newton's
conjecture, and consequently confirmed the Mosaic account. The result of
the experiments instituted to determine this point, proved that the
diameter of the earth at the equator is greater by more than
twenty-three and a half miles than it is at the poles, allowing the
polar diameter to be 1/334th part shorter than the equatorial, according
to the recent admeasurements of several degrees of latitude made by
Messrs. Mechain and Delambre - L'Histoire des Mathem. par M. de la
Lande, tom. iv., part v., liv. 6.

And God saw that it was good - This is the judgment which God pronounced
on his own works. They were beautiful and perfect in their kind, for
such is the import of the word טוב tob. They were in weight and measure
perfect and entire, lacking nothing. But the reader will think it
strange that this approbation should be expressed once on the first,
fourth, fifth, and sixth days; twice on the third, and not at all on the
second! I suppose that the words, And God saw that it was good, have
been either lost from the conclusion of the eighth verse, or that the
clause in the tenth verse originally belonged to the eighth. It appears,
from the Septuagint translation, that the words in question existed
originally at the close of the eighth verse, in the copies which they
used; for in that version we still find, Και ειδεν ὁ Θεος ὁτι καλον· And
God saw that it was good. This reading, however, is not acknowledged by
any of Kennicott's or De Rossi's MSS., nor by any of the other versions.
If the account of the second day stood originally as it does now, no
satisfactory reason can be given for the omission of this expression of
the Divine approbation of the work wrought by his wisdom and power on
that day.

[Genesis 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 1:11</span></span>

Let the earth bring forth grass - herb - fruit-tree, etc. - In these
general expressions all kinds of vegetable productions are included.
Fruit-tree is not to be understood here in the restricted sense in which
the term is used among us; it signifies all trees, not only those which
bear fruit, which may be applied to the use of men and cattle, but also
those which had the power of propagating themselves by seeds, etc. Now
as God delights to manifest himself in the little as well as in the
great, he has shown his consummate wisdom in every part of the vegetable
creation. Who can account for, or comprehend, the structure of a single
tree or plant? The roots, the stem, the woody fibres, the bark, the
rind, the air-vessels, the sap-vessels, the leaves, the flowers, and the
fruits, are so many mysteries. All the skill, wisdom, and power of men
and angels could not produce a single grain of wheat: A serious and
reflecting mind can see the grandeur of God, not only in the immense
cedars on Lebanon, but also in the endlessly varied forests that appear
through the microscope in the mould of cheese, stale paste, etc., etc.

[Genesis 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 1:12</span></span>

Whose seed was in itself - Which has the power of multiplying itself by
seeds, slips, roots, etc., ad infinitum; which contains in itself all
the rudiments of the future plant through its endless generations. This
doctrine has been abundantly confirmed by the most accurate observations
of the best modern philosophers. The astonishing power with which God
has endued the vegetable creation to multiply its different species, may
be instanced in the seed of the elm. This tree produces one thousand
five hundred and eighty-four millions of seeds; and each of these seeds
has the power of producing the same number. How astonishing is this
produce! At first one seed is deposited in the earth; from this one a
tree springs, which in the course of its vegetative life produces one
thousand five hundred and eighty-four millions of seeds. This is the
first generation. The second generation will amount to two trillions,
five hundred and nine thousand and fifty-six billions. The third
generation will amount to three thousand nine hundred and seventy-four
quadrillions, three hundred and forty-four thousand seven hundred and
four trillions! And the fourth generation from these would amount to six
sextillions two hundred and ninety-five thousand three hundred and
sixty-two quintillions, eleven thousand one hundred and thirty-six
quadrillions! Sums too immense for the human mind to conceive; and, when
we allow the most confined space in which a tree can grow, it appears
that the seeds of the third generation from one elm would be many
myriads of times more than sufficient to stock the whole superfices of
all the planets in the solar system! But plants multiply themselves by
slips as well as by seeds. Sir Kenelm Digby saw in 1660 a plant of
barley, in the possession of the fathers of the Christian doctrine at
Paris, which contained 249 stalks springing from one root or grain, and
in which he counted upwards of 18,000 grains. See my experiments on
Tilling in the Methodist Magazine.

[Genesis 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 1:14</span></span>

And God said, Let there be lights, etc. - One principal office of these
was to divide between day and night. When night is considered a state of
comparative darkness, how can lights divide or distinguish it? The
answer is easy: The sun is the monarch of the day, which is the state of
light; the moon, of the night, the state of darkness. The rays of the
sun, falling on the atmosphere, are refracted and diffused over the
whole of that hemisphere of the earth immediately under his orb; while
those rays of that vast luminary which, because of the earth's smallness
in comparison of the sun, are diffused on all sides beyond the earth,
falling on the opaque disc of the moon, are reflected back upon what may
be called the lower hemisphere, or that part of the earth which is
opposite to the part which is illuminated by the sun: and as the earth
completes a revolution on its own axis in about twenty-four hours,
consequently each hemisphere has alternate day and night. But as the
solar light reflected from the face of the moon is computed to be 50,000
times less in intensity and effect than the light of the sun as it comes
directly from himself to our earth, (for light decreases in its
intensity as the distance it travels from the sun increases), therefore
a sufficient distinction is made between day and night, or light and
darkness, notwithstanding each is ruled and determined by one of these
two great lights; the moon ruling the night, i.e., reflecting from her
own surface back on the earth the rays of light which she receives from
the sun. Thus both hemispheres are to a certain degree illuminated: the
one, on which the sun shines, completely so; this is day: the other, on
which the sun's light is reflected by the moon, partially; this is
night. It is true that both the planets and fixed stars afford a
considerable portion of light during the night, yet they cannot be said
to rule or to predominate by their light, because their rays arc quite
lost in the superior splendor of the moon's light.

And let them be for signs - לאתת leothoth. Let them ever be considered
as continual tokens of God's tender care for man, and as standing proofs
of his continual miraculous interference; for so the word את oth is
often used. And is it not the almighty energy of God that upholds them
in being? The sun and moon also serve as signs of the different changes
which take place in the atmosphere, and which are so essential for all
purposes of agriculture, commerce, etc.

For seasons - מועדים moadim; For the determination of the times on which
the sacred festivals should be held. In this sense the word frequently
occurs; and it was right that at the very opening of his revelation God
should inform man that there were certain festivals which should be
annually celebrated to his glory. Some think we should understand the
original word as signifying months, for which purpose we know the moon
essentially serves through all the revolutions of time.

For days - Both the hours of the day and night, as well as the different
lengths of the days and nights, are distinguished by the longer and
shorter spaces of time the sun is above or below the horizon.

And years - That is, those grand divisions of time by which all
succession in the vast lapse of duration is distinguished. This refers
principally to a complete revolution of the earth round the sun, which
is accomplished in 365 days, 5 hours, 48 minutes, and 48 seconds; for
though the revolution is that of the earth, yet it cannot be determined
but by the heavenly bodies.

[Genesis 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 1:16</span></span>

And God made two great lights - Moses speaks of the sun and moon here,
not according to their bulk or solid contents, but according to the
proportion of light they shed on the earth. The expression has been
cavilled at by some who are as devoid of mental capacity as of candour.
"The moon," say they, "is not a great body; on the contrary, it is the
very smallest in our system." Well, and has Moses said the contrary? He
has said it is a great Light; had he said otherwise he had not spoken
the truth. It is, in reference to the earth, next to the sun himself,
the greatest light in the solar system; and so true is it that the moon
is a great light, that it affords more light to the earth than all the
planets in the solar system, and all the innumerable stars in the vault
of heaven, put together. It is worthy of remark that on the fourth day
of the creation the sun was formed, and then "first tried his beams
athwart the gloom profound;" and that at the conclusion of the fourth
millenary from the creation, according to the Hebrew, the Sun of
righteousness shone upon the world, as deeply sunk in that mental
darkness produced by sin as the ancient world was, while teeming
darkness held the dominion, till the sun was created as the dispenser of
light. What would the natural world be without the sun? A howling waste,
in which neither animal nor vegetable life could possibly be sustained.
And what would the moral world be without Jesus Christ, and the light of
his word and Spirit? Just what those parts of it now are where his light
has not yet shone: "dark places of the earth, filled with the
habitations of cruelty," where error prevails without end, and
superstition, engendering false hopes and false fears, degrades and
debases the mind of man.

Many have supposed that the days of the creation answer to so many
thousands of years; and that as God created all in six days, and rested
the seventh, so the world shall last six thousand years, and the seventh
shall be the eternal rest that remains for the people of God. To this
conclusion they have been led by these words of the apostle, [Pe2
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#008.md) : One day is with the Lord as a
thousand years; and a thousand years as one day. Secret things belong to
God; those that are revealed to us and our children.

He made the stars also - Or rather, He made the lesser light, with the
stars, to rule the night. See Claudlan de Raptu Proser., lib. ii., v.
44.

Hic Hyperionis solem de semine nasci Fecerat,

et pariter lunam, sed dispare forma, Aurorae noctisque duces.

From famed Hyperion did he cause to rise

The sun, and placed the moon amid the skies,

With splendor robed, but far unequal light,

The radiant leaders of the day and night.

Of the Sun

On the nature of the sun there have been various conjectures. It was
long thought that he was a vast globe of fire 1,384,462 times larger
than the earth, and that he was continually emitting from his body
innumerable millions of fiery particles, which, being extremely divided,
answered for the purpose of light and heat without occasioning any
ignition or burning, except when collected in the focus of a convex lens
or burning glass.

Against this opinion, however, many serious and weighty objections have
been made; and it has been so pressed with difficulties that
philosophers have been obliged to look for a theory less repugnant to
nature and probability. Dr. Herschel's discoveries by means of his
immensely magnifying telescopes, have, by the general consent of
philosophers, added a new habitable world to our system, which is the
Sun. Without stopping to enter into detail, which would be improper
here, it is sufficient to say that these discoveries tend to prove that
what we call the sun is only the atmosphere of that luminary; "that this
atmosphere consists of various elastic fluids that are more or less
lucid and transparent; that as the clouds belonging to our earth are
probably decompositions of some of the elastic fluids belonging to the
atmosphere itself, so we may suppose that in the vast atmosphere of the
sun, similar decompositions may take place, but with this difference,
that the decompositions of the elastic fluids of the sun are of a
phosphoric nature, and are attended by lucid appearances, by giving out
light." The body of the sun he considers as hidden generally from us by
means of this luminous atmosphere, but what are called the maculae or
spots on the sun are real openings in this atmosphere, through which the
opaque body of the sun becomes visible; that this atmosphere itself is
not fiery nor hot, but is the instrument which God designed to act on
the caloric or latent heat; and that heat is only produced by the solar
light acting upon and combining with the caloric or matter of fire
contained in the air, and other substances which are heated by it. This
ingenious theory is supported by many plausible reasons and
illustrations, which may be seen in the paper he read before the Royal
Society. On this subject see the note on [Gen
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#003.md).

Of the Moon

There is scarcely any doubt now remaining in the philosophical world
that the moon is a habitable globe. The most accurate observations that
have been made with the most powerful telescopes have confirmed the
opinion. The moon seems, in almost every respect, to be a body similar
to our earth; to have its surface diversified by hill and dale,
mountains and valleys, rivers, lakes, and seas. And there is the fullest
evidence that our earth serves as a moon to the moon herself, differing
only in this, that as the earth's surface is thirteen times larger than
the moon's, so the moon receives from the earth a light thirteen times
greater in splendor than that which she imparts to us; and by a very
correct analogy we are led to infer that all the planets and their
satellites, or attendant moons, are inhabited, for matter seems only to
exist for the sake of intelligent beings.

Of the Stars

The Stars in general are considered to be suns, similar to that in our
system, each having an appropriate number of planets moving round it;
and, as these stars are innumerable, consequently there are innumerable
worlds, all dependent on the power, protection, and providence of God.
Where the stars are in great abundance, Dr. Herschel supposes they form
primaries and secondaries, i.e., suns revolving about suns, as planets
revolve about the sun in our system. He considers that this must be the
case in what is called the milky way, the stars being there in
prodigious quantity. Of this he gives the following proof: On August
22,1792, he found that in forty-one minutes of time not less than
258,000 stars had passed through the field of view in his telescope.
What must God be, who has made, governs, and supports so many worlds!
See Clarke's note on [Gen 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001.md).

[Genesis 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 1:20</span></span>

Let the waters bring forth abundantly - There is a meaning in these
words which is seldom noticed. Innumerable millions of animalcula are
found in water. Eminent naturalists have discovered not less than 30,000
in a single drop! How inconceivably small must each be, and yet each a
perfect animal, furnished with the whole apparatus of bones, muscles,
nerves, heart, arteries, veins, lungs, viscera in general, animal
spirits, etc., etc. What a proof is this of the manifold wisdom of God!
But the fecundity of fishes is another point intended in the text; no
creature's are so prolific as these. A Tench lay 1,000 eggs, a Carp
20,000, and Leuwenhoek counted in a middling sized Cod 9,384,000! Thus,
according to the purpose of God, the waters bring forth abundantly. And
what a merciful provision is this for the necessities of man! Many
hundreds of thousands of the earth's inhabitants live for a great part
of the year on fish only. Fish afford, not only a wholesome, but a very
nutritive diet; they are liable to few diseases, and generally come in
vast quantities to our shores when in their greatest perfection. In this
also we may see that the kind providence of God goes hand in hand with
his creating energy. While he manifests his wisdom and his power, he is
making a permanent provision for the sustenance of man through all his
generations.

[Genesis 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 1:21</span></span>

And God created great whales - התנינם הגדלים hattanninim haggedolim.
Though this is generally understood by the different versions as
signifying whales, yet the original must be understood rather as a
general than a particular term, comprising all the great aquatic
animals, such as the various species of whales, the porpoise, the
dolphin, the monoceros or narwal, and the shark. God delights to show
himself in little as well as in great things: hence he forms animals so
minute that 30,000 can be contained in one drop of water; and others so
great that they seem to require almost a whole sea to float in.

[Genesis 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 1:22</span></span>

Let fowl multiply in the earth - It is truly astonishing with what care,
wisdom, and minute skill God has formed the different genera and species
of birds, whether intended to live chiefly on land or in water. The
structure of a single feather affords a world of wonders; and as God
made the fowls that they might fly in the firmament of heaven, [Gen
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#020.md), so he has adapted the form of
their bodies, and the structure and disposition of their plumage, for
that very purpose. The head and neck in flying are drawn principally
within the breast-bone, so that the whole under part exhibits the
appearance of a ship's hull. The wings are made use of as sails, or
rather oars, and the tail as a helm or rudder. By means of these the
creature is not only able to preserve the center of gravity, but also to
go with vast speed through the air, either straight forward, circularly,
or in any kind of angle, upwards or downwards. In these also God has
shown his skill and his power in the great and in the little - in the
vast ostrich and cassowary, and In the beautiful humming-bird, which in
plumage excels the splendor of the peacock, and in size is almost on a
level with the bee.

[Genesis 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 1:24</span></span>

Let the earth bring forth the living creature, etc. - נפש חיה nephesh
chaiyah; a general term to express all creatures endued with animal
life, in any of its infinitely varied gradations, from the
half-reasoning elephant down to the stupid potto, or lower still, to the
polype, which seems equally to share the vegetable and animal life. The
word חיתו chaitho, in the latter part of the verse, seems to signify all
wild animals, as lions, tigers, etc., and especially such as are
carnivorous, or live on flesh, in contradistinction from domestic
animals, such as are graminivorous, or live on grass and other
vegetables, and are capable of being tamed, and applied to domestic
purposes. See the note on [Gen 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#029.md).
These latter are probably meant by בהמה behemah in the text, which we
translate cattle, such as horses, kine, sheep, dogs, etc. Creeping
thing, רמש remes, all the different genera of serpents, worms, and such
animals as have no feet. In beasts also God has shown his wondrous skill
and power; in the vast elephant, or still more colossal mammoth or
mastodon, the whole race of which appears to be extinct, a few skeletons
only remaining. This animal, an astonishing effect of God's power, he
seems to have produced merely to show what he could do, and after
suffering a few of them to propagate, he extinguished the race by a
merciful providence, that they might not destroy both man and beast. The
mammoth appears to have been a carnivorous animal, as the structure of
the teeth proves, and of an immense size; from a considerable part of a
skeleton which I have seen, it is computed that the animal to which it
belonged must have been nearly twenty-five feet high, and sixty in
length! The bones of one toe are entire; the toe upwards of three feet
in length. But this skeleton might have belonged to the megalonyx, a
kind of sloth, or bradypus, hitherto unknown. Few elephants have ever
been found to exceed eleven feet in height. How wondrous are the works
of God! But his skill and power are not less seen in the beautiful
chevrotin, or tragulus, a creature of the antelope kind, the smallest of
all bifid or cloven-footed animals, whose delicate limbs are scarcely so
large as an ordinary goose quill; and also in the shrew mouse, perhaps
the smallest of the many-toed quadrupeds. In the reptile kind we see
also the same skill and power, not only in the immense snake called boa
constrictor, the mortal foe and conqueror of the royal tiger, but also
in the cobra de manille, a venomous serpent, only a little larger than a
common sewing needle.

[Genesis 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 1:25</span></span>

And God made the beast of the earth after his kind, etc. - Every thing
both in the animal and vegetable world was made so according to its
kind, both in genus and species, as to produce its own kind through
endless generations. Thus the several races of animals and plants have
been kept distinct from the foundation of the world to the present day.
This is a proof that all future generations of plants and animals have
been seminally included in those which God formed in the beginning.

[Genesis 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gen 1:26</span></span>

And God said, Let us make man - It is evident that God intends to
impress the mind of man with a sense of something extraordinary in the
formation of his body and soul, when he introduces the account of his
creation thus; Let Us make man. The word אדם Adam, which we translate
man, is intended to designate the species of animal, as חיתו chaitho,
marks the wild beasts that live in general a solitary life; בהמה
behemah, domestic or gregarious animals; and רמש remes, all kinds of
reptiles, from the largest snake to the microscopic eel. Though the same
kind of organization may be found in man as appears in the lower
animals, yet there is a variety and complication in the parts, a
delicacy of structure, a nice arrangement, a judicious adaptation of the
different members to their great offices and functions, a dignity of
mien, and a perfection of the whole, which are sought for in vain in all
other creatures. See [Gen 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#022.md).

In our image, after our likeness - What is said above refers only to the
body of man, what is here said refers to his soul. This was made in the
image and likeness of God. Now, as the Divine Being is infinite, he is
neither limited by parts, nor definable by passions; therefore he can
have no corporeal image after which he made the body of man. The image
and likeness must necessarily be intellectual; his mind, his soul, must
have been formed after the nature and perfections of his God. The human
mind is still endowed with most extraordinary capacities; it was more so
when issuing out of the hands of its Creator. God was now producing a
spirit, and a spirit, too, formed after the perfections of his own
nature. God is the fountain whence this spirit issued, hence the stream
must resemble the spring which produced it. God is holy, just, wise,
good, and perfect; so must the soul be that sprang from him: there could
be in it nothing impure, unjust, ignorant, evil, low, base, mean, or
vile. It was created after the image of God; and that image, St. Paul
tells us, consisted in righteousness, true holiness, and knowledge, [Eph
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#024.md) [Col
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#010.md). Hence man was wise in his mind,
holy in his heart, and righteous in his actions. Were even the word of
God silent on this subject, we could not infer less from the lights held
out to us by reason and common sense. The text tells us he was the work
of Elohim, the Divine Plurality, marked here more distinctly by the
plural pronouns Us and Our; and to show that he was the masterpiece of
God's creation, all the persons in the Godhead are represented as united
in counsel and effort to produce this astonishing creature.

Gregory Nyssen has very properly observed that the superiority of man to
all other parts of creation is seen in this, that all other creatures
are represented as the effect of God's word, but man is represented as
the work of God, according to plan and consideration: Let us make man in
our image, after our likeness. See his Works, vol. i., p. 52, c. 3.

And let them have dominion - Hence we see that the dominion was not the
image. God created man capable of governing the world, and when fitted
for the office, he fixed him in it. We see God's tender care and
parental solicitude for the comfort and well-being of this masterpiece
of his workmanship, in creating the world previously to the creation of
man. He prepared every thing for his subsistence, convenience, and
pleasure, before he brought him into being; so that, comparing little
with great things, the house was built, furnished, and amply stored, by
the time the destined tenant was ready to occupy it.

It has been supposed by some that God speaks here to the angels, when he
says, Let us make man; but to make this a likely interpretation these
persons must prove, 1. That angels were then created. 2. That angels
could assist in a work of creation. 3. That angels were themselves made
in the image and likeness of God. If they were not, it could not be
said, in Our image, and it does not appear from any part in the sacred
writings that any creature but man was made in the image of God. See
Clarke's note on [Psa 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#005.md).

[Genesis 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">gen 1:28</span></span>

And God blessed them - Marked them as being under his especial
protection, and gave them power to propagate and multiply their own kind
on the earth. A large volume would be insufficient to contain what we
know of the excellence and perfection of man, even in his present
degraded fallen state. Both his body and soul are adapted with
astonishing wisdom to their residence and occupations; and also the
place of their residence, as well as the surrounding objects, in their
diversity, color, and mutual relations, to the mind and body of this
lord of the creation. The contrivance, arrangement, action, and
re-action of the different parts of the body, show the admirable skill
of the wondrous Creator; while the various powers and faculties of the
mind, acting on and by the different organs of this body, proclaim the
soul's Divine origin, and demonstrate that he who was made in the image
and likeness of God, was a transcript of his own excellency, destined to
know, love, and dwell with his Maker throughout eternity.

[Genesis 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">gen 1:29</span></span>

I have given you every herb - for meat - It seems from this, says an
eminent philosopher, that man was originally intended to live upon
vegetables only; and as no change was made In the structure of men's
bodies after the flood, it is not probable that any change was made in
the articles of their food. It may also be inferred from this passage
that no animal whatever was originally designed to prey on others; for
nothing is here said to be given to any beast of the earth besides green
herbs - Dr. Priestley. Before sin entered into the world, there could
be, at least, no violent deaths, if any death at all. But by the
particular structure of the teeth of animals God prepared them for that
kind of aliment which they were to subsist on after the Fall.

[Genesis 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">gen 1:31</span></span>

And, behold, it was very good - טוב מאד tob meod, Superlatively, or only
good; as good as they could be. The plan wise, the work well executed,
the different parts properly arranged; their nature, limits, mode of
existence, manner of propagation, habits, mode of sustenance, etc.,
etc., properly and permanently established and secured; for every thing
was formed to the utmost perfection of its nature, so that nothing could
be added or diminished without encumbering the operations of matter and
spirit on the one hand, or rendering them inefficient to the end
proposed on the other; and God has so done all these marvellous works as
to be glorified in all, by all, and through all.

And the evening and the morning were the sixth day - The word ערב ereb,
which we translate evening, comes from the root ערב arab, to mingle; and
properly signifies that state in which neither absolute darkness nor
full light prevails. It has nearly the same grammatical signification
with our twilight, the time that elapses from the setting of the sun
till he is eighteen degrees below the horizon and the last eighteen
degrees before he arises. Thus we have the morning and evening twilight,
or mixture of light and darkness, in which neither prevails, because,
while the sun is within eighteen degrees of the horizon, either after
his setting or before his rising, the atmosphere has power to refract
the rays of light, and send them back on the earth. The Hebrews extended
the meaning of this term to the whole duration of night, because it was
ever a mingled state, the moon, the planets, or the stars, tempering the
darkness with some rays of light. From the ereb of Moses came the Ερεβος
Erebus, of Hesiod, Aristophanes, and other heathens, which they deified
and made, with Nox or night, the parent of all things.

The morning - בקר boker; From בקר bakar, he looked out; a beautiful
figure which represents the morning as looking out at the east, and
illuminating the whole of the upper hemisphere. The evening and the
morning were the sixth day - It is somewhat remarkable that through the
whole of this chapter, whenever the division of days is made, the
evening always precedes the morning. The reason of this may perhaps be,
that darkness was pre-existent to light, ([Gen
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002.md), And darkness was upon the face of
the deep), and therefore time is reckoned from the first act of God
towards the creation of the world, which took place before light was
called forth into existence. It is very likely for this same reason,
that the Jews began their day at six o'clock in the evening in imitation
of Moses's division of time in this chapter. Caesar in his Commentaries
makes mention of the same peculiarity existing among the Gauls:

Galli se omnes ab Dite patre prognatas praedicant: idque ab Druidibus
proditum dicunt: ab eam causam spatia omnis temporis, non numero dierum,
sed noctium, finiunt; et dies natales, et mensium et annorum initia sic
observant, ut noctem dies subsequatur; De Bell. Gall. lib. vi.

Tacitus likewise records the same of the Germans:

Nec dierum numerum, ut nos, sed noctium computant: sic constituent, sic
condicunt, nox ducere diem videtur; De Mor. Germ. sec. ii.

And there are to this day some remains of the same custom in England, as
for instance in the word se'nnight and fortnight. See also Aeschyl.
Agamem. ver. 273, 287.

Thus ends a chapter containing the most extensive, most profound, and
most sublime truths that can possibly come within the reach of the human
intellect. How unspeakably are we indebted to God for giving us a
revelation of his Will and of his Works! Is it possible to know the mind
of God but from himself? It is impossible. Can those things and services
which are worthy of and pleasing to an infinitely pure, perfect, and
holy Spirit, be ever found out by reasoning and conjecture? Never! for
the Spirit of God alone can know the mind of God; and by this Spirit he
has revealed himself to man; and in this revelation has taught him, not
only to know the glories and perfections of the Creator, but also his
own origin, duty, and interest. Thus far it was essentially necessary
that God should reveal his Will; but if he had not given a revelation of
his Works, the origin, constitution, and nature of the universe could
never have been adequately known. The world by wisdom knew not God; this
is demonstrated by the writings of the most learned and intelligent
heathens. They had no just, no rational notion of the origin and design
of the universe. Moses alone, of all ancient writers, gives a consistent
and rational account of the creation; an account which has been
confirmed by the investigation of the most accurate philosophers. But
where did he learn this? "In Egypt." That is impossible; for the
Egyptians themselves were destitute of this knowledge. The remains we
have of their old historians, all posterior to the time of Moses, are
egregious for their contradictions and absurdity; and the most learned
of the Greeks who borrowed from them have not been able to make out,
from their conjoint stock, any consistent and credible account. Moses
has revealed the mystery that lay hid from all preceding ages, because
he was taught it by the inspiration of the Almighty. Reader, thou hast
now before thee the most ancient and most authentic history in the
world; a history that contains the first written discovery that God has
made of himself to man-kind; a discovery of his own being, in his
wisdom, power, and goodness, in which thou and the whole human race are
so intimately concerned. How much thou art indebted to him for this
discovery he alone can teach thee, and cause thy heart to feel its
obligations to his wisdom and mercy. Read so as to understand, for these
things were written for thy learning; therefore mark what thou readest,
and inwardly digest - deeply and seriously meditate on, what thou hast
marked, and pray to the Father of lights that he may open thy
understanding, that thou mayest know these holy Scriptures, which are
able to make thee wise unto salvation.

God made thee and the universe, and governs all things according to the
counsel of his will; that will is infinite goodness, that counsel is
unerring wisdom. While under the direction of this counsel, thou canst
not err; while under the influence of this will, thou canst not be
wretched. Give thyself up to his teaching, and submit to his authority;
and, after guiding thee here by his counsel, he will at last bring thee
to his glory. Every object that meets thy eye should teach thee
reverence, submission, and gratitude. The earth and its productions were
made for thee; and the providence of thy heavenly Father, infinitely
diversified in its operations, watches over and provides for thee.
Behold the firmament of his power, the sun, moon, planets, and stars,
which he has formed, not for himself, for he needs none of these things,
but for his intelligent offspring. What endless gratification has he
designed thee in placing within thy reach these astonishing effects of
his wisdom and power, and in rendering thee capable of searching out
their wonderful relations and connections, and of knowing himself, the
source of all perfection, by having made thee in his own image, and in
his own likeness! It is true thou art fallen; but he has found out a
ransom. God so loved thee in conjunction with the world that he gave his
only-begotten Son, that whosoever believeth on him should not perish,
but have everlasting life. Believe on Him; through him alone cometh
salvation; and the fair and holy image of God in which thou wast created
shall be again restored; he will build thee up as at the first, restore
thy judges and counsellors as at the beginning, and in thy second
creation, as in thy first, will pronounce thee to be very good, and thou
shalt show forth the virtues of him by whom thou art created anew in
Christ Jesus. Amen.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 2](gen002.md)

</div>
