<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen044)  [Next](gen046) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 45](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 45:0</span></span>

Joseph, deeply affected with the speech of Judah, could no longer
conceal himself, but discovers himself to his brethren, [Gen
45:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#001). Excuses their conduct towards
him, and attributes the whole to the providence of God, [Gen
45:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#005). Orders them to hasten to
Canaan, and bring up their father and their own families, cattle, etc.,
because there were five years of the famine yet to come, [Gen
45:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#009). He embraces and converses
with all his brethren, [Gen 45:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#014),
[Gen 45:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#015). Pharaoh, hearing that
Joseph's brethren were come to Egypt, and that Joseph had desired them
to return to Canaan and bring back their families, not only confirms the
order, but promises them the best part of the land of Egypt to dwell in;
and provides them carriages to transport themselves and their
households, [Gen 45:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#016). Joseph
provides them with wagons according to the commandment of Pharaoh; and
having given them various presents, sends them away with suitable
advice, [Gen 45:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#021). They depart,
arrive in Canaan, and announce the glad tidings to their father, who for
a time believes not, but being assured of the truth of their relation,
is greatly comforted, and resolves to visit Egypt, [Gen
45:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#025).

[Genesis 45:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 45:1</span></span>

Joseph could not refrain himself - The word התאפק hithappek is very
emphatic; it signifies to force one's self, to do something against
nature, to do violence to one's self. Joseph could no longer constrain
himself to act a feigned part - all the brother and the son rose up in
him at once, and overpowered all his resolutions; he felt for his
father, he realized his disappointment and agony; and he felt for his
brethren, "now at his feet submissive in distress;" and, that he' might
give free and full scope to his feelings, and the most ample play of the
workings of his affectionate heart, he ordered all his attendants to go
out, while he made himself known to his brethren. "The beauties of this
chapter," says Dr. Dodd, "are so striking, that it would be an indignity
to the reader's judgment to point them out; all who can read and feel
must be sensible of them, as there is perhaps nothing in sacred or
profane history more highly wrought up, more interesting or affecting."

[Genesis 45:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 45:2</span></span>

The Egyptians and the house of Pharaoh heard - It seems strange that
Joseph should have wept so loud that his cries should be heard at some
considerable distance, as we may suppose his dwelling was not very nigh
to the palace! "But this," says Sir John Chardin, "is exactly the genius
of the people of Asia - their sentiments of joy or grief are properly
transports, and their transports are ungoverned, excessive, and truly
outrageous. When any one returns from a long journey, or dies, his
family burst into cries that may be heard twenty doors off; and this is
renewed at different times, and continues many days, according to the
vigor of the passion. Sometimes they cease all at once, and then begin
as suddenly with a greater shrillness and loudness than one could easily
imagine." This circumstance Sir John brings to illustrate the verse in
question. See Harmer, vol. iii. p. 17. But the house of Pharaoh may
certainly signify Pharaoh's servants, or any of the members of his
household, such as those whom Joseph had desired to withdraw, and who
might still be within hearing of his voice. After all, the words may
only mean that the report was brought to Pharaoh's house. See [Gen
45:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#016).

[Genesis 45:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 45:3</span></span>

I am Joseph - Mr. Pope supposed that the discovery of Ulysses to his son
Telemachus bears some resemblance to Joseph's discovery of himself to
his brethren. The passage may be seen in Homer, Odyss. l. xvi., ver.
186-218.

A few lines from Cowper's translation will show much of the spirit of
the original, and also a considerable analogy between the two scenes: -

"I am thy father, for whose sake thou lead'st

A life of wo by violence oppress'd.

So saying, he kiss'd his son; while from his cheeks

Tears trickled, tears till then perforce restrain'd.

Then threw Telemachus

His arms around his father's neck, and wept.

Pangs of soft sorrow, not to be suppress'd,

Seized both. So they, their cheeks with big round drops of wo

Bedewing, stood."

[Genesis 45:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 45:5</span></span>

Be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves - This discovers a truly noble
mind: he not only forgives and forgets, but he wishes even those who had
wronged him to forget the injury they had done, that they might not
suffer distress on the account; and with deep piety he attributes the
whole to the providence of God; for, says he, God did send me before you
to preserve life. On every word here a strong emphasis may be laid. It
is not you, but God; it is not you that sold me, but God who sent me;
Egypt and Canaan must both have perished, had not a merciful provision
been made; you were to come down hither, and God sent me before you;
death must have been the consequence of this famine, had not God sent me
here to preserve life.

[Genesis 45:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 45:6</span></span>

There shall neither be earing nor harvest - Earing has been supposed to
mean collecting the ears of corn, which would confound it with harvest:
the word, however, means ploughing or seed-time, from the Anglo-Saxon
erian, probably borrowed from the Latin aro, to plough, and plainly
means that there should be no seed-time, and consequently no harvest;
and why? Because there should be a total want of rain in other
countries, and the Nile should not rise above twelve cubits in Egypt;
See Clarke on [Gen 41:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#031) (note). But
the expressions here must be qualified a little, as we find from [Gen
47:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#019), that the Egyptians came to
Joseph to buy seed; and it is probable that even during this famine they
sowed some of the ground, particularly on the borders of the river, from
which a crop, though not an abundant one, might be produced. The
passage, however, in the above chapter may refer to the last year of the
famine, when they came to procure seed for the ensuing year.

[Genesis 45:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 45:8</span></span>

He hath made me a father to Pharaoh - It has already been conjectured
that father was a name of office in Egypt, and that father of Pharaoh
might among them signify the same as prime minister or the king's
minister does among us. Calmet has remarked that among the Phoenicians,
Persians, Arabians, and Romans, the title of father was given to certain
officers of state. The Roman emperors gave the name of father to the
prefects of the Praetorium, as appears by the letters of Constantine to
Ablavius. The caliphs gave the same name to their prime ministers. In
[Jdg 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#010), Micah says to the young
Levite, Dwell with me, and be unto me a Father and a priest. And
Diodorus Siculus remarks that the teachers and counsellors of the kings
of Egypt were chosen out of the priesthood.

[Genesis 45:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 45:10</span></span>

Thou shalt dwell in the land of Goshen - Probably this district had been
allotted to Joseph by the king of Egypt, else we can scarcely think he
could have promised it so positively, without first obtaining Pharaoh's
consent. Goshen was the most easterly province of Lower Egypt, not far
from the Arabian Gulf, lying next to Canaan, (for Jacob went directly
thither when he came into Egypt), from whence it is supposed to have
been about fourscore miles distant, though Hebron was distant from the
Egyptian capital about three hundred miles. At Goshen Jacob stayed till
Joseph visited him, [Gen 46:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#028). It is
also called the land of Rameses, [Gen
47:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#011), from a city of that name, which
was the metropolis of the country. Josephus, Antiq., 1. ii., c. 4, makes
Heliopolis, the city of Joseph's father-in-law, the place of the
Israelites' residence. As גשם geshem signifies rain in Hebrew, St.
Jerome and some others have supposed that גשן Goshen comes from the same
root, and that the land in question was called thus because it had rain,
which was not the case with Egypt in general; and as it was on the
confines of the Arabian Gulf, it is very probable that it was watered
from heaven, and it might be owing to this circumstance that it was
peculiarly fertile, for it is stated to be the best of the land of
Egypt. See [Gen 47:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#006), [Gen
47:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#011). See also Calmet and Dodd.

[Genesis 45:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 45:12</span></span>

That it is my mouth that speaketh unto you - The Targum of Jonathan ben
Uzziel renders the place thus: - "Your eyes see, and the eyes of my
brother Benjamin, that it is my own mouth that speaketh with you, in the
language of the house of the sanctuary." Undoubtedly Joseph laid
considerable stress on his speaking with them in the Hebrew tongue,
without the assistance of an interpreter, as in the case mentioned [Gen
42:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#023).

[Genesis 45:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 45:14</span></span>

He fell upon his brother Benjamin's neck - Among the Asiatics kissing
the beard, the neck, and the shoulders, is in use to the present day;
and probably falling on the neck signifies no more than kissing the neck
or shoulders, with the arms around.

[Genesis 45:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 45:20</span></span>

Regard not your stuff - Literally, Let not your eye spare your
instruments or vessels. כליכם keleychem, a general term, in which may be
included household furniture, agricultural utensils, or implements of
any description. They were not to delay nor encumber themselves with
articles which could be readily found in Egypt, and were not worth so
long a carriage.

[Genesis 45:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 45:21</span></span>

Joseph gave them wagons - עגלות agaloth, from עגל agal, which, though
not used as a verb in the Hebrew Bible, evidently means to turn round,
roll round, be circular, etc., and hence very properly applied to wheel
carriages. It appears from this that such vehicles were very early in
use, and that the road from Egypt to Canaan must have been very open and
much frequented, else such carriages could not have passed by it.

[Genesis 45:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 45:22</span></span>

Changes of raiment - It is a common custom with all the Asiatic
sovereigns to give both garments and money to ambassadors and persons of
distinction, whom they particularly wish to honor. Hence they keep in
their wardrobes several hundred changes of raiment, ready made up for
presents of this kind. That such were given by way of reward and honor,
see [Jdg 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#012), [Jdg
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#019); [Rev
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#011). At the close of a feast the
Hindoos, among other presents to the guests, commonly give new garments.
A Hindoo garment is merely a piece of cloth, requiring no work of the
tailor - Ward.

[Genesis 45:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 45:23</span></span>

Meat for his father by the way - מזון mazon, from זן zan, to prepare,
provide, etc. Hence prepared meat, some made-up dish, delicacies,
confectionaries, etc. As the word is used, [Ch2
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#014), for aromatic preparations, it
may be restrained in its meaning to something of that kind here. In
Asiatic countries they have several curious methods of preserving flesh
by potting, by which it may be kept for any reasonable length of time
sweet and wholesome. Some delicacy, similar to the savory food which
Isaac loved, may be here intended; and this was sent to Jacob in
consideration of his age, and to testify the respect of his son. Of
other kinds of meat he could need none, as he had large herds, and could
kill a lamb, kid, sheep, or goat, whenever he pleased.

[Genesis 45:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 45:24</span></span>

See that ye fall not out by the way - This prudent caution was given by
Joseph, to prevent his brethren from accusing each other for having sold
him; and to prevent them from envying Benjamin, for the superior favor
shown him by his brother. It is strange, but so it is, that children of
the same parents are apt to envy each other, fall out, and contend; and
therefore the exhortation in this verse must be always seasonable in a
large family. But a rational, religious education will, under God,
prevent every thing of this sort.

[Genesis 45:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gen 45:26</span></span>

Jacob's heart fainted - Probably the good news so overpowered him as to
cast him into a swoon. He believed them not - he thought it was too good
news to be true; and though it occasioned his swooning, yet on his
recovery he could not fully credit it. See a similar case, [Luk
24:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#041) (note).

[Genesis 45:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gen 45:27</span></span>

When he saw the wagons - the spirit of Jacob - revived - The wagons were
additional evidences of the truth of what he had heard from his sons;
and the consequence was, that he was restored to fresh vigor, he seemed
as if he had gained new life, ותחי vattechi, and he lived; revixit, says
the Vulgate, he lived afresh. The Septuagint translate the original word
by ανεζωπυρησε, which signifies the blowing and stirring up of almost
extinguished embers that had been buried under the ashes, which word St.
Paul uses, [Ti2 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#006), for stirring up
the gift of God. The passage at once shows the debilitated state of the
venerable patriarch, and the wonderful effect the news of Joseph's
preservation and glory had upon his mind.

[Genesis 45:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">gen 45:28</span></span>

It is enough; Joseph my son is yet alive - It was not the state of
dignity to which Joseph had arisen that particularly affected Jacob, it
was the consideration that he was still alive. It was this that caused
him to exclaim רב rab; "much! multiplied! my son is yet alive! I will go
and see him before I die." None can realize this scene; the words, the
circumstances, all refer to indescribable feelings.

1\. In Joseph's conduct to his brethren there are several things for
which it is difficult to account. It is strange, knowing how much his
father loved him, that he never took an opportunity, many of which must
have offered, to acquaint him that he was alive; and that self-interest
did not dictate the propriety of this to him is at first view
surprising, as his father would undoubtedly have paid his ransom, and
restored him to liberty: but a little reflection will show that prudence
dictated secrecy. His brethren, jealous and envious in the extreme,
would soon have found out other methods of destroying his life, had they
again got him into their power. Therefore for his personal safety, he
chose rather to be a bond-slave in Egypt than to risk his life by
returning home. On this ground it is evident that he could not with any
safety have discovered the place of his residence.

2\. His carriage to his brethren, previously to his making himself
known, appears inexcusably harsh, if not vindictive; but when the men
are considered, it will appear sufficiently evident that no other means
would have been adequate to awaken their torpid consciences, and bring
them to a due sense of their guilt. A desperate disease requires a
desperate remedy. The event justified all that he did, and God appears
to have been the director of the whole.

3\. His conduct in requiring Benjamin to be as it were torn away from
the bleeding heart of an aged, desolate father, in whose affection he
himself had long lived, is the most difficult to be satisfactorily
accounted for. Unless the Spirit of prophecy had assured him that this
experiment would terminate in the most favorable manner, his conduct in
making it cannot well be vindicated. To such prophetic intimation this
conduct has been attributed by learned men; and we may say that this
consideration, if it does not untie the knot, at least cuts it. Perhaps
it is best to say that in all these things Joseph acted as he was
directed by a providence, under the influence of which he might have
been led to do many things which he had not previously designed. The
issue proves that the hand of God's wisdom and goodness directed,
regulated, and governed every circumstance, and the result was glory to
God in the highest, and on earth, peace and good will among men.

4\. This chapter, which contains the unravelling of the plot, and
wonderfully illustrates the mysteries of these particular providences,
is one of the most interesting in the whole account: the speech of
Joseph to his brethren, [Gen 45:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#001),
is inferior only to that of Judah in the preceding chapter. He saw that
his brethren were confounded at his presence, that they were struck with
his present power, and that they keenly remembered and deeply deplored
their own guilt. It was necessary to comfort them, lest their hearts
should have been overwhelmed with overmuch sorrow. How delicate and
finely wrought is the apology he makes for them! The whole heart of the
affectionate brother is at once seen in it - art is confounded and
swallowed up by nature - "Be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves - it
was not you that sent me hither, but God." What he says also concerning
his father shows the warmest feelings of a benevolent and filial heart.
Indeed, the whole chapter is a master-piece of composition; and it is
the more impressive because it is evidently a simple relation of facts
just as they occurred; for no attempt is made to heighten the effect by
rhetorical coloring or philosophical reflections; it is all simple,
sheer nature, from beginning to end. It is a history that has no fellow,
crowded with incidents as probable as they are true; where every passion
is called into action, where every one acts up to his own character, and
where nothing is outer in time, or extravagant in degree. Had not the
history of Joseph formed a part of the sacred Scriptures, it would have
been published in all the living languages of man, and read throughout
the universe! But it contains the things of God, and to all such the
carnal mind is enmity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 46](gen046)

</div>
