<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen027)  [Next](gen029.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#001.md)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 28:0</span></span>

Isaac directs Jacob to take a wife from the family of Laban, [Gen
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#001.md), [Gen
28:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#002.md); blesses and sends him away, [Gen
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#003.md), [Gen
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#004.md). Jacob begins his journey, [Gen
28:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#005.md). Esau, perceiving that the
daughters of Canaan were not pleasing to his parents, and that Jacob
obeyed them in going to get a wife of his own kindred, [Gen
28:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#006.md), went and took to wife
Mahalath, the daughter of Ishmael his father's brother, [Gen
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#009.md). Jacob, in his journey towards
Haran, came to a certain place, (Luz, [Gen
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#019).md), where he lodged all night,
[Gen 28:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#010.md), [Gen
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#011.md). He sees in a dream a ladder
reaching from earth to heaven, on which he beholds the angels of God
ascending and descending, [Gen 28:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#012.md).
God appears above this ladder, and renews those promises which he had
made to Abraham and to Isaac, [Gen
28:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#013.md), [Gen
28:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#014.md); promises Jacob personal
protection and a safe return to his own country, [Gen
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#015.md). Jacob awakes, and makes
reflections upon his dream, [Gen
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#016.md), [Gen
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#017.md). Sets up one of the stones he
had for his pillow, and pours oil on it, and calls the place Beth-el,
[Gen 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#018.md), [Gen
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#019.md). Makes a vow that if God will
preserve him in his journey, and bring him back in safety, the stone
should be God's house, and that he would give him the tenths of all that
he should have, [Gen 28:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#020.md).

[Genesis 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 28:1</span></span>

And Isaac called Jacob - See note on [Gen
27:46](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#046.md).

And blessed him - Now voluntarily and cheerfully confirmed to him the
blessing, which he had before obtained through subtlety. It was
necessary that he should have this confirmation previously to his
departure; else, considering the way in which he had obtained both the
birthright and the blessing, he might be doubtful, according to his own
words, whether he might not have got a curse instead of a blessing. As
the blessing now pronounced on Jacob was obtained without any deception
on his part, it is likely that it produced a salutary effect upon his
mind, might have led him to confession of his sin, and prepared his
heart for those discoveries of God's goodness with which he was favored
at Luz.

[Genesis 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 28:2</span></span>

Go to Padan-aram - This mission, in its spirit and design, is nearly the
same as that in Genesis 24 (note). There have been several ingenious
conjectures concerning the retinue which Jacob had, or might have had,
for his journey; and by some he has been supposed to have been well
attended. Of this nothing is mentioned here, and the reverse seems to be
intimated elsewhere. It appears, from [Gen
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#011.md), that he lodged in the open air,
with a stone for his pillow; and from [Gen
32:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#010.md), that he went on foot with his
staff in his hand; nor is there even the most indirect mention of any
attendants, nor is it probable there were any. He no doubt took
provisions with him sufficient to carry him to the nearest encampment or
village on the way, where he would naturally recruit his bread and water
to carry him to the next stage, and so on. The oil that he poured on the
pillar might be a little of that which he had brought for his own use,
and can be no rational argument of his having a stock of provisions,
servants, camels, etc., for which it has been gravely brought. He had
God alone with him.

[Genesis 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 28:3</span></span>

That thou mayest be a multitude of people - לקהל עמים likhal ammim.
There is something very remarkable in the original words: they signify
literally for an assembly, congregation, or church of peoples; referring
no doubt to the Jewish Church in the wilderness, but more particularly
to the Christian Church, composed of every kindred, and nation, and
people, and tongue. This is one essential part of the blessing of
Abraham. See [Gen 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#004.md).

[Genesis 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 28:4</span></span>

Give thee the blessing of Abraham - May he confirm the inheritance with
all its attendant blessings to thee, to the exclusion of Esau; as he did
to me, to the exclusion of Ishmael. But, according to St. Paul, much
more than this is certainly intended here, for it appears, from [Gal
3:6-14](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#006.md), that the blessing of Abraham,
which is to come upon the Gentiles through Jesus Christ, comprises the
whole doctrine of justification by faith, and its attendant privileges,
viz., redemption from the curse of the law, remission of sins, and the
promise of the Holy Spirit, including the constitution and establishment
of the Christian Church.

[Genesis 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 28:5</span></span>

Bethuel the Syrian - Literally the Aramean, so called, not because he
was of the race of Aram the son of Shem, but because he dwelt in that
country which had been formerly possessed by the descendants of Aram.

[Genesis 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 28:9</span></span>

Then went Esau unto Ishmael - Those who are apt to take every thing by
the wrong handle, and who think it was utterly impossible for Esau to do
any right action, have classed his taking a daughter of Ishmael among
his crimes; whereas there is nothing more plain than that he did this
with a sincere desire to obey and please his parents. Having heard the
pious advice which Isaac gave to Jacob, he therefore went and took a
wife from the family of his grandfather Abraham, as Jacob was desired to
do out of the family of his maternal uncle Laban. Mahalath, whom he took
to wife, stood in the same degree of relationship to Isaac his father as
Rachel did to his mother Rebekah. Esau married his father's niece; Jacob
married his mother's niece. It was therefore most obviously to please
his parents that Esau took this additional wife. It is supposed that
Ishmael must have been dead thirteen or fourteen years before this time,
and that going to Ishmael signifies only going to the family of Ishmael.
If we follow the common computation, and allow that Isaac was now about
one hundred and thirty-six or one hundred and thirty-seven years of age,
and Jacob seventy-seven, and as Ishmael died in the one hundred and
thirty-seventh year of his age, which according to the common
computation was the one hundred and twenty-third of Isaac, then Ishmael
must have been dead about fourteen years. But if we allow the ingenious
reasoning of Mr. Skinner and Dr. Kennicott, that Jacob was at this time
only fifty-seven years of age, and Isaac consequently only one hundred
and seventeen, it will appear that Ishmael did not die till six years
after this period; and hence with propriety it might be said, Esau went
unto Ishmael, and took Mahalath the daughter of Ishmael to be his wife.
See note on [Gen 26:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#034.md), etc.

[Genesis 28:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 28:11</span></span>

A certain place, and tarried there - From [Gen
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#019.md), we find this certain place was
Luz, or some part of its vicinity. Jacob had probably intended to reach
Luz; but the sun being set, and night coming on, he either could not
reach the city, or he might suspect the inhabitants, and rather prefer
the open field, as he must have heard of the character and conduct of
the men of Sodom and Gomorrah. Or the gates might be shut by the time he
reached it, which would prevent his admission; for it frequently
happens, to the present day, that travelers not reaching a city in the
eastern countries previously to the shutting of the gates, are obliged
to lodge under the walls all night, as when once shut they refuse to
open them till the next day. This was probably Jacob's case.

He took of the stones - He took one of the stones that were in that
place: from [Gen 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#018.md) we find it was
one stone only which he had for his pillow. Luz was about forty-eight
miles distant from Beer-sheba; too great a journey for one day, through
what we may conceive very unready roads.

[Genesis 28:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 28:12</span></span>

He dreamed, and behold a ladder - A multitude of fanciful things have
been spoken of Jacob's vision of the ladder, and its signification. It
might have several designs, as God chooses to accomplish the greatest
number of ends by the fewest and simplest means possible. 1. It is very
likely that its primary design was to point out the providence of God,
by which he watches over and regulates all terrestrial things; for
nothing is left to merely natural causes; a heavenly agency pervades,
actuates, and directs all. In his present circumstances it was highly
necessary that Jacob should have a clear and distinct view of this
subject, that he might be the better prepared to meet all occurrences
with the conviction that all was working together for his good. 2. It
might be intended also to point out the intercourse between heaven and
earth, and the connection of both worlds by the means of angelic
ministry. That this is fact we learn from many histories in the Old
Testament; and it is a doctrine that is unequivocally taught in the New:
Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them
who shall be heirs of salvation? 3. It was probably a type of Christ, in
whom both worlds meet, and in whom the Divine and human nature are
conjoined. The Ladder was set up on the Earth, and the Top of it reached
to Heaven; for God was manifested in the Flesh, and in him dwelt all the
fullness of the Godhead bodily. Nothing could be a more expressive
emblem of the incarnation and its effects; Jesus Christ is the grand
connecting medium between heaven and earth, and between God and man. By
him God comes down to man; through him man ascends to God. It appears
that our Lord applies the vision in this way himself, first, In that
remarkable speech to Nathanael, Hereafter ye shall see the heaven
opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of
man, [Joh 1:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#051.md). Secondly, in his
speech to Thomas, [Joh 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006.md) : I am the
Way, and the truth, and the life; no man cometh unto the Father but by
me.

[Genesis 28:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 28:13</span></span>

I am the Lord God of Abraham - Here God confirms to him the blessing of
Abraham, for which Isaac had prayed, [Gen
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#003.md), [Gen
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#004.md).

[Genesis 28:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 28:14</span></span>

Thy seed shall be as the dust - The people that shall descend from thee
shall be extremely numerous, and in thee and thy seed - the Lord Jesus
descending from thee, according to the flesh, shall all the families of
the earth - not only all of thy race, but all the other families or
tribes of mankind which have not proceeded from any branch of the
Abrahamic family, be blessed; for Jesus Christ by the grace of God
tasted death For Every Man, [Heb 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#009.md).

[Genesis 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 28:15</span></span>

And, behold, I am with thee - For I fill the heavens and the earth. "My
Word shall be thy help." - Targum. And will keep thee in all places, εν
τῃ ὁδῳ πασῃ, in all this way - Septuagint. I shall direct, help, and
support thee in a peculiar manner, in thy present journey, be with thee
while thou sojournest with thy uncle, and will bring thee again into
this land; so that in all thy concerns thou mayest consider thyself
under my especial providence, for I will not leave thee. Thy descendants
also shall be my peculiar people, whom I shall continue to preserve as
such until I have done that which I have spoken to thee of - until the
Messiah shall be born of thy race, and all the families of the earth -
the Gentiles, be blessed through thee; the Gospel being preached to
them, and they, with the believing Jews, made One Fold under One
Shepherd, and one Bishop or Overseer of souls. And this circumstantial
promise has been literally and punctually fulfilled.

[Genesis 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 28:16</span></span>

The Lord is in this place; and I knew it not - That is, God has made
this place his peculiar residence; it is a place in which he meets with
and reveals himself to his followers. Jacob might have supposed that
this place had been consecrated to God. And it has already been supposed
that, his mind having been brought into a humble frame, he was prepared
to hold communion with his Maker.

[Genesis 28:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 28:17</span></span>

How dreadful is this place! - The appearance of the ladder, the angels,
and the Divine glory at the top of the ladder, must have left deep,
solemn, and even awful impressions on the mind of Jacob; and hence the
exclamation in the text, How dreadful is this place! This is none other
but the house of God - The Chaldee gives this place a curious turn:
"This is not a common place, but a place in which God delights; and
opposite to this place is the gate of heaven." Onkelos seems to suppose
that the gate or entrance into heaven was actually above this spot, and
that when the angels of God descended to earth, they came through that
opening into this place, and returned by the same way. And it really
appears that Jacob himself had a similar notion.

[Genesis 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 28:18</span></span>

And Jacob - took the stone - and set it up for a pillar - He placed the
stone in an erect posture, that it might stand as a monument of the
extraordinary vision which he had in this place; and he poured oil upon
it, thereby consecrating it to God, so that it might be considered an
altar on which libations might be poured, and sacrifices offered unto
God. See [Gen 35:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#014.md).

The Brahmins anoint their stone images with oil before bathing; and some
anoint them with sweet-scented oil. This is a practice which arises more
from the customs of the Hindoos than from their idolatry. Anointing
persons as an act of homage has been transferred to their idols.

There is a foolish tradition that the stone set up by Jacob was
afterwards brought to Jerusalem, from which, after a long lapse of time,
it was brought to Spain, from Spain to Ireland, from Ireland to
Scotland, and on it the kings of Scotland sat to be crowned; and
concerning which the following leonine verses were made: -

Ni fallat fatum, - Scoti quocunque locatum

Invenient lapidem, - regnare tenentur ibidem.

Or fate is blind - or Scots shall find

Where'er this stone - the royal throne.

Camden's Perthshire.

Edward I. had it brought to Westminster; and there this stone, called
Jacob's pillar, and Jacob's pillow, is now placed under the chair on
which the king sits when crowned! It would be as ridiculous to attempt
to disprove the truth of this tradition, as to prove that the stone
under the old chair in Westminster was the identical stone which served
the patriarch for a bolster.

And poured oil upon the top of it - Stones, images, and altars,
dedicated to Divine worship, were always anointed with oil. This appears
to have been considered as a consecration of them to the object of the
worship, and a means of inducing the god or goddess to take up their
residence there, and answer the petitions of their votaries. Anointing
stones, images, etc., is used in idolatrous countries to the present
day, and the whole idol is generally smeared over with oil. Sometimes,
besides the anointing, a crown or garland was placed on the stone or
altar to honor the divinity, who was supposed, in consequence of the
anointing, to have set up his residence in that place. It appears to
have been on this ground that the seats of polished stone, on which the
kings sat in the front of their palaces to administer justice, were
anointed, merely to invite the deity to reside there, that true judgment
might be given, and a righteous sentence always be pronounced. Of this
we have an instance in Homer, Odyss. lib. v., ver. 406-410: -

Εκ δ' ελθων, κατ' αρ' ἑζετ' επι ξεστοισι λιθοσιν,

Οἱ οἱ εσαν προπαροιθε θυραων ὑψηλαων,

Δευκοι, αποστιλβοντες αλειφατος· οἱς επι μεν πριν

Νηλευς ἱζεσκεν, θεοφιν μηστωρ αταλαντος.

The old man early rose, walk'd forth, and sate

On polish'd stone before his palace gate;

With unguent smooth the lucid marble shone,

Where ancient Neleus sate, a rustic throne.

Pope.

This gives a part of the sense of the passage; but the last line, on
which much stress should be laid, is very inadequately rendered by the
English poet. It should be translated, -

Where Neleus sat, equal in counsel to the gods; because inspired by
their wisdom, and which inspiration he and his successor took pains to
secure by consecrating with the anointing oil the seat of judgment on
which they were accustomed to sit. Some of the ancient commentators on
Homer mistook the meaning of this place by not understanding the nature
of the custom; and these Cowper unfortunately follows, translating
"resplendent as with oil;" which as destroys the whole sense, and
obliterates the allusion. This sort of anointing was a common custom in
all antiquity, and was probably derived from this circumstance. Arnobius
tells us that it was customary with himself while a heathen, "when he
saw a smooth polished stone that had been smeared with oils, to kiss and
adore it, as if possessing a Divine virtue."

Si quando conspexeram lubricatum lapidem,

et ex olivi unguine sordidatum (ordinatum)

tanquam inesset vis prasens, adulabar, affabar.

And Theodoret, in his eighty-fourth question on Genesis, asserts that
many pious women in his time were accustomed to anoint the coffins of
the martyrs, etc. And in Catholic countries when a church is consecrated
they anoint the door-posts, pillars, altars, etc. So under the law there
was a holy anointing oil to sanctify the tabernacle, laver, and all
other things used in God's service, [Exo
40:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#009.md), etc.

[Genesis 28:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 28:19</span></span>

He called the name of that place Beth-el - That is, the house of God;
for in consequence of his having anointed the stone, and thus
consecrated it to God, he considered it as becoming henceforth his
peculiar residence; see on the preceding verse. This word should be
always pronounced as two distinct syllables, each strongly accented,
Beth-El.

Was called Luz at the first - The Hebrew has אולם לוז Ulam Luz, which
the Roman edition of the Septuagint translates Ουλαμλουζ Oulamlouz; the
Alexandrian MS., Ουλαμμους Oulammaus; the Aldine, Ουλαμμαους Oulammaous;
Symmachus, Λαμμαους Lammaous; and some others, Ουλαμ Oulam. The Hebrew
אולם ulam is sometimes a particle signifying as, just as; hence it may
signify that the place was called Beth-El, as it was formerly called
Luz. As Luz signifies an almond, almond or hazel tree, this place
probably had its name from a number of such trees growing in that
region. Many of the ancients confounded this city with Jerusalem, to
which they attribute the eight following names, which are all expressed
in this verse: -

Solyma, Luza, Bethel, Hierosolyma, Jebus, Aelia,

Urbs sacra, Hierusalem dicitur atque Salem.

Solyma, Luz, Beth-El, Hierosolyma, Jebus, Aelia,

The holy city is call'd, as also Jerusalem and Salem.

From Beth-El came the Baetylia, Bethyllia, Βαιτυλια, or animated stones,
so celebrated in antiquity, and to which Divine honors were paid. The
tradition of Jacob anointing this stone, and calling the place Beth-El,
gave rise to all the superstitious accounts of the Baetylia or
consecrated stones, which we find in Sanchoniathon and others. These
became abused to idolatrous purposes, and hence God strongly prohibits
them, [Lev 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#001.md); and it is very likely
that stones of this kind were the most ancient objects of idolatrous
worship; these were afterwards formed into beautiful human figures, male
and female, when the art of sculpture became tolerably perfected, and
hence the origin of idolatry as far as it refers to the worshipping of
images, for these, being consecrated by anointing, etc., were supposed
immediately to become instinct with the power and energy of some
divinity. Hence, then, the Baetylia or living stones of the ancient
Phoenicians, etc. As oil is an emblem of the gifts and graces of the
Holy Spirit, so those who receive this anointing are considered as being
alive unto God, and are expressly called by St. Peter living stones,
[Pe1 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#004.md), [Pe1
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005.md). May not the apostle have
reference to those living stones or Baetyllia of antiquity, and thus
correct the notion by showing that these rather represented the true
worshippers of God, who were consecrated to his service and made
partakers of the Holy Ghost, and that these alone could be properly
called the living stone, out of which the true spiritual temple is
composed?

[Genesis 28:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 28:20</span></span>

Vowed a vow - A vow is a solemn, holy promise, by which a man bound
himself to do certain things in a particular way, time, etc., and for
power to accomplish which he depended on God; hence all vows were made
with prayer.

If God will be with me, etc. - Jacob seems to make this vow rather for
his posterity than for himself, as we may learn from [Gen
28:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#013.md); for he particularly refers
to the promises which God had made to him, which concerned the
multiplication of his offspring, and their establishment in that land.
If, then, God shall fulfill these promises, he binds his posterity to
build God a house, and to devote for the maintenance of his worship the
tenth of all their earthly goods. This mode of interpretation removes
that appearance of self-interest which almost any other view of the
subject presents. Jacob had certainly, long ere this, taken Jehovah for
his God; and so thoroughly had he been instructed in the knowledge of
Jehovah, that we may rest satisfied no reverses of fortune could have
induced him to apostatize: but as his taking refuge with Laban was
probably typical of the sojourning of his descendants in Egypt, his
persecution, so as to be obliged to depart from Laban, the bad treatment
of his posterity by the Egyptians, his rescue from death, preservation
on his journey, re-establishment in his own country, etc., were all
typical of the exodus of his descendants, their travels in the desert,
and establishment in the promised land, where they built a house to God,
and where, for the support and maintenance of the pure worship of God,
they gave to the priests and Levites the tenth of all their worldly
produce. If all this be understood as referring to Jacob only, the
Scripture gives us no information how he performed his vow.

[Genesis 28:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 28:22</span></span>

This stone shall be God's house - That is, (as far as this matter refers
to Jacob alone), should I be preserved to return in safety, I shall
worship God in this place. And this purpose he fulfilled, for there he
built an altar, anointed it with oil, and poured a drink-offering
thereon.

For a practical use of Jacob's vision, see note on [Gen
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#012.md).

On the doctrine of tithes, or an adequate support for the ministers of
the Gospel, I shall here register my opinion. Perhaps a word may be
borne from one who never received any, and has none in prospect. Tithes
in their origin appear to have been a sort of eucharistic offering made
unto God, and probably were something similar to the minchah, which we
learn from Genesis 4 was in use almost from the foundation of the world.
When God established a regular, and we may add an expensive worship, it
was necessary that proper provision should be made for the support of
those who were obliged to devote their whole time to it, and
consequently were deprived of the opportunity of providing for
themselves in any secular way. It was soon found that a tenth part of
the produce of the whole land was necessary for this purpose, as a whole
tribe, that of Levi, was devoted to the public service of God; and when
the land was divided, this tribe received no inheritance among their
brethren. Hence, for their support, the law of tithes was enacted; and
by these the priests and Levites were not only supported as the
ministers of God, but as the teachers and intercessors of the people,
performing a great variety of religious duties for them which otherwise
they themselves were bound to perform. As this mode of supporting the
ministers of God was instituted by himself, so we may rest assured it
was rational and just. Nothing can be more reasonable than to devote a
portion of the earthly good which we receive from the free mercy of God,
to his own service; especially when by doing it we are essentially
serving ourselves. If the ministers of God give up their whole time,
talents, and strength, to watch over, labor for, and instruct the people
in spiritual things, justice requires that they shall receive their
support from the work. How worthless and wicked must that man be, who is
continually receiving good from the Lord's hands without restoring any
part for the support of true religion, and for charitable purposes! To
such God says, Their table shall become a snare to them, and that he
will curse their blessings. God expects returns of gratitude in this way
from every man; he that has much should give plenteously, he that has
little should do his diligence to give of that little.

It is not the business of these notes to dispute on the article of
tithes; certainly it would be well could a proper substitute be found
for them, and the clergy paid by some other method, as this appears in
the present state of things to be very objectionable; and the mode of
levying them is vexatious in the extreme, and serves to sow dissensions
between the clergyman and his parishioners, by which many are not only
alienated from the Church, but also from the power as well as the form
of godliness. But still the laborer is worthy of his hire; and the
maintenance of the public ministry of the word of God should not be left
to the caprices of men. He who is only supported for his work, will be
probably abandoned when he is no longer capable of public service. I
have seen many aged and worn-out ministers reduced to great necessity,
and almost literally obliged to beg their bread among those whose
opulence and salvation were, under God, the fruits of their ministry!
Such persons may think they do God service by disputing against "tithes,
as legal institutions long since abrogated," while they permit their
worn-out ministers to starve: - but how shall they appear in that day
when Jesus shall say, I was hungry, and ye gave me no meat; thirsty, and
ye gave me no drink; naked, and ye clothed me not? It is true, that
where a provision is established on a certain order of priesthood by the
law, it may be sometimes claimed and consumed by the worthless and the
profane; but this is no necessary consequence of such establishment, as
there are laws which, if put in action, have sufficient energy to expel
every wicked and slothful servant from the vineyard of Christ. This
however is seldom done. At all events, this is no reason why those who
have served God and their generation should not be comfortably supported
during that service; and when incapable of it, be furnished at least
with the necessaries of life. Though many ministers have reason to
complain of this neglect, who have no claims on a legal ecclesiastical
establishment, yet none have cause for louder complaint than the
generality of those called curates, or unbeneficed ministers, in the
Church of England: their employers clothe themselves with the wool, and
feed themselves with the fat; they tend not the flock, and their
substitutes that perform the labor and do the drudgery of the office,
are permitted at least to half starve on an inadequate remuneration. Let
a national worship be supported, but let the support be derived from a
less objectionable source than tithes; for as the law now stands
relative to them, no one purpose of moral instruction or piety can be
promoted by the system. On their present plan tithes are oppressive and
unjust; the clergyman has a right by law to the tenth of the produce of
the soil, and to the tenth of all that is supported by it. He claims
even the tenth egg, as well as the tenth apple; the tenth of all grain,
of all hay, and even of all the produce of the kitchen garden; but he
contributes nothing to the cultivation of the soil. A comparatively poor
man rents a farm; it is entirely out of heart, for it has been
exhausted; it yields very little, and the tenth is not much; at the
expense of all he has, he dresses and manures this ungrateful soil; to
repay him and keep up the cultivation would require three years'
produce. It begins to yield well, and the clergyman takes the tenth
which is now in quantity and quality more in value than a pound, where
before it was not a shilling. But the whole crop would not repay the
farmer's expenses. In proportion to the farmer's improvement is the
clergyman's tithe, who has never contributed one shilling to aid in this
extra produce! Here then not only the soil pays tithes, but the man's
property brought upon the soil pays tithes: his skill and industry also
are tithed; or if he have been obliged to borrow cash, he not only has
to pay tithes on the produce of this borrowed money, but five per cent
interest for the money itself. All this is oppressive and cruelly
unjust. I say again, let there be a national religion, and a national
clergy supported by the state; but let them be supported by a tax, not
by tithes, or rather let them be paid out of the general taxation; or,
if the tithe system must be continued, let the poor-rates be abolished,
and the clergy, out of the tithes, support the poor in their respective
parishes, as was the original custom.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 29](gen029.md)

</div>
