<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen043)  [Next](gen045.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 44](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#001.md)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 44:0</span></span>

Joseph commands his steward to put his cup secretly into Benjamin's
sack, [Gen 44:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#001.md), [Gen
44:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#002.md). The sons of Jacob depart with
the corn they had purchased, [Gen
44:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#003.md). Joseph commands his steward to
pursue them, and charge them with having stolen his cup, [Gen
44:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#004.md). The brethren excuse
themselves, protest their innocence, and offer to submit to be slaves
should the cup be found with any of them, [Gen
44:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#007.md). Search is made, and the cup is
found in Benjamin's sack, [Gen
44:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#010.md). They are brought back and
submit themselves to Joseph, [Gen
44:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#013.md). He determines that Benjamin
alone, with whom the cup is found, shall remain in captivity, [Gen
44:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#017.md). Judah, in a most affecting
speech, pleads for Benjamin's enlargement, and offers himself to be a
bondman in his stead, vv. 18-34.

[Genesis 44:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 44:2</span></span>

Put my cup in the sack's mouth of the youngest - The stratagem of the
cup seems to have been designed to bring Joseph's brethren into the
highest state of perplexity and distress, that their deliverance by the
discovery that Joseph was their brother might have its highest effect.

[Genesis 44:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 44:5</span></span>

Whereby - he divineth? - Divination by cups has been from time
immemorial prevalent among the Asiatics; and for want of knowing this,
commentators have spent a profusion of learned labor upon these words,
in order to reduce them to that kind of meaning which would at once be
consistent with the scope and design of the history, and save Joseph
from the impeachment of sorcery and divination. I take the word נחש
nachash here in its general acceptation of to view attentively, to
inquire. Now there has been in the east a tradition, the commencement of
which is lost in immemorial time, that there was a Cup, which had passed
successively into the hands of different potentates, which possessed the
strange property of representing in it the whole world, and all the
things which were then doing in it. The cup is called jami Jemsheed, the
cup of Jemsheed, a very ancient king of Persia, whom late historians and
poets have confounded with Bacchus, Solomon, Alexander the Great, etc.
This Cup, filled with the elixir of immortality, they say was discovered
when digging to lay the foundations of Persepolis. The Persian poets are
full of allusions to this cup, which, from its property of representing
the whole world and its transactions, is styled by them jam jehan nima,
"the cup showing the universe;" and to the intelligence received by
means of it they attribute the great prosperity of their ancient
monarchs, as by it they understood all events, past, present, and to
come. Many of the Mohammedan princes and governors affect still to have
information of futurity by means of a cup. When Mr. Norden was at Derri
in the farthest part of Egypt, in a very dangerous situation, an
ill-natured and powerful Arab, in a threatening way, told one of their
people whom they sent to him that "he knew what sort of people they
were, for he had consulted his cup, and found by it that they were those
of whom one of their prophets had said, that Franks (Europeans) would
come in disguise; and, passing everywhere, examine the state of the
country; and afterwards bring over a great number of other Franks,
conquer the country, and exterminate all." By this we see that the
tradition of the divining cup still exists, and in the very same country
too in which Joseph formerly ruled. Now though it is not at all likely
that Joseph practiced any kind of divination, yet probably, according to
the superstition of those times, (for I suppose the tradition to be even
older than the time of Joseph), supernatural influence might be
attributed to his cup; and as the whole transaction related here was
merely intended to deceive his brethren for a short time, he might as
well affect divination by his cup, as he affected to believe they had
stolen it. The steward therefore uses the word נחש nachash in its proper
meaning: Is not this it out of which my lord drinketh, and in which he
inspecteth accurately? [Gen 44:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#005.md). And
hence Joseph says, [Gen 44:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#015.md) : Wot ye
not - did ye not know, that such a person as I (having such a cup) would
accurately and attentively look into it? As I consider this to be the
true meaning, I shall not trouble the reader with other modes of
interpretation.

[Genesis 44:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 44:16</span></span>

What shall we say, etc. - No words can more strongly mark confusion and
perturbation of mind. They, no doubt, all thought that Benjamin had
actually stolen the cup; and the probability of this guilt might be
heightened by the circumstance of his having that very cup to drink out
of at dinner; for as he had the most honorable mess, so it is likely he
had the most honorable cup to drink out of at the entertainment.

[Genesis 44:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 44:18</span></span>

Thou art even as Pharaoh - As wise, as powerful, and as much to be
dreaded as he. In the Asiatic countries, the reigning monarch is always
considered to be the pattern of all perfection; and the highest honor
that can be conferred on any person, is to resemble him to the monarch;
as the monarch himself is likened, in the same complimentary way, to an
angel of God. See [Sa2 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#017.md), [Sa2
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#018.md). Judah is the chief speaker
here, because it was in consequence of his becoming surety for Benjamin
that Jacob permitted him to accompany them to Egypt. See [Gen
43:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#009.md).

"Every man who reads," says Dr. Dodd, "to the close of this chapter,
must confess that Judah acts here the part both of the affectionate
brother and of the dutiful son, who, rather than behold his father's
misery in ease of Benjamin's being left behind, submits to become a
bondman in his stead: and indeed there is such an air of candor and
generosity running through the whole strain of this speech, the
sentiments are so tender and affecting, the expressions so passionate,
and flow so much from artless nature, that it is no wonder if they came
home to Joseph's heart, and forced him to throw off the mask." "When one
sees," says Dr. Jackson, "such passages related by men who affect no
art, and who lived long after the parties who first uttered them, we
cannot conceive how all particulars could be so naturally and fully
recorded, unless they had been suggested by His Spirit who gives mouths
and speech unto men; who, being alike present to all successions, is
able to communicate the secret thoughts or forefathers to their
children, and put the very words of the deceased, never registered
before, into the mouths or pens of their successors born many ages
after; and that as exactly and distinctly as if they had been caught, in
characters of steel or brass, as they issued out of their mouths. For it
is plain that every circumstance is here related with such natural
specifications, as if Moses had heard them talk; and therefore could not
have been thus represented to us, unless they had been written by His
direction who knows all things, fore-past, present, or to come."

To two such able and accurate testimonies I may be permitted to add my
own. No paraphrase can heighten the effect of Judah's address to Joseph.
To add would be to diminish its excellence; to attempt to explain would
be to obscure its beauties; to clothe the ideas in other language than
that of Judah, and his translators in our Bible, would ruin its energy,
and destroy its influence. It is perhaps one of the most tender,
affecting pieces of natural oratory ever spoken or penned; and we need
not wonder to find that when Joseph heard it he could not refrain
himself, but wept aloud. His soul must have been insensible beyond what
is common to human nature, had he not immediately yielded to a speech so
delicately tender, and so powerfully impressive. We cannot but deplore
the unnatural and unscientific division of the narrative in our common
Bibles, which obliges us to have recourse to another chapter in order to
witness the effects which this speech produced on the heart of Joseph.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 45](gen045.md)

</div>
