<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen046)  [Next](gen048.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 47](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#001.md)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 47:0</span></span>

Joseph informs Pharaoh that his father and brethren are arrived in
Goshen, [Gen 47:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#001.md). He presents five of
his brethren before the king, [Gen
47:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#002.md), who questions them concerning
their occupation; they inform him that they are shepherds, and request
permission to dwell in the land of Goshen, [Gen
47:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#003.md), [Gen
47:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#004.md). Pharaoh consents, and desires
that some of the most active of them should be made rulers over his
cattle, [Gen 47:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#005.md), [Gen
47:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#006.md). Joseph presents his father to
Pharaoh, [Gen 47:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#007.md), who questions him
concerning his age, [Gen 47:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#008.md), to
which Jacob returns an affecting answer, and blesses Pharaoh, [Gen
47:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#009.md), [Gen
47:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#010.md). Joseph places his father and
family in the land of Rameses, (Goshen), and furnishes them with
provisions, [Gen 47:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#011.md), [Gen
47:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#012.md). The famine prevailing in the
land, the Egyptians deliver up all their money to Joseph to get food,
[Gen 47:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#013.md). The next year they
bring their cattle, [Gen 47:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#016.md), [Gen
47:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#017.md). The third, their lands and
their persons, [Gen 47:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#018.md). The land
of the priests Joseph does not buy, as it was a royal grant to them from
Pharaoh, [Gen 47:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#022.md). The people
receive seed to sow the land on condition that they shall give a fifth
part of the produce to the king, [Gen
47:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#023.md), [Gen
47:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#024.md). The people agree, and Joseph
makes it a law all over Egypt, [Gen
47:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#025.md), [Gen
47:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#026.md). The Israelites multiply
exceedingly, [Gen 47:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#027.md). Jacob, having
lived seventeen years in Goshen, and being one hundred and forty-seven
years old, [Gen 47:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#028.md), makes Joseph
promise not to bury him in Egypt, but in Canaan, [Gen
47:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#029.md), [Gen
47:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#030.md). Joseph promises and confirms it
with an oath, [Gen 47:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#031.md).

[Genesis 47:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 47:2</span></span>

He took some of his brethren - There is something very strange in the
original; literally translated it signifies "from the end or extremity
(מקצה miktseh) of his brethren he took five men." This has been
understood six different ways. 1. Joseph took five of his brethren that
came first to hand - at random, without design or choice. 2. Joseph took
five of the meanest-looking of his brethren to present before Pharaoh,
fearing if he had taken the sightliest that Pharaoh would detain them
for his service, whereby their religion and morals might be corrupted.
3. Joseph took five of the best made and finest-looking of his brethren,
and presented them before Pharaoh, wishing to impress his mind with a
favorable opinion of the family which he had just now brought into
Egypt, and to do himself honor. 4. Joseph took five of the youngest of
his brethren. 5. He took five of the eldest of his brethren. 6. He took
five from the extremity or end of his brethren, i. e., some of the
eldest and some of the youngest, viz., Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Issachar,
and Benjamin - Rab. Solomon. It is certain that in [Jdg
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#002.md), the word may be understood as
implying dignity, valor, excellence, and pre-eminence: And the children
of Dan sent of their family Five men מקצותם miktsotham, not from their
coasts, but of the most eminent or excellent they had; and it is
probable they might have had their eye on what Joseph did here when they
made their choice, choosing the same number, five, and of their
principal men, as did Joseph, because the mission was important, to go
and search out the land. But the word may be understood simply as
signifying some; out of the whole of his brethren he took only five men,
etc.

[Genesis 47:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 47:6</span></span>

In the best of the land make thy father and brethren to dwell; in the
land of Goshen let them dwell - So it appears that the land of Goshen
was the best of the land of Egypt.

Men of activity - אנשי חיל anshey chayil, stout or robust men - such as
were capable of bearing fatigue, and of rendering their authority
respectable.

Rulers over my cattle - מקנה mikneh signifies not only cattle, but
possessions or property of any kind; though most usually cattle are
intended, because in ancient times they constituted the principal part
of a man's property. The word may be taken here in a more extensive
sense, and the circumstances of the case seem obviously to require it.
If every shepherd was an abomination to the Egyptians, however we may
understand or qualify the expression, is it to be supposed that Pharaoh
should desire that the brethren of his prime minister, of his chief
favorite, should be employed in some of the very meanest offices in the
land? We may therefore safely understand Pharaoh as expressing his will,
that the brethren of Joseph should be appointed as overseers or
superintendents of his domestic concerns, while Joseph superintended
those of the state.

[Genesis 47:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 47:7</span></span>

Jacob blessed Pharaoh - Saluted him on his entrance with Peace be unto
thee, or some such expression of respect and good will. For the meaning
of the term to bless, as applied to God and man, See Clarke on [Gen
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#003) (note.md).

[Genesis 47:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 47:9</span></span>

The days of the years of my pilgrimage - מגורי megurai, of my sojourning
or wandering. Jacob had always lived a migratory or wandering life, in
different parts of Canaan, Mesopotamia, and Egypt, scarcely ever at
rest; and in the places where he lived longest, always exposed to the
fatigues of the field and the desert. Our word pilgrim comes from the
French pelerin and pelegrin, which are corrupted from the Latin
peregrinus, an alien, stranger, or foreigner, from the adverb peregre,
abroad, not at home. The pilgrim was a person who took a journey, long
or short, on some religious account, submitting during the time to many
hardships and privations. A more appropriate term could not be conceived
to express the life of Jacob, and the motive which induced him to live
such a life. His journey to Padan-aram or Mesopotamia excepted, the
principal part of his journeys were properly pilgrimages, undertaken in
the course of God's providence on a religious account.

Have not attained unto the - life of my fathers - Jacob lived in the
whole one hundred and forty-seven years; Isaac his father lived one
hundred and eighty; and Abraham his grandfather, one hundred and
seventy-five. These were days of years in comparison of the lives of the
preceding patriarchs, some of whom lived nearly ten centuries!

[Genesis 47:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 47:14</span></span>

Gathered up all the money - i. e., by selling corn out of the public
stores to the people; and this he did till the money failed, [Gen
47:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#015.md), till all the money was
exchanged for corn, and brought into Pharaoh's treasury. Be sides the
fifth part of the produce of the seven plentiful years, Joseph had
bought additional corn with Pharaoh's money to lay up against the famine
that was to prevail in the seven years of dearth; and it is very likely
that this was sold out at the price for which it was bought, and the
fifth part, which belonged to Pharaoh, sold out at the same price. And
as money at that time could not be plentiful, the cash of the whole
nation was thus exhausted as far as that had circulated among the common
people.

[Genesis 47:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 47:16</span></span>

Give your cattle - This was the wisest measure that could be adopted,
both for the preservation of the people and of the cattle also. As the
people had not grain for their own sustenance, consequently they could
have none for their cattle; hence the cattle were in the most imminent
danger of starving; and the people also were in equal danger, as they
must have divided a portion of that bought for themselves with the
cattle, which for the sake of tillage, etc., they wished of course to
preserve till the seven years of famine should end. The cattle being
bought by Joseph were supported at the royal expense, and very likely
returned to the people at the end of the famine; for how else could they
cultivate their ground, transport their merchandise, etc., etc.? For
this part of Joseph's conduct he certainly deserves high praise and no
censure.

[Genesis 47:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 47:18</span></span>

When that year was ended - The sixth year of the famine, they came unto
him the second year, which was the last or seventh year of the famine,
in which it was necessary to sow the land that there might be a crop the
succeeding year; for Joseph, on whose prediction they relied, had
foretold that the famine should continue only seven years, and
consequently they expected the eighth year to be a fruitful year
provided the land was sowed, without which, though the inundation of the
land by the Nile might amount to the sixteen requisite cubits, there
could be no crop.

[Genesis 47:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 47:19</span></span>

Buy us and our land for bread - In times of famine in Hindostan,
thousands of children have been sold to prevent their perishing. In the
Burman empire the sale of whole families to discharge debts is very
common - Ward's Customs.

[Genesis 47:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 47:21</span></span>

And as for the people, he removed them to cities - It is very likely
that Joseph was influenced by no political motive in removing the people
to the cities, but merely by a motive of humanity and prudence. As the
corn was laid up in the cities he found it more convenient to bring them
to the place where they might be conveniently fed; each being within the
reach of an easy distribution. Thus then the country which could afford
no sustenance was abandoned for the time being, that the people might be
fed in those places where the provision was deposited.

[Genesis 47:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 47:22</span></span>

The land of the priests bought he not - From this verse it is natural to
infer that whatever the religion of Egypt was, it was established by law
and supported by the state. Hence when Joseph bought all the lands of
the Egyptians for Pharaoh, he bought not the land of the priests, for
that was a portion assigned them by Pharaoh; and they did eat - did live
on, that portion. This is the earliest account we have of an established
religion supported by the state.

[Genesis 47:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 47:23</span></span>

I have bought you this day and your land for Pharaoh - It fully appears
that the kingdom of Egypt was previously to the time of Joseph a very
limited monarchy. The king had his estates; the priests had their lands;
and the common people their patrimony independently of both. The land of
Rameses or Goshen appears to have been the king's land, [Gen
47:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#011.md). The priests had their lands,
which they did not sell to Joseph, [Gen
47:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#022.md), [Gen
47:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#026.md); and that the people had lands
independent of the crown, is evident from the purchases Joseph made,
[Gen 47:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#019.md), [Gen
47:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#020.md); and we may conclude from those
purchases that Pharaoh had no power to levy taxes upon his subjects to
increase his own revenue until he had bought the original right which
each individual had in his possessions. And when Joseph bought this for
the king he raised the crown an ample revenue, though he restored the
lands, by obliging each to pay one fifth of the product to the king,
[Gen 47:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#024.md). And it is worthy of remark
that the people of Egypt well understood the distinction between
subjects and servants; for when they came to sell their land, they
offered to sell themselves also, and said: Buy us and our land, and we
and our land will be servants unto Pharaoh, [Gen
47:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#019.md).

Diodorus Siculus, lib. i., gives the same account of the ancient
constitution of Egypt. "The land," says he, "was divided into three
parts:

1\. One belonged to the Priests, with which they provided all
sacrifices, and maintained all the ministers of religion.

2\. A second part was the King's, to support his court and family, and
to supply expenses for wars if they should happen. Hence there were no
taxes, the king having so ample an estate.

3\. The remainder of the land belonged to the Subjects, who appear (from
the account of Diodorus) to have been all soldiers, a kind of standing
militia, liable, at the king's expense, to serve in all wars for the
preservation of the state."

This was a constitution something like the British; the government
appears to have been mixed, and the monarchy properly limited, till
Joseph, by buying the land of the people, made the king in some sort
despotic. But it does net appear that any improper use was made of this,
as in much later times we find it still a comparatively limited
monarchy.

[Genesis 47:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 47:24</span></span>

Ye shall give the fifth part unto Pharaoh - This is precisely the case
in Hindostan; the king has the fifth part of all the crops.

[Genesis 47:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gen 47:26</span></span>

And Joseph made it a law - That the people should hold their land from
the king, and give him the fifth part of the produce as a yearly tax.
Beyond this it appears the king had no farther demands. The whole of
this conduct of Joseph has been as strongly censured by some as
applauded by others. It is natural for men to run into extremes in
attacking or defending any position. Sober and judicious men will
consider what Joseph did by Divine appointment as a prophet of God, and
what he did merely as a statesman from the circumstances of the case,
the complexion of the times, and the character of the people over whom
he presided. When this is dispassionately done, we shall see much reason
to adore God, applaud the man, and perhaps in some cases censure the
minister. Joseph is never held up to our view as an unerring prophet of
God. He was an honored instrument in the hands of God of saving two
nations from utter ruin, and especially of preserving that family from
which the Messiah was to spring, and of perpetuating the true religion
among them. In this character he is represented in the sacred pages. His
conduct as the prime minister of Pharaoh was powerfully indicative of a
deep and consummate politician, who had high notions of prerogative,
which led him to use every prudent means to aggrandize his master, and
at the same time to do what he judged best on the whole for the people
he governed. See the conclusion at [Gen
50:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#026) (note.md).

[Genesis 47:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">gen 47:29</span></span>

Put - thy hand under my thigh - See Clarke on [Gen
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#002) (note.md).

[Genesis 47:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">gen 47:30</span></span>

I will lie with my fathers - As God had promised the land of Canaan to
Abraham and his posterity, Jacob considered it as a consecrated place,
under the particular superintendence and blessing of God: and as Sarah,
Abraham, and Isaac were interred near to Hebron, he in all probability
wished to lie, not only in the same place, but in the same grave; and it
is not likely that he would have been solicitous about this, had he not
considered that promised land as being a type of the rest that remains
for the people of God, and a pledge of the inheritance among the saints
in light.

[Genesis 47:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">gen 47:31</span></span>

And Israel bowed himself upon the bed's head - Jacob was now both old
and feeble, and we may suppose him reclined on his couch when Joseph
came; that he afterwards sat up erect (see [Gen
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#002).md) while conversing with his son,
and receiving his oath and promise; and that when this was finished he
bowed himself upon the bed's head - exhausted with the conversation, he
again reclined himself on his bed as before. This seems to be the simple
meaning, which the text unconnected with any religious system or
prejudice, naturally proposes. But because שחה shachah, signifies not
only to bow but to worship, because acts of religious worship were
performed by bowing or prostration, and because מטה mittah, a bed, by
the change of the points, only becomes matteh, a staff, in which sense
the Septuagint took it, translating the original words thus: Και
προσεκυνησεν Ισραηλ επι το ακρον της ῥαβδου αυτου, and Israel worshipped
upon the top of his staff, which the writer of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, [Heb 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#021.md), quotes literatim;
therefore some have supposed that Jacob certainly had a carved image on
the head or top of his staff, to which he paid a species of adoration;
or that he bowed himself to the staff or scepter of Joseph, thus
fulfilling the prophetic import of his son's dreams! The sense of the
Hebrew text is given above. If the reader prefers the sense of the
Septuagint and the Epistle to the Hebrews, the meaning is, that Jacob,
through feebleness, supported himself with a staff, and that, when he
got the requisite assurance from Joseph that his dead body should be
carried to Canaan, leaning on his staff be bowed his head in adoration
to God, who had supported him all his life long, and hitherto fulfilled
all his promises.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 48](gen048.md)

</div>
