<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen001)  [Next](gen003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 2:0</span></span>

The seventh day is consecrated for a sabbath, and the reasons assigned,
[Gen 2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#001). A recapitulation of the
six days' work of creation, [Gen
2:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#004). The garden of Eden planted,
[Gen 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#008). Its trees, [Gen
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#009). Its rivers, and the countries
watered by them, [Gen 2:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#010). Adam
placed in the garden, and the command given not to eat of the tree of
knowledge on pain of death, [Gen
2:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#015). God purposes to form a
companion for the man, [Gen 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#018). The
different animals brought to Adam that he might assign them their names,
[Gen 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#019), [Gen
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#020). The creation of the woman, [Gen
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#021), [Gen
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#022). The institution of marriage,
[Gen 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#023), [Gen
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024). The purity and innocence of our
first parents, [Gen 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#025).

[Genesis 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 2:1</span></span>

And all the host of them - The word host signifies literally an army,
composed of a number of companies of soldiers under their respective
leaders; and seems here elegantly applied to the various celestial
bodies in our system, placed by the Divine wisdom under the influence of
the sun. From the original word צבא tsaba, a host, some suppose the
Sabeans had their name, because of their paying Divine honors to the
heavenly bodies. From the Septuagint version of this place, πας ὁ κοσμος
αυτων, all their ornaments, we learn the true meaning of the word
κοσμος, commonly translated world, which signifies a decorated or
adorned whole or system. And this refers to the beautiful order,
harmony, and regularity which subsist among the various parts of
creation. This translation must impress the reader with a very favorable
opinion of these ancient Greek translators; had they not examined the
works of God with a philosophic eye, they never could have given this
turn to the original.

[Genesis 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 2:2</span></span>

On the Seventh day God ended, etc. - It is the general voice of
Scripture that God finished the whole of the creation in six days, and
rested the seventh! giving us an example that we might labor six days,
and rest the seventh from all manual exercises. It is worthy of notice
that the Septuagint, the Syriac, and the Samaritan, read the sixth day
instead of the seventh; and this should be considered the genuine
reading, which appears from these versions to have been originally that
of the Hebrew text. How the word sixth became changed into seventh may
be easily conceived from this circumstance. It is very likely that in
ancient times all the numerals were signified by letters, and not by
words at full length. This is the case in the most ancient Greek and
Latin MSS., and in almost all the rabbinical writings. When these
numeral letters became changed for words at full length, two letters
nearly similar might be mistaken for each other; ו vau stands for six, ז
zain for seven; how easy to mistake these letters for each other when
writing the words at full length, and so give birth to the reading in
question.

[Genesis 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 2:3</span></span>

And God blessed the seventh day - The original word ברך barach, which is
generally rendered to bless, has a very extensive meaning. It is
frequently used in Scripture in the sense of speaking good of or to a
person; and hence literally and properly rendered by the Septuagint
ευλογησεν, from ευ, good or well, and λεγω, I speak. So God has spoken
well of the Sabbath, and good to them who conscientiously observe it.
Blessing is applied both to God and man: when God is said to bless, we
generally understand by the expression that he communicates some good;
but when man is said to bless God, we surely cannot imagine that he
bestows any gifts or confers any benefit on his Maker. When God is said
to bless, either in the Old or New Testament, it signifies his speaking
good To man; and this comprises the whole of his exceeding great and
precious promises. And when man is said to bless God, it ever implies
that he speaks good Of him, for the giving and fulfillment of his
promises. This observation will be of general use in considering the
various places where the word occurs in the sacred writings. Reader, God
blesses thee when by his promises he speaks good To thee; and thou dost
bless him when, from a consciousness of his kindness to thy body and
soul, thou art thankful to him, and speakest good of his name.

Because that in it he had rested - שבת shabath, he rested; hence
Sabbath, the name of the seventh day, signifying a day of rest - rest to
the body from labor and toil, and rest to the soul from all worldly care
and anxieties. He who labors with his mind by worldly schemes and plans
on the Sabbath day is as culpable as he who labors with his hands in his
accustomed calling. It is by the authority of God that the Sabbath is
set apart for rest and religious purposes, as the six days of the week
are appointed for labor. How wise is this provision! It is essentially
necessary, not only to the body of man, but to all the animals employed
in his service: take this away and the labor is too great, both man and
beast would fail under it. Without this consecrated day religion itself
would fail, and the human mind, becoming sensualized, would soon forget
its origin and end. Even as a political regulation, it is one of the
wisest and most beneficent in its effects of any ever instituted. Those
who habitually disregard its moral obligation are, to a man, not only
good for nothing, but are wretched in themselves, a curse to society,
and often end their lives miserably. See Clarke's note on [Exo
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#008); See Clarke's note on [Exo
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#012); See Clarke's note on [Exo
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#016); and See Clarke's note on [Exo
31:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#013); to which the reader is
particularly desired to refer.

As God formed both the mind and body of man on principles of activity,
so he assigned him proper employment; and it is his decree that the mind
shall improve by exercise, and the body find increase of vigor and
health in honest labor. He who idles away his time in the six days is
equally culpable in the sight of God as he who works on the seventh. The
idle person is ordinarily clothed with rags, and the Sabbath-breakers
frequently come to an ignominious death. Reader, beware.

[Genesis 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 2:4</span></span>

In the day that the Lord God made, etc. - The word יהוה Yehovah is for
the first time mentioned here. What it signifies see the note on [Exo
34:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#005), [Exo
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006). Wherever this word occurs in the
sacred writings we translate it Lord, which word is, through respect and
reverence, always printed in capitals. Though our English term Lord does
not give the particular meaning of the original word, yet it conveys a
strong and noble sense. Lord is a contraction of the Anglo-Saxon,
Hlaford, afterwards written Loverd, and lastly Lord, from bread; hence
our word loaf, and ford, to supply, to give out. The word, therefore,
implies the giver of bread, i.e., he who deals out all the necessaries
of life. Our ancient English noblemen were accustomed to keep a
continual open house, where all their vassals, and all strangers, had
full liberty to enter and eat as much as they would; and hence those
noblemen had the honorable name of lords, i.e., the dispensers of bread.
There are about three of the ancient nobility who still keep up this
honorable custom, from which the very name of their nobility is derived.
We have already seen, [Gen 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001), with
what judgment our Saxon ancestors expressed Deus, the Supreme Being, by
the term God; and we see the same judgment consulted by their use of the
term Lord to express the word Dominus, by which terms the Vulgate
version, which they used, expresses Elohim and Jehovah, which we
translate Lord God. God is the good Being, and Lord is the dispenser of
bread, the giver of every good and perfect gift, who liberally affords
the bread that perisheth to every man, and has amply provided the bread
that endures unto eternal life for every human soul. With what propriety
then does this word apply to the Lord Jesus, who is emphatically called
the bread of life; the bread of God which cometh down from heaven, and
which is given for the life of the world! [Joh
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#033), [Joh
6:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#048), [Joh
6:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051). What a pity that this most
impressive and instructive meaning of a word in such general use were
not more extensively known, and more particularly regarded! See the
postscript to the general preface. I know that Mr. H. Tooke has
endeavored to render this derivation contemptible; but this has little
weight with me. I have traced it through the most accredited writers in
Saxony and on Saxon affairs, and I am satisfied that this and this only,
is its proper etymology and derivation.

[Genesis 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 2:5</span></span>

Every plant of the field before it was in the earth - It appears that
God created every thing, not only perfect as it respects its nature, but
also in a state of maturity, so that every vegetable production appeared
at once in full growth; and this was necessary that man, when he came
into being, might find every thing ready for his use.

[Genesis 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 2:6</span></span>

There went up a mist - This passage appears to have greatly embarrassed
many commentators. The plain meaning seems to be this, that the aqueous
vapours, ascending from the earth, and becoming condensed in the colder
regions of the atmosphere, fell back upon the earth in the form of dews,
and by this means an equal portion of moisture was distributed to the
roots of plants, etc. As Moses had said, [Gen
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#005), that the Lord had not caused it
to rain upon the earth, he probably designed to teach us, in [Gen
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#006), how rain is produced, viz., by
the condensation of the aqueous vapors, which are generally through the
heat of the sun and other causes raised to a considerable height in the
atmosphere, where, meeting with cold air, the watery particles which
were before so small and light that they could float in the air,
becoming condensed, i.e., many drops being driven into one, become too
heavy to be any longer suspended, and then, through their own gravity,
fall down in the form which we term rain.

[Genesis 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 2:7</span></span>

God formed man of the dust - In the most distinct manner God shows us
that man is a compound being, having a body and soul distinctly, and
separately created; the body out of the dust of the earth, the soul
immediately breathed from God himself. Does not this strongly mark that
the soul and body are not the same thing? The body derives its origin
from the earth, or as עפר aphar implies, the dust; hence because it is
earthly it is decomposable and perishable. Of the soul it is said, God
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; נשמת חיים nishmath
chaiyim, the breath of Lives, i.e., animal and intellectual. While this
breath of God expanded the lungs and set them in play, his inspiration
gave both spirit and understanding.

[Genesis 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 2:8</span></span>

A garden eastward in Eden - Though the word עדן Eden signifies pleasure
or delight, it is certainly the name of a place. See [Gen
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#016); [Kg2
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#012); [Isa
37:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#012); [Eze
27:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#023); [Amo
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#005). And such places probably received
their name from their fertility, pleasant situation, etc. In this light
the Septuagint have viewed it, as they render the passage thus:
Εφυτευσεν ὁ Θεος παραδεισον εν Εδεν, God planted a paradise in Eden.
Hence the word paradise has been introduced into the New Testament, and
is generally used to signify a place of exquisite pleasure and delight.
From this the ancient heathens borrowed their ideas of the gardens of
the Hesperides, where the trees bore golden fruit; the gardens of
Adonis, a word which is evidently derived from the Hebrew עדן Eden; and
hence the origin of sacred gardens or enclosures dedicated to purposes
of devotion, some comparatively innocent, others impure. The word
paradise is not Greek; in Arabic and Persian it signifies a garden, a
vineyard, and also the place of the blessed. The Mohammedans say that
God created the Jennet al Ferdoos, the garden of paradise, from light,
and the prophets and wise men ascend thither. Wilmet places it after the
root farada, to separate, especially a person or place, for the purposes
of devotion, but supposes it to be originally a Persian word, vox
originis Persicae quam in sua lingua conservarunt Armeni. As it is a
word of doubtful origin, its etymology is uncertain.

[Genesis 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 2:9</span></span>

Every tree that is pleasant to the sight, etc. - If we take up these
expressions literally, they may bear the following interpretation: the
tree pleasant to the sight may mean every beautiful tree or plant which
for shape, color, or fragrance, delights the senses, such as flowering
shrubs, etc.

And good for food - All fruit-bearing trees, whether of the pulpy
fruits, as apples, etc., or of the kernel or nut kind, such as dates,
and nuts of different sorts, together with all esculent vegetables.

The tree of life - חיים chaiyim; of lives, or life-giving tree, every
medicinal tree, herb, and plant, whose healing virtues are of great
consequence to man in his present state, when through sin diseases of
various kinds have seized on the human frame, and have commenced that
process of dissolution which is to reduce the body to its primitive
dust.

Yet by the use of these trees of life - those different vegetable
medicines, the health of the body may be preserved for a time, and death
kept at a distance. Though the exposition given here may be a general
meaning for these general terms, yet it is likely that this tree of life
which was placed in the midst of the garden was intended as an emblem of
that life which man should ever live, provided he continued in obedience
to his Maker. And probably the use of this tree was intended as the
means of preserving the body of man in a state of continual vital
energy, and an antidote against death. This seems strongly indicated
from [Gen 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#022).

And the tree of knowledge of good and evil - Considering this also in a
merely literal point of view, it may mean any tree or plant which
possessed the property of increasing the knowledge of what was in
nature, as the esculent vegetables had of increasing bodily vigor; and
that there are some ailments which from their physical influence have a
tendency to strengthen the understanding and invigorate the rational
faculty more than others, has been supposed by the wisest and best of
men; yet here much more seems intended, but what is very difficult to be
ascertained. Some very eminent men have contended that the passage
should be understood allegorically! and that the tree of the knowledge
of good and evil means simply that prudence, which is a mixture of
knowledge, care, caution, and judgment, which was prescribed to regulate
the whole of man's conduct. And it is certain that to know good and
evil, in different parts of Scripture, means such knowledge and
discretion as leads a man to understand what is fit and unfit, what is
not proper to be done and what should be performed. But how could the
acquisition of such a faculty be a sin? Or can we suppose that such a
faculty could be wanting when man was in a state of perfection? To this
it may be answered: The prohibition was intended to exercise this
faculty in man that it should constantly teach him this moral lesson,
that there were some things fit and others unfit to be done, and that in
reference to this point the tree itself should be both a constant
teacher and monitor. The eating of its fruit would not have increased
this moral faculty, but the prohibition was intended to exercise the
faculty he already possessed. There is certainly nothing unreasonable in
this explanation, and viewed in this light the passage loses much of its
obscurity. Vitringa, in his dissertation Deuteronomy arbore prudentiae
in Paradiso, ejusque mysterio, strongly contends for this
interpretation. See more on [Gen 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#006)
(note).

[Genesis 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 2:10</span></span>

A river went out of Eden, etc. - It would astonish an ordinary reader,
who should be obliged to consult different commentators and critics on
the situation of the terrestrial Paradise, to see the vast variety of
opinions by which they are divided. Some place it in the third heaven,
others in the fourth; some within the orbit of the moon, others in the
moon itself; some in the middle regions of the air, or beyond the
earth's attraction; some on the earth, others under the earth, and
others within the earth; some have fixed it at the north pole, others at
the south; some in Tartary, some in China; some on the borders of the
Ganges, some in the island of Ceylon; some in Armenia, others in Africa,
under the equator; some in Mesopotamia, others in Syria, Persia, Arabia,
Babylon, Assyria, and in Palestine; some have condescended to place it
in Europe, and others have contended it either exists not, or is
invisible, or is merely of a spiritual nature, and that the whole
account is to be spiritually understood! That there was such a place
once there is no reason to doubt; the description given by Moses is too
particular and circumstantial to be capable of being understood in any
spiritual or allegorical way. As well might we contend that the persons
of Adam and Eve were allegorical, as that the place of their residence
was such.

The most probable account of its situation is that given by Hadrian
Reland. He supposes it to have been in Armenia, near the sources of the
great rivers Euphrates, Tigris, Phasis, and Araxes. He thinks Pison was
the Phasis, a river of Colchis, emptying itself into the Euxine Sea,
where there is a city called Chabala, the pronunciation of which is
nearly the same with that of Havilah, or חוילה Chavilah, according to
the Hebrew, the vau ו being changed in Greek to beta β. This country was
famous for gold, whence the fable of the Golden Fleece, attempted to be
carried away from that country by the heroes of Greece. The Gihon he
thinks to be the Araxes, which runs into the Caspian Sea, both the words
having the same signification, viz., a rapid motion. The land of Cush,
washed by the river, he supposes to be the country of the Cussaei of the
ancients. The Hiddekel all agree to be the Tigris, and the other river
Phrat, or פרת Perath, to be the Euphrates. All these rivers rise in the
same tract of mountainous country, though they do not arise from one
head.

[Genesis 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 2:12</span></span>

There is bdellium (בדלח bedolach) and the onyx stone, אבן השהם eben
hashshoham - Bochart thinks that the bedolach or bdellium means the
pearl-oyster; and shoham is generally understood to mean the onyx, or
species of agate, a precious stone which has its name from ονυξ a man's
nail, to the color of which it nearly approaches. It is impossible to
say what is the precise meaning of the original words; and at this
distance of time and place it is of little consequence.

[Genesis 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 2:15</span></span>

Put him into the garden - to dress it, and to keep it - Horticulture, or
gardening, is the first kind of employment on record, and that in which
man was engaged while in a state of perfection and innocence. Though the
garden may be supposed to produce all things spontaneously, as the whole
vegetable surface of the earth certainly did at the creation, yet
dressing and tilling were afterwards necessary to maintain the different
kinds of plants and vegetables in their perfection, and to repress
luxuriance. Even in a state of innocence we cannot conceive it possible
that man could have been happy if inactive. God gave him work to do, and
his employment contributed to his happiness; for the structure of his
body, as well as of his mind, plainly proves that he was never intended
for a merely contemplative life.

[Genesis 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 2:17</span></span>

Of the tree of the knowledge - thou shalt not eat - This is the first
positive precept God gave to man; and it was given as a test of
obedience, and a proof of his being in a dependent, probationary state.
It was necessary that, while constituted lord of this lower world, he
should know that he was only God's vicegerent, and must be accountable
to him for the use of his mental and corporeal powers, and for the use
he made of the different creatures put under his care. The man from
whose mind the strong impression of this dependence and responsibility
is erased, necessarily loses sight of his origin and end, and is capable
of any species of wickedness. As God is sovereign, he has a right to
give to his creatures what commands he thinks proper. An intelligent
creature, without a law to regulate his conduct, is an absurdity; this
would destroy at once the idea of his dependency and accountableness.
Man must ever feel God as his sovereign, and act under his authority,
which he cannot do unless he have a rule of conduct. This rule God
gives: and it is no matter of what kind it is, as long as obedience to
it is not beyond the powers of the creature who is to obey. God says:
There is a certain fruit-bearing tree; thou shalt not eat of its fruit;
but of all the other fruits, and they are all that are necessary, for
thee, thou mayest freely, liberally eat. Had he not an absolute right to
say so? And was not man bound to obey?

Thou shalt surely die - מות תמות moth tamuth; Literally, a death thou
shalt die; or, dying thou shalt die. Thou shalt not only die
spiritually, by losing the life of God, but from that moment thou shalt
become mortal, and shalt continue in a dying state till thou die. This
we find literally accomplished; every moment of man's life may be
considered as an act of dying, till soul and body are separated. Other
meanings have been given of this passage, but they are in general either
fanciful or incorrect.

[Genesis 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 2:18</span></span>

It is not good that the man should be alone - לבדו lebaddo; only
himself. I will make him a help meet for him; עזר כנגדו ezer kenegdo, a
help, a counterpart of himself, one formed from him, and a perfect
resemblance of his person. If the word be rendered scrupulously
literally, it signifies one like, or as himself, standing opposite to or
before him. And this implies that the woman was to be a perfect
resemblance of the man, possessing neither inferiority nor superiority,
but being in all things like and equal to himself. As man was made a
social creature, it was not proper that he should be alone; for to be
alone, i.e. without a matrimonial companion, was not good. Hence we find
that celibacy in general is a thing that is not good, whether it be on
the side of the man or of the woman. Men may, in opposition to the
declaration of God, call this a state of excellence and a state of
perfection; but let them remember that the word of God says the reverse.

[Genesis 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 2:19</span></span>

Out of the ground, etc. - Concerning the formation of the different
kinds of animals, see the preceding chapter, Genesis 1 (note).

[Genesis 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 2:20</span></span>

And Adam gave names to all cattle - Two things God appears to have had
in view by causing man to name all the cattle, etc. 1. To show him with
what comprehensive powers of mind his Maker had endued him; and 2. To
show him that no creature yet formed could make him a suitable
companion. And that this twofold purpose was answered we shall shortly
see; for,

1\. Adam gave names; but how? From an intimate knowledge of the nature
and properties of each creature. Here we see the perfection of his
knowledge; for it is well known that the names affixed to the different
animals in Scripture always express some prominent feature and essential
characteristic of the creatures to which they are applied. Had he not
possessed an intuitive knowledge of the grand and distinguishing
properties of those animals, he never could have given them such names.
This one circumstance is a strong proof of the original perfection and
excellence of man, while in a state of innocence; nor need we wonder at
the account. Adam was the work of an infinitely wise and perfect Being,
and the effect must resemble the cause that produced it.

2\. Adam was convinced that none of these creatures could be a suitable
companion for him, and that therefore he must continue in the state that
was not good, or be a farther debtor to the bounty of his Maker; for
among all the animals which he had named there was not found a help meet
for him. Hence we read,

[Genesis 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 2:21</span></span>

The Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, etc. - This was
neither swoon nor ecstasy, but what our translation very properly terms
a deep sleep.

And he took one of his ribs - It is immaterial whether we render צלע
tsela a rib, or a part of his side, for it may mean either: some part of
man was to be used on the occasion, whether bone or flesh it matters
not; though it is likely, from verse [Gen
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#023), that a part of both was taken;
for Adam, knowing how the woman was formed, said, This is flesh of my
flesh, and bone of my bone. God could have formed the woman out of the
dust of the earth, as he had formed the man; but had he done so, she
must have appeared in his eyes as a distinct being, to whom he had no
natural relation. But as God formed her out of a part of the man
himself, he saw she was of the same nature, the same identical flesh and
blood, and of the same constitution in all respects, and consequently
having equal powers, faculties, and rights. This at once ensured his
affection, and excited his esteem.

[Genesis 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 2:23</span></span>

Adam said, This is now bone of my bones, etc. - There is a very delicate
and expressive meaning in the original which does not appear in our
version. When the different genera of creatures were brought to Adam,
that he might assign them their proper names, it is probable that they
passed in pairs before him, and as they passed received their names. To
this circumstance the words in this place seem to refer. Instead of this
now is זאת הפאם zoth happaam, we should render more literally this turn,
this creature, which now passes or appears before me, is flesh of my
flesh, etc. The creatures that had passed already before him were not
suitable to him, and therefore it was said, For Adam there was not a
help meet found, [Gen 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#020); but when
the woman came, formed out of himself, he felt all that attraction which
consanguinity could produce, and at the same time saw that she was in
her person and in her mind every way suitable to be his companion. See
Parkhurst, sub voce.

She shall be called Woman - A literal version of the Hebrew would appear
strange, and yet a literal version is the only proper one. איש ish
signifies man, and the word used to express what we term woman is the
same with a feminine termination, אשה ishshah, and literally means
she-man. Most of the ancient versions have felt the force of the term,
and have endeavored to express it as literally as possible. The
intelligent reader will not regret to see some of them here. The Vulgate
Latin renders the Hebrew virago, which is a feminine form of vir, a man.
Symmachus uses ανδρις, andris, a female form of ανηρ, aner, a man. Our
own term is equally proper when understood. Woman has been defined by
many as compounded of wo and man, as if called man's wo because she
tempted him to eat the forbidden fruit; but this is no meaning of the
original word, nor could it be intended, as the transgression was not
then committed. The truth is, our term is a proper and literal
translation of the original, and we may thank the discernment of our
Anglo-Saxon ancestors for giving it. The Anglo-Saxon word, of which
woman is a contraction, means the man with the womb. A very appropriate
version of the Hebrew אשה ishshah, rendered by terms which signify
she-man, in the versions already specified. Hence we see the propriety
of Adam's observation: This creature is flesh of my flesh, and bone of
my bones; therefore shall she be called Womb-Man, or female man, because
she was taken out of man. See Verstegan. Others derive it from the
Anglo-Saxon words for man's wife or she-man. Either may be proper, the
first seems the most likely.

[Genesis 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 2:24</span></span>

Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother - There shall be,
by the order of God, a more intimate connection formed between the man
and woman, than can subsist even between parents and children.

And they shall be one flesh - These words may be understood in a twofold
sense.

1\. These two shall be one flesh, shall be considered as one body,
having no separate or independent rights, privileges, cares, concerns,
etc., each being equally interested in all things that concern the
marriage state.

2\. These two shall be for the production of one flesh; from their union
a posterity shall spring, as exactly resembling themselves as they do
each other.

Our Lord quotes these words, [Mat
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#005), with some variation from this
text: They Twain shall be one flesh. So in [Mar
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#008). St. Paul quotes in the same way,
[Co1 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#016), and in [Eph
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#031). The Vulgate Latin, the
Septuagint, the Syriac, the Arabic, and the Samaritan, all read the word
Two. That this is the genuine reading I have no doubt. The word שניהם
sheneyhem, they two or both of them, was, I suppose, omitted at first
from the Hebrew text, by mistake, because it occurs three words after in
the following verse, or more probably it originally occurred in [Gen
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024), and not in [Gen
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#025); and a copyist having found that
he had written it twice, in correcting his copy, struck out the word in
[Gen 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024) instead of [Gen
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#025). But of what consequence is it?
In the controversy concerning polygamy, it has been made of very great
consequence. Without the word, some have contended a man may have as
many wives as he chooses, as the terms are indefinite, They shall be,
etc., but with the word, marriage is restricted. A man can have in legal
wedlock but One wife at the same time.

We have here the first institution of marriage, and we see in it several
particulars worthy of our most serious regard.

1\. God pronounces the state of celibacy to be a bad state, or, if the
reader please, not a good one; and the Lord God said, It is not good for
man to be alone. This is God's judgment. Councils, and fathers, and
doctors, and synods, have given a different judgment; but on such a
subject they are worthy of no attention. The word of God abideth for
ever.

2\. God made the woman for the man, and thus he has shown us that every
son of Adam should be united to a daughter of Eve to the end of the
world. See on [Co1 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#003) (note). God
made the woman out of the man, to intimate that the closest union, and
the most affectionate attachment, should subsist in the matrimonial
connection, so that the man should ever consider and treat the woman as
a part of himself: and as no one ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes
and supports it, so should a man deal with his wife; and on the other
hand the woman should consider that the man was not made for her, but
that she was made for the man, and derived, under God, her being from
him; therefore the wife should see that she reverence her husband, [Eph
5:33](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#033).

[Gen 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#023), [Gen
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024) contain the very words of the
marriage ceremony: This is flesh of my flesh, and bone of my bone,
therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave
unto his wife, and they two shall be one flesh. How happy must such a
state be where God's institution is properly regarded, where the parties
are married, as the apostle expresses it, in the Lord; where each, by
acts of the tenderest kindness, lives only to prevent the wishes and
contribute in every possible way to the comfort and happiness of the
other! Marriage might still be what it was in its original institution,
pure and suitable; and in its first exercise, affectionate and happy;
but how few such marriages are there to be found! Passion, turbulent and
irregular, not religion; custom, founded by these irregularities, not
reason; worldly prospects, originating and ending in selfishness and
earthly affections, not in spiritual ends, are the grand producing
causes of the great majority of matrimonial alliances. How then can such
turbid and bitter fountains send forth pure and sweet waters? See the
ancient allegory of Cupid and Psyche, by which marriage is so happily
illustrated, explained in the notes on [Mat
19:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#004).

[Genesis 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 2:25</span></span>

They were both naked, etc. - The weather was perfectly temperate, and
therefore they had no need of clothing, the circumambient air being of
the same temperature with their bodies. And as sin had not yet entered
into the world, and no part of the human body had been put to any
improper use, therefore there was no shame, for shame can only arise
from a consciousness of sinful or irregular conduct.

Even in a state of innocence, when all was perfection and excellence,
when God was clearly discovered in all his works, every place being his
temple, every moment a time of worship, and every object an incitement
to religious reverence and adoration - even then, God chose to
consecrate a seventh part of time to his more especial worship, and to
hallow it unto his own service by a perpetual decree. Who then shall
dare to reverse this order of God? Had the religious observance of the
Sabbath been never proclaimed till the proclamation of the law on Mount
Sinai, then it might have been conjectured that this, like several other
ordinances, was a shadow which must pass away with that dispensation;
neither extending to future ages, nor binding on any other people. But
this was not so. God gave the Sabbath, his first ordinance, to man, (see
the first precept, [Gen 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#017)), while
all the nations of the world were seminally included in him, and while
he stood the father and representative of the whole human race;
therefore the Sabbath is not for one nation, for one time, or for one
place. It is the fair type of heaven's eternal day - of the state of
endless blessedness and glory, where human souls, having fully regained
the Divine image, and become united to the Centre and Source of all
perfection and excellence, shall rest in God, unutterably happy through
the immeasurable progress of duration! Of this consummation every
returning Sabbath should at once be a type, a remembrancer, and a
foretaste, to every pious mind; and these it must be to all who are
taught of God.

Of this rest, the garden of Eden, that paradise of God formed for man,
appears also to have been a type and pledge; and the institution of
marriage, the cause, bond, and cement of the social state, was probably
designed to prefigure that harmony, order, and blessedness which must
reign in the kingdom of God, of which the condition of our first parents
in the garden of paradise is justly supposed to have been an expressive
emblem. What a pity that this heavenly institution should have ever been
perverted! that, instead of becoming a sovereign help to all, it is now,
through its prostitution to animal and secular purposes, become the
destroyer of millions! Reader, every connection thou formest in life
will have a strong and sovereign influence on thy future destiny.
Beware! an unholy cause, which from its peculiar nature must be
ceaselessly active in every muscle, nerve, and passion, cannot fail to
produce incessant effects of sin, misery, death, and perdition. Remember
that thy earthly connections, no matter of what kind, are not formed
merely for time, whatsoever thou mayest intend, but also for eternity.
With what caution there fore shouldst thou take every step in the path
of life! On this ground, the observations made in the preceding notes
are seriously recommended to thy consideration.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 3](gen003)

</div>
