<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen041)  [Next](gen043) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 42](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 42:0</span></span>

Jacob sends his ten sons to Egypt to buy corn, [Gen
42:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#001); but refuses to permit Benjamin
to go, [Gen 42:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#004). They arrive in
Egypt, and bow themselves before Joseph, [Gen
42:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#005), [Gen
42:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#006). He treats them roughly and calls
them spies, [Gen 42:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#007). They defend
themselves and give an account of their family, [Gen
42:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#011). He appears unmoved, and puts
them all in prison for three days, [Gen
42:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#014). On the third day he releases
them on condition of their bringing Benjamin, [Gen
42:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#018). Being convicted by their
consciences, they reproach themselves with their cruelty to their
brother Joseph, and consider themselves under the displeasure of God,
[Gen 42:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#021). Joseph is greatly
affected, detains Simeon as a pledge for Benjamin, orders their sacks to
be filled with corn, and the purchase money to be put in each man's
sack, [Gen 42:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#024), [Gen
42:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#025). When one of them is going to
give his ass provender he discovers his money in the mouth of his sack,
at which they are greatly alarmed, [Gen
42:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#026). They come to their father in
Canaan, and relate what happened to them in their journey, [Gen
42:29-34](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#029). On emptying their sacks,
each man's money is found in his sack's mouth, which causes alarm both
to them and their father, [Gen 42:35](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#035).
Jacob deplores the loss of Joseph and Simeon, and refuses to let
Benjamin go, though Reuben offers his two sons as pledges for his
safety, [Gen 42:36-38](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#036).

[Genesis 42:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 42:1</span></span>

Jacob saw that there was corn - That is, Jacob heard from the report of
others that there was plenty in Egypt. The operations of one sense, in
Hebrew, are often put for those of another. Before agriculture was
properly known and practiced, famines were frequent; Canaan seems to
have been peculiarly vexed by them. There was one in this land in the
time of Abraham, [Gen 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#010); another
in the days of Isaac, [Gen 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#001); and
now a third in the time of Jacob. To this St. Stephen alludes, [Act
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#011) : there was great affliction, and
our fathers found no sustenance.

[Genesis 42:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 42:6</span></span>

Joseph was the governor - שליט shallit, an intendant, a protector, from
שלט skalat, to be over as a protector; hence שלטים shelatim, shields, or
arms for protection and defense, [Sa2
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#007); and שלטון shilton, power and
authority, [Ecc 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#004), [Ecc
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#008); and hence the Arabic sultan, a
lord, prince, or king, from salata, he obtained and exercised dominion,
he ruled. Was it not from this very circumstance, Joseph being shallit,
that all the Mohammedan governors of Egypt, etc., took the title of
sultan? Bowed down themselves before him - Thus fulfilling the prophetic
dream, [Gen 37:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#007), [Gen
37:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#008), which they had taken every
precaution to render null and void. But there is neither might nor
counsel against the Lord.

[Genesis 42:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 42:9</span></span>

Ye are spies - מרגלים אתם meraggelim attem, ye are footmen, trampers
about, footpads, vagabonds, lying in wait for the property of others;
persons who, under the pretense of wishing to buy corn, desire only to
find out whether the land be so defenceless that the tribes to which ye
belong (see [Gen 42:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#011)) may attack it
successfully, drive out the inhabitants, and settle in it themselves;
or, having plundered it, retire to their deserts. This is a frequent
custom among the Arabs to the present day. Thus Joseph spake roughly to
them merely to cover that warmth of affection which he felt towards
them; and that being thus brought, apparently, into straits and
dangerous circumstances, their consciences might be awakened to reflect
on and abhor their own wickedness.

[Genesis 42:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 42:11</span></span>

We are all one man's sons - We do not belong to different tribes, and it
is not likely that one family would make a hostile attempt upon a whole
kingdom. This seems to be the very ground that Joseph took, viz., that
they were persons belonging to different tribes. Against this
particularly they set up their defense, asserting that they all belonged
to one family; and it is on the proof of this that Joseph puts them,
[Gen 42:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#015), in obliging them to leave
one as a hostage, and insisting on their bringing their remaining
brother; so that he took exactly the same precautions to detect them as
if he had had no acquaintance with them, and had every reason to be
suspicious.

[Genesis 42:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 42:13</span></span>

One is not - An elliptical sentence, One is not alive.

[Genesis 42:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 42:15</span></span>

By the life of Pharaoh - חי פרעה chey Pharaoh, Pharaoh liveth. As if he
had said, As surely as the king of Egypt lives, so surely shall ye not
go hence unless your brother come hither. Here therefore is no oath; it
is just what they themselves make it in their report to their father,
[Gen 43:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#003) : the man did solemnly
protest unto us; and our translators should not have put it in the form
of an oath, especially as the original not only will bear another
version, but is absolutely repugnant to this in our sense of the word.

[Genesis 42:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 42:18</span></span>

I fear God - את האלהים אני ירא eth haelohim ani yare, literally
translated the passage runs thus, I also fear the gods; but the emphatic
ה ha is probably added by Joseph, both here and in his conversation with
Pharaoh, the more particularly to point out the eminence and perfection
of the Supreme Being as contradistinguished from the gods of Egypt. He
seems to say to his brethren, I am a worshipper of the true God, and ye
have nothing to fear.

[Genesis 42:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 42:21</span></span>

We are verily guilty - How finely are the office and influence of
conscience exemplified in these words! It was about twenty-two years
since they had sold their brother, and probably their conscience had
been lulled asleep to the present hour. God combines and brings about
those favorable circumstances which produce attention and reflection,
and give weight to the expostulations of conscience. How necessary to
hear its voice in time, for here it may be the instrument of salvation;
but if not heard in this world, it must be heard in the next; and there,
in association with the unquenchable fire, it will be the never-dying
worm. Reader, has not thy sin as yet found thee out? Pray to God to take
away the veil from thy heart, and give thee that deep sense of guilt
which shall oblige thee to flee for refuge to the hope which is set
before thee in the Gospel of Christ.

[Genesis 42:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 42:23</span></span>

For he spake unto them by an interpreter - Either there was a very great
difference between the two languages as then spoken, or Joseph, to
prevent all suspicion, might affect to be ignorant of both. We have many
evidences in this book that the Egyptians, Hebrews, Canaanites, and
Syrians, could understand each other in a general way, though there are
also proofs that there was a considerable difference between their
dialects.

[Genesis 42:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 42:24</span></span>

Took - Simeon and bound him before their eyes - This was retaliation,
if, as the rabbins suppose, it was Simeon who bound Joseph, and put him
into the pit. A recollection of this circumstance must exceedingly
deepen the sense he had of his guilt.

[Genesis 42:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 42:25</span></span>

Commanded to fill their sacks - כליהם keleyhem, their vessels; probably
large woolen bags, or baskets lined with leather, which, as Sir John
Chardin says, are still in use through all Asia, and are called
tambellet; they are covered with leather, the better to resist the wet,
and to prevent dirt and sand from mixing with the grain. These vessels,
of whatever sort, must have been different from those called שק sak in
the twenty-seventh and following verses, which was probably only a small
sack or bag, in which each had reserved a sufficiency of corn for his
ass during the journey; the larger vessels or bags serving to hold the
wheat or rice they had brought, and their own packages. The reader will
at once see that the English word sack is plainly derived from the
Hebrew.

[Genesis 42:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gen 42:26</span></span>

They laded their asses - Amounting, no doubt, to several scores, if not
hundreds, else they could not have brought a sufficiency of corn for the
support of so large a family as that of Jacob.

[Genesis 42:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gen 42:27</span></span>

One of them opened his sack - From [Gen
42:35](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#035) we learn that each of the ten
brethren on emptying his sack when he returned found his money in it;
can we suppose that this was not discovered by them all before? It seems
not; and the reason was probably this: the money was put in the mouth of
the sack of one only, in the sacks of the others it was placed at or
near to the bottom; hence only one discovered it on the road, the rest
found it when they came to empty their sacks at their father's house.

In the inn - במלון bammalon, from לן lan, to lodge, stay, remain, etc.
The place at which they stopped to bait or rest themselves and their
asses. Our word inn gives us a false idea here; there were no such
places of entertainment at that time in the desert over which they had
to pass, nor are there any to the present day. Travellers generally
endeavor to reach a well, where they fill their girbahs, or leather
bottles, with fresh water, and having clogged their camels, asses, etc.,
permit them to crop any little verdure there may be in the place,
keeping watch over them by turns. This is all we are to understand by
the malon or inn in the text, for even caravansaries were not then in
use, which are generally no more than four walls perfectly exposed, the
place being open at the top.

[Genesis 42:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">gen 42:28</span></span>

Their heart failed them - ויצא לבם valyetse libbam, their heart went
out. This refers to that spasmodic affection which is felt in the breast
at any sudden alarm or fright. Among the common people in our own
country we find an expression exactly similar, "My heart was ready to
leap out at my mouth," used on similar occasions.

What is this that God hath done unto us? - Their guilty consciences, now
thoroughly awakened, were in continual alarms; they felt that they
deserved God's curse, and every occurrence served to confirm and
increase their suspicions.

[Genesis 42:35](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">gen 42:35</span></span>

As they emptied their sacks - See Clarke on [Gen
42:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#027) (note).

[Genesis 42:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">gen 42:36</span></span>

All these things are against me - עלי היו כלנה alai hayu cullanah;
literally, All these things are upon me. Not badly translated by the
Vulgate, In me haec omnia mala reciderunt, "All these evils fall back
upon me." They lie upon me as heavy loads, hastening my death; they are
more than I can bear.

[Genesis 42:37](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">gen 42:37</span></span>

Slay my two sons, if I bring him not to thee - What a strange proposal
made by a son to his father, concerning his grandchildren! But they show
the honesty and affection of Reuben's heart; he felt deeply for his
father's distress, and was determined to risk and hazard every thing in
order to relieve and comfort him. There is scarcely a transaction in
which Reuben is concerned that does not serve to set his character in an
amiable point of view, except the single instance mentioned [Gen
35:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#022) (note), and which for the sake
of decency and piety we should wish to understand as the Targumists have
explained it. See the notes.

[Genesis 42:38](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">gen 42:38</span></span>

He is left alone - That is, Benjamin is the only remaining son of
Rachel; for he supposed Joseph, who was the other son, to be dead.

Shall ye bring down my gray hairs with sorrow - Here he keeps up the
idea of the oppressive burden mentioned [Gen
42:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#036), to which every occurrence was
adding an additional weight, so that he felt it impossible to support it
any longer.

The following observations of Dr. Dodd on this verse are very
appropriate and judicious: "Nothing can be more tender and picturesque
than the words of the venerable patriarch. Full of affection for his
beloved Rachel, he cannot think of parting with Benjamin, the only
remaining pledge of that love, now Joseph, as he supposes, is no more.
We seem to behold the gray-headed, venerable father pleading with his
sons, the beloved Benjamin standing by his side, impatient sorrow in
their countenances, and in his all the bleeding anxiety of paternal
love. It will be difficult to find in any author, ancient or modern, a
more exquisite picture."

1\. There is one doctrine relative to the economy of Divine Providence
little heeded among men; I mean the doctrine of restitution. When a man
has done wrong to his neighbor, though, on his repentance, and faith in
our Lord Jesus, God forgives him his sin, yet he requires him to make
restitution to the person injured, if it lie in the compass of his
power. If he do not, God will take care to exact it in the course of his
providence. Such respect has he for the dictates of infinite justice
that nothing of this kind shall pass unnoticed. Several instances of
this have already occurred in this history, and we shall see several
more. No man should expect mercy at the hand of God who, having wronged
his neighbor, refuses, when he has it in his power, to make restitution.
Were he to weep tears of blood, both the justice and mercy of God would
shut out his prayer, if he made not his neighbor amends for the injury
he may have done him. The mercy of God, through the blood of the cross,
can alone pardon his guilt; but no dishonest man can expect this; and he
is a dishonest man who illegally holds the property of another in his
hand. The unnatural brethren who sold their brother are now about to be
captivated themselves; and the binder himself is bound in his turn: and
though a kind Providence permits not the evil to fall upon them, yet,
while apprehending it, they feel all its reality, conscience supplying
the lack of prison, jailer, and bonds.

2\. The ways of Providence are often to us dark and perplexed, so that
we are ready to imagine that good can never result from what appears to
us to be directly contrary to our interest; and we are often tempted to
think that those very providential dealings of God, which have for their
object our present and eternal welfare, are rather proofs of his
displeasure, or evidences of his vindictive judgment. All these things
are against me, said poor desponding Jacob; whereas, instead of being
against him, all these things were for him; and by all these means was
the merciful God working for the preservation of himself and his family,
and the fulfillment of his ancient promise, that the posterity of
Abraham should be as the stars of heaven for multitude. How strange is
it that our faith, after so many evidences of his goodness, should still
be so weak; and that our opinion of him should be so imperfect, that we
can never trust in him but while he is under our own eye! If we see him
producing good, we can believe that he is doing so, and this is all. If
we believe not, he abides faithful; but our unbelief must make our own
way extremely perplexing and difficult.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 43](gen043)

</div>
