<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen024)  [Next](gen026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 25:0</span></span>

Abraham marries Keturah, [Gen 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#001).
Their issue, [Gen 25:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#002). Makes Isaac
his heir, [Gen 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#005); but gives
portions to the sons of his concubines, and sends them eastward from
Isaac, to find settlements, [Gen 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#006).
Abraham's age, [Gen 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#007), and death,
[Gen 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#008). Is buried by his sons Isaac
and Ishmael in the cave of Machpelah, [Gen
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#009), [Gen
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#010). God's blessing upon Isaac, [Gen
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#011). The generations of Ishmael,
[Gen 25:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#012). His age, [Gen
25:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#017), and death, [Gen
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#018). Of the generations of Isaac,
[Gen 25:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#019), who was married in his
fortieth year, [Gen 25:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#020). Rebekah his
wife being barren, on his prayer to God she conceives, [Gen
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#021). She inquires of the Lord
concerning her state, [Gen 25:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#022). The
Lord's answer, [Gen 25:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#023). She is
delivered of twins, [Gen 25:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#024).
Peculiarities in the birth of her sons Esau and Jacob, from which they
had their names, [Gen 25:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#025), [Gen
25:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#026). Their different manner of life,
[Gen 25:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#027), [Gen
25:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#028). Esau, returning from the field
faint, begs pottage from his brother, [Gen
25:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#029), [Gen
25:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#030). Jacob refuses to grant him any
but on condition of his selling him his birthright, [Gen
25:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#031). Esau, ready to die, parts with
his birthright to save his life, [Gen
25:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#032). Jacob causes him to confirm the
sale with an oath, [Gen 25:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#033). He
receives bread and pottage of lentils, and departs, [Gen
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#034).

[Genesis 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 25:1</span></span>

Then again Abraham took a wife - When Abraham took Keturah we are not
informed; it might have been in the lifetime of Sarah; and the original
ויסף vaiyoseph, and he added, etc., seems to give some countenance to
this opinion. Indeed it is not very likely that he had the children
mentioned here after the death of Sarah; and from the circumstances of
his age, feebleness, etc., at the birth of Isaac, it is still more
improbable. Even at that age, forty years before the marriage of Isaac,
the birth of his son is considered as not less miraculous on his part
than on the part of Sarah; for the apostle expressly says, [Rom
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#019), that Abraham considered not his
own body Now Dead, when he was about a hundred years old, nor the
Deadness of Sarah's womb; hence we learn that they were both past the
procreation of children, insomuch that the birth of Isaac is ever
represented as supernatural. It is therefore very improbable that he had
any child after the birth of Isaac; and therefore we may well suppose
that Moses had related this transaction out of its chronological order,
which is not infrequent in the sacred writings, when a variety of
important facts relative to the accomplishment of some grand design are
thought necessary to be produced in a connected series. On this account
intervening matters of a different complexion are referred to a future
time. Perhaps we may be justified in reading the verse: "And Abraham had
added, and had taken a wife (besides Hagar) whose name was Keturah,"
etc. The chronology in the margin dates this marriage with Keturah A. M.
2154, nine years after the death of Sarah, A. M. 2145. Jonathan ben
Uzziel and the Jerusalem Targum both assert that Keturah was the same as
Hagar. Some rabbins, and with them Dr. Hammond, are of the same opinion;
but both Hagar and Keturah are so distinguished in the Scriptures, that
the opinion seems destitute of probability.

[Genesis 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 25:2</span></span>

Zimran - Stephanus Byzantinus mentions a city in Arabia Felix called
Zadram, which some suppose to have been named from this son of Keturah;
but it is more likely, as Calmet observes, that all these sons of
Abraham resided in Arabia Deserta; and Pliny, Hist. Nat., lib. vi., c.
28, mentions a people in that country called Zamarenians, who were
probably the descendants of this person.

Jokshan - Several learned men have been of opinion that this Jokshan was
the same as Kachtan, the father of the Arabs. The testimonies in favor
of this opinion see in Dr. Hunt's Oration, De Antiquitate, etc., Linguae
Arabicae, p. 4. Calmet supposes that the Cataneans, who inhabited a part
of Arabia Deserta, sprang from this Jokshan.

Medan, and Midian - Probably those who peopled that part of Arabia
Petraea contiguous to the land of Moab eastward of the Dead Sea. St.
Jerome terms the people of this country Madinaeans; and Ptolemy mentions
a people called Madianites, who dwelt in the same place.

Ishbak - From this person Calmet supposes the brook Jabbok, which has
its source in the mountains of Gilead, and falls into the sea of
Tiberias, took its name.

Shuah - Or Shuach. From this man the Sacceans, near to Batanla, at the
extremity of Arabia Deserta, towards Syria, are supposed to have sprung.
Bildad the Shuhite, one of Job's friends, is supposed to have descended
from this son of Abraham.

[Genesis 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 25:3</span></span>

Sheba - From whom sprang the Sabeans, who robbed Job of his cattle. See
Bochart and Calmet.

Asshurim, and Letushim, and Leummim - We know not who these were, but as
each name is plural they must have been tribes or families, and not
individuals. Onkelos interprets these words of persons dwelling in
camps, tents, and islands; and Jonathan ben Uzziel calls them merchants,
artificers, and heads or chiefs of people.

[Genesis 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 25:4</span></span>

Ephah, and Epher, etc. - Of these we know no more than of the preceding;
an abundance of conjectures is already furnished by the commentators.

[Genesis 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 25:5</span></span>

Gave all that he had unto Isaac - His principal flocks, and especially
his right to the land of Canaan, including a confirmation to him and his
posterity of whatever was contained in the promises of God.

[Genesis 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 25:6</span></span>

Unto the sons of the concubines - Viz., Hagar and Keturah, Abraham gave
gifts. Cattle for breed, seed to sow the land, and implements for
husbandry, may be what is here intended.

And sent them away - while he yet lived - Lest after his death they
should dispute a settlement in the Land of Promise with Isaac; therefore
he very prudently sent them to procure settlements during his lifetime,
that they might be under no temptation to dispute the settlement with
Isaac in Canaan. From this circumstance arose that law which has
prevailed in almost all countries, of giving the estates to the eldest
son by a lawful wife; for though concubines, or wives of the second
rank, were perfectly legitimate in those ancient times, yet their
children did not inherit, except in case of the failure of legal issue,
and with the consent of the lawful wife; and it is very properly
observed by Calmet, that it was in consequence of the consent of Leah
and Rachel that the children of their slaves by Jacob had a common and
equal lot with the rest. By a law of Solon all natural children were
excluded from the paternal inheritance, but their fathers were permitted
to give them any sum not beyond a thousand drachma by way of present.
Eastward, unto the east country - Arabia Deserta, which was eastward of
Beer-sheba, where Abraham lived.

[Genesis 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 25:7</span></span>

The days of the years, etc. - There is a beauty in this expression which
is not sufficiently regarded. Good men do not live by centuries, though
many such have lived several hundred years, nor do they count their
lives even by years, but by days, living as if they were the creatures
only of A Day; having no more time than they can with any propriety call
their own, and living that day in reference to eternity.

[Genesis 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 25:8</span></span>

Then Abraham gave up the ghost - Highly as I value our translation for
general accuracy, fidelity, and elegance, I must beg leave to dissent
from this version. The original word יגוע yigva, from the root גוע gava,
signifies to pant for breath, to expire, to cease from breathing, or to
breathe one's last; and here, and wherever the original word is used,
the simple term expired would be the proper expression. In our
translation this expression occurs [Gen
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#008), [Gen
25:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#017); [Gen
35:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#029); [Gen
44:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#033); [Job
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#011); [Job
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#018); [Job
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#020); [Job
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#019); [Job
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#010); [Lam
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#019); in all of which places the
original is גוע gava. It occurs also in our translation, [Jer
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#009), but there the original is נפחה
נפשה naphecah naphshah, she breathed out her soul; the verb גוע gava not
being used. Now as our English word ghost, from the Anglo-Saxon gast, an
inmate, inhabitant, guest, (a casual visitant), also a spirit, is now
restricted among us to the latter meaning, always signifying the
immortal spirit or soul of man, the guest of the body; and as giving up
the spirit, ghost, or soul, is an act not proper to man, though
commending it to God, in our last moments, is both an act of faith and
piety; and as giving up the ghost, i.e., dismissing his spirit from his
body, is attributed to Jesus Christ, to whom alone it is proper, I
therefore object against its use in every other case.

Every man since the fall has not only been liable to death, but has
deserved it, as all have forfeited their lives because of sin. Jesus
Christ, as born immaculate, and having never sinned, had not forfeited
his life, and therefore may be considered as naturally and properly
immortal. No man, says he, taketh it - my life, from me, but I lay it
down of myself; I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it
again: therefore doth the Father love me, because I lay down my life
that I might take it again, [Joh
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#017), [Joh
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018). Hence we rightly translate [Mat
27:50](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#050), αφηκε το πνευμα, he gave up the
ghost; i.e., he dismissed his spirit that he might die for the sin of
the world. The Evangelist St. [Joh
19:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#030), makes use of an expression to
the same import, which we translate in the same way, παρεδωκε το πνευμα,
he delivered up his spirit. We translate [Mar
15:37](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#037), and [Luk
23:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#046), he gave up the ghost, but not
correctly, because the word in both these places is very different,
εξεπνευσε, he breathed his last, or expired, though in the latter place
([Luk 23:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#046)) there is an equivalent
expression, O Father, into thy hands παρατιθεμαι το πνευμα μου, I commit
my spirit, i.e., I place my soul in thy hand; proving that the act was
his own, that no man could take his life away from him, that he did not
die by the perfidy of his disciple, or the malice of the Jews, but by
his own free act. Thus He Laid Down his life for the sheep. Of Ananias
and Sapphira, [Act 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#005), [Act
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#010), and of Herod, [Act
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#023), our translation says they gave
up the ghost; but the word in both places is εξεψυξε, which simply means
to breathe out, to expire, or die; but in no case, either by the
Septuagint in the Old or any of the sacred writers in the New Testament,
is αφηκε το μνευμα or παρεδωκε το πνευμα, he dismissed his spirit or
delivered up his spirit, spoken of any person but Christ. Abraham,
Isaac, Ishmael, Jacob, etc., breathed their last; Ananias, Sapphira, and
Herod expired; but none, Jesus Christ excepted, gave up the ghost,
dismissed, or delivered up his own spirit, and was consequently free
among the dead. Of the patriarchs, etc., the Septuagint uses the word
εκλειπων, failing, or κατεπαυσε, he ceased or rested.

An old man - Viz., one hundred and seventy-five, the youngest of all the
patriarchs; and full of years. The word years is not in the text; but as
our translators saw that some word was necessary to fill up the text,
they added this in italics. It is probable that the true word is ימים
yamim, days, as in [Gen 35:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#029); and
this reading is found in several of Kennicott's and De Rossi's MSS., in
the Samaritan text, Septuagint, Vulgate, Syriac, Arabic, Persic, and
Chaldee. On these authorities it might be safely admitted into the text.

Being full of days, or full of years - To be satiated with days or life,
has been in use among different nations to express the termination of
life, and especially life ended without reluctance. It seems to be a
metaphor taken from a guest regaled by a plentiful banquet, and is thus
used by the Roman poets. Lucretius, lib. iii., ver. 947, ridiculing
those who were unreasonably attached to life, and grievously afflicted
at the prospect of death, addresses them in the following manner: -

Quid mortem congemis, ac fies?

Nam si grata fuit tibi vita anteacta, priorque,

Et non omnia pertusum congesta quasi in vas

Commoda perfluxere, atque ingrata interiere:

Cur non, ut Plenus Vitae Conviva, Recedis?

Fond mortal, what's the matter, thou dost sigh?

Why all these fears because thou once must die?

For if the race thou hast already run

Was pleasant, if with joy thou saw'st the sun,

If all thy pleasures did not pass thy mind

As through a sieve, but left some sweets behind,

Why dost thou not then, like a Thankful Guest,

Rise cheerfully from life's Abundant Feast?

Creech.

Et nec opinanti mors ad caput astitit ante,

Quam Satur, ac Plenus possis discedere rerum

Ib. ver. 972.

And unexpected hasty death destroys,

Before thy greedy mind is Full of Joys. Idem.

Horace makes use of the same figure: -

Inde fit, ut raro, qui se vixisse beatum

Dicat, et exacto Contentus tempore vitae

Cedat, ut Conviva Satur, reperire queamus.

Sat. l. i. Sat. i. ver. 117.

From hence how few, like Sated Guests,

depart From life's Full Banquet with a cheerful heart?

Francis.

The same image is expressed with strong ridicule in his last Epistle -

Lusisti satis, edisti satis, atque bibisti;

Tempus Abire tibi est.

Epist. l. ii., ver. 216.

Thou hast eaten, drunk, and play'd Enough;

then why So stark reluctant to leave off, and Die?

The poet Statius uses abire paratum Plenum vita, "prepared to depart,
being Full of Life," in exactly the same sense: -

Dubio quem non in turbine rerum

Deprendet suprema dies; sed abire paratum,

Acts Plenum Vita. Sylv. l. ii., Villa Surrentina, ver. 128.

The man whose mighty soul is not immersed in dubious whirl of secular
concerns, His final hour ne'er takes him by surprise, But, Full of Life,
he stands Prepared to Die.

It was the opinion of Aristotle that a man should depart from life as he
should rise from a banquet. Thus Abraham died Full of days, and
Satisfied with life, but in a widely different spirit from that
recommended by the above writers - He left life with a hope full of
immortality, which they could never boast; for He saw the day of Christ,
and was glad; and his hope was crowned, for here it is expressly said,
He was gathered to his fathers; surely not to the bodies of his sleeping
ancestors, who were buried in Chaldea and not in Canaan, nor with his
fathers in any sense, for he was deposited in the cave where his Wife
alone slept; but he was gathered to the spirits of just men made
perfect, and to the Church of the first-born, whose names are written in
heaven; [Heb 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#023).

[Genesis 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 25:9</span></span>

His sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him - Though Ishmael and his mother
had been expelled from Abraham's family on the account of Isaac, yet, as
he was under the same obligation to a most loving affectionate father as
his brother Isaac, if any personal feuds remained, they agreed to bury
them on this occasion, that both might dutifully join in doing the last
offices to a parent who was an honor to them and to human nature: and,
considering the rejection of Ishmael from the inheritance, this
transaction shows his character in an amiable point of view; for though
he was a wild man, (see [Gen 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#012)),
yet this appellation appears to be more characteristic of his habits of
life than of his disposition.

For the character of Abraham see the conclusion of this chapter, [Gen
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#034) (note).

[Genesis 25:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 25:11</span></span>

God blessed his son Isaac - The peculiar blessings and influences by
which Abraham had been distinguished now rested upon Isaac; but how
little do we hear in him of the work of faith, the patience of hope, and
the labor of love! Only one Abraham and one Christ ever appeared among
men; there have been some successful imitators, there should have been
many.

[Genesis 25:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 25:12</span></span>

These are the generations of Ishmael - The object of the inspired writer
seems to be to show how the promises of God were fulfilled to both the
branches of Abraham's family. Isaac has been already referred to; God
blessed him according to the promise. He had also promised to multiply
Ishmael, and an account of his generation is introduced to show how
exactly the promise had also been fulfilled to him.

[Genesis 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 25:13</span></span>

Nebajoth - From whom came the Nabatheans, whose capital was Petra, or,
according to Strabo, Nabathea. They dwelt in Arabia Petraea, and
extended themselves on the east towards Arabia Deserta.

Kedar - The founder of the Cedreans, who dwelt near to the Nabatheans.
The descendants of Kedar form a part of the Saracens.

Adbeel, and Mibsam - Where these were situated is not known.

[Genesis 25:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 25:14</span></span>

Mishma, and Dumah, and Massa - Where the first and last of these settled
is not known; but it is probable that Dumah gave his name to a place
called Dumah in Arabia. See a prophecy concerning this place, [Isa
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#011) (note), from which we find that
it was in the vicinity of Mount Seir.

These three names have passed into a proverb among the Hebrews, because
of their signification. משמע mishma signifies Hearing; דומה dumah,
Silence; and משא massa, Patience. Hence, "Hear much, say little, and
bear much," tantamount to the famous maxim of the Stoics, Ανεχου και
απεχου, "Sustain and abstain," is supposed to be the spirit of the
original words.

[Genesis 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 25:15</span></span>

Hadar - This name should be read Hadad as in [Ch1
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#030). This reading is supported by
more than three hundred MSS., versions, and printed editions. See Clarke
at [Gen 25:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#018) (note).

Tema - Supposed to be a place in Arabia Deserta, the same of which Job
speaks, [Job 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#019).

Jetur - From whom came the Itureans, who occupied a small tract of
country beyond Jordan, which was afterwards possessed by the half-tribe
of Manasseh.

Naphish - These are evidently the same people mentioned [Ch1
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#019), who, with the Itureans and the
people of Nadab, assisted the Hagarenes against the Israelites, but were
overcome by the two tribes of Reuben and Gad, and the half-tribe of
Manasseh.

Kedemah - Probably the descendants of this person dwelt at Kedemoth, a
place mentioned [Deu 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#026). I wish the
reader to observe, that concerning those ancient tribes mentioned here
or elsewhere in the Pentateuch little is known; nor of their places of
settlement have we more certain information. On this subject many
learned men have toiled hard with but little fruit of their labor. Those
who wish to enter into discussions of this nature must consult Bochart's
Geographia Sacra, Calmet, etc.

[Genesis 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 25:16</span></span>

These are their names - By which their descendants were called. Their
towns - places of encampment in the wilderness, such as have been used
by the Arabs from the remotest times. Their castles, טירתם tirotham,
their towers, probably mountain tops, fortified rocks, and fastnesses of
various kinds in woods and hilly countries.

[Genesis 25:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 25:18</span></span>

They dwelt from Havilah unto Shur - The descendants of Ishmael possessed
all that country which extends from east to west, from Havilah on the
Euphrates, near its junction with the Tigris, to the desert of Shur
eastward of Egypt; and which extends along the isthmus of Suez, which
separates the Red Sea from the Mediterranean.

As thou goest toward Assyria - "These words," says Calmet, "may refer
either to Egypt, to Shur, or to Havilah. The desert of Shur is on the
road from Egypt to Assyria in traversing Arabia Petraea, and in passing
by the country of Havilah. I know not," adds he, "whether Ashshurah in
the text may not mark out rather the Asshurim descended from Keturah,
than the Assyrians, who were the descendants of Asshur the son of Shem."

He died in the presence of all his brethren - The original will not well
bear this translation. In [Gen 25:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#017)
it is said, He gave up the ghost and died, and was gathered to his
people. Then follows the account of the district occupied by the
Ishmaelites, at the conclusion of which it is added על פני כל אחיו נפל
al peney col echaiv naphal, "It (the lot or district) Fell (or was
divided to him) in the presence of all his brethren:" and this was
exactly agreeable to the promise of God, [Gen
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#012), He shall dwell in the presence
of all his brethren; and to show that this promise had been strictly
fulfilled, it is here remarked that his lot or inheritance was assigned
him by Divine Providence, contiguous to that of the other branches of
the family. The same word, נפל naphal, is used [Jos
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#004), for to divide by lot.

On the subject of writing the same proper name variously in our common
Bibles, the following observations and tables will not be unacceptable
to the reader. "Men who have read their Bible with care," says Dr.
Kennicott, "must have remarked that the name of the same person is often
expressed differently in different places. Indeed the variation is
sometimes so great that we can scarcely persuade ourselves that one and
the same person is really meant. A uniform expression of proper names is
diligently attended to in other books: perhaps in every other book,
except the Old Testament. But here we find strange variety in the
expression, and consequently great confusion: and indeed there is
scarcely any one general source of error which calls for more careful
correction than the same proper names now wrongly expressed. I shall add
here, from the Pentateuch, some proper names which are strangely varied:
first, twenty-three names expressed differently in the Hebrew text
itself, and seventeen of them in our English translation; and then
thirty-one names expressed uniformly in the Hebrew yet differently in
the English.

"Nothing can be more clear than that these fifty-four proper names (at
least the far greater part of them) should be expressed with the very
same letters, in the places where they are now different. In the second
list, instances 6, 10, and 13, have been corrected and expressed
uniformly in the English Bible printed at Oxford in 1769. And surely the
same justice in the translation should be done to the rest of these
proper names, and to all others through the Bible; at least, where the
original words are now properly the same. Who would not wonder at seeing
the same persons named both Simon and Shimon, Richard and Ricard? And
can we then admit here both Seth and Sheth, Rachel and Rahel? Again:
whoever could admit (as above) both Gaza and Azzak, with Rameses and
Raamses, should not object to London and Ondon, with Amsterdam and
Amstradam. In short, in a history far more interesting than any other,
the names of persons and places should be distinguished accurately, and
defined with exact uniformity. And no true critic will think lightly of
this advice of Origen, Contemnenda non est accurata circa Nomina
diligentia ei, qui volurit probe intelligere sanctas literas? No person
who desires thoroughly to understand the sacred writings, should
undervalue a scrupulous attention to the proper names." - Kennicott's
Remarks.

[Genesis 25:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 25:19</span></span>

These are the generations of Isaac - This is the history of Isaac and
his family. Here the sixth section of the law begins, called תולדת יעחק
toledoth yitschak; as the fifth, called חיי שרה chaiye Sarah, which
begins with Genesis 23, ends at the preceding verse.

[Genesis 25:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 25:21</span></span>

Isaac entreated the Lord for his wife - Isaac and Rebekah had now lived
nineteen years together without having a child; for he was forty years
old when he married Rebekah, [Gen
25:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#020), and he was threescore years of
age when Jacob and Esau were born, [Gen
25:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#026). Hence it is evident they had
lived nineteen years together without having a child.

The form of the original in this place is worthy of notice: Isaac
entreated Jehovah, לנכח אשתו lenochach ishto, directly, purposely,
especially, for his wife. Ainsworth thinks the words imply their praying
together for this thing; and the rabbins say that "Isaac and Rebekah
went on purpose to Mount Moriah, where he had been bound, and prayed
together there that they might have a son." God was pleased to exercise
the faith of Isaac previous to the birth of Jacob, as he had exercised
that of Abraham previous to his own birth.

[Genesis 25:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 25:22</span></span>

The children struggled together - יתרצצו yithrotsatsu, they dashed
against or bruised each other, there was a violent agitation, so that
the mother was apprehensive both of her own and her children's safety;
and, supposing this was an uncommon case, she went to inquire of the
Lord, as the good women in the present day would go to consult a surgeon
or physician; for intercourse with God is not so common now, as it was
in those times of great primitive simplicity. There are different
opinions concerning the manner in which Rebekah inquired of the Lord.
Some think it was by faith and prayer simply; others, that she went to
Shem or Melchizedek; but Shem is supposed to have been dead ten years
before this time; but as Abraham was yet alive, she might have gone to
him, and consulted the Lord through his means. It is most likely that a
prophet or priest was applied to on this occasion. It appears she was in
considerable perplexity, hence that imperfect speech, If so, why am I
thus? the simple meaning of which is probably this; if I must suffer
such things, why did I ever wish to have a child? A speech not uncommon
to mothers in their first pregnancy.

[Genesis 25:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 25:23</span></span>

Two nations are in thy womb - "We have," says Bishop Newton, "in the
prophecies delivered respecting the sons of Isaac, ample proof that
these prophecies were not meant so much of single persons as of whole
nations descended from them; for what was predicted concerning Esau and
Jacob was not verified in themselves, but in their posterity. The
Edomites were the offspring of Esau, the Israelites were of Jacob; and
who but the Author and Giver of life could foresee that two children in
the womb would multiply into two nations? Jacob had twelve sons, and
their descendants were all united and incorporated into one nation; and
what an overruling providence was it that two nations should arise from
the two sons only of Isaac! and that they should be two such different
nations! The Edomites and Israelites have been from the beginning two
such different people in their manners, customs, and religion, as to be
at perpetual variance among themselves. The children struggled together
in the womb, which was an omen of their future disagreement; and when
they grew up to manhood, they manifested very different inclinations.
Esau was a cunning hunter, and delighted in the sports of the field;
Jacob was a plain man, dwelling in tents - minding his sheep and his
cattle. The religion of the Jews is well known; but whatever the
Edomites were at first, in process of time they became idolaters. When
Amaziah king of Judah overthrew them, he brought their gods, and set
them up to be his gods. The king of Edom having refused a passage to the
Israelites through his territories on their return from Egypt, the
history of the Edomites afterwards is little more than the history of
their wars with the Jews."

The one people shall be stronger than the other people - The same author
continues to observe, that "for some time the family of Esau was the
more powerful of the two, there having been dukes and kings in Edom
before there was any king in Israel; but David and his captains made an
entire conquest of the Edomites, slew several thousands of them, and
compelled the rest to become tributaries, and planted garrisons among
them to secure their obedience. In this state of servitude they
continued about one hundred and fifty years, without a king of their
own, being governed by deputies or viceroys appointed by the kings of
Judah; but in the days of Jehoram they revolted, recovered their
liberties, and set up a king of their own. Afterwards Amaziah, king of
Judah, gave them a total overthrow in the valley of Salt; and Azariah
took Elath, a commodious harbor on the Red Sea, from them. Judas
Maccabeus also attacked and defeated them with a loss of more than
twenty thousand at two different times, and took their chief city
Hebron. At last Hyrcanus his nephew took other cities from them, and
reduced them to the necessity of leaving their country or embracing the
Jewish religion; on which they submitted to be circumcised, and become
proselytes to the Jewish religion, and were ever afterwards incorporated
into the Jewish Church and nation."

The elder shall serve the younger - "This passage," says Dr. Dodd,
"serves for a key to explain the ninth chapter of the Epistle to the
Romans, where the words are quoted; for it proves to a demonstration
that this cannot be meant of God's arbitrary predestination of
particular persons to eternal happiness or misery, without any regard to
their merit or demerit - a doctrine which some have most impiously
fathered on God, who is the best of beings, and who cannot possibly
hate, far less absolutely doom to misery, any creature that he has made:
but that it means only his bestowing greater external favors, or, if you
please, higher opportunities for knowing and doing their duty, upon some
men, than he does upon others; and that merely according to his own wise
purpose, without any regard to their merits or demerits, as having a
right to confer greater or smaller degrees or perfection on whom he
pleases."

The doctrine of unconditional predestination to eternal life and eternal
death cannot be supported by the example of God's dealings with Esau and
Jacob, or with the Edomites and Israelites. After long reprobation the
Edomites were incorporated among the Jews, and have ever since been
undistinguishable members in the Jewish Church. The Jews, on the
contrary, the elect of God, have been cut off and reprobated, and
continue so to this day. If a time should ever come when the Jews shall
all believe in Christ Jesus, which is a general opinion, then the
Edomites, which are now absorbed among them, shall also become the
elect. And even now Isaac finds both his children within the pale of the
Jewish Church, equally entitled to the promises of salvation by Christ
Jesus, of whom he was the most expressive and the most illustrious type.
See the account of Abraham's offering, Genesis 22 (note).

[Genesis 25:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 25:24</span></span>

There were twins - תומם thomim, from which comes Thomas, properly
interpreted by the word Διδυμος, Didymus, which signifies a twin; so the
first person who was called Thomas or Didymus, we may take for granted,
had this name from the circumstance of his being a twin.

[Genesis 25:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 25:25</span></span>

Red, all over like a hairy garment - This simply means that he was
covered all over with red hair or down; and that this must be intended
here is sufficiently evident from another part of his history, where
Rebekah, in order to make her favourite son Jacob pass for his brother
Esau, was obliged to take the skins of kids, and put them upon his hands
and on the smooth part of his neck.

They called his name Esau - It is difficult to assign the proper meaning
of the original עשו esau or esav; if we derive it from עשה asah it must
signify made, performed, and, according to some, perfected; esa in
Arabic signifies to make firm or hard, and also to come to man's estate,
to grow old. Probably he had this name from his appearing to be more
perfect, robust, etc., than his brother.

[Genesis 25:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gen 25:26</span></span>

His name was called Jacob - יעקב Yaccob, from עקב akab, to defraud,
deceive, to supplant, i.e., to overthrow a person by tripping up his
heels. Hence this name was given to Jacob, because it was found he had
laid hold on his brother's heel, which was emblematical of his
supplanting Esau, and defrauding him of his birthright.

[Genesis 25:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gen 25:27</span></span>

A man of the field - איש שדה ish sadeh, one who supported himself and
family by hunting and by agriculture.

Jacob was a plain man - איש תם ish tam, a perfect or upright man;
dwelling in tents - subsisting by breeding and tending cattle, which was
considered in those early times the most perfect employment; and in this
sense the word תם tam, should be here understood, as in its moral
meaning it certainly could not be applied to Jacob till after his name
was changed, after which time only his character stands fair and
unblemished. See [Gen 32:26-30](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#026).

[Genesis 25:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">gen 25:28</span></span>

Isaac loved Esau - but Rebekah loved Jacob - This is an early proof of
unwarrantable parental attachment to one child in preference to another.
Isaac loved Esau, and Rebekah loved Jacob; and in consequence of this
the interests of the family were divided, and the house set in
opposition to itself. The fruits of this unreasonable and foolish
attachment were afterwards seen in a long catalogue of both natural and
moral evils among the descendants of both families.

[Genesis 25:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">gen 25:29</span></span>

Sod pottage - יזד נזיד yazed nazid, he boiled a boiling; and this we are
informed, [Gen 25:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#034), was of עדשים
adashim, what the Septuagint render φακος, and we, following them and
the Vulgate lens, translate lentils, a sort of pulse. Dr. Shaw casts
some light on this passage, speaking of the inhabitants of Barbary.
"Beans, lentils, kidney beans, and garvancos," says he, "are the
chiefest of their pulse kind; beans, when boiled and stewed with oil and
garlic, are the principal food of persons of all distinctions; lentils
are dressed in the same manner with beans, dissolving easily into a
mass, and making a pottage of a chocolate color. This we find was the
red pottage which Esau, from thence called Edom, exchanged for his
birthright." Shaw's Travels, p. 140, 4th. edit.

[Genesis 25:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">gen 25:30</span></span>

I am faint - It appears from the whole of this transaction, that Esau
was so completely exhausted by fatigue that he must have perished had he
not obtained some immediate refreshment. He had been either hunting or
laboring in the field, and was now returning for the purpose of getting
some food, but had been so exhausted that his strength utterly failed
before he had time to make the necessary preparations.

[Genesis 25:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">gen 25:31</span></span>

Sell me this day thy birthright - What the בחרה bechorah or birthright
was, has greatly divided both ancient and modern commentators. It is
generally supposed that the following rights were attached to the
primogeniture:

1\. Authority and superiority over the rest of the family.

2\. A double portion of the paternal inheritance.

3\. The peculiar benediction of the father.

4\. The priesthood, previous to its establishment in the family of
Aaron.

Calmet controverts most of these rights, and with apparent reason, and
seems to think that the double portion of the paternal inheritance was
the only incontestable right which the first-born possessed; the others
were such as were rather conceded to the first-born, than fixed by any
law in the family. However this may be, it appears,

1\. That the first-born were peculiarly consecrated to God, [Exo
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#029).

2\. Were next in honor to their parents, [Gen
49:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#003).

3\. Had a double portion of their father's goods, [Deu
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#017).

4\. Succeeded him in the government of the family or kingdom, [Ch2
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#003).

5\. Had the sole right of conducting the service of God, both at the
tabernacle and temple; and hence the tribe of Levi, which was taken in
lieu of the first-born, had the sole right of administration in the
service of God, [Num 8:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#014); and
hence we may presume, had originally a right to the priesthood previous
to the giving of the law; but however this might have been, afterwards
the priesthood is never reckoned among the privileges of the first-born.

That the birthright was a matter of very great importance, there can be
no room to doubt; and that it was a transferable property, the
transaction here sufficiently proves.

[Genesis 25:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">gen 25:34</span></span>

Pottage of lentils - See note [Gen
25:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#029).

Thus Esau despised his birthright - On this account the apostle, [Heb
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#016), calls Esau a profane person,
because he had, by this act, alienated from himself and family those
spiritual offices connected with the rights of primogeniture. While we
condemn Esau for this bad action, (for he should rather have perished
than have alienated this right), and while we consider it as a proof
that his mind was little affected with Divine or spiritual things, what
shall we say of his most unnatural brother Jacob, who refused to let him
have a morsel of food to preserve him from death, unless he gave him up
his birthright? Surely he who bought it, in such circumstances, was as
bad as he who sold it. Thus Jacob verified his right to the name of
supplanter, a name which in its first imposition appears to have had no
other object in view than the circumstance of his catching his brother
by the heel; but all his subsequent conduct proved that it was truly
descriptive of the qualities of his mind, as his whole life, till the
time his name was changed, (and then he had a change of nature), was a
tissue of cunning and deception, the principles of which had been very
early instilled into him by a mother whose regard for truth and
righteousness appears to have been very superficial. See on Genesis 27
(note).

The death of Abraham, recorded in this chapter, naturally calls to mind
the virtues and excellences of this extraordinary man. His obedience to
the call of God, and faith in his promises, stand supereminent. No
wonders, signs, or miraculous displays of the great and terrible God, as
Israel required in Egypt, were used or were necessary to cause Abraham
to believe and obey. He left his own land, not knowing where he was
going, or for what purpose God had called him to remove. Exposed to
various hardships, in danger of losing his life, and of witnessing the
violation of his wife, he still obeyed and went on; courageous, humane,
and disinterested, he cheerfully risked his life for the welfare of
others; and, contented with having rescued the captives and avenged the
oppressed, he refused to accept even the spoils he had taken from the
enemy whom his skill and valor had vanquished. At the same time he
considers the excellency of the power to be of God, and acknowledges
this by giving to him the tenth of those spoils of which he would
reserve nothing for his private use. His obedience to God, in offering
up his son Isaac, we have already seen and admired; together with the
generosity of his temper, and that respectful decency of conduct towards
superiors and inferiors for which he was so peculiarly remarkable; see
on Genesis 23 (note). Without disputing with his Maker, or doubting in
his heart, he credited every thing that God had spoken; hence he always
walked in a plain way. The authority of God was always sufficient for
Abraham; he did not weary himself to find reasons for any line of
conduct which he knew God had prescribed; it was his duty to obey; the
success and the event he left with God. His obedience was as prompt as
it was complete. As soon as he hears the voice of God, he girds himself
to his work! Not a moment is lost! How rare is such conduct! But should
not we do likewise? The present moment and its duties are ours; every
past moment was once present; every future will be present; and, while
we are thinking on the subject, the present is past, for life is made up
of the past and the present. Are our past moments the cause of deep
regret and humiliation? Then let us use the present so as not to
increase this lamentable cause of our distresses. In other words, let us
now believe-love-obey. Regardless of all consequences, let us, like
Abraham, follow the directions of God's word, and the openings of his
providence, and leave all events to Him who doth all things well.

See to what a state of moral excellence the grace of God can exalt a
character, when there is simple, implicit faith, and prompt obedience!
Abraham walked before God, and Abraham was perfect. Perhaps no human
being ever exhibited a fairer, fuller portrait of the perfect man than
Abraham. The more I consider the character of this most amiable
patriarch, the more I think the saying of Calmet justifiable: "In the
life of Abraham," says he, "we find an epitome of the whole law of
nature, of the written law, and of the Gospel of Christ. He has
manifested in his own person those virtues, for which reason and
philosophy could scarcely find out names, when striving to sketch the
character of their sophist - wise or perfect man. St. Ambrose very
properly observes that 'philosophy itself could not equal, in its
descriptions and wishes, what was exemplified by this great man in the
whole of his conduct.' Magnus plane vir, quem votis suis philosophia non
potuit aequare; denique minus est quod illa finxit quam quod ille
gessit. The Law which God gave to Moses, and in which he has proposed
the great duties of the law of nature, seems to be a copy of the life of
Abraham. This patriarch, without being under the law, has performed the
most essential duties it requires; and as to the Gospel, its grand
object was that on which he had fixed his eye - that Jesus Whose day he
rejoiced to see; and as to its spirit and design, they were wondrously
exemplified in that faith which was imputed to him for righteousness,
receiving that grace which conformed his whole heart and life to the
will of his Maker, and enabled him to persevere unto death. 'Abraham,'
says the writer of Ecclesiasticus, 44:20, etc., 'was a great father of
many people: in glory was there none like unto him, who kept the law of
the Most high, and was in covenant with him. He established the covenant
in his flesh, and when he was tried he was found faithful.'" See Calmet.

As a son, as a husband, as a father, as a neighbor, as a sovereign, and
above all as a man of God, he stands unrivalled; so that under the most
exalted and perfect of all dispensations, the Gospel of Jesus Christ, he
is proposed and recommended as the model and pattern according to which
the faith, obedience, and perseverance of the followers of the Messiah
are to be formed. Reader, while you admire the man, do not forget the
God that made him so great, so good, and so useful. Even Abraham had
nothing but what he had received; from the free unmerited mercy of God
proceeded all his excellences; but he was a worker together with God,
and therefore did not receive the grace of God in vain. Go thou,
believe, love, obey, and persevere in like manner.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 26](gen026)

</div>
