<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen008)  [Next](gen010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#001.md)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 9:0</span></span>

God blesses Noah and his sons, [Gen
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#001.md). The brute creation to be subject
to them through fear, [Gen 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#002.md). The
first grant of animal food, [Gen 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#003.md).
Eating of blood forbidden, [Gen 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#004.md).
Cruelty to animals forbidden, [Gen
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#005.md). A man-slayer to forfeit his life,
[Gen 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#006.md). The covenant of God
established between him and Noah and the whole brute creation, [Gen
9:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#008.md). The rainbow given as the sign
and pledge of this covenant, [Gen
9:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#012.md). The three sons of Noah people
the whole earth, [Gen 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#018.md), [Gen
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#019.md). Noah plants a vineyard, drinks
of the wine, is intoxicated, and lies exposed in his tent, [Gen
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#020.md), [Gen
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#021.md). The reprehensible conduct of
Ham, [Gen 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#022.md). The laudable carriage
of Shem and Japheth, [Gen 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#023.md). Noah
prophetically declares the servitude of the posterity of Ham, [Gen
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#024.md), [Gen
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#025.md); and the dignity and increase of
Shem and Japheth, [Gen 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#026.md), [Gen
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#027.md). The age and death of Noah, [Gen
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#028.md), [Gen
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#029.md).

[Genesis 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 9:1</span></span>

God blessed Noah - Even the increase of families, which appears to
depend on merely natural means, and sometimes fortuitous circumstances,
is all of God. It is by his power and wisdom that the human being is
formed, and it is by his providence alone that man is supported and
preserved.

[Genesis 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 9:2</span></span>

The fear of you and the dread, etc. - Prior to the fall, man ruled the
inferior animals by love and kindness, for then gentleness and docility
were their principal characteristics. After the fall, untractableness,
with savage ferocity, prevailed among almost all orders of the brute
creation; enmity to man seems particularly to prevail; and had not God
in his mercy impressed their minds with the fear and terror of man, so
that some submit to his will while others flee from his residence, the
human race would long ere this have been totally destroyed by the beasts
of the field. Did the horse know his own strength, and the weakness of
the miserable wretch who unmercifully rides, drives, whips, goads, and
oppresses him, would he not with one stroke of his hoof destroy his
tyrant possessor? But while God hides these things from him he impresses
his mind with the fear of his owner, so that either by cheerful or
sullen submission he is trained up for, and employed in, the most useful
and important purposes; and even willingly submits, when tortured for
the sport and amusement of his more brutish oppressor. Tigers, wolves,
lions, and hyenas, the determinate foes of man, incapable of being tamed
or domesticated, flee, through the principle of terror, from the
dwelling of man, and thus he is providentially safe. Hence, by fear and
by dread man rules every beast of the earth, every fowl of the air, and
every fish of the sea. How wise and gracious is this order of the Divine
providence! and with what thankfulness should it be considered by every
human being!

[Genesis 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 9:3</span></span>

Every moving thing - shall be meat - There is no positive evidence that
animal food was ever used before the flood. Noah had the first grant of
this kind, and it has been continued to all his posterity ever since. It
is not likely that this grant would have been now made if some
extraordinary alteration had not taken place in the vegetable world, so
as to render its productions less nutritive than they were before; and
probably such a change in the constitution of man as to render a grosser
and higher diet necessary. We may therefore safely infer that the earth
was less productive after the flood than it was before, and that the
human constitution was greatly impaired by the alterations which had
taken place through the whole economy of nature. Morbid debility,
induced by an often unfriendly state of the atmosphere, with sore and
long-continued labor, would necessarily require a higher nutriment than
vegetables could supply. That this was the case appears sufficiently
clear from the grant of animal food, which, had it not been
indispensably necessary, had not been made. That the constitution of man
was then much altered appears in the greatly contracted lives of the
postdiluvians; yet from the deluge to the day of Abraham the lives of
several of the patriarchs amounted to some hundreds of years; but this
was the effect of a peculiar providence, that the new world might be the
more speedily repeopled.

[Genesis 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 9:4</span></span>

But flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood - Though animal food
was granted, yet the blood was most solemnly forbidden, because it was
the life of the beast, and this life was to be offered to God as an
atonement for sin. Hence the blood was ever held sacred, because it was
the grand instrument of expiation, and because it was typical of that
blood by which we enter into the holiest. 1. Before the deluge it was
not eaten, because animal food was not in use. 2. After the deluge it
was prohibited, as we find above; and, being one of the seven Noahic
precepts, it was not eaten previously to the publication of the Mosaic
law. 3. At the giving of the law, and at several times during the
ministry of Moses, the prohibition was most solemnly, and with awful
penalties renewed. Hence we may rest assured that no blood was eaten
previously to the Christian era, nor indeed ever since by the Jewish
people. 4. That the prohibition has been renewed under the Christian
dispensation, can admit of little doubt by any man who dispassionately
reads [Act 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#020.md), [Act
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#029.md); [Act
21:25](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#025.md), where even the Gentile converts
are charged to abstain from it on the authority, not only of the
apostles, but of the Holy Ghost, who gave them there and then especial
direction concerning this point; see [Act
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#028.md); not for fear of stumbling the
converted Jews, the gloss of theologians, but because it was one των
επαναγκες τουτων, of those necessary points, from the burden (βαρος) of
obedience to which they could not be excused. 5. This command is still
scrupulously obeyed by the oriental Christians, and by the whole Greek
Church; and why? because the reasons still subsist. No blood was eaten
under the law, because it pointed out the blood that was to be shed for
the sin of the world; and under the Gospel it should not be eaten,
because it should ever be considered as representing the blood which has
been shed for the remission of sins. If the eaters of blood in general
knew that it affords a very crude, almost indigestible, and unwholesome
ailment, they certainly would not on these physical reasons, leaving
moral considerations out of the question, be so much attached to the
consumption of that from which they could expect no wholesome nutriment,
and which, to render it even pleasing to the palate, requires all the
skill of the cook. See [Lev 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#010.md).

[Genesis 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 9:5</span></span>

Surely your blood - will I require; at the hand of every beast - This is
very obscure, but if taken literally it seems to be an awful warning
against cruelty to the brute creation; and from it we may conclude that
horse-racers, hare-hunters, bull-baiters, and cock-fighters shall be
obliged to give an account to God for every creature they have wantonly
destroyed. Instead of חיה chaiyah, "beast," the Samaritan reads Yod Kaph
chai, "living," any "living creature or person;" this makes a very good
sense, and equally forbids cruelty either to men or brutes.

[Genesis 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 9:6</span></span>

Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood - Hence it appears
that whoever kills a man, unless unwittingly, as the Scripture expresses
it, shall forfeit his own life.

A man is accused of the crime of murder; of this crime he is guilty or
he is not: if he be guilty of murder he should die; if not, let him be
punished according to the demerit of his crime; but for no offense but
murder should he lose his life. Taking away the life of another is the
highest offense that can be committed against the individual, and
against society; and the highest punishment that a man can suffer for
such a crime is the loss of his own life. As punishment should be ever
proportioned to crimes, so the highest punishment due to the highest
crime should not be inflicted for a minor offense. The law of God and
the eternal dictates of reason say, that if a man kill another, the loss
of his own life is at once the highest penalty he can pay, and an
equivalent for his offense as far as civil society is concerned. If the
death of the murderer be the highest penalty he can pay for the murder
he has committed, then the infliction of this punishment for any minor
offense is injustice and cruelty; and serves only to confound the claims
of justice, the different degrees of moral turpitude and vice, and to
render the profligate desperate: hence the adage so frequent among
almost every order of delinquents, "It is as good to be hanged for a
sheep as a lamb;" which at once marks their desperation, and the
injustice of those penal laws which inflict the highest punishment for
almost every species of crime. When shall a wise and judicious
legislature see the absurdity and injustice of inflicting the punishment
of death for stealing a sheep or a horse, forging a twenty shillings'
note, and Murdering A Man; when the latter, in its moral turpitude and
ruinous consequences, infinitely exceeds the others?\* (\* On this head
the doctor's pious wish has been realized since this paragraph was
written. - Publishers)

[Genesis 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 9:13</span></span>

I do set my bow in the cloud - On the origin and nature of the rainbow
there had been a great variety of conjectures, till Anthony de Dominis,
bishop of Spalatro, in a treatise of his published by Bartholus in 1611,
partly suggested the true cause of this phenomenon, which was afterwards
fully explained and demonstrated by Sir Isaac Newton. To enter into this
subject here in detail would be improper; and therefore the less
informed reader must have recourse to treatises on Optics for its full
explanation. To readers in general it may be sufficient to say that the
rainbow is a mere natural effect of a natural cause:

1\. It is never seen but in showery weather.

2\. Nor then unless the sun shines.

3\. It never appears in any part of the heavens but in that opposite to
the sun.

4\. It never appears greater than a semicircle, but often much less.

5\. It is always double, there being what is called the superior and
inferior, or primary and secondary rainbow.

6\. These bows exhibit the seven prismatic colors, red, orange, yellow,
green, blue, indigo, and violet.

7\. The whole of this phenomenon depends on the rays of the sun falling
on spherical drops of water, and being in their passage through them,
refracted and reflected.

The formation of the primary and secondary rainbow depends on the two
following propositions;

1\. When the sun shines on the drops of rain as they are falling, the
rays that come from those drops to the eye of the spectator, after One
reflection and Two refractions, produce the primary rainbow.

2\. When the sun shines on the drops of rain as they are falling, the
rays that come from those drops to the eye of the spectator after Two
reflections and Two refractions, produce the secondary rainbow.

The illustration of these propositions must be sought in treatises on
Optics, assisted by plates. From the well-known cause of this phenomenon
It cannot be rationally supposed that there was no rainbow in the
heavens before the time mentioned in the text, for as the rainbow is the
natural effect of the sun's rays falling on drops of water, and of their
being refracted and reflected by them, it must have appeared at
different times from the creation of the sun and the atmosphere. Nor
does the text intimate that the bow was now created for a sign to Noah
and his posterity; but that what was formerly created, or rather that
which was the necessary effect, in certain cases, of the creation of the
sun and atmosphere, should now be considered by them as an unfailing
token of their continual preservation from the waters of a deluge;
therefore the text speaks of what had already been done, and not of what
was now done, קשתי נתתי kashti nathatti, "My bow I have given, or put in
the cloud;" as if he said: As surely as the rainbow is a necessary
effect of sunshine in rain, and must continue such as long as the sun
and atmosphere endure, so surely shall this earth be preserved from
destruction by water; and its preservation shall be as necessary an
effect of my promise as the rainbow is of the shining of the sun during
a shower of rain.

[Genesis 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 9:17</span></span>

This is the token - אות oth, The Divine sign or portent: The bow shall
be in the cloud. For the reasons above specified it must be there, when
the circumstances already mentioned occur; if therefore it cannot fail
because of the reasons before assigned, no more shall my promise; and
the bow shall be the proof of its perpetuity.

Both the Greeks and Latins, as well as the Hebrews, have ever considered
the rainbow as a Divine token or portent; and both of these nations have
even deified it, and made it a messenger of the gods.

Homer, Il. xi., ver. 27, speaking of the figures on Agamemnon's
breastplate, says there were three dragons, whose colors were

\- - ιρισσιν εοικοτες, ἁς τε Κρονων.

Εν νεφεΐ στηριξε, τερας μεροπων ανθρωπων.

"like to the rainbow which the son of Saturn has placed in the cloud as
a Sign to mankind," or to men of various languages, for so the μεροπων
ανθρωπων of the poet has been understood. Some have thought that the
ancient Greek writers give this epithet to man from some tradition of
the confusion and multiplication of tongues at Babel; hence in this
place the words may be understood as implying mankind at large, the
whole human race; God having given the rainbow for a sign to all the
descendants of Noah, by whom the whole earth was peopled after the
flood. Thus the celestial bow speaks a universal language, understood by
all the sons and daughters of Adam. Virgil, from some disguised
traditionary figure of the truth, considers the rainbow as a messenger
of the gods. Aen. v., ver. 606:

Irim de caelo misit Saturnia Juno.

"Juno, the daughter of Saturn, sent down the rainbow from heaven;" and
again, Aen. ix., ver. 803: -

aeriam caelo nam Jupiter Irim Demisit.

"For Jupiter sent down the ethereal rainbow from heaven."

It is worthy of remark that both these poets understood the rainbow to
be a sign, warning, or portent from heaven."

As I believe the rainbow to have been intended solely for the purpose
mentioned in the text, I forbear to make spiritual uses and
illustrations of it. Many have done this, and their observations may be
very edifying, but they certainly have no foundation in the text.

[Genesis 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 9:20</span></span>

Noah began to be a husbandman - איש האדמה ish haadamah, A man of the
ground, a farmer; by his beginning to be a husbandman we are to
understand his recommencing his agricultural operations, which
undoubtedly he had carried on for six hundred years before, but this had
been interrupted by the flood. And the transaction here mentioned might
have occurred many years posterior to the deluge, even after Canaan was
born and grown up, for the date of it is not fixed in the text.

The word husband first occurs here, and scarcely appears proper, because
it is always applied to man in his married state, as wife is to the
woman. The etymology of the term will at once show its propriety when
applied to the head of a family. Husband, is Anglo-Saxon, and simply
signifies the bond of the house or family; as by him the family is
formed, united, and bound together, which, on his death, is disunited
and scattered.

It is on this etymology of the word that we can account for the farmers
and petty landholders being called so early as the twelfth century,
husbandi, as appears in a statute of David II., king of Scotland: we may
therefore safely derive the word from hus, a house, and bond from
binben, to bind or tie; and this etymology appears plainer in the
orthography which prevailed in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries,
in which I have often found the word written house-bond; so it is in a
MS. Bible before me, written in the fourteenth century. Junius disputes
this etymology, but I think on no just ground.

[Genesis 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 9:21</span></span>

He drank of the wine, etc. - It is very probable that this was the first
time the wine was cultivated; and it is as probable that the strength or
intoxicating power of the expressed juice was never before known. Noah,
therefore, might have drunk it at this time without the least blame, as
he knew not till this trial the effects it would produce. I once knew a
case which I believe to be perfectly parallel. A person who had scarcely
ever heard of cider, and whose beverage through his whole life had been
only milk or water, coming wet and very much fatigued to a farmer's
house in Somersetshire, begged for a little water or milk. The good
woman of the house, seeing him very much exhausted, kindly said, "I will
give you a little cider, which will do you more good." The honest man,
understanding no more of cider than merely that it was the simple juice
of apples, after some hesitation drank about a half pint of it; the
consequence was, that in less than half an hour he was perfectly
intoxicated, and could neither speak plain nor walk! This case I myself
witnessed. A stranger to the circumstances, seeing this person, would
pronounce him drunk; and perhaps at a third hand he might be represented
as a drunkard, and thus his character be blasted; while of the crime of
drunkenness he was as innocent as an infant.

This I presume to have been precisely the case with Noah; and no person
without an absolute breach of every rule of charity and candour, can
attach any blame to the character of Noah on this ground, unless from a
subsequent account they were well assured that, knowing the power and
effects of the liquor, he had repeated the act. Some expositors seem to
be glad to fix on a fact like this, which by their distortion becomes a
crime; and then, in a strain of sympathetic tenderness, affect to
deplore "the failings and imperfections of the best of men;" when, from
the interpretation that should be given of the place, neither failing
nor imperfection can possibly appear.

[Genesis 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 9:22</span></span>

And Ham, the father of Canaan, etc. - There is no occasion to enter into
any detail here; the sacred text is circumstantial enough. Ham, and very
probably his son Canaan, had treated their father on this occasion with
contempt or reprehensible levity. Had Noah not been innocent, as my
exposition supposes him, God would not have endued him with the spirit
of prophecy on this occasion, and testified such marked disapprobation
of their conduct. The conduct of Shem and Japheth was such as became
pious and affectionate children, who appear to have been in the habit of
treating their father with decency, reverence, and obedient respect. On
the one the spirit of prophecy (not the incensed father) pronounces a
curse: on the others the same spirit (not parental tenderness)
pronounces a blessing. These things had been just as they afterwards
occurred had Noah never spoken. God had wise and powerful reasons to
induce him to sentence the one to perpetual servitude, and to allot to
the others prosperity and dominion. Besides, the curse pronounced on
Canaan neither fell immediately upon himself nor on his worthless
father, but upon the Canaanites; and from the history we have of this
people, in [Lev 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#006.md), [Lev
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#007.md), [Lev
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#024.md), [Lev
18:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#029.md), [Lev
18:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#030.md), [Lev
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#009.md), [Lev
20:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#022.md), [Lev
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#026.md); and [Deu
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#004.md); [Deu
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#031.md), we may ask, Could the curse of
God fall more deservedly on any people than on these? Their profligacy
was great, but it was not the effect of the curse; but, being foreseen
by the Lord, the curse was the effect of their conduct. But even this
curse does not exclude them from the possibility of obtaining salvation;
it extends not to the soul and to eternity, but merely to their bodies
and to time; though, if they continued to abuse their liberty, resist
the Holy Ghost, and refuse to be saved on God's terms, then the wrath of
Divine justice must come upon them to the uttermost. How many, even of
these, repented, we cannot tell.

[Genesis 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 9:25</span></span>

Cursed be Canaan - See on the preceding verses. In the 25th, 26th, and
27th verses, instead of Canaan simply, the Arabic version has Ham the
father of Canaan; but this is acknowledged by none of the other
versions, and seems to be merely a gloss.

[Genesis 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">gen 9:29</span></span>

The days of Noah were nine hundred and fifty years - The oldest
patriarch on record, except Methuselah and Jared. This, according to the
common reckoning, was A. M. 2006, but according to Dr. Hales, 3505.

"Ham," says Dr. Hales, "signifies burnt or black, and this name was
peculiarly significant of the regions allotted to his family. To the
Cushites, or children of his eldest son Cush, were allotted the hot
southern regions of Asia, along the coasts of the Persian Gulf, Susiana
or Chusistan, Arabia, etc.; to the sons of Canaan, Palestine and Syria;
to the sons of Misraim, Egypt and Libya, in Africa.

The Hamites in general, like the Canaanites of old, were a seafaring
race, and sooner arrived at civilization and the luxuries of life than
their simpler pastoral and agricultural brethren of the other two
families. The first great empires of Assyria and Egypt were founded by
them, and the republics of Sidon, Tyre, and Carthage were early
distinguished for their commerce but they sooner also fell to decay; and
Egypt, which was one of the first, became the last and basest of the
kingdoms, [Eze 29:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#015.md), and has been
successively in subjection to the Shemites and Japhethites, as have also
the settlements of the other branches of the Hamites.

"Shem signifies name or renown; and his indeed was great in a temporal
and spiritual sense. The finest regions of Upper and Middle Asia
allotted to his family, Armenia, Mesopotamia, Assyria, Media, Persia,
etc., to the Indus and Ganges, and perhaps to China eastward. "The chief
renown of Shem was of a spiritual nature: he was destined to be the
lineal ancestor of the blessed seed of the woman; and to this glorious
privilege Noah, to whom it was probably revealed, might have alluded in
that devout ejaculation, Blessed be the Lord, the God of Shem! The
pastoral life of the Shemites is strongly marked in the prophecy by the
tents of Shem; and such it remains to the present day, throughout their
midland settlements in Asia.

"Japheth signifies enlargement; and how wonderfully did Providence
enlarge the boundaries of Japheth! His posterity diverged eastward and
westward throughout the whole extent of Asia, north of the great range
of Taurus, as far as the Eastern Ocean, whence they probably crossed
over to America by Behring's Straits from Kamtschatka, and in the
opposite direction throughout Europe to the Mediterranean Sea and the
Atlantic Ocean; from whence also they might have crossed over to America
by Newfoundland, where traces of early settlements remain in parts now
desert. Thus did they gradually enlarge themselves till they literally
encompassed the earth, within the precincts of the northern temperate
zone, to which their roving hunter's life contributed not a little.
Their progress northwards was checked by the much greater extent of the
Black Sea in ancient times, and the increasing rigour of the climates:
but their hardy race, and enterprising, warlike genius, made them
frequently encroach southwards on the settlements of Shem, whose
pastoral and agricultural occupations rendered them more inactive,
peaceable and unwarlike; and so they dwelt in the tents of Shem when the
Scythians invaded Media, and subdued western Asia southwards as far as
Egypt, in the days of Cyaxares; when the Greeks, and afterwards the
Romans, overran and subdued the Assyrians, Medes, and Persians in the
east, and the Syrians and Jews in the south; as foretold by the Syrian
prophet Balaam, [Num 24:24](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#024.md) : -

"Ships shall come from Chittim, And shall afflict the Assyrians, and
afflict the Hebrews; But he (the invader) shall perish himself at last".

"And by Moses: And the Lord shall bring thee (the Jews) into Egypt (or
bondage) again with ships, etc., [Deu
28:68](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#068.md). And by Daniel: For the ships of
Chittim shall come against him, viz., Antiochus, king of Syria, [Dan
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#030.md). In these passages Chittim
denotes the southern coasts of Europe, bounding the Mediterranean,
called the isles of the Gentiles or Nations; see [Gen
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#005.md). And the isles of Chittim are
mentioned [Jer 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#010.md). And in after
times the Tartars in the east have repeatedly invaded and subdued the
Hindoos and the Chinese; while the warlike and enterprising genius of
the greatest of the isles of the Gentiles, Great Britain and Ireland,
have spread their colonies, their arms, their language, their arts, and
in some measure their religion, from the rising to the setting sun." See
Dr. Hales's Analysis of Chronology, vol. 1., p. 352, etc.

Though what is left undone should not cause us to lose sight of what is
done, yet we have reason to lament that the inhabitants of the British
isles, who of all nations under heaven have the purest light of Divine
revelation, and the best means of diffusing it, have been much more
intent on spreading their conquests and extending their commerce, than
in propagating the Gospel of the Son of God. But the nation, by getting
the Bible translated into every living language, and sending it to all
parts of the habitable globe, and, by its various missionary societies,
sending men of God to explain and enforce the doctrines and precepts of
this sacred book, is rapidly redeeming its character, and becoming great
in goodness and benevolence over the whole earth!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 10](gen010.md)

</div>
