<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen009)  [Next](gen011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 10:0</span></span>

The generations of the sons of Noah, [Gen
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#001). Japheth and his descendants,
[Gen 10:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#002). The isles of the
Gentiles, or Europe, peopled by the Japhethites, [Gen
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#005). Ham and his posterity, [Gen
10:6-20](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#006). Nimrod, one of his
descendants, a mighty hunter, [Gen
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#008), [Gen
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#009), founds the first kingdom, [Gen
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#010). Nineveh and other cities
founded, [Gen 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#011), [Gen
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#012). The Canaanites in their nine
grand branches or families, [Gen
10:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#015). Their territories, [Gen
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#019). Shem and his posterity, [Gen
10:21-31](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#021). The earth divided in the
days of Peleg, [Gen 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#025). The
territories of the Shemites, [Gen
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#030). The whole earth peopled by the
descendants of Noah's three sons, [Gen
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#032).

[Genesis 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 10:1</span></span>

Now these are the generations - It is extremely difficult to say what
particular nations and people sprang from the three grand divisions of
the family of Noah, because the names of many of those ancient people
have become changed in the vast lapse of time from the deluge to the
Christian era; yet some are so very distinctly marked that they can be
easily ascertained, while a few still retain their original names.

Moses does not always give the name of the first settler in a country,
but rather that of the people from whom the country afterwards derived
its name. Thus Mizraim is the dual of Mezer, and could never be the name
of an individual. The like may be said of Kittim, Dodanim, Ludim,
Ananim, Lehabim, Naphtuhim, Pathrusim, Casluhim, Philistim, and
Caphtorim, which are all plurals, and evidently not the names of
individuals, but of families or tribes. See [Gen
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#004), [Gen
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#006), [Gen
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#013), [Gen
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#014).

In the posterity of Canaan we find whole nations reckoned in the
genealogy, instead of the individuals from whom they sprang; thus the
Jebusite, Amorite, Girgasite, Hivite, Arkite, Sinite, Arvadite,
Zemarite, and Hamathite, [Gen
10:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#016), were evidently whole nations
or tribes which inhabited the promised land, and were called Canaanites
from Canaan, the son of Ham, who settled there. Moses also, in this
genealogy, seems to have introduced even the name of some places that
were remarkable in the sacred history, instead of the original settlers.
Such as Hazarmaveth, [Gen 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#026); and
probably Ophir and Havilah, [Gen
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#029). But this is not infrequent in
the sacred writings, as may be seen [Ch1
2:51](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#051), where Salma is called the father
of Bethlehem, which certainly never was the name of a man, but of a
place sufficiently celebrated in the sacred history; and in [Ch1
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#014), where Joab is called the father
of the valley of Charashim, which no person could ever suppose was
intended to designate an individual, but the society of craftsmen or
artificers who lived there.

Eusebius and others state (from what authority we know not) that Noah
was commanded of God to make a will and bequeath the whole of the earth
to his three sons and their descendants in the following manner: - To
Shem, all the East; to Ham, all Africa; to Japheth, the Continent of
Europe with its isles, and the northern parts of Asia. See the notes at
the end of the preceding chapter, [Gen
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#029) (note).

[Genesis 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 10:2</span></span>

The sons of Japheth - Japheth is supposed to be the same with the
Japetus of the Greeks, from whom, in an extremely remote antiquity, that
people were supposed to have derived their origin.

Gomer - Supposed by some to have peopled Galatia; so Josephus, who says
that the Galatians were anciently named Gomerites. From him the
Cimmerians or Cimbrians are supposed to have derived their origin.

Bochart has no doubt that the Phrygians sprang from this person, and
some of our principal commentators are of the same opinion.

Magog - Supposed by many to be the father of the Scythians and Tartars,
or Tatars, as the word should be written; and in great Tartary many
names are still found which bear such a striking resemblance to the Gog
and Magog of the Scriptures, as to leave little doubt of their identity.

Madai - Generally supposed to be the progenitor of the Medes; but Joseph
Mede makes it probable that he was rather the founder of a people in
Macedonia called Maedi, and that Macedonia was formerly called Emathia,
a name formed from Ei, an island, and Madai, because he and his
descendants inhabited the maritime coast on the borders of the Ionian
Sea. On this subject nothing certain can be advanced.

Javan - It is almost universally agreed that from him sprang the
Ionians, of Asia Minor; but this name seems to have been anciently given
to the Macedonians, Achaians, and Baeotians.

Tubal - Some think be was the father of the Iberians, and that a part at
least of Spain was peopled by him and his descendants; and that Meshech,
who is generally in Scripture joined with him, was the founder of the
Cappadocians, from whom proceeded the Muscovites.

Tiras - From this person, according to general consent, the Thracians
derived their origin.

[Genesis 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 10:3</span></span>

Ashkenaz - Probably gave his name to Sacagena, a very excellent province
of Armenia. Pliny mentions a people called Ascanitici, who dwelt about
the Tanais and the Palus Maeotis; and some suppose that from Ashkenaz
the Euxine Sea derived its name, but others suppose that from him the
Germans derived their origin.

Riphath - Or Diphath, the founder of the Paphlagonians, which were
anciently called Riphataei.

Togarmah - The Sauromates, or inhabitants of Turcomania. See the reasons
in Calmet.

[Genesis 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 10:4</span></span>

Elishah - As Javan peopled a considerable part of Greece, it is in that
region that we must seek for the settlements of his descendants; Elishah
probably was the first who settled at Elis, in Peloponnesus.

Tarshish - He first inhabited Cilicia, whose capital anciently was the
city of Tarsus, where the Apostle Paul was born.

Kittim - We have already seen that this name was rather the name of a
people than of an individual: some think by Kittim Cyprus is meant:
others, the isle of Chios; and others, the Romans; and others, the
Macedonians.

Dodanim - Or Rodanim, for the ד and ר may be easily mistaken for each
other, because of their great similarity. Some suppose that this family
settled at Dodona in Epirus; others at the isle of Rhodes; others, at
the Rhone, in France, the ancient name of which was Rhodanus, from the
Scripture Rodanim.

[Genesis 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 10:5</span></span>

Isles of the Gentiles - Europe, of which this is allowed to be a general
epithet. Calmet supposes that it comprehends all those countries to
which the Hebrews were obliged to go by sea, such as Spain, Gaul, Italy,
Greece, and Asia Minor.

Every one after his tongue - This refers to the time posterior to the
confusion of tongues and dispersion from Babel.

[Genesis 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 10:6</span></span>

Cush - Who peopled the Arabic nome near the Red Sea in Lower Egypt. Some
think the Ethiopians descended from him.

Mizraim - This family certainly peopled Egypt; and both in the East and
in the West, Egypt is called Mezr and Mezraim.

Phut - Who first peopled an Egyptian nome or district, bordering on
Libya.

Canaan - He who first peopled the land so called, known also by the name
of the Promised Land.

[Genesis 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 10:7</span></span>

Seba - The founder of the Sabaeans. There seem to be three different
people of this name mentioned in this chapter, and a fourth in [Gen
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#003).

Havilah - Supposed by some to mean the inhabitants of the country
included within that branch of the river Pison which ran out of the
Euphrates into the bay of Persia, and bounded Arabia Felix on the east.

Sabtah - Supposed by some to have first peopled an isle or peninsula
called Saphta, in the Persian Gulf.

Raamah - Or Ragmah, for the word is pronounced both ways, because of the
ע ain, which some make a vowel, and some a consonant. Ptolemy mentions a
city called Regma near the Persian Gulf; it probably received its name
from the person in the text.

Sabtechah - From the river called Samidochus, in Caramanla; Bochart
conjectures that the person in the text fixed his residence in that
part.

Sheba - Supposed to have had his residence beyond the Euphrates, in the
environs of Charran, Eden, etc.

Dedan - Supposed to have peopled a part of Arabia, on the confines of
Idumea.

[Genesis 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 10:8</span></span>

Nimrod - Of this person little is known, as he is not mentioned except
here and in [Ch1 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#010), which is
evidently a copy of the text in Genesis. He is called a mighty hunter
before the Lord; and from [Gen 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#010),
we learn that he founded a kingdom which included the cities Babel,
Erech, Accad, and Calneh, in the land of Shinar. Though the words are
not definite, it is very likely he was a very bad man. His name Nimrod
comes from מרד, marad, he rebelled; and the Targum, on [Ch1
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#010), says: Nimrod began to be a
mighty man in sin, a murderer of innocent men, and a rebel before the
Lord. The Jerusalem Targum says: "He was mighty in hunting (or in prey)
and in sin before God, for he was a hunter of the children of men in
their languages; and he said unto them, Depart from the religion of
Shem, and cleave to the institutes of Nimrod." The Targum of Jonathan
ben Uzziel says: "From the foundation of the world none was ever found
like Nimrod, powerful in hunting, and in rebellions against the Lord."
The Syriac calls him a warlike giant. The word ציד tsayid, which we
render hunter, signifies prey; and is applied in the Scriptures to the
hunting of men by persecution, oppression, and tyranny. Hence it is
likely that Nimrod, having acquired power, used it in tyranny and
oppression; and by rapine and violence founded that domination which was
the first distinguished by the name of a kingdom on the face of the
earth. How many kingdoms have been founded in the same way, in various
ages and nations from that time to the present! From the Nimrods of the
earth, God deliver the world!

Mr. Bryant, in his Mythology, considers Nimrod as the principal
instrument of the idolatry that afterwards prevailed in the family of
Cush, and treats him as an arch rebel and apostate. Mr. Richardson, who
was the determined foe of Mr. Bryant's whole system, asks, Dissertation,
p. 405, "Where is the authority for these aspersions? They are nowhere
to be discovered in the originals, in the versions, nor in the
paraphrases of the sacred writings." If they are not to be found either
in versions or paraphrases of the sacred writings, the above quotations
are all false.

[Genesis 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 10:10</span></span>

The beginning of his kingdom was Babel - בבל babel signifies confusion;
and it seems to have been a very proper name for the commencement of a
kingdom that appears to have been founded in apostasy from God, and to
have been supported by tyranny, rapine, and oppression.

In the land of Shinar - The same as mentioned [Gen
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#002). It appears that, as Babylon was
built on the river Euphrates, and the tower of Babel was in the land of
Shinar, consequently Shinar itself must have been in the southern part
of Mesopotamia.

[Genesis 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 10:11</span></span>

Out of that land went forth Asshur - The marginal reading is to be
preferred here. He - Nimrod, went out into Assyria and built Nineveh;
and hence Assyria is called the land of Nimrod, [Mic
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#006). Thus did this mighty hunter
extend his dominions in every possible way. The city of Nineveh, the
capital of Assyria, is supposed to have had its name from Ninus, the son
of Nimrod; but probably Ninus and Nimrod are the same person. This city,
which made so conspicuous a figure in the history of the world, is now
called Mossul; it is an inconsiderable place, built out of the ruins of
the ancient Nineveh.

Rehoboth, and Calah, etc. - Nothing certain is known concerning the
situation of these places; conjecture is endless, and it has been amply
indulged by learned men in seeking for Rehoboth in the Birtha of
Ptolemy, Calah in Calachine, Resen in Larissa, etc., etc.

[Genesis 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 10:13</span></span>

Mizraim begat Ludim - Supposed to mean the inhabitants of the Mareotis,
a canton in Egypt, for the name Ludim is evidently the name of a people.

Anamim - According to Bochart, the people who inhabited the district
about the temple of Jupiter Ammon.

Lehabim - The Libyans, or a people who dwelt on the west of the Thebaid,
and were called Libyo-Egyptians.

Naphtuhim - Even the conjectures can scarcely fix a place for these
people. Bochart seems inclined to place them in Marmarica, or among the
Troglodytae.

[Genesis 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 10:14</span></span>

Pathrusim - The inhabitants of the Delta, in Egypt, according to the
Chaldee paraphrase; but, according to Bochart, the people who inhabited
the Thebaid, called Pathros in Scripture.

Casluhim - The inhabitants of Colchis; for almost all authors allow that
Colchis was peopled from Egypt.

Philistim - The people called Philistines, the constant plagues and
frequent oppressors of the Israelites, whose history may be seen at
large in the books of Samuel, Kings, etc.

Caphtorim - Inhabitants of Cyprus according to Calmet.

[Genesis 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 10:15</span></span>

Sidon - Who probably built the city of this name, and was the father of
the Sidonians.

Heth - From whom came the Hittites, so remarkable among the Canaanitish
nations.

[Genesis 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 10:16</span></span>

The Jebusite-Amorite, etc. - Are well known as being the ancient
inhabitants of Canaan, expelled by the children of Israel.

[Genesis 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 10:20</span></span>

These are the sons of Ham after their families - No doubt all these were
well known in the days of Moses, and for a long time after; but at this
distance, when it is considered that the political state of the world
has been undergoing almost incessant revolutions through all the
intermediate portions of time, the impossibility of fixing their
residences or marking their descendants must be evident, as both the
names of the people and the places of their residences have been changed
beyond the possibility of being recognized.

[Genesis 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 10:21</span></span>

Shem also, the father of all the children of Eber - It is generally
supposed that the Hebrews derived their name from Eber or Heber, son of
Shem; but it appears much more likely that they had it from the
circumstance of Abraham passing over (for so the word עבר abar
signifies) the river Euphrates to come into the land of Canaan. See the
history of Abraham, [Gen 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#013) (note).

[Genesis 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 10:22</span></span>

Elam - From whom came the Elamites, near to the Medes, and whose chief
city was Elymais.

Asshur - Who gave his name to a vast province (afterwards a mighty
empire) called Assyria.

Arphaxad - From whom Arrapachitis in Assyria was named, according to
some; or Artaxata in Armenia, on the frontiers of Media, according to
others.

Lud - The founder of the Lydians. In Asia Minor; or of the Ludim, who
dwelt at the confluence of the Euphrates and Tigris, according to Arias
Montanus.

Aram - The father of the Arameans, afterwards called Syrians.

[Genesis 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 10:23</span></span>

Uz - Who peopled Caelosyria, and is supposed to have been the founder of
Damascus.

Hul - Who peopled a part of Armenia.

Gether - Supposed by Calmet to have been the founder of the Itureans,
who dwelt beyond the Jordan, having Arabia Desert on the east, and the
Jordan on the west.

Mash - Who inhabited mount Masius in Mesopotamia, and from whom the
river Mazeca, which has its source in that mountain, takes its name.

[Genesis 10:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 10:24</span></span>

Salah - The founder of the people of Susiana.

Eber - See [Gen 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#021). The Septuagint
add Cainan here, with one hundred and thirty to the chronology.

[Genesis 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 10:25</span></span>

Peleg - From פלג palag, to divide, because in his days, which is
supposed to be about one hundred years after the flood, the earth was
divided among the sons of Noah. Though some are of opinion that a
physical division, and not a political one, is what is intended here,
viz., a separation of continents and islands from the main land; the
earthy parts having been united into one great continent previously to
the days of Peleg. This opinion appears to me the most likely, for what
is said, [Gen 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#005), is spoken by way
of anticipation.

[Genesis 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gen 10:26</span></span>

Joktan - He had thirteen sons who had their dwelling from Mesha unto
Sephar, a mount of the east, which places Calmet supposes to be mount
Masius, on the west in Mesopotamia, and the mountains of the Saphirs on
the east in Armenia, or of the Tapyrs farther on in Media. In
confirmation that all men have been derived from one family, let it be
observed that there are many customs and usages, both sacred and civil,
which have prevailed in all parts of the world; and that these could owe
their origin to nothing but a general institution, which could never
have existed, had not mankind been originally of the same blood, and
instructed in the same common notions before they were dispersed. Among
these usages may be reckoned,

1\. The numbering by tens.

2\. Their computing time by a cycle of seven days.

3\. Their setting apart the seventh day for religious purposes.

4\. Their use of sacrifices, propitiatory and eucharistical.

5\. The consecration of temples and altars.

6\. The institution of sanctuaries or places of refuge, and their
privileges.

7\. Their giving a tenth part of the produce of their fields, etc., for
the use of the altar.

8\. The custom of worshipping the Deity bare-footed.

9\. Abstinence of the men from all sensual gratifications previously to
their offering sacrifice.

10\. The order of priesthood and its support.

11\. The notion of legal pollutions, defilements, etc.

12\. The universal tradition of a general deluge.

13\. The universal opinion that the rainbow was a Divine sign, or
portent, etc., etc.

See Dodd.

The wisdom and goodness of God are particularly manifested in repeopling
the earth by means of three persons, all of the same family, and who had
witnessed that awful display of Divine justice in the destruction of the
world by the flood, while themselves were preserved in the ark. By this
very means the true religion was propagated over the earth; for the sons
of Noah would certainly teach their children, not only the precepts
delivered to their father by God himself, but also how in his justice he
had brought the flood on the world of the ungodly, and by his merciful
providence preserved them from the general ruin. It is on this ground
alone that we can account for the uniformity and universality of the
above traditions, and for the grand outlines of religious truth which
are found in every quarter of the world. God has so done his marvellous
works that they may be had in everlasting remembrance.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 11](gen011)

</div>
