<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen017)  [Next](gen019.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#001.md)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 18:0</span></span>

The Lord appears unto Abraham in Mamre, [Gen
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#001.md). Three angels, in human
appearance, come towards his tent, [Gen
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#002.md). He invites them in to wash and
refresh themselves, [Gen 18:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#003.md);
prepares a calf, bread, butter, and milk, for their entertainment; and
himself serves them, [Gen 18:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#006.md). They
promise that within a year Sarah shall have a son, [Gen
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#009.md), [Gen
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#010.md). Sarah, knowing herself and
husband to be superannuated, smiles at the promise, [Gen
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#011.md), [Gen
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#012.md). One of the three, who is called
the Lord or Jehovah, chides her, and asserts the sufficiency of the
Divine power to accomplish the promise, [Gen
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#013.md), [Gen
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#014.md). Sarah, through fear, denies
that she had laughed or showed signs of unbelief, [Gen
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#015.md). Abraham accompanies these
Divine persons on their way to Sodom, [Gen
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#016.md); and that one who is called
Jehovah informs him of his purpose to destroy Sodom and Gomorrah,
because of their great wickedness, [Gen
18:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#017.md). The two former proceed
toward Sodom, while the latter (Jehovah) remains with Abraham, [Gen
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#022.md). Abraham intercedes for the
inhabitants of those cities, entreating the Lord to spare them provided
fifty righteous persons should be found in them, [Gen
18:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#023.md). The Lord grants this
request, [Gen 18:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#026.md). He pleads for the
same mercy should only forty-five be found there; which is also granted,
[Gen 18:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#027.md), [Gen
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#028.md). He pleads the same for forty,
which is also granted, [Gen 18:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#029.md); for
thirty, with the same success, [Gen
18:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#030.md); for twenty, and receives the
some gracious answer, [Gen 18:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#031.md); for
ten, and the Lord assures him that should ten righteous persons be found
there, he will not destroy the place, [Gen
18:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#032.md). Jehovah then departs, and
Abraham returns to his tent, [Gen
18:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#033.md).

[Genesis 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 18:1</span></span>

And the Lord appeared - See note on [Gen
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001.md).

Sat in the tent door - For the purpose of enjoying the refreshing air in
the heat of the day, when the sun had most power. A custom still
frequent among the Asiatics.

[Genesis 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 18:2</span></span>

Three men stood by him - נצבים עליו nitstsabim alaiv, were standing over
against him; for if they had been standing by him, as our translation
says, he needed not to have "run from the tent door to meet them." To
Abraham these appeared at first as men; but he entertained angels
unawares, see [Heb 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#002.md).

[Genesis 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 18:3</span></span>

And said, My Lord, etc. - The word is אדני Adonai, not יהוה Yehovah, for
as yet Abraham did not know the quality of his guests. For an
explanation of this word, See note on [Gen
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#008.md).

[Genesis 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 18:4</span></span>

Let a little water - be fetched, and wash your feet, etc. - In these
verses we find a delightful picture of primitive hospitality. In those
ancient times shoes such as ours were not in use; and the foot was
protected only by sandals or soles, which fastened round the foot with
straps. It was therefore a great refreshment in so hot a country to get
the feet washed at the end of a day's journey; and this is the first
thing that Abraham proposes.

Rest yourselves under the tree - We have already heard of the oak grove
of Mamre, [Gen 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#006.md), and this was the
second requisite for the refreshment of a weary traveler, viz., rest in
the shade.

[Genesis 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 18:5</span></span>

I will fetch a morsel of bread - This was the third requisite, and is
introduced in its proper order; as eating immediately after exertion or
fatigue is very unwholesome. The strong action of the lungs and heart
should have time to diminish before any food is received into the
stomach, as otherwise concoction is prevented, and fever in a less or
greater degree produced.

For therefore are ye come - In those ancient days every traveler
conceived he had a right to refreshment, when he needed it, at the first
tent he met with on his journey.

So do as thou hast said - How exceedingly simple was all this! On
neither side is there any compliment but such as a generous heart and
sound sense dictate.

[Genesis 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 18:6</span></span>

Three measures of fine meal - The סאה seah, which is here translated
measure, contained, according to Bishop Cumberland, about two gallons
and a half; and Mr. Ainsworth translates the word peck. On this
circumstance the following observations of the judicious and pious Abbe
Fleury cannot fail to be acceptable to the reader. Speaking of the
frugality of the patriarchs he says: "We have an instance of a splendid
entertainment in that which Abraham made for the three angels. He set a
whole calf before them, new bread, but baked on the hearth, together
with butter and milk. Three measures of meal were baked into bread on
this occasion, which come to more than two of our bushels, and nearly to
fifty-six pounds of our weight; hence we may conclude that men were
great eaters in those days, used much exercise, were probably of a much
larger stature as well as longer lives than we. Homer (Odyss. lib. xiv.,
ver. 74, etc). makes his heroes great eaters. When Eumaeus entertained
Ulysses, he dressed two pigs for himself and his guest.

'So saying, he girded quick his tunic close,

And issuing sought the styes; thence bringing two,

Of the imprisoned herd, he slaughtered both,

Singed them and slash'd and spitted them, and placed

The whole well roasted, banquets spits, and all,

Reeking before Ulysses.'

Cowper.

On another occasion a hog of five years old was slaughtered and served
up for five persons: -

' - His wood for fuel he prepared,

And dragging thither a well-fatted brawn

Of the fifth year:

Next piercing him, and scorching close his hair,

The joints they parted,' etc.

Cowper. Ibid. ver. 419.

Homer's heroes wait upon themselves and guests in the common occasions
of life; the patriarchs do the same. Abraham, who had so many servants,
and was nearly a hundred years old, brought the water himself to wash
the feet of his guests, ordered his wife to make the bread quickly, went
himself to choose the calf from the herd, and came again to serve them
standing. I will allow that he was animated on this occasion with a
desire of showing hospitality, but the lives of all the rest of the
patriarchs were similar to this."

Make cakes upon the hearth - Or under the ashes. This mode is used in
the east to the present day. When the hearth is strongly heated with the
fire that has been kindled on it, they remove the coals, sweep off the
ashes, lay on the bread, and then cover it with the hot cinders.

[Genesis 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 18:8</span></span>

And he stood by them under the tree, and they did eat - Nothing is more
common in Hindostan than to see travelers and guests eating under the
shade of trees. Feasts are scarcely ever held in houses. The house of a
Hindoo serves for sleeping and cooking, and for shutting up the women;
but is never considered as a sitting or dining room - Ward.

[Genesis 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 18:10</span></span>

I will certainly return - Abraham was now ninety-nine years of age, and
this promise was fulfilled when he was a hundred; so that the phrase
according to the time of life must mean either a complete year, or nine
months from the present time, the ordinary time of pregnancy. Taken in
this latter sense, Abraham was now in the ninety-ninth year of his age,
and Isaac was born when he was in his hundredth year.

[Genesis 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 18:11</span></span>

It ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of women - And consequently,
naturally speaking, conception could not take place; therefore if she
have a son it must be in a supernatural or miraculous way.

[Genesis 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 18:12</span></span>

Sarah laughed - Partly through pleasure at the bare idea of the
possibility of the thing, and partly from a conviction that it was
extremely improbable. She appears to have been in the same spirit, and
to have had the same feelings of those who, unexpectedly hearing of
something of great consequence to themselves, smile and say, "The news
is too good to be true;", see [Gen
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#006.md). There is a case very similar to
this mentioned [Psa 126:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#001.md), [Psa
126:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#002.md). On Abraham's laughing, See note
on [Gen 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#017.md).

[Genesis 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 18:13</span></span>

And the Lord (Jehovah) said, etc. - So it appears that one of those
three persons was Jehovah, and as this name is never given to any
created being, consequently the ever-blessed God is intended; and as he
was never seen in any bodily shape, consequently the great Angel of the
covenant, Jesus Christ, must be meant. See note on [Gen
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#007.md).

[Genesis 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 18:14</span></span>

Is any thing too hard for the Lord? - היפלא מיהוה דבר hayippale meihovah
dabar, shall a word (or thing) be wonderful from the Lord? i.e., Can any
thing be too great a miracle for him to effect? The Septuagint translate
the passage, Μη αδυνατησει παρα τῳ Θεῳ ῥημα; which St. Luke adopts
almost literatim, only making it an affirmative position instead of a
question: Ουκ αδυνατησει παρα τῳ Θεῳ παν ῥημα, which we translate, "With
God nothing shall be impossible," [Luk
1:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#037.md). Many copies of the Septuagint
insert the word παν before ῥημα, as in St. Luke; but it makes little
difference in the sense. It was to correct Sarah's unbelief, and to
strengthen her faith, that God spoke these most important words; words
which state that where human wisdom, prudence, and energy fall, and
where nature herself ceases to be an agent, through lack of energy to
act, or laws to direct and regulate energy, there also God has full
sway, and by his own omnific power works all things after the counsel of
his own will. Is there an effect to be produced? God can produce it as
well without as with means. He produced nature, the whole system of
causes and effects, when in the whole compass of his own eternity there
was neither means nor being. He spake, and it was done; He commanded,
and it stood fast. How great and wonderful is God!

[Genesis 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 18:16</span></span>

Abraham went with them to bring them on the way - This was another piece
of primitive hospitality - to direct strangers in the way. Public roads
did not then exist and guides were essentially necessary in countries
where villages were seldom to be met with, and where solitary dwellings
did not exist.

[Genesis 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 18:17</span></span>

Shall I hide from Abraham - That is, I will not hide. A common mode of
speech in Scripture - a question asked when an affirmative is designed.
Do men gather grapes of thorns? Men do not gather grapes of thorns, etc.

[Genesis 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 18:18</span></span>

Shall surely become a great and mighty nation - The revelation that I
make to him shall be preserved among his posterity; and the exact
fulfillment of my promises, made so long before, shall lead them to
believe in my name and trust in my goodness.

[Genesis 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 18:19</span></span>

And they shall keep the way of the Lord - The true religion; God's way;
that in which God walks himself, and in which, of course, his followers
walk also; to do justice and judgment; not only to preserve the truth in
their creed, but maintain it in their practice.

[Genesis 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 18:20</span></span>

Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah - See note on [Gen
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#013.md).

[Genesis 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 18:21</span></span>

I will go down now, etc. - A lesson to magistrates, teaching them not to
judge according to report, but accurately to inquire into the facts
themselves - Jarchi.

[Genesis 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 18:22</span></span>

And the men turned their faces - That is, the two angels who accompanied
Jehovah were now sent towards Sodom; while the third, who is called the
Lord or Jehovah, remained with Abraham for the purpose of teaching him
the great usefulness and importance of faith and prayer.

[Genesis 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 18:23</span></span>

Wilt thou also destroy the righteous with the wicked? - A form of speech
similar to that in [Gen 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#017.md), an
invariable principle of justice, that the righteous shall not be
punished for the crimes of the impious. And this Abraham lays down as
the foundation of his supplications. Who can pray with any hope of
success who cannot assign a reason to God and his conscience for the
petitions he offers? The great sacrifice offered by Christ is an
infinite reason why a penitent sinner should expect to find the mercy
for which he pleads.

[Genesis 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 18:25</span></span>

Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? - God alone is the Judge
of all men. Abraham, in thus addressing himself to the person in the
text, considers him either as the Supreme Being or his representative.

[Genesis 18:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gen 18:27</span></span>

Which am but dust and ashes - עפר ואפר aphar vaepher, words very similar
in sound, as they refer to matters which so much resemble each other.
Dust - the lightest particles of earth. Ashes - the residuum of consumed
substances. By these expressions he shows how deeply his soul was
humbled in the presence of God. He who has high thoughts of himself must
have low thoughts of the dignity of the Divine nature, of the majesty of
God, and the sinfulness of sin.

[Genesis 18:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">gen 18:32</span></span>

Peradventure ten shall be found there - Knowing that in the family of
his nephew the true religion was professed and practiced, he could not
suppose there could be less than ten righteous persons in the city, he
did not think it necessary to urge his supplication farther; he
therefore left off his entreaties, and the Lord departed from him. It is
highly worthy of observation, that while he continued to pray the
presence of God was continued; and when Abraham ended, "the glory of the
Lord was lifted up," as the Targum expresses it.

This chapter, though containing only the preliminaries to the awful
catastrophe detailed in the next, affords us several lessons of useful
and important information.

1\. The hospitality and humanity of Abraham are worthy, not only of our
most serious regard, but also of our imitation. He sat in the door of
his tent in the heat of the day, not only to enjoy the current of
refreshing air, but that if he saw any weary and exhausted travelers he
might invite them to rest and refresh themselves. Hospitality is ever
becoming in one human being towards another; for every destitute man is
a brother in distress, and demands our most prompt and affectionate
assistance, according to that heavenly precept, "What ye would that men
should do unto you, do even so unto them." From this conduct of Abraham
a Divine precept is formed: "Be not forgetful to entertain strangers,
for thereby some have entertained angels unawares. [Heb
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#002.md).

2\. Whatever is given on the ground of humanity and mercy is given unto
God, and is sure to meet with his approbation and a suitable reward.
While Abraham entertained his guests God discovers himself, and reveals
to him the counsels of his will, and renews the promise of a numerous
posterity. Sarah, though naturally speaking past child-bearing, shall
have a son: natural obstacles cannot hinder the purpose of God; nature
is his instrument; and as it works not only by general laws, but also by
any particular will of God, so it may accomplish that will in any way he
may choose to direct. It is always difficult to credit God's promises
when they relate to supernatural things, and still more so when they
have for their object events that are contrary to the course of nature;
but as nothing is too hard for God, so "all things are possible to him
that believeth." It is that faith alone which is of the operation of
God's Spirit, that is capable of crediting supernatural things; he who
does not pray to be enabled to believe, or, if he do, uses not the power
when received, can never believe to the saving of the soul.

3\. Abraham trusts much in God, and God reposes much confidence in
Abraham. He knows that God is faithful, and will fulfill his promises;
and God knows that Abraham is faithful, and will command his children
and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord to
do justice and judgment; [Gen 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#019.md).
No man lives unto himself; and God gives us neither spiritual nor
temporal blessings for ourselves alone; our bread we are to divide with
the hungry, and to help the stranger in distress. He who understands the
way of God should carefully instruct his household in that way; and he
who is the father of a family should pray to God to teach him, that he
may teach his household. His ignorance of God and salvation can be no
excuse for his neglecting his family: it is his indispensable duty to
teach them; and God will teach him, if he earnestly seek it, that he may
be able to discharge this duty to his family. Reader, if thy children or
servants perish through thy neglect, God will judge thee for it in the
great day.

4\. The sin of Sodom and the cities of the plain was great and grievous;
the measure of their iniquity was full, and God determined to destroy
them. Judgment is God's strange work, but though rarely done it must be
done sometimes, lest men should suppose that right and wrong, vice and
virtue, are alike in the eye of God. And these judgments must be
dispensed in such a way as to show they are not the results of natural
causes, but come immediately from the incensed justice of the Most High.

5\. Every man who loves God loves his neighbor also; and he who loves
his neighbor will do all in his power to promote the well-being both of
his soul and his body. Abraham cannot prevent the men of Sodom from
sinning against God; but he can make prayer and intercession for their
souls, and plead, if not in arrest, yet in mitigation, of judgment. He
therefore intercedes for the transgressors, and God is well pleased with
his intercessions. These are the offspring of God's own love in the
heart of his servant.

6\. How true is that word, The energetic faithful prayer of a righteous
man availeth much! Abraham draws near to God by affection and faith, and
in the most devout and humble manner makes prayer and supplication; and
every petition is answered on the spot. Nor does God cease to promise to
show mercy till Abraham ceases to intercede! What encouragement does
this hold out to them that fear God, to make prayer and intercession for
their sinful neighbors and ungodly relatives! Faith in the Lord Jesus
endues prayer with a species of omnipotence; whatsoever a man asks of
the Father in his name, he will do it. Prayer has been termed the gate
of heaven, but without faith that gate cannot be opened. He who prays as
he should, and believes as he ought, shall have the fullness of the
blessings of the Gospel of peace.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 19](gen019.md)

</div>
