<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Haggai Index](hag)  
  [Previous](hag001)  [Next](zac000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Haggai Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#001)

[Haggai](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hag 2:0</span></span>

When this prophecy was uttered, about four years before the temple was
finished, and sixty-eight after the former one was destroyed, it appears
that some old men among the Jews were greatly dispirited on account of
its being so much inferior in magnificence to that of Solomon. Compare
[Ezr 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#012). To raise the spirits of the
people, and encourage them to proceed with the work, the prophet assures
them that the glory of the second temple should be greater than that of
the first, alluding perhaps to the glorious doctrines which should be
preached in it by Jesus Christ and his apostles, [Hag
2:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#001). He then shows the people that
the oblations brought by their priests could not sanctify them while
they were unclean by their neglect of the temple; and to convince them
that the difficult times they had experienced during that neglect
proceeded from this cause, he promises fruitful seasons from that day
forward, [Hag 2:10-19](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#010). The concluding
verses contain a prediction of the mighty revolutions that should take
place by the setting up of the kingdom of Christ under the type of
Zerubbabel, [Hag 2:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#020). As the time
which elapsed between the date of the prophecy and the dreadful
concussion of nations is termed in [Hag
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#006), A Little While, the words may
likewise have reference to some temporal revolutions then near, such as
the commotions of Babylon in the reign of Darius, the Macedonian
conquests in Persia, and the wars between the successors of Alexander;
but the aspect of the prophecy is more directly to the amazing victories
of the Romans, who, in the time of Haggai and Zechariah, were on the
Very Eve of their successful career, and in the lapse of a few centuries
subjugated the whole habitable globe; and therefore, in a very good
sense, God may be said by these people to have shaken "the heavens, and
the earth, and the sea, and the dry land;" and thus to have prepared the
way for the opening of the Gospel dispensation. See [Heb
12:25-29](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#025). Others have referred this
prophecy to the period of our Lord's second advent, to which there is no
doubt it is also applicable; and when it will be in the most signal
manner fulfilled. That the convulsion of the nations introducing this
most stupendous event will be very great and terrible, is sufficiently
plain from Isaiah 34, [Isa 35:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#001), as
well as from many other passages of holy writ.

[Haggai 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hag 2:1</span></span>

In the seventh month - This was a new message, and intended to prevent
discouragement, and excite them to greater diligence in their work.

[Haggai 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">hag 2:3</span></span>

Who is left among you that saw this house in her first glory? - Who of
you has seen the temple built by Solomon? The foundation of the present
house had been laid about fifty-three years after the destruction of the
temple built by Solomon and though this prophecy was uttered fifteen
years after the foundation of this second temple, yet there might still
survive some of those who had seen the temple of Solomon.

Is it not in your eyes - Most certainly the Jews at this time had
neither men nor means to make any such splendid building as that erected
by Solomon. The present was as nothing when compared with the former.

[Haggai 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">hag 2:4</span></span>

Yet now be strong - Do not let this discourage you. The chief glory of
the temple is not its splendid building, but my presence; and as I
covenanted to be with you when ye came out of Egypt, so I will fulfill
my covenant; for my Spirit remaineth among you, fear not; [Hag
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#005). What is the most splendid
cathedral, if God be not in it, influencing all by his presence and
Spirit? But he will not be in it unless there be a messenger of the Lord
there, and unless he deliver the Lord's message.

[Haggai 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">hag 2:6</span></span>

Yet once, it is a little while, and I will shake the heavens - When the
law was given on Mount Sinai, there was an earthquake that shook the
whole mountain, [Exo 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#018). "The
political or religious revolutions which were to be effected in the
world, or both, are here," says Abp. Newcome, "referred to; compare [Exo
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#021), [Exo
19:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#022); [Mat
24:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#029); [Heb
12:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#026). The political ones began in
the overthrow of the Persian monarchy by Alexander, within two centuries
after this prediction; and if the Messiah's kingdom be meant, which is
my opinion, this was erected in somewhat more than five centuries after
the second year of Darius; a short period of time when compared with
that which elapsed from the creation to the giving of the law, or from
the giving of the law to the coming of the Messiah's kingdom. It must be
understood that the word אחת achath, once, has a clear sense, if
understood of the evangelical age; for many political revolutions
succeeded, as the conquest of Darius Codomanus, and the various fortunes
of Alexander's successors; but only one great and final religious
revolution." - Newcome.

[Haggai 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">hag 2:7</span></span>

And the Desire of all nations shall come - The present Hebrew text is as
follows: ובאו חמדת כל הגוים. This is a difficult place if understood of
a person: but חמדת chemdath, desire, cannot well agree with באו bau,
they shall come. It is true that some learned men suppose that חמדות
chemdoth, desirable things, may have been the original reading: but this
is supported by no MS., nor is באו found in the singular number in any.
It is generally understood of the desirable or valuable things which the
different nations should bring into the temple; and it is certain that
many rich presents were brought into this temple. All are puzzled with
it. But the principal difficulty lies in the verb ובאו ubau, they shall
come. If we found ובאה חמדת ubaa chemdath in the singular, then it would
read as in our text, And the Desire of all nations shall come: but no
such reading appears in any MS.; nor is it fairly acknowledged, except
by the Vulgate, which reads, Et veniet desideratus cunctis gentibus,
"And that which is desired," or the desired Person, "shall come to all
nations." In [Hag 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#007) God says he will
shake or stir up all nations; that these nations shall bring their
desirable things; that the house shall be filled with God's glory; that
the silver and gold, which these nations are represented as bringing by
way of gifts, are the Lord's; and that the glory of this latter house
shall exceed the former. Bp. Chandler labors to vindicate the present
translation; but he makes rash assertions, and is abandoned by the
Hebrew text. The בא ba, to come, is often used in the sense of bring,
and that חמדת chemdath, desire, may be considered as the plural for
חמדות, having the point holem instead of the ו vau, and thus mean
desirable things, will not be denied by those who are acquainted with
the genius and construction of the Hebrew language. Bp. Chandler thinks
that בא, he came, cannot be used of things, but of persons only. Here he
is widely mistaken, for it is used of days perpetually; and of the ark,
[Sa2 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#009); and of mounts coming against
Jerusalem, [Jer 32:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#024); and of trees
coming to adorn the temple, [Isa
60:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#013); and of silver and gold coming
into the temple, [Jos 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#019); and [Jer
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#020), Why doth incense come to me? See
Abp. Secker's notes. I cannot see how the words can apply to Jesus
Christ, even if the construction were less embarrassed than it is;
because I cannot see how he could be called The Desire of All Nations.

The whole seems to be a metaphorical description of the Church of
Christ, and of his filling it with all the excellences of the Gentile
world, when the fullness of the Gentiles shall be brought in.

[Haggai 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">hag 2:9</span></span>

And in this place will I give peace - שלום shalom a peace-offering, as
well as peace itself; or Jesus Christ, who is called the Prince of
peace, through whom peace is proclaimed between God and man, between man
and his fellows; and through whom peace is established in the
disconsolate soul. And at this temple this peace was first promulgated
and proclaimed.

But it is said that the glory of this latter house shall be greater than
of the former. Now this cannot be said because Jesus Christ made his
personal appearance in that temple, or rather in that built by Herod;
for, though we allow that Jesus Christ is equal with God, we do not
grant that he is greater. Now the first temple was the dwelling-place of
God: here he manifested his glory between the cherubim, and it was his
constant residence for more than four hundred years. But the glory of
this latter house was greater because under it the grand scheme of human
salvation was exhibited, and the redemption price paid down for a lost
world. As all probably applies to the Christian Church, the real house
of God, its glory was most certainly greater than any glory which was
ever possessed by that of the Jews. See on [Hag
2:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#022) (note).

[Haggai 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">hag 2:10</span></span>

In the four and twentieth day of the ninth month - Three months after
they had begun to rebuild the temple, Haggai is ordered to go and put
two questions to the priests.

1\. If one bear holy flesh in the skirt of his garment, and he touch any
thing with his skirt, is that thing made holy? The priests answered, No!
[Hag 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#012).

2\. If one has touched a dead body and thereby become unclean, does he
communicate his uncleanness to whatever he may touch? And the priests
answered, Yes! [Hag 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#013).

[Haggai 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">hag 2:14</span></span>

Then answered Haggai - So is this people - As an unclean man
communicates his uncleanness to every thing he touches, so are ye
unclean; and whatever ye have hitherto done is polluted in the sight of
God. For your neglect of my temple has made you unclean, as if you had
contracted legal pollution by touching a dead body.

[Haggai 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">hag 2:16</span></span>

Since those days were - I have shown my displeasure against you, by
sending blasting and mildew; and so poor have been your crops that a
heap of corn which should have produced twenty measures produced only
ten; and that quantity of grapes which in other years would have
produced fifty measures, through their poverty, smallness, etc.,
produced only twenty. And this has been the case ever since the first
stone was laid in this temple; for your hearts were not right with me,
and therefore I blasted you in all the labors of your hands; and yet ye
have not turned to me, [Hag 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#017).

[Haggai 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">hag 2:18</span></span>

Consider now from this day - I will now change my conduct towards you:
from, this day that ye have begun heartily to rebuild my temple, and
restore my worship, I will bless you. Whatever you sow, whatever you
plant, shall be blessed; your land shall be fruitful, and ye shall have
abundant crops of all sorts.

[Haggai 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">hag 2:20</span></span>

Again the word of the Lord came - This was a second communication in the
same day.

[Haggai 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">hag 2:21</span></span>

I will shake the heavens and the earth - Calmet supposes that the
invasion of Cambyses, and his death, are what the prophet has in view by
this shaking of the heavens and the earth: but this invasion and defeat
happened three years before they had begun to work at the temple; and
how could it be made a matter of interest to Zerubbabel? Calmet answers
this, by translating the words in the past tense; and shows that the
fact was recalled to Zerubbabel's attention, to fix his confidence in
God, etc. Bp. Newcome says we may well understand this and the
twenty-second verse of the calamity undergone by Babylon in the reign of
Darius; of the Macedonian conquests in Persia; and of the wars which the
successors of Alexander waged against each other: others under stand it
of the Romans.

[Haggai 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">hag 2:23</span></span>

In that day, saith the Lord - Some think, says this same learned writer,
that Zerubbabel is put here for his people and posterity: but it may
well be said that the commotions foretold began in the rebellion of
Babylon, which Darius besieged and took; and exercised great cruelties
upon its inhabitants. - Herod. lib. iii., sec. 220. Justin. 1:10.
Prideaux places this event in the fifth year of Darius; others with more
probability, in the eighth year. Compare [Zac
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#009).

And will make thee as a signet - I will exalt thee to high dignity,
power, and trust, of which the seal was the instrument or sign in those
days. Thou shalt be under my peculiar care, and shalt be to me very
precious. See [Jer 22:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#024) (note); [Sol
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#006) (note); and see the notes on these
two places.

For I have chosen thee - He had an important and difficult work to do,
and it was necessary that he should be assured of God's especial care
and protection during the whole.

On the three last verses of this prophecy a sensible and pious
correspondent sends me the following illustration, which I cheerfully
insert. Though in many respects different from that given above, yet I
believe that the kingdom of Christ is particularly designed in this
prophecy.

"I think there is an apparent difficulty in this passage, because the
wars of the Persians and Babylonians were not so interesting to the
rising commonwealth of the Jews as many subsequent events of less note
in the world, but which were more directly levelled at their own
national prosperity; and yet neither the one nor the other could be
termed 'a shaking of the heavens and the earth, and an overthrow of the
throne of kingdoms.' "I know not if the following view may be admitted
as an explanation of this difficult passage. I take 'the shaking of the
heavens and earth' here (as in [Hag
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#006)) to have a more distant and
comprehensive meaning than can belong to Zerubbabel's time, or to his
immediate posterity; and that it extends not only to the overthrow of
kingdoms then existing, but of the future great monarchies of the world;
and not excepting even the civil and ecclesiastical establishments of
the Jews themselves. For I take 'the heavens,' in the prophetic
language, uniformly to denote the true Church, and never the
superstitions and idols of the nations.

"What, then, are we to understand by the promise made to Zerubbabel, 'I
will make thee as a signet?' In the first place, the restitution of the
religious and civil polity of the people of Israel, conformably to the
promises afterwards given in the four first chapters of Zechariah. And,
secondly, as the royal signet is the instrument by which kings give
validity to laws, and thereby unity and consistence to their empire; so
Jehovah, the God and King of Israel, condescends to promise he will
employ Zerubbabel as his instrument of gathering and uniting the people
again as a distinguished nation; and that such should be the permanency
of their political existence, that, whilst other nations and mighty
empires should be overthrown, and their very name blotted out under
heaven, the Jews should ever remain a distinct people, even in the wreck
of their own government, and the loss of all which rendered their
religion splendid and attractive.

"In confirmation of this interpretation, I would refer to the
threatening denounced against Jeconiah, (called Coniah, Jeremiah 22),
the last reigning king of Judah, and the progenitor of Zerubbabel. I
apprehend I may be authorized to read [Jer
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#024) thus: 'As I live, saith the
Lord, though Coniah, the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, be the signet
upon my right hand, yet will I pluck thee thence, and I will give thee
into the hand of them that seek thy life,' etc.

"If it be considered that the kings of Judah were in an especial and
peculiar manner the delegates of Jehovah, governing in his name and by
his authority, a peculiar propriety will appear in their being resembled
to signets, or royal seals contained in rings. Compare [Gen
41:42](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#042); [Est
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#010), [Est
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#012); [Est
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#002), [Est
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#008); [Dan
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#007). And the promise to Zerubbabel
will be equivalent to those which clearly predict the preservation of
the Jewish people by the Divine command. see [Zac
2:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#001); and the faithfulness of God to
his covenant concerning the Messiah, who should be born of the seed of
Abraham, and in the family of David, of whose throne he was the rightful
Proprietor.

"According to this view, by the promise, 'In that day; - I will make
thee as a signet,' etc., must be understood, that the preservation of
the Jews as a distinct people, when all the great empires of the heathen
were overthrown, would manifest the honor now conferred on Zerubbabel as
the instrument of their restoration after the Babylonish-captivity. Thus
the promise to Abraham, Genesis 22, 'I will make of thee a great nation
- and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed,' evidently
referred to a very distant future period and the honor connected with it
could not be enjoyed by Abraham during his mortal life." - M. A. B.

I think, however, that we have lived to see the spirit of this prophecy
fulfilled. The earth has been shaken; another shaking, and time shall be
swallowed up in eternity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Introduction](zac000)

</div>
