<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hebrews Index](heb)  
  [Previous](heb004)  [Next](heb006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#001)

[Hebrews](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">heb 5:0</span></span>

The nature of the high priesthood of Christ; his pre-eminence,
qualifications, and order, [Heb
5:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#001). Imperfect state of the
believing Hebrews, and the necessity of spiritual improvement, [Heb
5:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#011).

[Hebrews 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 5:1</span></span>

For every high priest taken from among men - This seems to refer to [Lev
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#010), where it is intimated that the
high priest shall be taken מאחיו meachaiv, from his brethren; i.e. he
shall be of the tribe of Levi, and of the family of Aaron.

Is ordained for men - Ὑπερ ανθρωπων καθισταται τα προς τον Θεον· Is
appointed to preside over the Divine worship in those things which
relate to man's salvation.

That he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins - God ever appeared
to all his followers in two points of view:

1\. As the author and dispenser of all temporal good.

2\. As their lawgiver and judge. In reference to this twofold view of
the Divine Being, his worship was composed of two different parts:

1\. Offerings or gifts.

2\. Sacrifices.

1\. As the creator and dispenser of all good, he had offerings by which
his bounty and providence were acknowledged.

2\. As the lawgiver and judge, against whose injunctions offenses had
been committed, he had sacrifices offered to him to make atonement for
sin.

The δωρα, or gifts, mentioned here by the apostle, included every kind
of eucharistical offering. The θυσιαι, sacrifices, included victims of
every sort, or animals whose lives were to be offered in sacrifice, and
their blood poured out before God, as an atonement for sins. The high
priest was the mediator between God and the people; and it was his
office, when the people had brought these gifts and sacrifices, to offer
them to God in their behalf. The people could not legitimately offer
their own offerings, they must be all brought to the priest, and he
alone could present them to God. As we have a high priest over the house
of God, to offer all our gifts and his own sacrifice, therefore we may
come with boldness to the throne of grace. See above.

[Hebrews 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">heb 5:2</span></span>

Who can have compassion on the ignorant - The word μετριοπαθειν,
signifies, not merely to have compassion, but to act with moderation,
and to bear with each in proportion to his ignorance, weakness, and
untoward circumstances, all taken into consideration with the offenses
he has committed: in a word, to pity, feel for, and excuse, as far as
possible; and, when the provocation is at the highest, to moderate one's
passion towards the culprit, and be ready to pardon; and when punishment
must be administered, to do it in the gentlest manner.

Instead of αγνοουσι, the ignorant, one MS. only, but that of high
repute, has ασθενουσι, the weak. Most men sin much through ignorance,
but this does not excuse them if they have within reach the means of
instruction. And the great majority of the human race sin through
weakness. The principle of evil is strong in them; the occasions of sin
are many; through their fall from God they are become exceedingly weak;
and what the apostle calls, [Heb 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#001),
that ευπεριστατον ἁμαρτιαν, the well-circumstanced sin, often occurs to
every man. But, as in the above ease, weakness itself is no excuse, when
the means of strength and succor are always at hand. However, all these
are circumstances which the Jewish high priest took into consideration,
and they are certainly not less attended to by the High Priest of our
profession.

The reason given why the high priest should be slow to punish and prone
to forgive is, that he himself is also compassed with weakness;
περικειται ασθενειαν; weakness lies all around him, it is his clothing;
and as he feels his clothing, so should he feel it; and as he feels it,
so he should deplore it, and compassionate others.

[Hebrews 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">heb 5:3</span></span>

And by reason hereof - As he is also a transgressor of the commands of
God, and unable to observe the law in its spirituality, he must offer
sacrifices for sin, not only for the people, but for himself also: this
must teach him to have a fellow feeling for others.

[Hebrews 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">heb 5:4</span></span>

This honor - Την τιμην undoubtedly signifies here the office, which is
one meaning of the word in the best Greek writers. It is here an
honorable office, because the man is the high priest of God, and is
appointed by God himself to that office.

But he that is called of God, as was Aaron - God himself appointed the
tribe and family out of which the high priest was to be taken, and Aaron
and his sons were expressly chosen by God to fill the office of the high
priesthood. As God alone had the right to appoint his own priest for the
Jewish nation, and man had no authority here; so God alone could provide
and appoint a high priest for the whole human race. Aaron was thus
appointed for the Jewish people; Christ, for all mankind.

Some make this "an argument for the uninterrupted succession of popes
and their bishops in the Church, who alone have the authority to ordain
for the sacerdotal office; and whosoever is not thus appointed is, with
them, illegitimate." It is idle to employ time in proving that there is
no such thing as an uninterrupted succession of this kind; it does not
exist, it never did exist. It is a silly fable, invented by
ecclesiastical tyrants, and supported by clerical coxcombs. But were it
even true, it has nothing to do with the text. It speaks merely of the
appointment of a high priest, the succession to be preserved in the
tribe of Levi, and in the family of Aaron. But even this succession was
interrupted and broken, and the office itself was to cease on the coming
of Christ, after whom there could be no high priest; nor can Christ have
any successor, and therefore he is said to be a priest for ever, for he
ever liveth the intercessor and sacrifice for mankind. The verse,
therefore, has nothing to do with the clerical office, with preaching
God's holy word, or administering the sacraments; and those who quote it
in this way show how little they understand the Scriptures, and how
ignorant they are of the nature of their own office.

[Hebrews 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">heb 5:5</span></span>

Christ glorified not himself - The man Jesus Christ, was also appointed
by God to this most awful yet glorious office, of being the High Priest
of the whole human race. The Jewish high priest represented this by the
sacrifices of beasts which he offered; the Christian High Priest must
offer his own life: Jesus Christ did so; and, rising from the dead, he
ascended to heaven, and there ever appeareth in the presence of God for
us. Thus he has reassumed the sacerdotal office; and because he never
dies, he can never have a successor. He can have no vicars, either in
heaven or upon earth; those who pretend to be such are impostors, and
are worthy neither of respect nor credit.

Thou art my Son - See on [Heb 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#005)
(note), and the observations at the end of that chapter. And thus it
appears that God can have no high priest but his Son; and to that office
none can now pretend without blasphemy, for the Son of God is still the
High Priest in his temple.

[Hebrews 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">heb 5:6</span></span>

He saith also in another place - That is, in [Psa
110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004), a psalm of extraordinary
importance, containing a very striking prediction of the birth,
preaching, suffering, death, and conquests of the Messiah. See the notes
on [Psa 110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004). For the mode of
quotation here, See the note on [Heb
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#006).

Thou art a priest for ever - As long as the sun and moon endure, Jesus
will continue to be high priest to all the successive generations of
men, as he was the lamb slain from the foundation of the world. If he be
a priest for ever, there can be no succession of priests; and if he have
all power in heaven and in earth, and if he be present wherever two or
three are gathered together in his name, he can have no vicars; nor can
the Church need one to act in his place, when he, from the necessity of
his nature, fills all places, and is everywhere present. This one
consideration nullifies all the pretensions of the Romish pontiff, and
proves the whole to be a tissue of imposture.

After the order of Melchisedec - Who this person was must still remain a
secret. We know nothing more of him than is written in [Gen
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#018) (note), etc., where see the
notes, and particularly the observations at the end of that chapter, in
which this very mysterious person is represented as a type of Christ.

[Hebrews 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">heb 5:7</span></span>

Who in the days of his flesh - The time of his incarnation, during which
he took all the infirmities of human nature upon him, and was afflicted
in his body and human soul just as other men are, irregular and sinful
passions excepted.

Offered up prayers and supplications - This is one of the most difficult
places in this epistle, if not in the whole of the New Testament. The
labors of learned men upon it have been prodigious; and even in their
sayings it is hard to find the meaning.

I shall take a general view of this and the two following verses, and
then examine the particular expressions.

It is probable that the apostle refers to something in the agony of our
Lord, which the evangelists have not distinctly marked.

The Redeemer of the world appears here as simply man; but he is the
representative of the whole human race. He must make expiation for sin
by suffering, and he can suffer only as man. Suffering was as necessary
as death; for man, because he has sinned, must suffer, and because he
has broken the law, should die. Jesus took upon himself the nature of
man, subject to all the trials and distresses of human nature. He is now
making atonement; and he begins with sufferings, as sufferings commence
with human life; and he terminates with death, as that is the end of
human existence in this world. Though he was the Son of God, conceived
and born without sin, or any thing that could render him liable to
suffering or death, and only suffered and died through infinite
condescension; yet, to constitute him a complete Savior, he must submit
to whatever the law required; and therefore he is stated to have learned
Obedience by the things which he suffered, [Heb
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#008), that is, subjection to all the
requisitions of the law; and being made perfect, that is, having
finished the whole by dying, he, by these means, became the author of
eternal salvation to all them who obey him, [Heb
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#009); to them who, according to his own
command, repent and believe the Gospel, and, under the influence of his
Spirit, walk in holiness of life. "But he appears to be under the most
dreadful apprehension of death; for he offered up prayers and
supplications, with strong crying and tears, unto him that was able to
save him from death, [Heb 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007)." I
shall consider this first in the common point of view, and refer to the
subsequent notes. This fear of death was in Christ a widely different
thing from what it is in men; they fear death because of what lies
beyond the grave; they have sinned, and they are afraid to meet their
Judge. Jesus could have no fear on these grounds: he was now suffering
for man, and he felt as their expiatory victim; and God only can tell,
and perhaps neither men nor angels can conceive, how great the suffering
and agony must be which, in the sight of infinite Justice, was requisite
to make this atonement. Death, temporal and eternal, was the portion of
man; and now Christ is to destroy death by agonizing and dying! The
tortures and torments necessary to effect this destruction Jesus Christ
alone could feel, Jesus Christ alone could sustain, Jesus Christ alone
can comprehend. We are referred to them in this most solemn verse; but
the apostle himself only drops hints, he does not attempt to explain
them: he prayed; he supplicated with strong crying and tears; and he was
heard in reference to that which he feared. His prayers, as our
Mediator, were answered; and his sufferings and death were complete and
effectual as our sacrifice. This is the glorious sum of what the apostle
here states; and it is enough. We may hear it with awful respect; and
adore him with silence whose grief had nothing common in it to that of
other men, and is not to be estimated according to the measures of human
miseries. It was: -

A weight of wo, more than whole worlds could bear.

I shall now make some remarks on particular expressions, and endeavor to
show that the words may be understood with a shade of difference from
the common acceptation.

Prayers and supplications, etc. - There may be an allusion here to the
manner in which the Jews speak of prayer, etc. "Rabbi Yehudah said: All
human things depend on repentance and the prayers which men make to the
holy blessed God; especially if tears be poured out with the prayers.
There is no gate which tears will not pass through." Sohar, Exod., fol.
5.

"There are three degrees of prayer, each surpassing the other in
sublimity; prayer, crying, and tears: prayer is made in silence; crying,
with a loud voice; but tears surpass all." Synops. Sohar, p. 33.

The apostle shows that Christ made every species of prayer, and those
especially by which they allowed a man must be successful with his
Maker.

The word ἱκετηριας, which we translate supplications, exists in no other
part of the New Testament. Ἱκετης signifies a supplicant, from ἱκομαι, I
come or approach; it is used in this connection by the purest Greek
writers. Nearly the same words are found in Isocrates, De Pace:
Ἱκετηριας πολλας και δεησεις ποιουμενοι. Making many supplications and
prayers. Ἱκετηρια, says Suidas, καλειται ελαιας κλαδος, στεμματι
εστεμμενος· - εστιν, ἡν οἱ δεομενοι κατατιθενται που, η μετα χειρας
εχουσις· "Hiketeria is a branch of olive, rolled round with wool - is
what suppliants were accustomed to deposite in some place, or to carry
in their hands." And ἱκετης , hiketes, he defines to be, ὁ δουλοπρεπως
παρακαλων, και δεομενος περι τινος ὁτουουν· "He who, in the most humble
and servile manner, entreats and begs any thing from another." In
reference to this custom the Latins used the phrase velamenta
pratendere, "to hold forth these covered branches," when they made
supplication; and Herodian calls them ἱκετηριας θαλλους, "branches of
supplication." Livy mentions the custom frequently; see lib. xxv. cap.
25: lib. xxix. c. 16; lib. xxxv. c. 34; lib. xxxvi. c. 20. The place in
lib. xxix. c. 16, is much to the point, and shows us the full force of
the word, and nature of the custom. "Decem legati Locrensium, obsiti
squalore et sordibus, in comitio sedentibus consulibus velamenta
supplicium, ramos oleae (ut Graecis mos est), porrigentes, ante tribunal
cum flebili vociferatione humi procubuerunt." "Ten delegates from the
Locrians, squalid and covered with rags, came into the hall where the
consuls were sitting, holding out in their hands olive branches covered
with wool, according to the custom of the Greeks; and prostrated
themselves on the ground before the tribunal, with weeping and loud
lamentation." This is a remarkable case, and may well illustrate our
Lord's situation and conduct. The Locrians, pillaged, oppressed, and
ruined by the consul, Q. Plemmius, send their delegates to the Roman
government to implore protection and redress they, the better to
represent their situation, and that of their oppressed fellow citizens,
take the hiketeria, or olive branch wrapped round with wool, and present
themselves before the consuls in open court, and with wailing and loud
outcries make known their situation. The senate heard, arrested
Plemmius, loaded him with chains, and he expired in a dungeon. Jesus
Christ, the representative of and delegate from the whole human race,
oppressed and ruined by Satan and sin, with the hiketeria, or ensign of
a most distressed suppliant, presents himself before the throne of God,
with strong crying and tears, and prays against death and his ravages,
in behalf of those whose representative he was; and he was heard in that
he feared - the evils were removed, and the oppressor cast down. Satan
was bound, he was spoiled of his dominion, and is reserved in chains of
darkness to the judgment of the great day.

Every scholar will see that the words of the Roman historian answer
exactly to those of the apostle; and the allusion in both is to the same
custom. I do not approve of allegorizing or spiritualizing; but the
allusion and similarity of the expressions led me to make this
application. Many others would make more of this circumstance, as the
allusion in the text is so pointed to this custom. Should it appear to
any of my readers that I should, after the example of great names, have
gone into this house of Rimmon, and bowed myself there, they will pardon
their servant in this thing.

To save him from death - I have already observed that Jesus Christ was
the representative of the human race; and have made some observations on
the peculiarity of his sufferings, following the common acceptation of
the words in the text, which things are true, howsoever the text may be
interpreted. But here we may consider the pronoun αυτον, him, as
implying the collective body of mankind; the children who were partakers
of flesh and blood, [Heb 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014); the
seed of Abraham, [Heb 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#016), who
through fear of death were all their life subject to bondage. So he made
supplication with strong crying and tears to him who was able to save
Them from death; for I consider the τουτους, them, of [Heb
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#015), the same or implying the same
thing as αυτον, him, in this verse; and, thus understood, all the
difficulty vanishes away. On this interpretation I shall give a
paraphrase of the whole verse: Jesus Christ, in the days of his flesh,
(for he was incarnated that he might redeem the seed of Abraham, the
fallen race of man), and in his expiatory sufferings, when representing
the whole human race, offered up prayers and supplications, with strong
crying and tears, to him who was able to save Them from death: the
intercession was prevalent, the passion and sacrifice were accepted, the
sting of death was extracted, and Satan was dethroned.

If it should be objected that this interpretation occasions a very
unnatural change of person in these verses, I may reply that the change
made by my construction is not greater than that made between [Heb
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#006) and [Heb
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007); in the first of which the apostle
speaks of Melchisedec, who at the conclusion of the verse appears to be
antecedent to the relative who in [Heb
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007); and yet, from the nature of the
subject, we must understand Christ to be meant. And I consider, [Heb
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#008), Though he were a Son, yet learned
he obedience by the things which he suffered, as belonging, not only to
Christ considered in his human nature, but also to him in his collective
capacity; i.e., belonging to all the sons and daughters of God, who, by
means of suffering and various chastisements, learn submission,
obedience and righteousness; and this very subject the apostle treats in
considerable detail in [Heb 12:2-11](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#002)
(note), to which the reader will do well to refer.

[Hebrews 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">heb 5:8</span></span>

Though he were a Son - See the whole of the preceding note.

[Hebrews 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">heb 5:9</span></span>

And being made perfect - Και τελειωθεις· And having finished all -
having died and risen again. Τελειωθηναι signifies to have obtained the
goal; to have ended one's labor, and enjoyed the fruits of it. [Heb
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#023) : The spirits of just men made
perfect, πνευμασι δικαιων τετελειωμενων, means the souls of those who
have gained the goal, and obtained the prize. So, when Christ had
finished his course of tremendous sufferings, and consummated the whole
by his death and resurrection, he became αιτιος σωτηριας αιωνιου, the
cause of eternal salvation unto all them who obey him. He was
consecrated both highs priest and sacrifice by his offering upon the
cross.

"In this verse," says Dr. Macknight, "three things are clearly stated:

1\. That obedience to Christ is equally necessary to salvation with
believing on him.

2\. That he was made perfect as a high priest by offering himself a
sacrifice for sin, [Heb 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#003).

3\. That, by the merit of that sacrifice, he hath obtained pardon and
eternal life for them who obey him."

He tasted death for every man; but he is the author and cause of eternal
salvation only to them who obey him. It is not merely believers, but
obedient believers, that shall be finally saved. Therefore this text is
an absolute, unimpeachable evidence, that it is not the imputed
obedience of Christ that saves any man. Christ has bought men by his
blood; and by the infinite merit of his death he has purchased for them
an endless glory; but, in order to be prepared for it, the sinner must,
through that grace which God withholds from no man, repent, turn from
sin, believe on Jesus as being a sufficient ransom and sacrifice for his
soul, receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, be a worker together with him,
walk in conformity to the Divine will through this Divine aid, and
continue faithful unto death, through him, out of whose fullness he may
receive grace upon grace.

[Hebrews 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">heb 5:10</span></span>

Called of God a high priest - Προσαγορευθεις· Being constituted, hailed,
and acknowledged to be a high priest. In Hesychius we find προσαγορευει,
which he translates ασπαζεται· hence we learn that one meaning of this
word is to salute; as when a man was constituted or anointed king, those
who accosted him would say, Hail king! On this verse Dr. Macknight has
the following note, with the insertion of which the reader will not be
displeased: "As our Lord, in his conversation with the Pharisees,
recorded [Mat 22:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#043), spake of it as a
thing certain of itself, and universally known and acknowledged by the
Jews, that David wrote the 110th Psalm by inspiration, concerning the
Christ or Messiah; the apostle was well founded in applying the whole of
that Psalm to Jesus. Wherefore, having quoted the fourth verse, Thou art
a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec, as directed to
Messiah, David's Lord, he justly termed that speech of the Deity a
salutation of Jesus, according to the true import of the word
προσαγορευθεις, which properly signifies to address one by his name, or
title, or office; accordingly Hesychius explains προσαγορευομαι by
ασπαζομαι. Now, that the deep meaning of this salutation may be
understood, I observe, First, that, by the testimony of the inspired
writers, Jesus sat down at the right hand of God when he returned to
heaven, after having finished his ministry upon earth; [Mar
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#019); [Act
7:56](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#056); [Heb
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003); [Heb
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#001); [Pe1
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#022). Not, however, immediately, but
after that he had offered the sacrifice of himself in heaven, by
presenting his crucified body before the presence of God; [Heb
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003); [Heb
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#010). Secondly, I observe, that God's
saluting Messiah a priest after the order of Melchisedec, being
mentioned in the psalm after God is said to have invited him to sit at
his right hand, it is reasonable to think the salutation was given him
after he had offered the sacrifice of himself; and had taken his seat at
God's right hand. Considered in this order, the salutation of Jesus, as
a priest after the order of Melchisedec, was a public declaration on the
part of God that he accepted the sacrifice of himself, which Jesus then
offered, as a sufficient atonement for the sin of the world, and
approved of the whole of his ministrations on earth, and confirmed all
the effects of that meritorious sacrifice, And whereas we are informed
in the psalm that, after God had invited his Son, in the human nature;
to sit at his right hand as Governor of the world, and foretold the
blessed fruits of his government, he published the oath by which he made
him a Priest for ever, before he sent him into the world to accomplish
the salvation of mankind; and declared that he would never repent of
that oath: The Lord hath sworn, and will not repent; Thou art a Priest
for ever after the similitude of Melchisedec. It was, in effect, a
solemn publication of the method in which God would pardon sinners; and
a promise that the effects of his Son's government as a King, and of his
ministrations as a Priest, should be eternal; see [Heb
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#020). Moreover, as this solemn
declaration of the dignity of the Son of God, as a King and a Priest for
ever in the human nature, was made in the hearing of the angelical
hosts, it was designed for this instruction, that they might understand
their subordination to God's Son, and pay him that homage that is due to
him as Governor of the world, and as Savior of the human race; [Phi
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009), [Phi
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010); [Heb
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#006). The above explanation of the
import of God's saluting Jesus a Priest for ever, is founded on the
apostle's reasonings in the seventh and following chapters, where he
enters into the deep meaning of the oath by which that salutation was
conferred."

[Hebrews 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">heb 5:11</span></span>

Of whom we have many things to say - The words περι οὑ, which we
translate of whom, are variously applied:

1\. To Melchisedec;

2\. To Christ;

3\. To the endless priesthood.

Those who understand the place of Melchisedec, suppose that it is in
reference to this that the apostle resumes the subject in the seventh
chapter, where much more is said on this subject, though not very
difficult of comprehension; and indeed it is not to be supposed that the
Hebrews could be more capable of understanding the subject when the
apostle wrote the seventh chapter than they were when, a few hours
before, he had written the fifth. It is more likely, therefore, that the
words are to be understood as meaning Jesus, or that endless priesthood,
of which he was a little before speaking, and which is a subject that
carnal Christians cannot easily comprehend.

Hard to be uttered - Δυσερμηνευτος· Difficult to be interpreted, because
Melchisedec was a typical person. Or if it refer to the priesthood of
Christ, that is still more difficult to be explained, as it implies, not
only his being constituted a priest after this typical order, but his
paying down the ransom for the sins of the whole world; and his
satisfying the Divine justice by this sacrifice, but also thereby
opening the kingdom of heaven to all believers, and giving the whole
world an entrance to the holy of holies by his blood.

Dull of hearing - Νωθροι ταις ακοαις· Your souls do not keep pace with
the doctrines and exhortations delivered to you. As νωθρος signifies a
person who walks heavily and makes little speed, it is here elegantly
applied to those who are called to the Christian race, have the road
laid down plain before them, how to proceed specified, and the blessings
to be obtained enumerated, and yet make no exertions to get on, but are
always learning, and never able to come to the full knowledge of the
truth.

[Hebrews 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">heb 5:12</span></span>

For when for the time - They had heard the Gospel for many years, and
had professed to be Christians for a long time; on these accounts they
might reasonably have been expected to be well instructed in Divine
things, so as to be able to instruct others.

Which be the first principles - Τινα τα στοιχεια· Certain first
principles or elements. The word τινα is not the nominative plural, as
our translators have supposed, but the accusative case, governed by
διδασκειν· and therefore the literal translation of the passage is this:
Ye have need that one teach you a second time (παλιν) certain elements
of the doctrines of Christ, or oracles of God; i.e. the notices which
the prophets gave concerning the priesthood of Jesus Christ, such as are
found in [Psa 110:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001) :, and in [Isa
53:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001) : By the oracles of God the
writings of the Old Testament, are undoubtedly meant.

And are become such - The words seem to intimate that they had once been
better instructed, and had now forgotten that teaching; and this was
occasioned by their being dull of hearing; either they had not continued
to hear, or they had heard so carelessly that they were not profited by
what they heard. They had probably totally omitted the preaching of the
Gospel, and consequently forgotten all they had learned. Indeed, it was
to reclaim those Hebrews from backsliding, and preserve them from total
apostasy, that this epistle was written.

Such as have need of milk - Milk is a metaphor by which many authors,
both sacred and profane, express the first principles of religion and
science; and they apply sucking to learning; and every student in his
novitiate, or commencement of his studies, was likened to an infant that
derives all its nourishment from the breast of its mother, not being
able to digest any other kind of food. On the contrary, those who had
well learned all the first principles of religion and science, and knew
how to apply them, were considered as adults who were capable of
receiving στερεα τροφη, solid food; i.e. the more difficult and sublime
doctrines. The rabbins abound with this figure; it occurs frequently in
Philo, and in the Greek ethic writers also. In the famous Arabic poem
called al Bordah, written by Abi Abdallah Mohammed ben Said ben Hamad
Albusiree, in praise of Mohammed and his religion, every couplet of
which ends with the letter mim, the first letter in Mohammed's name, we
meet with a couplet that contains a similar sentiment to that of the
apostle: -

"The soul is like to a young infant, which, if permitted, will grow up
to manhood in the love of sucking; but if thou take it from the breast
it will feel itself weaned."

Dr. Owen observes that there are two Sorts of hearers of the Gospel,
which are here expressed by an elegant metaphor or similitude; this
consists,

1\. In the conformity that is between bodily food and the Gospel as
preached.

2\. In the variety of natural food as suited to the various states of
them that feed on it, answered by the truths of the Gospel, which are of
various kinds; and, in exemplification of this metaphor, natural food is
reduced to two kinds:

1\. milk;

2\. strong or solid meat; and those who feed on these are reduced to two
sorts:

1\. children;

2\. men of ripe age. Both of which are applied to hearers of the Gospel.

1\. Some there are who are νηπιοι, babes or infants, and some are
τελειοι, perfect or full grown.

2\. These babes are described by a double properly:

1\. They are dull of hearing;

2\. They are unskilful in the word of righteousness.

In opposition to this, those who are spiritually adult are,

1\. They who are capable of instruction.

2\. Such as have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil.

3\. The different means to be applied to these different sorts for their
good, according to their respective conditions, are expressed in the
terms of the metaphor: to the first, γαλα, milk; to the others, στεοεα
τροφη, strong meat. All these are compromised in the following scheme: -

The hearers of the Gospel Are,

I. Νηπιοι· Babes or Infants II. Τελειοι· Perfect or Adult Who are Who
are 1. Νωθροι ταις ακοαις· Dull of hearing 1. Φρονιμοι· Wise and
prudent. 2. Απειροι λογου δικαιοσυνης· Inexperienced in the doctrine of
righteousness. 2. Τα αισθητηρια γεγυμνασμενα εχοντες· And have their
senses properly exercised. These have need These have need Γαλακτος· Of
milk. Στερεας τροφης· Of solid food.

But all these are to derive their nourishment or spiritual instruction
εκ των λογιων του Θεου, from the oracles of God. The word oracle, by
which we translate the λογιον of the apostle, is used by the best Greek
writers to signify a divine speech, or answer of a deity to a question
proposed. It always implied a speech or declaration purely celestial, in
which man had no part; and it is thus used wherever it occurs in the New
Testament.

1\. It signifies the Law received from God by Moses, [Act
7:38](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#038).

2\. The Old Testament in general; the holy men of old having spoken by
the inspiration of the Divine Spirit, [Rom
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#002), and in the text under
consideration.

3\. It signifies Divine revelation in general, because all delivered
immediately from God, [Th1 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#013); [Pe1
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#011). When we consider what respect
was paid by the heathens to their oracles, which were supposed to be
delivered by those gods who were the objects of their adoration, but
which were only impostures, we may then learn what respect is due to the
true oracles of God.

Among the heathens the credit of oracles was so great, that in all
doubts and disputes their determinations were held sacred and
inviolable; whence vast numbers flocked to them for advice in the
management of their affairs, and no business of any importance was
undertaken, scarcely any war waged or peace concluded, any new form of
government instituted or new laws enacted, without the advice and
approbation of the oracle. Croesus, before he durst venture to declare
war against the Persians, consulted not only the most famous oracles of
Greece, but sent ambassadors as far as Libya, to ask advice of Jupiter
Ammon. Minos, the Athenian lawgiver, professed to receive instructions
from Jupiter how to model his intended government; and Lycurgus,
legislator of Sparta, made frequent visits to the Delphian Apollo, and
received from him the platform of the Lacedemonian commonwealth. See
Broughton.

What a reproach to Christians, who hold the Bible to be a collection of
the oracles of God, and who not only do not consult it in the momentous
concerns of either this or the future life, but go in direct opposition
to it! Were every thing conducted according to these oracles, we should
have neither war nor desolation in the earth; families would be well
governed, and individuals universally made happy.

Those who consulted the ancient oracles were obliged to go to enormous
expenses, both in sacrifices and in presents to the priests. And when
they had done so, they received oracles which were so equivocal, that,
howsoever the event fell out, they were capable of being interpreted
that way.

[Hebrews 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">heb 5:13</span></span>

For every one that useth milk - It is very likely that the apostle, by
using this term, refers to the doctrines of the law, which were only the
rudiments of religion, and were intended to lead us to Christ, that we
might be justified by faith.

The word of righteousness - Αογος δικαιοσυνης· The doctrine of
justification. I believe this to be the apostle's meaning. He that uses
milk - rests in the ceremonies and observances of the law, is unskilful
in the doctrine of justification; for this requires faith in the
sacrificial death of the promised Messiah.

[Hebrews 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">heb 5:14</span></span>

But strong meat - The high and sublime doctrines of Christianity; the
atonement, justification by faith, the gift of the Holy Ghost, the
fullness of Christ dwelling in the souls of men, triumph in and over
death, the resurrection of the body, the glorification of both body and
soul in the realms of blessedness, and an endless union with Christ in
the throne of his glory. This is the strong food which the genuine
Christian understands, receives, digests, and by which he grows.

By reason of use - Who, by constant hearing, believing, praying, and
obedience, use all the graces of God's Spirit; and, in the faithful use
of them, find every one improved, so that they daily grow in grace, and
in the knowledge of Jesus Christ our Lord.

Have their senses exercised - The word αισθητηρια signifies the
different organs of sense, as the eyes, ears, tongue, and palate, nose,
and finger ends, and the nervous surface in general, through which we
gain the sensations called seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling, and
feeling. These organs of sense, being frequently exercised or employed
on a variety of subjects, acquire the power to discern the various
objects of sense: viz. all objects of light; difference of sounds; of
tastes or savours; of odours or smelling; and of hard, soft, wet, dry,
cold, hot, rough, smooth, and all other tangible qualities.

There is something in the soul that answers to all these senses in the
body. And as universal nature presents to the other senses their
different and appropriate objects, so religion presents to these
interior senses the objects which are suited to them. Hence in Scripture
we are said, even in spiritual things, to see, hear, taste, smell, and
touch or feel. These are the means by which the soul is rendered
comfortable, and through which it derives its happiness and perfection.

In the adult Christian these senses are said to be γεγυμνασμενα,
exercised, a metaphor taken from the athlete or contenders in the
Grecian games, who were wont to employ all their powers, skill, and
agility in mock fights, running, wrestling, etc., that they might be the
better prepared for the actual contests when they took place. So these
employ and improve all their powers, and in using grace get more grace;
and thus, being able to discern good from evil, they are in little
danger of being imposed on by false doctrine, or by the pretensions of
hypocrites; or of being deceived by the subtleties of Satan. They feel
that their security depends, under God, on this exercise - on the proper
use which they make of the grace already given them by God. Can any
reader be so dull as not to understand this?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 6](heb006)

</div>
