<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hebrews Index](heb)  
  [Previous](heb003)  [Next](heb005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#001)

[Hebrews](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">heb 4:0</span></span>

As the Christian rest is to be obtained by faith, we should beware of
unbelief lest we lose it, as the Hebrews did theirs, [Heb
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#001). The reason why they were not
brought into the rest promised to them, [Heb
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#002). The rest promised to the Hebrews
was a type of that promised to Christians, [Heb
4:3-10](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#003). Into this rest we should
earnestly labor to enter, [Heb 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#011). A
description of the word of God, [Heb
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012), [Heb
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#013). Jesus is our sympathetic High
Priest, [Heb 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#015). Through him we have
confidence to come to God, [Heb 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#016).

[Hebrews 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 4:1</span></span>

Let us therefore fear - Seeing the Israelites lost the rest of Canaan,
through obstinacy and unbelief, let us be afraid lest we come short of
the heavenly rest, through the same cause.

Should seem to come short of it - Lest any of us should actually come
short of it; i.e. miss it. See the note on the verb δοκειν, to seem,
[Luk 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#018) (note). What the apostle had
said before, relative to the rest, might be considered as an allegory;
here he explains and applies that allegory, showing that Canaan was a
type of the grand privileges of the Gospel of Christ, and of the
glorious eternity to which they lead.

Come short - The verb ὑστερειν is applied here metaphorically; it is an
allusion, of which there are many in this epistle, to the races in the
Grecian games: he that came short was he who was any distance, no matter
how small, behind the winner. Will it avail any of us how near we get to
heaven, if the door be shut before we arrive? How dreadful the thought,
to have only missed being eternally saved! To run well, and yet to
permit the devil, the world, or the flesh, to hinder in the few last
steps! Reader, watch and be sober.

[Hebrews 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">heb 4:2</span></span>

For unto us was the Gospel preached - Και γαρ εσμεν ευηγγελισμενοι· For
we also have received good tidings as well as they. They had a gracious
promise of entering into an earthly rest; we have a gracious promise of
entering into a heavenly rest. God gave them every requisite advantage;
he has done the same to us. Moses and the elders spoke the word of God
plainly and forcibly to them: Christ and his apostles have done the same
to us. They might have persevered; so may we: they disbelieved,
disobeyed, and fell: and so may we.

But the word preached did not profit them - Αλλ ουκ ωφελησεν ὁ λογος της
ακοης εκεινους· But the word of hearing did not profit them. The word
and promise to which the apostle most probably refers is that in [Deu
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#020), [Deu
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#021) : Ye are come unto to the
mountain of the Amorites, which the Lord our God doth give unto to us.
Behold, the Lord thy God hath set the land before thee; go up and
possess it, as the Lord God of thy fathers hath said unto thee: fear
not. Many exhortations they had to the following effect: Arise, that we
may go up against them; for we have seen the land, and, behold, it is
very good: and are ye still? Be not slothful to go, and to enter to
possess the land; for God hath given it into your hands; a place where
there is no want of any thing that is in the earth; [Jdg
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#009), [Jdg
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#010). But instead of attending to the
word of the Lord by Moses, the whole congregation murmured against him
and Aaron, and said one to another, Let us make a captain, and let us
return into Egypt; [Num 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#002), [Num
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#004). But they were dastardly through
all their generations. They spoke evil of the pleasant land, and did not
give credence to his word. Their minds had been debased by their
Egyptian bondage, and they scarcely ever arose to a state of mental
nobility.

Not being mixed with faith in them that heard - There are several
various readings in this verse, and some of them important. The
principal are on the word συγκεκραμενος, mixed; which in the common text
refers to ὁ λογος, the word mixed; but, in ABCD and several others, it
is συγκεκραμενους, referring to, and agreeing with, εκεινους, and may be
thus translated: The word of hearing did not profit them, they not being
mixed with those who heard it by faith. That is, they were not of the
same spirit with Joshua and Caleb. There are other variations, but of
less importance; but the common text seems best.

The word συγκεκραμενος, mixed, is peculiarly expressive; it is a
metaphor taken from the nutrition of the human body by mixing the
aliment taken into the stomach with the saliva and gastric juice, in
consequence of which it is concocted, digested, reduced into chyle,
which, absorbed by the lacteal vessels, and thrown into the blood,
becomes the means of increasing and supporting the body, all the solids
and fluids being thus generated; so that on this process, properly
performed, depend (under God) strength, health, and life itself. Should
the most nutritive aliment be received into the stomach, if not mixed
with the above juices, it would be rather the means of death than of
life; or, in the words of the apostle, it would not profit, because not
thus mixed. Faith in the word preached, in reference to that God who
sent it, is the grand means of its becoming the power of God to the
salvation of the soul. It is not likely that he who does not credit a
threatening, when he comes to hear it, will be deterred by it from
repeating the sin against which it is levelled; nor can he derive
comfort from a promise who does not believe it as a pledge of God's
veracity and goodness. Faith, therefore, must be mixed with all that we
hear, in order to make the word of God effectual to our salvation.

This very use of the word, and its explanation, we may find in Maximus
Tyrius, in his description of health, Dissert. x., page 101. "Health,"
says he, it is a certain disposition ὑγρων και ξηρων και ψυχρων και
θερμων δυναμεων, η ὑπο τεχνης συγκραθεισων καλως, η ὑπο φυσεως
ἁρμοσθεισων τεχνικως, which consists in a proper mixture together of the
wet and the dry, the cold and the hot, either by an artificial process,
or by the skillful economy of nature."

[Hebrews 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">heb 4:3</span></span>

For we which have believed do enter into rest - The great spiritual
blessings, the forerunners of eternal glory, which were all typified by
that earthly rest or felicity promised to the ancient Israelites, we
Christians do, by believing in Christ Jesus, actually possess. We have
peace of conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost; are saved from the guilt
and power of sin; and thus enjoy an inward rest.

But this is a rest differing from the seventh day's rest, or Sabbath,
which was the original type of Canaan, the blessings of the Gospel, and
eternal glory; seeing God said, concerning the unbelieving Israelites in
the wilderness, I have sworn in my wrath that they shall not enter into
my rest, notwithstanding the works of creation were finished, and the
seventh day's rest was instituted from the foundation of the world;
consequently the Israelites had entered into that rest before the oath
was sworn. See Macknight.

We who believe, Οἱ πιστευσαντες, is omitted by Chrysostom, and some few
MSS. And instead of εισερχομεθα γαρ, for we do enter, AC, several
others, with the Vulgate and Coptic, read εισερχωμεθα ουν, therefore let
us enter; and thus it answers to φωβηθωμεν ουν, therefore let us fear,
[Heb 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#001); but this reading cannot well
stand unless οι πιστευσαντες be omitted, which is acknowledged to be
genuine by every MS. and version of note and importance. The meaning
appears to be this: We Jews, who have believed in Christ, do actually
possess that rest-state of happiness in God, produced by peace of
conscience and joy in the Holy Ghost - which was typified by the
happiness and comfort to be enjoyed by the believing Hebrews, in the
possession of the promised land. See before.

From the foundation of the world - The foundation of the world, καταβολη
κοσμου, means the completion of the work of creation in six days. In
those days was the world, i.e. the whole system of mundane things, begun
and perfected; and this appears to be the sense of the expression in
this place.

[Hebrews 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">heb 4:4</span></span>

For he spake in a certain place - This certain place or somewhere, που,
is probably [Gen 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#002); and refers to
the completion of the work of creation, and the setting apart the
seventh day as a day of rest for man, and a type of everlasting
felicity. See the notes on [Gen 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#001),
etc., and See here [Heb 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#006) (note).

[Hebrews 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">heb 4:5</span></span>

And in this place again - In the ninety-fifth Psalm, already quoted,
[Psa 95:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#003). This was a second rest
which the Lord promised to the believing, obedient seed of Abraham; and
as it was spoken of in the days of David, when the Jews actually
possessed this long promised Canaan, therefore it is evident that that
was not the rest which God intended, as the next verse shows.

[Hebrews 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">heb 4:6</span></span>

It remaineth that some must enter therein - Why our translators put in
the word must here I cannot even conjecture. I hope it was not to serve
a system, as some have since used it: "Some must go to heaven, for so is
the doctrine of the decree; and there must be certain persons infallibly
brought thither as a reward to Christ for his sufferings; and in this
the will of man and free agency can have no part," etc, etc. Now,
supposing that even all this was true, yet it does not exist either
positively or by implication in the text. The words επει ουν απολειπεται
τινας εισελθειν εις αυτην, literally translated, are as follows: Seeing
then it remaineth for some to enter into it; or, Whereas therefore it
remaineth that some enter into it, which is Dr. Owen's translation, and
they to whom it was first preached (οἱ προτερον ευαγγελισθεντες, they to
whom the promise was given; they who first received the good tidings;
i.e., the Israelites, to whom was given the promise of entering into the
rest of Canaan) did not enter in because of their unbelief; and the
promise still continued to be repeated even in the days of David;
therefore, some other rest must be intended.

[Hebrews 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">heb 4:7</span></span>

He limiteth a certain day - The term day signifies not only time in
general, but also present time, and a particular space. Day here seems
to have the same meaning as rest in some other parts of this verse. The
day or time of rest relative to the ancient Jews being over and past,
and a long time having elapsed between God's displeasure shown to the
disobedient Jews in the wilderness and the days of David, and the true
rest not having been enjoyed, God in his mercy has instituted another
day - has given another dispensation of mercy and goodness by Christ
Jesus; and now it may be said, as formerly, To-day, if ye will hear his
voice, harden not your hearts. God speaks now as he spoke before; his
voice is in the Gospel as it was in the law. Believe, love, obey, and ye
shall enter into this rest.

[Hebrews 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">heb 4:8</span></span>

For if Jesus had given them rest - It is truly surprising that our
translators should have rendered the Ιησους of the text Jesus, and not
Joshua, who is most clearly intended. They must have known that the
יהושע Yehoshua of the Hebrew, which we write Joshua, is everywhere
rendered Ιησους, Jesus, by the Septuagint; and it is their reading which
the apostle follows. It is true the Septuagint generally write Ιησους
Ναυη, or Υἱος Ναυη, Jesus Nave, or Jesus, son of Nave, for it is thus
they translate יהושע בן נון Yehoshua ben Nun, Joshua the son of Nun; and
this is sufficient to distinguish it from Jesus, son of David. But as
Joshua, the captain general of Israel, is above intended, the word
should have been written Joshua, and not Jesus. One MS., merely to
prevent the wrong application of the name, has Ιησους ὁ του Ναυη, Jesus
the son of Nave. Theodoret has the same in his comment, and one Syriac
version has it in the text. It is Joshua in Coverdale's Testament, 1535;
in Tindal's 1548; in that edited by Edmund Becke, 1549; in Richard
Cardmarden's, Rouen, 1565; several modern translators, Wesley,
Macknight, Wakefield, etc., read Joshua, as does our own in the margin.
What a pity it had not been in the text, as all the smaller Bibles have
no marginal readings, and many simple people are bewildered with the
expression.

The apostle shows that, although Joshua did bring the children of Israel
into the promised land, yet this could not be the intended rest, because
long after this time the Holy Spirit, by David, speaks of this rest; the
apostle, therefore, concludes,

[Hebrews 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">heb 4:9</span></span>

There, remaineth therefore a rest to the people of God - It was not,

1\. The rest of the Sabbath; it was not,

2\. The rest in the promised land,

for the psalmist wrote long after the days of Joshua; therefore there is
another rest, a state of blessedness, for the people of God; and this is
the Gospel, the blessings it procures and communicates, and the eternal
glory which it prepares for, and has promised to, genuine believers.

There are two words in this chapter which we indifferently translate
rest, καταπαυσις and σαββατισμος· he first signifying a cessation from
labor, so that the weary body is rested and refreshed; the second
meaning, not only a rest from labor, but a religious rest; sabbatismus,
a rest of a sacred kind, of which both soul and body partake. This is
true, whether we understand the rest as referring to Gospel blessings,
or to eternal felicity, or to both.

[Hebrews 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">heb 4:10</span></span>

For he that is entered into his rest - The man who has believed in
Christ Jesus has entered into his rest; the state of happiness which he
has provided, and which is the forerunner of eternal glory.

Hath ceased from his own works - No longer depends on the observance of
Mosaic rites and ceremonies for his justification and final happiness.
He rests from all these works of the law as fully as God has rested from
his works of creation.

Those who restrain the word rest to the signification of eternal glory,
say, that ceasing from our own works relates to the sufferings,
tribulations, afflictions, etc., of this life; as in [Rev
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#013). I understand it as including
both.

In speaking of the Sabbath, as typifying a state of blessedness in the
other world, the apostle follows the opinions of the Jews of his own and
after times. The phrase שבת עלאה ושבת התאה shabbath illaah, veshabbath
tethaah, the sabbath above, and the sabbath below, is common among the
Jewish writers; and they think that where the plural number is used, as
in [Lev 19:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#030) : Ye shall keep my
Sabbaths, that the lower and higher sabbaths are intended, and that the
one is prefigured by the other. See many examples in Schoettgen.

[Hebrews 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">heb 4:11</span></span>

Let us labor therefore - The word σπουδασωμεν implies every exertion of
body and mind which can be made in reference to the subject. Rebus aliis
omissis, hoc agamus; All things else omitted, this one thing let us do.
We receive grace, improve grace, retain grace, that we may obtain
eternal glory.

Lest any man fall - Lest he fall off from the grace of God, from the
Gospel and its blessings, and perish everlastingly. This is the meaning
of the apostle, who never supposed that a man might not make final
shipwreck of faith and of a good conscience, as long as he was in a
state of probation.

[Hebrews 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">heb 4:12</span></span>

For the word of God is quick, and powerful - Commentators are greatly
divided concerning the meaning of the phrase Ὁ λογος τον Θεου, the word
of God; some supposing the whole of Divine revelation to be intended;
others, the doctrine of the Gospel faithfully preached; others, the mind
of God or the Divine intellect; and others, the Lord Jesus Christ, who
is thus denominated in [Joh 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001), etc.,
and [Rev 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#013); the only places in
which he is thus incontestably characterized in the New Testament. The
disputed text, [Jo1 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#007), I leave at
present out of the question. In the introduction to this epistle I have
produced sufficient evidence to make it very probable that St. Paul was
the author of this epistle. In this sentiment the most eminent scholars
and critics are now agreed. That Jesus Christ, the eternal, uncreated
Word, is not meant here, is more than probable from this consideration,
that St. Paul, in no part of his thirteen acknowledged epistles, ever
thus denominates our blessed Lord; nor is he thus denominated by any
other of the New Testament writers except St. John. Dr. Owen has
endeavored to prove the contrary, but I believe to no man's conviction
who was able to examine and judge of the subject. He has not been able
to find more than two texts which even appeared to look his way. The
first is, [Luk 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#002) : Us, which - were
eye witnesses, and ministers του λογου, of the word; where it is evident
the whole of our Lord's ministry is intended. The second is, [Act
20:32](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#032) : I commend you to God, and to
the word of his grace; where nothing but the gracious doctrine of
salvation by faith, the influence of the Divine Spirit, etc., etc., can
be meant: nor is there any legitimate mode of construction with which I
am acquainted, by which the words in either place can be personally
applied to our Lord. That the phrase was applied to denominate the
second subsistence in the glorious Trinity, by Philo and the rabbinical
writers, I have already proved in my notes on John 1, where such
observations are alone applicable.

Calmet, who had read all that either the ancients or moderns have said
on this subject, and who does not think that Jesus Christ is here
intended, speaks thus: "None of the properties mentioned here can be
denied to the Son of God, the eternal Word; he sees all things, knows
all things, penetrates all things, and can do all things. He is the
ruler of the heart, and can turn it where he pleases. He enlightens the
soul, and calls it gently and efficaciously, when and how he wills.
Finally, he punishes in the most exemplary manner the insults offered to
his Father and himself by infidels, unbelievers, and the wicked in
general. But it does not appear that the Divine Logos is here intended,

1\. Because St. Paul does not use that term to express the Son of God.

2\. Because the conjunction γαρ, for, shows that this verse is an
inference drawn from the preceding, where the subject in question is
concerning the eternal rest, and the means by which it is to be
obtained.

It is therefore more natural to explain the term of the word, order, and
will of God, for the Hebrews represent the revelation of God as an
active being, living, all-powerful, illumined, executing vengeance,
discerning and penetrating all things. Thus The Wisdom of Solomon 16:26:
'Thy children, O Lord, know that it is not the growing of fruits that
nourisheth man, but that it is thy word that preserveth them that put
their trust in thee.' See [Deu 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#003).
That is, the sacred Scriptures point out and appoint all the means of
life. Again, speaking of the Hebrews who were bitten with the fiery
serpents, the same writer says, 16:12: 'For it was neither herb nor
mollifying plaster that restored them to health, but thy word, O Lord,
which healeth all things;' i.e. which describes and prescribes the means
of healing. And it is very likely that the purpose of God, sending the
destroying angel to slay the firstborn in Egypt is intended by the same
expression, The Wisdom of Solomon 18:15, 16: 'Thine almighty word leaped
down from heaven out of thy royal throne, as a fierce man of war into a
land of destruction, and brought thine unfeigned commandment as a sharp
sword, and, standing up, filled all things with death.' This however may
be applied to the eternal Logos, or uncreated Word.

"And this mode of speech is exactly conformable to that of the Prophet
Isaiah, [Isa 55:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#010), [Isa
55:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#011), where to the word of God,
spoken by his prophets, the same kind of powers are attributed as those
mentioned here by the apostle: For as the rain cometh down and the snow
from heaven, and returneth not thither, but watereth the earth, and
maketh it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and
bread to the eater; so shall my Word Be that Goeth Forth Out of My
Mouth: it shall not return unto me void; but it shall accomplish that
which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it. The
centurion seems to speak a similar language, [Luk
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#007) : But say in a word, (αλλα ειπε
λογῳ, speak to thy word), and my servant shall be healed." This is the
sum of what this very able commentator says on the subject.

In Dr. Dodd's collections we find the following: -

"The word of God, which promises to the faithful, an entrance into God's
rest in David's time, and now to us, is not a thing which died or was
forgotten as soon as it was uttered, but it continues one and the same
to all generations; it is ζων, quick or living. So Isaiah says: The word
of our God shall stand for ever; [Isa
40:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#008). Compare [Isa
51:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#006); [Isa
55:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#011); 1 Esdras 4:38; [Joh
3:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#034); [Pe1
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#023). And powerful, ενεργης,
efficacious, active; sufficient, if it be not actually hindered, to
produce its effects; effectual, [Plm
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#006). See [Co2
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#004); [Th1
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#013). And sharper than any two-edged
sword; τομωτερος ὑπερ, more cutting than. The word of God penetrates
deeper into a man than any sword; it enters into the soul and spirit,
into all our sensations, passions, appetites, nay, to our very thoughts;
and sits as judge of the most secret intentions, contrivances, and
sentiments of the heart. Phocylides has an expression very similar to
our author, where he says, of reason, 'that it is a weapon which
penetrates deeper into a man than a sword.' See also [Isa
40:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#004); [Eph
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#017); [Rev
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#016); [Rev
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#016).

"Piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit. - When the
soul is thus distinguished from the spirit, by the former is meant that
inferior faculty by which we think of and desire what concerns our
present being and welfare. By spirit is meant a superior power by which
we prefer future things to present, by which we are directed to pursue
truth and right above all things, and even to despise what is agreeable
to our present state, if it stand in competition with, or is prejudicial
to, our future happiness. See [Th1
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023). Some have thought that by the
expression before us is implied that the word of God is able to bring
death, as in the case of Ananias and Sapphira; for, say they, if the
soul and spirit, or the joints and marrow are separated one from
another, it is impossible that life can remain. But perhaps the meaning
of the latter clause may rather be: 'It can divide the joints and divide
the marrow; i.e. enter irresistibly into the soul, and produce some
sentiment which perhaps it would not willingly have received; and
sometimes discover and punish secret, as well as open wickedness.' Mr.
Pierce observes that our author has been evidently arguing from a
tremendous judgment of God upon the ancient Israelites, the ancestors of
those to whom this epistle is directed; and in this verse, to press upon
them that care and diligence he had been recommending, he sets before
them the efficacy and virtue of the word of God, connecting this verse
with the former by a for in the beginning of it; and therefore it is
natural to suppose that what he says of the word of God may have a
relation to somewhat remarkable in that sore punishment of which he had
been speaking, particularly to the destruction of the people by
lightning, or fire from heaven. See [Lev
10:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#001); [Num
11:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#001), [Num
16:35](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#035); [Psa
78:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#021). All the expressions in this
view will receive an additional force, for nothing is more quick and
living, more powerful and irresistible, sharp and piercing, than
lightning. If this idea be admitted, the meaning of the last clause in
this verse will be, 'That the word of God is a judge, to censure and
punish the evil thoughts and intents of the heart.' And this brings the
matter home to the exhortation with which our author began, [Heb
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#012), [Heb
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#013); for under whatever disguise they
might conceal themselves, yet, from such tremendous judgments as God
executed upon their fathers, they might learn to judge as Moses did,
[Num 32:23](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#023) : If ye will not do so, ye
have sinned against the Lord; and be sure your sin will find you out."
See Hammond, Whitby, Sykes, and Pierce.

Mr. Wesley's note on this verse is expressed with his usual precision
and accuracy: -

"For the word of God - preached, [Heb
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#002), and armed with threatenings, [Heb
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#003), is living and powerful - attended
with the power of the living God, and conveying either life or death to
the hearers; sharper than any two-edged sword - penetrating the heart
more than this does the body; piercing quite through, and laying open,
the soul and spirit, joints and marrow - the inmost recesses of the
mind, which the apostle beautifully and strongly expresses by this heap
of figurative words; and is a discerner, not only of the thoughts, but
also of the intentions."

The law, and the word of God in general, is repeatedly compared to a
two-edged sword among the Jewish writers, חרב שתי פיפיות chereb shetey
piphiyoth, the sword with the two mouths. By this sword the man himself
lives, and by it he destroys his enemies. This is implied in its two
edges. See also Schoettgen.

Is a discerner of the thoughts - Και κριτικος ενθυμησεων και εννοιων
καρδιας· Is a critic of the propensities and suggestions of the heart.
How many have felt this property of God's word where it has been
faithfully preached! How often has it happened that a man has seen the
whole of his own character, and some of the most private transactions of
his life, held up as it were to public view by the preacher; and yet the
parties absolutely unknown to each other! Some, thus exhibited, have
even supposed that their neighbors must have privately informed the
preacher of their character and conduct; but it was the word of God,
which, by the direction and energy of the Divine Spirit, thus searched
them out, was a critical examiner of the propensities and suggestions of
their hearts, and had pursued them through all their public haunts and
private ways. Every genuine minister of the Gospel has witnessed such
effects as these under his ministry in repeated instances.

But while this effect of the word or true doctrine of God is
acknowledged, let it not be supposed that it, of itself can produce such
effects. The word of God is compared to a hammer that breaks the rock in
pieces, [Jer 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#029); but will a hammer
break a stone unless it is applied by the skill and strength of some
powerful agent? It is here compared to a two-edged sword; but will a
sword cut or pierce to the dividing of joints and marrow, or separation
of soul and spirit, unless some hand push and direct it? Surely, no. Nor
can even the words and doctrine of God produce any effect but as
directed by the experienced teacher, and applied by the Spirit of God.
It is an instrument the most apt for the accomplishing of its work; but
it will do nothing, can do nothing, but as used by the heavenly workman.
To this is the reference in the next verse.

[Hebrews 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">heb 4:13</span></span>

Neither is there any creature that is not manifest - God, from whom this
word comes, and by whom it has all its efficacy, is infinitely wise. He
well knew how to construct his word, so as to suit it to the state of
all hearts; and he has given it that infinite fullness of meaning, so as
to suit it to all cases. And so infinite is he in his knowledge, and so
omnipresent is he, that the whole creation is constantly exposed to his
view; nor is there a creature of the affections, mind, or imagination,
that is not constantly under his eye. He marks every rising thought,
every budding desire; and such as these are supposed to be the creatures
to which the apostle particularly refers, and which are called, in the
preceding verse, the propensities and suggestions of the heart.

But all things are naked and opened - Παντα δε γυμνα και τετραχηλισμενα.
It has been supposed that the phraseology here is sacrificial, the
apostle referring to the case, of slaying and preparing a victim to be
offered to God.

1\. It is slain;

2\. It is flayed, so it is naked;

3\. It is cut open, so that all the intestines are exposed to view;

4\. It is carefully inspected by the priest, to see that all is sound
before any part is offered to him who has prohibited all imperfect and
diseased offerings; and,

5\. It is divided exactly into two equal parts, by being split down the
chine from the nose to the rump; and so exactly was this performed, that
the spinal marrow was cloven down the center, one half lying in the
divided cavity of each side of the backbone. This is probably the
metaphor in [Ti2 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#015) (note).

But there is reason to suspect that this is not the metaphor here. The
verb τραχηλιζω, from which the apostle's τετραχηλισμενα comes, signifies
to have the neck bent back so as to expose the face to full view, that
every feature might be seen; and this was often done with criminals, in
order that they might be the better recognized and ascertained. To this
custom Pliny refers in the very elegant and important panegyric which he
delivered on the Emperor Trajan, about a.d. 103, when the emperor had
made him consul; where, speaking of the great attention which Trajan
paid to the public morals, and the care he took to extirpate informers,
etc., he says: Nihil tamen gratius, nihil saeculo dignius, quam quod
contigit desuper intueri delatorum supina ora, retortasque cervices.
Agnoscebamus et fruebamur, cum velut piaculares publicae sollicitudinis
victimae, supra sanguinem noxiorum ad lenta supplicia gravioresque
poenas ducerentur. Plin. Paneg., cap. 34. "There is nothing, however, in
this age which affects us more pleasingly, nothing more deservedly, than
to behold from above the supine faces and reverted necks of the
informers. We thus knew them, and were gratified when, as expiatory
victims of the public disquietude, they were led away to lingering
punishments, and sufferings more terrible than even the blood of the
guilty."

The term was also used to describe the action of wrestlers who, when
they could, got their hand under the chin of their antagonists, and
thus, by bending both the head and neck, could the more easily give them
a fall; this stratagem is sometimes seen in ancient monuments. But some
suppose that it refers to the custom of dragging them by the neck.
Diogenes the philosopher, observing one who had been victor in the
Olympic games often fixing his eyes upon a courtezan, said, in allusion
to this custom: Ιδε κριον αρειμανιον, ὡς ὑπο του τυχοντος κορασιου
τραχηλιζεται. "See how this mighty champion (martial ram) is drawn by
the neck by a common girl." See Stanley, page 305.

With whom we have to do - Προς ὁν ἡμιν ὁ λογος· To whom we must give an
account. He is our Judge, and is well qualified to be so, as all our
hearts and actions are naked and open to him.

This is the true meaning of λογος in this place; and it is used in
precisely the same meaning in [Mat
12:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#036); [Mat
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#023); [Luk
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#002). [Rom
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#012) : So then every one of us λογον
δωσει, shall give an account of himself to God. And [Heb
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#017) : They watch for your souls, ὡς
λογον αποδωσοντες, as those who must give account. We translate the
words, With whom we have to do; of which, though the phraseology is
obsolete, yet the meaning is nearly the same. To whom a worde to us, is
the rendering of my old MS. and Wiclif. Of whom we speake, is the
version of our other early translators.

[Hebrews 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">heb 4:14</span></span>

Seeing then that we have a great high priest - It is contended, and very
properly, that the particle ουν, which we translate seeing, as if what
followed was an immediate inference from what the apostle had been
speaking, should be translated now; for the apostle, though he had
before mentioned Christ as the High Priest of our profession, [Heb
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#001), and as the High Priest who made
reconciliation for the sins of the people, [Heb
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#017), does not attempt to prove this
in any of the preceding chapters, but now enters upon that point, and
discusses it at great length to the end of chap. 10.

After all, it is possible that this may be a resumption of the discourse
from [Heb 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#006); the rest of that
chapter, and the preceding thirteen verses of this, being considered as
a parenthesis. These parts left out, the discourse runs on with perfect
connection. It is very likely that the words, here, are spoken to meet
an objection of those Jews who wished the Christians of Palestine to
apostatize: "You have no tabernacle - no temple - no high priest - no
sacrifice for sin. Without these there can be no religion; return
therefore to us, who have the perfect temple service appointed - by
God." To these he answers: We have a High Priest who is passed into the
heavens, Jesus, the Son of God; therefore let us hold fast our
profession. See on [Heb 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#001) (note), to
which this verse seems immediately to refer.

Three things the apostle professes to prove in this epistle: -

1\. That Christ is greater than the angels.

2\. That he is greater than Moses.

3\. That he is greater than Aaron, and all high priests.

The two former arguments, with their applications and illustrations, he
has already despatched; and now he enters on the third. See the preface
to this epistle.

The apostle states,

1\. That we have a high priest.

2\. That this high priest is Jesus, the Son of God; not a son or
descendant of Aaron, nor coming in that way, but in a more transcendent
line.

3\. Aaron and his successors could only pass into the holy of holies,
and that once a year; but our High Priest has passed into the heavens,
of which that was only the type. There is an allusion here to the high
priest going into the holy of holies on the great day of atonement.

1\. He left the congregation of the people.

2\. He passed through the veil into the holy place, and was not seen
even by the priests.

3\. He entered through the second veil into the holy of holies, where
was the symbol of the majesty of God. Jesus, our High Priest,

1\. Left the people at large.

2\. He left his disciples by ascending up through the visible heavens,
the clouds, as a veil, screening him from their sight.

3\. Having passed through these veils, he went immediately to be our
Intercessor: thus he passed ουρανους, the visible or ethereal heavens,
into the presence of the Divine Majesty; through the heavens,
διεληλυθοτα τους ουρανους, and the empyreum, or heaven of heavens.

[Hebrews 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">heb 4:15</span></span>

For we have not a high priest - To the objection, "Your High Priest, if
entered into the heavens, can have no participation with you, and no
sympathy for you, because out of the reach of human feelings and
infirmities," he answers: Ου γαρ εχομεν Αρχιερεα μη δυναμενον συμπαθησαι
ταις ασθενειαις ἡμων· We have not a high priest who cannot sympathize
with our weakness. Though he be the Son of God, as to his human nature,
and equal in his Divine nature with God; yet, having partaken of human
nature, and having submitted to all its trials and distresses, and being
in all points tempted like as we are, without feeling or consenting to
sin; he is able to succor them that are tempted. See [Heb
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#018), and the note there.

The words κατα παντα καθ' ὁμοιοτητα might be translated, in all points
according to the likeness, i.e. as far as his human nature could bear
affinity to ours; for, though he had a perfect human body and human
soul, yet that body was perfectly tempered; it was free from all morbid
action, and consequently from all irregular movements. His mind, or
human soul, being free from all sin, being every way perfect, could feel
no irregular temper, nothing that was inconsistent with infinite purity.
In all these respects he was different from us; and cannot, as man,
sympathize with us in any feelings of this kind: but, as God, he has
provided support for the body under all its trials and infirmities, and
for the soul he has provided an atonement and purifying sacrifice; so
that he cleanses the heart from all unrighteousness, and fills the soul
with his Holy Spirit, and makes it his own temple and continual
habitation. He took our flesh and blood, a human body and a human soul,
and lived a human life. Here was the likeness of sinful flesh, [Rom
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#005); and by thus assuming human
nature, he was completely qualified to make an atonement for the sins of
the world.

[Hebrews 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">heb 4:16</span></span>

Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace - The allusion to
the high priest, and his office on the day of atonement, is here kept
up. The approach mentioned here is to the כפרת kapporeth, ἱλαστηριον,
the propitiatory or mercy-seat. This was the covering of the ark of the
testimony or covenant, at each end of which was a cherub, and between
them the shechinah, or symbol of the Divine Majesty, which appeared to,
and conversed with, the high priest. Here the apostle shows the great
superiority of the privileges of the new testament above those of the
old; for there the high priest only, and he with fear and trembling, was
permitted to approach; and that not without the blood of the victim; and
if in any thing he transgressed, he might expect to be struck with
death. The throne of grace in heaven answers to this propitiatory, but
to this All may approach who feel their need of salvation; and they may
approach μετα παρῥησιας, with freedom, confidence, liberty of speech, in
opposition to the fear and trembling of the Jewish high priest. Here,
nothing is to be feared, provided the heart be right with God, truly
sincere, and trusting alone in the sacrificial blood.

That we may obtain mercy - Ἱνα λαβωμεν ελεον· That we may take mercy -
that we may receive the pardon of all our sins; there is mercy for the
taking. As Jesus Christ tasted death for every man, so every man may go
to that propitiatory, and take the mercy that is suited to his degree of
guilt.

And find grace - Mercy refers to the pardon of sin, and being brought
into the favor of God. Grace is that by which the soul is supported
after it has received this mercy, and by which it is purified from all
unrighteousness, and upheld in all trials and difficulties, and enabled
to prove faithful unto death.

To help in time of need - Εις ευκαιρον βοηθειαν· For a seasonable
support; that is, support when necessary, and as necessary, and in due
proportion to the necessity. The word βονθεια is properly rendered
assistance, help, or support; but it is an assistance in consequence of
the earnest cry of the person in distress, for the word signifies to run
at the cry, θειν εις βοην, or επι βοην θειν. So, even at the throne of
grace, or great propitiatory, no help can be expected where there is no
cry, and where there is no cry there is no felt necessity; for he that
feels he is perishing will cry aloud for help, and to such a cry the
compassionate High Priest will run; and the time of need is the time in
which God will show mercy; nor will he ever delay it when it is
necessary. We are not to cry to-day to be helped to-morrow, or at some
indefinite time, or at the hour of death. We are to call for mercy and
grace when we need them; and we are to expect to receive them when we
call. This is a part of our liberty or boldness; we come up to the
throne, and we call aloud for mercy, and God hears and dispenses the
blessing we need.

That this exhortation of the apostle may not be lost on us, let us
consider: -

1\. That there is a throne of grace, i.e. a propitiatory, the place
where God and man are to meet.

2\. That this propitiatory or mercy-seat is sprinkled with the atoning
blood of that Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the world.

3\. That we must come up, προσερχωμεθα, to this throne; and this implies
faith in the efficacy of the sacrifice.

4\. That we must call aloud on God for his mercy, if we expect him to
run to our assistance.

5\. That we must feel our spiritual necessities, in order to our calling
with fervency and earnestness.

6\. That calling thus we shall infallibly get what we want; for in
Christ Jesus, as a sacrificial offering, God is ever well pleased; and
he is also well pleased with all who take refuge in the atonement which
he has made.

7\. That thus coming, feeling, and calling, we may have the utmost
confidence; for we have boldness, liberty of access, freedom of speech;
may plead with our Maker without fear; and expect all that heaven has to
bestow; because Jesus, who died, sitteth upon the throne! Hallelujah!
the Lord God Omnipotent reigneth.

8\. All these are reasons why we should persevere.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 5](heb005)

</div>
