<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hebrews Index](heb)  
  [Previous](heb002)  [Next](heb004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#001)

[Hebrews](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">heb 3:0</span></span>

Jesus is the High Priest of our profession, [Heb
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#001). And is counted worthy of more
honor than Moses, as the Son Israelites did, and were excluded from the
earthly rest in Canaan, [Heb 3:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#007).
We should be on our guard against unbelief, [Heb
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#012). And exhort each other, lest we
be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin; and we should hold fast
the beginning of our confidence to the end, and not provoke God as the
Israelites did, and who were destroyed in the wilderness, [Heb
3:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#013). They were promised the
earthly rest, but did not enter because of unbelief, [Heb
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#018), [Heb
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#019).

[Hebrews 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 3:1</span></span>

Holy brethren - Persons consecrated to God, as the word literally
implies, and called, in consequence, to be holy in heart, holy in life,
and useful in the world. The Israelites are often called a holy people,
saints, etc., because consecrated to God, and because they were bound by
their profession to be holy; and yet these appellations are given to
them in numberless instances where they were very unholy. The not
attending to this circumstance, and the not discerning between actual
positive holiness, and the call to it, as the consecration of the
persons, has led many commentators and preachers into destructive
mistakes. Antinomianism has had its origin here: and as it was found
that many persons were called saints, who, in many respects, were
miserable sinners, hence it has been inferred that they were called
saints in reference to a holiness which they had in another; and hence
the Antinomian imputation of Christ's righteousness to unholy believers,
whose hearts were abominable before God, and whose lives were a scandal
to the Gospel. Let, therefore, a due distinction be made between persons
by their profession holy, i.e. consecrated to God; and persons who are
faithful to that profession, and are both inwardly and outwardly holy.
They are not all Israel who are of Israel: a man, by a literal
circumcision, may be a Jew outwardly; but the circumcision of the heart
by the Spirit makes a man a Jew inwardly. A man may be a Christian in
profession, and not such in heart; and those who pretend that, although
they are unholy in themselves, they are reputed holy in Christ, because
his righteousness is imputed to them, most awfully deceive their own
souls.

Dr. Owen has spoken well on the necessity of personal holiness against
the Antinomians of his day. "If a man be not made holy he cannot enter
into the kingdom of God. It is this that makes them meet for the
inheritance of the saints in light; as without it they are not meet for
their duty, so are they not capable of their reward. Yea, heaven itself,
in the true light and notion of it, is undesirable to an unsanctified
person. Such a one neither can nor would enjoy God if he might. In a
word, there is no one thing required of the sons of God that an
unsanctified person can do, and no one thing promised unto them that he
can enjoy.

"There is surely then a woful mistake in the world. If Christ sanctify
all whom he saves, many will appear to have been mistaken in their
expectations at another day. It is grown amongst us almost an abhorrency
to all flesh to say, the Church of God is to be holy. What! though God
has promised that it should be so; that Christ has undertaken to make it
so? What! if it be required to be so? What! if all the duties of it be
rejected of God, if it be not so? It is all one, if men be baptized,
whether they will or not, and outwardly profess the name of Christ,
though not one of them be truly sanctified, yet they are, it is said,
the Church of Christ. Why then let them be so; but what are they the
better for it? Are their persons or their services therefore accepted
with God? Are they related or united to Christ? Are they under his
conduct unto glory? Are they meet for the inheritance of the saints in
light? Not at all: not all nor any of these things do they obtain
thereby. What is it then that they get by the furious contest which they
make for the reputation of this privilege? Only this: that, satisfying
their minds by it, resting if not priding themselves in it, they obtain
many advantages to stifle all convictions of their condition, and so
perish unavoidably. A sad success, and for ever to be bewailed! Yet is
there nothing at all at this day more contended for in this world than
that Christ might be thought to be a captain of salvation to them, unto
whom he is not a sanctifier; that he may have an unholy Church, a dead
body. These things tend neither to the glory of Christ, nor to the good
of the souls of men. Let none then deceive themselves; sanctification is
a qualification indispensably necessary to them who will be under the
conduct of the Lord Christ unto salvation; he leads none to heaven but
whom he sanctifies on earth. The holy God will not receive unholy
persons. This living head will not admit of dead members, nor bring men
into possession of a glory which they neither love nor like."

Heavenly calling - The Israelites had an earthly calling; they were
called out of Egypt to go into the promised land: Christians have a
heavenly calling; they are invited to leave the bondage of sin, and go
to the kingdom of God. These were made partakers of this calling; they
had already embraced the Gospel, and were brought into a state of
salvation.

Apostle and High Priest of our profession - Among the Jews the high
priest was considered to be also the apostle of God; and it is in
conformity to this notion that the apostle speaks. And he exhorts the
Hebrews to consider Jesus Christ to be both their High Priest and
Apostle; and to expect these offices to be henceforth fulfilled by him,
and by him alone. This was the fullest intimation that the Mosaic
economy was at an end, and the priesthood changed. By της ὁμολογιας
ἡμων, our profession, or that confession of ours, the apostle
undoubtedly means the Christian religion. Jesus was the Apostle of the
Father, and has given to mankind the new covenant; and we are to
consider the whole system of Christianity as coming immediately from
him. Every system of religion must have a priest and a prophet; the one
to declare the will of God, the other to minister in holy things. Moses
was the apostle under the old testament, and Aaron the priest. When
Moses was removed, the prophets succeeded him; and the sons of Aaron
were the priests after the death of their father. This system is now
annulled; and Jesus is the Prophet who declares the Father's will, and
he is the Priest who ministers in the things pertaining to God, see [Heb
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#017); as he makes atonement for the
sins of the people, and is the Mediator between God and man.

[Hebrews 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">heb 3:2</span></span>

Who was faithful to him - In [Num
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#007), God gives this testimony to
Moses: My servant Moses - is faithful in all my house; and to this
testimony the apostle alludes. House not only means the place where a
family dwells, but also the family itself. The whole congregation of
Israel was the house or family of God, and God is represented as
dwelling among them; and Moses was his steward, and was faithful in the
discharge of his office; strictly enforcing the Divine rights; zealously
maintaining God's honor; carefully delivering the mind and will of God
to the people; proclaiming his promises, and denouncing his judgments,
with the most inflexible integrity, though often at the risk of his
life. Jesus Christ has his house - the whole great family of mankind,
for all of whom he offered his sacrificial blood to God; and the
Christian Church, which is especially his own household, is composed of
his own children and servants, among and in whom he lives and constantly
resides. He has been faithful to the trust reposed in him as the apostle
of God; he has faithfully proclaimed the will of the Most High;
vindicated the Divine honor against the corrupters of God's worship;
testified against them at the continual hazard of his life; and, at
last, not only died as a victim to cancel sin, but also as a martyr to
his faithfulness. Christ's faithfulness, says Leigh, consists in this:
"That he has as fully revealed unto us the doctrine of the Gospel, as
Moses did that of the law; and that he hath faithfully performed and
fulfilled all the types of himself and all the things signified by
Moses' ceremonies, as Moses hath faithfully and distinctly set them
down."

But there is a sense given to the word נאמן neeman, [Num
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#007), which we translate faithful, by
several of the Jewish writers, which is well worthy of note: it
signifies, say they, "one to whom secrets are confided, with the utmost
confidence of their being safely and conscientiously kept." The secret
of God was with Moses, but all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge
were in Christ. Life and immortality were comparatively secrets till
Christ revealed and illustrated them, and even the Divine nature was but
little known, and especially the Divine philanthropy, till Jesus Christ
came; and it was Jesus alone who declared that God whom no man had ever
seen. Moses received the secrets of God, and faithfully taught them to
the people; Jesus revealed the whole will of God to mankind. Moses was
thus faithful to a small part of mankind, viz. the Jewish people; but in
this sense Jesus was faithful to all mankind: for he was the light to
enlighten the Gentiles, and the glory of his people Israel.

[Hebrews 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">heb 3:3</span></span>

For this man was counted - As Jesus Christ, in the character of apostle
and high priest, is here intended, the word apostle, or this person or
personage, should have been supplied, if any, instead of man. Indeed,
the pronoun οὑτος should have been translated this person, and this
would have referred immediately to Jesus Christ, [Heb
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#001).

More glory than Moses - We have already seen that the apostle's design
is to prove that Jesus Christ is higher than the angels, higher than
Moses, and higher than Aaron. That he is higher than the angels has been
already proved; that he is higher than Moses he is now proving.

He who hath builded the house - There can be no doubt that a man who
builds a house for his own accommodation is more honorable than the
house itself; but the house here intended is the Church of God. This
Church, here called a house or family, is built by Christ; he is the
Head, Governor, Soul and Life of it; he must therefore be greater than
Moses, who was only a member and officer in that Church, who never put a
stone in this spiritual building but was even himself put in it by the
great Architect. Moses was in this house, and faithful in this house;
but the house was the house of God, and builded and governed by Christ.

[Hebrews 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">heb 3:4</span></span>

For every house is builded by some man - The literal sense is plain
enough: "Every structure plainly implies an, architect, and an end for
which it was formed. The architect may be employed by him for whose use
the house is intended; but the efficient cause of the erection is that
which is here to he regarded." The word house, here, is still taken in a
metaphorical sense as above, it signifies family or Church. Now the
general meaning of the words, taken in this sense, is: "Every family has
an author, and a head or governor. Man may found families, civil and
religious communities, and be the head of these; but God alone is the
Head, Author, and Governor, of all the families of the earth; he is the
Governor of the universe. But the apostle has a more restricted meaning
in the words τα παντα, all these things; and as he has been treating of
the Jewish and Christian Churches, so he appears to have them in view
here. Who could found the Jewish and Christian Church but God? Who could
support, govern, influence, and defend them, but himself? Communities or
societies, whether religious or civil, may be founded by man; but God
alone can build his own Church. Now as all these things could be builded
only by God, so he must be God who has built all these things. But as
Jesus is the Founder of the Church, and the Head of it, the word God
seems here to be applied to him; and several eminent scholars and
critics bring this very text as a proof of the supreme Deity of Christ:
and the apostle's argument seems to require this; for, as he is proving
that Christ is preferred before Moses because he built this house, which
Moses could not do, where he to be understood as intimating that this
house was built by another, viz. the Father, his whole argument would
fall to the ground; and for all this, Moses might be equal, yea,
superior to Christ. On this ground Dr. Owen properly concludes: "This
then is that which the apostle intends to declare; namely, the ground
and reason whence it is that the house was or could be, in that glorious
manner, built by Christ, even because he is God, and so able to effect
it; and by this effect of his power, he is manifested so to be."

[Hebrews 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">heb 3:5</span></span>

As a servant - The fidelity of Moses was the fidelity of a servant; he
was not the framer of that Church or house; he was employed, under God,
to arrange and order it: he was steward to the Builder and Owner.

For a testimony of those things - Every ordinance under the law was
typical; every thing bore a testimony to the things which were to be
spoken after; i.e. to Jesus Christ, his suffering, death, and the glory
which should follow; and to his Gospel in all its parts. The
faithfulness of Moses consisted in his scrupulous attention to every
ordinance of God; his framing every thing according to the pattern
showed him by the Lord; and his referring all to that Christ of whom he
spoke as the prophet who should come after him, and should be raised up
from among themselves; whom they should attentively hear and obey, on
pain of being cut off from being the people of the Lord. Hence our Lord
told the Jews, [Joh 5:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#046) : If ye had
believed Moses, ye would have believed me, for he wrote of me; "namely;"
says Dr. Macknight, "in the figures, but especially in the prophecies,
of the law, where the Gospel dispensation, the coming of its Author, and
his character as Messiah, are all described with a precision which adds
the greatest lustre of evidence to Jesus and to his Gospel."

[Hebrews 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">heb 3:6</span></span>

But Christ as a Son over his own house - Moses was faithful as a servant
In the house; Jesus was faithful, as the first-born Son, Over the house
of which he is the Heir and Governor. Here, then, is the conclusion of
the argument in reference to Christ's superiority over Moses. Moses did
not found the house or family, Christ did; Moses was but in the house,
or one of the family, Christ was over the house as its Ruler; Moses was
but servant in the house, Christ was the Son and Heir; Moses was in the
house of another, Christ in his own house.

It is well known to every learned reader that the pronoun αυτου, without
an aspirate, signifies his simply; and that with the aspirate, αὑτου, it
signifies his own: the word being in this form a contraction, not
uncommon, of ἑαυτου. If we read αυτου without the aspirate, then his
must refer to God, [Heb 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#004).

But Christ as a Son over his (that is, God's) house: if we read αὑτου,
with the aspirate, as some editions do, then what is spoken refers to
Christ; and the words above convey the same sense as those words, [Act
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028) : Feed the Church of God, which
he hath purchased with his own blood. Some editions read the word thus;
and it is evident that the edition which our translators used had the
word αὑτου, his own, and not αυτου, his. The Spanish and London
Polyglots have the same reading. From the most ancient MSS. we can get
no help to determine which is to be preferred, as they are generally
written without accents. The two first editions of the Greek Testament,
that of Complutum, 1514, and that of Erasmus, 1516, have αυτου, his; and
they are followed by most other editions: but the celebrated edition of
Robert Stephens, 1550, has αὑτου, his own. The reading is certainly
important; but it belongs to one of those difficulties in criticism
which, if the context or collateral evidence do not satisfactorily solve
it, must remain in doubt; and every reader is at liberty to adopt which
reading he thinks best.

Whose house are we - We Christians are his Church and family; he is our
Father, Governor, and Head.

If we hold fast the confidence - We are now his Church, and shall
continue to be such, and be acknowledged by him If we maintain our
Christian profession, την παρῥησιαν, that liberty of access to God,
which we now have, and the rejoicing of the hope, i.e. of eternal life,
which we shall receive at the resurrection of the dead. The word
παρῥησια, which is here translated confidence, and which signifies
freedom of speech, liberty of access, etc., seems to be used here to
distinguish an important Christian privilege. Under the old testament no
man was permitted to approach to God: even the very mountain on which
God published his laws must not be touched by man nor beast; and only
the high priest was permitted to enter the holy of holies, and that only
once a year, on the great day of atonement; and even then he must have
the blood of the victim to propitiate the Divine justice. Under the
Christian dispensation the way to the holiest is now laid open; and we
have παρῥησιαν, liberty of access, even to the holiest, by the blood of
Jesus. Having such access unto God, by such a Mediator, we may obtain
all that grace which is necessary to fit us for eternal glory; and,
having the witness of his Spirit in our heart, we have a well grounded
hope of endless felicity, and exult in the enjoyment of that hope. But
If we retain not the grace, we shall not inherit the glory.

[Hebrews 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">heb 3:7</span></span>

Wherefore (as the Holy Ghost saith, Today - These words are quoted from
[Psa 95:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#007); and as they were written by
David, and attributed here to the Holy Ghost, it proves that David
wrote, by the inspiration of God's Holy Spirit. As these words were
originally a warning to the Israelites not to provoke God, lest they
should be excluded from that rest which he had promised them, the
apostle uses them here to persuade the Christians in Palestine to hold
fast their religious privileges, and, the grace they had received, lest
they should come short of that state of future glory which Christ had
prepared for them. The words strongly imply, as indeed does the whole
epistle, the possibility of falling from the grace of God, and perishing
everlastingly; and without this supposition these words, and all such
like, which make more than two-thirds of the whole of Divine revelation,
would have neither sense nor meaning. Why should God entreat man to
receive his mercy, if he have rendered this impossible? Why should he
exhort a believer to persevere, if it be impossible for him to fall
away? What contemptible quibbling have men used to maintain a false and
dangerous tenet against the whole tenor of the word of God! Angels fell
- Adam fell - Solomon fell - and multitudes of believers have fallen,
and, for aught we know, rose no more; and yet we are told that we cannot
finally lose the benefits of our conversion! Satan preached this
doctrine to our first parents; they believed him, sinned, and fell; and
brought a whole world to ruin!

[Hebrews 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">heb 3:8</span></span>

Harden not your hearts - Which ye will infallibly do, if ye will not
hear his voice.

Provocation - Παραπικρασμος· From παρα, signifying intensity, and
πικραινω, to make bitter; the exasperation, or bitter provocation. "The
Israelites provoked God first in the wilderness of Sin, (Pelusium), when
they murmured for want of bread, and had the manna given them, [Exo
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#004). From the wilderness of Sin they
journeyed to Rephidim, where they provoked God a second time for want of
water, and insolently saying, Is the Lord God among us or not? [Exo
17:2-9](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#002), on which account the place was
called Massah and Meribah. See [Co1
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004) (note), note 1. From Rephidim
they went into the wilderness of Sinai, where they received the law, in
the beginning of the third year from their coming out of Egypt. Here
they provoked God again, by making the golden calf, [Exo
32:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#010). After the law was given they
were commanded to go directly to Canaan, and take possession of the
promised land, [Deu 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#006), [Deu
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#007) : God spake unto us in Horeb,
saying, Ye have dwelt long enough in this mount: turn you, and take your
journey, and go to the mount of the Amorites, and unto all the places
nigh thereunto, in the plain, in the hills, and in the vales, and in the
south, and by the seaside, to the land if the Canaanites, and unto
Lebanon, and unto the great river, the river Euphrates. The Israelites,
having received this order, departed from Horeb, and went forward three
days' journey, [Num 10:33](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#033), till they
came to Taberah, [Num 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#003), where they
provoked God the fourth time, by murmuring for want of flesh to eat; and
for that sin were smitten with a very great plague, [Num
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#033); this place was called
Kibroth-hattaavah, because there they buried the people who lusted. From
Kibroth-hattaavah they went to Hazeroth, [Num
11:35](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#035), and from thence into the
wilderness of Paran, [Num 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#016), to a
place called Kadesh, [Num 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#026). Their
journey from Horeb to Kadesh is thus described by Moses, [Deu
1:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#019) : And when we departed from
Horeb, we went through all that great and terrible wilderness, which you
saw by the way of the mountain of the Amorites, as the Lord our God
commanded us; and, we came to Kadesh-barnea. And I said unto you, Ye are
come unto the mountain of the Amorites, which the Lord our God doth give
unto us. Behold, the Lord thy God hath set the land before thee; go up
and possess it. But the people proposed to Moses to send spies, to bring
them an account of the land, and of its inhabitants, [Deu
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#022). These after forty days returned
to Kadesh; and, except Caleb and Joshua, they all agreed in bringing an
evil report of the land, [Num
13:25-32](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#025); whereby the people were so
discouraged that they refused to go up, and proposed to make a captain,
and return into Egypt, [Num 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#004).
Wherefore, having thus shown an absolute disbelief of God's promises,
and an utter distrust of his power, he sware that not one of that
generation should enter Canaan, except Caleb and Joshua, but should all
die in the wilderness, [Num 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#020);
[Deu 1:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#034), [Deu
1:35](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#035); and ordered them to turn, and
get into the wilderness, by the way of the Red Sea. In that wilderness
the Israelites, as Moses informs us, sojourned thirty-eight years, [Deu
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#014) : And the space in which we came
from Kadesh-barnea, until we were come over the brook Zereb, was thirty
and eight years; until all the generation of the men of war were wasted
out from among the host, as the Lord sware unto them. Wherefore,
although the Israelites provoked God to wrath in the wilderness, from
the day they came out of the land of Egypt until their arrival in
Canaan, as Moses told them, [Deu 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#007),
their greatest provocation, the provocation in which they showed the
greatest degree of evil disposition, undoubtedly was their refusing to
go into Canaan from Kadesh. It was therefore very properly termed the
bitter provocation and the day of temptation, by way of eminence; and
justly brought on them the oath of God, excluding them from his rest in
Canaan. To distinguish this from the provocation at Rephidim, it is
called Meribah-Kadesh," [Deu 32:51](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#051).
See Dr. Macknight.

[Hebrews 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">heb 3:9</span></span>

When your fathers tempted me - It would be better to translate οὑ where
than when, as the Vulgate has done in its ubi; and this translation has
been followed by Wiclif, Coverdale, Tindal, and our first translators in
general. In my old MS. Bible the 7th, 8th, and 9th verses stand thus: -

Wherefore as the Holy Gost seith, to-day gif yhe han herde his voyce:
nye yhe herden ghour hertis as in wrath-thinge, after the day of
temptacioun in desert. Where ghoure fadris temptiden me: provyden and
saiden my werkis. Wherefore fourtye yeere I was offendid or wrothe to
this generatoun.

In behalf of this translation, Dr. Macknight very properly argues: "The
word When implies that, at the time of the bitter provocation, the
Israelites had seen God's works forty years; contrary to the history,
which shows that the bitter provocation happened, in the beginning of
the third year after the Exodus: whereas the translation where, as well
as the matter of fact, represents God as saying, by David, that the
Israelites tempted God in the wilderness during forty years,
notwithstanding all that time they had seen God's miracles."

[Hebrews 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">heb 3:10</span></span>

Wherefore I was grieved - God represents himself as the Father of this
great Jewish family, for whose comfort and support he had made every
necessary provision, and to whom he had given every proof of tenderness
and fatherly affection; and because, they disobeyed him, and walked ill
that way in which they could not but be miserable, therefore he
represents himself as grieved and exceedingly displeased with them.

They do alway err in their hearts - Their affections are set on earthly
things, and they do not acknowledge my ways to be right - holy, just,
and good. They are radically evil; and they are evil, continually. They
have every proof, of my power and goodness, and lay nothing to heart.
They might have been saved, but they would not. God was grieved on this
account. Now, can we suppose that it would have grieved him if, by a
decree of his own, he had rendered their salvation impossible?

[Hebrews 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">heb 3:11</span></span>

So I sware in my wrath - God's grief at their continued disobedience
became wrath at their final impenitence, and therefore he excluded them
from the promised rest.

[Hebrews 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">heb 3:12</span></span>

Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you - Take warning by those
disobedient Israelites; they were brought out of the house of bondage,
and had the fullest promise of a land of prosperity and rest. By their
disobedience they came short of it, and fell in the wilderness. Ye have
been brought from the bondage of sin, and have a most gracious promise
of an everlasting inheritance among the saints in light; through
unbelief and disobedience they lost their rest, through the same ye may
lose yours. An evil heart of unbelief will head away from the living
God. What was possible in their case, is possible in yours. The apostle
shows here five degrees of apostasy:

1\. Consenting to sin, being deceived by its solicitations.

2\. Hardness of heart, through giving way to sin.

3\. Unbelief in consequence of this hardness which leads them to call
even the truth of the Gospel in question.

4\. This unbelief causing them to speak evil of the Gospel, and the
provision God has made for the salvation of their souls.

5\. Apostasy itself, or falling off from the living God; and thus
extinguishing all the light that was in them, and finally grieving the
Spirit of God, so that he takes his flight, and leaves them to a seared
conscience and reprobate mind.

See Leigh. He who begins to give the least way to sin is in danger of
final apostasy; the best remedy against this is to get the evil heart
removed, as one murderer in the house is more to be dreaded than ten
without.

[Hebrews 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">heb 3:13</span></span>

But exhort one another daily - This supposes a state of chose Church
fellowship, without which they could not have had access to each other.

While it is called to-day - Use time while you have: it, for by and by
there will be no more present time; all will be future; all will be
eternity. Daily signifies time continued. To-day, all present time. Your
fathers said: Let us make ourselves a captain, and return back unto
Egypt, [Num 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#004). Thus they exhorted
each other to depart from the living God. Be ye warned by their example;
let not that unbelieving heart be in you that was in them; exhort each
other daily to cleave to the living God; lest, if ye, do not, ye, like
them, may be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.

[Hebrews 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">heb 3:14</span></span>

For we are made partakers of Christ - Having believed in Christ as the
promised Messiah, and embraced the whole Christian system, they were
consequently made partakers of all its benefits in this life, and
entitled to the fulfillment of all its exceeding great and precious
promises relative to the glories of the eternal world. The former they
actually possessed, the latter they could have only in case of their
perseverance; therefore the apostle says, If we hold fast the beginning
of our confidence steadfast unto the end, i.e. of our life. For our
participation of glory depends on our continuing steadfast in the faith,
to the end of our Christian race.

The word ὑποστασις, which we here translate confidence, from ὑπο, under,
and ἱστημι, to place or stand, signifies properly a basis or foundation;
that on which something else is builded, and by which it is supported.
Their faith in Christ Jesus was this hypostasis or foundation; on that
all their peace, comfort, and salvation were builded. If this were not
held fast to the end, Christ, in his saving influences, could not be
held fast; and no Christ, no heaven. He who has Christ in him, has the
well-founded hope of glory; and he who is found in the great day with
Christ in his heart, will have an abundant entrance into eternal glory.

[Hebrews 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">heb 3:15</span></span>

While it is said, To-day - You may see the necessity of perseverance
from the saying, "Today, if ye will hear his voice," therefore harden
not your hearts - do not neglect so great a salvation; hold fast what ye
have obtained, and let no man take your crown. See on [Heb
3:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#007) (note) and [Heb
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#012) (note).

[Hebrews 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">heb 3:16</span></span>

For some, when they had heard, did provoke - There is a various reading
here, which consists merely in the different placing of an accent, and
yet gives the whole passage a different turn: - τινες, from τις, who, if
read with the accent on the epsilon, τινὲς, is the plural indefinite,
and signifies some, as in our translation; if read with the accent on
the iota, τίνες, it has an interrogative meaning; and, according to
this, the whole clause, τίνες γαρ ακουσαντες παρεπικραναν; But who were
those hearers who did bitterly provoke? αλλ' ου παντες οἱ εξελθοντες εξ
Αιγυπτου δια Μωσεως; Were they not all they who came out of the land of
Egypt by Moses? Or, the whole clause may be read with one interrogation:
But who were those hearers that did bitterly provoke, but all those who
came out of Egypt by Moses? This mode of reading is followed by some
editions, and by Chrysostom and Theodoret, and by several learned
moderns. It is more likely that this is the true reading, as all that
follows to the end of the 18th verse is a series of interrogations.

Should it be said that all did not provoke, for Joshua and Caleb are
expressly excepted; I answer, that the term all may be with great
propriety used, when out of many hundreds of thousands only two persons
were found who continued faithful. To these also we may add the priests
and the whole tribe of Levi, who, it is very likely, did not provoke;
for, as Dr. Macknight very properly remarks, they were not of the number
of those who were to fight their way into Canaan, being entirely devoted
to the service of the sanctuary. See [Num
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#003), [Num
1:45](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#045), and [Num
1:49](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#049). And therefore what remained of
them after forty years, no doubt, entered Canaan; for it appears from
[Num 34:17](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#017), and [Jos
24:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#033), that Eleazar, the son of Aaron,
was one of those who did take possession of Canaan. Should it be still
said our version appears to be most proper, because all did not provoke;
it may be answered, that the common reading, τινὲς, some, is too
contracted in its meaning to comprehend the hundreds of thousands who
did rebel.

[Hebrews 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">heb 3:17</span></span>

But with whom was he grieved forty years? - I believe it was Surenhusius
who first observed that "the apostle, in using the term forty years,
elegantly alludes to the space of time which had elapsed since the
ascension of our Lord till the time in which this epistle was written,
which was about forty years." But this does not exactly agree with what
appears to be the exact date of this epistle. However, God had now been
a long time provoked by that race rejecting the manifested Messiah, as
he was by the conduct of their forefathers in the wilderness; and as
that provocation was punished by a very signal judgment, so they might
expect this to be punished also. The analogy was perfect in the crimes,
and it might reasonably be expected to be so in the punishment. And was
not the destruction of Jerusalem a proof of the heinous nature of their
crimes, and of the justice of God's outpoured wrath?

Whose carcasses fell - Ὡν τα κωλα επεσεν· Whose members fell; for τα
κωλα properly signifies the members of the body, and here may be an
allusion to the scattered, bleached bones of this people, that were a
long time apparent in the wilderness, continuing there as a proof of
their crimes, and of the judgments of God.

[Hebrews 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">heb 3:18</span></span>

To whom sware he - God never acts by any kind of caprice; whenever he
pours out his judgments, there are the most positive reasons to
vindicate his conduct.

Those whose carcasses fell in the wilderness were they who had sinned.
And those who did not enter into his rest were those who believed not.
God is represented here as swearing that they should not enter in, in
order to show the determinate nature of his purpose, the reason on which
it was founded, and the height of the aggravation which occasioned it.

[Hebrews 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">heb 3:19</span></span>

So we see that they could not enter in - It was no decree of God that
prevented them, it was no want of necessary strength to enable them, it
was through no deficiency of Divine counsel to instruct them; all these
they had in abundance: but they chose to sin, and would not believe.
Unbelief produced disobedience, and disobedience produced hardness of
heart and blindness of mind; and all these drew down the judgments of
God, and wrath came upon them to the uttermost.

1\. This whole chapter, as the epistle in general, reads a most awful
lesson against backsliders, triflers, and loiterers in the way of
salvation. Every believer in Christ is in danger of apostasy, while any
remains of the evil heart of unbelief are found in him. God has promised
to purify the heart; and the blood of Christ cleanses from all sin. It
is therefore the highest wisdom of genuine Christians to look to God for
the complete purification of their souls; this they cannot have too
soon, and for this they cannot be too much in earnest.

2\. No man should defer his salvation to any future time. If God speaks
to-day, it is to-day that he should be heard and obeyed. To defer
reconciliation to God to any future period, is the most reprehensible
and destructive presumption. It supposes that God will indulge us in our
sensual propensities, and cause his mercy to tarry for us till we have
consummated our iniquitous purposes. It shows that we prefer, at least
for the present, the devil to Christ, sin to holiness, and earth to
heaven. And can we suppose that God will be thus mocked? Can we suppose
that it can at all consistent with his mercy to extend forgiveness to
such abominable provocation? What a man sows that shall he reap. If he
sows to the flesh, he shall of the flesh reap corruption. Reader, it is
a dreadful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

3\. Unbelief has generally been considered the most damning of all sins.
I wish those who make this assertion would condescend to explain
themselves. What is this unbelief that damns and ruins mankind? Their
not permitting their minds to be persuaded of the truths which God
speaks. Απιστια, from α, negative, and πιστις, faith, signifies
faithless or to be without faith. And this is an effect from another
cause. In [Heb 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#011), these very people
are said to have fallen through unbelief; but there the word is
απειθεια, from α, negative, and πειθω, to persuade. They heard the
Divine instructions, they saw God's stupendous miracles; but they would
not suffer themselves to be persuaded, that he who said and did such
things would perform those other things which he had either threatened
or promised: hence they had no faith, because they were unpersuaded; and
their unbelief was the effect of their unpersuaded or unpersuadable
mind. And their minds were not persuaded of God's truth, because they
had ears open only to the dictates of the flesh; see on [Heb
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#002) (note). Here then is the damning
sin, the not inferring, from what God has said and done, that he will do
those other things which he has either threatened or promised. And how
few are there who are not committing this sin daily! Reader, dost thou
in this state dream of heaven? Awake out of sleep!

4\. Where there are so many snares and dangers it is impossible to be
too watchful and circumspect. Satan, as a roaring lion, as a subtle
serpent, or in the guise of an angel of light, is momentarily going
about seeking whom he may deceive, blind, and devour; and, when it is
considered that the human heart, till entirely renewed, is on his side,
it is a miracle of mercy that any soul escapes perdition: no man is safe
any longer than he maintains the spirit of watchfulness and prayer; and
to maintain such a spirit, he has need of all the means of grace. He who
neglects any of them which the mercy of God has placed in his power,
tempts the devil to tempt him. As a preventive of backsliding and
apostasy, the apostle recommends mutual exhortation. No Christian should
live for himself alone; he should consider his fellow Christian as a
member of the same body, and feel for him accordingly, and have, succor,
and protect him. When this is carefully attended to in religious
society, Satan finds it very difficult to make an inroad on the Church;
but when coldness, distance, and a want of brotherly love take place,
Satan can attack each singly, and, by successive victories over
individuals, soon make an easy conquest of the whole.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 4](heb004)

</div>
