<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hebrews Index](heb)  
  [Previous](heb008)  [Next](heb010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#001)

[Hebrews](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">heb 9:0</span></span>

Of the first covenant, and its ordinances, [Heb
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#001). The tabernacle, candlestick,
table, show-bread, veil, holy of holies, censer, ark, pot of manna,
Aaron's rod, tables of the covenant, cherubim of glory, and mercy seat,
[Heb 9:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#002). How the priests served,
[Heb 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#006), [Heb
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#007). What was signified by the
service, [Heb 9:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#008). The superior
excellency of Christ's ministry and sacrifice, and the efficacy of his
blood, vv. 11-26. As men must once die and be judged, so Christ was once
offered to bear the sins of many, and shall come without a sin-offering,
a second time, to them that expect him, [Heb
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#027), [Heb
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#028).

[Hebrews 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 9:1</span></span>

The first covenant had also ordinances - Our translators have introduced
the word covenant, as if διαθηκη had been, if not originally in the
text, yet in the apostle's mind. Several MSS., but not of good note, as
well as printed editions, with the Coptic version, have σκηνη
tabernacle; but this is omitted by ABDE, several others, both the
Syriac, Ethiopic, Armenian, Vulgate, some copies of the Itala, and
several of the Greek fathers; it is in all probability a spurious
reading, the whole context showing that covenant is that to which the
apostle refers, as that was the subject in the preceding chapter, and
this is a continuation of the same discourse.

Ordinances - Δικαιωματα· Rites and ceremonies.

A worldly sanctuary - Ἁγιον κοσμικον. It is supposed that the term
worldly, here, is opposed to the term heavenly, [Heb
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#005); and that the whole should be
referred to the carnality or secular nature of the tabernacle service.
But I think there is nothing plainer than that the apostle is speaking
here in praise of this sublimely emblematic service, and hence he
proceeds to enumerate the various things contained in the first
tabernacle, which added vastly to its splendor and importance; such as
the table of the show-bread, the golden candlestick, the golden censer,
the ark of the covenant overlaid round about with gold, in which was the
golden pot that had the manna, Aaron's rod that budded, and the two
tables which God had written with his own finger: hence I am led to
believe that κοσμικος is here taken in its proper, natural meaning, and
signifies adorned, embellished, splendid; and hence κοσμος, the world:
Tota hujus universi machina, coelum et terram complectens et quicquid
utroque contineter, κοσμος dicitur, quod nihil ea est mundius,
pulchrius, et ornatius. "The whole machine of this universe,
comprehending the heavens and the earth, and whatsoever is contained in
both, is called κοσμος, because nothing is more beautiful, more fair,
and more elegant." So Pliny, Hist. Nat., l. ii. c. 5: Nam quem κοσμον
Graeci nomine ornamenti appellaverunt, eum nos a perfecta absolutaque
elegantia, Mundum. "That which the Greeks call κοσμος, ornament, we,
(the Latins), from its perfect and absolute elegance call mundum,
world." See on [Gen 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#001) (note).

The Jews believe that the tabernacle was an epitome of the world; and it
is remarkable, when speaking of their city, that they express this
sentiment by the same Greek word, in Hebrew letters, which the apostle
uses here: so in Bereshith Rabba, s. 19, fol. 19: כל קוזמיקון שלו שם הוא
col kozmikon (κοσμικον) shelo sham hu. "All his world is placed there."
Philo says much to the same purpose.

If my exposition be not admitted, the next most likely is, that God has
a worldly tabernacle as well as a heavenly one; that he as truly dwelt
in the Jewish tabernacle as he did in the heaven of heavens; the one
being his worldly house, the other his heavenly house.

[Hebrews 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">heb 9:2</span></span>

For there was a tabernacle made; the first, wherein - The sense is here
very obscure, and the construction involved: leaving out all
punctuation, which is the case with all the very ancient MSS., the verse
stands thus: Σκηνη γαρ κατεσκευασθη ἡ πρωτη εν ᾑ ἡ τε λυχνια, κ. τ. λ.
which I suppose an indifferent person, who understood the language,
would without hesitation render, For, there was the first tabernacle
constructed, in which were the candlestick, etc. And this tabernacle or
dwelling may be called the first dwelling place which God had among men,
to distinguish it from the second dwelling place, the temple built by
Solomon; for tabernacle here is to be considered in its general sense,
as implying a dwelling.

To have a proper understanding of what the apostle relates here, we
should endeavor to take a concise view of the tabernacle erected by
Moses in the wilderness. This tabernacle was the epitome of the Jewish
temple; or rather, according to this as a model was the Jewish temple
built. It comprised,

1\. The court where the people might enter.

2\. In this was contained the altar of burnt-offerings, on which were
offered the sacrifices in general, besides offerings of bread, wine, and
other things.

3\. At the bottom or lower end of this court was the tent of the
covenant; the two principal parts of the tabernacle were, the holy place
and the holy of holies.

In the temple built by Solomon there was a court for the Levites,
different from that of the people; and, at the entrance of the holy
place, a vestibule. But in the tabernacle built by Moses these parts
were not found, nor does the apostle mention them here.

In the holy place, as the apostle observes, there were,

1\. The golden candlestick of seven branches, on the south.

2\. The golden altar, or altar of incense, on the north.

3\. The altar, or table of the show-bread; or where the twelve loaves,
representing the twelve tribes, were laid before the Lord.

1\. In each branch of the golden candlestick was a lamp; these were
lighted every evening, and extinguished every morning. They were
intended to give light by night.

2\. The altar of incense was of gold; and a priest, chosen by lot each
week, offered incense every morning and evening in a golden censer,
which he probably left on the altar after the completion of the
offering.

3\. The table of the show-bread was covered with plates of gold; and on
this, every Sabbath, they placed twelve loaves in two piles, six in
each, which continued there all the week till the next Sabbath, when
they were removed, and fresh loaves put in their place. The whole of
this may be seen in all its details in the book of Exodus, from chap. 35
to [Exo 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#001). See Calmet also.

Which is called the sanctuary - Ἡτις λεγεται ἁγια· This is called holy.
This clause may apply to any of the nouns in this verse, in the
nominative case, which are all of the feminine gender; and the adjective
ἁγια, holy, may be considered here as the nominative singular feminine,
agreeing with ἡτις. Several editions accent the words in reference to
this construction. The word σκηνη, tabernacle, may be the proper
antecedent; and then we may read ἁγία, instead of ἅγια: but these
niceties belong chiefly to grammarians.

[Hebrews 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">heb 9:3</span></span>

And after the second veil - The first veil, of which the apostle has not
yet spoken, was at the entrance of the holy place, and separated the
temple from the court, and prevented the people, and even the Levites,
from seeing what was in the holy place.

The second veil, of which the apostle speaks here, separated the holy
place from the holy of holies.

The tabernacle, which is called the Holiest of all - That is, that part
of the tabernacle which is called the holy of holies.

[Hebrews 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">heb 9:4</span></span>

Which had the golden censer - It is evident that the apostle speaks here
of the tabernacle built by Moses, and of the state and contents of that
tabernacle as they were during the lifetime of Moses. For, as Calmet
remarks, in the temple which was afterwards built there were many things
added which were not in the tabernacle, and several things left out. The
ark of the covenant and the two tables of the law were never found after
the return from the Babylonish captivity. We have no proof that, even in
the time of Solomon, the golden pot of manna, or the rod of Aaron, was
either in or near the ark. In Solomon's temple the holy place was
separated from the holy of holies by a solid wall, instead of a veil,
and by strong wooden doors, [Kg1
6:31-33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#031). In the same temple there was
a large vestibule before the holy place; and round about this and the
holy of holies there were many chambers in three stories, [Kg1
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#005), [Kg1
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#006). But there was nothing of all this
in the Mosaic tabernacle; therefore, says Calmet, we need not trouble
ourselves to reconcile the various scriptures which mention this
subject; some of which refer to the tabernacle, others to Solomon's
temple, and others to the temple built by Zorobabel; which places were
very different from each other.

The apostle says that the golden censer was in the holy of holies; but
this is nowhere mentioned by Moses. But he tells us that the high priest
went in, once every year, with the golden censer to burn incense; and
Calmet thinks this censer was left there all the year, and that its
place was supplied by a new one, brought in by the priest the year
following. Others think it was left just within the veil, so that the
priest, by putting his hand under the curtain, could take it out, and
prepare it for his next entrance into the holiest.

The ark of the covenant - This was a sort of chest overlaid with plates
of gold, in which the two tables of the law, Aaron's rod, the pot of
manna, etc., were deposited. Its top, or lid, was the propitiatory or
mercy-seat.

[Hebrews 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">heb 9:5</span></span>

And over it the cherubims of glory - Cherubim is the plural of cherub,
and it is absurd to add our plural termination (s) to the plural
termination of the Hebrew. The glory here signifies the shechinah or
symbol of the Divine presence.

Shadowing the mercy-seat - One at each end of the ark, with their faces
turned toward each other, but looking down on the cover or propitiatory,
ἱλαστηριον, here called the mercy-seat.

Of which we cannot now speak particularly - The apostle did not judge
any farther account of these to be necessary; and I may be excused from
considering them particularly here, having said so much on each in the
places where they occur in the Pentateuch. What these point out or
signify is thus explained by St. Cyril: Christus licet unus sit,
multifariam tamen a nobis intelligitur: Ipse est Tabernaculum propter
carnis tegumenturn: Ipse est Mensa, quia noster cibus est et vita: Ipse
est Arca habens legem Dei reconditam, quia est Verbum Patris: Ipse est
Candelabrum, quia est lux spiritualis: Ipse est Altare incensi, quia est
odor suavitatis in sanctificationem: Ipse est Altare holocausti, quia
est hostia pro totius mundi vita in cruce oblata. "Although Christ be
but one, yet he is understood by us under a variety of forms. He is the
Tabernacle, on account of the human body in which he dwelt. He is the
Table, because he is our Bread of life. He is the Ark which has the law
of God enclosed within, because he is the Word of the Father. He is the
Candlestick, because he is our spiritual light. He is the Altar of
incense, because he is the sweet-smelling odour of sanctification. He is
the Altar of burnt-offering, because he is the victim, by death on the
cross, for the sins of the whole world." This father has said, in a few
words, what others have employed whole volumes on, by refining,
spiritualizing, and allegorizing.

[Hebrews 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">heb 9:6</span></span>

When these thing were thus ordained - When the tabernacle was made, and
its furniture placed in it, according to the Divine direction.

The priests went always into the first Tabernacle - That is, into the
first part of the tabernacle, or holy place, into which he went every
day twice, accomplishing the services, τας λατρειας επιτελουντες, which
included his burning the incense at the morning and evening sacrifice,
dressing the lamps, removing the old show-bread and laying on the new,
and sprinkling the blood of the sin-offerings before the veil [Lev
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#006) : and for these works he must have
constant access to the place.

[Hebrews 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">heb 9:7</span></span>

But into the second - That is, the holy of holies, or second part of the
tabernacle, the high priest alone, once every year, that is, on one day
in the year only, which was the day on which the general atonement was
made. The high priest could enter into this place only on one day in the
year; but on that day he might enter several times. See Lev. 16.

Not without blood - The day prescribed by the law for this great
solemnity was the tenth of the month Tisri, in which the high priest
brought in the incense or perfumes, which he placed on the golden
censer; he brought also the blood of the bullock; and sprinkled some
portion of it seven times before the ark, and the veil which separated
the holy place from the holy of holies. See [Lev
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#014). He then came out, and, taking
some of the blood of the goat which had been sacrificed, he sprinkled it
between the veil and the ark of the covenant, [Lev
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#015).

Which he offered for himself, and for the errors of the people - Ὑπερ
των του λαου αγνοηματων· For transgressions of which they were not
conscious: there were so many niceties in the ritual worship of the
Jews, and so many ways in which they might offend against the law and
incur guilt, that it was found necessary to institute sacrifices to
atone for these sins of ignorance. And as the high priest was also
clothed with infirmity, he required to have an interest in the same
sacrifice, on the same account. This was a national sacrifice; and by it
the people understood that they were absolved from all the errors of the
past year, and that they now had a renewed right of access to the
mercy-seat.

[Hebrews 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">heb 9:8</span></span>

The Holy Ghost this signifying - These services were divinely appointed,
and by each of them the Holy Spirit of God is supposed to speak.

The way into the holiest - That full access to God was not the common
privilege of the people, while the Mosaic economy subsisted. That the
apostle means that it is only by Christ that any man and every man can
approach God, is evident from [Heb
10:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#019), and it is about this, and
not about the tabernacle of this world, that he is here discoursing.

I have already observed that the apostle appears to use the word σκηνη,
or tabernacle, in the general sense of a dwelling place; and therefore
applies it to the temple, which was reputed the house or dwelling place
of God, as well as the ancient tabernacle. Therefore, what he speaks
here concerning the first tabernacle, may be understood as applying with
propriety to the then Jewish temple, as well as to the ancient
tabernacle, which, even with all their sacrifices and ceremonies, could
not make the way of holiness plain, nor the way to God's favor possible.

[Hebrews 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">heb 9:9</span></span>

Which - Tabernacle and its services, was a figure, παραβολη, a dark
enigmatical representation, for the time then present - for that age and
dispensation, and for all those who lived under it.

In which, καθ' ὁν, during which, time or dispensation were offered both
gifts and sacrifices - eucharistic offerings and victims for sin, that
could not make him that did the service, whether the priest who made the
offering, or the person who brought it in the behalf of his soul,
perfect as pertaining to the conscience - could not take away guilt from
the mind, nor purify the conscience from dead works. The whole was a
figure, or dark representation, of a spiritual and more glorious system:
and although a sinner, who made these offerings and sacrifices according
to the law, might be considered as having done his duty, and thus he
would be exempted from many ecclesiastical and legal disabilities and
punishments; yet his conscience would ever tell him that the guilt of
sin was still remaining, and that it was impossible for the blood of
bulls and goats to take it away. Thus even he that did the service best
continued to be imperfect - had a guilty conscience, and an unholy
heart.

The words καθ' ὁν, in which, referred in the above paraphrase to τον
καιρον, the time, are read καθ' ἡν by ABD, and several others, one copy
of the Slavonic, the Vulgate, and some of the fathers, and thus refer to
την σκηνην, the tabernacle; and this is the reading which our
translators appear to have followed. Griesbach places it in his margin,
as a very probable reading; but I prefer the other.

[Hebrews 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">heb 9:10</span></span>

In meats and drinks, and divers washings - He had already mentioned
eucharistic and sacrificial offerings, and nothing properly remained but
the different kinds of clean and unclean animals which were used, or
forbidden to be used, as articles of food; together with the different
kinds or drinks, washings, βαπτισμοις, baptisms, immersions, sprinklings
and washings of the body and the clothes, and carnal ordinances, or
things which had respect merely to the body, and could have no moral
influence upon the soul, unless considered in reference to that of which
they were the similitudes, or figures.

Carnal ordinances - Δικαιωματα σαρκος· Rites and ceremonies pertaining
merely to the body. The word carnal is not used here, nor scarcely in
any part of the New Testament, in that catachrestical or degrading sense
in which many preachers and professors of Christianity take the liberty
to use it.

Imposed on them until the time of reformation - These rites and
ceremonies were enacted, by Divine authority, as proper representations
of the Gospel system, which should reform and rectify all things.

The time of reformation, καιρος διορθωσεως, the time of rectifying,
signifies the Gospel dispensation, under which every thing is set
straight; every thing referred to its proper purpose and end; the
ceremonial law fulfilled and abrogated; the moral law exhibited and more
strictly enjoined; (see our Lord's sermon upon the mount); and the
spiritual nature of God's worship taught, and grace promised to purify
the heart: so that, through the power of the eternal Spirit, all that
was wrong in the soul is rectified; the affections, passions, and
appetites purified; the understanding enlightened; the judgment
corrected; the will refined; in a word, all things made new.

[Hebrews 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">heb 9:11</span></span>

But Christ being come a high priest of good things - I think this and
the succeeding verses not happily translated: indeed, the division of
them has led to a wrong translation; therefore they must be taken
together, thus: But the Christ, the high priest of those good things (or
services) which were to come, through a greater and more perfect
tabernacle, not made with hands, that is, not of the same workmanship,
entered once for all into the sanctuary; having obtained eternal
redemption for us, not by the blood of goats and calves, but by his own
blood, [Heb 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#013). For if the blood of
Goats, and bulls, and calves, and a heifer's ashes, sprinkled on the
unclean, sanctifieth to the cleansing of the flesh, ([Heb
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#014)), how much more shall the blood
of Christ, who, through the eternal Spirit, offered himself without spot
to God, cleanse your consciences from dead works, in order to worship
(or that ye may worship) the living God?

In the above translation I have added, in [Heb
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#013), τραγων, of goats, on the
authority of ABDE, three others, the Syriac, the Arabic of Erpen,
Coptic, Vulgate, two copies of the Itala, and Theodoret. And I have
rendered εις το λατρευειν, ([Heb
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#014)), In Order to worship, or That Ye
May worship; for this is the meaning of these particles εις το in many
parts of the New Testament. I shall now make a few observations on some
of the principal expressions.

High priest of good things - Or services, to come, των μελλοντων αγαθων.
He is the High Priest of Christianity; he officiates in the behalf of
all mankind; for by him are all the prayers, praises, and services of
mankind offered to God; and he ever appears in the presence of God for
us.

A greater and more perfect tabernacle - This appears to mean our Lord's
human nature. That, in which dwelt all the fullness of the Godhead
bodily, was fitly typified by the tabernacle and temple, in both of
which the majesty of God dwelt.

Not made with hands - Though our Lord's body was a perfect human body,
yet it did not come in the way of natural generation; his miraculous
conception will sufficiently justify the expressions used here by the
apostle.

[Hebrews 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">heb 9:12</span></span>

But by his own blood - Here the redemption of man is attributed to the
blood of Christ; and this blood is stated to be shed in a sacrificial
way, precisely as the blood of bulls, goats and calves was shed under
the law.

Once - Once for all, εφαπαξ, in opposition to the annual entering of the
high priest into the holiest, with the blood of the annual victim.

The holy place - Or sanctuary, τα ἁγιᾳ, signifies heaven, into which
Jesus entered with his own blood, as the high priest entered into the
holy of holies with the blood of the victims which he had sacrificed.

Eternal redemption - Αιωνιαν λυτρωσιν· A redemption price which should
stand good for ever, when once offered; and an endless redemption from
sin, in reference to the pardon of which, and reconciliation to God,
there needs no other sacrifice: it is eternal in its merit and efficacy.

[Hebrews 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">heb 9:13</span></span>

Sanctifieth to the purifying of the flesh - Answers the end proposed by
the law; namely, to remove legal disabilities and punishments, having
the body and its interests particularly in view, though adumbrating or
typifying the soul and its concerns.

[Hebrews 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">heb 9:14</span></span>

Who through the eternal Spirit - This expression is understood two ways:

1\. Of the Holy Ghost himself. As Christ's miraculous conception was by
the Holy Spirit, and he wrought all his miracles by the Spirit of God,
so his death or final offering was made through or by the eternal
Spirit; and by that Spirit he was raised from the dead, [Pe1
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#018). Indeed, through the whole of his
life be was justified by the Spirit; and we find that in this great work
of human redemption, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit were
continually employed: therefore the words may be understood of the Holy
Spirit properly.

2\. Of the eternal Logos or Deity which dwelt in the man Christ Jesus,
through the energy of which the offering of his humanity became an
infinitely meritorious victim; therefore the Deity of Christ is here
intended.

But we cannot well consider one of these distinct from the other; and
hence probably arose the various readings in the MSS. and versions on
this article. Instead of δια Πνευματος αιωνιου, by the Eternal Spirit,
δια Πνευματος Ἁγιου, by the Holy Spirit, is the reading of D\*, and more
than twenty others of good note, besides the Coptic, Slavonic, Vulgate,
two copies of the Itala, Cyril, Athanasius sometimes, Damascenus,
Chrysostom, and some others. But the common reading is supported by
ABD\*\*, and others, besides the Syriac, all the Arabic, Armenian,
Ethiopic, Athanasius generally, Theodoret, Theophylact, and Ambrosius.
This, therefore, is the reading that should he preferred, as it is
probable that the Holy Ghost, not the Logos, is what the apostle had
more immediately in view. But still we must say, that the Holy Spirit,
with the eternal Logos, and the almighty Father, equally concurred in
offering up the sacrifice of the human nature of Christ, in order to
make atonement for the sin of the world.

Purge your conscience - Καθαριει την συνειδησιν· Purify your conscience.
The term purify should be everywhere, both in the translation of the
Scriptures, and in preaching the Gospel, preferred to the word purge,
which, at present, is scarcely ever used in the sense in which our
translators have employed it.

Dead works - Sin in general, or acts to which the penalty of death is
annexed by the law. See the phrase explained, [Heb
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#001) (note).

[Hebrews 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">heb 9:15</span></span>

And for this cause - Some translate δια τουτο, on account of this
(blood.) Perhaps it means no more than a mere inference, such as
therefore, or wherefore.

He is the Mediator of the new testament - There was no proper reason why
our translators should render διαθηκη by testament here, when in almost
every other case they render it covenant, which is its proper
ecclesiastical meaning, as answering to the Hebrew ברית berith, which
see largely explained, [Gen 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#010), and
in other places of the Pentateuch.

Very few persons are satisfied with the translation of the following
verses to the 20th, particularly the 16th and 17th; at all events the
word covenant must be retained. He - Jesus Christ, is Mediator; the
μεσιτης, or mediator, was the person who witnessed the contract made
between the two contracting parties, slew the victim, and sprinkled each
with its blood.

Of the new testament - The new contract betwixt God and the whole human
race, by Christ Jesus the Mediator, distinguished here from the old
covenant between God and the Israelites, in which Moses was the
mediator.

That by means of death - His own death upon the cross.

For the redemption of the transgressions - To make atonement for the
transgressions which were committed under the old covenant, which the
blood of bulls and calves could not do; so the death of Jesus had
respect to all the time antecedent to it, as well as to all the time
afterward till the conclusion of the world.

They which are called - The Gentiles, might receive the promise - might,
by being brought into a covenant with God, have an equal right with the
Jews, not merely to an inheritance such as the promised land, but to an
eternal inheritance, and consequently infinitely superior to that of the
Jews, inasmuch as the new covenant is superior in every point of view to
the old.

How frequently the Gentiles are termed οἱ κλητοι and οἱ κεκλημενοι, the
called, all St. Paul's writings show. And they were thus termed because
they were called and elected in the place of the Jews, the ancient
called and elect, who were now divorced and reprobated because of their
disobedience.

[Hebrews 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">heb 9:16</span></span>

For where a testament is - A learned and judicious friend furnishes me
with the following translation of this and the 17th verse: -

"For where there is a covenant, it is necessary that the death of the
appointed victim should be exhibited, because a covenant is confirmed
over dead victims, since it is not at all valid while the appointed
victim is alive."

He observes, "There is no word signifying testator, or men, in the
original. Διαθεμενος is not a substantive, but a participle, or a
participial adjective, derived from the same root as διατηκη, and must
have a substantive understood. I therefore render it the disposed or
appointed victim, alluding to the manner of disposing or setting apart
the pieces of the victim, when they were going to ratify a covenant; and
you know well the old custom of ratifying a covenant, to which the
apostle alludes. I refer to your own notes on [Gen
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#018) (note), and [Gen
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#010) (note). - J. C."

Mr. Wakefield has translated the passage nearly in the same way.

"For where a covenant is, there must be necessarily introduced the death
of that which establisheth the covenant; because a covenant is confirmed
over dead things, and is of no force at all whilst that which
establisheth the covenant is alive." This is undoubtedly the meaning of
this passage; and we should endeavor to forget that testament and
testator were ever introduced, as they totally change the apostle's
meaning. See the observations at the end of this chapter.

[Hebrews 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">heb 9:18</span></span>

Whereupon - Ὁθεν. Wherefore, as a victim was required for the
ratification of every covenant, the first covenant made between God and
the Hebrews, by the mediation of Moses, was not dedicated,
εγκεκαινισται, renewed or solemnized, without blood - without the death
of a victim, and the aspersion of its blood.

[Hebrews 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">heb 9:19</span></span>

When Moses had spoken every precept - The place to which the apostle
alludes is [Exo 24:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#004), where the
reader is requested to consult the notes.

And sprinkled both the book - The sprinkling of the book is not
mentioned in the place to which the apostle refers, (see above), nor did
it in fact take place. The words αυτο τε το βιβλιον, and the book
itself, should be referred to λαβων, having taken, and not to ερῥαντισε,
he sprinkled; the verse should therefore be read thus: For after every
commandment of the law had been recited by Moses to all the people, he
took the blood of the calves, and of the goats, with water and scarlet
wool, and the book itself, and sprinkled all the people. The rite was
performed thus: Having received the blood of the calves and goats into
basins, and mingled it with water to prevent it from coagulating, he
then took a bunch of hyssop, and having bound it together with thread
made of scarlet wool, he dipped this in the basin, and sprinkled the
blood and water upon the people who were nearest to him, and who might
be considered on this occasion the representatives of all the rest; for
it is impossible that he should have had blood enough to have sprinkled
the whole of the congregation.

Some think that the blood was actually sprinkled upon the book itself,
which contained the written covenant, to signify that the covenant
itself was ratified by the blood.

[Hebrews 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">heb 9:20</span></span>

This is the blood of the testament - (covenant.) Our Lord refers to the
conduct of Moses here, and partly quotes his words in the institution of
the eucharist: This is my blood of the new covenant, which is shed for
many for the remission of sins, [Mat
26:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#028). And by thus using the words and
applying them, he shows that his sacrificial blood was intended by the
blood shed and sprinkled on this occasion, and that by it alone the
remission of sins is obtained.

[Hebrews 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">heb 9:21</span></span>

He sprinkled - with blood - all the vessels of the ministry - To
intimate that every thing used by sinful man is polluted, and that
nothing can be acceptable in the sight of a holy God that has not in
effect the sprinkling of the atoning blood.

[Hebrews 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">heb 9:22</span></span>

And almost all things are - purged with blood - The apostle says almost,
because in some cases certain vessels were purified by water, some by
fire, [Num 31:23](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#023), and some with the
ashes of the red heifer, [Num 19:2-10](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#002),
but it was always understood that every thing was at first consecrated
by the blood of the victim.

And without shedding of blood is no remission - The apostle shows fully
here what is one of his great objects in the whole of this epistle, viz.
that there is no salvation but through the sacrificial death of Christ,
and to prefigure this the law itself would not grant any remission of
sin without the blood of a victim. This is a maxim even among the Jews
themselves, אין כפרה אלא בדם ein capparah ella bedam, "There is no
expiation but by blood." Yoma, fol. 5, 1; Menachoth, fol. 93, 2. Every
sinner has forfeited his life by his transgressions, and the law of God
requires his death; the blood of the victim, which is its life, is shed
as a substitute for the life of the sinner. By these victims the
sacrifice of Christ was typified. He gave his life for the life of the
world; human life for human life, but a life infinitely dignified by its
union with God.

[Hebrews 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">heb 9:23</span></span>

The patterns of things in the heavens - That is: The tabernacle and all
its utensils, services, etc., must be purified by these, viz.: The blood
of calves and goats, and the sprinkling of the blood and water with the
bunch of hyssop bound about with scarlet wool. These are called
patterns, ὑποδειγματα, exemplars, earthly things, which were the
representatives of heavenly things. And there is no doubt that every
thing in the tabernacle, its parts, divisions, utensils, ministry, etc.,
as appointed by God, were representations of celestial matters; but how
far and in what way we cannot now see.

Purification implies, not only cleansing from defilement, but also
dedication or consecration. All the utensils employed in the tabernacle
service were thus purified though incapable of any moral pollution.

But the heavenly things themselves -

1\. Some think this means heaven itself, which, by receiving the
sacrificed body of Christ, which appears in the presence of God for us,
may be said to be purified, i.e., set apart for the reception of the
souls of those who have found redemption in his blood.

2\. Others think the body of Christ is intended, which is the tabernacle
in which his Divinity dwelt; and that this might be said to be purified
by its own sacrifice, as he is said, [Joh
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#019), to sanctify himself; that is,
to consecrate himself unto God as a sin-offering for the redemption of
man.

3\. Others suppose the Church is intended, which he is to present to the
Father without spot or wrinkle or any such thing.

4\. As the entrance to the holy of holies must be made by the sprinkling
of the blood of the sacrifice, and as that holy of holies represented
heaven, the apostle's meaning seems to be that there was and could be no
entrance to the holiest but through his blood; and therefore, when by a
more perfect tabernacle, [Heb 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#011),
[Heb 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#012), he passed into the heavens,
not with the blood of bulls and goats, but by his own blood, he thus
purified or laid open the entrance to the holiest, by a more valuable
sacrifice than those required to open the entrance of the holy of
holies. It was necessary, therefore, for God had appointed it so, that
the tabernacle and its parts, etc., which were patterns of things in the
heavens, should be consecrated and entered with such sacrifices as have
already been mentioned; but the heaven of heavens into which Jesus
entered, and whither he will bring all his faithful followers, must be
propitiated, consecrated, and entered, by the infinitely better
sacrifice of his own body and blood. That this is the meaning appears
from the following verse.

[Hebrews 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">heb 9:24</span></span>

Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands - He is not
gone into the holy of holies of the tabernacle or temple, as the Jewish
high priest does once in the year with the blood of the victim, to
sprinkle it before the mercy-seat there; but into heaven itself, which
he has thus opened to all believers, having made the propitiatory
offering by which both he and those whom he represents are entitled to
enter and enjoy eternal blessedness. And hence we may consider that
Christ, appearing in his crucified body before the throne, is a real
offering of himself to the Divine justice in behalf of man; and that
there he continues in the constant act of being offered, so that every
penitent and believer, coming unto God through him, find him their ever
ready and available sacrifice, officiating as the High Priest of mankind
in the presence of God.

[Hebrews 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">heb 9:25</span></span>

Nor yet that he should offer himself often - The sacrifice of Christ is
not like that of the Jewish high priest; his must be offered every year,
Christ has offered himself once for all: and this sacrificial act has
ever the same efficacy, his crucified body being still a powerful and
infinitely meritorious sacrifice before the throne.

[Hebrews 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">heb 9:26</span></span>

For then must he often have suffered - In the counsel of God, Christ was
considered the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, [Rev
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#008), so that all believers before his
advent were equally interested in his sacrificial death with those who
have lived since his coming. Humanly speaking, the virtue of the annual
atonement could not last long, and must be repeated; Christ's sacrifice
is ever the same; his life's blood is still considered as in the act of
being continually poured out. See [Rev
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006).

The end of the world - The conclusion of the Jewish dispensation, the
Christian dispensation being that which shall continue till the end of
time.

To put away sin - Εις αθετησιν ἁμαρτιας· To abolish the sin-offerings;
i.e. to put an end to the Mosaic economy by his one offering of himself.
It is certain that, after Christ had offered himself, the typical
sin-offerings of the law ceased; and this was expressly foretold by the
Prophet Daniel, [Dan 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024). Some think
that the expression should be applied to the putting away the guilt,
power, and being of sin from the souls of believers.

[Hebrews 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">heb 9:27</span></span>

As it is appointed - Αποκειται· It is laid before them by the Divine
decree: Dust thou art, and unto dust thou shalt return. Unto men
generally, during the course of the present world, not all men as some
falsely quote; for Enoch and Elijah have not died, and those that shall
be alive at the day of judgment shall not die, but be changed.

But after this the judgment - They shall die but once, and be judged but
once, therefore there is no metempsychosis, no transmigration from body
to body; judgment succeeds to dying; and as they shall be judged but
once, they can die but once.

[Hebrews 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">heb 9:28</span></span>

So Christ was once offered - He shall die no more; he has borne away the
sins of many, and what he has done once shall stand good for ever. Yet
he will appear a second time without sin, χωρις ἁμαρτιας, without a
sin-offering; That he has already made.

Unto salvation - To deliver the bodies of believers from the empire of
death, to reunite them to their purified souls, and bring both into his
eternal glory. This is salvation, and the very highest of which the
human being is capable. Amen! Even so, come Lord Jesus! Hallelujah!

1\. In the preceding notes I have given my reasons for dissenting from
our translation of the 15th, 16th, and 17th verses. Many learned men are
of the same opinion; but I have not met with one who appears to have
treated the whole in a more satisfactory manner than Dr. Macknight, and
for the edification of my readers I shall here subjoin the substance of
what he has written on this point.

"[Heb 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#015). Mediator of the new
covenant. See [Heb 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#007). The word
διαθηκη, here translated covenant, answers to the Hebrew word berith,
which all the translators of the Jewish Scriptures have understood to
signify a covenant. The same signification our translators have affixed
to the word διαθηκη, as often as it occurs in the writings of the
evangelists and apostles, except in the history of the institution of
the supper, and in [Co2 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006) : and [Heb
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#022), and in the passage under
consideration; in which places, copying the Vulgate version, they have
rendered διαθηκη by the word testament. Beza, following the Syriac
Version, translates διαθηκη everywhere by the words foedas, pactum,
except in the 16th, 17th, and 20th verses of this chapter, where
likewise following the Syriac version, he has testamentum. Now if καινη
διαθηκη, the new testament, in the passages above mentioned, means the
Gospel covenant, as all interpreters acknowledge, παλαια διαθηκη, the
old testament, [Co2 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#014), and πρωτη
διαθηκη, the first testament, [Heb
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#015), must certainly be the Sinaitic
covenant or law of Moses, as is evident also from [Heb
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#020). On this supposition it may be
asked,

1\. In what sense the Sinaitic covenant or law of Moses, which required
perfect obedience to all its precepts under penalty of death, and
allowed no mercy to any sinner, however penitent, can be called a
testament, which is a deed conferring something valuable on a person who
may accept or refuse it, as he thinks fit? Besides, the transaction at
Sinai, in which God promised to continue the Israelites in Canaan, on
condition they refrained from the wicked practices of the Canaanites,
and observed his statutes, Lev. 18, can in no sense be called a
testament.

2\. If the law of Moses be a testament, and if, to render that testament
valid, the death of the testator be necessary, as the English
translators have taught us, [Heb 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#016),
I ask who it was that made the testament of the law? Was it God or
Moses? And did either of them die to render it valid?

3\. I observe that even the Gospel covenant is improperly called a
testament, because, notwithstanding all its blessings were procured by
the death of Christ, and are most freely bestowed, it lost any validity
which, as a testament, it is thought to have received by the death of
Christ, when he revived again on the third day.

4\. The things affirmed in the common translation of [Heb
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#015), concerning the new testament,
namely, that it has a Mediator; that that Mediator is the Testator
himself; that there were transgressions of a former testament, for the
redemption of which the Mediator of the new testament died; and, [Heb
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#019), that the first testament was
made by sprinkling the people in whose favor it was made with blood; are
all things quite foreign to a testament. For was it ever known in any
nation that a testament needed a mediator? Or that the testator was the
mediator of his own testament? Or that it was necessary the testator of
a new testament should die to redeem the transgressions of a former
testament? Or that any testament was ever made by sprinkling the
legatees with blood? These things however were usual in covenants. They
had mediators who assisted at the making of them, and were sureties for
the performance of them. They were commonly ratified by sacrifices, the
blood of which was sprinkled on the parties; withal, if any former
covenant was infringed by the parties, satisfaction was given at the
making of a second covenant.

5\. By calling Christ the Mediator of the new testament our thoughts are
turned away entirely from the view which the Scriptures give us of his
death as a sacrifice for sin; whereas, if he is called the Mediator of
the new covenant, which is the true translation of διαθηκης καινης
μεσιτης, that appellation directly suggests to us that the new covenant
was procured and ratified by his death as a sacrifice for sin.
Accordingly Jesus, on account of his being made a priest by the oath of
God, is said to be the Priest or Mediator of a better covenant than that
of which the Levitical priests were the mediators. I acknowledge that in
classical Greek διαθηκη, commonly signifies a testament. Yet, since the
Seventy have uniformly translated the Hebrew word berith, which properly
signifies a covenant, by the word διαθηκη, in writing Greek the Jews
naturally used διαθηκη for συνθηκη as our translators have acknowledged
by their version of [Heb 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#016). To
conclude: Seeing in the verses under consideration διαθηκη may be
translated a covenant; and seeing, when so translated, these verses make
a better sense, and agree better with the scope of the apostle's
reasoning than if it were translated a testament; we can be at no loss
to know which translation of διαθηκη in these verses ought to be
preferred. Nevertheless, the absurdity of a phraseology to which readers
have been long accustomed, without attending distinctly to its meaning,
does not soon appear.

"He is the Mediator. Here it is remarkable that Jesus is not called
διαθεμενος, the Testator, but μεσιτης, the Mediator, of the new
covenant; first, because he procured the new covenant for mankind, in
which the pardon of sin is promised; for, as the apostle tells us, his
death, as a sacrifice for sin, is the consideration on account of which
the pardon of the transgressions of the first covenant is granted.
Secondly, because the new covenant having been ratified as well as
procured by the death of Christ, he is fitly called the Mediator of that
covenant in the same sense that God's oath is called, [Heb
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#017), the mediator, or confirmor, of
his promise. Thirdly, Jesus, who died to procure the new covenant, being
appointed by God the high priest thereof, to dispense his blessings, he
is on that account also called, [Heb
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#006), the mediator of that better
covenant.

[Heb 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#016). For where a covenant (is
made by sacrifice), there is a necessity that the death of the appointed
sacrifice be produced. This elliptical expression must be completed, if,
as is probable, the apostle had now in his eye the covenant which God
made with Noah and Abraham. His covenant is recorded, [Gen
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#020), where we are told, that on
coming out of the ark Noah offered a burnt-offering of every clean beast
and fowl. And the Lord smelled a sweet savor. And the Lord said in his
heart, I will not again curse the ground, neither will I again smite any
more every living thing as I have done. This promise or declaration God
called his covenant with men, and with every living creature. [Gen
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#009), [Gen
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#010). In like manner God made a
covenant with Abraham by sacrifice, [Gen
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#009), [Gen
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018), and with the Israelites at
Sinai, [Exo 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#008). See also [Psa
50:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#005). By making his covenants with men
in this manner, God taught them that his intercourses with them were all
founded on an expiation afterwards to be made for their sins by the
sacrifice of the seed of the woman, the bruising of whose heel, or
death, was foretold at the fall. On the authority of these examples, the
practice of making covenants by sacrifice prevailed among the Jews; [Jer
34:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#018); [Zac
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#011); and even among the heathens; for
they had the knowledge of these examples by tradition. Stabant et caesa
jungebant foedera porca; Virgil, Aeneid, viii. 611. Hence the phrases,
foedus ferire and percutere, to strike or kill the covenant.

"There is a necessity that the death του διαθεμενου, of the appointed.
Here we may supply either the word θυματος, sacrifice, or ζωου, animal,
which might be either a calf, a goat, a bull, or any other animal which
the parties making the covenant chose. Διαθεμενου is the participle of
the second aorist of the middle voice of the verb διατιθημι, constituo,
I appoint. Wherefore its primary and literal signification is, of the
appointed. Our translators have given the word this sense, [Luk
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#029); Καγω διατιθεμαι ὑμιν, καθως
διετιθετο μοι ὁ Πατηρ μου, βασιλειαν. And I appoint to you a kingdom, as
my Father hath appointed to me a kingdom.

"Be brought in; Θανατον αναγκη φερεσθαι του διαθεμενου, Elsner, vol.
ii., p. 381, has shown that the word φερεσθαι is sometimes used in a
forensic sense for what is produced, or proved, or made apparent in a
court of judicature. Wherefore the apostle's meaning is, that it is
necessary the death of the appointed sacrifice be brought in, or
produced, at the making of the covenant. In the margin of our Bibles
this clause is rightly translated, be brought in. See [Act
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#007), where φεροντες is used in the
forensic sense.

[Heb 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#017). A covenant is firm over
dead sacrifices; Επι νεκροις. Νεκροις being an adjective, it must have a
substantive agreeing with it, either expressed or understood. The
substantive understood in this place, I think, is θυμασι, sacrifices;
for which reason I have supplied it in the translation. Perhaps the word
ζωοις, animals, may be equally proper; especially as, in the following
clause, διαθεμενος is in the gender of the animals appointed for the
sacrifice. Our translators have supplied the word ανθρωποις, men, and
have translated επι νεκροις, after men are dead, contrary to the
propriety of the phrase.

"It never hath force whilst the appointed liveth; Ὁτε ζῃ ὁ διαθεμενος.
Supply μοσχος, or τραγος, or ταυρος· whilst the calf, or goat, or bull,
appointed for the sacrifice of ratification, liveth. The apostle having,
in [Heb 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#015), showed that Christ's
death was necessary as ὁ Μεσιτης, the Mediator, that is, the procurer,
and ratifier of the new covenant, he in the 16th and 17th verses
observes that, since God's covenants with men were all ratified by
sacrifice to show that his intercourses with men are founded on the
sacrifice of his Son, it was necessary that the new covenant itself
should be ratified by his Son's actually dying as a sacrifice.

1\. "The faultiness of the common translation of the 15th, 16th, 17th,
18th, and 20th verses of this chapter having been already shown in the
notes, nothing needs be added here, except to call the reader's
attention to the propriety and strength of the apostle's reasoning, as
it appears in the translation of these verses which I have given,
compared with his reasoning as represented in the common version."

2\. It is supposed that in [Heb 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#028),
the apostle, in speaking about Christ's bearing the sins of many,
alludes to the ceremony of the scape goat. This mysterious sacrifice was
to be presented to God, [Lev 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#007), and
the sins of the people were to be confessed over the head of it, [Lev
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#021), and after this the goat was
dismissed into a land uninhabited, laden, as the institution implied,
with the sins of the people; and this the word ανενεγκειν, to bear or
carry away, seems to imply. So truly as the goat did metaphorically bear
away the sins of the many, so truly did Christ literally bear the
punishment due to our sins; and in reference to every believer, has so
borne them away that they shall never more rise in judgment against him.

3\. In Christ's coming, or appearing the second time, it is very
probable, as Dr. Doddridge and others have conjectured, that there is an
allusion to the return of the high priest from the inner tabernacle;
for, after appearing there in the presence of God, and making atonement
for the people in the plain dress of an ordinary priest, [Lev
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#023), [Lev
16:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#024), he came out arrayed in his
magnificent robes, to bless the people, who waited for him in the court
of the tabernacle of the congregation. "But there will be this
difference," says Dr. Macknight, "between the return of Christ to bless
his people, and the return of the high priest to bless the congregation.
The latter, after coming out of the most holy place, made a new
atonement in his pontifical robes for himself and for the people, [Lev
16:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#024), which showed that the former
atonement was not real but typical. Whereas Jesus, after having made
atonement, (and presented himself in heaven, before God), will not
return to the earth for the purpose of making himself a sacrifice the
second time; but having procured an eternal redemption for us, by the
sacrifice of himself once offered, he will return for the purpose of
declaring to them who wait for him that they are accepted, and of
bestowing on them the great blessing of eternal life. This reward he,
being surrounded with the glory of the Father, [Mat
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#027), will give them in the presence
of an assembled universe, both as their King and their Priest. This is
the great salvation which Christ came to preach, and which was confirmed
to the world by them who heard him: [Heb
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#003)." Reader, lay this sincerely to
heart!

4\. The form in which the high priest and the ordinary priests were to
bless the people, after burning the incense in the tabernacle, is
prescribed, [Num 6:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#023). Literally
translated from the Hebrew it is as follows, and consists of three parts
or benedictions: -

1\. May Jehovah bless thee, and preserve thee!

2\. May Jehovah cause his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto
thee!

3\. May Jehovah lift up his faces upon thee, and may he put prosperity
unto thee! (See my notes on the place, [Num
6:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#023).)

We may therefore say that Christ, our High Priest, came to bless each of
us, by turning us away from our iniquity. And let no one ever expect to
see him at his second coming with joy, unless he have, in this life,
been turned away from his iniquity, and obtained remission of all his
sins, and that holiness without which none can see God. Reader, the time
of his reappearing is, to thee, at hand! Prepare to meet thy God!

On the word conscience, which occurs so often in this chapter, and in
other parts of this epistle, see the observations at the end of chap.
13.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 10](heb010)

</div>
