<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Hebrews Index](heb.md)  
  [Previous](heb012)  [Next](jam000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#001.md)

[Hebrews](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">heb 13:0</span></span>

Exhortations to hospitality to Strangers, [Heb
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#001.md), [Heb
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#002.md). Kindness to those in bonds, [Heb
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#003.md). Concerning marriage, [Heb
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#004.md). Against covetousness, [Heb
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#005.md), [Heb
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#006.md). How they should imitate their
teachers, [Heb 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#007.md), [Heb
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#008.md). To avoid strange doctrines, [Heb
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#009.md). Of the Jewish sin-offerings,
[Heb 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#010.md), [Heb
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#011.md). Jesus suffered without the
gate, and we should openly confess him and bear his reproach, [Heb
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#012.md), [Heb
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#013.md). Here we have no permanent
residence; and while we live should devote ourselves to God, and live to
do good, [Heb 13:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#014.md). We should obey
them that have the rule over us, [Heb
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#017.md). The apostle exhorts them to
pray for him, that he might be restored to them the sooner, [Heb
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#018.md), [Heb
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#019.md). Commends them to God in a very
solemn prayer, [Heb 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#020.md), [Heb
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#021.md). Entreats them to bear the word
of exhortation, mentions Timothy, and concludes with the apostolical
benediction, [Heb 13:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#022.md).

[Hebrews 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 13:1</span></span>

Let brotherly love continue - Be all of one heart and one soul.

Feel for, comfort, and support each other; and remember that he who
professes to love God should love his brother also. They had this
brotherly love among them; they should take care to retain it. As God is
remarkable for his φιλανθρωπια, philanthropy, or love to man, so should
they be for φιλαδελφια, or love to each other. See the note on [Tit
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#004.md).

[Hebrews 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">heb 13:2</span></span>

To entertain stranger's - In those early times, when there were scarcely
any public inns or houses of entertainment, it was an office of charity
and mercy to receive, lodge, and entertain travelers; and this is what
the apostle particularly recommends.

Entertained angels - Abraham and Lot are the persons particularly
referred to. Their history, the angels whom they entertained, not
knowing them to be such, and the good they derived from exercising their
hospitality on these occasions, are well known; and have been
particularly referred to in the notes on [Gen
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#003) (note.md); [Gen
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#002) (note.md).

[Hebrews 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">heb 13:3</span></span>

Remember them that are in bonds - He appears to refer to those
Christian's who were suffering imprisonment for the testimony of Jesus.

As bound with them - Feel for them as you would wish others to feel for
you were you in their circumstances, knowing that, being in the body,
you are liable to the same evils, and may be called to suffer in the
same way for the same cause.

[Hebrews 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">heb 13:4</span></span>

Marriage is honorable in all - Let this state be highly esteemed as one
of God's own instituting, and as highly calculated to produce the best
interests of mankind. This may have been said against the opinions of
the Essenes, called Therapeutae, who held marriage in little repute, and
totally abstained from it themselves as a state of comparative
imperfection. At the same time it shows the absurdity of the popish
tenet, that marriage in the clergy is both dishonorable and sinful;
which is, in fact, in opposition to the apostle, who says marriage is
honorable in All; and to the institution of God, which evidently
designed that every male and female should be united in this holy bond;
and to nature, which in every part of the habitable world has produced
men and women in due proportion to each other.

The bed undefiled - Every man cleaving to his own wife, and every wife
cleaving to her own husband, because God will judge, i.e. punish, all
fornicators and adulterers.

Instead of δε but, γαρ, for, is the reading of AD\*, one other, with the
Vulgate, Coptic, and one of the Itala; it more forcibly expresses the
reason of the prohibition: Let the bed be undefiled, For whoremongers
and adulterers God will judge.

[Hebrews 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">heb 13:5</span></span>

Let your conversation - That is, the whole tenor of your conduct,
τροπος, the manner of your life, or rather the disposition of your
hearts in reference to all your secular transactions; for in this sense
the original is used by the best Greek writers.

Be without covetousness - Desire nothing more than what God has given
you; and especially covet nothing which the Divine Providence has given
to another man, for this is the very spirit of robbery.

Content with such things as ye have - Αρκουμενοι τοις παρουσιν· Being
satisfied with present things. In one of the sentences of Phocylides we
have a sentiment in nearly the same words as that of the apostle:
Αρκεισθαι παρεουσι, και αλλοτριων απεχεσθαι· Be content with present
things, and abstain from others. The covetous man is ever running out
into futurity with insatiable desires after secular good; and, if this
disposition be not checked, it increases as the subject of it increases
in years. Covetousness is the vice of old age.

I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee - These words were, in sum,
spoken to Joshua, [Jos 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#005.md) : "As I was
with Moses, so will I be with thee; I will not fail thee, nor forsake
thee." They were spoken also by David to Solomon, [Ch1
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#020.md) : "David said to Solomon his
son, Be strong and of good courage, and do it: fear not, nor be
dismayed; for the Lord God, even my God, will be with thee; he will not
fail thee, nor forsake thee." The apostle, in referring to the same
promises, feels authorized to strengthen the expressions, as the
Christian dispensation affords more consolation and confidence in
matters of this kind than the old covenant did. The words are peculiarly
emphatic: Ου μη σε ανω, ουδ' ου μη σε εγκαταλιπω. There are no less than
five negatives in this short sentence, and these connected with two
verbs and one pronoun twice repeated. To give a literal translation is
scarcely possible; it would run in this way: "No, I will not leave thee;
no, neither will I not utterly forsake thee." Those who understand the
genius of the Greek language, and look at the manner in which these
negatives are placed in the sentence, will perceive at once how much the
meaning is strengthened by them, and to what an emphatic and energetic
affirmative they amount.

This promise is made to those who are patiently bearing affliction or
persecution for Christ's sake; and may be applied to any faithful soul
in affliction, temptation, or adversity of any kind. Trust in the Lord
with thy whole heart, and never lean to thy own understanding; for he
hath said, "No, I will never leave thee; not I: I will never, never cast
thee off."

[Hebrews 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">heb 13:6</span></span>

So that we may boldly say - We, in such circumstances, while cleaving to
the Lord, may confidently apply to ourselves what God spake to Joshua
and to Solomon; and what he spake to David, "The Lord is my helper, I
will not fear what man can do." God is omnipotent, man's power is
limited; howsoever strong he may be, he can do nothing against the
Almighty.

[Hebrews 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">heb 13:7</span></span>

Remember them which have the rule over you - This clause should be
translated, Remember your guides, των ἡγουμενων, who have spoken unto
you the doctrine of God. Theodoret's note on this verse is very
judicious: "He intends the saints who were dead, Stephen the first
martyr, James the brother of John, and James called the Just. And there
were many others who were taken off by the Jewish rage. 'Consider these,
(said he), and, observing their example, imitate their faith.'" This
remembrance of the dead saints, with admiration of their virtues, and a
desire to imitate them, is, says Dr. Macknight, the only worship which
is due to them from the living.

Considering the end of their conversation - Ὡν αναθεωρουντες την εκβασιν
της αναστροφης· "The issue of whose course of life most carefully
consider." They lived to get good and do good; they were faithful to
their God and his cause; they suffered persecution; and for the
testimony of Jesus died a violent death. God never left them; no, he
never forsook them; so that they were happy in their afflictions, and
glorious in their death. Carefully consider this; act as they did; keep
the faith, and God will keep you.

[Hebrews 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">heb 13:8</span></span>

Jesus Christ the same yesterday - In all past times there was no way to
the holiest but through the blood of Jesus, either actually shed, or
significantly typified. To-day - he is the lamb newly slain, and
continues to appear in the presence of God for us. For ever - to the
conclusion of time, he will be the way, the truth, and the life, none
coming to the Father but through him; and throughout eternity, εις τους
αιωνας, it will appear that all glorified human spirits owe their
salvation to his infinite merit. This Jesus was thus witnessed of by
your guides, who are already departed to glory. Remember Him; remember
them; and take heed to yourselves.

[Hebrews 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">heb 13:9</span></span>

Be not carried about - Μη περιφερεσθε· Be not whirled about. But ABCD,
and almost every other MS. of importance, with the Syriac, Coptic,
Arabic, Vulgate, and several of the Greek fathers, have μη παραφερεσθε,
be not carried away, which is undoubtedly the true reading, and
signifies here, do not apostatize; permit not yourselves to be carried
off from Christ and his doctrine.

Divers and strange doctrines - Διδαχαις, ποικιλαις· Variegated
doctrines; those that blended the law and the Gospel, and brought in the
Levitical sacrifices and institutions in order to perfect the Christian
system. Remember the old covenant is abolished; the new alone is in
force.

Strange doctrines, διδαχαις ξεναις, foreign doctrines; such as have no
apostolical authority to recommend them.

That the heart be established with grace - It is well to have the heart,
the mind, and conscience, fully satisfied with the truth and efficacy of
the Gospel; for so the word χαρις should be understood here, which is
put in opposition to βρωμασιν, meats, signifying here the Levitical
institutions, and especially its sacrifices, these being emphatically
termed meats, because the offerers were permitted to feast upon them
after the blood had been poured out before the Lord. See [Lev
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#015.md); [Deu
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#006.md), [Deu
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#007.md).

Which have not profited them - Because they neither took away guilt,
cleansed the heart, nor gave power over sin.

[Hebrews 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">heb 13:10</span></span>

We have an altar - The altar is here put for the sacrifice on the altar;
the Christian altar is the Christian sacrifice, which is Christ Jesus,
with all the benefits of his passion and death. To these privileges they
had no right who continued to offer the Levitical sacrifices, and to
trust in them for remission of sins.

[Hebrews 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">heb 13:11</span></span>

For the bodies of those beasts - Though in making covenants, and in some
victims offered according to the law, the flesh of the sacrifice was
eaten by the offerers; yet the flesh of the sin-offering might no man
eat: when the blood was sprinkled before the holy place to make an
atonement for their souls, the skins, flesh, entrails, etc., were
carried without the camp, and there entirely consumed by fire; and this
entire consumption, according to the opinion of some, was intended to
show that sin was not pardoned by such offerings. For, as eating the
other sacrifices intimated they were made partakers of the benefits
procured by those sacrifices, so, not being permitted to eat of the
sin-offering proved that they had no benefit from it, and that they must
look to the Christ, whose sacrifice is pointed out, that they might
receive that real pardon of sin which the shedding of his blood could
alone procure. While, therefore, they continued offering those
sacrifices, and refused to acknowledge the Christ, they had no right to
any of the blessings procured by him, and it is evident they could have
no benefit from their own.

[Hebrews 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">heb 13:12</span></span>

That he might sanctify the people - That he might consecrate them to
God, and make an atonement for their sins, he suffered without the gate
at Jerusalem, as the sin-offering was consumed without the camp when the
tabernacle abode in the wilderness. Perhaps all this was typical of the
abolition of the Jewish sacrifices, and the termination of the whole
Levitical system of worship. He left the city, denounced its final
destruction, and abandoned it to its fate; and suffered without the gate
to bring the Gentiles to God.

[Hebrews 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">heb 13:13</span></span>

Let us go forth therefore unto him - Let us leave this city and system,
devoted to destruction, and take refuge in Jesus alone, bearing his
reproach-being willing to be accounted the refuse of all things, and the
worst of men, for his sake who bore the contradiction of sinners against
himself, and was put to death as a malefactor.

[Hebrews 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">heb 13:14</span></span>

For here have we no continuing city - Here is an elegant and forcible
allusion to the approaching destruction of Jerusalem. The Jerusalem that
was below was about to be burnt with fire, and erased to the ground; the
Jerusalem that was from above was that alone which could be considered
to be μενουσαν, permanent. The words seem to say: "Arise, and depart;
for this is not your rest: it is polluted:" About seven or eight years
after this, Jerusalem was wholly destroyed.

[Hebrews 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">heb 13:15</span></span>

By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise - He has now
fulfilled all vision and prophecy, has offered the last bloody sacrifice
which God will ever accept; and as he is the gift of God's love to the
world, let us through him offer the sacrifice of praise to God
continually, this being the substitute for all the Levitical sacrifices.

The Jews allowed that, in the time of the Messiah, all sacrifices,
except the sacrifice of praise, should cease. To this maxim the apostle
appears to allude; and, understood in this way, his words are much more
forcible. In Vayikra Rabba, sect. 9, fol. 153, and Rabbi Tanchum, fol.
55: "Rabbi Phineas, Rabbi Levi, and Rabbi Jochanan, from the authority
of Rabbi Menachem of Galilee, said, In the time of the Messiah all
sacrifice shall cease, except the sacrifice of praise." This was, in
effect, quoting the authority of one of their own maxims, that now was
the time of the Messiah; that Jesus was that Messiah; that the Jewish
sacrificial system was now abolished; and that no sacrifice would now be
accepted of God, except the sacrifice of praise for the gift of his Son.

That is, the fruit of our lips - This expression is probably borrowed
from [Hos 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#002.md), in the version of the
Septuagint, καρπον χειλεων which in the Hebrew text is פרים שפתינו parim
sephatheinu, "the heifers of our lips." This may refer primarily to the
sacrifices, heifers, calves, etc., which they had vowed to God; so that
the calves of their lips were the sacrifices which they had promised.
But how could the Septuagint translate פרים parim, calves, by καρπον,
fruit? Very easily, if they had in their copy פרי peri, the mem being
omitted; and thus the word would be literally fruit, and not calves.
This reading, however, is not found in any of the MSS. hitherto
collated.

[Hebrews 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">heb 13:16</span></span>

But to do good and to communicate - These are continual sacrifices which
God requires, and which will spring from a sense of God's love in Christ
Jesus. Praise to God for his unspeakable gift, and acts of kindness to
men for God's sake. No reliance, even on the infinitely meritorious
sacrifice of Christ, can be acceptable in the sight of God if a man have
not love and charity towards his neighbor. Praise, prayer, and
thanksgiving to God, with works of charity and mercy to man, are the
sacrifices which every genuine follower of Christ must offer: and they
are the proofs that a man belongs to Christ; and he who does not bear
these fruits gives full evidence, whatever his creed may be, that he is
no Christian.

[Hebrews 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">heb 13:17</span></span>

Obey them that have the rule over you - Obey your leaders, τοις
ἡγουμενοις. He is not fit to rule who is not capable of guiding. See on
[Heb 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#007), (note.md). In the former verse
the apostle exhorts them to remember those who had been their leaders,
and to imitate their faith; in this he exhorts them to obey the leaders
they now had, and to submit to their authority in all matters of
doctrine and discipline, on the ground that they watched for their
souls, and should have to give an account of their conduct to God. If
this conduct were improper, they must give in their report before the
great tribunal with grief; but in it must be given: if holy and pure,
they would give it in with joy. It is an awful consideration that many
pastors, who had loved their flocks as their own souls, shall be obliged
to accuse them before God for either having rejected or neglected the
great salvation.

[Hebrews 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">heb 13:18</span></span>

Pray for us - Even the success of apostles depended, in a certain way,
on the prayers of the Church. Few Christian congregations feel, as they
ought, that it is their bounden duty to pray for the success of the
Gospel, both among themselves and in the world. The Church is weak,
dark, poor, and imperfect, because it prays little.

We trust we have a good conscience - We are persuaded that we have a
conscience that not only acquits us of all fraud and sinister design,
but assures us that in simplicity and godly sincerity we have labored to
promote the welfare of you and of all mankind.

To live honestly - Εν πασι καλως θελοντες αναστρεφεσθαι· Willing in all
things to conduct ourselves well - to behave with decency and propriety.

[Hebrews 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">heb 13:19</span></span>

The rather to do this - That is, pray for us, that, being enabled to
complete the work which God has given us here to do, we may be the
sooner enabled to visit you. It is evident, from this, that the people
to whom this epistle was written knew well who was the author of it; nor
does there appear, in any place, any design in the writer to conceal his
name, and how the epistle came to lack a name it is impossible to say. I
have sometimes thought that a part of the beginning might have been
lost, as it not only begins without a name, but begins very abruptly.

[Hebrews 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">heb 13:20</span></span>

Now the God of peace - We have often seen that peace among the Hebrews
signifies prosperity of every kind. The God of peace is the same as the
God of all blessedness, who has at his disposal all temporal and eternal
good; who loves mankind, and has provided them a complete salvation.

Brought again from the dead our Lord - As our Lord's sacrificial death
is considered as an atonement offered to the Divine justice, God's
acceptance of it as an atonement is signified by his raising the human
nature of Christ from the dead; and hence this raising of Christ is,
with the utmost propriety, attributed to God the Father, as this proves
his acceptance of the sacrificial offering.

That great Shepherd of the sheep - This is a title of our blessed Lord,
given to him by the prophets; so [Isa
40:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#011.md); He shall feed his flock like a
shepherd; He shall gather the lambs with his arms, and carry them in his
bosom, and shall gently lead those which are with young: and [Eze
34:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#023.md); I will set up one shepherd over
them, and he shall feed them; even my servant David, (i.e. the beloved,
viz. Jesus), and he shall feed them, and be their shepherd: and [Zac
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#007.md); Awake, O sword, against my
shepherd - smite the shepherd, and the flock shall be scattered. In all
these places the term shepherd is allowed to belong to our blessed Lord;
and he appropriates it to himself, [Joh
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#011.md), by calling himself the good
Shepherd, who, lays down his life for the sheep.

Through the blood of the everlasting covenant - Some understand this in
the following way, that "God brought back our Lord from the dead on
account of his having shed his blood to procure the everlasting
covenant." Others, that the Lord Jesus became the great Shepherd and
Savior of the sheep by shedding his blood to procure and ratify the
everlasting covenant." The sense, however, will appear much plainer if
we connect this with the following verse: "Now the God of peace, who
brought again from the dead, our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the
sheep, make you, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, perfect
in every good work to do his will." The Christian system is termed the
everlasting covenant, to distinguish it from the temporary covenant made
with the Israelites at Mount Sinai; and to show that it is the last
dispensation of grace to the world, and shall endure to the end of time.

[Hebrews 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">heb 13:21</span></span>

Make you perfect - Καταρτισια ὑμας· Put you completely in joint. See the
note on [Co2 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#009.md), where the meaning
of the original word is largely considered. From the following terms we
see what the apostle meant by the perfection for which he prays. They
were to do the will of God in every good work, from God working in them
that which is well pleasing in his sight.

1\. This necessarily implies a complete change in the whole soul, that
God may be well pleased with whatsoever he sees in it; and this supposes
its being cleansed from all sin, for God's sight cannot be pleased with
any thing that is unholy.

2\. This complete inward purity is to produce an outward conformity to
God's will, so they were to be made perfect in every good work.

3\. The perfection within and the perfection without were to be produced
by the blood of the everlasting covenant; for although God is love, yet
it is not consistent with his justice or holiness to communicate any
good to mankind but through his Son, and through him as having died for
the offenses of the human race.

To whom be glory for ever - As God does all in, by, and through Christ
Jesus, to him be the honor of his own work ascribed through time and
eternity. Amen.

[Hebrews 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">heb 13:22</span></span>

Suffer the word of exhortation - Bear the word or doctrine of this
exhortation. This seems to be an epithet of this whole epistle: and as
the apostle had in it shown the insufficiency of the Levitical system to
atone for sin and save the soul; and had proved that it was the design
of God that it should be abolished; and had proved also that it was now
abolished by the coming of Christ, whom he had shown to be a greater
priest than Aaron, higher than all the angels, the only Son of God as to
his human nature, and the Creator, Governor, and Judge of all; and that
their city was shortly to be destroyed; he might suppose that they would
feel prejudiced against him, and thus lose the benefit of his kind
intentions toward them; therefore he entreats them to bear the
exhortation which, notwithstanding the great extent of the subject, he
had included in a short compass.

I have written a letter unto you in few words - Perhaps it would be
better to translate δια βραχεων επεστειλα ὑμιν, I have written to you
briefly, as επιστελλειν often signifies simply to write, and this
appears to be its meaning here.

[Hebrews 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">heb 13:23</span></span>

Know ye that our brother Timothy - The word ἡμων, our, which is supplied
by our translators, is very probably genuine, as it is found in ACD\*,
ten others, the Syriac, Erpen's Arabic, the Coptic, Armenian, Slavonic,
and Vulgate.

Is set at liberty - Απολελυμενον· Is sent away; for there is no evidence
that Timothy had been imprisoned. It is probable that the apostle refers
here to his being sent into Macedonia, [Phi
2:19-24](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#019.md), in order that he might bring
the apostle an account of the affairs of the Church in that country. In
none of St. Paul's epistles, written during his confinement in Rome,
does he give any intimation of Timothy's imprisonment, although it
appears from [Phi 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001.md); [Col
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#001.md); [Plm
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#001.md); that he was with Paul during the
greatest part of the time.

With whom, if he come shortly, I will see you - Therefore Paul himself,
or the writer of this epistle, was now at liberty, as he had the
disposal of his person and time in his own power. Some suppose that
Timothy did actually visit Paul about this time, and that both together
visited the Churches in Judea.

[Hebrews 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">heb 13:24</span></span>

Salute all them that have the rule over you - Salute all your leaders or
guides, τους ἡγουμενους ὑμων. See on [Heb
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#007) (note.md) and [Heb
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#017) (note.md).

And all the saints - All the Christians; for this is the general meaning
of the term in most parts of St. Paul's writings. But a Christian was
then a saint, i.e. by profession a holy person; and most of the
primitive Christians were actually such. But in process of time the term
was applied to all that bore the Christian name; as elect, holy people,
sanctified, etc., were to the nation of the Jews, when both their piety
and morality were at a very low ebb.

They of Italy salute you - Therefore it is most likely that the writer
of this epistle was then in some part of Italy, from which he had not as
yet removed after his being released from prison. By they of Italy
probably the apostle means the Jew's there who had embraced the
Christian faith. These salutations show what a brotherly feeling existed
in every part of the Christian Church; even those who had not seen each
other yet loved one another, and felt deeply interested for each other's
welfare.

[Hebrews 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">heb 13:25</span></span>

Grace be with you all - May the Divine favor ever rest upon you and
among you; and may you receive, from that source of all good, whatsoever
is calculated to make you wise, holy, useful, and happy! And may you be
enabled to persevere in the truth to the end of your lives! Amen. May it
be so! May God seal the prayer by giving the blessings!

The subscriptions to this epistle are, as in other cases, various and
contradictory.

The Versions are as follow: -

The Epistle to the Hebrews was written from Roman Italy, and sent by the
hand of Timothy. - Syriac.

Vulgate nothing, in the present printed copies.

It was written from Italy by Timothy: with the assistance of God,
disposing every thing right, the fourteen epistles of the blessed Paul
are completed, according to the copy from which they have been
transcribed.

May the Lord extend his benedictions to us. Amen. - Arabic.

The Epistle to the Hebrews is completed. The end. - Aethiopic.

Written in Italy, and sent by Timothy. - Coptic.

The Manuscripts, and ancient editions taken from MSS., are not more to
be relied on.

To the Hebrews, written from Rome. - Codex Alexandrinus.

The epistles of Saint Paul the apostle arc finished. - Colophon, at the
end of this epistle; in one of the first printed Bibles; and in an
ancient MS. of the Vulgate in my own collection.

The end of the Epistle to the Hebrews. - Greek Text of the Complutensian
Edition.

The Epistle of the blessed Paul to the Hebrews is finished. - Latin Text
of ditto.

To the Hebrews. - The Epistle of Paul the apostle to the Hebrews. - The
Epistle to the Hebrews, written from Italy. - From Athens. - From Italy
by Timothy. - Written in the Hebrew tongue, etc. - Various MSS.

Written to the Hebrews from Italy by Timothy. - Common Greek Text.

That it was neither written from Athens, nor in the Hebrew tongue, is
more than probable; and that it was not sent by Timothy, is evident from
[Heb 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#023.md). For the author, time,
place, and people to whom sent, see the Introduction.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: James Introduction](jam000.md)

</div>
