<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hosea Index](hos)  
  [Previous](hos002)  [Next](hos004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#001)

[Hosea](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hos 3:0</span></span>

By the prophet's taking back his wife, for whom he (her friend or
husband) still retained has affection, though she had proved unfaithful;
by his entering into a new contract with her; and by his giving her
hopes of reconciliation, after she should for some time prove, as in a
state of widowhood, the sincerity of her repentance; is represented the
gracious manner in which God will restore the Jews from the Babylonish
captivity, [Hos 3:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#001). It is also very
strongly intimated that the whole house of Israel will be added to the
Church of Christ in the latter days, [Hos
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005).

[Hosea 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hos 3:1</span></span>

Go ye, love a woman - This is a different command from that mentioned in
the first chapter. That denoted the infidelity of the kingdom of Israel,
and God's divorce of them. He gave them up to their enemies, and caused
them to be carried into captivity. The woman mentioned here represents
one who was a lawful wife joining herself to a paramour; then divorced
by her husband; afterwards repenting, and desirous to be joined to her
spouse; ceasing from her adulterous commerce, but not yet reconciled to
him. This was the state and disposition of the Jews under the Babylonish
captivity. Though separated from their own idols, they continued
separated from their God. He is still represented as having affectionate
feelings towards them; awaiting their full repentance and contrition, in
order to renew the marriage covenant. These things are pointed out by
the symbolical actions of the prophet.

Beloved of her friend - Or, a lover of evil; or, loving another: for the
Hebrew words אהבת רע mean one who loves evil or a friend: because רע
signifies a friend, or evil, according as it is pointed. The former
seems to be its best sense here; רע rea is a friend; רע ra is evil.

According to the love of the Lord - This woman, who had proved false to
her husband, was still beloved by him, though he could not acknowledge
her; as the Israelites were beloved by the Lord, while they were looking
after other gods. The flagons of wine were probably such as were used
for libations, or drunk in idol feasts. Others think that the words
should be translated cakes of dried grapes, sweet cakes, consecrated
wafers.

[Hosea 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">hos 3:2</span></span>

Fifteen pieces of silver - If they were shekels, the price of this woman
was about two pounds five shillings.

A homer of barley - As the homer was about eight bushels, or something
more, the homer and half was about twelve or thirteen bushels.

[Hosea 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">hos 3:3</span></span>

Thou shalt abide for me many days - He did not take her home, but made a
contract with her that, if she would abstain from her evil ways, he
would take her to himself after a sufficient trial. In the meantime he
gave her the money and the barley to subsist upon, that she might not be
under the temptation of becoming again unfaithful.

So will I also be for thee - That is, if thou, Israel, wilt keep thyself
separate from thy idolatry, and give me proof, by thy total abstinence
from idols, that thou wilt be my faithful worshipper, I will receive
thee again, and in the meantime support thee with the necessaries of
life while thou art in the land of thy captivity. This is farther
illustrated in the following verses.

[Hosea 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">hos 3:4</span></span>

Many days without a king - Hitherto this prophecy has been literally
fulfilled. Since the destruction of the temple by the Romans they have
neither had king nor prince, nor any civil government of their own, but
have lived in different nations of the earth as mere exiles. They have
neither priests nor sacrifices nor urim nor thummim; no prophet, no
oracle, no communication of any kind from God.

Without an image ephod - teraphim - The Septuagint read, Ουδε ουσης
θυσιας, ουδε οντος θυσιαστηριου, ουδε ἱερατειας, ουδε δηλων: "Without a
sacrifice, without an altar, without a priesthood, and without oracles;"
that is, the urim and thummim. The Vulgate, Arabic, and Syriac read
nearly the same. Instead of מצבה matstsebah, an image, they have
evidently read מזבח mizbeach, an altar; the letters of these words being
very similar, and easily mistaken for each other. But instead of either,
one, if not two, of Kennicott's MSS. has מנחה minchah, an oblation.

What is called image may signify any kind of pillar, such as God forbade
them to erect [Lev 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#001), lest it
should be an incitement to idolatry.

The ephod was the high priest's garment of ceremony; the teraphim were
some kind of amulets, telesms, or idolatrous images; the urim and
thummim belonged to the breastplate, which was attached to the ephod.

Instead of teraphim some would read seraphim, changing the ת tau into ש
sin; these are an order of the celestial hierarchy. In short, all the
time that the Israelites were in captivity in Babylon, they seem to have
been as wholly without forms of idolatrous worship as they were without
the worship of God; and this may be what the prophet designs: they were
totally without any kind of public worship, whether true or false. As
well without images and teraphim, as they were without sacrifice and
ephod, though still idolaters in their hearts. They were in a state of
the most miserable darkness, which was to continue many days; and it has
continued now nearly eighteen hundred years, and must continue yet
longer, till they acknowledge him as their Savior whom they crucified as
a blasphemer.

[Hosea 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">hos 3:5</span></span>

Afterward shall the children of Israel return - Shall repent of their
iniquities, and seek the Lord; lay aside their mock worship, and serve
the true God in spirit and in truth.

And David their king - Or as the Targum, "They shall obey the Messiah,
the Son of David their King;" and thus look believingly upon him whom
they have pierced, and mourn. And then shall their long spiritual
darkness and dismal captivity have an end; but not before. The Messiah,
as David, is promised in [Jer 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#009)
(note); [Eze 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#023) (note); [Eze
37:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#022) (note), and in this place of
Hosea. Some think that the family of David is intended; but if we go to
the rigour of the letter, the house of Israel was scarcely ever
perfectly submissive to David. And we know that after the death of
Solomon they never acknowledged the house of David till they were all
carried away captive; and certainly never since. And to say that
Zerubbabel is here meant, is not supportable, as the very short and
imperfect obedience of the Jews to Zerubbabel can never comport with the
high terms of this and similar prophecies. We are obliged, therefore,
from the evidence of these prophecies, from the evidence of the above
facts, from the evidence of the rabbins themselves, and from the
evidence of the New Testament, to consider these texts as applying
solely to Jesus Christ, the promised Messiah, who has been a light to
lighten the Gentiles, and will yet be the glory of his people Israel.
There is a strange propensity in some men to deny these evidences of
Christianity, while they profess to believe its doctrines.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 4](hos004)

</div>
