<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hosea Index](hos)  
  [Previous](hos013)  [Next](joe000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#001)

[Hosea](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hos 14:0</span></span>

By the terrible denunciation of vengeance which concludes the preceding
chapter, the prophet is led to exhort Israel to repentance, furnishing
them with a beautiful form of prayer, very suitable to the occasion,
[Hos 14:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#001). Upon which God, ever
ready to pardon the penitent, is introduced making large promises of
blessings, in allusion to those copious dews which refresh the green
herbs, and which frequently denote, not only temporal salvation, but
also the rich and refreshing comforts of the Gospel, [Hos
14:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#004). Their reformation from
idolatry is foretold, and their consequent prosperity, under the emblem
of a green flourishing fir tree, [Hos
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#008); but these promises are confined
to those who may bring forth the fruits of righteousness, and the wicked
are declared to have no share in them, [Hos
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#009).

[Hosea 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hos 14:1</span></span>

O Israel, return unto the Lord - These words may be considered as
addressed to the people now in captivity; suffering much, but having
still much more to suffer if they did not repent. But it seems all these
evils might yet be prevented, though so positively predicted, if the
people would repent and return; and the very exhortation to this
repentance shows that they still had power to repent, and that God was
ready to save them and avert all these evils. All this is easily
accounted for on the doctrine of the contingency of events, i.e., the
poising a multitude of events on the possibility of being and not being,
and leaving the will of man to turn the scale; and that God will not
foreknow a thing as absolutely certain, which his will has determined to
make contingent. A doctrine against which some solemn men have
blasphemed, and philosophic infidels declaimed; but without which fate
and dire necessity must be the universal governors, prayer be a useless
meddling, and Providence nothing but the ineluctable adamantine chain of
unchangeable events; all virtue is vice, and vice virtue, or there is no
distinction between them, each being eternally determined and
unalterably fixed by a sovereign and uncontrollable will and unvarying
necessity, from the operation of which no soul of man can escape, and no
occurrence in the universe be otherwise than it is. From such blasphemy,
and from the monthly publications which avouch it, good Lord, deliver
us!

[Hosea 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">hos 14:2</span></span>

Take with you words - And you may be assured that you pray aright, when
you use the words which God himself has put in your mouths. On this very
ground there is a potency in the Lord's Prayer, when offered up
believingly, beyond what can be found in any human composition. And it
may be presumed that it was this consideration that induced our
reformers to introduce it so frequently in the public liturgy.

See the order of God's directions here: -

1\. Hearing these merciful invitations, believe them to be true.

2\. Cast aside your idols; and return to God as your Maker, King, and
Savior.

3\. Take with you the words by which you have been encouraged, and plead
them before God.

4\. Remember your iniquity, deeply deplore it, and beg of God to take it
all away.

5\. Let faith be in exercise to receive what God waits to impart.
"Receive us graciously;" וקח טוב vekach tob, receive, or let us receive
good; when thou has emptied us of evil, fill us with goodness.

6\. Be then determined, through grace, to live to his glory, "so shall
we render thee the calves" (פרים parim, for which the versions in
general read פרי peri, fruits, omitting the ם mem) "of our lips;" the
sacrifices of praise, thanksgiving, gratitude, and the hearty obedience
which our lips have often promised.

7\. Having thus determined, specify your resolutions to depend on God
alone for all that can make you wise, useful, holy, and happy. The
resolutions are: -

1\. Asshur shall not save us - We will neither trust in, nor fear, this
rich and powerful king. We will not look either to riches or power for
true rest and peace of mind.

2\. We will not ride upon horses - We shall no more fix our hopes on the
proud Egyptian cavalry, to deliver us out of the hands of enemies to
whom thy Divine justice has delivered us. We will expect no rest nor
happiness in the elegances of life, and gratification of our senses.

3\. Neither will we say any more to the work of our hands, Ye are our
gods - We will not trust in any thing without us; nor even in any good
thing we are able to do through thy grace; knowing we have nothing but
what we have received. We will trust in thy infinite mercy for our final
salvation.

4\. And we will do all this from the conviction, that in thee the
fatherless findeth mercy; for we are all alike helpless, desolate,
perishing orphans, till translated into thy family.

[Hosea 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">hos 14:4</span></span>

I will heal their backsliding - Here is the answer of God to these
prayers and resolutions. See its parts: -

1\. Ye have backslidden and fallen, and are grievously and mortally
wounded by that fall; but I, who am the Author of life, and who redeem
from death, will heal all these wounds and spiritual diseases.

2\. I will love them freely - נדבה nedabah, after a liberal, princely
manner. I will love them so as to do them incessant good. It shall not
be a love of affection merely, but shall be a beneficial love. A love
that not only feels delight in itself, but fills them with delight who
are its objects, by making them unutterably and supremely happy.

3\. For mine anger is turned away from him - Because he has turned back
to me. Thus God and man become friends.

[Hosea 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">hos 14:5</span></span>

I will be as the dew unto Israel - On these metaphors I gladly avail
myself of the elegant and just observations of Bp. Lowth. "These verses
([Hos 14:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#005)) contain gracious
promises of God's favor and blessings upon Israel's conversion. In the
fifth verse, it is described by that refreshment which copious dews give
to the grass in summer. If we consider the nature of the climate, and
the necessity of dews in so hot a country, not only to refresh, but
likewise to preserve life; if we consider also the beauty of the
oriental lilies, the fragrance of the cedars which grow upon Lebanon,
the beauteous appearance which the spreading olive trees afforded, the
exhilarating coolness caused by the shade of such trees, and the
aromatic smell exhaled by the cedars; we shall then partly understand
the force of the metaphors here employed by the prophet; but their full
energy no one can conceive, till he feels both the want, and enjoys the
advantage, of the particulars referred to in that climate where the
prophet wrote." - Lowth's twelfth and nineteenth prelection; and Dodd on
the place.

What a glorious prophecy! What a wonderful prophet! How sublime, how
energetic, how just! The great master prophet, Isaiah, alone could have
done this better. And these promises are not for Israel merely after the
flesh; they are for all the people of God. We have a lot and portion in
the matter; God also places his love upon us. Here the reader must feel
some such sentiment as the shepherd in Virgil, when enraptured with the
elegy which his associate had composed on their departed friend. The
phraseology and metaphors are strikingly similar; and therefore I shall
produce it.

Tale tuum carmen nobis, divine poeta,

Quale sopor fesses in gramine, quale per aestum

Dulcis aquae saliente sitim restinguere rivo.

Nec calamis solum aequiparas, sed voce magistrum.

Fortunate puer! tu nunc eris alter ab illo.

Nos tamen haec quocunque modo tibi nostra vicissim

Dicemus, Daphninque tuum tollemus ad astra:

Daphnin ad astra feremus: amavit nos quoque Daphnis.

Virgil. Ecl. v., ver. 45.

"O heavenly poet, such thy verse appears,

So sweet, so charming to my ravish'd ears,

As to the weary swain with cares oppress'd,

Beneath the sylvan shade, refreshing rest;

As to the feverish traveler, when first

He finds a crystal stream to quench his thirst.

In singing, as in piping, you excel;

And scarce your master could perform so well.

O fortunate young man! at least your lays

Are next to his, and claim the second praise.

Such as they are, my rural songs I join

To raise your Daphnis to the powers divine;

For Daphnis was my friend, as well as thine."

[Hosea 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">hos 14:7</span></span>

They that dwell under his shadow shall return - The Targum is curious:
"They shall be gathered together from the midst of their captivity; they
shall dwell under the shadow of his Christ, and the dead shall revive."

They shall revive as the corn - The justness and beauty of this metaphor
is not generally perceived. After the corn has been a short time above
the earth, in a single spike, the blades begin to separate, and the
stalk to spring out of the center. The side leaves turn back to make way
for the protruding stalk; and fall bending down to the earth, assuming a
withered appearance, though still attached to the plant. To look at the
corn in this state, no one, unacquainted with the circumstance, could
entertain any sanguine hope of a copious harvest. In a short time other
leaves spring out; the former freshen, and begin to stand erect; and the
whole seems to revive from a vegetative death. This is the circumstance
to which the prophet refers "they shall revive as the corn." Of this a
prudent and profitable use may be made.

1\. When a soul is first "drawn by the cords of love," [Hos
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#004), every thing seems to it
promising, comfortable, and delightful, like the corn in its first
state.

2\. But when the Spirit of judgment brings to the light of conscience
the hidden things of iniquity, and repentance is deepened into
contrition, the broken and the contrite heart groans, and thinks that
all is lost; deep distress takes place, and discouragement succeeds
discouragement. This answers to the corn in its second state.

3\. By and by the pardon comes, and God's love is shed abroad in the
heart by the Holy Ghost; every hope is revived and realized, the full
corn in the ear becomes manifest; and this answers to the corn in its
third state. "They shall revive as the corn." Glory be to God for his
unspeakable gift!

[Hosea 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">hos 14:8</span></span>

What have I to do any more with idols? - The conversion of Ephraim is
now as complete as if was sincere. God hears and observes this.

I am like a green fir tree - Perhaps these words should be joined to the
preceding, as Newcome has done, and be a part of God's speech to
Ephraim. "I have heard him; and I have seen him as a flourishing fir
tree." He is become strong and vigorous; and from his present appearance
of healthiness, his future increase and prosperity may be safely
anticipated.

From me is thy fruit found - All thy goodness springs from the principle
of grace which I have planted in thy soul; for as the earth cannot bring
forth fruit without the blessing of God, sending the dews and rains,
with the genial rays of the sun, so neither can the soul of man, even of
the most pious, bear fruit, without a continual influence from the Most
High. Without the former, neither grass could grow for cattle, nor corn
for the service of man; without the latter, no seeds of righteousness
could take root, no stalk of promise could grow, no fruit of grace could
be produced. And the unclean spirit, which was cast out, would soon
return; and, finding his former house empty, swept, and garnished, would
re-enter with seven demons of greater power and worse influence; and the
latter end of that man would be worse than the first. Reader, ever
consider that all thy good must be derived from God; and all that good
must be preserved in thee by his continued influence of light, love, and
power upon thy soul.

[Hosea 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">hos 14:9</span></span>

Who is wise, and he shall understand these things? - What things? Those
which relate to the backslidings, iniquity, and punishment of Israel;
and to the mercy and kindness of God in their promised restoration. The
things which belong to the work of sin in the heart; the things which
belong to the work of grace in the soul; and particularly the things
mentioned in this wonderful chapter.

Prudent, and he shall know them? - He who endeavors to understand them,
who lays his heart to them, such a person shall understand them.

For the ways of the Lord are right - This is the conclusion which the
prophet makes from the whole. All God's conduct, both in the
dispensation of justice and mercy, is right: all as it should be, all as
it must be; because he is too wise to err, too good to be unkind.

The just shall walk, in them - This is a truth which he will always
acknowledge; and illustrate it by a righteous and godly life.

But the transgressors shall fall therein - Howsoever good they might
have been before, if they do not consider the necessity of depending
upon God; of receiving all their light, life, power, and love from him;
ever evidencing that faith which worketh by love; maintaining an
obedient conduct, and having respect to all God's precepts; they shall
fall, even in the "way of righteousness." When still using the Divine
ordinances, and associating with God's people, they shall perish from
the way; and be like Ephraim, who once "spoke trembling," and "was
exalted in Israel," who was "God's beloved son," and "called out of
Egypt;" yet, by "offending in Baal," giving way to "the idols of his
heart," fell from God, fell into the hands of his enemies, and became a
wretched thrall in a heathen land.

"Whoso is wise, let him understand these things!

Whoso is prudent, let him know them!" -

He who is well instructed will make a proper application of what he has
here read; will tremble at the threatenings, and embrace the promises,
of his God.

The Targum is worthy the most serious attention.

"The ways of the Lord are right, and the just who walk in them shall
live for ever; but the ungodly, because they have not walked in them,
shall be delivered into hell."

How instructive, how convincing, how awakening, and yet how consolatory,
are the words of this prophecy! Reader, lay them to heart. A godly mind
cannot consider them in vain; such shall know them, and know that the
ways of the Lord are right.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joel Introduction](joe000)

</div>
