<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Hosea Index](hos.md)  
  [Previous](hos007)  [Next](hos009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#001.md)

[Hosea](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hos 8:0</span></span>

This chapter begins with threatening some hostile invasion in short and
broken sentences, full of rapidity, and expressive of sudden danger and
alarm: "The trumpet to thy mouth; he cometh as an eagle," [Hos
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#001.md). And why? For their hypocrisy,
[Hos 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#002.md); iniquity, [Hos
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#003.md); treason (see [Kg2
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#013.md), [Kg2
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#017).md) and idolatry, [Hos
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#004.md); particularly the worshipping of
the calves of Dan and Bethel, [Hos
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#005.md), [Hos
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#006.md). The folly and unprofitableness of
pursuing evil courses is then set forth in brief but very emphatic
terms. The labor of the wicked is vain, like sowing of the wind; and the
fruit of it destructive as the whirlwind. Like corn blighted in the bud,
their toil shall have no recompense; or if it should have a little,
their enemies shell devour it, [Hos
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#007.md). They themselves, too, shall
suffer the same fate, and shall be treated by the nations of Assyria and
Egypt as the vile sherds of a broken vessel, [Hos
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#008.md), [Hos
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#009.md). Their incorrigible idolatry is
again declared to be the cause of their approaching captivity under the
king of Assyria. And as they delighted in idolatrous altars, there they
shall have these in abundance, [Hos
8:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#010.md). The last words contain a
prediction of the destruction of the fenced cities of Judah, because the
people trusted in these for deliverance, and not in the Lord their God.

[Hosea 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hos 8:1</span></span>

Set the trumpet to thy mouth - Sound another alarm. Let them know that
an enemy is fast approaching.

As an eagle against the house of the Lord - of this be a prophecy
against Judah, as some have supposed, then by the eagle Nebuchadnezzar
is meant, who is often compared to this king of birds. See [Eze
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#003.md); [Jer
48:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#040.md); [Jer
49:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#022.md); [Dan
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#004.md).

But if the prophecy be against Israel, which is the most likely, then
Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, is intended, who, for his rapidity,
avarice, rapacity, and strength, is fitly compared to this royal bird.
He is represented here as hovering over the house of God, as the eagle
does over the prey which he has just espied, and on which he is
immediately to pounce.

[Hosea 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">hos 8:2</span></span>

Israel shalt cry - The rapidity of the eagle's flight is well imitated
in the rapidity of the sentences in this place.

My God, we know thee - The same sentiment, from the same sort of
persons, under the same feelings, as that in the Gospel of St. Matthew,
[Mat 7:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#029.md) : "Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have cast out devils? Then will
I profess unto them, I never Knew You."

[Hosea 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">hos 8:4</span></span>

They have set up kings, but not by me - Properly speaking, not one of
the kings of Israel, from the defection of the ten tribes from the house
of David, was the anointed or the Lord.

I knew it not - It had not my approbation. In this sense the word know
is frequently understood.

That they may be cut off - That is, They shall be cut off in consequence
of their idolatry.

[Hosea 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">hos 8:5</span></span>

Thy calf, O Samaria, hath cast thee off - Bishop Newcome translates:
"Remove far from thee thy calf, O Samaria!" Abandon thy idolatry; for my
anger is kindled against thee.

How long will it be ere they attain to innocency? - How long will ye
continue your guilty practices? When shall it be said that ye are from
these vices? The calf or ox, which was the object of the idolatrous
worship of the Israelites, was a supreme deity in Egypt; and it was
there they learned this idolatry. A white ox was worshipped under the
name of Apis, at Memphis; and another ox under the name of Mnevis, was
worshipped at On, or Heliopolis. To Osiris the males of this genus were
consecrated, and the females to Isis. It is a most ancient superstition,
and still prevails in the East. The cow is a most sacred animal among
the Hindoos.

[Hosea 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">hos 8:6</span></span>

The workman made it; therefore it is not God - As God signifies the
supreme eternal Good, the Creator and Upholder of all things, therefore
the workman cannot make Him who made all things. This is an overwhelming
argument against all idols. Nothing need be added. The workman has made
them; therefore they are not God.

[Hosea 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">hos 8:7</span></span>

They have sown the wind, and they shall reap the whirlwind - As the
husbandman reaps the same kind of grain which he has sown, but in far
greater abundance, thirty, sixty, or one hundred fold; so he who sows
the wind shall have a whirlwind to reap. The vental seed shall be
multiplied into a tempest so they who sow the seed of unrighteousness
shall reap a harvest of judgment. This is a fine, bold, and energetic
metaphor.

It hath no stalk - Nothing that can yield a blossom. If it have a
blossom that blossom shall not yield fruit; if there be fruit, the sower
shall not enjoy it, for strangers shall eat it. The meaning is, the
labors of this people shall be utterly unprofitable and vain.

[Hosea 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">hos 8:8</span></span>

Now shall they be among the Gentiles - They shall be carried into
captivity, and there be as a vessel wherein there is no pleasure; one
soiled, unclean, infectious, to be despised, abhorred, not used. The
allusion is to a rotten, corrupted skin-bottle; a bottle made of goat,
deer, or calf hide, still commonly used in Asia and Africa. Some of them
are splendidly ornamented. This is the case with one now before me made
of a goat's skin well dressed, variously painted, and ornamented with
leather fringes, tassels, etc. In such a bottle there might be pleasure;
but the Israelites are compared to such a bottle, rough, ill-dressed,
not ornamented, old, musty, and putrid. This shows the force of the
comparison.

[Hosea 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">hos 8:9</span></span>

They are gone up to Assyria - For succor.

A wild ass alone by himself - Like that animal, jealous of its liberty,
and suffering no rival. If we may credit Pliny and others, one male wild
ass will keep a whole flock of females to himself, suffer no other to
approach them, and even bite off the genitals of the colts, lest in
process of time they should become his rivals. "Mares singuli faeminarum
gregibus imperitant; timent libidinis aemulos, et ideo gravidas
custodiunt, morsuque natos mares castrant." - Hist. Nat., lib. viii., c.
30. The Israelites, with all this selfishness and love of liberty, took
no step that did not necessarily lead to their thraldom and destruction.

Ephraim hath hired lovers - Hath subsidized the neighboring heathen
states.

[Hosea 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">hos 8:10</span></span>

For the burden of the king of princes - The exactions of the Assyrian
king, and the princes of the provinces.

[Hosea 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">hos 8:11</span></span>

Many altars to sin - Though it does not appear that the Jews in Babylon
were obliged to worship the idols of the country, except in the case
mentioned by Daniel, yet it was far otherwise with the Israelites in
Assyria, and the other countries of their dispersion. Because they had
made many altars to sin while they were in their own land, they were
obliged to continue in the land of their captivity a similar system of
idolatry against their will. Thus they felt and saw the evil of their
idolatry, without power to help themselves.

[Hosea 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">hos 8:12</span></span>

I have written to him the great things of my law - I have as it were
inscribed my laws to them, and they have treated them as matters in
which they had no interest.

[Hosea 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">hos 8:13</span></span>

They sacrifice flesh - Bp. Newcome translates thus: "They sacrifice
gifts appointed unto me, and eat flesh." They offer to their idols the
things which belong to Jehovah; or, while pretending to offer unto the
Lord, they eat and drink idolatrously; and therefore the Lord will not
accept them.

They shall return to Egypt - Many of them did return to Egypt after the
conquest of Palestine by Shalmaneser, and many after the ruin of
Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar; but they had in effect returned to Egypt by
setting up the worship of the golden calves, which were in imitation of
the Egyptian Apis.

[Hosea 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">hos 8:14</span></span>

Israel hath forgotten his Maker - And therefore built temples to other
gods. Judah had lost all confidence in the Divine protection, and
therefore built many fenced cities. But the fire of God's anger burnt up
both the temples and the fortified cities.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 9](hos009.md)

</div>
