<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Hosea Index](hos.md)  
  [Previous](hos008)  [Next](hos010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#001.md)

[Hosea](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hos 9:0</span></span>

The prophet reproves the Israelites for their sacrifices and rejoicings
on their corn-floors, by which they ascribed to idols, as the heathen
did, the praise of all their plenty, [Hos
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#001.md). For which reason they are
threatened with famine and exile, [Hos
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#002.md), [Hos
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#003.md), in a land where they should be
polluted, and want the means of worshipping the God of their fathers, or
observing the solemnities of his appointment, [Hos
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#004.md), [Hos
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#005.md). Nay more; they shall speedily
fall before the destroyer, be buried in Egypt, and leave their own
pleasant places desolate, [Hos 9:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#006.md).
God is then introduced declaring his early favor for his people, and the
delight he took in their obedience; but now they had so deeply revolted,
all their glory will take wing, God will forsake them, and their
offspring be devoted to destruction, [Hos
9:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#010.md).

[Hosea 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hos 9:1</span></span>

Rejoice not - Do not imitate the heathens, nor serve their idols. Do not
prostitute thy soul and body in practicing their impurities. Hitherto
thou hast acted as a common harlot, who goes even to the common
threshing places; connects herself with the meanest, in order to get a
hire even of the grain there threshed out.

[Hosea 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">hos 9:3</span></span>

But Ephraim shall return to Egypt - See on [Hos
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#012) (note.md).

[Hosea 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">hos 9:4</span></span>

As the bread of mourners - By the law, a dead body, and every thing that
related to it, the house where it lay, and the persons who touched it,
were all polluted and unclean, and whatever they touched was considered
as defiled. See [Deu 26:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#014.md); [Num
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#011.md), [Num
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#013.md), [Num
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#014.md).

For their bread for their soul - The bread for the common support of
life shall not be sanctified to them by having the first-fruits
presented at the temple.

[Hosea 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">hos 9:5</span></span>

What will ye do in the solemn day - When ye shall be despoiled of every
thing by the Assyrians; for the Israelites who remained in the land
after its subjection to the Assyrians did worship the true God, and
offer unto him the sacrifices appointed by the law, though in an
imperfect and schismatic manner; and it was a great mortification to
them to be deprived of their religious festivals in a land of strangers.
See Calmet.

[Hosea 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">hos 9:6</span></span>

For, lo, they are gone - Many of them fled to Egypt to avoid the
destruction; but they went there only to die.

Memphis - Now Cairo, or Kahira, found them graves.

The pleasant places for their silver - The fine estates or villas which
they had purchased by their money, being now neglected and uninhabited,
are covered with nettles; and even in their tabernacles, thorns and
brambles of different kinds grow. These are the fullest marks of utter
desolation.

[Hosea 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">hos 9:7</span></span>

The days of visitation - Of punishment are come.

The prophet is a fool - Who has pretended to foretell, on Divine
authority, peace and plenty; for behold all is desolation.

The spiritual man - איש הרוח ish haruach, the man of spirit, who was
ever pretending to be under a Divine afflatus.

Is mad - He is now enraged to see every thing falling out contrary to
his prediction.

[Hosea 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">hos 9:8</span></span>

The watchman of Ephraim - The true prophet, was with - faithful to, God.

The prophet - The false prophet is the snare of a fowler; is continually
deceiving the people, and leading them into snares, and infusing into
their hearts deep hatred against God and his worship.

[Hosea 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">hos 9:9</span></span>

They have deeply corrupted themselves, as in the days of Gibeah - This
relates to that shocking rape and murder of the Levite's wife, mentioned
[Jdg 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#016.md), etc.

[Hosea 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">hos 9:10</span></span>

I found Israel like grapes in the wilderness - While they were faithful,
they were as acceptable to me as ripe grapes would be to a thirsty
traveler in the desert.

I saw your fathers - Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Joshua, Caleb,
Samuel, etc.

As the first ripe - Those grapes, whose bud having come first, and being
exposed most to the sun, have been the first ripe upon the tree; which
tree was now in the vigor of youth, and bore fruit for the first time. A
metaphor of the rising prosperity of the Jewish state.

But they went to Baal-Peor - The same as the Roman Priapus, and
worshipped with the most impure rites.

And their abominations were according as they loved - Or, "they became
as abominable as the object of their love." So Bp. Newcome. And this was
superlatively abominable.

[Hosea 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">hos 9:11</span></span>

Their glory shall fly away - It shall suddenly spring away from them,
and return no more.

From the birth - "So that there shall be no birth, no carrying in the
womb, no conception." - Newcome. They shall cease to glory in their
numbers; for no children shall be born, no woman shall be pregnant, for
none shall conceive. Here judgment blasts the very germs of population.

[Hosea 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">hos 9:12</span></span>

Though they bring up their children - And were they even to have
children, I would bereave them of them; for, when I depart from them,
they shall have all manner of wretchedness and wo.

[Hosea 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">hos 9:13</span></span>

Ephraim, as I saw Tyrus - Tyre was strongly situated on a rock in the
sea; Samaria was on a mountain, both strong and pleasant. But the
strength and beauty of those cities shall not save them from
destruction.

Ephraim shall bring forth his children to the murderer - The people
shall be destroyed, or led into captivity by the Assyrians. Of the
grandeur, wealth, power, etc., of Tyre, see the notes on Ezekiel 27
(note) and Ezekiel 28 (note).

[Hosea 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">hos 9:14</span></span>

Give them, O Lord: what wilt thou give? - There is an uncommon beauty in
these words. The prophet, seeing the evils that were likely to fall upon
his countrymen, begins to make intercession for them; but when he had
formed the first part of his petition, "Give them, O Lord!" the
prophetic light discovered to him that the petition would not be
answered and that God was about to give them something widely different.
Then changing his petition, which the Divine Spirit had interrupted, by
signifying that he must not proceed in his request, he asks the
question, then, "What wilt thou give them?" and the answer is, "Give
them a miscarrying womb, and dry breasts." And this he is commanded to
announce. It is probable that the Israelites had prided themselves in
the fruitfulness of their families, and the numerous population of their
country. God now tells them that this shall be no more; their wives
shall be barren, and their land cursed.

[Hosea 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">hos 9:15</span></span>

All their wickedness is in Gilgal - Though we are not directly informed
of the fact, yet we have reason to believe they had been guilty of some
scandalous practices of idolatry in Gilgal See [Hos
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#015.md).

For there I hated them - And therefore he determined, "for the
wickedness of their doings, to drive them out of his house," so that
they should cease to be a part of the heavenly family, either as sons or
servants; for he would "love them no more," and bear with them no
longer.

[Hosea 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">hos 9:16</span></span>

Ephraim is smitten - The thing being determined, it is considered as
already done.

Their root is dried up - They shall never more be a kingdom. And they
never had any political form from their captivity by the Assyrians to
the present day.

Yea, though they bring forth - See the note on [Hos
9:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#011) (note.md).

[Hosea 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">hos 9:17</span></span>

My God will cast them away - Here the prophet seems to apologize for the
severity of these denunciations; and to vindicate the Divine justice,
from which they proceeded. It is: -

Because they did not hearken unto him - That "my God," the fountain of
mercy and kindness, "will cast them away."

And they shall be wanderers among the nations - And where they have
wandered to, who can tell? and in what nations to be found, no man
knows. Wanderers they are; and perhaps even now unknown to themselves.
Some have thought they have found them in one country; some, in another;
and a very pious writer, in a book entitled, The Star in the West,
thinks he has found their descendants in the American Indians; among
whom he has discovered many customs, apparently the same with those of
the ancient Jews, and commanded in the Law. He even thinks that the word
Je-ho-vah is found in their solemn festal cry, Ye-ho-wa-he. If they be
this long lost people, they are utterly unknown to themselves; their
origin being lost in a very remote antiquity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 10](hos010.md)

</div>
