<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa018)  [Next](isa020.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001.md)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 19:0</span></span>

Prophecy concerning Egypt, in which her lamentable condition under the
Babylonians, Persians, etc., Is forcibly pointed out, vv. 1-17. The true
religion shall be propagated in Egypt; referring primarily to the great
spread of Judaism in that country in the reign of the Ptolemies, and
ultimately to its reception of the Gospel in the latter days, [Isa
19:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#018.md). Profound peace between
Egypt, Assyria, and Israel, and their blessed condition under the
Gospel, [Isa 19:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#023.md).

Not many years after the destruction of Sennacherib's army before
Jerusalem, by which the Egyptians were freed from the yoke with which
they were threatened by so powerful an enemy, who had carried on a
successful war of three years' continuance against them; the affairs of
Egypt were again thrown into confusion by intestine broils among
themselves, which ended in a perfect anarchy, that lasted some few
years. This was followed by an aristocracy, or rather tyranny, of twelve
princes, who divided the country between them, and at last by the sole
dominion of Psammitichus, which he held for fifty-four years. Not long
after that followed the invasion and conquest of Egypt by
Nebuchadnezzar, and then by the Persians under Cambyses, the son of
Cyrus. The yoke of the Persians was so grievous, that the conquest of
the Persians by Alexander may well be considered as a deliverance to
Egypt; especially as he and his successors greatly favored the people
and improved the country. To all these events the prophet seems to have
had a view in this chapter; and in particular, from [Isa
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#018.md), the prophecy of the propagation
of the true religion in Egypt seems to point to the flourishing state of
Judaism in that country, in consequence of the great favor shown to the
Jews by the Ptolemies. Alexander himself settled a great many Jews in
his new city Alexandria, granting them privileges equal to those of the
Macedonians. The first Ptolemy, called Soter, carried great numbers of
them thither, and gave them such encouragement that still more of them
were collected there from different parts; so that Philo reckons that in
his time there were a million of Jews in that country. These worshipped
the God of their fathers; and their example and influence must have had
a great effect in spreading the knowledge and worship of the true God
through the whole country. See Bp. Newton on the Prophecies, Dissert.
xii.

[Isaiah 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 19:1</span></span>

The burden of Egypt - That is, the prophet's declaration concerning
Egypt.

[Isaiah 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 19:3</span></span>

They shall seek to the idols, and to the charmers, and to them that have
familiar spirits, and to the wizards - And thei schul asken their
symulacres, and their debynouris, and their devyl clepers, and their
devyl sacristers. - Old Bible. The import of the original words has
already been given where they occur in the Pentateuch. See [Deu
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#010.md), etc.

[Isaiah 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 19:4</span></span>

A cruel lord "Cruel lords" - Nebuchadnezzar in the first place, and
afterwards the whole succession of Persian kings, who in general were
hard masters, and grievously oppressed the country. Note, that for קשה
kasheh, lord, a MS. reads קשים kashim, lords, agreeable to which is the
rendering of the Septuagint, Syriac, and Vulgate.

[Isaiah 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 19:5</span></span>

The river shall be wasted and dried up - The Nile shall not overflow its
banks; and if no inundation, the land must become barren. For, as there
is little or no rain in Egypt, its fertility depends on the overflowing
of the Nile.

[Isaiah 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 19:6</span></span>

Shall turn the rivers far away "Shall become putrid" - האזניחו
heeznichu. This sense of the word, which Simonis gives in his Lexicon,
from the meaning of it in Arabic, suits the place much better than any
other interpretation hitherto given; and that the word in Hebrew had
some such signification, is probable from [Ch2
29:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#019.md), where the Vulgate renders it by
polluit, polluted, and the Targum, by profaned, and made abominable,
which the context in that place seems plainly to require. The form of
the verb here is very irregular; and the rabbins and grammarians seem to
give no probable account of it.

[Isaiah 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 19:8</span></span>

The fishers also "And the fishers" - There was great plenty of fish in
Egypt; see [Num 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#005.md). "The Nile," says
Diodorus, lib. i., "abounds with incredible numbers of all sorts of
fish." And much more the lakes. So Egmont, Pococke, etc.

[Isaiah 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 19:9</span></span>

They that work in fine flax - פשתים שריקות pishtim sericoth, heckled
flax, i.e., flax dressed on the heckle, or comb used for that purpose.
The Vulgate uses the word pectentes, combing.

They that weave networks shall be confounded - And confounden schul ben
that wrogten flax, plattinge and webynge sotel thingis. - Old MS. Bible.

[Isaiah 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 19:10</span></span>

And they shall be broken, etc. "Her stores" - שתתיה shathotheyha,
αποθηκαι, granaries. - Aquila.

All that make sluices and ponds for fish "All that make a gain of pools
for fish" - This obscure line is rendered by different interpreters in
very different manners. Kimchi explains אגמי agmey as if it were the
same with אגמה agemah, from [Job
30:25](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#025.md), in which he is followed by some
of the rabbins, and supported by the Septuagint: and שכר secher, which I
translate gain, and which some take for nets or enclosures, the
Septuagint render by ζυθον, strong drink or beer, which it is well known
was much used in Egypt; and so likewise the Syriac, retaining the Hebrew
word שכרא sekra. I submit these very different interpretations to the
reader's judgment. The Version of the Septuagint is as follows:

Και παντες οἱ ποιουντες τον ζυθον λυπηθησονται, και τας ψυχας πονεσουσι·
"And all they that make barley wine shall mourn, and be grieved in
soul."

[Isaiah 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 19:11</span></span>

The counsel of the wise counselors of Pharaoh is become brutish "Have
counseled a brutish counsel" - The sentence as it now stands in the
Hebrew, is imperfect: it wants the verb. Archbishop Secker conjectures
that the words יועצי פרעה yoatsey pharoh should be transposed; which
would in some degree remove the difficulty. But it is to be observed,
that the translator of the Vulgate seems to have found in his copy the
verb יעצו yaatsu added after פרעה pharoh: Sapientes consiliarii
Pharaonis dederunt consilium insipiens, "The wise counsellors of Pharaoh
gave unwise counsel." This is probably the true reading: it is perfectly
agreeable to the Hebrew idiom, makes the construction of the sentence
clear, and renders the transposition of the words above mentioned
unnecessary. - L.

[Isaiah 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 19:12</span></span>

"Let them come" - Here too a word seems to have been left out of the
text. After חכמיך chochameycha, thy wise men, two MSS., one ancient, add
יבאו yibu, let them come; which, if we consider the form and
construction of the sentence, has very much the appearance of being
genuine: otherwise the connective conjunction at the beginning of the
next member is not only superfluous but embarrassing. See also the
Version of the Septuagint, in which the same deficiency is manifest.

Let them tell thee now "And let them declare" - For ידעו yidu, let them
know, perhaps we ought to read יודיעו yodiu, let them make known. -
Secker. The Septuagint and Vulgate favor this reading, ειπατωισαν, let
them declare.

[Isaiah 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 19:13</span></span>

Are deceived "They have caused," etc. - The text has וחתעו vehithu, And
they have caused to err. Fifty of Kennicott's MSS., fifty-three of De
Rossi's, and one of my own, ancient, thirty-two editions, and the
Vulgate and Chaldee. omit the ו vau, and.

Stay "Pillars" - פנת pinnath, to be pointed as plural pinnoth, without
doubt. So Grotius, and so the Chaldee.

[Isaiah 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 19:14</span></span>

In the midst thereof - בקרבם bekirbam; so the Septuagint, and perhaps
more correctly." - Secker. So likewise the Chaldee.

[Isaiah 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 19:15</span></span>

The head or tail, branch or rush - R. D. Kimchi says, there are some who
suppose that these words mean the dragon's head and tail; and refer to
all those who are conversant in astronomy, astrology, etc.

[Isaiah 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 19:16</span></span>

Shall Egypt be "The Egyptians shall be" - יהיו yihyu, they shall be,
plural, MS. Bodl. Septuagint, and Chaldee. This is not proposed as an
emendation, for either form is proper.

[Isaiah 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 19:17</span></span>

And the land of Judah - The threatening hand of God will be held out and
shaken over Egypt, from the side of Judea; through which the Assyrians
will march to invade it. It signifies that kind of terror that drives
one to his wit's end, that causes him to reel like a drunken man, to be
giddy through astonishment. Such is the import of חג chag, and חגה
chagah. Five MSS. and two editions have לחגה lechagah.

[Isaiah 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 19:18</span></span>

The city of destruction "The city of the sun" - עיר החרס ir hacheres.
This passage is attended with much difficulty and obscurity. First, in
regard to the true reading. It is well known that Onias applied it to
his own views, either to procure from the king of Egypt permission to
build his temple in the Hieropolitan Nome, or to gain credit and
authority to it when built; from the notion which he industriously
propagated, that Isaiah had in this place prophesied of the building of
such a temple. He pretended that the very place where it should be built
was expressly named by the prophet, עיר החרס ir hacheres, the city of
the sun. This possibly may have been the original reading. The present
text has עיר ההרס ir haheres, the city of destruction; which some
suppose to have been introduced into the text by the Jews of Palestine
afterwards, to express their detestation of the place, being much
offended with this schismatical temple in Egypt. Some think the latter
to have been the true reading, and that the prophet himself gave this
turn to the name out of contempt, and to intimate the demolition of this
Hieropolitan temple; which in effect was destroyed by Vespasian's
orders, after that of Jerusalem, "Videtur propheta consulto scripsisse
הרס heres, pro חרס cheres, ut alibi scribitur בית און beith aven pro בית
אל beith El: איש בשת ish bosheth for איש בעל ish baal, etc. Vide Lowth
in loc." - Secker. "It seems that the prophet designedly wrote הרס
heres, destruction, for חרס cheres, the sun: as elsewhere בית און beith
aven, the house of iniquity, is written for בית אל beith El, the house
of God; איש בשת ish bosheth for איש בעל ish baal," etc. But on the
supposition that עיר ההרס air haheres is the true reading, others
understand it differently. The word הרס heres in Arabic signifies a
lion; and Conrad Ikenius has written a dissertation (Dissert. Philol.
Theol. XVI.) to prove that the place here mentioned is not Heliopolis,
as it is commonly supposed to be, but Leontopolis in the Heliopolitan
Nome, as it is indeed called in the letter, whether real or pretended,
of Onias to Ptolemy, which Josephus has inserted in his Jewish
Antiquities, lib. 13 c. 3. And I find that several persons of great
learning and judgment think that Ikenius has proved the point beyond
contradiction. See Christian. Muller. Satura Observ. Philolog. Michaelis
Bibliotheque Oriental, Part v., p. 171. But, after all, I believe that
neither Onias, Heliopolis, nor Leontopolis has any thing to do with this
subject. The application of this place of Isaiah to Onias's purpose
seems to have been a mere invention, and in consequence of it there may
perhaps have been some unfair management to accommodate the text to that
purpose; which has been carried even farther than the Hebrew text; for
the Greek version has here been either translated from a corrupted text,
or wilfully mistranslated or corrupted, to serve the same cause. The
place is there called πολις Ασεδεκ, the city of righteousness; a name
apparently contrived by Onias's party to give credit to their temple,
which was to rival that of Jerusalem. Upon the whole, the true reading
of the Hebrew text in this place is very uncertain; fifteen MSS. and
seven editions have חרס cheres, the city of Hacheres, or, of the sun. So
likewise Symmachas, the Vulgate, Arabic, Septuagint, and Complutensian.
On the other hand, Aquila, Theodotion, and the Syriac read הרס heres,
destruction; the Chaldee paraphrase takes in both readings.

The reading of the text being so uncertain, no one can pretend to
determine what the city was that is here mentioned by name; much less to
determine what the four other cities were which the prophet does not
name. I take the whole passage from the 18th verse to the end of the
chapter, to contain a general intimation of the future propagation of
the knowledge of the true God in Egypt and Syria, under the successors
of Alexander; and, in consequence of this propagation, of the early
reception of the Gospel in the same countries, when it should be
published to the world. See more on this subject in Prideaux's Connect.
An. 145; Dr. Owen's Inquiry into the present state of the Septuagint
Version, p. 41; and Bryant's Observations on Ancient History, p. 124. -
L.

[Isaiah 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 19:19</span></span>

An altar to the Lord - צבאות tsebaoth, "of hosts," or Yehovah tsebaoth,
is added by eight MSS. of good repute, and the Syriac Version.

[Isaiah 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">isa 19:23</span></span>

Shall there be a highway - Under the latter kings of Persia, and under
Alexander, Egypt, Judea, and Assyria lived peaceably under the same
government, and were on such friendly terms that there was a regular,
uninterrupted intercourse between them, so that the Assyrian came into
Egypt and the Egyptian into Assyria, and Israel became the third, i.e.,
was in strict union with the other two; and was a blessing to both, as
affording them some knowledge of the true God, [Isa
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#024.md).

[Isaiah 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">isa 19:25</span></span>

Blessed be Egypt - Assyria - and Israel - All these countries shall be
converted to the Lord. Concerning Egypt, it was said, [Isa
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#007.md), that it should bring gifts to
the Lord at Jerusalem. Here it is predicted, [Isa
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#019.md), that there shall be an altar to
the Lord in Egypt itself; and that they, with the Assyrians shall become
the people of God with the Israelites. This remains partly to be
fulfilled. These countries shall be all, and perhaps at no very distant
time from this, converted to the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 20](isa020.md)

</div>
