<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa034)  [Next](isa036.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 35](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#001.md)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 35:0</span></span>

Flourishing state of the Church of God consequent to the awful judgments
predicted in the preceding chapter. The images employed in the
description are so very consolatory and sublime as to oblige us to
extend their fulfillment to that period of the Gospel dispensation when
Messiah shall take unto himself his great power and reign. The fifth and
sixth verses were literally accomplished by our Savior and his apostles:
but that the miracles wrought in the first century were not the only
import of the language used by the prophet, is sufficiently plain from
the context. They, therefore, have a farther application; and are
contemporary with, or rather a consequence of, the judgments of God upon
the enemies of the Church in the latter days; and so relate to the
greater influence and extension of the Christian faith, the conversion
of the Jews, their restoration to their own land, and the second advent
of Christ. Much of the imagery of this chapter seems to have been
borrowed from the exodus from Egypt: but it is greatly enlivened by the
life, sentiments, and passions ascribed to inanimate objects; all nature
being represented as rejoicing with the people of God in consequence of
their deliverance; and administering in such an unusual manner to their
relief and comfort, as to induce some commentators to extend the meaning
of the prophecy to the blessedness of the saints in heaven, [Isa
35:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#001.md).

The various miracles our Lord wrought are the best comment on this
chapter, which predicts those wondrous works and the glorious state of
the Christian Church. See the parallel texts in the margin.

On this chapter Bishop Lowth has offered some important emendations. I
shall introduce his translation, as the best yet given of this singular
prophecy: -

1\. The desert and the waste shall be glad;And the wilderness shall
rejoice, and flourish:

2\. Like the rose shall it beautifully flourish;And the well-watered
plain of Jordan shall also rejoice:The glory of Lebanon shall be given
unto it,The beauty of Carmel and of Sharon;These shall behold the glory
of Jehovah,The majesty of our God.

3\. Strengthen ye the feeble hands,And confirm ye the tottering knees.

4\. Say ye to the faint-hearted, Be ye strong;Fear ye not; behold your
God!Vengeance will come; the retribution of God:He himself will come,
and will deliver you.

5\. Then shall be unclosed the eyes of the blind;And the ears of the
deaf shall be opened:

6\. Then shall the lame bound like the hart,And the tongue of the dumb
shall sing;For in the wilderness shall burst forth waters,And torrents
in the desert:

7\. And the glowing sand shall become a pool,And the thirsty soil
bubbling springs:And in the haunt of dragons shall spring forthThe grass
with the reed and the bulrush.

8\. And a highway shall be there;And it shall be called The way of
holiness:No unclean person shall pass through it:But he himself shall be
with them, walking in the way,And the foolish shall not err therein:

9\. No lion shall be there;Nor shall the tyrant of the beasts come up
thither:Neither shall he be found thereBut the redeemed shall walk in
it.

10\. Yea, the ransomed of Jehovah shall return;They shall come to Sion
with triumph;And perpetual gladness shall crown their heads.Joy and
gladness shall they obtain;And sorrow and sighing shall flee away.

[Isaiah 35:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 35:1</span></span>

Shall be glad - יששום yesusum; in one MS. the מ mem seems to have been
added; and שום sum is upon a rasure in another. None of the ancient
versions acknowledge it; it seems to have been a mistake, arising from
the next word beginning with the same letter. Seventeen MSS. have ישושום
yesusum, both vaus expressed; and five MSS. יששם yesusum, without the
vaus. Probably the true reading is, "The wilderness and the dry place
shall be glad. "Not for them.

[Isaiah 35:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 35:2</span></span>

Rejoice even with joy and singing "The well-watered plain of Jordan
shall also rejoice" - For ורנן veranen, the Septuagint read ירדן yarden,
τα ερηνα του Ιορδανου, "the deserts of Jordan." Four MSS. read גלת
gulath; see [Jos 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#019.md) : "Irrigua
Jordani;" Houbigant. גידת gidoth, Ripae Jordani, "the banks of Jordan;"
Kennicott. See De S. Poesi Hebr. Praelect. 20 note.

Unto it - For לה lah, to it, nine MSS. of Kennicott's and four of De
Rossi's read לך lecha, to thee. See ibid.

[Isaiah 35:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 35:7</span></span>

The parched ground "The glowing sand" - שרב sharab; this word is Arabic,
as well as Hebrew, expressing in both languages the same thing, the
glowing sandy plain, which in the hot countries at a distance has the
appearance of water. It occurs in the Koran, chap. 24: "But as to the
unbelievers, their works are like a vapor in a plain, which the thirsty
traveler thinketh to be water, until, when he cometh thereto, he findeth
it to be nothing. "Mr. Sale's note on this place is, "The Arabic word
serab signifies that false appearance which in the eastern countries is
often seen on sandy plains about noon, resembling a large lake of water
in motion, and is occasioned by the reverberation of the sun beams: 'by
the quivering undulating motion of that quick succession of vapours and
exhalations which are extracted by the powerful influence of the sun.' -
Shaw, Trav. p. 378. It sometimes tempts thirsty travelers out of their
way; but deceives them when they come near, either going forward, (for
it always appears at the Same distance), or quite vanishing." Q. Curtius
has mentioned it: "Arenas vapor aestivi solis accendit; camporumque non
alia, quam vasti et profundi aequoris species est." - Lib. vii., c. 5.
Dr. Hyde gives us the precise meaning and derivation of the word.
"Dictum nomen Barca הברקה habberakah, splendorem, seu splendentem
regionem notat; cum ea regio radiis solaribus tam copiose collustretur,
ut reflexum ab arenis lumen adeo intense fulgens, a longinquo
spectantibus, ad instar corporis solaris, aquarum speciem referat; et
hinc arenarum splendor et radiatio, (et lingua Persica petito nomine),
dicitur serab, i.e., aquae superficies seu superficialis aquarum
species." Annot. in Peritsol., cap. ii.

"Shall spring forth" - The ה he in רבצה rebitseh seems to have been at
first מ mem in MS. Bodl., whence Dr. Kennicott concludes it should be
רבצים rebitsim. But instead of this word the Syriac, Vulgate, and
Chaldee read some word signifying to grow, spring up, or abound. Perhaps
פרצה paretsah, or פרצו paretsu, or פרץ החציר parats hachatsir, as
Houbigant reads. - L.

[Isaiah 35:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 35:8</span></span>

And a highway - The word ודרך vederech is by mistake added to the first
member of the sentence from the beginning of the following member.
Sixteen MSS. of Dr. Kennicott's, seven ancient, and two of De Rossi's
have it but once; so likewise the Syriac, Septuagint, and Arabic.

Err therein - A MS. of Dr. Kennicott's adds בו bo, in it, which seems
necessary to the sense, and so the Vulgate, per eam, "by it. "One of De
Rossi's has שם sham, there.

But it shall be for those "But he himself shall be with them, walking in
the way" - That is, God; see [Isa
35:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#004.md). "Who shall dwell among them, and
set them an example that they should follow his steps." Our old English
Version translated the place to this purpose, our last translators were
misled by the authority of the Jews, who have absurdly made a division
of the verses in the midst of the sentence, thereby destroying the
construction and the sense.

[Isaiah 35:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 35:9</span></span>

It shall not be found there "Neither shall he be found there" - Three
MSS. read ולא velo, adding the conjunction; and so likewise the
Septuagint and Vulgate. And four MSS., one ancient, read ימצא yimmatsa,
the verb, as it certainly ought to be, in the masculine form.

The redeemed shall walk there - גאולים geulim. Those whose forfeited
inheritances are brought back by the kinsman, גואל goel, the nearest of
kin to the family. This has been considered by all orthodox divines as
referring to the incarnation of our Lord, and his sacrificial offering.
After גאולים geulim, one of De Rossi's MSS. adds עד עולם ad olam, for
ever, "The redeemed shall walk there for ever."

[Isaiah 35:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 35:10</span></span>

The ransomed - פדויי peduyey, from פדה padah, "to redeem by paying a
price." Those for whom a price was paid down to redeem them from bondage
and death.

Sighing shall flee away - אנחה anachah. Never was a sorrowful accent
better expressed than in this strong guttural word, an-ach-ah; nearly
the same with the Irish in their funeral wailings, och-och-on. The whole
nation express all their mournful accents by these three monosyllables.

This chapter contains the following parts: -

1\. We have here blessed promises of the latter-day glory.

2\. The prophet may be considered as addressing the teachers of the
Gospel, to show them that it was their business to encourage and direct
the people in their expectation of redemption.

3\. A promise of the manifestation of God among men is given.

4\. The miracles which Christ should work are explicitly mentioned.

5\. The privileges of Christianity are specified; there shall be,

1\. Thorough teaching;

2\. Holy walking.

6\. Perfect safety.

7\. Complete happiness. And -

8\. Final glory.

The chapter shows also that no impurity should be tolerated in the
Church of God; for as that is the mystical body of Christ, it should be
like himself, without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 36](isa036.md)

</div>
