<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa020)  [Next](isa022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 21:0</span></span>

Prediction of the taking of Babylon by the Medes and Persians at the
time of a great festival, [Isa 21:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#001).
Short application of the prophecy to the Jews, partly in the person of
God, and partly in his own, [Isa
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#010). Obscure prophecy respecting
Dumah, [Isa 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#011), [Isa
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#012). Prophecy concerning the
Arabians to be fulfilled in a very short time after its delivery, [Isa
21:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#013).

The first ten verses of this chapter contain a prediction of the taking
of Babylon by the Medes and Persians. It is a passage singular in its
kind for its brevity and force, for the variety and rapidity of the
movements, and for the strength and energy of coloring with which the
action and event are painted. It opens with the prophet's seeing at a
distance the dreadful storm that is gathering and ready to burst upon
Babylon. The event is intimated in general terms, and God's orders are
issued to the Persians and Medes to set forth upon the expedition which
he has given them in charge. Upon this the prophet enters into the midst
of the action; and in the person of Babylon expresses, in the strongest
terms, the astonishment and horror that seizes her on the sudden
surprise of the city at the very season dedicated to pleasure and
festivity, [Isa 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#003), [Isa
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#004). Then, in his own person,
describes the situation of things there, the security of the
Babylonians, and in the midst of their feasting the sudden alarm of war,
[Isa 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#005). The event is then declared
in a very singular manner. God orders the prophet to set a watchman to
look out, and to report what he sees; he sees two companies marching
onward, representing by their appearance the two nations that were to
execute God's orders, who declare that Babylon is fallen, [Isa
21:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#006).

But what is this to the prophet, and to the Jews, the object of his
ministry? The application, the end, and design of the prophecy are
admirably given in a short, expressive address to the Jews, partly in
the person of God, partly in that of the prophet: "O my threshing" "O my
people, whom for your punishment I shall make subject to the
Babylonians, to try and to prove you, and to separate the chaff from the
corn, the bad from the good, among you; hear this for your consolation:
your punishment, your slavery, and oppression will have an end in the
destruction of your oppressors." - L.

[Isaiah 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 21:1</span></span>

The desert of the sea - This plainly means Babylon, which is the subject
of the prophecy. The country about Babylon, and especially below it
towards the sea, was a great flat morass, overflowed by the Euphrates
and Tigris. It became habitable by being drained by the many canals that
were made in it.

Herodotus, lib. 1:184, says that "Semiramis confined the Euphrates
within its channel by raising great dams against it; for before it
overflowed the whole country like a sea." And Abydenus, (quoting
Megasthenes, apud Euseb. Praep. Evang. 9:41), speaking of the building
of Babylon by Nebuchadonosor, says, "it is reported that all this part
was covered with water and was called the sea; and that Belus drew off
the waters, conveying them into proper receptacles, and surrounded
Babylon with a wall." When the Euphrates was turned out of its channel
by Cyrus, it was suffered still to drown the neighboring country; and,
the Persian government, which did not favor the place, taking no care to
remedy this inconvenience, it became in time a great barren morassy
desert, which event the title of the prophecy may perhaps intimate. Such
it was originally; such it became after the taking of the city by Cyrus;
and such it continues to this day.

As whirlwinds in the south "Like the southern tempests" - The most
vehement storms to which Judea was subject came from the desert country
to the south of it. "Out of the south cometh the whirlwind," [Job
37:9](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#009). "And there came a great wind
from the wilderness, and smote the four corners of the house," [Job
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#019). For the situation of Idumea, the
country (as I suppose) of Job, see [Lam
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#021) compared with [Job
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001), was the same in this respect with
that of Judea: -

"And Jehovah shall appear over them,

And his arrow shall go forth as the lightning;

And the Lord Jehovah shall sound the trumpet;

And shall march in the whirlwinds of the south."

[Zac 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#014).

[Isaiah 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 21:2</span></span>

The treacherous dealer dealeth treacherously, and the spoiler spoileth
"The plunderer is plundered, and the destroyer is destroyed" - הבוגד
בוגד והשודד שודד habboged boged vehashshoded shoded. The MSS. vary in
expressing or omitting the ו vau, in these four words. Ten MSS. of
Kennicott are without the ו vau in the second word, and eight MSS. are
without the ו vau in the fourth word; which justifies Symmachus, who has
rendered them passively: ὁ αθετων αθετειται και ὁ ταλαιπωριζων
ταλαιπωρει. He read בגוד שדוד bagud shadud. Cocceius (Lexicon in voce)
observes that the Chaldee very often renders the verb בגד bagad, by בזז
bazaz, he spoiled; and in this place, and in [Isa
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#001), by the equivalent word אנס anas,
to press, give trouble; and in [Isa
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#016) both by אנס anas and בזז bazaz;
and the Syriac in this place renders it by טלם talam, he oppressed.

All the sighing thereof have I made to cease "I have put an end to all
her vexations" - Hebrews "Her sighing; that is, the sighing caused by
her." So Kimchi on the place: "It means those who groaned through fear
of him: for the suffixes of the nouns refer both to the agent and the
patient. All those who groaned before the face of the king of Babylon he
caused to rest;" Chald. And so likewise Ephrem Syr. in loc., edit.
Assemani: "His groans, viz., the grief and tears which the Chaldeans
occasioned through the rest of the nations."

[Isaiah 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 21:5</span></span>

Prepare the table "The table is prepared" - In Hebrew the verbs are in
the infinitive mood absolute, as in [Eze
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#014) : "And the animals ran and
returned, רצוא ושוב ratso veshob, like the appearance of the lightning;"
just as the Latins say, currere et reverti, for currebant et
revertebantur. See [Isa 33:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#011) (note),
and the note there.

Arise, ye princes, and anoint the shield - Kimchi observes that several
of the rabbins understood this of Belshazzar's impious feast and death.
The king of a people is termed the shield, because he is their defense.
The command, Anoint the shield, is the same with Anoint a new king.
Belshazzar being now suddenly slain, while they were all eating and
drinking, he advises the princes, whose business it was, to make speed
and anoint another in his stead.

[Isaiah 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 21:7</span></span>

And he saw a chariot, etc. "And he saw a chariot with two riders; a
rider on an ass, a rider on a camel" - This passage is extremely obscure
from the ambiguity of the term רכב recheb, which is used three times,
and which signifies a chariot, or any other vehicle, or the rider in it;
or a rider on a horse, or any other animal; or a company of chariots, or
riders. The prophet may possibly mean a cavalry in two parts, with two
sorts of riders; riders on asses or mules, and riders on camels; or led
on by two riders, one on an ass, and one on a camel. However, so far it
is pretty clear, that Darius and Cyrus, the Medes and the Persians, are
intended to be distinguished by the two riders on the two sorts of
cattle. It appears from Herodotus, 1:80, that the baggage of Cyrus' army
was carried on camels. In his engagement with Croesus, he took off the
baggage from the camels, and mounted his horsemen upon them; the enemy's
horses, offended with the smell of the camels, turned back and fled. -
L.

[Isaiah 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 21:8</span></span>

And he cried, A lion "He that looked out on the watch" - The present
reading, אריה aryeh, a lion, is so unintelligible, and the mistake so
obvious, that I make no doubt that the true reading is הראה haroeh, the
seer; as the Syriac translator manifestly found it in his copy, who
renders it by דקוא duka, a watchman.

[Isaiah 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 21:9</span></span>

Here cometh a chariot of men, etc. "A man, one of the two riders" - So
the Syriac understands it, and Ephrem Syr.

[Isaiah 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 21:10</span></span>

O my threshing - "O thou, the object upon which I shall exercise the
severity of my discipline; that shalt lie under my afflicting hand, like
corn spread upon the floor to be threshed out and winnowed, to separate
the chaff from the wheat!" The image of threshing is frequently used by
the Hebrew poets, with great elegance and force, to express the
punishment of the wicked and the trial of the good, or the utter
dispersion and destruction of God's enemies. Of the different ways of
threshing in use among the Hebrews, and the manner of performing them,
see the note on [Isa 28:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#027) (note).

Our translators have taken the liberty of using the word threshing in a
passive sense, to express the object or matter that is threshed; in
which I have followed them, not being able to express it more properly,
without departing too much from the form and letter of the original.
"Son of my floor," Hebrews It is an idiom of the Hebrew language to call
the effect, the object, the adjunct, any thing that belongs in almost
any way to another, the son of it. "O my threshing." The prophet
abruptly breaks off the speech of God; and instead of continuing it in
the form in which he had begun, and in the person of God, "This I
declare unto you by my prophet," he changes the form of address, and
adds, in his own person, "This I declare unto you from God."

[Isaiah 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 21:11</span></span>

The burden of Dumah "The oracle concerning Dumah" - Pro דומה Dumah,
Codex R. Meiri habet אדום Edom; and so the Septuagint, Vid. Kimchi ad h.
50. Biblia Michaelis, Halae, 1720, not. ad 50. See also De Rossi. Bishop
Lowth translates the prophecy thus: -

11\. The Oracle Concerning Dumah.

A voice crieth to me from Seir:

Watchman, what from the night?

Watchman, what from the night?

12\. The watchman replieth: -

The morning cometh, and also the night.

If ye will inquire, inquire ye: come again.

This differs very little from our common Version. One of Kennicott's
MSS., and one of my own, omit the repetition, "Watchman, what from the
night?"

This prophecy, from the uncertainty of the occasion on which it was
uttered, and from the brevity of the expression, is extremely obscure.
The Edomites as well as the Jews were subdued by the Babylonians. They
inquire of the prophet how long their subjection is to last: he
intimates that the Jews should be delivered from their captivity; not so
the Edomites. Thus far the interpretation seems to carry with it some
degree of probability. What the meaning of the last line may be, I
cannot pretend to divine. In this difficulty the Hebrew MSS. give no
assistance. The MSS. of the Septuagint, and the fragments of the other
Greek Versions, give some variations, but no light. This being the case,
I thought it best to give an exact literal translation of the whole two
verses, which may serve to enable the English reader to judge in some
measure of the foundation of the various interpretations that have been
given of them.

The burden of Dumah. - R. D. Kimchi says, "His father understood this of
the destruction of Dumah (one of the cities of the Ishmaelites) by the
inhabitants of Seir; and that they inquired of the prophet to know the
particular time in which God had given them a commission against it. The
prophet answered: The morning - the time of success to you, cometh, is
just at hand; and the night - the time of utter destruction to the
inhabitants of Dumah, is also ready." I have heard the words applied in
the way of general exhortation.

1\. Every minister of God is a watchman. He is continually watching for
the safety and interests of his people, and looking for the counsel of
God that he may be properly qualified to warn and to comfort.

2\. Such are often called to denounce heavy judgments; they have the
burden of the word of the Lord to denounce against the impenitent, the
backslider, the lukewarm, and the careless.

3\. When the watchman threatens judgments, some are awakened, and some
mock: Watchman, what of the night? "What are the judgments thou
threatenest, and when are they to take place?"

4\. To this question, whether seriously or tauntingly proposed, the
watchman answers:

1\. The morning cometh - there is a time of repentance granted; a
morning of God's long-suffering kindness now appears: and also the night
- the time in which God will no longer wait to be gracious, but will cut
you off as cumberers of the ground.

2\. But if you will inquire seriously how you are to escape God's
judgments, inquire ye.

3\. There is still a door of hope; continue to pray for mercy.

4\. Return from your iniquities.

5\. Come to God, through Christ, that ye may obtain salvation.

[Isaiah 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 21:13</span></span>

The burden upon Arabia "The oracle concerning Arabia" - This title is of
doubtful authority. In the first place, because it is not in many of the
MSS. of the Septuagint; it is in MSS. Pachom. and 1. D. 2. only, as far
as I can find with certainty. Secondly, from the singularity of the
phraseology; for משא massa is generally prefixed to its object without a
preposition, as משא בבל massa babel; and never but in this place with
the preposition ב beth. Besides, as the word בערב baarab occurs at the
very beginning of the prophecy itself, the first word but one, it is
much to be suspected that some one, taking it for a proper name and the
object of the prophecy, might note it as such by the words משא בערב
massa baarab written in the margin, which he might easily transfer to
the text. The Septuagint did not take it for a proper name, but render
it εν τῳ δρυμῳ ἑσπερας, "in the forest, in the evening," and so the
Chaldee, which I follow; for otherwise, the forest in Arabia is so
indeterminate and vague a description, that in effect it means nothing
at all. This observation might have been of good use in clearing up the
foregoing very obscure prophecy, if any light had arisen from joining
the two together by removing the separating title; but I see no
connection between them. The Arabic Version has, "The prophecy
concerning the Arabians, and the children of Chedar."

This prophecy was to have been fulfilled within a year of the time of
its delivery, see [Isa 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#016); and it
was probably delivered about the same time with the rest in this part of
the book, that is, soon before or after the 14th of Hezekiah, the year
of Sennacherib's invasion. In his first march into Judea, or in his
return from the Egyptian expedition, he might perhaps overrun these
several clans of Arabians; their distress on some such occasion is the
subject of this prophecy. - L.

[Isaiah 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 21:14</span></span>

The land of Tema "The southern country" - Θαιμαν, Sept.; Austri, Vulg.
They read תימן teiman, which seems to be right; for probably the
inhabitants of Tema might be involved in the same calamity with their
brethren and neighbors of Kedar, and not in a condition to give them
assistance, and to relieve them, in their flight before the enemy, with
bread and water. To bring forth bread and water is an instance of common
humanity in such cases of distress; especially in those desert countries
in which the common necessaries of life, more particularly water, are
not easily to be met with or procured. Moses forbids the Ammonite and
Moabite to be admitted into the congregation of the Lord to the tenth
generation. One reason which he gives for this reprobation is their
omission of the common offices of humanity towards the Israelites;
"because they met them not with bread and water in the way, when they
came forth out of Egypt," [Deu 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#004).

[Isaiah 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 21:17</span></span>

The archers, the mighty men of the children of Kedar "The mighty bowmen
of the sons of Kedar" - Sagittariorum fortium, Vulg.; transposing the
two words, and reading גבורי קשה gibborey kesheth; which seems to be
right. The strong men of the bow, the most excellent archers.

For the Lord - hath spoken it "For Jehovah hath spoken it" - The
prophetic Carmina of Marcius, foretelling the battle of Cannae, lib.
25:12, conclude with the same kind of solemn form: Nam mihi ita Jupiter
fatus est; "Thus hath Jupiter spoken to me." Observe that the word נאם
naam, to pronounce, to declare, is the solemn word appropriated to the
delivering of prophecies: "Behold, I am against the prophets, saith (נאם
naam, pronounceth) Jehovah, who use their tongues, וינאמו נאם vaiyinamu
neum, and solemnly pronounce, He hath pronounced it;" [Jer
23:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#031). What God says shall most
assuredly come to pass; he cannot be deceived.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 22](isa022)

</div>
