<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa014)  [Next](isa016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 15:0</span></span>

Prediction of very heavy calamities about to fall upon the Moabites,
[Isa 15:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#001).

This and the following chapter, taken together, make one entire
prophecy, very improperly divided into two parts. The time of its
delivery, and consequently of its accomplishment, which was to be in
three years from that time, is uncertain; the former not being marked in
the prophecy itself, nor the latter recorded in history. But the most
probable account is, that it was delivered soon after the foregoing, in
the first year of Hezekiah; and that it was accomplished in his fourth
year, when Shalmaneser invaded the kingdom of Israel. He might probably
march through Moab; and to secure every thing behind him, possess
himself of the whole country, by taking their principal strong places Ar
and Kirhares. - L. The authorized Version which we have followed in the
margin, places the prophecy in this chapter fourteen years earlier than
that contained in the two preceding.

Jeremiah has happily introduced much of this prophecy of Isaiah into his
own larger prophecy against the same people in his forty-eighth chapter,
denouncing God's judgment on Moab, subsequent to the calamity here
foretold, and to be executed by Nebuchadnezzar; by which means several
mistakes of transcribers in the present text of both prophets may be
rectified.

[Isaiah 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 15:1</span></span>

Because in the night - בליל beleil. That both these cities should be
taken in the night is a circumstance somewhat unusual; but not so
material as to deserve to be so strongly insisted upon. Vitringa, by his
remark on this word, shows that he was dissatisfied with it in its plain
and obvious meaning, and is forced to have recourse to a very hard
metaphorical interpretation of it. Noctu vel nocturno impetu; vel
metaphorice, repente, subito, inexpectata destructione: placet
posterius. Calmet conjectures, and I think it probable, that the true
reading is כליל keleil, as the night. There are many mistakes in the
Hebrew text arising from the very great similitude of the letters ב
beth, and כ caph, which in many MSS., and some printed editions, are
hardly distinguishable.

Admitting this reading, the translation will be, -

"Because Ar is utterly destroyed, Moab is undone!

Because Kir is utterly destroyed, Moab is undone!"

[Isaiah 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 15:2</span></span>

He is gone to Bajith, and to Dibon - עלה הבית alah habbayith, should be
rendered, he is gone to the House, i.e., to their chief temple, where
they practiced idolatry. Dibon was the name of a tower where also was an
idolatrous temple; thither they went to weep and pray before their
idols, that they might interpose and save them from their calamities. So
R. D. Kimchi. Me is gone to Bajith and to Dibon: but Bishop Lowth reads
Beth Dibon; this is the name of one place; and the two words are to be
joined together, without the ו vau intervening. So the Chaldee and
Syriac. This reading is not supported by any MS. or Version: but some
MSS., instead of ער ar, have עיר ir, a city, others have עד ad, unto,
and some editions have על al, upon. But all these help little, though
they show that the place puzzled both the scribes and the editors.

On all their heads shall be baldness, etc." On every head there is
baldness," etc. - Herodotus, 2:36, speaks of it as a general practice
among all men, except the Egyptians, to cut off their hair as a token of
mourning. "Cut off thy hair, and cast it away," says Jeremiah, [Jer
7:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#029), "and take up a lamentation."

Τουτο νυ και γερας οιον οἱζυροισι βροτοισι

Κειρασθαι τε κομην, βαλεειν τ' απο δακρυ παρειων.

Hom. Odyss. 4:197.

"The rites of wo

Are all, alas! the living can bestow;

O'er the congenial dust enjoined to shear

The graceful curl, and drop the tender tear."

Pope.

On every head. - For ראשיו roshaiv, read ראש rosh. So the parallel
place, [Jer 48:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#037), and so three MSS.,
one ancient. An ancient MS. reads על כל ראש al col rosh. Five read בכל
ראש bechol rosh, on every head, with the Septuagint and Arabic. And
every head. The ו vau, and, is found in thirty MSS., in three editions,
and in the Syriac, Vulgate, and Chaldee.

Cut off "Shorn" - The printed editions, as well as the MSS., are divided
on the reading of this word. Some have גדועה geduah, shorn, others גרעה
geruah, diminished. The similitude of the letters ד daleth and ר resh
has likewise occasioned many mistakes. In the present case, the sense is
pretty much the same with either reading. The text of [Jer
48:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#037) has the latter, diminished. The
former reading is found in twelve of Dr. Zennicott's MSS., forty of De
Rossi's, and two of my own. A great number of editions have the same
reading.

[Isaiah 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 15:3</span></span>

With sackcloth - שק sak. The word is in the plural שקים sakkim, sacks,
in one of De Rossi's MSS.

[Isaiah 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 15:4</span></span>

The armed soldiers "The very loins" - So the Septuagint, ἡ οσφυς, and
the Syriac. They cry out violently, with their utmost force.

[Isaiah 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 15:5</span></span>

My heart shall cry out for Moab "The heart of Moab crieth within her" -
For לבי libbi, my heart, the Septuagint reads לבו libbo, his heart, or
לב leb; the Chaldee, לבו libbo. For בריחיה bericheyha, the Syriac reads
ברוחה berocheh; and so likewise the Septuagint, rendering it εν αυτῃ,
Edit. Vat: or εν ἑαυτῃ, Edit. Alex. and MSS. I., D. II.

A heifer of three years old "A young heifer" - Hebrew, a heifer three
years old, in full strength; as Horace uses equa trima, for a young mare
just coming to her prime. Bochart observes, from Aristotle, Hist.
Animal. lib. 4 that in this kind of animals alone the voice of the
female is deeper than that of the male; therefore the lowing of the
heifer, rather than of the bullock, is chosen by the prophet, as the
more proper image to express the mourning of Moab. But I must add that
the expression here is very short and obscure; and the opinions of
interpreters are various in regard to the meaning. Compare [Jer
48:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#034).

Shall they go it up "They shall ascend" - For יעלה yaaleh, the
Septuagint and a MS. read in the plural, יעלו yaalu. And from this
passage the parallel place in [Jer
48:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#005) must be corrected; where, for
יעלה בכי yaaleh bechi, which gives no good sense, read יעלה בו yaaleh
bo.

[Isaiah 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 15:7</span></span>

"Shall perish" - אבדו abadu or אבדה abadeh. This word seems to have been
lost out of the text: it is supplied by the parallel place, [Jer
48:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#036). The Syriac expresses it by עבר
aber, praeteriit, "he hath passed;" and the Chaldee by יתבזזון
yithbazezun, diripientur.

To the brook of the willows "To the valley of willows" - That is, to
Babylon. Hieron. and Jarchi in loc., both referring to [Psa
137:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#002). So likewise Prideaux, Le Clerc,
etc.

[Isaiah 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 15:9</span></span>

The waters of Dimon - Some have Dibon, others have Ribon and Rimon. St.
Jerome observes that the same town was called both Dibon and Dimon. The
reading is therefore indifferent.

Upon him that escapeth of Moab, etc. "Upon the escaped of Moab, and
Ariel, and the remnant of Admah" - The Septuagint for עריה aryeh, read
אריאל ariel. Ar Moab was called also Ariel or Areopolis, Hieron. and
Theodoret. See Cellarius. They make אדמה Admah, also a proper name.
Michaelis thinks that the Moabites might be called the remnant of Admah,
as sprung from Lot and his daughters, escaped from the destruction of
that and the other cities; or, metaphorically, as the Jews are called
princes of Sodom, and people of Gomorrah, [Isa
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010). Bibliotheque Orient. Part v., p.
195. The reading of this verse is very doubtful; and the sense, in every
way in which it can be read, very obscure. - L. Calmet thinks there may
be a reference to [Ch1 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#022), where it
is said, "Benaiah slew two lion-like men of Moab," or the two Ariels of
Moab, and would therefore translate, "I will bring down the remnant of
Moab like Ariel, (which Benaiah smote), and them that are escaped like
Adamah." They shall be exterminated, as were the inhabitants of those
two cities. Ariel was a double city - the river Arnon dividing it in
two. This is the two Ariels of Moab - not two lion-like men, much less
two lions. See Calmet on this place.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 16](isa016)

</div>
