<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa007)  [Next](isa009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 8:0</span></span>

Prediction respecting the conquest of Syria and Israel by the Assyrians,
[Isa 8:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#001). Israel, for rejecting the
gentle stream of Shiloah, near Jerusalem, is threatened to be overflowed
by the great river of Assyria, manifestly alluding by this strong figure
to the conquests of Tiglath-pileser and Shalmaneser over that kingdom,
[Isa 8:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#005). The invasion of the
kingdom of Judah by the Assyrians under Sennacherib foretold, [Isa
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#008). The prophet assures the
Israelites and Syrians that their hostile attempts against Judah shall
be frustrated, [Isa 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#009), [Isa
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#010). Exhortation not to be afraid of
the wrath of man, but to fear the displeasure of God, [Isa
8:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#011). Judgments which shall
overtake those who put no confidence in Jehovah, [Isa
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014), [Isa
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#015). The prophet proceeds to warn his
countrymen against idolatry, divination, and the like sinful practices,
exhorting them to seek direction from the word of God, professing in a
beautiful apostrophe that this was his own pious resolution. And to
enforce this counsel, and strengthen their faith, he points to his
children, whose symbolic names were signs or pledges of the Divine
promises, [Isa 8:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#016). Judgments of
God against the finally impenitent, [Isa
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#021), [Isa
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#022).

The prophecy of the foregoing chapter relates directly to the kingdom of
Judah only: the first part of it promises them deliverance from the
united invasion of the Israelites and Syrians; the latter part, from
[Isa 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#017), denounces the desolation to
be brought upon the kingdom of Judah by the Assyrians. The sixth,
seventh, and eighth verses of this chapter seem to take in both the
kingdoms of Israel and Judah. "This people that refuseth the waters of
Shiloah," may be meant of both: the Israelites despised the kingdom of
Judah, which they had deserted, and now attempted to destroy; the people
of Judah, from a consideration of their own weakness, and a distrust of
God's promises, being reduced to despair, applied to the Assyrians for
assistance against the two confederate kings. But how could it be said
of Judah, that they rejoiced in Rezin, and the son of Remaliah, the
enemies confederated against them? If some of the people were inclined
to revolt to the enemy, (which however does not clearly appear from any
part of the history or the prophecy), yet there was nothing like a
tendency to a general defection. This, therefore, must be understood of
Israel. The prophet denounces the Assyrian invasion, which should
overwhelm the whole kingdom of Israel under Tiglath-pileser, and
Shalmaneser; and the subsequent invasion of Judah by the same power
under Sennacherib, which would bring them into the most imminent danger,
like a flood reaching to the neck, in which a man can but just keep his
head above water. The two next verses, [Isa 8:9, 23
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#009), are addressed by the prophet, as
a subject of the kingdom of Judah, to the Israelites and Syrians, and
perhaps to all the enemies of God's people; assuring them that their
attempts against that kingdom shall be fruitless; for that the promised
Immanuel, to whom he alludes by using his name to express the
signification of it, for God is with us, shall be the defense of the
house of David, and deliver the kingdom of Judah out of their hands. He
then proceeds to warn the people of Judah against idolatry, divination,
and the like forbidden practices; to which they were much inclined, and
which would soon bring down God's judgments upon Israel. The prophecy
concludes at the sixth verse of chap. 9 with promises of blessings in
future times by the coming of the great deliverer already pointed out by
the name of Immanuel, whose person and character is set forth in terms
the most ample and magnificent.

And here it may be observed that it is almost the constant practice of
the prophet to connect in like manner deliverances temporal with
spiritual. Thus the eleventh chapter, setting forth the kingdom of
Messiah, is closely connected with the tenth, which foretells the
destruction of Sennacherib. So likewise the destruction of nations,
enemies to God, in the thirty-fourth chapter, introduces the flourishing
state of the kingdom of Christ in the thirty-fifth. And thus the
chapters from 40 to 49 inclusive, plainly relating to the deliverance
from the captivity of Babylon, do in some parts plainly relate to the
greater deliverance by Christ.

[Isaiah 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 8:1</span></span>

Take thee a great roll "Take unto thee a large mirror" - The word גליון
gillayon is not regularly formed from גלל galal, to roll, but from גלה
galah, as פדיון pidyon from פדה padah, כליון killayon from כלה, calah,
נקיון nikkayon from נקה nakah, עליון elyon from עלה alah, etc., the י
yod supplying the place of the radical ה he. גלה galah signifies to
show, to reveal; properly, as Schroederus says, (De Vestitu Mulier.
Hebr. p. 294), to render clear and bright by rubbing; to polish. גליון
gillayon, therefore, according to this derivation, is not a roll or
volume: but may very well signify a polished tablet of metal, such as
was anciently used for a mirror. The Chaldee paraphrast renders it by
לוח luach, a tablet, and the same word, though somewhat differently
pointed, the Chaldee paraphrast and the rabbins render a mirror, [Isa
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#023). The mirrors of the Israelitish
women were made of brass finely polished, [Exo
38:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#008), from which place it likewise
appears that what they used were little hand mirrors which they carried
with them even when they assembled at the door of the tabernacle. I have
a metalline mirror found in Herculaneum, which is not above three inches
square. The prophet is commanded to take a mirror, or brazen polished
tablet, not like these little hand mirrors, but a large one; large
enough for him to engrave upon it in deep and lasting characters, בחרט
אנוש becheret enosh, with a workman's graving tool, the prophecy which
he was to deliver. חרט cheret in this place certainly signifies an
instrument to write or engrave with: but חריט charit, the same word,
only differing a little in the form, means something belonging to a
lady's dress, [Isa 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#022), (where
however five MSS. leave out the י yod, whereby only it differs from the
word in this place), either a crisping-pin, which might be not unlike a
graving tool, as some will have it, or a purse, as others infer from
[Kg2 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#023). It may therefore be called
here חרט אנוש cheret enosh, a workman's instrument, to distinguish it
from חרט אשה cheret ishshah, an instrument of the same name, used by the
women. In this manner he was to record the prophecy of the destruction
of Damascus and Samaria by the Assyrians; the subject and sum of which
prophecy is here expressed with great brevity in four words, מהר שלל הש
בז maher shalal hash baz; i.e., to hasten the spoil, to take quickly the
prey; which are afterwards applied as the name of the prophet's son, who
was made a sign of the speedy completion of it; Maher-shalal-hash-baz;
Haste-to-the-spoil, Quick-to-the-prey. And that it might be done with
the greater solemnity, and to preclude all doubt of the real delivery of
the prophecy before the event, he calls witnesses to attest the
recording of it.

The prophet is commanded to take a great roll, and yet four words only
are to be written in it, מהר שלל הש בז maher shalal hash baz, Make haste
to the spoil; fall upon the prey. The great volume points out the land
of Judea; and the few words the small number of inhabitants, after the
ten tribes were carried into captivity.

The words were to be written with a man's pen; i.e., though the prophecy
be given in the visions of God, yet the writing must be real; the words
must be transcribed on the great roll, that they may be read and
publicly consulted. Or, חרט אנוש cherot enosh, the pen or graver of the
weak miserable man, may refer to the already condemned Assyrians, who
though they should be the instruments of chastening Damascus and
Samaria, should themselves shortly be overthrown. The four words may be
considered as the commission given to the Assyrians to destroy and spoil
the cities. Make haste to the spoil; Fall upon the prey, etc.

[Isaiah 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 8:4</span></span>

For before the child - For my father and my mother, one MS. and the
Vulgate have his father and his mother. The prophecy was accordingly
accomplished within three years; when Tiglath-pileser, king of Assyria,
went up against Damascus and took it, and carried the people of it
captive to Kir, and slew Rezin, and also took the Reubenites and the
Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh, and carried them captive to
Assyria, [Kg2 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#029); [Kg2
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#009); [Ch1
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#026).

[Isaiah 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 8:6</span></span>

Forasmuch as this people refuseth "Because this people have rejected" -
The gentle waters of Shiloah, a small fountain and brook just without
Jerusalem, which supplied a pool within the city for the use of the
inhabitants, is an apt emblem of the state of the kingdom and house of
David, much reduced in its apparent strength, yet supported by the
blessing of God; and is finely contrasted with the waters of the
Euphrates, great, rapid, and impetuous; the image of the Babylonian
empire, which God threatens to bring down like a mighty flood upon all
these apostates of both kingdoms, as punishment for their manifold
iniquities, and their contemptuous disregard of his promises. The brook
and the river are put for the kingdoms to which they belong, and the
different states of which respectively they most aptly represent.
Juvenal, inveighing against the corruption of Rome by the importation of
Asiatic manners, says, with great elegance, that "the Orontes has been
long discharging itself into the Tiber:" -

Jampridem Syrus in Tiberim defluxit Orontes.

And Virgil, to express the submission of some of the Eastern countries
to the Roman arms, says: -

Euphrates ibat jam mollior undis.

Aen. 8:726.

"The waters of the Euphrates now flowed more humbly and gently."

But the happy contrast between the brook and the river gives a peculiar
beauty to this passage of the prophet, with which the simple figure in
the Roman poets, however beautiful, yet uncontrasted, cannot contend.

[Isaiah 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 8:8</span></span>

He shall reach even to the neck - He compares Jerusalem, says Kimchi, to
the head of the human body. As when the waters come up to a man's neck,
he is very near drowning, (for a little increase of them would go over
his head), so the king of Assyria coming up to Jerusalem was like a
flood reaching to the neck - the whole country was overflowed, and the
capital was in imminent danger. Accordingly the Chaldee renders reaching
to the neck by reaching to Jerusalem.

[Isaiah 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 8:9</span></span>

Associate yourselves "Know ye this" - God by his prophet plainly
declares to the confederate adversaries of Judah, and bids them regard
and attend to his declaration, that all their efforts shall be in vain.

The present reading, רעו rou, is subject to many difficulties; I follow
that of the Septuagint, דעו deu, γνωτε. Archbishop Secker approves this
reading. דעו deu know ye this, is parallel and synonymous to האזינו
haazinu, give ear to It, in the next line. The Septuagint have likewise
very well paraphrased the conclusion of this verse: "When ye have
strengthened yourselves, ye shall be broken; and though ye again
strengthen yourselves, again shall ye be broken;" taking חתו chottu as
meaning the same with נשברו, shall be broken.

[Isaiah 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 8:11</span></span>

With a strong hand "As taking me by the hand" - Eleven MSS., (two
ancient), of Kennicott's, thirty-four of De Rossi's, and seven editions,
read כחזקת kechezkath; and so Symmachus, the Syriac, and Vulgate. Or
rather with a strong hand, that is, with a strong and powerful influence
of the prophetic Spirit.

[Isaiah 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 8:12</span></span>

Say ye not, A confederacy "Say ye not, It is holy" - קשר kesher. Both
the reading and the sense of this word are doubtful. The Septuagint
manifestly read קשה kashah; for they render it by σκληρον, hard. The
Syriac and Chaldee render it מרדא merda, and מרוד dn merod, rebellion.
How they came by this sense of the word, or what they read in their
copies, is not so clear. But the worst of it is, that neither of these
readings or renderings gives any clear sense in this place. For why
should God forbid his faithful servants to say with the unbelieving
Jews, It is hard; or, There is a rebellion; or, as our translators
render it, a confederacy? And how can this be called "walking in the way
of this people?" [Isa 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#011), which
usually means, following their example, joining with them in religious
worship. Or what confederacy do they mean? The union of the kingdoms of
Syria and Israel against Judah? That was properly a league between two
independent states, not an unlawful conspiracy of one part against
another in the same state; this is the meaning of the word קשר kesher.
For want of any satisfactory interpretation of this place that I can
meet with, I adopt a conjecture of Archbishop Secker, which he proposes
with great diffidence, and even seems immediately to give up, as being
destitute of any authority to support it. I will give it in his own
words:

"Videri potest ex cap. [Isa 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#016), et
hujus cap. [Isa 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#013), [Isa
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014), [Isa
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#019), legendum קרש vel קדוש kadosh,
eadem sententia, qua אלהינו Eloheynu, [Hos
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#003). Sed nihil necesse est. Vide enim
[Jer 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#009); [Eze
22:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#025). Optime tamen sic responderent
huic versiculo versiculi [Isa 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#013),
[Isa 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014)."

The passages of Jeremiah and Ezekiel above referred to seem to me not at
all to clear up the sense of the word קשר kesher in this place. But the
context greatly favors the conjecture here given, and makes it highly
probable: "Walk not in the way of this people; call not their idols
holy, nor fear ye the object of their fear:" (that is, the σεβασματα, or
gods of the idolaters; for so fear here signifies, to wit, the thing
feared. So God is called "The fear of Isaac," [Gen
31:42](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#042), [Gen
31:53](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#053)): "but look up to Jehovah as
your Holy One; and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread; and
he shall be a holy Refuge unto you." Here there is a harmony and
consistency running through the whole sentence; and the latter part
naturally arises out of the former, and answers to it. Idolatry,
however, is full of fears. The superstitious fears of the Hindoos are
very numerous. They fear death, bad spirits generally, and hobgoblins of
all descriptions. They fear also the cries of jackals, owls, crows,
cats, asses, vultures, dogs, lizards, etc. They also dread different
sights in the air, and are alarmed at various dreams. See Ward's
Customs. Observe that the difference between קשר kesher and קדש kadosh
is chiefly in the transposition of the two last letters, for the letters
ר resh and ד daleth are hardly distinguishable in some copies, printed
as well as MS.; so that the mistake, in respect of the letters
themselves, is a very easy and a very common one. - L.

[Isaiah 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 8:14</span></span>

And he shall be for a sanctuary "And he shall be unto you a sanctuary" -
The word לכם lachem, unto you, absolutely necessary, as I conceive, to
the sense, is lost in this place: it is preserved by the Vulgate, "et
erit vobis in sanctificationem." The Septuagint have it in the singular
number: εσται σοι εις ἁγιασμον, it shall be to Thee. Or else, instead of
מקדש mikdash, a sanctuary, we must read מוקש mokesh, a snare, which
would then be repeated without any propriety or elegance, at the end of
the verse. The Chaldee reads instead of it משפט mishpat, judgment; for
he renders it by פורען purean, which word frequently answers to משפט
mishpat in his paraphrase. One MS. has in stead of מקדש ולאבן mikdash
uleeben, להם לאבן lahem leeben, which clears the sense and construction.
But the reading of the Vulgate is, I think, the best remedy to this
difficulty; and is in some degree authorized by להם lahem, the reading
of the MS. above mentioned.

[Isaiah 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 8:16</span></span>

Among my disciples - בלמדי belimmudai. The Septuagint render it του μη
μαθειν. Bishop Chandler, Defence of Christianity, p. 308, thinks they
read מלמד, that it be not understood, and approves of this reading. -
Abp. Secker.

[Isaiah 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 8:18</span></span>

Lord of hosts - One MS. reads אלהי צבאות Elohey tsebaoth, God of hosts.

[Isaiah 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 8:19</span></span>

Should not a people seek "Should they seek" - After ידרש yidrosh, the
Septuagint, repeating the word, read הידרש hayidrosh: Ουκ εθνος προς
Θεον αυτου εκζητησουσι; τι εκζητησουσι περι των ζωντων τους νεκρους;
Should not a nation seek unto its God? Why should you seek unto the dead
concerning the living? and this repetition of the verb seems necessary
to the sense; and, as Procopius on the place observes, it strongly
expresses the prophet's indignation at their folly.

[Isaiah 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 8:20</span></span>

To the law and to the testimony "Unto the command, and unto the
testimony" - "Is not תעודה teudah here the attested prophecy, [Isa
8:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#001)? and perhaps תורה torah the
command, [Isa 8:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#011)? for it means
sometimes a particular, and even a human, command; see [Pro
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#020), and [Pro
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#001), [Pro
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#002), where it is ordered to be hid,
that is, secretly kept." - Abp. Secker. So Deschamps, in his
translation, or rather paraphrase, understands it: "Tenons nous a
l'instrument authentique mis en depot par ordre du Seigneur," "Let us
stick to the authentic instrument, laid up by the command of the Lord."
If this be right, the sixteenth verse must be understood in the same
manner.

Because there is no light in them "In which there is no obscurity" - שחר
shachor, as an adjective, frequently signifies dark, obscure; and the
noun שחר shachar signifies darkness, gloominess, [Joe
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#002), if we may judge by the context: -

"A day of darkness and obscurity;

Of cloud, and of thick vapor;

As the gloom spread upon the mountains:

A people mighty and numerous."

Where the gloom, שחר shachar, seems to be the same with the cloud and
thick vapor mentioned in the line preceding. See [Lam
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#008), and [Job
30:30](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#030). See this meaning of the word
שחר shachar well supported in Christ. Muller. Sat. Observat. Philippians
p. 53, Lugd. Bat. 1752. The morning seems to have been an idea wholly
incongruous in the passage of Joel; and in this of Isaiah the words in
which there is no morning (for so it ought to be rendered if שחר shachar
in this place signifies, according to its usual sense, morning) seem to
give no meaning at all. "It is because there is no light in them," says
our translation. If there be any sense in these words, it is not the
sense of the original; which cannot justly be so translated. Qui n'a
rien d'obscur, "which has no obscurity." - Deschamps. The reading of the
Septuagint and Syriac, שחד shochad, gift, affords no assistance towards
the clearing up of any of this difficult place. R. D. Kimchi says this
was the form of an oath: "By the law and by the testimony such and such
things are so." Now if they had sworn this falsely, it is because there
is no light, no illumination, שחר shachar, no scruple of conscience, in
them.

[Isaiah 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 8:21</span></span>

Hardly bestead "Distressed" - Instead of נקשה niksheh, distressed, the
Vulgate, Chaldee, and Symmachus manifestly read נכשל nichshal,
stumbling, tottering through weakness, ready to fall; a sense which
suits very well with the place.

And look upward "And he shall cast his eyes upward" - The learned
professor Michaelis, treating of this place (Not. in de Sacr. Poes.
Hebr. Prael. ix.) refers to a passage in the Koran which is similar to
it. As it is a very celebrated passage, and on many accounts remarkable,
I shall give it here at large, with the same author's farther remarks
upon it in another place of his writings. It must be noted here that the
learned professor renders נבט nibbat, הביט hibbit, in this and the
parallel place, [Isa 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#030), which I
translate he looketh by it thundereth, from Schultens, Orig. Ling. Hebr.
Lib. 1 cap. 2, of the justness of which rendering I much doubt.

This brings the image of Isaiah more near in one circumstance to that of
Mohammed than it appears to be in my translation: -

"Labid, contemporary with Mohammed, the last of the seven Arabian poets
who had the honor of having their poems, one of each, hung up in the
entrance of the temple of Mecca, struck with the sublimity of a passage
in the Koran, became a convert to Mohammedism; for he concluded that no
man could write in such a manner unless he were Divinely inspired.

"One must have a curiosity to examine a passage which had so great an
effect upon Labid. It is, I must own, the finest that I know in the
whole Koran: but I do not think it will have a second time the like
effect, so as to tempt any one of my readers to submit to circumcision.
It is in the second chapter, where he is speaking of certain apostates
from the faith. 'They are like,' saith he, 'to a man who kindles a
light. As soon as it begins to shine, God takes from them the light, and
leaves them in darkness that they see nothing. They are deaf, dumb, and
blind; and return not into the right way. Or they fare as when a cloud,
full of darkness, thunder, and lightning, covers the heaven. When it
bursteth, they stop their ears with their fingers, with deadly fear; and
God hath the unbelievers in his power. The lightning almost robbeth them
of their eyes: as often as it flasheth they go on by its light; and when
it vanisheth in darkness, they stand still. If God pleased, they would
retain neither hearing nor sight.' That the thought is beautiful, no one
will deny; and Labid, who had probably a mind to flatter Mohammed, was
lucky in finding a passage in the Koran so little abounding in poetical
beauties, to which his conversion might with any propriety be ascribed.
It was well that he went no farther; otherwise his taste for poetry
might have made him again an infidel." Michaelis, Erpenii Arabische
Grammatik abgekurzt, Vorrede, s. 32.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 9](isa009)

</div>
