<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa037)  [Next](isa039) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 38](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 38:0</span></span>

Account of Hezekiah's dangerous sickness and miraculous recovery, [Isa
38:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#001). Tender and beautiful song of
thanksgiving, in which this pious king breathed out the sentiments of a
grateful heart, when his life was, as it were, restored. This ode may be
adapted to other cases; and will always afford profit and pleasure to
those who are not void of feeling and piety, [Isa
38:10-22](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#010).

[Isaiah 38:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 38:1</span></span>

In those days - The reader is requested to consult the notes on 2 Kings
20 in reference to the principal parts of this chapter.

[Isaiah 38:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 38:2</span></span>

Then Hezekiah turned his face toward the wall - The furniture of an
eastern divan or chamber, either for the reception of company or for
private use, consists chiefly of carpets spread on the floor in the
middle; and of sofas, or couches ranged on one or more sides of the
room, on a part raised somewhat above the floor. On these they repose
themselves in the day, and sleep at night. It is to be observed that the
corner of the room is the place of honor. Dr. Pococke, when he was
introduced to the Sheikh of Furshout, found him sitting in the corner of
his room. He describes another Arab Sheikh "as sitting in the corner of
a large green tent, pitched in the middle of an encampment of Arabs; and
the Bey of Girge as placed on a sofa in a corner to the right as one
entered the room." - Harmer's Observ. 2 p. 60. Lady Mary Montague,
giving an account of a visit which she made to the Kahya's lady at
Adrianople, says, "She ordered cushions to be given me; and took care to
place me in the corner, which is the place of honor." - Letter 33. The
reason of this seems to be, that the person so placed is distinguished,
and in a manner separated, from the rest of the company, and as it were
guarded by the wall on each side. We are to suppose Hezekiah's couch
placed in the same situation; in which turning on either side, he must
turn his face to the wall; by which he would withdraw himself from those
who were attending upon him in his apartment, in order to address his
private prayer to God.

[Isa 38:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#003) And he said, I beseech thee,
O Jehovah, remember now how I have endeavored to walk before thee in
truth, and with a perfect heart; and have done that which is good in
thine eyes. And Hezekiah wept, and lamented grievously. - L.

[Isa 38:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#004) Now \[before Isaiah was gone
out into the middle court\] the word of Jehovah came unto him, saying,
Go \[back\], and say unto Hezekiah, Thus saith Jehovah the God of David
thy father, I have heard thy supplication; I have seen thy tears. Behold
\[I will heal thee; and on the third day thou shalt go up into the house
of Jehovah.

[Isa 38:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#005) And\] I will add unto thy
days fifteen years. And I will deliver thee, and this city, from the
hand of the king of Assyria; and I will protect this city. And
\[Hezekiah said, By what sign shall I know that I shall go up into the
house of Jehovah?

[Isa 38:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#007) And Isaiah said\], This
shall be the sign unto thee from Jehovah, that Jehovah still bring to
effect this word which he hath spoken.

The words in the translation included within crotchets are supplied from
the parallel place, [Kg2 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#004), [Kg2
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#005), to make the narration more
perfect. I have also taken the liberty, with Houbigant, of bringing
forward the two last verses of this chapter, and inserting them in their
proper places of the narration with the same mark. Kimchi's note on
these two verses is as follows: "This and the following verse belong not
to the writing of Hezekiah; and I see no reason why they are written
here after the writing; for their right place is above, after And I will
protect this city, [Isa 38:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#006). And so
they stand in the book of Kings, "[Kg2
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#007), [Kg2
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#008). The narration of this chapter
seems to be in some parts an abridgment of that of 2 Kings 20. The
abridger, having finished his extract here with the eleventh verse,
seems to have observed, that the seventh and eighth verses of 2 Kings 20
were wanted to complete the narration: he therefore added them at the
end of the chapter, after he had inserted the song of Hezekiah, probably
with marks for their insertion in their proper places; which marks were
afterwards neglected by transcribers. Or a transcriber might omit them
by mistake, and add them at the end of the chapter with such marks. Many
transpositions are, with great probability, to be accounted for in the
same way.

[Isaiah 38:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 38:6</span></span>

I will defend this city - The other copy, [Kg2
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#006), adds:" for mine own sake, and
for the sake of David my servant;" and the sentence seems somewhat
abrupt without it.

[Isaiah 38:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 38:8</span></span>

Which is gone down "By which the sun is gone down" - For בשמש
bashshemesh, the Septuagint, Syriac, and Chaldee read השמש, hashshemesh.
- Houbigant. In the history of this miracle in the book of Kings, ([Kg2
20:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#009)), there is no mention at all
made of the sun, but only of the going backward of the shadow: which
might be effected by a supernatural refraction. The first ὁ ἡλιος, the
sun, in this verse is omitted in the Septuagint, MS. Pachom.

[Isaiah 38:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 38:9</span></span>

The writing of Hezekiah - Here the book of Kings deserts us, the song of
Hezekiah not being inserted in it. Another copy of this very obscure
passage (obscure not only from the concise poetical style, but because
it is probably very incorrect) would have been of great service.

The MSS. and ancient Versions, especially the latter, will help us to
get through some of the many difficulties which we meet with in it.

[Isaiah 38:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 38:11</span></span>

The Lord "Jehovah" - יה Yah, יה Yah, seems to be יהוה Yehovah, in MS.
Bodl., and it was so at first written in another. So the Syriac. See
Houbigant. I believe יהוה Yehovah was the original reading. See the note
on [Isa 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#002) (note).

[Isaiah 38:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 38:12</span></span>

Mine age - is removed from me as a shepherd's tent - רעי roi is put for
רעה roeh, say the rabbis (Sal. Den Melec on the place); but much more
probably is written imperfectly for רעים roim, shepherds. See note on
[Isa 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001).

I shall be removed from this state to another, as a shepherd removes his
tent from one place to another for the sake of his flock. Is not this a
strong intimation of his belief in a future state?

I have cut off like a weaver my life "My life is cut off as by the
weaver" - קפדתי kippadti. This verb is rendered passively, and in the
third person, by the Syriac, Chaldee, and Vulgate.

[Isaiah 38:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 38:13</span></span>

The last line of the foregoing verse מיום עד לילה תשלימני miyom ad
layelah tashlimeni, "In the course of the day thou wilt finish my web;
"or, as the common version has it, "From day even to night wilt thou
make an end of me, "is not repeated at the end of this verse in the
Syriac version; and a MS. omits it. It seems to have been inserted a
second time in the Hebrew text by mistake.

I reckoned till morning, etc. "I roared until the morning like the lion"
- For שויתי shivvithi, the Chaldee has נהמית nihameith: he read שאגתי
shaagti, the proper term for the roaring of a lion; often applied to the
deep groaning of men in sickness. See Psalm 22, [Psa
32:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#003); [Psa
38:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#009); [Job
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#024). The Masoretes divide the
sentence, as I have done; taking כארי caari, like a lion, into the first
member; and so likewise the Septuagint.

[Isaiah 38:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 38:14</span></span>

Like - a swallow "Like the swallow" - כסיס kesis; so read two MSS.,
Theodot., and Hieron.

Mine eyes fail - For דלו dallu the Septuagint read כלו calu, εξελιπον.
Compare [Psa 69:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#004); [Psa
119:82](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#082), [Psa
119:123](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#123); [Lam
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#011); [Lam
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#017), in the Hebrew and in the
Septuagint.

O Lord "O Lord" - For יהוה Jehovah, thirty MSS. and eight editions read
אדני Adonai.

Undertake for me "Contend for me" - עשקה ashekah, with ש shin, Jarchi:
this sense of the word is established by [Gen
26:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#020) : "He called the name of the
well עשק esek, because they strove with him:" התעשקו hithasseku,
equivalent to יריבו yaribu, at the beginning of the verse.

[Isaiah 38:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 38:15</span></span>

I shall go softly all my years in the bitterness of my soul "Through the
rest of my years will I reflect on this bitterness of my soul" - אדדה
eddaddeh; recogitabo, Vulg., reputabo, Hieron. in loc.

[Isaiah 38:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 38:16</span></span>

By these things men live "For this cause shall it be declared" - Περι
αυτης γαρ ανηγγελη σοι, και εξηγειρας μου την πνοην, Sept. They read in
their copies עליה יחוו לך ותחיי רוחי not very different from the present
text, from which all the ancient Versions vary. They entirely omit two
words, ולכל בהן ulecol bahen; as to which there is some variation in the
MSS. One MS. has ובכל ubechol, and in all; two others וכל vechol, and
all, and ten MSS. have בהם bahem, in them, in the masculine gender.

Taking this as in the common Version, we may observe, it is not an
unfrequent case, that afflictions, and especially such as tend to a
speedy death, become the means, not only of saving the soul, but also of
lengthening the life.

Make me to live "Hast prolonged my life" - A MSS. and the Babylonish
Talmud read ותחיני vetachayeni, and so the ancient Versions. It must
necessarily be in the second person.

[Isaiah 38:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 38:17</span></span>

For peace I had great bitterness "My anguish is changed into ease" - מר
לי מר mar li mar, "mutata mthi est amaritudo." Paronomasia; a figure
which the prophet frequently admits. I do not always note it, because it
cannot ever be preserved in the translation, and the sense seldom
depends upon it. But here it perfectly clears up the great obscurity of
the passage. See Lowth on the place.

Thou hast rescued - חשכת chashachta, with כ caph, instead of ק koph; so
the Septuagint and Vulgate; Houbigant. See Chappelow on [Job
33:18](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#018).

From perdition - משחת בלי mishshachath beli, ἱνα μη αποληται, Sept. ut
non periret, "that it may not perish." Vulg. Perhaps inverting the order
of the words. See Houbigant.

Thou hast in love to my soul - חשקת chashakta, "thou hast lovingly
embraced" or kissed "my soul out of the pit of corruption."

[Isaiah 38:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 38:19</span></span>

Thy truth - אל אמתך el amittecha. A MS. omits אל el; and instead of אל
el, an ancient MS. and one edition read את eth. The same mistake as in
[Psa 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007).

[Isaiah 38:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 38:21</span></span>

Let them take a lump of figs, etc. - God, in effecting this miraculous
cure, was pleased to order the use of means not improper for that end.

"Folia, et, quae non maturuere, fici, strumis illinuntur omnibusque quae
emollienda sunt discutiendave." - Plin. Nat. Hist. 23:7.

"Ad discutienda ea, quae in corporis parte aliqua coierunt, maxime
possunt-ficus arida," etc. - Celsus, 5:11.

See the note on [Kg2 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#007) (note).
Philemon Holland translates the passage as a medical man: "The milke or
white juice that the figge tree yieldeth is of the same nature that
vinegre: and therefore it will cruddle milke as well as rennet, or
rendles. The right season of gathering this milkie substance is before
that the figs be ripe upon the tree; and then it must be dried in the
shadow: thus prepared, it is good to break impostumes, and keepe ulcer
open."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 39](isa039)

</div>
