<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa025)  [Next](isa027) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 26](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 26:0</span></span>

This chapter, like the foregoing, is a song of praise, in which
thanksgivings for temporal and spiritual mercies are beautifully
mingled, though the latter still predominate. Even the sublime and
evangelical doctrine of the resurrection seems here to be hinted at, and
made to typify the deliverance of the people of God from a state of the
lowest misery; the captivity, the general dispersion, or both. This hymn
too, like the preceding, is beautifully diversified by the frequent
change of speakers. It opens with a chorus of the Church, celebrating
the protection vouchsafed by God to his people; and the happiness of the
righteous, whom he guards, contrasted with the misery of the wicked,
whom he punishes, [Isa 26:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#001). To this
succeeds their own pious resolution of obeying, trusting, and delighting
in God, [Isa 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#008). Here the prophet
breaks in, in his own person, eagerly catching the last words of the
chorus, which were perfectly in unison with the feelings of his own
soul, and which he beautifully repeats, as one musical instrument
reverberates the sound of another on the same key with it. He makes
likewise a suitable response to what had been said on the judgments of
God, and observes their different effects on the good and the bad;
improving the one, and hardening the other, [Isa
26:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#009). After this, a chorus of Jews
express their gratitude to God for past deliverances, make confession of
their sins, and supplicate his power, which they had been long
expecting, [Isa 26:12-18](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#012). To this God
makes a gracious reply, promising deliverance that should be as life
from the dead, [Isa 26:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#019). And the
prophet, (apparently alluding to the command of Moses to the Israelites,
when the destroying angel was to go through the land of Egypt),
concludes with exhorting his people to patience and resignation, till
God sends the deliverance he has promised, [Isa
26:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#020), [Isa
26:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#021).

[Isaiah 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 26:1</span></span>

We have a strong city - In opposition to the city of the enemy, which
God hath destroyed, [Isa 25:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#001)
(note). See the note there.

Salvation - for walls and bulwarks - חומת וחל chomsoth vachel, walls and
redoubts, or the walls and the ditch. חל chel properly signifies the
ditch or trench without the wall; see Kimchi. The same rabbin says, This
song refers to the time of salvation, i.e., the days of the Messiah.

[Isaiah 26:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 26:2</span></span>

The righteous nation - The converted Gentiles shall have the gates
opened - a full entrance into all the glories and privileges of the
Gospel; being fellow heirs with the converted Jews. The Jewish
peculiarity is destroyed, for the middle wall of partition is broken
down.

The truth - The Gospel itself - as the fulfillment of all the ancient
types, shadows, and ceremonies; and therefore termed the truth, in
opposition to all those shadowy rites and ceremonies. "The law was given
by Moses; but grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ; "[Joh
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#017), and see the note there.

[Isaiah 26:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 26:3</span></span>

In perfect peace - שלום שלום shalom, shalom, "peace, peace, "i.e., peace
upon peace - all kinds of prosperity - happiness in this world and in
the world to come.

Because he trusteth in thee "Because they have trusted in thee" - So the
Chaldee, בטחו betacho. The Syriac and Vulgate read בטוח batachnu, "we
have trusted. "Schroeder, Gram. Hebrews p. 360, explains the present
reading בטוח batuach, impersonally, confisum est.

[Isaiah 26:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 26:4</span></span>

In the Lord Jehovah "In Jehovah" - In Jah Jehovah, Heb.; but see
Houbigant, and the note on [Isa 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#002)
(note).

Everlasting strength - צור עולמים tsur olamim, "the rock of ages; "or,
according to Rab. Maimon, - the eternal Fountain, Source, or Spring.
Does not this refer to the lasting streams from the rock in the desert?
And that rock was Christ. ge han hoped in the Lord fro the everlastinge
worldis. - Old Ms. Bible.

[Isaiah 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 26:8</span></span>

Have we waited for thee "We have placed our confidence in thy name" -
The Septuagint, Syriac, and Chaldee read קוינו kavinu, without the
pronoun annexed.

[Isaiah 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 26:9</span></span>

Have I desired thee - Forty-one MSS. of Dr. Kennicott's and many of De
Rossi's, (nine ancient), and five editions read אויתיך invithicha. It is
proper to note this; because the second י yod being omitted in the text,
the Vulgate and many others have rendered it in the third person.

When thy judgments, etc. - It would be better to read, When thy
judgments were in the earth, the inhabitants of the world have learned
(למדו lamedu) righteousness. Men seldom seek God in prosperity; they are
apt to rest in an earthly portion: but God in mercy embitters this by
adversity; then there is a general cry after himself as our chief,
solid, and only permanent good.

[Isaiah 26:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 26:16</span></span>

Lord, in trouble have they visited thee "O Jehovah, in affliction we
have sought thee" - So the Septuagint and two MSS. have פקדנוך
pekadnucha, in the first person plural. And so perhaps it should be צקנו
tsaknu, in the first person; but how the Septuagint read this word is
not clear; and this last member of the verse is extremely obscure.

For למו lamo, "on them," the Septuagint read לנו lanu, "on us," in the
first person likewise; a frequent mistake; see note on [Isa
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#029).

[Isaiah 26:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 26:18</span></span>

We have - brought forth wind - The learned Professor Michaelis explains
this image in the following manner: "Rariorem morbum describi,
empneumatosin, aut ventosam molam, dictum; quo quae laborant diu et sibi
et peritis medicis gravidae videntur,tandemque post omnes verae
graviditatis molestias et labored ventum ex utero emittunt: quem morbum
passim describunt medici. "Syntagma Comment., vol. ii., p. 165. The
empneumatosis, or windy inflation of the womb, is a disorder to which
females are liable. Some have had this in such wise, for a long time
together, that they have appeared to themselves, and even to very
skillful medical men, to be pregnant; and after having endured much
pain, and even the throes of apparent childbearing, they have been eased
and restored to health by the emission of a great quantity of wind from
the uterus. This disorder is well known to medical men. "The Syriac
translator seems to have understood it in this manner: Enixi sumus, ut
illae quae ventos pariunt. "We have brought forth as they who bring
forth wind."

In the earth "In the land" - בארץ bearets; so a MS., the Septuagint,
Syriac, and Vulgate.

[Isaiah 26:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 26:19</span></span>

My dead body "My deceased" - All the ancient Versions render it in the
plural; they read נבלותי niblothai, my dead bodies. The Syriac and
Chaldee read נבלותיהם niblotheyhem, their dead bodies. No MS. yet found
confirms this reading.

The dew of herbs "The dew of the dawn" - Lucis, according to the
Vulgate; so also the Syriac and Chaldee.

The deliverance of the people of God from a state of the lowest
depression is explained by images plainly taken from the resurrection of
the dead. In the same manner the Prophet Ezekiel represents the
restoration of the Jewish nation from a state of utter dissolution by
the restoring of the dry bones to life, exhibited to him in a vision,
chap. 37, which is directly thus applied and explained, [Eze
37:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#011). And this deliverance is
expressed with a manifest opposition to what is here said above, [Eze
37:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#014), of the great lords and tyrants,
under whom they had groaned: -

"They are dead, they shall not live;

They are deceased tyrants, they shall not rise:"

that they should be destroyed utterly, and should never be restored to
their former power and glory. It appears from hence, that the doctrine
of the resurrection of the dead was at that time a popular and common
doctrine; for an image which is assumed in order to express or represent
any thing in the way of allegory or metaphor, whether poetical or
prophetical, must be an image commonly known and understood; otherwise
it will not answer the purpose for which it is assumed. - L.

Kimchi refers these words to the days of the Messiah, and says, "Then
many of the saints shall rise from the dead. "And quotes [Dan
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#002). Do not these words speak of the
resurrection of our blessed Lord; and of that resurrection of the bodies
of men, which shall be the consequence of his body being raised from the
dead?

Thy dead men shall live, - with my dead body shall they arise - This
seems very express.

[Isaiah 26:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 26:20</span></span>

Comes my people, enter thou into thy chambers - An exhortation to
patience and resignation under oppression, with a confident expectation
of deliverance by the power of God manifestly to be exerted in the
destruction of the oppressor. It seems to be an allusion to the command
of Moses to the Israelites, when the destroying angel was to go through
the land of Egypt, "not to go out at the door of their houses until the
morning;" [Exo 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#022). And before the
passage of the Red Sea: "Fear ye not, stand still, and see the salvation
of Jehovah. Jehovah shall fight for you, and ye shall hold your peace,
"[Exo 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#013), [Exo
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#014).

[Isaiah 26:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 26:21</span></span>

The earth also shall disclose her blood - Crimes of cruelty and
oppression, which have passed away from the eyes of men, God will bring
into judgment, and exact punishment for them. O what a reckoning will
the kingdoms of the earth have with God, for the torrents of blood which
they have shed for the gratification of the lust of power and ambition!
Who shall live when he doeth this?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 27](isa027)

</div>
