<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa000)  [Next](isa002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

The prophet, with a boldness and majesty becoming the herald of the Most
High, begins with calling on the whole creation to attend while Jehovah
speaks, [Isa 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002). A charge of gross
insensibility and ingratitude is then brought against the Jews, by
contrasting their conduct with that of the ox end ass, the most stupid
of animals, [Isa 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003). This leads to an
amplification of their guilt, [Isa
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#004); highly aggravated by their
slighting the chastisements and judgments of God, though repeated till
they had been left almost like Sodom and Gomorrah, [Isa
1:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#005). The incidental mention of those
places leads to an address to the rulers and people of the Jews, under
the character of princes of Sodom, and people of Gomorrah, which is no
less spirited and severe than elegant and unexpected, [Isa
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010). The vanity of trusting to the
performance of the outward rites and ceremonies of religion is then
exposed, [Isa 1:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011); and the
necessity of repentance and reformation is strongly enjoined, [Isa
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016), [Isa
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#017), and urged by the most
encouraging promises as well as by the most awful threatenings, [Isa
1:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018). But neither of these
producing the proper effect on that people who were the prophet's
charge, he bitterly laments their degeneracy, [Isa
1:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#021); and concludes with
introducing God, declaring his purpose of inflicting such heavy
judgments as would entirely cut off the wicked, and excite in the
righteous, who should also pass through the furnace, an everlasting
shame and abhorrence of every thing connected with idolatry, the source
of their misery, [Isa 1:24-31](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#024).

Isaiah exercised the prophetical office during a long period of time, if
he lived to the reign of Manasseh; for the lowest computation, beginning
from the year in which Uzziah died, when some suppose him to have
received his first appointment to that office, brings it to sixty-one
years. But the tradition of the Jews, that he was put to death by
Manasseh, is very uncertain; and one of their principal rabbins, Aben
Ezra, Com. in [Isa 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001), seems rather
to think that he died before Hezekiah, which is indeed more probable. It
is however certain that he lived at least to the fifteenth or sixteenth
year of Hezekiah; this makes the least possible term of the duration of
his prophetical office about forty-eight years. The time of the delivery
of some of his prophecies is either expressly marked, or sufficiently
clear from the history to which they relate; that of a few others may
with some probability be deduced from internal marks; from expressions,
descriptions, and circumstances interwoven. It may therefore be of some
use in this respect, and for the better understanding of his prophecies
in general, to give here a summary view of the history of his time.

The kingdom of Judah seems to have been in a more flourishing condition
during the reigns of Uzziah and Jotham, than at any other time after the
revolt of the ten tribes. The former recovered the port of Elath on the
Red Sea, which the Edomites had taken in the reign of Joram. He was
successful in his wars with the Philistines, and took from them several
cities, Gath, Jabneh, Ashdod; as likewise against some people of Arabia
Deserta, and against the Ammonites, whom he compelled to pay him
tribute. He repaired and improved the fortifications of Jerusalem; and
had a great army, well appointed and disciplined. He was no less
attentive to the arts of peace; and very much encouraged agriculture,
and the breeding of cattle. Jotham maintained the establishments and
improvements made by his father; added to what Uzziah had done in
strengthening the frontier places; conquered the Ammonites, who had
revolted, and exacted from them a more stated and probably a larger
tribute. However, at the latter end of his time, the league between
Pekah, king of Israel, and Retsin, king of Syria, was formed against
Judah; and they began to carry their designs into execution.

But in the reign of Ahaz his son not only all these advantages were
lost, but the kingdom of Judah was brought to the brink of destruction.
Pekah king of Israel overthrew the army of Ahaz, who lost in battle one
hundred and twenty thousand men; and the Israelites carried away
captives two hundred thousand women and children, who however were
released and sent home again upon the remonstrance of the prophet Oded.
After this, as it should seem, (see Vitrinpa on [Isa
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#002)), the two kings of Israel and
Syria, joining their forces, laid siege to Jerusalem; but in this
attempt they failed of success. In this distress Ahaz called in the
assistance of Tiglath-pileser, king of Assyria, who invaded the kingdoms
of Israel and Syria, and slew Rezin; but he was more in danger than ever
from his too powerful ally; to purchase whose forbearance, as he had
before bought his assistance, he was forced to strip himself and his
people of all the wealth he could possibly raise from his own treasury,
from the temple, and from the country. About the time of the siege of
Jerusalem the Syrians took Elath, which was never after recovered. The
Edomites likewise, taking advantage of the distress of Ahaz, ravaged
Judea, and carried away many captives. The Philistines recovered what
they had before lost; and took many places in Judea, and maintained
themselves there. Idolatry was established by the command of the king in
Jerusalem, and throughout Judea; and the service of the temple was
either intermitted, or converted into an idolatrous worship.

Hezekiah, his son, on his accession to the throne, immediately set about
the restoration of the legal worship of God, both in Jerusalem and
through Judea. He cleansed and repaired the temple, and held a solemn
passover. He improved the city, repaired the fortification, erected
magazines of all sorts, and built a new aqueduct. In the fourth year of
his reign Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, invaded the kingdom of Israel,
took Samaria, and carried away the Israelites into captivity, and
replaced them by different people sent from his own country; and this
was the final destruction of that kingdom, in the sixth year of the
reign of Hezekiah.

Hezekiah was not deterred by this alarming example from refusing to pay
the tribute to the king of Assyria, which had been imposed on Ahaz: this
brought on the invasion of Sennacherib in the fourteenth year of his
reign, an account of which is inserted among the prophecies of Isaiah.
After a great and miraculous deliverance from so powerful an enemy,
Hezekiah continued his reign in peace. He prospered in all his works,
and left his kingdom in a flourishing state to his son Manasseh - a son
in every respect unworthy of such a father. See Lowth.

[Isaiah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 1:1</span></span>

The vision of Isaiah - It seems doubtful whether this title belongs to
the whole book, or only to the prophecy contained in this chapter. The
former part of the title seems properly to belong to this particular
prophecy; the latter part, which enumerates the kings of Judah under
whom Isaiah exercised his prophetical office, seems to extend it to the
whole collection of prophecies delivered in the course of his ministry.
Vitringa - to whom the world is greatly indebted for his learned labors
on this prophet and to whom we should have owed much more if he had not
so totally devoted himself to Masoretic authority - has, I think, very
judiciously resolved this doubt. He supposes that the former part of the
title was originally prefixed to this single prophecy; and that, when
the collection of all Isaiah's prophecies was made, the enumeration of
the kings of Judah was added, to make it at the same time a proper title
to the whole book. As such it is plainly taken in [Ch2
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#032), where the book of Isaiah is
cited by this title: "The vision of Isaiah the prophet, the son of
Amoz."

The prophecy contained in this first chapter stands single and
unconnected, making an entire piece of itself. It contains a severe
remonstrance against the corruptions prevailing among the Jews of that
time, powerful exhortations to repentance, grievous threatenings to the
impenitent, and gracious promises of better times, when the nation shall
have been reformed by the just judgments of God. The expression, upon
the whole, is clear; the connection of the several parts easy; and in
regard to the images, sentiments, and style, it gives a beautiful
example of the prophet's elegant manner of writing; though perhaps it
may not be equal in these respects to many of the following prophecies.

[Isaiah 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 1:2</span></span>

Hear, O heavens "Hear, O ye heavens" - God is introduced as entering
into a public action, or pleading, before the whole world, against his
disobedient people. The prophet, as herald or officer to proclaim the
summons to the court, calls upon all created beings, celestial and
terrestrial, to attend and bear witness to the truth of his plea and the
justice of his cause. The same scene is more fully displayed in the
noble exordium of [Psa 1:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001), where
God summons all mankind, from east to west, to be present to hear his
appeal; and the solemnity is held on Sion, where he is attended with the
same terrible pomp that accompanied him on Mount Sinai: -

"A consuming fire goes before him

And round him rages a violent tempest:

He calleth the heavens from above.

And the earth, that he may contend in judgment with his people."

[Psa 50:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#003), [Psa
50:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#004).

By the same bold figure, Micah calls upon the mountains, that is, the
whole country of Judea, to attend to him, [Isa
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001), [Isa
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#002) : -

"Arise, plead thou before the mountains,

And let the hills hear thy voice.

Hear, O ye mountains, the controversy of Jehovah;

And ye, O ye strong foundations of the earth:

For Jehovah hath a controversy with his people,

And he will plead his cause against Israel."

With the like invocation, Moses introduces his sublime song, the design
of which was the same as that of this prophecy, "to testify as a
witness, against the Israelites," for their disobedience, [Deu
31:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#021) : -

"Give ear, O ye heavens, and I will speak;

And let the earth hear the words of my mouth."

[Deu 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#001).

This, in the simple yet strong oratorical style of Moses, is, "I call
heaven and earth to witness against thee this day; life and death have I
set before thee; the blessing and the curse: choose now life, that thou
mayest live, thou and thy seed." [Deu
30:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#019). The poetical style, by an
apostrophe, sets the personification in a much stronger light.

Hath spoken "That speaketh" - I render it in the present time, pointing
it דבר dober. There seems to be an impropriety in demanding attention to
a speech already delivered. But the present reading may stand, as the
prophet may be here understood to declare to the people what the Lord
had first spoken to him.

I have nourished - The Septuagint have εγεννησα, "I have begotten."
Instead of גדלתי giddalti, they read ילדתי yaladti; the word little
differing from the other, and perhaps more proper; which the Chaldee
likewise seems to favor; "vocavi eos filios." See [Exo
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#022); [Jer
31:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#009).

[Isaiah 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 1:3</span></span>

The ox knoweth - An amplification of the gross insensibility of the
disobedient Jews, by comparing them with the most heavy and stupid of
all animals, yet not so insensible as they. Bochart has well illustrated
the comparison, and shown the peculiar force of it. "He sets them lower
than the beasts, and even than the most stupid of all beasts, for there
is scarcely any more so than the ox and the ass. Yet these acknowledge
their master; they know the manger of their lord; by whom they are fed,
not for their own, but for his good; neither are they looked upon as
children, but as beasts of burden; neither are they advanced to honors,
but oppressed with great and daily labors. While the Israelites, chosen
by the mere favor of God, adopted as sons, promoted to the highest
dignity, yet acknowledged not their Lord and their God; but despised his
commandments, though in the highest degree equitable and just." Hieroz.
i., Colossians 409.

Jeremiah's comparison to the same purpose is equally elegant, but has
not so much spirit and severity as this of Isaiah.

"Even the stork in the heavens knoweth her season;

And the turtle, and the swallow, and the crane, observe the time of
their coming:

But my people doth not know the judgment of Jehovah.

[Jer 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#007).

Hosea has given a very elegant turn to the same image, in the way of
metaphor or allegory: -

"I drew them with human cords, with the bands of love:

And I was to them as he that lifteth up the yoke upon their cheek;

And I laid down their fodder before them."

[Hos 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#004).

Salomo ben Melech thus explains the middle part of the verse, which is
somewhat obscure: "I was to them at their desire as they that have
compassion on a heifer, lest she be overworked in ploughing; and that
lift up the yoke from off her neck, and rest it upon her cheek that she
may not still draw, but rest from her labor an hour or two in the day."

But Israel - The Septuagint, Syriac, Aquila, Theodotion, and Vulgate,
read וישראל veyisrael, But Israel, adding the conjunction, which being
rendered as an adversative, sets the opposition in a stronger light.

Doth not know - The same ancient versions agree in adding Me, which very
properly answers, and indeed is almost necessarily required to answer,
the words possessor and lord preceding. Ισραηλ δε ΜΕ ουκ εγνω; Sept.
"Israel autem me non cognovit," Vulg. Ισραηλ δε ΜΟΥ ουκ εγνω; Aquil.,
Theod. The testimony of so scrupulous an interpreter as Aquila is of
great weight in this case. And both his and Theodotion's rendering is
such as shows plainly that they did not add the word ΜΟΥ to help out the
sense, for it only embarrasses it. It also clearly determines what was
the original reading in the old copies from which they translated. It
could not be ידעני yedani, which most obviously answers to the version
of the Septuagint and Vulgate, for it does not accord with that of
Aquila and Theodotion. The version of these latter interpreters, however
injudicious, clearly ascertains both the phrase, and the order of the
words of the original Hebrew; it was ישראל אותי לא ידע veyisrael othi lo
yada. The word אותי othi has been lost out of the text. The very same
phrase is used by Jeremiah, [Jer 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#022),
עמי אותי לא ידעו ammi othi lo yadau. And the order of the words must
have been as above represented; for they have joined ישראל yisrael, with
אותי othi, as in regimine; they could not have taken it in this sense,
Israel meus non cognovit, had either this phrase or the order of the
words been different. I have endeavored to set this matter in a clear
light, as it is the first example of a whole word lost out of the text,
of which the reader will find many other plain examples in the course of
these notes. But Rosenmuller contends that this is unnecessary, as the
passage may be translated, "Israel knows nothing: my people have no
understanding." The Septuagint, Syriac, and Vulgate, read ועמי veammi,
"and my people;" and so likewise sixteen MSS. of Kennicott, and fourteen
of De Rossi.

[Isaiah 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 1:4</span></span>

Ah sinful nation "Degenerate" - Five MSS., one of them ancient, read
משחתים moschathim, without the first י yod, in hophal corrupted, not
corrupters. See the same word in the same form, and in the same sense,
[Pro 25:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#026).

Are corrupters "Are estranged" - Thirty-two MSS., five ancient, and two
editions, read נזורו nazoru; which reading determines the word to be
from the root זור zur, to alienate, not from נזר nazar, to separate; so
Kimchi understands it. See also Annotat. in Noldium, 68.

They are gone away backward "They have turned their backs upon him" - So
Kimchi explains it:" they have turned unto him the back and not the
face." See [Jer 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#027); [Jer
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#024). I have been forced to render
this line paraphrastically; as the verbal translation, "they are
estranged backward," would have been unintelligible.

[Isaiah 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 1:5</span></span>

Why should ye be stricken any more "On what part," etc.? - The Vulgate
renders על מה al meh, super quo, (see [Job
38:6](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#006); [Ch2
32:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#010)), upon what part. And so
Abendana on Sal. Den Melech: "There are some who explain it thus: Upon
what limb shall you be smitten, if you add defection? for already for
your sins have you been smitten upon all of them; so that there is not
to be found in you a whole limb on which you can be smitten." Which
agrees with what follows: "From the sole of the foot even unto the head,
there is no soundness in it:" and the sentiment and image is exactly the
same with that of Ovid, Pont. 2:7, 42: -

Vix habet in nobis jam nova plaga locum.

There is no place on you for a new stripe. Or that still more expressive
line of Euripides; the great force and effect of which Longinus ascribes
to its close and compressed structure, analogous to the sense which it
expresses: -

́γεμω κακων δη· κ' ουκετ' εσθ' ὁπη τιθῃ.

I am full of miseries: there's no room for more.

Herc. Fur. 1245, Long. sec. 40.

"On what part will ye strike again? will ye add correction?" This is
addressed to the instruments of God's vengeance; those that inflicted
the punishment, who or whatsoever they were. Ad verbum certae personae
intelligendae sunt, quibus ista actio quae per verbum exprimitur
competit; "The words are addressed to the persons who were the agents
employed in the work expressed by the original word," as Glassius says
in a similar case, Philippians Sacr. 1:3, 22. See [Isa
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#004).

As from ידע yada, דעה deah, knowledge; from יעץ yaats, עצה etsah,
counsel; from ישן yeshan, שנה shenah, sleep, etc.; so from יסר yasar is
regularly derived סרה sarah, correction.

The whole head is sick - The king and the priests are equally gone away
from truth and righteousness. Or, The state is oppressed by its enemies,
and the Church corrupted in its rulers and in its members.

[Isaiah 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 1:6</span></span>

They have not been closed, etc. "It hath not been pressed," etc. - The
pharmaceutical art in the East consists chiefly in external
applications: accordingly the prophet's images in this place are all
taken from surgery. Sir John Chardin, in his note on [Pro
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#008), "It shall be health to thy navel,
and marrow to thy bones," observes that "the comparison is taken from
the plasters, ointments, oils, and frictions, which are made use of in
the East upon the belly and stomach in most maladies. Being ignorant in
the villages of the art of making decoctions and potions, and of the
proper doses of such things, they generally make use of external
medicines." - Harmer's Observations on Scripture, vol. 2 p. 488. And in
surgery their materia medica is extremely simple, oil making the
principal part of it. "In India," says Tavernier, "they have a certain
preparation of oil and melted grease, which they commonly use for the
healing of wounds." Voyage Ind. So the good Samaritan poured oil and
wine on the wounds of the distressed Jew: wine, cleansing and somewhat
astringent, proper for a fresh wound; oil, mollifying and healing, [Luk
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#034). Kimchi has a judicious remark
here: "When various medicines are applied, and no healing takes place,
that disorder is considered as coming immediately from God."

Of the three verbs in this sentence, one is in the singular number in
the text; another is singular in two MSS., (one of them ancient), חבשה
chubbeshah; and the Syriac and Vulgate render all of them in the
singular number.

[Isaiah 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 1:7</span></span>

Your country is desolate - The description of the ruined and desolate
state of the country in these verses does not suit with any part of the
prosperous times of Uzziah and Jotham. It very well agrees with the time
of Ahaz, when Judea was ravaged by the joint invasion of the Israelites
and Syrians, and by the incursions of the Philistines and Edomites. The
date of this prophecy is therefore generally fixed to the time of Ahaz.
But on the other hand it may be considered whether those instances of
idolatry which are urged in [Isa 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#029)
- the worshipping in groves and gardens - having been at all times too
commonly practiced, can be supposed to be the only ones which the
prophet would insist upon in the time of Ahaz; who spread the grossest
idolatry through the whole country, and introduced it even into the
temple; and, to complete his abominations, made his son pass through the
fire to Molech. It is said, [Kg2
15:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#037), that in Jotham's time "the Lord
began to send against Judah Rezin - and Pekah." If we may suppose any
invasion from that quarter to have been actually made at the latter end
of Jotham's reign, I should choose to refer this prophecy to that time.

And your cities are burned. - Nineteen of Dr. Kennicott's MSS. and
twenty-two of De Rossi's, some of my own, with the Syriac and Arabic,
add the conjunction which makes the hemistich more complete.

At the end of the verse, זרים zarim. This reading, though confirmed by
all the ancient versions, gives us no good sense; for "your land is
devoured by strangers; and is desolate, as if overthrown by strangers,"
is a mere tautology, or, what is as bad, an identical comparison. Aben
Ezra thought that the word in its present form might be taken for the
same with זרם zerem, an inundation: Schultens is of the same opinion;
(see Taylor's Concord.); and Schindler in his Lexicon explains it in the
same manner: and so, says Zimchi, some explain it. Abendana endeavors to
reconcile it to grammatical analogy in the following manner: "זרים zarim
is the same with זרם zerem; that is, as overthrown by an inundation of
waters: and these two words have the same analogy as קדם kedem and קדים
kadim. Or it may be a concrete of the same form with שכיר shechir; and
the meaning will be: as overthrown by rain pouring down violently, and
causing a flood." On Sal. ben Melech, in loc. But I rather suppose the
true reading to be זרם zerem, and have translated it accordingly: the
word זרים zerim, in the line above, seems to have caught the
transcriber's eye, and to have led him into this mistake. But this
conjecture of the learned prelate is not confirmed by any MS. yet
discovered.

[Isaiah 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 1:8</span></span>

As a cottage in a vineyard "As a shed in a vineyard" - A little
temporary hut covered with boughs, straw, turf, or the like materials,
for a shelter from the heat by day, and the cold and dews by night, for
the watchman that kept the garden or vineyard during the short season
the fruit was ripening, (see [Job
27:18](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#018)), and presently removed when it
had served that purpose. See Harmer's Observ. 1:454. They were probably
obliged to have such a constant watch to defend the fruit from the
jackals. "The jackal," (chical of the Turks), says Hasselquist,
(Travels, p. 227), "is a species of mustela which is very common in
Palestine, especially during the vintage; and often destroys whole
vineyards, and gardens of cucumbers." "There is also plenty of the canis
vulpes, the fox, near the convent of St. John in the desert, about
vintage time; for they destroy all the vines unless they are strictly
watched." Ibid. p. 184. See [Sol 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#015).

Fruits of the gourd kind, melons, watermelons, cucumbers, etc., are much
used and in great request in the Levant, on account of their cooling
quality. The Israelites in the wilderness regretted the loss of the
cucumbers and melons among the other good things of Egypt, [Num
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#005). In Egypt the season of
watermelons, which are most in request, and which the common people then
chiefly live upon, lasts but three weeks. See Hasselquist, p. 256.
Tavernier makes it of longer continuance:

L'on y void de grands carreaux de melons et de concombres, mais beaucoup
plus de derniers, dont les Levantins font leur delices. Le plus souvent,
ils les mangent sans les peter, apres quoi ils vont boire une verre
d'eau. Dans toute l'Asie c'est la nourriture ordinaire du petit peuple
pendant trois ou quatre mois; toute la famine en vit, et quand un enfant
demand a manger, au lieu qu'en France ou aillieurs nous luy donnerions
du pain, dans le Levant on luy presente un concombre, qu'il mange cru
comme on le vient de cueillir. Les concombres dans le Levant ont une
bonte particuliere; et quoiqu' on les mange crus, ils ne font jamais de
mal;

"There are to be seen great beds of melons and cucumbers, but a greater
number of the latter, of which the Levantines are particularly fond. In
general they eat them without taking off the rind, after which they
drink a glass of water. In every part of Asia this is the aliment of the
common people for three or four months; the whole family live on them;
and when a child asks something to eat, instead of giving it a piece of
bread, as is done in France and other countries, they present it with a
cucumber, which it eats raw, as gathered. Cucumbers in the Levant are
peculiarly excellent; and although eaten raw, they are seldom
injurious." Tavernier, Relat. du Serrail, cap. xix.

As a lodge, etc. - That is, after the fruit was gathered; the lodge
being then permitted to fall into decay. Such was the desolate, ruined
state of the city.

So the ὡς πολις πολιορκουμενη; Septuagint: see also the Vulgate.

[Isaiah 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 1:9</span></span>

The Lord of hosts "Jehovah God of hosts" - As this title of God, יהוה
צבאות Yehovah tsebaoth, "Jehovah of hosts, occurs here for the first
time, I think it proper to note, that I translate it always, as in this
place, "Jehovah God of hosts;" taking it as an elliptical expression for
יהוה אלהי צבאות Yehovah Elohey tsebaoth. This title imports that Jehovah
is the God or Lord of hosts or armies; as he is the Creator and Supreme
Governor of all beings in heaven and earth, and disposeth and ruleth
them all in their several orders and stations; the almighty, universal
Lord.

We should have been as Sodom - As completely and finally ruined as that
and the cities of the plain were, no vestige of which remains at this
day.

[Isaiah 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 1:10</span></span>

Ye rulers of Sodom "Ye princes of Sodom" - The incidental mention of
Sodom and Gomorrah in the preceding verse suggested to the prophet this
spirited address to the rulers and inhabitants of Jerusalem, under the
character of princes of Sodom and people of Gomorrah. Two examples of a
sort of elegant turn of the like kind may be observed in St. Paul's
Epistle to the Romans, [Rom 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#004), [Rom
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#005), [Rom
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#012), [Rom
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#013). See Locke on the place; and see
[Isa 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#029), [Isa
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#030), of this chapter, which gives
another example of the same.

And - like unto Gomorrah. - The ו vau is added by thirty-one of
Kennicott's MSS., twenty-nine of De Rossi's and one, very ancient, of my
own. See note on [Isa 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#006) (note).

[Isaiah 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 1:11</span></span>

To what purpose, etc. "What have I to do" - The prophet Amos has
expressed the same sentiments with great elegance: -

I hate, I despise your feasts;

And I will not delight in the odour of your solemnities:

Though ye offer unto me burnt-offerings

And your meat-offerings, I will not accept:

Neither will I regard the peace-offerings of your fatlings.

Take away from me the noise of your songs;

And the melody of your viols I will not hear.

But let judgment roll down like waters;

And righteousness like a mighty stream.

[Amo 5:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#021).

So has Persius; see Sat. 2 v. 71-75: -

"Quin damus id Superis, de magna quod dare lanae," etc.

The two or three last pages of Plato's Euthyphro contain the same idea.
Sacrifices and prayers are not profitable to the offerer, nor acceptable
to the gods, unless accompanied with an upright life.

The fat of fed beasts, etc. - The fat and the blood are particularly
mentioned, because these were in all sacrifices set apart to God. The
fat was always burnt upon the altar, and the blood was partly sprinkled,
differently on different occasions, and partly poured out at the bottom
of the altar. See Leviticus 4.

[Isaiah 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 1:12</span></span>

When ye come to appear - Instead of לראות leraoth, to appear, one MS.
has לראות liroth, to see. See De Rossi. The appearing before God here
refers chiefly to the three solemn annual festivals. See [Exo
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#014).

Tread my courts (no more) - So the Septuagint divide the sentence,
joining the end of this verse to the beginning of the next: Πατειν την
αυλην μου, ου προσθησεσθε; "To tread my court ye shall not add - ye
shall not be again accepted in worship."

[Isaiah 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 1:13</span></span>

The new moons and Sabbaths "The fast and the day of restraint" - און
ועצרה aven vaatsarah. These words are rendered in many different manners
by different interpreters, to a good and probable sense by all; but I
think by none in such a sense as can arise from the phrase itself,
agreeably to the idiom of the Hebrew language. Instead of און aven, the
Septuagint manifestly read צום tsom, νηστειαν, "the fast." This
Houbigant has adopted. The prophet could not well have omitted the fast
in the enumeration of their solemnities, nor the abuse of it among the
instances of their hypocrisy, which he has treated at large with such
force and elegance in his fifty-eighth chapter. Observe, also, that the
prophet Joel, ([Joe 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#014), and [Joe
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#015)), twice joins together the fast
and the day of restraint: -

עצרה קראו צום קדשו atsarah kiru tsom kaddeshu

"Sanctify a fast; proclaim a day of restraint:"

which shows how properly they are here joined together. עצרה atsarah,
"the restraint," is rendered, both here and in other places of our
English translation, "the solemn assembly." Certain holy days ordained
by the law were distinguished by a particular charge that "no servile
work should be done therein;" [Lev
23:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#036); [Num
29:35](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#035); [Deu
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#008). This circumstance clearly
explains the reason of the name, the restraint, or the day of restraint,
given to those days.

If I could approve of any translation of these two words which I have
met with, it should be that of the Spanish version of the Old Testament,
made for the use of the Spanish Jews: Tortura y detenimento, "it is a
pain and a constraint unto me." But I still think that the reading of
the Septuagint is more probably the truth.

[Isaiah 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 1:15</span></span>

When ye spread - The Syriac, Septuagint, and a MS., read בפרשכם
beparshecem, without the conjunction ו vau.

Your hands "For your hands" - Αἱ γαρ χειρες - Sept. Manus enim
vestrae-Vulg. They seem to have read כי ידיכם ki yedeychem.

[Isaiah 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 1:16</span></span>

Wash you - Referring to the preceding verse, "your hands are full of
blood;" and alluding to the legal washing commanded on several
occasions. See [Lev 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#008), [Lev
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#009), [Lev
14:47](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#047).

[Isaiah 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 1:17</span></span>

Relieve the oppressed "Amend that which is corrupted" - אשרו חמוץ asheru
chamots. In rendering this obscure phrase I follow Bochart, (Hieroz.
Part i., lib. ii., cap. 7), though I am not perfectly satisfied with
this explication of it.

[Isaiah 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 1:18</span></span>

Though your sins be as scarlet - שני shani, "scarlet or crimson,"
dibaphum, twice dipped, or double dyed; from שנה shanah, iterare, to
double, or to do a thing twice. This derivation seems much more probable
than that which Salmasius prefers from שנן shanan, acuere, to whet, from
the sharpness and strength of the color, οξυφοινικον; תלע tela, the
same; properly the worm, vermiculus, (from whence vermeil), for this
color was produced from a worm or insect which grew in a coccus or
excrescence of a shrub of the ilex kind, (see Plin. Nat. Hist. 16:8),
like the cochineal worm in the opuntia of America. See Ulloa's Voyage
book v., chap. ii., note to page 342. There is a shrub of this kind that
grows in Provence and Languedoc, and produces the like insect, called
the kermes oak, (see Miller, Dict. Quercus), from kermez, the Arabic
word for this color, whence our word crimson is derived.

"Neque amissos colores

Lana refert medicata fuco,"

says the poet, applying the same image to a different purpose. To
discharge these strong colors is impossible to human art or power; but
to the grace and power of God all things, even much more difficult are
possible and easy. Some copies have כשנים keshanim, "like crimson
garments."

Though they be red, etc. - But the conjunction ו vau is added by
twenty-one of Kennicott's, and by forty-two of De Rossi's MSS., by some
early editions, with the Septuagint, Syriac, Vulgate, and Arabic. It
makes a fuller and more emphatic sense. "And though they be red as
crimson," etc.

[Isaiah 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 1:19</span></span>

Ye shall eat the good of the land - Referring to [Isa
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#007) : it shall not be "devoured by
strangers."

[Isaiah 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 1:20</span></span>

Ye shall be devoured with the sword "Ye shall be food for the sword" -
The Septuagint and Vulgate read תאכלכם tochalchem, "the sword shall
devour you;" which is of much more easy construction than the present
reading of the text.

The Chaldee seems to read בחרב אויב תאכלו bechereb oyeb teachelu, "ye
shall be consumed by the sword of the enemy." The Syriac also reads בחרב
beehereb and renders the verb passively. And the rhythmus seems to
require this addition. - Dr. Jubb.

[Isaiah 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 1:21</span></span>

Become a harlot - See before, the Discourse on the Prophetic Style; and
see Lowth's Comment on the place, and De Sacr. Poes. Hebr. Prael. xxxi.

[Isaiah 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 1:22</span></span>

Wine mixed with water - An image used for the adulteration of wines,
with more propriety than may at first appear, if what Thevenot says of
the people of the Levant of late times were true of them formerly. He
says, "They never mingle water with their wine to drink; but drink by
itself what water they think proper for abating the strength of the
wine." "Lorsque les Persans boivent du vin, ils le prennent tout pur, a
la facon des Levantins, qui ne le melent jamais avec de l'eua; mais en
beuvant du vin, de temps en temps ils prennent un pot d'eau, et en
boivent de grand traits." Voyage, part ii., 54 ii., chap. 10. "Ils (les
Turcs) n'y meslent jamais d'eau, et se moquent des Chretiens qui en
mettent, ce qui leur semble tout a fait ridicule." Ibid. part i., chap.
24. "The Turks never mingle water with their wine, and laugh at the
Christians for doing it, which they consider altogether ridiculous."

It is remarkable that whereas the Greeks and Latins by mixed wine always
understood wine diluted and lowered with water, the Hebrews on the
contrary generally mean by it wine made stronger and more inebriating by
the addition of higher and more powerful ingredients, such as honey,
spices, defrutum, (or wine inspissated by boiling it down to two-thirds
or one-half of the quantity), myrrh, mandragora, opiates, and other
strong drugs. Such were the exhilarating, or rather stupefying,
ingredients which Helen mixed in the bowl together with the wine for her
guests oppressed with grief to raise their spirits, the composition of
which she had learned in Egypt: -

Αυτικ' αρ' εις οινον βαλε φαρμακον, ενθεν επινον,

Νηπενθες τ' αχολον τε, κακων επιληθον ἁπαντων.

Homer. Odyss. lib. iv., ver. 220.

"Meanwhile, with genial joy to warm the soul,

Bright Helen mix'd a mirth-inspiring bowl;

Temper'd with drugs of sovereign use, to assuage

The boiling bosom of tumultuous rage:

Charm'd with that virtuous draught, the exalted mind

All sense of wo delivers to the wind."

Pope.

Such was the "spiced wine and the juice of pomegranates," mentioned [Sol
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#002). And how much the Eastern people
to this day deal in artificial liquors of prodigious strength, the use
of wine being forbidden, may be seen in a curious chapter of Kempfer
upon that subject. Amoen. Exot. Fasc. iii., Obs. 15.

Thus the drunkard is properly described, [Pro
23:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#030), as one "that seeketh mixed
wine," and "is mighty to mingle strong drink," [Isa
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#022). And hence the poet took that
highly poetical and sublime image of the cup of God's wrath, called by
[Isa 51:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#017), the "cup of trembling,"
causing intoxication and stupefaction, (see Chappelow's note on Hariri,
p. 33), containing, as St. John expresses in Greek the Hebrew idea with
the utmost precision, though with a seeming contradiction in terms,
κεκερασμενον ακρατον, merum mixtum, pure wine made yet stronger by a
mixture of powerful ingredients; [Rev
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#010). "In the hand of Jehovah," saith
the psalmist, [Psa 75:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#008), "there is a
cup, and the wine is turbid: it is full of a mixed liquor, and he
poureth out of it," or rather, "he poureth it out of one vessel into
another," to mix it perfectly, according to the reading expressed by the
ancient versions, ויגר מזה אל זה vaiyagger mizzeh al zeh, and he pours
it from this to that, "verily the dregs thereof," the thickest sediment
of the strong ingredients mingled with it, "all the ungodly of the earth
shall wring them out, and drink them."

R. D. Kimchi says, "The current coin was adulterated with brass, tin,
and other metals, and yet was circulated as good money. The wine also
was adulterated with water in the taverns, and sold notwithstanding for
pure wine."

[Isaiah 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">isa 1:23</span></span>

Companions of thieves "Associates" - The Septuagint, Vulgate, and four
MSS., read חברי chabrey without the conjunction ו vau.

[Isaiah 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 1:24</span></span>

Ah, I will ease me "Aha! I will be eased" - Anger, arising from a sense
of injury and affront, especially from those who, from every
consideration of duty and gratitude, ought to have behaved far
otherwise, is an uneasy and painful sensation: and revenge, executed to
the full on the offenders, removes that uneasiness, and consequently is
pleasing and quieting, at least for the present. Ezekiel, [Eze
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#013), introduces God expressing
himself in the same manner: -

"And mine anger shall be fully accomplished;

And I will make my fury rest upon them;

And I will give myself ease."

This is a strong instance of the metaphor called anthropopathia, by
which, throughout the Scriptures, as well the historical as the poetical
parts, the sentiments sensations, and affections, the bodily faculties
qualities, and members, of men, and even of brute animals, are
attributed to God, and that with the utmost liberty and latitude of
application. The foundation of this is obvious; it arises from
necessity; we have no idea of the natural attributes of God, of his pure
essence, of his manner of existence, of his manner of acting: when
therefore we would treat on these subjects, we find ourselves forced to
express them by sensible images. But necessity leads to beauty; this is
true of metaphor in general, and in particular of this kind of metaphor,
which is used with great elegance and sublimity in the sacred poetry;
and what is very remarkable, in the grossest instances of the
application of it, it is generally the most striking and the most
sublime. The reason seems to be this: when the images are taken from the
superior faculties of the human nature, from the purer and more generous
affections, and applied to God, we are apt to acquiesce in the notion;
we overlook the metaphor, and take it as a proper attribute; but when
the idea is gross and offensive as in this passage of Isaiah, where the
impatience of anger and the pleasure of revenge is attributed to God, we
are immediately shocked at the application; the impropriety strikes us
at once, and the mind, casting about for something in the Divine nature
analogous to the image, lays hold on some great, obscure, vague idea,
which she endeavors to comprehend, and is lost in immensity and
astonishment. See De Sacr. Poesi. Hebr. Praeel. 16 sub. fin., where this
matter is treated and illustrated by examples.

[Isaiah 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">isa 1:25</span></span>

I will turn my hand upon thee - So the common version; and this seems to
be a metaphor taken from the custom of those who, when the metal is
melted, strike off the scoriae with their hand previously to its being
poured out into the mould. I have seen this done with the naked hand,
and no injury whatever sustained.

Purge away thy dross "In the furnace" - The text has כבר cabbor, which
some render "as with soap;" as if it were the same with כברית keborith;
so Kimchi; but soap can have nothing to do with the purifying of metals.
Others, "according to purity," or "purely," as our version. Le Clerc
conjectured that the true reading is ככור kechur, "as in the furnace;"
see [Eze 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#018), [Eze
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#020). Dr. Durell proposes only a
transposition of letters בכר to the same sense; and so likewise
Archbishop Secker. That this is the true reading is highly probable.

[Isaiah 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">isa 1:26</span></span>

I will restore - "This," says Kimchi, "shall be in the days of the
Messiah, in which all the wicked shall cease, and the remnant of Israel
shall neither do iniquity, nor speak lies." What a change must this be
among Jews!

Afterward "And after this" - The Septuagint, Syriac, Chaldee, and
eighteen MSS., and one of my own, very ancient, add the conjunction ו
vau, And.

[Isaiah 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">isa 1:27</span></span>

With judgment "In judgment" - By the exercise of God's strict justice in
destroying the obdurate, (see [Isa
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#028)), and delivering the penitent in
righteousness; by the truth and faithfulness of God in performing his
promises."

[Isaiah 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">isa 1:29</span></span>

For they shall be ashamed of the oaks "For ye shall be ashamed of the
ilexes" - Sacred groves were a very ancient and favorite appendage of
idolatry. They were furnished with the temple of the god to whom they
were dedicated, with altars, images, and every thing necessary for
performing the various rites of worship offered there; and were the
scenes of many impure ceremonies, and of much abominable superstition.
They made a principal part of the religion of the old inhabitants of
Canaan; and the Israelites were commanded to destroy their groves, among
other monuments of their false worship. The Israelites themselves became
afterwards very much addicted to this species of idolatry.

"When I had brought them into the land,

Which I swore that I would give unto them;

Then they saw every high hill and every thick tree;

And there they slew their victims;

And there they presented the provocation of their offerings;

And there they placed their sweet savor;

And there they poured out their libations."

[Eze 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#028).

"On the tops of the mountains they sacrifice;

And on the hills they burn incense;

Under the oak and the poplar;

And the ilex, because her shade is pleasant."

[Hos 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#013).

Of what particular kinds the trees here mentioned are, cannot be
determined with certainty. In regard to אלה ellah, in this place of
Isaiah, as well as in Hosea, Celsius (Hierobot.) understands it of the
terebinth, because the most ancient interpreters render it so; in the
first place the Septuagint. He quotes eight places; but in three of
these eight places the copies vary, some having δρυς, the oak, instead
of τερεβινθος, the terebinth or turpentine tree. And he should have told
us, that these same seventy render it in sixteen other places by δρυς,
the oak; so that their authority is really against him; and the
Septuagint, "stant pro quercu," contrary to what he says at first
setting out. Add to this that Symmachus, Theodotion, and Aquila,
generally render it by δρυς, the oak; the latter only once rendering it
by τερεβινθος, the terebinth. His other arguments seem to me not very
conclusive; he says, that all the qualities of אלה ellah agree to the
terebinth, that it grows in mountainous countries, that it is a strong
tree, long-lived, large and high, and deciduous. All these qualities
agree just as well to the oak, against which he contends; and he
actually attributes them to the oak in the very next section. But I
think neither the oak nor the terebinth will do in this place of Isaiah,
from the last circumstance which he mentions, their being deciduous,
where the prophet's design seems to me to require an evergreen,
otherwise the casting of its leaves would be nothing out of the common
established course of nature, and no proper image of extreme distress
and total desolation, parallel to that of a garden without water, that
is, wholly burnt up and destroyed. An ancient, who was an inhabitant and
a native of this country, understands it in like manner of a tree
blasted with uncommon and immoderate heat; velut arbores, cum frondes
aestu torrente decusserunt. Ephrem Syr. in loc., edit. Assemani. Compare
[Psa 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#004); [Jer
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#008). Upon the whole I have chosen to
make it the ilex, which word Vossius, Etymolog., derives from the Hebrew
אלה ellah, that whether the word itself be rightly rendered or not, I
might at least preserve the propriety of the poetic image. - L.

By the ilex the learned prelate means the holly, which, though it
generally appears as a sort of shrub, grows, in a good soil, where it is
unmolested, to a considerable height. I have one in my own garden,
rising three stems from the root, and between twenty and thirty feet in
height. It is an evergreen.

For they shall be ashamed "For ye shall be ashamed" - תבושו teboshu, in
the second person, Vulgate, Chaldee, three MSS., one of my own, ancient,
and one edition; and in agreement with the rest of the sentence.

[Isaiah 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">isa 1:30</span></span>

Whose leaf "Whose leaves" - Twenty-six of Kennicott's, twenty-four of De
Rossi's, one ancient, of my own, and seven editions, read אליה aleyha,
in its full and regular form. This is worth remarking, as it accounts
for a great number of anomalies of the like kind, which want only the
same authority to rectify them.

As a garden that hath no water "A garden wherein is no water" - In the
hotter parts of the Eastern countries, a constant supply of water is so
absolutely necessary for the cultivation and even for the preservation
and existence of a garden, that should it want water but for a few days,
every thing in it would be burnt up with the heat, and totally
destroyed. There is therefore no garden whatever in those countries but
what has such a certain supply, either from some neighboring river, or
from a reservoir of water collected from springs, or filled with rain
water in the proper season, in sufficient quantity to afford ample
provision for the rest of the year.

Moses, having described the habitation of man newly created as a garden
planted with every tree pleasant to the sight and good for food, adds,
as a circumstance necessary to complete the idea of a garden, that it
was well supplied with water, "And a river went out of Eden to water the
garden;" [Gen 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#010) : see also [Gen
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#010).

That the reader may have a clear notion of this matter, it will be
necessary to give some account of the management of their gardens in
this respect.

"Damascus," says Maundrell, p. 122, "is encompassed with gardens,
extending no less, recording to common estimation, than thirty miles
round; which makes it look like a city in a vast wood. The gardens are
thick set with fruit trees of all kinds, kept fresh and verdant by the
waters of the Barrady, (the Chrysorrhoas of the ancients), which supply
both the gardens and city in great abundance. This river, as soon as it
issues out from between the cleft of the mountain before mentioned into
the plain, is immediately divided into three streams; of which the
middlemost and biggest runs directly to Damascus, and is distributed to
all the cisterns and fountains of the city. The other two (which I take
to be the work of art) are drawn round, one to the right hand, and the
other to the left, on the borders of the gardens, into which they are
let as they pass, by little currents, and so dispersed all over the vast
wood, insomuch that there is not a garden but has a fine quick stream
running through it. The Barrady is almost wholly drunk up by the city
and gardens. What small part of it escapes is united, as I was informed,
in one channel again on the southeast side of the city; and, after about
three or four hours' course finally loses itself in a bog there, without
ever arriving at the sea." This was likewise the case in former times,
as Strabo, lib. xvi., Pliny, lib. 5:18, testify; who say, "that this
river was expended in canals, and drunk up by watering the place."

"The best sight," says the same Maundrell, p. 39, "that the palace of
the emir of Beroot, anciently Berytus, affords, and the worthiest to be
remembered, is the orange garden. It contains a large quadrangular plat
of ground, divided into sixteen lesser squares, four in a row, with
walks between them. The walks are shaded with orange trees of a large
spreading size. Every one of these sixteen lesser squares in the garden
was bordered with stone; and in the stone work were troughs, very
artificially contrived, for conveying the water all over the garden;
there being little outlets cut at every tree for the stream as it passed
by to flow out and water it." The royal gardens at Ispahan are watered
just in the same manner, according to Kempfer's description, Amoen.
Exot., p. 193.

This gives us a clear idea of the פלגי מים palgey mayim, mentioned in
the first Psalm, and other places of Scripture, "the divisions of
waiters," the waters distributed in artificial canals; for so the phrase
properly signifies. The prophet Jeremith, chap. 17:8, has imitated, and
elegantly amplified, the passage of the psalmist above referred to: -

"He shall be like a tree planted by the water side,

And which sendeth forth her roots to the aqueduct.

She shall not fear, when the heat cometh;

But her leaf shall be green;

And in the year of drought she shall not be anxious,

Neither shall she cease from bearing fruit."

From this image the son of Sirach, Ecclesiasticus 24:30, 31, has most
beautifully illustrated the influence and the increase of religious
wisdom in a well prepared heart.

"I also come forth as a canal from a river,

And as a conduit flowing into a paradise.

I said, I will water my garden,

And I will abundantly moisten my border:

And, lo! my canal became a river,

And my river became a sea."

This gives us the true meaning of the following elegant proverb, [Pro
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#001) : -

"The heart of the king is like the canals of waters in the hand of
Jehovah; Whithersoever it pleaseth him, he inclineth it."

The direction of it is in the hand of Jehovah, as the distribution of
the water of the reservoir through the garden by different canals is at
the will of the gardener.

"Et, cum exustus ager morientibus aestuat herbis,

Ecce supercilio clivosi tramitis undam

Elicit: illa cadens raucum per levia murmur

Saxa ciet, scatebrisque arentia temperat arva."

Virg., Georg. 1:107.

"Then, when the fiery suns too fiercely play,

And shrivelled herbs on withering stems decay,

The wary ploughman on the mountain's brow

Undams his watery stores; huge torrents flow;

And, rattling down the rocks, large moisture yield,

Tempering the thirsty fever of the field."

Dryden.

Solomon, [Ecc 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#001), [Ecc
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#006), mentions his own works of this
kind: -

"I made me gardens, and paradises;

And I planted in them all kinds of fruit trees.

I made me pools of water,

To water with them the grove flourishing with trees."

Maundrell, p. 88, has given a description of the remains, as they are
said to be, of these very pools made by Solomon, for the reception and
preservation of the waters of a spring, rising at a little distance from
them; which will give us a perfect notion of the contrivance and design
of such reservoirs.

"As for the pools, they are three in number, lying in a row above each
other; being so disposed that the waters of the uppermost may descend
into the second, and those of the second into the third. Their figure is
quadrangular, the breadth is the same in all, amounting to about ninety
paces. In their length there is some difference between them; the first
being about one hundred and sixty paces long, the second, two hundred,
and the third, two hundred and twenty. They are all lined with wall and
plastered; and contain a great depth of water."

The immense works which were made by the ancient kings of Egypt for
recovering the waters of the Nile, when it overflowed, for such uses,
are well known. But there never was a more stupendous work of this kind
than the reservoir of Saba, or Merab, in Arabia Felix. According to the
tradition of the country, it was the work of Balkis, that queen of Sheba
who visited Solomon. It was a vast lake formed by the collection of the
waters of a torrent in a valley, where, at a narrow pass between two
mountains, a very high mole or dam was built. The water of the lake so
formed had near twenty fathoms depth; and there were three sluices at
different heights, by which, at whatever height the lake stood, the
plain below might be watered. By conduits and canals from these sluices
the water was constantly distributed in due proportion to the several
lands; so that the whole country for many miles became a perfect
paradise. The city of Saba, or Merab, was situated immediately below the
great dam; a great flood came, and raised the lake above its usual
height; the dam gave way in the middle of the night; the waters burst
forth at once, and overwhelmed the whole city, with the neighboring
towns and people. The remains of eight tribes were forced to abandon
their dwellings, and the beautiful valley became a morass and a desert.
This fatal catastrophe happened long before the time of Mohammed, who
mentions it in the Koran, chap. 34: ver. 15. See also Sale, Prelim. s. 1
p. 10, and Michaelis, Quest. aux Voyag. Daniel No. 94. Niebuhr, Descrip.
de l'Arabie. p. 240. - L.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 2](isa002)

</div>
