<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa061)  [Next](isa063) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 62](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 62:0</span></span>

The prophet opens this chapter with ardent prayers that the happy period
of reconciliation just now promised, and here again foretold, may be
hastened, [Isa 62:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#001). He then calls
upon the faithful, particularly the priests and Levites, to join him,
urging the promises, and even the oath, of Jehovah, as the foundation of
their request, [Isa 62:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#006). And,
relying on this oath, he goes on to speak of the general restoration
promised, as already performing; and calls to the people to march forth,
and to the various nations among whom they are dispersed to prepare the
way for them, as God had caused the order for their return to be
universally proclaimed, [Isa 62:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#010).

[Isaiah 62:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 62:1</span></span>

For Zion's sake will I not hold my peace - These are the words of
Jehovah declaring his purpose relative to the events predicted in the
preceding chapter.

Thou shalt be called by a new name - Viz., Christian - or, as in the
fourth verse, חפצי בה chephtsi bah, "my delight is in her" - because she
has now received that command, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased; Hear Him."

[Isaiah 62:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 62:4</span></span>

Thy land Beulah - בעולה beulah, married. In the prophets, a desolate
land is represented under the notion of a widow; an inhabited land,
under that of a married woman, who has both a husband and children.

[Isaiah 62:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 62:5</span></span>

For as a young man - so - The particles of comparison are not at present
in the Hebrew Text: but the Septuagint, Syriac, and Chaldee seem to have
read in their copies כ caph prefixed to the verb, כי כיבעל ki keyibal
which seems to have been omitted by mistake of a transcriber, occasioned
by the repetition of the same two letters. And before the verb in the
second line a MS. adds כן ken, so; which the Septuagint, Syriac, and
Chaldee seem also to have had in their copies. In the third line of this
verse the same MS. has in like manner וכמשוש vechimsos, and two MSS. and
the Babylonish Talmud כמשוש kimsos, adding the כ caph; and in the fourth
line, the Babylonish Talmud likewise adds כן ken, so, before the verb.

Sir John Chardin, in his note on this place, tells us, "that it is the
custom in the east for youths, that were never married, always to marry
virgins; and widowers, however young, to marry widows." - Harmer,
Observ. 2 p. 482.

So shall thy sons marry thee - For בניך banayich, thy sons, Bishop Lowth
reads, restorer or builder, as he does not consider the word as the
plural of בן ben, a son, but the participle benoni of the verb בנה
banah, he built. I do not see that we gain much by this translation. Thy
sons shall dwell in thee, Vulgate; and so the Septuagint and Chaldee.

[Isaiah 62:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 62:6</span></span>

Ye that make mention of the Lord, keep not silence - The faithful, and
in particular the priests and Levites, are exhorted by the prophet to
beseech God with unremitted importunity (compare [Luk
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#001), etc.) to hasten the redemption
of Sion. The image in this place is taken from the temple service; in
which there was appointed a constant watch, day and night, by the
Levites: and among them this seems to have belonged particularly to the
singers, see [Ch1 9:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#033). Now the
watches in the east, even to this day, are performed by a loud cry from
time to time of the watchmen, to mark the time, and that very
frequently, and in order to show that they themselves are constantly
attentive to their duty. Hence the watchmen are said by the prophet,
[Isa 52:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#008), to lift up their voice; and
here they are commanded, not to keep silence; and the greatest reproach
to them is, that they are dumb dogs; they cannot bark; dreamers;
sluggards, loving to slumber, [Isa
56:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#010). "The watchmen in the camp of
the caravans go their rounds crying one after another, 'God is one, he
is merciful:' and often add, 'Take heed to yourselves.'" Tavernier,
Voyage de Perse, 54:1 chap. 10. The hundred and thirty-fourth Psalm
gives us an example of the temple watch. The whole Psalm is nothing more
than the alternate cry of two different divisions of the watch. The
first watch addresses the second, reminding them of their duty; the
second answers by a solemn blessing. The address and the answer seem
both to be a set form, which each division proclaimed, or sung aloud, at
stated intervals, to notify the time of the night: -

First Chorus

"Come on now, bless ye Jehovah, all ye servants of Jehovah;

Ye that stand in the house of Jehovah in the nights;

Lift up your hands towards the sanctuary,

And bless ye Jehovah."

Second Chorus

"Jehovah bless thee out of Sion;

He that made heaven and earth."

"Ye who stand in the place of the watch, in the house of the sanctuary
of the Lord; and ye praise through the nights;" - says the Chaldee
paraphrase on the second line. And this explains what is here
particularly meant by proclaiming, or making remembrance of, the name of
Jehovah: the form, which the watch made use of on these occasions, was
always a short sentence, expressing some pious sentiment, of which
Jehovah was the subject; and it is remarkable, that the custom in the
east in this respect also still continues the very same; as appears by
the example above given from Tavernier.

And this observation leads to the explanation of an obscure passage in
the Prophet Malachi, [Mal 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#012).

"Jehovah will cut off the man that doeth this;

The watchman and the answerer, from the tabernacles of Jacob;

And him that presenteth an offering to Jehovah God of hosts."

ער וענה er veoneh, the master and the scholar, says our translation,
after the Vulgate: the son and the grandson, says the Syriac and
Chaldee, as little to the purpose: Arias Montanus has given it
vigilantem et respondentem, "the watchman and the answerer;" that is,
the Levite and "him that presenteth an offering to Jehovah," that is,
the priest. - L. Ye that make mention of the Lord, keep not silence. Is
not this clause an address to the ministers of Christ, to continue in
supplication for the conversion of the Jewish people? Kimchi seems to
think that the watchmen are the interceding angels!

[Isaiah 62:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 62:9</span></span>

But they that have gathered it shall eat it, and praise the Lord - This
and the following line have reference to the law of Moses: "Thou mayest
not eat within thy gates the tithe of thy corn, or of thy wine, or of
thy oil; but thou must eat them before the Lord thy God, in the place
which the Lord thy God shall choose," [Deu
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#017), [Deu
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#018). "And when ye shall come into
the land, and shall have planted all manner of trees for food, then ye
shall count the fruit thereof as uncircumcised: three years it shall be
as uncircumcised unto you; it shall not be eaten of. But in the fourth
year all the fruit thereof shall be holy to praise the Lord withal. And
in the fifth year ye shall eat the fruit thereof," [Lev
19:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#023). This clearly explains the
force of the expressions, "shall praise Jehovah," and "shall drink it in
my sacred courts."

Five MSS., one ancient, have יאכלוהו yocheluhu, they shall eat it, fully
expressed: and so likewise ישתוהו yishtuhu, they shall drink it, is
found in nineteen MSS., three of them ancient. - L.

[Isaiah 62:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 62:10</span></span>

Of the people "For the people" - Before the word העם haam, the people,
two MSS. insert יהוה Yehovah; one MS. adds the same word after; and
eight MSS., three ancient, instead of העם haam, have יהוה Yehovah, and
so likewise one edition. But though it makes a good sense either way, I
believe it to be an interpolation, as the ancient Versions do not favor
it. The Septuagint indeed read עמי ammi, my people. - L.

[Isaiah 62:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 62:11</span></span>

Unto the end of the world - אל קצה הארץ el ketseh haarets - Instead of
אל el, to, עד ad, Unto, is the reading of two of Kennicott's MSS.; and
one of mine has מקצה mikketseh, "From the end of the earth."

Behold, thy salvation cometh "Lo, thy Savior cometh" - So all the
ancient Versions render the word ישעך yishech.

Behold, his reward - See note on [Isa
40:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#010), [Isa
40:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#011). This reward he carries as it
were in his hand. His work is before him - he perfectly knows what is to
be done; and is perfectly able to do it. He will do what God should do,
and what man cannot do; and men should be workers with him. Let no man
fear that the promise shall not be fulfilled on account of its
difficulty, its greatness, the hinderances in the way, or the
unworthiness of the person to whom it is made. It is God's work; he is
able to do it, and as willing as he is able.

[Isaiah 62:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 62:12</span></span>

They shall call them - These characteristics seem to be put in their
inverted order. -

1\. God will not forsake them.

2\. They shall be sought out.

3\. They shall be redeemed. And,

4\. Be in consequence a holy people.

1\. When God calls, it is a proof that he has not forsaken.

2\. When he seeks, it is a proof he is waiting to be gracious.

3\. When the atonement is exhibited, all things are then ready.

4\. And when that is received, holiness of heart and life is then to be
kept continually in view, as this is the genuine work of God's Spirit;
and without holiness none shall see the Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 63](isa063)

</div>
