<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa029)  [Next](isa031.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#001.md)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 30:0</span></span>

The Jews reproved for their reliance on Egypt, [Isa
30:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#001.md). Threatened for their obstinate
adherence to this alliance, [Isa
30:8-17](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#008.md). Images the most elegant and
lofty, by which the intense gloriousness of Messiah's reign at the
period when all Israel shall be added to the Church is beautifully set
forth, [Isa 30:18-26](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#018.md). Dreadful fall of
Sennacherib's army, an event most manifestly typical of the terrible and
sudden overthrow of Antichrist; as, unless this typical reference be
admitted, no possible connection can be imagined between the stupendous
events which took place in Hezekiah's reign, and the very remote and
inconceivably more glorious displays of Divine vengeance and mercy in
the days of the Messiah, [Isa
30:27-33](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#027.md).

[Isaiah 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 30:1</span></span>

And that cover with a covering "Who ratify covenants" - Hebrews "Who
pour out a libation." Sacrifice and libation were ceremonies constantly
used, in ancient times by most nations in the ratifying of covenants: a
libation therefore is used for a covenant, as in Greek the word σπονδη,
for the same reason, stands for both. This seems to be the most easy
explication of the Hebrew phrase, and it has the authority of the
Septuagint, εποιησατε συνθηκας.

[Isaiah 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 30:4</span></span>

Hanes - Six MSS. of Kennicott's, and perhaps six others, with four of De
Rossi's, read חנם chinnam, in vain, for הנס Hanes; and so also the
Septuagint, who read likewise יגעו yageu, labored, for יגיעו yaggiu,
arrived at.

[Isaiah 30:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 30:5</span></span>

Were - ashamed - Eight MSS. (one ancient) of Kennicott's, and ten of De
Rossi's, read הביש hobish, without א aleph. So the Chaldee and Vulgate.

But a shame "But proved even a shame" - Four MSS. (three ancient) after
כי ki, add אם im, unless, which seems wanted to complete the phrase in
its usual form.

[Isaiah 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 30:6</span></span>

The burden - משא massa seems here to be taken in its proper sense; the
load, not the oracle. The same subject is continued; and there seems to
be no place here for a new title to a distinct prophecy.

Does not burden of the beasts of the South in this place relate to the
presents sent by Hoshea king of Israel to the South - to Egypt, which
lay south of Judea, to engage the Egyptians to succor him against the
king of Assyria?

Into the land of trouble and anguish "Through a land of distress and
difficulty" - The same deserts are here spoken of which the Israelites
passed through when they came out of Egypt, which Moses describes, [Deu
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#015.md), as "that great and terrible
wilderness wherein were fiery serpents, and scorpions, and drought;
where there was no water. "And which was designed to be a kind of
barrier between them and Egypt, of which the Lord had said, "Ye shall
henceforth return no more that way," [Deu
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#016.md).

Shall not profit them - A MS. adds in the margin the word למו lamo,
them, which seems to have been lost out of the text: it is authorized by
the Septuagint and Vulgate.

[Isaiah 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 30:7</span></span>

Their strength is to sit still "Rahab the Inactive" - The two last
words, הם שבת hem shabeth, joined into one, make the participle pihel
המשבת hammeshabbeth. I find the learned Professor Doederlein, in his
version of Isaiah, and note on this place, has given the same
conjecture; which he speaks of as having been formerly published by him.
A concurrence of different persons in the same conjecture adds to it a
greater degree of probability.

[Isaiah 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 30:8</span></span>

For ever and ever "For a testimony for ever" - לעד leed. So the Syriac,
Chaldee, Vulgate, and Septuagint, in MSS. Pachom. and 1. D. 2: εις
μαρτυριον, which two words have been lost out of the other copies of the
Septuagint.

[Isaiah 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 30:12</span></span>

In oppression "In obliquity" - בעקש beakesh, transposing the two last
letters of בעשק beoshek, in oppression, which seems not to belong to
this place: a very probable conjecture of Houbigant.

[Isaiah 30:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 30:13</span></span>

Swelling out to a high wall "A swelling in a high wall" - It has been
observed before, that the buildings of Asia generally consist of little
better than what we call mud walls. "All the houses at Ispahan, "says
Thevenot, Vol. II., p. 159, "are built of bricks made of clay and straw,
and dried in the sun; and covered with a plaster made of a fine white
stone. In other places in Persia the houses are built with nothing else
but such bricks, made with tempered clay and chopped straw, well mingled
together, and dried in the sun, and then used: but the least rain
dissolves them. "Sir John Chardin's MS. remark on this place of Isaiah
is very apposite: Murs en Asie etant faits de terre se fendent ainsi par
milieu et de haut en bas. "The walls in Asia being made of earth often
cleave from top to bottom." This shouts clearly how obvious and
expressive the image is. The psalmist has in the same manner made use of
it, to express sudden and utter destruction: -

"Ye shall be slain all of you;

Ye shall be like an inclining wall, like a shattered fence."

[Psa 62:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#004.md).

[Isaiah 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 30:14</span></span>

He shall not spare "And spareth it not" - Five MSS. add the conjunction
ו vau to the negative; ולא velo.

[Isaiah 30:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 30:17</span></span>

At the rebuke of five shall ye flee "At the rebuke of five, ten thousand
of you shall flee" - In the second line of this verse a word is
manifestly omitted, which should answer to one thousand in the first:
the Septuagint supply πολλοι, רבים rabbim. But the true word is רבבה
rebabah, as I am persuaded any one will be convinced, who will compare
the following passages with this place: -

"How should one chase a thousand;

And two put ten thousand (רבבה) to flight?"

[Deu 32:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#030.md).

"And five of you shall chase a hundred;

And a hundred of you shall chase (רבבה) ten thousand."

[Lev 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#008.md).

[Isaiah 30:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 30:18</span></span>

And therefore will he be exalted "Even for this shall he expect in
silence" - For ירום yarum, he shall be exalted, which belongs not to
this place, Houbigant reads ידום yadum, he shall be silent: and so it
seems to be in a MS. Another MS. instead of it reads ישוב yashub, he
shall return. The mistakes occasioned by the similitude of the letters ד
daleth and ר resh are very frequent, as the reader may have already
observed.

[Isaiah 30:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 30:19</span></span>

For the people shall dwell in Zion "When a holy people shall dwell in
Sion" - Λαος ἁγιος, Septuagint; עם קדוש am kadosh. The word קדוש dro
kadosh, lost out of the text, but happily supplied by the Septuagint,
clears up the sense, otherwise extremely obscure. When the rest of the
cities of the land were taken by the king of Assyria, Zion was
preserved, and all that were in it.

Thou shalt weep no more "Thou shalt implore him with weeping" - The
negative particle לא lo is not acknowledged by the Septuagint. It may
perhaps have been written by mistake for לו lo, to him, of which there
are many examples.

[Isaiah 30:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 30:20</span></span>

Though the Lord "Though Jehovah" - For אדני Adonai, sixteen MSS. and
three editions have יהוה Yehovah, many of De Rossi's have the same
reading; all my own have יהוה Yehovah.

[Isaiah 30:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 30:21</span></span>

When ye turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the left "Turn not
aside, to the right or to the left" - The Syriac Chaldee, and Vulgate,
translate as if, instead of כי־וכי ki-vechi, they read לא־ולא lo-velo.

[Isaiah 30:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 30:22</span></span>

Ye shall defile "Ye shall treat as defiled" - The very prohibition of
Moses, [Deu 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#025.md), only thrown out of
the prose into the poetical form: "The graven images of their gods ye
shall burn with fire: thou shalt not desire the silver or the gold that
is on them; nor take it unto thee, lest thou be snared therein; for it
is an abomination to Jehovah thy God."

[Isaiah 30:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">isa 30:25</span></span>

When the towers fall "When the mighty fall" - מגדלים migdalim, μεγαλους,
Sym.; μεγαλυνομενους, Aquila; רברבין rabrebin, Chard.; all signifying
mighty sizes.

[Isaiah 30:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">isa 30:26</span></span>

Shall be sevenfold - The text adds כאור שבעת הימים keor shibath
haiyamayim, "as the light of seven days, "a manifest gloss, taken in
from the margin; it is not in most of the copies of the Septuagint. It
interrupts the rhythmical construction, and obscures the sense by a
false, or at least an unnecessary, interpretation.

By moon, sun, light, are to be understood the abundance of spiritual and
temporal felicity with which God should bless them in the days of the
Messiah, which should be sevenfold, i.e. vastly exceed all that they had
ever before possessed.

[Isaiah 30:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">isa 30:27</span></span>

And the burden thereof is heavy "And the flame raged violently" - משאה
massaah; this word seems to be rightly rendered in our translation, the
flame, [Jdg 20:38](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#038.md), [Jdg
20:40](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#040.md), etc.; a sign of fire, [Jer
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#001.md); called properly משאת masseeth, an
elevation, from its tending upwards.

[Isaiah 30:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">isa 30:28</span></span>

To sift the nations with a sieve of vanity "To toss the nations with the
van of perdition" - The word להנפה lahanaphah is in its form very
irregular. Kimchi says it is for להניף lehaniph. Houbigant supposes it
to be a mistake, and shows the cause of it; the joining it to the ה he,
which should begin the following word. The true reading is להניף הגוים
lehaniph haggoyim, "to sift the nations."

The Vulgate seems to be the only one of the ancient interpreters who has
explained rightly the sense; but he has dropped the image: ad perdendas
gentes in nihilum, "to reduce the nations to nothing. "Kimchi's
explanation is to the following effect:" נפה naphah is a van with which
they winnow corn; and its use is to cleanse the corn from the chaff and
straw: but the van with which God will winnow the nations will be the
van of emptiness or perdition; for nothing useful shall remain behind,
but all shall come to nothing, and perish. In like manner, a bridle is
designed to guide the horse in the right way; but the bridle which God
will put in the jaws of the people shall not direct them aright, but
shall make them err, and lead them into destruction." This latter image
the prophet has applied to the same subject afterwards, [Isa
37:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#029.md) : -

"I will put my bridle in thy jaws, And turn thee back by the way in
which thou camest."

And as for the former it is to be observed, that the van of the ancients
was a large instrument, somewhat like a shovel, with a long handle, with
which they tossed the corn mixed with the chaff and chopped straw into
the air, that the wind might separate them. See Hammond on [Mat
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012.md).

There shall be a bridle in the jaws - A metaphor taken from a
headstrong, unruly horse: the bridle checks, restrains, and directs him.

What the true God does in restraining sinners has been also attributed
to the false gods of the heathen. Thus Aeschylus, prom. Vinct. 691: -

αλλ' επηναγκαζε νιν

Διος χαλινος προς βιαν πρασσειν ταδε.

"But the bridle of Jupiter violently constrained him to do these
things."

[Isaiah 30:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">isa 30:30</span></span>

The Lord shall cause his glorious voice to be heard - Kimchi understands
this of the great destruction of the Assyrian host by the angel of the
Lord. Instead of בזעף אץ bezaaph ats, "with swift anger, "five of Dr.
Kennicott's MSS. and one of my own, read בזעם אף bezaam aph, "with
detestation indignant." For אץ ats, "swift, "which is the common
reading, forty-two of Kennicott's, forty-three of De Rossi's, and two of
my own, have אץ ats, "wrath or fury." The former reading, אץ ats, is not
found in any Bible previously to that of Van der Hooght, in 1705; and
there it seems to be a typographical mistake.

[Isaiah 30:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">isa 30:31</span></span>

Which smote with a rod "He that was ready to smite with his staff" -
"Post אשור ashshur, forte excidit אשר asher." - Secker. After אשור
ashshur, probably אשר asher, "which, "has been omitted.

[Isaiah 30:32](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">isa 30:32</span></span>

The grounded staff "The rod of his correction" - For מוסדה musadah, the
grounded staff, of which no one yet has been able to make any tolerable
sense, Le Clerc conjectured מוסרה musarah, of correction; (see [Pro
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#015).md); and so it is in two MSS., (one
of them ancient), and seems to be so in the Bodleian MS. The Syriac has
דשוע בדה deshuebedah, Virgo domans, vet subjectionis, "the taming rod,
or rod of subjection."

With tabrets and harps - With every demonstration of joy and
thanksgiving for the destruction of the enemy in so wonderful a manner:
with hymns of praise, accompanied with musical instruments. See [Isa
30:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#029.md).

With it "Against them" - For בה bah. against her, fifty-two MSS. and
five editions read בם bam, against them.

[Isaiah 30:33](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">isa 30:33</span></span>

For Tophet is ordained - Tophet is a valley very near to Jerusalem, to
the southeast, called also the valley of Hinnom or Gehenna; where the
Canaanites, and afterwards the Israelites, sacrificed their children, by
making them pass through the fire, that is, by burning them in the fire,
to Molech, as some suppose. It is therefore used for a place of
punishment by fire; and by our blessed Savior in the Gospel for
hell-fire, as the Jews themselves had applied it. See Chald. on [Isa
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#014.md), where מוקדי עלם mokedey olam is
rendered "the Gehenna of everlasting fire." Here the place where the
Assyrian army was destroyed is called Tophet by a metonymy; for the
Assyrian army was destroyed probably at a greater distance from
Jerusalem, and quite on the opposite side of it: for Nob is mentioned as
the last station, from which the king of Assyria should threaten
Jerusalem, [Isa 10:32](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#032.md), where the
prophet seems to have given a very exact chorographical description of
his march in order to attack the city; which however he never reached. -
L.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 31](isa031.md)

</div>
