<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](sol008)  [Next](isa001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to the Book of the Prophet Isaiah

On the term prophet, and on the nature and several kinds of prophecy, I
have already discoursed in different parts of this work. See the notes
on [Gen 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001) (note); [Gen
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#007) (note), and the preface to the
four Gospels, and Acts of the Apostles. A few things only require to be
recapitulated. נבא naba signifies not only to foretell future events,
but also to pray and supplicate; and נביא nabi, the prophet, was by
office not only a declarer of events still future, but the general
preacher of the day; and as he frequently foresaw the approach of
disastrous times, such was the wickedness of the people, he employed his
time in counseling sinners to turn from the error of their ways, and in
making strong prayer and supplication to God to avert the threatened
judgments: for such predictions, however apparently positive in their
terms, were generally conditional; strange as this may appear to some
who, through their general ignorance of every thing but the
peculiarities of their own creed, suppose that every occurrence is
impelled by an irresistible necessity.

To his own conduct, in reference to such matters, God has been pleased
to give us a key (see Jeremiah 18.) which opens all difficulties, and
furnishes us with a general comment on his own providence. God is
absolute master of his own ways; and as he has made man a free agent,
whatever concerns him in reference to futurity, on which God is pleased
to express his mind in the way of prophecy, there is a condition
generally implied or expressed. As this is but seldom attended to by
partial interpreters, who wish by their doctrine of fatalism to bind
even God himself, many contradictory sentiments are put in the mouths of
his prophets.

In ancient times those who were afterwards called Prophets were termed
Seers; [Sa1 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#009). הראה haroeh, the
seeing person; he who perceives mentally what the design of God is.
Sometimes called also חזה chozeh, the man who has visions, or
supernatural revelations; [Kg1 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#017);
[Kg2 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#013). Both these terms are
translated seer in our common Version. They were sometimes called men of
God, and messengers or angels of God. In their case it was ever
understood that all God's prophets had an extraordinary commission and
had their message given them by immediate inspiration.

In this the heathen copied after the people of God. They also had their
prophets and seers; and hence their augurs and auguries, their
haruspices, and priestesses, and their oracles; all pretending to be
divinely inspired, and to declare nothing but the truth; for what was
truth and fact among the former, was affected and pretended among the
latter.

Many prophets and seers are mentioned in the sacred writings; but,
fragments and insulated prophecies excepted, we have the works of only
Sixteen; four of whom are termed the former or larger prophets, and
twelve, the latter or minor prophets. They have these epithets, not from
priority of time, or from minor importance, but merely from the places
they occupy in the present arrangement of the books in the Bible, and
from the relative size of their productions.

The Jews reckon forty-eight prophets, and seven prophetesses; and
Epiphanius, in a fragment preserved by Cotelerius, reckons not fewer
than seventy-three prophets, and ten prophetesses; but in both
collections there are many which have no Scriptural pretensions to such
a distinguished rank.

The succession of prophets in the Jewish Church is well worthy of note,
because it not only manifests the merciful regards of God towards that
people, but also the uninterrupted succession of the prophetic
influence, at least from Moses to Malachi, if not before; for this gift
was not withheld under the patriarchal dispensation; indeed we might
boldly ask any man to show when the time was in which God left himself
without a witness of this kind.

To show this succession, I shall endeavor to give the different prophets
in order of time.

1\. The first man, Adam, has an undoubted right to stand at the head of
the prophets, as he does at the head of the human race. His declaration
concerning marriage, "For this cause shall a man leave his father and
mother, and cleave to his wife," is so truly prophetic, that no doubt
can be formed on the subject. There was then nothing in nature or
experience to justify such an assertion; and he could have it only by
Divine inspiration. The millions of instances which have since occurred,
and the numerous laws which have been founded on this principle among
all the nations of the earth, show with what precision the declaration
was conceived, and with what truth it was published to the world. Add to
this, his correct knowledge of the nature of the different animals, so
that he could impose on them names expressive of their respective
natures or propensities; which proves that he must have acted under a
Divine inspiration; for known only to God are all his works from the
beginning.

2\. Enoch, the seventh from Adam, is expressly called a prophet; and St.
Jude, [Jde 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#014), [Jde
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#015), has preserved a fragment of one
of his prophecies, relative to the corruption of the ante-diluvian
world, and the approaching judgments of God.

3\. Noah was a prophet and preacher of righteousness, and predicted the
general deluge, and the time of respite which God in his mercy had
granted to the offenders of that age.

4\. Abraham is expressly called a prophet also, [Gen
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#007); and it appears from [Psa
105:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#015), that he partook of the Divine
anointing.

5\. Isaac, [Gen 27:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#027), predicted the
future greatness of his son Jacob, and of the race that was to spring
from him.

6\. Jacob was so especially favored with the prophetic gift, that he
distinctly foretold what should happen to each of his sons. See Genesis
49.

7\. Joseph was favored with several prophetic visions, and had the gift
of interpreting dreams which portended future occurrences; (see Genesis
27, 40, 41.); and foretold the redemption of the Israelites from Egypt;
[Gen 50:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#025). Thus far the prophetic
influence extended through the patriarchal dispensation for about two
thousand three hundred and seventy years from the creation.

With the Jewish dispensation the prophetic gift revived; and,

8\. Moses became one of the most eminent prophets that had ever
appeared. He not only enjoyed the continual prophetic afflatus, but had
such visions of and intercourse with God as no other person either
before or since was favored with; and by which he was highly qualified
to perform the arduous work which God had given him to do, and to frame
that Code of Laws which had no equal before the promulgation of the
Gospel. See [Deu 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#010). He predicted
expressly the coming of the Messiah. See [Deu
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#018).

9\. Aaron, the brother of Moses, his prime minister and God's high
priest, was also a partaker of his Divine influence, and declared the
will of God to Pharaoh and the Israelites, not merely from information
received from Moses, but also by immediate communication from God. See
[Exo 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#015).

10\. Miriam, the sister of Moses and Aaron, is expressly called a
prophetess, [Exo 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#020); [Num
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#002).

11\. Joshua, who succeeded Moses, was a partaker of the same grace. He
was appointed by Moses under the especial direction of God; [Num
27:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#018); [Deu
34:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#009); and has always been reckoned
among the Jews as one of the prophets. See Sirach 46:1-6. Though I
cannot place them in the same rank, yet it is necessary to state that,
by the Jews, several of the judges are classed among the prophets; such
as Othniel, Ehud, Samson, and Barak.

12\. Deborah, the coadjutor of Barak, is called a prophetess, [Jdg
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#004). During her time, and down to the
days of Eli the high priest, prophecy had been very scarce, there having
been very few on whom the Spirit of the Lord had rested; for "the word
of the Lord was scarce in those days, and there was no open vision;"
[Sa1 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#001).

13\. Hannah, the wife of Elkanah, is supposed to have partaken of the
spirit of prophecy; and to have foretold, at least indirectly, the
advent of the Messiah, and the glory that should be revealed under the
Gospel. See her Song, [Sa1 2:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#001). And
what renders this more likely is, that it is on the model, and with many
of the expressions, of this song, that the blessed Virgin composed her
Magnificat, [Luk 1:46-55](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#046).

14\. Samuel, her son, was one of the most eminent of the Jewish
prophets, and was the last, and indeed the greatest, of the judges of
Israel. In his time the prophetic influence seems to have rested upon
many; so that we find even whole schools or colleges of prophets which
were under his direction. See [Sa1
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#005), [Sa1
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#010); [Sa1
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#020), and elsewhere.

15\. David united in himself the character of prophet and king, in the
most eminent manner; and from his reign down to the captivity the
succession was not only not interrupted, but these extraordinary
messengers of God became very numerous.

16\. Gad flourished under his reign, and was emphatically called David's
Seer, [Sa2 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#011); [Ch1
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#009), [Ch1
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#019), [Ch1
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#020); and it appears that he had
written a Book of Prophecies, which is now lost, [Ch1
29:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#029).

17\. Nathan lived also under the same reign, [Sa2
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#002); and, in conjunction with Gad,
composed a book of the acts of David, [Ch1
29:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#029).

18\. To Solomon also, son of David, the prophetic gift has been
attributed. This might be implied in the extraordinary wisdom with which
God had endowed him, [Kg1 3:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#005); [Ch2
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#007); [Ch2
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#012); and in his writings several
prophetic declarations may be found, even independently of the supposed
reference to Christ and his Church in the Song of Solomon.

19\. Iddo is termed a Seer, [Ch2
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#015); [Ch2
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#022); and was one of Solomon's
biographers.

20\. Shemaiah lived under Rehoboam; he is called a man of God, and to
him the word of prophecy came relative to Judah and Benjamin, [Kg1
12:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#022). Some think this was the same
person who was sent to Jeroboam relative to his idolatry; see [Kg1
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#001), etc.

21\. Ahijah, the Shilonite, prophesied to Jeroboam, [Kg1
11:29-39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#029).

22\. Hanani the Seer prophesied under Azariah and Asa, [Ch2
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#007).

23\. Jehu, son of Hanani, prophesied under Jehoshaphat, [Kg1
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#001), [Kg1
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#007); [Ch2
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#007); [Ch2
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#002); and [Ch2
20:34](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#034).

24\. Azariah, the son of Oded, prophesied under Asa, [Ch2
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#001).

25\. Elijah prophesied under the reign of Ahab and Jezebel.

26\. Elisha succeeded Elijah under the same reigns. And these eminent
men had many disciples on whom the spirit of prophecy rested. They, and
their masters, Elijah and Elisha, prophesied in the kingdoms both of
Israel and Judah. Their histories make a prominent part of the first and
second Books of Kings; and are well known.

27\. Micaiah, the son of Imlah, prophesied under the same reign, [Kg1
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#009).

28\. Hosea prophesied under Jeroboam the second, king of Israel, and
under the reign of Uzziah, king of Judah.

29\. Isaiah was contemporary with Hosea, but probably began to prophesy
a little later than he did.

30\. Amos prophesied about the same time.

31\. Jonah, son of Amittai, is supposed to have been contemporary with
the above.

32\. Eliezer, the son of Dodavah, prophesied against Jehoshaphat and
Ahaziah, [Ch2 20:37](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#037).

33\. Jahaziel, son of Zechariah, prophesied against Judah and Israel
under the same reign, [Ch2 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#014).

34\. Micah prophesied against Samaria and Jerusalem, in the reigns of
Jotham, Ahaz and Hezekiah.

35\. Oded, father of Azariah, prophesied against Asa, [Ch2
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#008).

36\. Nahum prophesied under Hezekiah.

37\. Joel, under Josiah.

38\. Jeremiah, about the same time.

39\. Zephaniah, under the same reign. See their prophecies.

40\. Huldah, the prophetess, was contemporary with the above.

41\. Igdaliah, called a man of God, and probably a prophet, was
contemporary with Jeremiah, [Jer 35:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#004).

42\. Habakkuk lived about the end of the reign of Josiah, or the
beginning of that of Jehoiakim.

43\. Ezekiel lived under the captivity; and prophesied in Mesopotamia,
about the time that Jeremiah prophesied in Jerusalem.

44\. Obadiah lived in Judea, after the capture of Jerusalem and before
the desolation of Idumea by Nebuchadnezzar.

45\. Daniel prophesied in Babylon during the captivity.

46\. Haggai prophesied during and after the captivity.

47\. Urijah, the son of Shemaiah, prophesied under Jehoiakim. See [Jer
26:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#020), [Jer
26:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#021).

48\. Zechariah, son of Barachiah, flourished in the second year of
Darius, after the captivity.

49\. Malachi lived under Nehemiah, and some time after Haggai and
Zechariah.

Here is a succession of divinely inspired men, by whom God at sundry
times and in divers manners spake unto the fathers, from the beginning
of the world down to the restoration from the Babylonish captivity, a
period of three thousand six hundred years. From the time of Malachi,
who was the last of the prophets, till the advent of Christ, a period of
nearly four hundred years elapsed without vision or prophecy: but during
the whole of that interval the Jews had the law and the prophetical
writings, to which, till the time of Christ, there was no necessity to
add any thing; for God had with the writings of the last mentioned
prophet completed the canon of the Old Testament, nothing being further
necessary, till he should, in the fullness of time, superadd the Gospel;
and this having taken place, vision and prophecy are now for ever sealed
up, and the temple of God is established among all genuine believers in
Christ Jesus.

It is not easy to ascertain the order in which the sixteen prophets,
whose writings are preserved, have succeeded to each other. There are
chronological notes prefixed to several of their prophecies, which
assist to settle generally the times of the whole. Several were
contemporary, as the reader has already seen in the preceding list. The
major and minor prophets may be thus arranged: -

1\. Jonah, under the reign of Jeroboam the second.

2\. Hosea, under Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, etc.

3\. Joel, contemporary with Hosea.

4\. Amos, under Uzziah and Jeroboam the second.

5\. Isaiah, under Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah.

6\. Micah, contemporary with Isaiah.

7\. Nahum, under the reign of Hezekiah.

8\. Habakkuk, under the reign of Manasseh or Josiah.

9\. Zephaniah, under Josiah.

10\. Jeremiah, from Josiah to Zedekiah.

11\. Daniel, under the captivity, after Zedekiah.

12\. Ezekiel, at the same time.

13\. Obadiah, during the captivity.

14\. Haggai began to prophecy in the second year of Darius.

15\. Zechariah, about the same time. See [Zac
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001); [Zac
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#001).

16\. Malachi, under Nehemiah. The last of all the prophets.

The works of these prophets constitute the principal and most important
part of what is called The Bible or Old Testament.

On the style of the prophets much has been said by several learned men;
particularly Calmet, Lowth, Bishop Newton, Vitringa, Michaelis, and
Houbigant. Their chief observations, and especially those most within
the reach of the common people, have been selected and abridged with
great care and industry by the Revelation Dr. John Smith, of Cambleton,
in his little Tract entitled "A Summary View and Explanation of the
Writings of the Prophets," to which it forms preliminary observations,
drawn up at the desire of the Scottish Society for propagating Christian
Knowledge, in a small 8vo. 1804. From this work I thankfully borrow what
concerns the present subject; taking occasion at the same time to
recommend the whole to all Christian ministers, to private persons, and
to all families who wish to read the prophets to their edification.

"The writings of the prophets, the most sublime and beautiful in the
world, lose much of that usefulness and effect which they are so well
calculated to produce on the souls of men, from their not being more
generally understood. Many prophecies are somewhat dark, till events
explain them. They are, besides, delivered in such lofty and figurative
terms, and with such frequent allusions to the customs and manners of
times and places the most remote, that ordinary readers cannot, without
some help, be supposed capable of understanding them. It must therefore
be of use to make the language of prophecy as intelligible as may be, by
explaining those images and figures of speech in which it most
frequently abounds; and this may be done generally, even when the
prophecies themselves are obscure.

"Some prophecies seem as if it were not intended that they should be
clearly understood before they are fulfilled. As they relate to
different periods, they may have been intended for exciting the
attention of mankind from time to time both to providence and to
Scripture and to furnish every age with new evidence of Divine
revelation; by which means they serve the same purpose to the last ages
of the world that miracles did to the first. Whereas, if they had been
in every respect clear and obvious from the beginning, this wise purpose
had been in a great measure defeated. Curiosity, industry, and attention
would at once be at an end, or, by being too easily gratified, would be
little exercised.

"Besides, a great degree of obscurity is necessary to some prophecies
before they can be fulfilled; and if not fulfilled, the consequence
would not be so beneficial to mankind. Thus many of the ancient
prophecies concerning the destruction of Jerusalem had a manifest
relation to the remoter destruction by the Romans, as well as to the
nearer one by the Chaldeans. Had the Jews perceived this, which was not
indeed clear enough till the event explained it, they would probably
have wished to have remained for ever in their captivity at Babylon,
rather than expose themselves or their offspring a second time to a
destruction so dreadful as that which they had already experienced.

"With respect to our times, by far the greatest number of prophecies
relate to events which are now past; and therefore a sufficient
acquaintance with history, and with the language and style of prophecy,
is all that is requisite to understand them. Some prophecies, however,
relate to events still future; and these too may be understood in
general although some particular circumstances connected with them may
remain obscure till they are fulfilled. If prophecies were not capable
of being understood in general, we should not find the seers so often
blamed in this respect for their ignorance and want of discernment. That
they did actually understand many of them when they chose to search the
Scriptures we know. Daniel understood, from the prophecies of Jeremiah,
the time at which the captivity in Babylon was to be at an end; and the
scribes knew from Micah, and told Herod, where the Messiah was to be
born. A very little attention might have enabled them in the same manner
to understand others, as they probably did; such as the seventy weeks of
Daniel; the destruction of the Babylonian empire, and of the other three
that were to succeed; and also of the ruin of the people and places
around them, Moab, Ammon, Tyre, Sidon, Philistia, Egypt, and Idumea.
Perhaps, indeed, a few enigmatical circumstances might have been
annexed, which could not be understood till they were accomplished; but
the general tenor of the prophecies they could be at no loss to
understand. With regard to prophecies still future, we are in a similar
situation. It is understood in general, that the Jews will be gathered
from their dispersions, restored to their own land, and converted to
Christianity; that the fullness of the Gentiles will likewise come in;
that Antichrist, Gog and Magog, and all the enemies of the Church will
be destroyed; after which the Gospel will remarkably flourish, and be
more than ever glorified. But several circumstances connected with those
general events must probably remain in the dark till their
accomplishment shall clearly explain them.

"But this degree of obscurity which sometimes attends prophecy does not
always proceed from the circumstances or subject; it frequently proceeds
from the highly poetical and figurative style, in which prophecy is for
the most part conveyed, and of which it will be proper to give some
account. To speak of all the rhetorical figures with which the prophets
adorn their style would lead us into a field too wide, and would be more
the province of the rhetorician than of the commentator. It will be
sufficient for our purpose at present to attend to the most common of
them, consisting of allegory, parable, and metaphor, and then to
consider the sources from which the prophets most frequently borrow
their images in those figures, and the sense which they wish to convey
by them.

"By allegory, the first of the figures mentioned, is meant that mode of
speech in which the writer or speaker means to convey a different idea
from what the words in their obvious and primary signification bear.
Thus, 'Break up your fallow ground, and sow not among thorns,' ([Jer
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#003)), is to be understood, not of
tillage, but of repentance. And these words, 'Thy rowers have brought
thee into great waters, the east wind hath broken thee in the midst of
the seas,' [Eze 27:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#026), allude not to
the fate of a ship, but of a city.

"To this figure the parable, in which the prophets frequently speak, is
nearly allied. It consists in the application of some feigned narrative
to some real truth, which might have been less striking or more
disagreeable if expressed in plain terms. Such is the following one of
Isaiah, [Isa 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001), [Isa
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#002) : 'My well-beloved hath a vineyard
in a very fruitful hill. And he fenced it, and gathered out the stones
thereof, and planted it with the choicest vine, and built a tower in the
midst of it, and also made a wine-press therein; and he looked that it
should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes.' The
seventh verse tells us that this vineyard was the house of Israel, which
had so ill requited the favor which God had shown it. On this subject
see the dissertation at the end of the notes on Matthew 13 (note).

"There is, besides, another kind of allegory not uncommon with the
prophets, called mystical allegory or double prophecy. Thus it is said
of Eliakim, [Isa 22:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#022) : 'And the key
of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder; and he shall open,
and none shall shut; and he shall shut, and none shall open.' In the
first and obvious sense, the words relate to Eliakim; but in the
secondary or mystical sense, to the Messiah. Instances of the same kind
are frequent in those prophecies that relate to David, Zerubbabel,
Cyrus, and other types of Christ. In the first sense the words relate to
the type; in the second, to the antitype. The use of this allegory,
however, is not so frequent as that of the former. It is generally
confined to things most nearly connected with the Jewish religion; with
Israel, Sion, Jerusalem, and its kings and rulers; or such as were most
opposite to these, Assyria, Babylon, Egypt, Idumea, and the like. In the
former kind of allegory the primitive meaning is dropped, and the
figurative only is retained; in this, both the one and the other are
preserved, and this is what constitutes the difference.

"But of all the figures used by the prophets the most frequent is the
metaphor, by which words are transferred from their primitive and plain
to a secondary meaning. This figure, common in all poetry and in all
languages, is of indispensable necessity in Scripture, which, having
occasion to speak of Divine and spiritual matters, could do it only by
terms borrowed from sensible and material objects. Hence it is that the
sentiments, actions, and corporeal parts, not only of man, but also of
inferior creatures, are ascribed to God himself; it being otherwise
impossible for us to form any conceptions of his pure essence and
incommunicable attributes. But though the prophets, partly from
necessity and partly from choice, are thus profuse in the use of
metaphors, they do not appear, like other writers, to have the liberty
of using them as fancy directed. The same set of images, however
diversified in the manner of applying them, is always used, both in
allegory and metaphor, to denote the same subjects, to which they are in
a manner appropriated. This peculiar characteristic of the Hebrew poetry
might perhaps be owing to some rules taught in the prophetic schools,
which did not allow the same latitude in this respect as other poetry.
Whatever it may be owing to, the uniform manner in which the prophets
apply these images tends greatly to illustrate the prophetic style; and
therefore it will be proper now to consider the sources from which those
images are most frequently derived, and the subjects and ideas which
they severally denote. These sources may be classed under four heads;
natural, artificial, religious, and historical.

"I. The first and most copious, as well as the most pleasing source of
images in the prophetic writings, as in all other poetry, is nature; and
the principal images drawn from nature, together with their application,
are the following: -

"The sun, moon, and stars, the highest objects in the natural world,
figuratively represent kings, queens, and princes or rulers; the highest
in the world politic. 'The moon shall be confounded, and the sun
ashamed;' [Isa 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#023). 'I will cover
the heavens, and make the stars thereof dark: I will cover the sun with
a cloud, and the moon shall not give her light;' [Eze
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#007).

"Light and darkness are used figuratively for joy and sorrow, prosperity
and adversity. 'We wait for light, but behold obscurity; for brightness,
but we walk in darkness;' [Isa 59:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#009).
An uncommon degree of light denotes an uncommon degree of joy and
prosperity, and vice versa. 'The light of the moon shall be as the light
of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold;' [Isa
30:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#026). The same metaphors are likewise
used to denote knowledge and ignorance. 'If they speak not according to
this word, it is because there is no light in them;' [Isa
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#020). 'The people that walked in
darkness have seen a great light;' [Isa
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#002).

"Dew, moderate rains, gentle streams, and running waters denote the
blessings of the Gospel. 'Thy dew is as the dew of herbs;' [Isa
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#019). 'He shall come unto us as the
rain;' [Hos 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#003). 'I will water it
every moment;' [Isa 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#003). 'I will pour
water on him that is thirsty;' [Isa
44:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#003).

"Immoderate rains on the other hand, hail, floods, deep waters,
torrents, and inundations, denote judgments and destruction. 'I will
rain upon him an overflowing rain, and great hailstones,' [Eze
38:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#022). 'Waters rise up out of the
north, and shall overflow the land,' [Jer
47:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#002).

"Fire also, and the east wind, parching and hurtful, frequently denote
the same. 'They shall cast thy choice cedars into the fire,' [Jer
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#007). 'He stayeth his rough wind in
the day of the east wind,' [Isa 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#008).

"Wind in general is often taken in the same sense. 'The wind shall eat
up all thy pastures,' [Jer 22:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#022).
Sometimes it is put for any thing empty or fallacious, as well as
hurtful. 'The prophets shall become wind,' [Jer
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#013). 'They have sown the wind, and
they shall reap the whirlwind,' [Hos
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#007).

"Lebanon and Carmel; the one remarkable for its height and stately
cedars, was the image of majesty, strength, or anything very great or
noble. 'He shall cut down the thickets of the forest with iron, and
Lebanon shall fall by a mighty one,' [Isa
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#034). 'The Assyrian was a cedar in
Lebanon,' [Eze 31:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze031.htm#003). The other
mountain (Carmel) being fruitful, and abounding in vines and olives,
denoted beauty and fertility. 'The glory of Lebanon shall be given it,
the excellency of Carmel,' [Isa 35:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#002).
The vine alone is a frequent image of the Jewish Church. 'I had planted
thee a noble vine,' [Jer 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#021).

"Rams and bullocks of Bashan, lions, eagles, sea-monsters, or any
animals of prey, are figures frequently used for cruel and oppressive
tyrants and conquerors. 'Hear this word ye kine of Bashan, which oppress
the poor,' [Amo 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#001). 'The lion is come
up from his thicket,' [Jer 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#007). 'A
great eagle came unto Lebanon, and took the highest branch of the
cedar,' [Eze 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#003). 'Thou art as a
whale in the seas,' [Eze 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#002). 'The
unicorns shall come down, and their land shall be soaked with blood,'
[Isa 34:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#007).

"II. The ordinary occupations and customs of life, with the few arts
practiced at the time, were another source from which the prophets
derived many of their figures, particularly,

"From husbandry in all its parts, and from its implements. 'Sow to
yourselves in righteousness, reap in mercy: break up your fallow
ground,' [Hos 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#012). 'Put in the
sickle, for the harvest is ripe,' [Joe
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#013). 'I am pressed under you, as a
wain under a load of sheaves,' [Amo
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#013). Threshing was performed in
various ways, (mentioned [Isa 28:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#024),
etc.), which furnish a variety of images denoting punishment. 'Arise and
thresh, O daughter of Zion; for I will make thine horn iron, and thy
hoofs brass,' etc., [Mic 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#013). The
operation was performed on rising grounds, where the chaff was driven
away by the wind, while the grain remained; a fit emblem of the fate of
the wicked, and of the salvation of the just. 'Behold, I will make thee
a new threshing-instrument having teeth; thou shalt thresh the
mountains, and beat them small, and thou shalt make the hills as chaff.
Thou shalt fan them, and the wind shall carry them away, and the
whirlwind shall scatter them,' [Isa
41:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#015), [Isa
41:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#016).

"The vintage and winepress also furnish many images, obvious enough in
their application. 'The press is full, the fats overflow, for their
wickedness is great,' [Joe 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#013). 'I
have trod the winepress alone. I will tread down the people in mine
anger,' [Isa 63:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#003), etc. As the vintage
was gathered with shouting and rejoicing, the ceasing of the
vintage-shouting is frequently one of the figures that denote misery and
desolation. 'None shall tread with shouting; their shouting shall be no
shouting,' [Jer 48:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#033).

"From the occupation of tending cattle we have many images. 'Wo unto the
pastors that destroy and scatter the sheep of my pasture,' [Jer
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#001). The people are the flock;
teachers and rulers the pastors. 'Israel is a scattered sheep, the lions
have driven him away.' 'As a shepherd taketh out of the mouth of the
lion two legs, or a piece of an ear,' etc., [Amo
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#012). Some of the images derived from
husbandry, tending cattle, etc., may perhaps appear mean to us; though
not to the Jews, whose manner of life was simple and plain, and whose
greatest men (such as Moses, David, Gideon, etc.) were often husbandmen
and shepherds. Accordingly, the Messiah himself is frequently described
under the character of a shepherd.

\[See Fleury's Manners of the Israelites\].

"It was customary in deep mournings to shave the head and beard, to
retire to the housetops, which in those countries were flat, and
furnished with little chambers adapted to the purposes of devotion or of
sequestered grief; also to sing dirges at funerals, and to accompany
them with a mournful sort of music; and from these and the like
circumstances images are frequently borrowed by the prophets to denote
the greatest danger, and the deepest distress. 'Mine heart shall sound
for Moab like pipes.' 'Every head shall be bald, and every beard clipt -
there shall be lamentation on all the house - tops of Moab,' [Jer
48:36-38](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#036); [Isa
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#002), [Isa
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#003).

"The mode of burying in the Jewish sepulchers, or 'sides of the pit,'
and their Hades, or state of the dead, supplied many images of the same
kind. See observations on Isaiah 14 (note), and [Eze
26:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#020) (note).

"According to the barbarous custom of those times, conquerors drove
their captives before them almost naked, and exposed to the intolerable
heat of the sun, and the inclemencies of the weather. They afterwards
employed them frequently in grinding at the handmill, (watermills not
being then invented); hence nakedness, and grinding at the mill, and
sitting on the ground (the posture in which they wrought) express
captivity. 'Descend and sit in the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon;
take the millstones - thy nakedness shall be uncovered,' [Isa
47:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#001).

"The marriage relation supplied metaphors to express the relation or
covenant between God and his people. On the other hand adultery,
infidelity to the marriage bed, etc., denoted any breach of covenant
with God, particularly the love and worship of idols. 'Turn, O
backsliding children, saith the Lord, for I am married unto you,' [Jer
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#014). 'There were two women, the
daughters of one mother, and they committed whoredoms - with their idols
have they committed adultery,' etc., Ezekiel 23:2-37.

"The debility and stupefaction caused by intoxicating liquors suggested
very apt images to express the terrible effects of the Divine judgments
on those who are the unhappy objects of them. 'Thou shalt be filled with
drunkenness, with the cup of thy sister Samaria,' [Eze
23:33](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#033).

"From the method of refining metals in the furnace images are often
borrowed to denote the judgments inflicted by God on his people, with a
view to cleanse them from their sins, as metal from its dross. 'Israel
is dross in the midst of the furnace,' [Eze
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#018). 'He shall sit as a refiner and
purifier of silver,' [Mal 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#003).

"Among the other few arts from which the Hebrew poets derive some of
their images, are those of the fuller and potter, [Mal
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#002), etc.; [Jer
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#001), etc.; of which the application
is obvious. No less so is that of images derived from fishing, fowling,
and the implements belonging to them; the hook, net, pit, snare, etc.,
which generally denote captivity or destruction. 'I will send for many
fishers, and they shall fish them; and for many hunters, and they shall
hunt them; for their iniquity is not hid from mine eyes,' [Jer
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#016), [Jer
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#017). 'I will put hooks to thy jaws,'
[Eze 29:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#004). 'Fear, and the pit, and the
snare, are upon thee, O inhabitant of the earth,' [Isa
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#017).

"A few images are derived from building, as when the Messiah is denoted
by a foundation and corner-stone, [Isa
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016). The next verse describes the
rectitude of judgment by metaphors borrowed from the line and plummet;
and by building with precious stones is denoted a very high degree of
prosperity, whether applied to church or state, [Isa
54:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#011), [Isa
54:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#012).

"III. Religion, and things connected with it, furnished many images to
the sacred poets.

"From the temple and its pompous service, from the tabernacle,
shechinah, mercy-seat, etc., are derived a variety of images, chiefly
serving to denote the glory of the Christian Church, the excellency of
its worship, God's favor towards it, and his constant presence with it;
the prophets speaking to the Jews in terms accommodated to their own
ideas. 'And the Lord will create upon every dwelling-place of Mount
Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining
of a flaming fire by night; for upon all the glory shall be a covering,'
[Isa 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#005). 'Then will I sprinkle clean
water upon you, and ye shall be clean,' [Eze
36:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#025). "The ceremonial law, and
especially its distinctions between things clean and unclean, furnished
a number of images, all obvious in their application. 'Wash ye, make you
clean, put away the evil of your doings,' [Isa
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016). 'Their way was before me as the
uncleanness of a removed woman,' [Eze
36:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#017).

"The killing of sacrifices and feasting upon them, serve as metaphors
for slaughter. 'The Lord hath a sacrifice in Bozrah,' [Isa
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#006); [Eze
39:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#017).

"The pontifical robes, which were very splendid, suggested several
images expressive of the glory of both the Jewish and Christian Church.
'I clothed thee with broidered work,' etc., [Eze
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#010). 'He clothed me with the
garments of salvation,' [Isa 61:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#010).
The prophets wore a rough upper garment; false prophets wore the like,
in imitation of true ones; and to this there are frequent allusions.
'Neither shall they wear a rough garment to deceive,' [Zac
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#004).

"From the pots, and other vessels and utensils of the temple, are
likewise borrowed a few metaphors obvious enough without explanation:
'Every pot in Jerusalem and in Judah shall be holiness,' [Zac
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#021).

"The prophets have likewise many images that allude to the idolatrous
rites of the neighboring nations, to their groves and high places, [Isa
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#009), and to the worship paid to their
idols, Baal, Molech, Chemosh, Gad, Meni, Ashtaroth, Tammuz, etc., [Eze
8:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#010).

"IV. Many of the metaphors and images used by the prophets are likewise
borrowed from history, especially sacred.

"From the fall of angels: 'How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer,
son of the morning;' [Isa 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#012). 'Thou
art the anointed cherub, - thou wast upon the holy mountain of God;'
[Eze 28:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#014). And from the fall of man:
'Thou hast been in Eden, the garden of God;' [Eze
28:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#013).

"From chaos: 'I beheld the earth, and, lo! it was without form, and
void; and the heavens, and they had no light;' [Jer
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#023). 'He shall stretch over it the
line of devastation, and the plummet of emptiness;' [Isa
34:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#011).

"From the deluge: 'The windows from on high are open, and the
foundations of the earth do shake;' [Isa
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#018).

"From the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah: 'And the streams thereof
shall be turned into pitch, and the dust thereof into brimstone, and the
land thereof shall become burning pitch;' [Isa
34:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#009). Also from the destruction of the
Hivites and Amorites, etc., [Isa 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#009).

"The exodus and deliverance from Egypt, is frequently used to shadow
forth other great deliverances: 'Thus saith the Lord, who maketh a way
in the sea, and a path in the mighty waters,' etc.; [Isa
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#015), [Isa
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#016); [Isa
43:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#016); [Isa
51:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#009), [Isa
51:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#010), etc.

"From the descent on Sinai: 'Behold, the Lord cometh forth out of his
place, and will come down and tread on the high places of the earth; and
the mountains shall be molten under him;' [Mic
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#003), [Mic
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#004).

"From the resurrection, the end of the world, and the last judgment, are
derived many images, of which the application is natural and obvious:
'Thy dead men shall live, with my dead body shall they arise, - awake
and sing, ye that dwell in the dust,' etc.; [Isa
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#019). 'And all the host of heaven
shall be dissolved, and the heavens shall be rolled together as a
scroll; and all their host shall fall down as a leaf falleth from the
vine, and as a falling fig from the fig-tree;' [Isa
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#004).

"The foregoing account of the images which most frequently occur in the
writings of the prophets may be of considerable use in studying their
style; but as a thorough knowledge of this must be allowed to be of the
highest importance, a few general remarks are farther added, although
some part of them may appear to be superseded by what has been already
observed.

1\. Although the prophets use words so frequently in a figurative or
metaphorical meaning; yet we ought not, without necessity, to depart
from the primitive and original sense of language; and such a necessity
there is, when the plain and original sense is less proper, less
suitable to the subject and context, or contrary to other scriptures.

2\. By images borrowed from the world natural the prophets frequently
understand something analogous in the world politic. Thus, the sun,
moon, stars, and heavenly bodies denote kings, queens, rulers, and
persons in great power; their increase of splendor denotes increase of
prosperity; their darkening, setting, or falling denotes a reverse of
fortune, or the entire ceasing of that power or kingdom to which they
refer. Great earthquakes, and the shaking of heaven and earth, denote
the commotion and overthrow of kingdoms; and the beginning or end of the
world, their rise or ruin.

3\. The cedars of Lebanon, oaks of Bashan, fir-trees, and other stately
trees of the forest, denote kings, princes, potentates, and persons of
the highest rank; briers and thorns, the common people, or those of the
meanest order.

4\. High mountains and lofty hills, in like manner, denote kingdoms,
republics, states, and cities; towers and fortresses signify defenders
and protectors; ships of Tarshish, merchants or commercial people; and
the daughter of any capital or mother city, the lesser cities or suburbs
around it. Cities never conquered are farther styled virgins.

5\. The prophets likewise describe kings and kingdoms by their ensigns;
as Cyrus and the Romans by an eagle, the king of Macedon by a goat, and
the king of Persia by a ram; these being the figures on their respective
standards, or in the ornaments of their architecture.

6\. The prophets in like manner borrow some of their images from ancient
hieroglyphics, which they take in their usual acceptation: thus, a star
was the emblem of a god or hero; a horn, the emblem of great power or
strength; and a rod, the emblem of royalty; and they signify the same in
the prophets.

7\. The same prophecies have frequently a double meaning; and refer to
different events, the one near, the other remote; the one temporal, the
other spiritual, or perhaps eternal. The prophets having thus several
events in their eye, their expressions may be partly applicable to one,
and partly to another; and it is not always easy to mark the
transitions. Thus, the prophecies relating to the first and second
restoration of the Jews, and first and second coming of our Lord, are
often interwoven together; like our Savior's own prediction (Matthew
24.) concerning the destruction of Jerusalem and the end of the world.
What has not been fulfilled in the first, we must apply to the second;
and what has been already fulfilled may often be considered as typical
of what still remains to be accomplished.

8\. Almost all the prophecies of the Old Testament, whatever view they
may have to nearer events, are ultimately to be referred to the New,
where only we are to look for their full completion. Thus Babylon, under
the Old Testament, was a type of mystical Babylon under the New; and the
king of Syria, (Antiochus Epiphanes), a type of Antichrist; the temporal
enemies of the Jews, types and figures of the spiritual enemies of
Christians. We must not, however, expect to find always a mystical
meaning in prophecy; and when the near and most obvious meaning is
plain, and gives a good sense, we need not depart from it, nor be
over-curious to look beyond it.

9\. In prophecies, as in parables, we are chiefly to consider the scope
and design, without attempting too minute an explication of all the
poetical images and figures which the sacred writers use to adorn their
style.

10\. Prophecies of a general nature are applicable by accommodation to
individuals; most of the things that are spoken of the Church in general
being no less applicable to its individual members.

11\. Prophecies of a particular nature, on the other hand, admit, and
often require, to be extended. Thus, Edom, Moab, or any of the enemies
of God's people, is often put for the whole; what is said of one being
generally applicable to the rest.

12\. In like manner, what is said to or of any of God's people, on any
particular occasion, is of general application and use; all that stand
in the same relation to God having an interest in the same promises.

13\. A cup of intoxicating liquor is frequently used to denote the
indignation of God; and the effects of such a cup, the effects of his
displeasure.

14\. As the covenant of God with his people is represented under the
figure of marriage; so their breach of that covenant, especially their
idolatry, is represented by whoredom, adultery, and infidelity to the
marriage bed; on which the prophets sometimes enlarge, to excite
detestation of the crime. The epithet strange does likewise, almost
always, relate to something connected with idolatry.

15\. Persons or nations are frequently said in Scripture to be related
to those whom they resemble in their life and conduct. In the same
manner, men are denoted by animals whose qualities they resemble. A
definite number, such as three, four, seven, ten, etc., is sometimes
used by the prophets for an indefinite, and commonly denotes a great
many.

16\. In the reckoning of time, a day is used by the prophets to denote a
year; and things still future, to denote their certainty, are spoken of
as already past.

17\. When the prophets speak of the last or latter days, they always
mean the days of the Messiah, or the time of the Gospel dispensation.
That day means often the same, and always some period at a distance.

18\. When places are mentioned as lying north, south, east, or west, it
is generally to be understood of their situation with respect to Judea
or Jerusalem, when the context does not plainly restrict the scene to
some other place.

19\. By the earth, or the word so translated, the prophets frequently
mean the land of Judea; and sometimes, says Sir Isaac Newton, the great
continent of all Asia and Africa, to which they had access by land. By
the isles of the sea, on the other hand, they understood the places to
which they sailed, particularly all Europe, and probably the islands and
seacoasts of the Mediterranean.

20\. The greatest part of the prophetic writings was first composed in
verse, and still retains, notwithstanding all the disadvantages of a
literal prose translation, much of the air and cast of the original,
particularly in the division of the lines, and in that peculiarity of
Hebrew poetry by which the sense of one line or couplet so frequently
corresponds with that of the other. Thus: -

I will greatly rejoice in the Lord,

My soul shall be joyful in my God;

For he hath clothed me with the garments of salvation,

He hath covered me with the robe of righteousness

As a bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments,

And as a bride adorneth herself with her jewels.

[Isa 61:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#010).

"Attention to this peculiarity in sacred poetry will frequently lead to
the meaning of many passages in the poetical parts of Scripture, in
which it perpetually occurs, as the one line of a couplet, or member of
a sentence, is generally a commentary on the other. Thus: -

The Lord hath a sacrifice in Bozrah,

And a great slaughter in the land of Idumea.

[Isa 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#006).

"Here the metaphor in the first line is expressed in plain terms in the
next: the sacrifice in Bozrah means the great slaughter in Idumea, of
which Bozrah was the capital. "It must be observed that the parallelism
is frequently more extended. Thus: -

For I will pour out waters on the thirsty,

And flowing streams upon the dry ground;

I will pour out my Spirit on thy seed,

And my blessing on thine offspring.

[Isa 44:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#003).

"Here the two last lines explain the metaphor in the two preceding."

As the gift of prophecy was the greatest which God gave to men upon
earth, so the prophet, as being the immediate instrument of revealing
the will of God to the people, was the greatest, the most important, the
most august, venerable, and useful person in the land of Israel. Ipsi
eis exeant, says St. Augustine, philosophi ipsi sapientes, ipsi
theologi, ipsi prophetae, ipsi doctores probitatis ac pietatis; "They
were to the people the philosophers, the wise men, the divines, the
prophets, and the teachers of truth and godliness." By their intercourse
with God, they were his mediators with the people; and their persons, as
well as their office, were considered as peculiarly sacred. They did not
mix with the people, and only appeared in public when they came to
announce the will of God. They were also a kind of typical persons -
whatever occurred to them was instructive, so that they were for signs,
metaphors, and portents.

Most of the ancient prophets were extraordinary messengers. They were
not bred up to the prophetic function; as the office was immediately
from God, as well as the message they were to deliver to the people, so
they had no previous education, in reference to such an office, for no
man knew whom the God of Israel might please to call to announce his
righteousness to the people. Several of them were taken out of the walks
of common life. Jonah appears to have been a private person at
Gath-heper, in Galilee, before God called him to prophesy against
Nineveh. Elisha was a ploughman at Abel-meholah ([Kg1
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#016)) when called to the prophetic
function. Zechariah appears to have been a husbandman, and a keeper of
cattle, [Zac 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#005). Amos was a herdsman
of Tekoa, and a gatherer of sycamore fruit; ([Amo
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001); [Amo
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#014), [Amo
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#015)); and no doubt several others of
the ancient prophets had an equally mean origin; but the office and the
calling dignified the man. We know that our blessed Lord called not his
disciples from the higher walks or offices of life; but out of
fishermen, tax-gatherers, and tent-makers, he formed evangelists and
apostles.

The prophets appear to have gone in mean clothing; either sack-cloth,
hair-cloth, or coats of skin appear to have been their ordinary
clothing. They spoke against the pride and vain-glory of man; and their
very garb and manner gave additional weight to the solemn words they
delivered. They lived in a retired manner; and, when not sent on special
errands, they employed their vacant time in the instruction of youth; as
this is probably what we are to understand by the schools of the
prophets, such as those over which Elijah, Elisha, and Samuel presided;
though no doubt there were some of their disciples that were made
partakers of the prophetic gift.

The prophets do not appear to have been called to a life of celibacy.
Isaiah was a married man, [Isa 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#003);
and so was Hosea, [Isa 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002); unless we
are to understand the latter case enigmatically. And that the sons of
the prophets had wives, we learn from [Kg2
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#001), etc.; and from this, as well as
from the case of the apostles, we learn that the matrimonial state was
never considered, either by Moses or the prophets, Christ or his
apostles, as disqualifying men from officiating in the most holy
offices; as we find Moses, Aaron, Isaiah, Zechariah, and Peter, all
married men, and yet the most eminent of their order.

Of Isaiah, the writer of this book, very little is known. He is supposed
to have been of the tribe of Judah, and of the royal family of David.
Himself says that he was son of Amoz; and others tell us that this Amoz
was the son of Joash, and brother of Amaziah, king of Judah. "Of his
family and tribe we know nothing," says R. D. Kimchi, "only our rabbins,
of blessed memory, have received the tradition that Amoz and Amaziah
were brothers;" and it is on this ground that he has been called the
royal prophet. It has been also said that Isaiah gave his daughter in
marriage to Manasseh, son of Hezekiah, king of Judah; and that himself
was put to death by Manasseh, being sawn asunder with a wooden saw. But
all these traditions stand on very slender authority, and are worthy of
very little regard. Several commentators have thought that his
prophecies afford presumptive evidence of his high descent and elegant
education:

1\. Because his style is more correct and majestic than any of the other
prophets.

2\. That his frequent use of images taken from royalty is a proof that
this state was familiar to him, being much at court, as he must have
been, had he been the brother of the king.

These things are spoken by many with much confidence; for my own part, I
had rather look to his inspiration for the correctness of his language
and the dignity of his sentiments, than to those very inferior helps. On
the other hypothesis nothing is left to the Divine Spirit, except the
mere matter of his prophecies. Suppositions of this kind are not
creditable to Divine revelation.

Isaiah appears to have had two sons, who were typical in their names;
one, Shear-jashub, "a remnant shall return," [Isa
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#003); and the other
Maher-shalal-hash-baz, "haste to the spoil; quick to the prey;" [Isa
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#003); and it is remarkable, that his
wife is called a prophetess. Other matters relative to his character
will appear in the notes on his prophecies.

In the notes on this book I have consulted throughout the commentary of
Rabbi David Kimchi, and have made much use of Bishop Lowth, as the
reader will perceive. His various readings I have re-collated with Dr.
Kennicott, and B. De Rossi; in consequence of which I have been enabled
in many cases to add double weight to the authorities by which the
learned bishop was supported in the readings which he has either
mentioned, or received into the text. Bishop Lowth could avail himself
only of the collections of Dr. Kennicott - the sheets of Isaiah in the
doctor's edition of the Hebrew Bible, as they passed through the press,
were sent by him to the Bishop; but the Collections of De Rossi, more
numerous and more accurate than those of Dr. Kennicott, were not
published till six years after the doctor had published his Bible, and
about one year before this most learned and pious prelate went to his
reward. I have also consulted some excellent Hebrew MSS. in my own
library from six to eight hundred years old, which have afforded me
additional help in estimating the worth and importance of the various
readings in the above Collections of Kenicott and De Rossi, as far as
they are employed in the illustration of this prophet. From the ancient
English MS. Version of this prophet I have extracted several curious
translations of select parts, which I have no doubt will meet with every
reader's approbation. Though I have followed Bishop Lowth chiefly, yet I
have consulted the best commentators within my reach, in order to remove
doubts and clear up difficult passages, but have studied to be as brief
as possible, that the sacred text might not be encumbered either with
the multitude or length of the notes, nor the reader's time occupied
with any thing not essentially necessary; besides, I wish to bring my
work to as speedy a close as possible.

This book, according to Vitringa, is twofold in its matter: 1.
Prophetical; 2. Historical.

1\. The prophetical is divided into five parts:

Part 1: From Isaiah 1: to Isaiah 13: is directed to the Jews and
Ephraimites, and contains five prophetic discourses.

Part 2: From Isaiah 13: to Isaiah 24: declares the fate of the
Babylonians, Philistines, Moabites, Syrians, Egyptians, Tyrians, and
others; and contains eight prophetic discourses.

Part 3: From Isaiah 24: to Isaiah 36: denounces judgments on the
disobedient Jews, and consoles the true followers of God. This contains
three discourses.

Part 4: From Isaiah 40: to Isaiah 49: refers to the Messiah and the
deliverance of the Jews from the Babylonians; and contains four
discourses.

Part 5: From Isaiah 49: to the end, points out the passion, crucifixion,
and glory of the Messiah, and contains five discourses.

2\. The historical part begins with Isaiah 36, and ends with [Isa
39:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa039.htm#001), and relates some of the
transactions of the prophet's own times. On this analysis Vitringa
explains the whole prophecy. For my own part I have little or no
confidence in such technical arrangements.

Calmet takes a different view of it. He divides it into eight parts,
viz.:

Part 1: he supposes to relate to Jotham, son of Uzziah, king of Judah:
this is included in the first six chapters. The prophet inveighs against
the crimes of the Jews; declares the judgments of God against them;
predicts a more auspicious time, which took place under Hezekiah, who
was a type of Christ.

Part 2: concerns the reign of Ahaz, and comprehends the six following
chapters, in which he speaks of the siege of Jerusalem by Pekah and
Resin; of the birth of Immanuel, as a proof of the approaching
deliverance of Judah; predicts the calamities that were to fall on the
kingdoms of Syria and Israel, etc.

Part 3: contains many prophecies against Babylon, the Philistines,
Moabites, etc.

Part 4: contains prophecies against Egypt, Babylon, Kedar, Arabia, etc.

Part 5: concerns the reign of Hezekiah, and especially the war of
Sennacherib against the Jews, etc. The four historical chapters inserted
here contain the account of the fulfillment of the preceding prophecy.

Part 6, included in Isaiah 40 to Isaiah 45 inclusive, contains the
prophet's discourses on the existence of God, the truth and perfection
of the Jewish religion, the vanity of idolatry, the return of the people
from captivity, and the coming of Christ.

Part 7: from Isaiah 49: to Isaiah 51, the prophet, personifying the
Messiah, speaks of his sufferings, death, and burial; predicts the
return from the Babylonish captivity, and the glory of the latter days.

Part 8: speaks of the coming of the Messiah, and the vocation of the
Gentiles; the disgrace and confusion of all false prophets and teachers;
and the establishment of a pure and holy Church, etc.

I might give other analyses of this book, but it is needless; from what
is before the reader he will at once see how vain all attempts of this
kind are, and how foolish to make divisions and subdivisions, partitions
and classifications, where the Spirit of God has given no intimations of
the kind, and where even the most learned men differ in their
arrangement.

"God never left his work for man to mend." The prophecies were given as
they were necessary, and no classification was ever intended. We should
take them up as we find them; and humbly endeavor to find out their
objects and meaning, and how far ourselves are interested in these
denunciations of Divine wrath; and in those glorious promises of mercy
and salvation through Him who was once the hope of Israel, and now is
salvation to the ends of the earth.

Bishop Lowth's translation is by far the best that has ever been made of
this sublime prophet: as he thoroughly understood his language, so he
entered deeply into his spirit. Were it allowable, I should be glad to
supersede what is called the authorized version, and put that of the
learned bishop, with a few genuine alterations, in its place, as being
abundantly more correct and nervous, rendering the sacred text more
clearly, and consequently more intelligibly, so that the common reader
can understand this text better without a comment, than he can the
authorized version even with one. His notes, which are a treasure of
learning and sound criticism, I have almost universally preserved,
intermingling them with my own; but large quotations from his notes I
have distinguished by the letter L.; and I have often adopted his text,
as being vastly superior to that in common use; the catch words from
which follow those from the authorized version. Should a new translation
of the Bible be ever published by authority, I have no doubt but, with a
few alterations, that of Bishop Lowth would be adopted as the standard.

Adam Clarke

Millbrook, Sept. 24, 1823.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 1](isa001)

</div>
