<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa051)  [Next](isa053) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 52](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 52:0</span></span>

Jerusalem, in manifest allusion to the strong figure employed in the
close of the preceding chapter, is represented as fallen asleep in the
dust, and in that helpless state bound by her enemies. The prophet, with
all the ardor natural to one who had such joyful news to communicate,
bids her awake, arise, put on her best attire, (holiness to the Lord),
and ascend her lofty seat; and then he delivers the message he had in
charge, a very consolatory part of which was, that "no more should enter
into her the uncircumcised and the polluted," [Isa
52:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#001). Awaking from her stupefaction,
Jerusalem sees the messenger of such joyful tidings on the eminence from
which he spied the coming deliverance. She expresses, in beautiful
terms, her joy at the news, repeating with peculiar elegance the words
of the crier, [Isa 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007). The rapturous
intelligence, that Jehovah was returning to resume his residence on his
holy mountain, immediately spreads to others on the watch, who all join
in the glad acclamation, [Isa 52:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#008);
and, in the ardor of their joy, they call to the very ruins of Jerusalem
to sing along with them, because Jehovah maketh bare his holy arm in the
sight of all the nations, and all the ends of the earth are about to see
the salvation of Israel's God, [Isa
52:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#009), [Isa
52:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#010). To complete the deliverance,
they are commanded to march in triumph out of Babylon, earnestly
exhorted to have nothing to do with any of her abominations, and assured
that Jehovah will guide them in all their way, [Isa
52:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#011), [Isa
52:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#012). The prophet then passes to the
procuring cause of this great blessedness to the house of Israel in
particular, and to the world in general, viz., the humiliation,
sufferings, death, burial, resurrection, and ascension of Jesus Christ;
a very celebrated and clear prophet which takes up the remainder of this
and the whole of the following chapter.

[Isaiah 52:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 52:1</span></span>

There shall no more come into thee - For יבא yabo, "shall come," לבא
lebo, "to come," is the reading of five of Kennicott's and two of De
Rossi's MSS. This is the better reading, כי לא יוסיף לבא ki lo yosiph
lebo, "There shall not add to come."

The uncircumcised and the unclean - Christians have turned many passages
of the prophets against the Jews; and it is not to be wondered at, that
in support of their obstinate and hopeless cause, they should press a
prophecy into their service, and make it speak against the Christians.
This Kimchi does in this place; for he says, by the uncircumcised, the
Christians are meant; and by the unclean the Turks. The Christians are
uncircumcised and the Turks, though circumcised, and using many
ablutions, are unclean in their works.

[Isaiah 52:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 52:2</span></span>

Sit down, O Jerusalem "Ascend thy lofty seat, O Jerusalem" - The literal
rendering here is, according to our English translation, "arise, sit;"
on which a very learned person remarks: "So the old versions. But
sitting is an expression of mourning in Scripture and the ancients; and
doth not well agree with the rising just before." It does not indeed
agree, according to our ideas; but, considered in an oriental light, it
is perfectly consistent. The common manner of sitting in the eastern
countries is upon the ground or the floor with the legs crossed. The
people of better condition have the floors of their chambers or divans
covered with carpets for this purpose; and round the chamber broad
couches, raised a little above the floor, spread with mattresses
handsomely covered, which are called sofas. When sitting is spoken of as
a posture of more than ordinary state, it is quite of a different kind;
and means sitting on high, on a chair of state or throne called the
musnud; for which a footstool was necessary, both in order that the
person might raise himself up to it, and for supporting the legs when he
was placed in it. "Chairs," says Sir John Chardin, "are never used in
Persia, but at the coronation of their kings. The king is seated in a
chair of gold set with jewels, three feet high. The chairs which are
used by the people in the east are always so high as to make a footstool
necessary. And this proves the propriety of the style of Scripture,
which always joins the footstool to the throne." ([Isa
66:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001); [Psa
105:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#001).) Voyages, tom. 9 p. 85, 12mo.
Besides the six steps to Solomon's throne, there was a footstool of gold
fastened to the seat, [Ch2 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#018), which
would otherwise have been too high for the king to reach, or to sit on
conveniently.

When Thetis comes to wait on Vulcan to request armor for her son, she is
received with great respect, and seated on a silver-studded throne, a
chair of ceremony, with a footstool: -

Την μεν επειτα καθεισεν επι θρονου αργυροηλου,

Καλου, δαιδαλεου· ὑπο δε θρηνυς ποσιν ηεν.

Iliad 18:389.

"High on a throne, with stars of silver graced,

And various artifice, the queen she placed;

A footstool at her feet."

Pope.

Ὁ γαρ θρονος αυτος μονον ελευθεριος εστι καθεδρα συν ὑποποδιῳ.

Athenaeus, 5:4.

"A throne is n othing more than a handsome sort of chair with a
footstool." - L.

[Isaiah 52:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 52:4</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord God - אדני יהוה Adonai Jehovah; but Adonai is
wanting in twelve of Kennicott's, five of De Rossi's, and two of my own
MSS.; and by the Septuagint and Arabic. Some MSS. have יהוה צבאות
Jehovah tsebaoth, "Lord of hosts;" and others have יהוה אלהים Yehovah
Elohim, "Lord God."

[Isaiah 52:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 52:5</span></span>

They that rule over them "They that are lords over them" - For משלו
moshelo, singular, in the text, more than a hundred and twenty MSS. (De
Rossi says, codices innumeri, "numberless copies") have משליו moshelaiv
plural, according to the Masoretical correction in the margin; which
shows that the Masoretes often superstitiously retained apparent
mistakes in the text, even when they had sufficient evidence to
authorize the introduction of the true reading.

Make them to howl "Make their boast of it" - For יהילילו yeheililu,
"make them to howl," five MSS., (two ancient), have יהללו yehalelu,
"make their boast;" which is confirmed by the Chaldee paraphrast, who
renders it משתבחין mishtabbechin. Ulaloo is not only the cry itself, but
also the name of the funeral song of the Irish. The Arabs have a cry
very much resembling this.

[Isaiah 52:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 52:6</span></span>

Therefore my people shall know - The word לכן lachen, occurring the
second time in this verse, seems to be repeated by mistake. It has no
force nor emphasis as a repetition; it only embarrasses the construction
and the sense. It was not in the copies from which the Septuagint,
Syriac, and Vulgate were translated; it was not in the copy of the
Septuagint from which the Arabic was translated; but in the Aldine and
Complutensian editions δια τουτο is repeated; probably so corrected, in
order to make it conformable with the Hebrew text.

I am he that Moth speak "I am he, Jehovah, that promised" - For הוא hu,
the Bodleian MS. and another have יהוה, Jehovah; "For I am Jehovah that
promised;" and another ancient MS. adds יהוה Jehovah after הוא hu. The
addition of Jehovah seems to be right in consequence of what was said in
the preceding line, "My people shall know my name."

[Isaiah 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 52:7</span></span>

How beautiful - The watchmen discover afar off, on the mountains, the
messenger bringing the expected and much-wished-for news of the
deliverance from the Babylonish captivity. They immediately spread the
joyful tidings, [Isa 52:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#008), and with a
loud voice proclaim that Jehovah is returning to Zion, to resume his
residence on his holy mountain, which for some time he seemed to have
deserted. This is the literal sense of the place.

"How beautiful on the mountains are the feet of the joyful messenger,"
is an expression highly poetical: for, how welcome is his arrival! how
agreeable are the tidings which he brings!

Nahum, [Nah 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#015), who is generally
supposed to have lived after Isaiah, has manifestly taken from him this
very pleasing image; but the imitation does not equal the beauty of the
original: -

"Behold upon the mountain the feet of the joyful messenger,

Of him that announceth peace!

Celebrate, O Judah, thy festivals; perform thy vows:

For no more shall pass through thee the wicked one;

He is utterly cut off."

But it must at the same time be observed that Isaiah's subject is
infinitely more interesting and more sublime than that of Nahum; the
latter denounces the destruction of the capital of the Assyrian empire,
the most formidable enemy of Judah; the ideas of the former are in their
full extent evangelical; and accordingly St. Paul has, with the utmost
propriety, applied this passage to the preaching of the Gospel, [Rom
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#015). The joyful tidings here to be
proclaimed, "Thy God, O Zion, reigneth, "are the same that John the
Baptist, the messenger of Christ, and Christ himself, published: "The
kingdom of heaven is at hand."

From the use made of this by our Lord and the apostles, we may rest
assured that the preachers of the Gospel are particularly intended.
Mountains are put for the whole land of Judea, where the Gospel was
first preached. There seems to be an allusion to a battle fought, and
the messengers coming to announce the victory, which was so decisive
that a peace was the consequence, and the king's throne established in
the land.

There appear to have been two sorts of messengers among the Jews: one
sort always employed to bring evil tidings; the other to bring good. The
names also and persons of these different messengers appear to have been
well known; so that at a distance they could tell, from seeing the
messenger, what sort of tidings he was bringing. See a case in point,
[Sa2 18:19-27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#019) (note). Ahimaaz and
Cushi running to bring tidings of the defeat of Absalom and his rebel
army. Ahimaaz is a Good man and bringeth Good tidings.

[Isaiah 52:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 52:8</span></span>

Thy watchmen lift up the voice "All thy watchmen lift up their voice" -
There is a difficulty in the construction of this place which, I think,
none of the ancient versions or modern interpreters have cleared up
satisfactorily. Rendered word for word it stands thus: "The voice of thy
watchmen: they lift up their voice." The sense of the first member,
considered as elliptical, is variously supplied by various expositors;
by none, as it seems to me, in any way that is easy and natural. I am
persuaded there is a mistake in the present text, and that the true
reading is כל צפיך col tsophayich, all thy watchmen, instead of קול צפיך
kol tsophayich, the voice of thy watchmen. The mistake was easy from the
similitude in sound of the two letters כ caph and ק koph. And in one MS.
the ק koph is upon a rasure. This correction perfectly rectifies the
sense and the construction. - L.

They shall see eye to eye - May not this be applied to the prophets and
apostles; the one predicting, and the other discovering in the
prediction the truth of the prophecy. The meaning of both Testaments is
best understood by bringing them face to face.

When the Lord shall bring again Zion "When Jehovah returneth to Zion" -
So the Chaldee: כד יתיב שכנתיה לציון cad yethib shechinteih letsiyon,
"when he shall place the shechinah in Zion." God is considered as having
deserted his people during the captivity; and at the restoration, as
returning himself with them to Zion, his former habitation. See [Psa
60:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001); [Isa
40:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#009), and note.

[Isaiah 52:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 52:9</span></span>

He hath redeemed Jerusalem "He hath redeemed Israel" - For the word
ירושלם yerushalaim, which occurs the second time in this verse, MS.
Bodleian and another read ישראל yisrael. It is upon a rasure in a third;
and left unpointed at first, as suspected, in a fourth. It was an easy
mistake, by the transcriber casting his eye on the line above: and the
propriety of the correction, both in regard to sense and elegance, is
evident.

[Isaiah 52:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 52:11</span></span>

Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence - The Prophet Jeremiah seems
to have had his eye on this passage of Isaiah, and to have applied it to
a subject directly opposite. It is here addressed by the prophet in a
way of encouragement and exhortation to the Jews coming out of Babylon.
Jeremiah has given it a different turn, and has thrown it out, as a
reproach of the heathen upon the Jews when they were driven from
Jerusalem into captivity: -

"Depart; ye are polluted, depart; depart ye, forbear to touch.

Yea, they are fled, they are removed: they shall dwell here no more."

[Lam 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#015).

Of the metrical distribution of these lines, see the Prelim. Dissert.,
p. 58 note.

[Isaiah 52:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 52:13</span></span>

My servant shall deal prudently - ישכיל yaskil, shall prosper, or act
prosperously. The subject of Isaiah's prophecy, from the fortieth
chapter inclusive, has hitherto been, in general, the deliverance of the
people of God. This includes in it three distinct parts; which, however,
have a close connection with one another; that is,

1\. The deliverance of the Jews from the captivity of Babylon;

2\. The deliverance of the Gentiles from their miserable state of
ignorance and idolatry; and,

3\. The deliverance of mankind from the captivity of sin and death.

These three subjects are subordinate to one another; and the two latter
are shadowed out under the image of the former. They are covered by it
as by a veil; which however is transparent, and suffers them to appear
through it.

Cyrus is expressly named as the immediate agent of God in effecting the
first deliverance. A greater person is spoken of as the Agent who is to
effect the two latter deliverances, called the servant, the elect, of
God, in whom his soul delighteth; Israel, in whom God will be glorified.
Now these three subjects have a very near relation to one another; for
as the Agent who was to effect the two latter deliverances, - that is,
the Messiah, - was to be born a Jew, with particular limitations of
time, family, and other circumstances; the first deliverance was
necessary in the order of providence, and according to the determinate
counsel of God, to the accomplishment of the two latter deliverances;
and the second deliverance was necessary to the third, or rather was
involved in it, and made an essential part of it. This being the case,
Isaiah has not treated the three subjects as quite distinct and separate
in a methodical and orderly manner, like a philosopher or a logician,
but has taken them in their connective veiw. He has handled them as a
prophet and a poet; he has allegorized the former, and under the image
of it has shadowed out the two latter: he has thrown them all together,
has mixed one with another, has passed from this to that with rapid
transitions, and has painted the whole with the strongest and boldest
imagery. The restoration of the Jews from captivity, the call of the
Gentiles, the redemption by Messiah, have hitherto been handled
interchangeably and alternately. Babylon has hitherto been kept pretty
much in sight; at the same time, that strong intimations of something
much greater have frequently been thrown in. But here Babylon is at once
dropped, and I think hardly ever comes in sight again; unless perhaps in
[Isa 55:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#012), and [Isa
57:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#014). The prophet's views are almost
wholly engrossed by the superior part of his subject. He introduces the
Messiah as appearing at first in the lowest state of humiliation, which
he had just touched upon before, ([Isa
50:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#005), [Isa
50:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#006)), and obviates the offense which
would be occasioned by it, by declaring the important and necessary
cause of it, and foreshowing the glory which should follow it.

This seems to me to be the nature and the true design of this part of
Isaiah's prophecies; and this view of them seems to afford the best
method of resolving difficulties, in which expositors are frequently
engaged, being much divided between what is called the literal and the
mystical sense, not very properly; for the mystical or spiritual sense
is very often the most literal sense of all.

Abarbanel seems to have had an idea of this kind, as he is quoted by
Vitringa on [Isa 49:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#001), who thus
represents his sentiments: Censet Abarbanel prophetam hic transitum
facere a liberatione ex exilio Babylonico ad liberationem ex exilio
Romano; et, quod hic animadversu dignum est, observat liberationem ex
exilio Babylonico esse אות וראיה oth veraayah, signum et argumentum
liberationis futurae; atque adeo orationem prophetae de duabus hisce
liberationibus in superioribus concionibus saepe inter se permisceri.
Verba ejus: "Et propterea verba, sive res, in prophetic superiore inter
se permixtae occurrunt; modo de liberatione Babylonica, modo de
liberatione extrema accipiendae, ut orationis necessitas exigit." Nullum
hic vitium, nisi quod redemptionem veram et spiritualem a Messia vero
Jesu adductam, non agnoscat. "Abarbanel supposes that the prophet here
makes a transition from the deliverance from the Babylonish captivity to
the deliverance from the Roman captivity; and (which is worthy of
particular note) he observes that the deliverance from the Babylonish
captivity is a sign and pledge of the future redemption; and that on
this account it is we find in the preceding prophecies the circumstances
of the two captivities intimately blended together. His words are the
following: 'And, therefore, the words or subjects in the foregoing
prophecy are very much intermixed; in one passage the redemption from
the Babylonish captivity being treated of, in another the redemption
from the general dispersion, as may be collected from the obvious import
of the words.' No fault can be found with the above remark, except that
the true and spiritual redemption procured by Jesus the Messiah is not
acknowledged." - L.

[Isaiah 52:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 52:14</span></span>

As many were astonished at thee "As many were astonished at him" - For
עליך aleicha read עליו alaiv. So the Syriac, Chaldee, and Vulgate in a
MS.; and so likewise two ancient MSS.

His visage was so marred more than any man - Most interpreters
understand this of the indignities offered to our blessed Lord: but
Kimchi gives it another turn, and says, "It means the Jewish people,
whom are considered by most nations as having an appearance different
from all the people of the earth. "Poor Jews! they have in general a
very disagreeable look, partly affected, and partly through neglect of
neatness and cleanliness. Most Christians think they carry the impress
of their reprobation on every feature of their face. However this may
be, it should never be forgotten that the greatest men that ever
flourished as kings, judges, magistrates, lawgivers, heroes, and poets,
were of Jewish extraction. Isaiah was a Jew; so was Paul, and so was
Jesus of Nazareth.

[Isaiah 52:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 52:15</span></span>

So shall he sprinkle many nations - I retain the common rendering,
though I am by no means satisfied with it. "יזה yazzeh, frequent in the
law, means only to sprinkle: but the water sprinkled is the accusative
case; the thing on which has על al or אל el. Θαυμασονται, ό, makes the
best apodosis. ינהג yenahag would do. ינהרו yinharu is used [Isa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002); [Jer
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#012); [Jer
51:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#014), but is unlike. 'Kings shall
shut,' etc., is good, but seems to want a first part." - Secker. Munster
translates it, faciet loqui, (de se); and in his note thus explains it:
יזה yazzeh proprie significat spargere et stillas disseminare; hic hero
capitur pro loqui, et verbum disseminare. "יזה yazzeh properly signifies
to sprinkle, and to scatter about drops; but it here means to speak, and
to disseminate the word." This is pretty much as the Rabbins Kimchi and
Sal. ben Belec explain it, referring to the expression of "dropping the
word." But the same objection lies to this as to the common rendering;
it ought to be על גוים(דבר)יזה yazzeh (debar) al goyim. Bishop Chandler,
Defence, p. 148, says, "that to sprinkle is used for to surprise and
astonish, as people are that have much water thrown upon them. And this
sense is followed by the Septuagint." This is ingenious, but rather too
refined. Dr. Duress conjectures that the true reading may be יהזו
yechezu, they shall regard, which comes near to the θαυμασονται of the
Septuagint, who seem to give the best sense of any to this place.

"I find in my papers the same conjecture which Dr. Durell made from
θαυμασονται in the Septuagint. And it may be added that חזה chazah is
used to express 'looking on any thing with admiration,' [Psa
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#007); [Psa
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#015); [Psa
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#004); [Psa
63:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#002); [Sol
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#013). It is particularly applied to
'looking on God,' [Exo 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#011), and [Job
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#026). Gisbert Cuper, in Observ. lib.
[Job 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#001), though treating on another
subject, has some observations which show how nearly ὁραω and θαυμαζω
are allied, which, with the peculiar sense of the verb חזה chazah above
noted, add to the probability of θαυμασονται being the version of יחזו
yechezu in the text: οἱ δε νυ λαοι Παντες ες αυτον ὁρωσι. Hesiod., id
est. cum veneratione quadam adminantur. Hinc ὁραω et θαυμαζω junxit
Themistius Or. 1: Ειτα παυσονται οἱ ανθρωποι προς σε μονον ὁρωνες, και
σε μονον θαυμαζοντες. Theophrastus in Charact. c. 3. Ενθυμη ὡς
αποβλεπουσιν εις σε οἱ ανθρωποι. Hence the rendering of this verse seems
to be -

"So many nations shall look on him with admiration

Kings shall stop their mouths."

Dr. Jubb.

Does not sprinkling the nations refer to the conversion and baptism of
the Gentiles? Many nations shall become proselytes to his religion.

Kings shall shut their mouths at him - His Gospel shall so prevail that
all opposition shall be finally overcome; and kings and potentates shall
be overwhelmed with confusion, and become speechless before the
doctrines of his truth. When they hear these declared they shall
attentively consider them, and their conviction of their truth shall be
the consequence.

For that which had not been told them - The mystery of the Gospel so
long concealed. See [Rom 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#021); [Rom
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#025).

Shall they see - With the eyes of their faith; God enlightening both
organ and object.

And that which they had not heard - The redemption of the world by Jesus
Christ; the conversion of the Gentiles, and making them one flock with
the converted Jews. - Trapp

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 53](isa053)

</div>
