<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa049)  [Next](isa051) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 50](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 50:0</span></span>

In this chapter God vindicates his dealings unth his people, whose
alienation is owing to themselves, [Isa
50:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#001). And, by allusion to the temporal
deliverances connected with the drying up of the Red Sea and the
Euphrates, asserts his power to save, [Isa
50:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#002), [Isa
50:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#003); namely, by the obedience and
sufferings of the Messiah, [Isa
50:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#004); who was at length to prove
victorious over all his enemies, [Isa
50:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#007). The two last verses exhort to
faith and trust in God in the most disconsolate circumstances; with a
denunciation of vengeance on those who should trust to their own
devices, [Isa 50:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#010), [Isa
50:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#011).

[Isaiah 50:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 50:1</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord - This chapter has been understood of the prophet
himself; but it certainly speaks more clearly about Jesus of Nazareth
than of Isaiah, the son of Amos.

Where is the bill "Where is this bill" - Husbands, through moroseness or
levity of temper, often sent bills of divorcement to their wives on
slight occasions, as they were permitted to do by the law of Moses, [Deu
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#001). And fathers, being oppressed
with debt, often sold their children, which they might do for a time,
till the year of release, [Exo 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#007).
That this was frequently practiced, appears from many passages of
Scripture, and that the persons and the liberty of the children were
answerable for the debts of the father. The widow, [Kg2
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#001), complains "that the creditor is
come to take unto him her two sons to be bondmen." And in the parable,
[Mat 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#025) : "The lord, forasmuch as
his servant had not to pay, commands him to be sold, and his wife and
children, and all that he had, and payment to be made." Sir John
Chardin's MS. note on this place of Isaiah is as follows: En Orient on
paye ses dettes avec ses esclaves, car ils sont des principaux meubles;
et en plusieurs lieux on les paye aussi de ses enfans. "In the east they
pay their debts by giving up their slaves, for these are their chief
property of a disposable kind; and in many places they give their
children to their creditors." But this, saith God, cannot be my case, I
am not governed by any such motives, neither am I urged by any such
necessity. Your captivity therefore and your afflictions are to be
imputed to yourselves, and to your own folly and wickedness.

[Isaiah 50:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 50:2</span></span>

Their fish stinketh "Their fish is dried up" - For תבאש tibaosh,
stinketh, read תיבש tibash, is dried up; so it stands in the Bodl. MS.,
and it is confirmed by the Septuagint, ξηρανθησονται, they shall be
dried up.

[Isaiah 50:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 50:5</span></span>

Neither turned away back "Neither did I withdraw myself backward" -
Eleven MSS. and the oldest edition prefix the conjunction ו vau; and so
also the Septuagint and Syriac.

[Isaiah 50:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 50:6</span></span>

And my cheeks to them that plunked off the hair - The greatest indignity
that could possibly be offered. See the note on [Isa
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#020) (note).

I hid not my face from shame and spitting - Another instance of the
utmost contempt and detestation. It was ordered by the law of Moses as a
severe punishment, carrying with it a lasting disgrace; [Deu
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#009). Among the Medes it was highly
offensive to spit in any one's presence, Herod. 1:99; and so likewise
among the Persians, Xenophon, Cyrop. Lib. i., p. 18.

"They abhor me; they flee far from me;

They forbear not to spit in my face."

[Job 30:10](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#010).

"And Jehovah said unto Moses, If her father had but spit in her face,
should she not be ashamed seven days?" [Num
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#014). On which place Sir John Chardin
remarks, that "spitting before any one, or spitting upon the ground in
speaking of any one's actions, is through the east an expression of
extreme detestation." - Harmer's Observ. 2:509. See also, of the same
notions of the Arabs in this respect, Niebuhr, Description de l'Arabie,
p. 26. It so evidently appears that in those countries spitting has ever
been an expression of the utmost detestation, that the learned doubt
whether in the passages of Scripture above quoted any thing more is
meant than spitting, - not in the face, which perhaps the words do not
necessarily imply, - but only in the presence of the person affronted.
But in this place it certainly means spitting in the face; so it is
understood in St. Luke, where our Lord plainly refers to this prophecy:
"All things that are written by the prophets concerning the Son of man
shall be accomplished; for he shall be delivered to the Gentiles, and
shall be mocked and spitefully entreated, and spitted on, εμπτυσθησεται,
"[Luk 18:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#031), [Luk
18:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#032), which was in fact fulfilled;
και ηρξεαντο τινες εμπτυειν αυτῳ, "and some began to spit on him," [Mar
14:65](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#065), [Mar
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#019). If spitting in a person's
presence was such an indignity, how much more spitting in his face?

[Isaiah 50:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 50:7</span></span>

Therefore have I set my face like a flint - The Prophet Ezekiel, [Eze
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#008), [Eze
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#009), has expressed this with great
force in his bold and vehement manner:

"Behold, I have made thy face strong against their faces,

And thy forehead strong against their foreheads:

As an adamant, harder than a rock, have I made thy forehead;

Fear them not, neither be dismayed at their looks,

Though they be a rebellious house."

[Isaiah 50:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 50:8</span></span>

Who will contend with me - The Bodleian MS. and another add the word הוא
hu; מי הוא יריב mi hu yarib, as in the like phrase in the next verse;
and in the very same phrase [Job
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#019), and so likewise in many other
places, [Job 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#003); [Job
41:1](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#001). Sometimes on the like occasions
it is מי זה mi zeh, and מי הוא זה mi hu zeh, "Who is this one?" The word
has probably been lost out of the present text; and the reading of the
MSS. above mentioned seems to be genuine.

[Isaiah 50:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 50:10</span></span>

Who is among you that feareth the Lord - I believe this passage has been
generally, if not dangerously, misunderstood. It has been quoted, and
preached upon, to prove that "a man might conscientiously fear God, and
be obedient to the words of the law and the prophets; obey the voice of
his servant-of Jesus Christ himself, that is, be sincerely and regularly
obedient to the moral law and the commands of our blessed Lord, and yet
walk in darkness and have no light, no sense of God's approbation, and
no evidence of the safety of his state. "This is utterly impossible; for
Jesus hath said, "He that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but
shall have the light of life." If there be some religious persons who,
under the influence of morbid melancholy, are continually writing bitter
things against themselves, the word of God should not be bent down to
their state. There are other modes of spiritual and Scriptural comfort.
But does not the text speak of such a case? And are not the words
precise in reference to it? I think not: and Bishop Lowth's translation
has set the whole in the clearest light, though he does not appear to
have been apprehensive that the bad use I mention had been made of the
text as it stands in our common Version. The text contains two
questions, to each of which a particular answer is given: -

Q. 1. "Who is there among you that feareth Jehovah?

Ans. Let him hearken unto the voice of his servant.

Q. 2. Who that walketh in darkness and hath no light?

Ans. Let him trust in the name of Jehovah;

And lean himself (prop himself) upon his God."

Now, a man awakened to a sense of his sin and misery, may have a dread
of Jehovah, and tremble at his word, and what should such a person do?
Why he should hear what God's servant saith: "Come unto me, all ye who
labor and are heavy laden; and I will give you rest." There may be a
sincere penitent, walking in darkness, having no light of salvation; for
this is the case of all when they first begin to turn to God. What
should such do? They should trust, believe on, the Lord Jesus, who died
for them, and lean upon his all-sufficient merits for the light of
salvation which God has promised. Thus acting, they will soon have a
sure trust and confidence that God for Christ's sake has forgiven them
their sin, and thus they shall have the light of life.

That obeyeth the voice of his servant "Let him hearken unto the voice of
his servant" - For שמע shomea, pointed as the participle, the Septuagint
and Syriac read ישמע yishma, future or imperative. This gives a much
more elegant turn and distribution to the sentence.

[Isaiah 50:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 50:11</span></span>

Ye that kindle a fire - The fire of their own kindling, by the light of
which they walk with security and satisfaction, is an image designed to
express, in general, human devices and mere worldly policy, exclusive of
faith, and trust in God; which, though they flatter themselves for a
while with pleasing expectations and some appearance of success, shall
in the end turn to the confusion of the authors. Or more particularly,
as Vitringa explains it, it may mean the designs of the turbulent and
factious Jews in the times succeeding those of Christ, who, in pursuit
of their own desperate schemes, stirred up the war against the Romans,
and kindled a fire which consumed their city and nation.

That compass yourselves about with sparks "Who heap the fuel round
about" - "מגוזלי megozeley, accendentes, Syr.; forte leperunt pro מאזרי
meazzerey מאירי meirey; nam sequitur אור ur." - Secker. Lud. Capellus,
in his criticism on this place, thinks it should be מאזרי meazzerey,
from the Septuagint, κατισχυοντες.

There are others who are widely different from those already described.
Without faith, repentance, or a holy life, they are bold in their
professed confidence in God - presumptuous in their trust in the mercy
of God; and, while destitute of all preparation for and right to the
kingdom of heaven, would think it criminal to doubt their final
salvation! Living in this way, what can they have at the hand of God but
an endless bed of sorrow! Ye shall lie down in sorrow.

But there is a general sense, and accordant to the design of the
prophecy, in which these words may be understood and paraphrased:
Behold, all ye that kindle a fire - provoke war and contention; compass
yourselves about with sparks - stirring up seditions and rebellions:
walk in the light of your fire - go on in your lust of power and
restless ambition. Ye shall lie down in sorrow - it will turn to your
own perdition. See the Targum. This seems to refer to the restless
spirit of the Jews, always stirring up confusion and strife; rebelling
against and provoking the Romans, till at last their city was taken,
their temple burnt to the ground, and upwards of a million of themselves
destroyed, and the rest led into captivity!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 51](isa051)

</div>
