<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa001)  [Next](isa003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 2:0</span></span>

Prophecy concerning the kingdom of the Messiah, and the conversion of
the Gentile world, [Isa 2:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#001). Great
wickedness and idolatry of the unbelieving Jews, [Isa
2:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#006). Terrible consternation that
will seize the wicked, who shall in vain seek for rocks and mountains to
hide them from the face of God in the day of his judgments, [Isa
2:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#010). Total destruction of idolatry
in consequence of the establishment of Messiah's kingdom, [Isa
2:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#018). An exhortation to put no
confidence in man, [Isa 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#022).

The prophecy contained in the second, third, and fourth chapters, makes
one continued discourse. The first five verses of chap. 2 foretell the
kingdom of Messiah, the conversion of the Gentiles, and their admission
into it. From the sixth verse to the end of the second chapter is
foretold the punishment of the unbelieving Jews for their idolatrous
practices, their confidence in their own strength, and distrust of God's
protection; and moreover the destruction of idolatry, in consequence of
the establishment of Messiah's kingdom. The whole of the third chapter,
with the first verse of the fourth, is a prophecy of the calamities of
the Babylonian invasion and captivity; with a particular amplification
of the distress of the proud and luxurious daughters of Sion; [Isa
4:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#002) promises to the remnant, which
shall have escaped this severe purgation, a future restoration to the
favor and protection of God.

This prophecy was probably delivered in the time of Jotham, or perhaps
in that of Uzziah, as Isaiah is said to have prophesied in his reign; to
which time not any of his prophecies is so applicable as that of these
chapters. The seventh verse of the second, and the latter part of the
third chapter, plainly point out times in which riches abounded, and
luxury and delicacy prevailed. Plenty of silver and gold could only
arise from their commerce; particularly from that part of it which was
carried on by the Red Sea. This circumstance seems to confine the
prophecy within the limits above mentioned, while the port of Elath was
in their hands; it was lost under Ahaz, and never recovered.

[Isaiah 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 2:2</span></span>

In the last days "In the latter days" - "Wherever the latter times are
mentioned in Scripture, the days of the Messiah are always meant," says
Kimchi on this place: and, in regard to this place, nothing can be more
clear and certain. And the mountain of the Lord's house, says the same
author, is Mount Moriah, on which the temple was built. The prophet
Micah, [Mic 4:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001), has repeated this
prophecy of the establishment of the kingdom of Christ, and of its
progress to universality and perfection, in the same words, with little
and hardly any material variation: for as he did not begin to prophesy
till Jotham's time, and this seems to be one of the first of Isaiah's
prophecies, I suppose Micah to have taken it from hence. The variations,
as I said, are of no great importance.

[Isa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002). הוא hu, after ונשא venissa,
a word of some emphasis, may be supplied from Micah, if dropped in
Isaiah. An ancient MS. has it here in the margin. It has in like manner
been lost in [Isa 53:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004) (note), and in
[Psa 22:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#029), where it is supplied by
the Syriac, and Septuagint. Instead of כל הגוים col haggoyim, all the
nations, Micah has only עמים ammim, peoples; where the Syriac has כל
עמים col ammim, all peoples, as probably it ought to be.

[Isa 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003). For the second אל el, read
ואל veel, seventeen MSS., one of my own, ancient, two editions, the
Septuagint, Vulgate, Syriac, Chaldee, and so Micah, [Mic
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#002).

[Isa 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#004). Micah adds עד רחק ad rachok,
afar off, which the Syriac also reads in this parallel place of Isaiah.
It is also to be observed that Micah has improved the passage by adding
a verse, or sentence, ([Mic 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#004)) for
imagery and expression worthy even of the elegance of Isaiah: -

"And they shall sit every man under his vine,

And under his fig tree, and none shall affright them:

For the mouth of Jehovah, God of hosts, hath spoken it."

The description of well established peace, by the image of "beating
their swords into ploughshares, and their spears into pruning-hooks," is
very poetical. The Roman poets have employed the same image, Martial,
14:34. "Falx ex ense."

"Pax me certa ducis placidos curvavit in usus:

Agricolae nunc sum; militis ante fui."

"Sweet peace has transformed me. I was once the property of the soldier,
and am now the property of the husbandman."

The prophet Joel, [Joe 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#010), hath
reversed it, and applied it to war prevailing over peace: -

"Beat your ploughshares into swords,

And your pruning-hooks into spears."

And so likewise the Roman poets: -

\- Non ullus aratro

Dignus honos: squalent abductis arva colonis,

Et curvae rigidum falces conflantur in ensem.

Virg., Georg. 1:506.

"Agriculture has now no honor: the husbandmen being taken away to the
wars, the fields are overgrown with weeds, and the crooked sickles are
straightened into swords."

Bella diu tenuere viros: erat aptior ensis

Vomere: cedebat taurus arator equo

Sarcula cessabant; versique in pila ligones;

Factaque de rastri pondere cassis erat.

Ovid, Fast. 1:697.

"War has lasted long, and the sword is preferred to the plough. The bull
has given place to the war-horse; the weeding-hooks to pikes; and the
harrow-pins have been manufactured into helmets."

The prophet Ezekiel, [Eze 17:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#022),
has presignified the same great event with equal clearness, though in a
more abstruse form, in an allegory; from an image, suggested by the
former part of the prophecy, happily introduced, and well pursued: -

"Thus saith the Lord Jehovah:

I myself will take from the shoot of the lofty cedar,

Even a tender scion from the top of his scions will I pluck off:

And I myself will plant it on a mountain high and eminent.

On the lofty mountain of Israel will I plant it;

And it shall exalt its branch, and bring forth fruit,

And it shall become a majestic cedar:

And under it shall dwell all fowl of every wing;

In the shadow of its branches shall they dwell:

And all the trees of the field shall know,

That I Jehovah have brought low the high tree;

Have exalted the low tree;

Have dried up the green tree;

And have made the dry tree to flourish:

I Jehovah have spoken it, and will do it."

The word ונתתי venathatti, in this passage, [Eze
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#022), as the sentence now stands,
appears incapable of being reduced to any proper construction or sense.
None of the ancient versions acknowledge it, except Theodotion, and the
Vulgate; and all but the latter vary very much from the present reading
of this clause. Houbigant's correction of the passage, by reading
instead of ונתתי venathatti, ויונקת veyoneketh, and a tender scion which
is not very unlike it, perhaps better ויונק veyonek, with which the
adjective רך rach will agree without alteration - is ingenious and
probable; and I have adopted it in the above translation. - L.

[Isaiah 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 2:3</span></span>

To the house - The conjunction ו vau is added by nineteen of
Kennicott's, thirteen of De Rossi's MSS., one of my own, and two
editions, the Septuagint, Syriac, Vulgate, Arabic, and some copies of
the Targum; And to the house. It makes the sentence more emphatic.

He will teach us of his ways - Unless God grant a revelation of his
will, what can we know?

We will walk in his paths - Unless we purpose to walk in the light, of
what use can that light be to us?

For out of Zion shall go forth the law - In the house of God, and in his
ordinances only can we expect to hear the pure doctrines of revelation
preached.

1\. God alone can give a revelation of his own will.

2\. We must use the proper means in order to know this will.

3\. We should know it in order to do it.

4\. We should do it in order to profit by it.

5\. He who will not walk in the light when God vouchsafes it, shall be
shut up in everlasting darkness.

6\. Every man should help his neighbor to attain that light, life, and
felicity: "Come ye, and let us walk in the light of the Lord."

[Isaiah 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 2:4</span></span>

Neither shall they learn war any more - If wars are necessary, how deep
must that fall be that renders them so! But what a reproach to humanity
is the trade of war! Men are regularly instructed in it, as in any of
the necessary arts.

"How to dislodge most souls from their frail shrines

By bomb, sword, ball, and bayonet, is the art

Which some call great and glorious!"

And is this a necessary part of a finished education in civilized
society? O Earth! Earth! Earth!

[Isaiah 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 2:6</span></span>

They be replenished "And they multiply" - Seven MSS. and one edition,
for ישפיקו yaspiku, read ישפיחו yaspichu, "and have joined themselves to
the children of strangers;" that is, in marriage or worship. - Dr. Jubb.
So Vulg., adhaeserunt. Compare [Isa
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#001). But the very learned professor
Chevalier Michaelis has explained the word יספחו yesupachu, [Job
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#007), (German translation, note on the
place), in another manner; which perfectly well agrees with that place,
and perhaps will be found to give as good a sense here. ספיח saphiach,
the noun, means corn springing up, not from the seed regularly sown on
cultivated land, but in the untilled field, from the scattered grains of
the former harvest. This, by an easy metaphor, is applied to a spurious
brood of children irregularly and casually begotten. The Septuagint seem
to have understood the verb here in this sense, reading it as the
Vulgate seems to have done. This justifies their version, which it is
hard to account for in any other manner: και τεκνα πολλα αλλοφυλα
εγενηθῃ αυτοις. Compare [Hos 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#007), and
the Septuagint there. But instead of ובילדי ubeyaldey, "and in the
children," two of Kennicott's and eight of De Rossi's MSS. have וכילדי
ucheyaldey, "and as the children." And they sin impudently as the
children of strangers. See De Rossi.

And are soothsayers "They are filled with diviners" - Hebrews "They are
filled from the east;" or "more than the east." The sentence is
manifestly imperfect. The Septuagint, Vulgate, and Chaldee, seem to have
read כמקדם kemikkedem; and the latter, with another word before it,
signifying idols; "they are filled with idols as from of old."
Houbigant, for מקדם mikkedem, reads מקסם mikkesem, as Brentius had
proposed long ago. I rather think that both words together give us the
true reading: מקדם mikkedem, מקסם mikkesem, "with divination from the
east;" and that the first word has been by mistake omitted, from its
similitude to the second.

[Isaiah 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 2:7</span></span>

Their land is also full of horses "And his land is filled with horses" -
This was in direct contradiction to God's command in the law: "But he
(the king) shall not multiply horses to himself; nor cause the people to
return to Egypt, to the end that he should multiply horses; neither
shall he greatly multiply to himself silver and gold," [Deu
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#016), [Deu
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#017). Uzziah seems to have followed
the example of Solomon, see [Kg1
10:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#026), who first transgressed in
these particulars; he recovered the port of Elath on the Red Sea, and
with it that commerce which in Solomon's days had "made silver and gold
as plenteous at Jerusalem as stones," [Ch2
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#015). He had an army of 307,500 men,
in which, as we may infer from the testimony of Isaiah, the chariots and
horse made a considerable part. "The law above mentioned was to be a
standing trial of prince and people, whether they had trust and
confidence in God their deliverer." See Bp. Sherlock's Discourses on
Prophecy. Dissert. iv., where he has excellently explained the reason
and effect of the law, and the influence which the observance or neglect
of it had on the affairs of the Israelites.

[Isaiah 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 2:8</span></span>

Their land also is full of idols "And his land is filled with idols" -
Uzziah and Fotham are both said, [Kg2
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#003), [Kg2
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#004), [Kg2
15:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#034), [Kg2
15:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#035), "to have done that which was
right in the sight of the Lord;" that is, to have adhered to and
maintained the legal worship of God, in opposition to idolatry and all
irregular worship; for to this sense the meaning of that phrase is
commonly to be restrained; "save that the high places were not removed
where the people still sacrificed and burned incense." There was hardly
any time when they were quite free from this irregular and unlawful
practice, which they seem to have looked upon as very consistent with
the true worship of God; and which seems in some measure to have been
tolerated, while the tabernacle was removed from place to place, and
before the temple was built. Even after the conversion of Manasseh, when
he had removed the strange gods, commanded Judah to serve Jehovah the
God of Israel, it is added, "Nevertheless the people did sacrifice still
on the high places, yet unto Jehovah their God only," [Ch2
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#017). The worshipping on the high
places therefore does not necessarily imply idolatry; and from what is
said of these two kings, Uzziah and Jotham, we may presume that the
public exercise of idolatrous worship was not permitted in their time.
The idols therefore here spoken of must have been such as were designed
for a private and secret use. Such probably were the teraphim so often
mentioned in Scripture; a kind of household gods, of human form, as it
should seem, (see [Sa1 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#013) (note),
and compare [Gen 31:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#034) (note)), of
different magnitude, used for idolatrous and superstitious purposes,
particularly for divination, and as oracles, which they consulted for
direction in their affairs.

[Isaiah 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 2:9</span></span>

Boweth down "Shall be bowed down" - This has reference to the preceding
verse. They bowed themselves down to their idols, therefore shall they
be bowed down and brought low under the avenging hand of God.

Therefore forgive them not - "And thou wilt not forgive them." - L.

[Isaiah 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 2:10</span></span>

"When he ariseth to strike the earth with terror" - On the authority of
the Septuagint, confirmed by the Arabic and an ancient MS., I have added
here to the text a line, which in the 19th and 21st verses ([Isa
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#019), [Isa
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#021)) is repeated together with the
preceding line, and has, I think, evidently been omitted by mistake in
this place. The MS. here varies only in one letter from the reading of
the other two verses; it has בארץ baarets, instead of הארץ haarets. None
of De Rossi's MSS. confirm this addition. The line added is, When he
ariseth to strike the earth with terror.

[Isaiah 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 2:11</span></span>

Be humbled - "שפל ושח shaphel veshach, read שפלו שח shaphelu shach." -
Dr. Durell. Which rectifies the grammatical construction. No MS. or
version confirms this reading.

[Isaiah 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 2:13</span></span>

And upon all the cedars "Even against all the cedars" - Princes,
potentates, rulers, captains, rich men, etc. - So Kimchi. These verses
afford us a striking example of that peculiar way of writing, which
makes a principal characteristic of the parabolical or poetical style of
the Hebrews, and in which the prophets deal so largely, namely, their
manner of exhibiting things Divine, spiritual, moral, and political, by
a set of images taken from things natural, artificial, religious,
historical, in the way of metaphor or allegory. Of these nature
furnishes much the largest and the most pleasing share; and all poetry
has chiefly recourse to natural images, as the richest and most powerful
source of illustration. But it may be observed of the Hebrew poetry in
particular, that in the use of such images, and in the application of
them in the way of illustration and ornament, it is more regular and
constant than any other poetry whatever; that it has for the most part a
set of images appropriated in a manner to the explication of certain
subjects. Thus you will find, in many other places besides this before
us, that cedars of Lebanon and oaks of Bashan, are used in the way of
metaphor and allegory for kings, princes, potentates of the highest
rank; high mountains and lofty hills, for kingdoms, republics, states,
cities; towers and fortresses, for defenders and protectors, whether by
counsel or strength, in peace or war; ships of Tarshish and works of
art, and invention employed in adorning them, for merchants, men
enriched by commerce, and abounding in all the luxuries and elegances of
life, such as those of Tyre and Sidon; for it appears from the course of
the whole passage, and from the train of ideas, that the fortresses and
the ships are to be taken metaphorically, as well as the high trees and
the lofty mountains.

Ships of Tarshish - Are in Scripture frequently used by a metonymy for
ships in general, especially such as are employed in carrying on traffic
between distant countries, as Tarshish was the most celebrated mart of
those times, frequented of old by the Phoenicians, and the principal
source of wealth to Judea and the neighboring countries. The learned
seem now to be perfectly well agreed that Tarshish is Tartessus, a city
of Spain, at the mouth of the river Baetis, whence the Phoenicians, who
first opened this trade, brought silver and gold, ([Jer
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#009); [Eze
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#012)), in which that country then
abounded; and, pursuing their voyage still farther to the Cassiterides,
(Bogart, Canaan, 1 c. 39; Huet, Hist. de Commerce, p. 194), the islands
of Scilly and Cornwall, they brought from thence lead and tin.

Tarshish is celebrated in Scripture, [Ch2
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2008.htm#017), [Ch2
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2008.htm#018); [Ch2
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#021), for the trade which Solomon
carried on thither, in conjunction with the Tyrians. Jehoshaphat, [Kg1
22:48](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#048);[Ch2
20:36](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#036), attempted afterwards to renew
their trade. And from the account given of his attempt it appears that
his fleet was to sail to Ezion-geber on the Red Sea; they must therefore
have designed to sail round Africa, as Solomon's fleet had done before,
(see Huet, Histoire de Commerce, p. 32), for it was a three years'
voyage, ([Ch2 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#021)), and they brought
gold from Ophir, probably on the coast of Arabia; silver from Tartessus;
and ivory, apes, and peacocks, from Africa." אופרי Afri, Africa, the
Roman termination, Africa terra. תרשיש Tarshish, some city or country in
Africa. So the Chaldee on [Kg1 22:49](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#049),
where it renders תרשיש Tarshish by אפריקה Aphricah; and compare [Ch2
20:36](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#036), from whence it appears, to go
to Ophir and to Tarshish is one and the same thing." - Dr. Jubb.

It is certain that under Pharaoh Necho, about two hundred years
afterwards, this voyage was made by the Egyptians; Herodot. 4:42. They
sailed from the Red Sea, and returned by the Mediterranean, and they
performed it in three years, just the same time that the voyage under
Solomon had taken up. It appears likewise from Pliny, Nat. Hist., 2:67,
that the passage round the Cape of Good Hope was known and frequently
practiced before his time, by Hanno, the Carthaginian, when Carthage was
in its glory; by one Eudoxus, in the time of Ptolemy Lathyrus, king of
Egypt; and Coelus Antipater, a historian of good credit, somewhat
earlier than Pliny, testifies that he had seen a merchant who had made
the voyage from Gades to Ethiopia. The Portuguese under Vasco de Gama,
near three hundred years ago, recovered this navigation, after it had
been intermitted and lost for many centuries. - L.

[Isaiah 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 2:18</span></span>

Shall utterly abolish "Shall disappear" - The ancient versions and an
ancient MS. read יחלפו yachalpu, plural. One of my MSS. reads יחלוף
yachaloph, probably a mistake for יחלפו yachalpu.

[Isaiah 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 2:19</span></span>

Into the holes of the rocks "Into caverns of rocks" - The country of
Judea being mountainous and rocky, is full of caverns, as appears from
the history of David's persecution under Saul. At En-gedi, in
particular, there was a cave so large that David with six hundred men
hid themselves in the sides of it; and Saul entered the mouth of the
cave without perceiving that any one was there, 1 Samuel 24. Josephus,
Antiq., lib. xiv., c. 15, and Bell. Jud., lib. 1, c. 16, tells us of a
numerous gang of banditti, who, having infested the country, and being
pursued by Herod with his army retired into certain caverns almost
inaccessible, near Arbela in Galilee, where they were with great
difficulty subdued. Some of these were natural, others artificial.
"Beyond Damascus," says Strabo, lib. xvi., "are two mountains called
Trachones, from which the country has the name of Trachonitis; and from
hence towards Arabia and Iturea, are certain rugged mountains, in which
there are deep caverns, one of which will hold four thousand men."
Tavernier, Voyage de Perse, part ii., chap. 4, speaks of a grot, between
Aleppo and Bir, that would hold near three thousand horse. "Three hours
distant from Sidon, about a mile from the sea, there runs along a high
rocky mountain, in the sides of which are hewn a multitude of grots, all
very little differing from each other. They have entrances about two
feet square: on the inside you find in most or all of them a room of
about four yards square. There are of these subterraneous caverns two
hundred in number. It may, with probability at least, be concluded that
these places were contrived for the use of the living, and not of the
dead. Strabo describes the habitations of the Troglodytae to have been
somewhat of this kind." - Maundrell, p. 118. The Horites, who dwelt in
Mount Seir, were Troglodytae, as their name הרים horim, imports. But
those mentioned by Strabo were on each side of the Arabian gulf.
Mohammed (Koran, chap. 15 xxvi.) speaks of a tribe of Arabians, the
tribe of Thamud, "who hewed houses out of the mountains, to secure
themselves." Thus, "because of the Midianites, the children of Israel
made them the dens which are in the mountains, and caves and strong
holds," [Jdg 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#002). To these they betook
themselves for refuge in times of distress and hostile invasion: "When
the men of Israel saw that they were in a strait, for the people were
distressed, then the people did hide themselves in caves, and in
thickets, and in rocks, and in high places, and in pits," [Sa1
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#006), and see [Jer
41:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#009). Therefore "to enter into the
rock, to go into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves of the
earth," was to them a very proper and familiar image to express terror
and consternation. The prophet Hosea, [Hos
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#008), hath carried the same image
farther, and added great strength and spirit to it:

"They shall say to the mountains, Cover us;

And to the hills, Fall on us;"

which image, together with these of Isaiah, is adopted by the sublime
author of the Revelation, [Rev 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#015),
[Rev 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#016), who frequently borrows his
imagery from our prophet. - L.

[Isaiah 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 2:20</span></span>

Which they made each one for himself to worship "Which they have made to
worship" - The word לו lo, for himself, is omitted by two ancient MSS.,
and is unnecessary. It does not appear that any copy of the Septuagint
has it, except MS. Pachom, and MS. 1. D. II., and they have ἑαυτοις, להם
lahem, to themselves.

To the moles - They shall carry their idols with them into the dark
caverns, old ruins, or desolate places, to which they shall flee for
refuge; and so shall give them up, and relinquish them to the filthy
animals that frequent such places, and have taken possession of them as
their proper habitation. Bellonias, Greaves, P. Lucas, and many other
travelers, speak of bats of an enormous size, as inhabiting the Great
Pyramid. See Harmer, Obs., vol. ii., 455. Three MSS. express חפרפרות
chapharperoth, the moles as one word.

[Isaiah 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 2:22</span></span>

Cease ye from man - Trust neither in him, nor in the gods that he has
invented. Neither he, nor they, can either save or destroy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 3](isa003)

</div>
